to the memory of the lament mr. ROBERT Hawke k——y. 

fair break the morn over yonder eastern sky,
 and brighten hill in please prospect rise;
 but who can say, serene the day will end,
 the sun unclouded to its depth descend? 
such dear depart infant be thy dawn,
 but gloom overshade the eve my hope have draw. 
oh, thou! so late my child — my hope and pride,
 who ever please, until the hour thou die,
 in mournful strain let now my sad heart tell,
 how i my darling boy can bid farewell! 
angelic brightness! oh! look down and see
 what bitter pang thy parent feel for thou. 
if thy pure shade can know what pass here;
 accept the burst sigh —— the gush tear; ——
 and thou, so soon enthrone in realm above,
 forgive the murmur of maternal love! 
severe kind be that all-sacred day,
 when thy sweet form do every pain repay:
 thy angel beauty do my hope engage,
 that thou shall bless my life, and cheer my age;
 and thou, fair spirit, now remove from pain,
 have teach my humble heart, that life be vain:
 yet, what be this that struggle at my breast
 for thou, my child? —— it will not be suppress:
 thy spotless innocence —— thy soul so pure,
 from scorn can not thy guiltless clay secure. 
what though distinguish by that honour name
 which gain to Britain glory, wealth and fame,
 that swift destruction over her foe have hurl,
 and live the pride of a admire world;
 what though descend from that soldier breast,
 who reign a hero, worship in the east,
 who gallant deed adorn indostan page,
 and thou the late darling of his age;
 do it avail thou, honour, worth, and grace,
 give brilliant lustre to thy mother race, —
 a noble race, where all the virtue glow,
 adorn with all that monarch can bestow? 
ah, no! though thus distinguish by thy birth,
 thou be deny a little spot of earth;
 though soft humanity exalt her crest,
 and in Britannia reign a honour guest,
 yet cruel c—b—w-l refuse a grave,
 the last retreat thy lovely form can crave
 but if unhallowed be thy close scene,
 thou angel innocent art now serene;
 and though no costly marble ever may grace
 thy low-reposing bed — thy resting-place —
 yet shall the fair flower the spot adorn,
 cherish with pure tear of early morn;
 and angel guard thy guiltless sleep clay,
 till thou awake to eternal day. 
how sweet thy rest! from every evil free! 
 "the world be leave to wretchedness and i." 
oh, why! — but soft — be still, my murmur breast, —
 my little angel go to endless rest;
 with kindred spirit, far remote from pain,
 he wait the hour when we shall meet again. 
