modern virtue.

a satire.

 "let venal annal boast a caesar reign,
" when Rome great genius hug the imperial chain,
 "freedom, gay goddess, glad our happy isle,
" peace smooth her brow, as plenty deck her smile;
 "in every son the inspirer life confess,
" and light up all the patriot in his breast,
 "breathe the same social warmth from soul to soul,
" till widen nature pant but for a whole. 

 "shine he in life meridian beam display,
" or give his mild virtue to the shade;
 "glare the proud ribbon, nod the martial crest,
" or flaunt the tatter on he mot vest;
 "the godlike briton fill his every sphere
" without a frailty, and without a fear. 
 "if rich: bright image of the eternal mind,
" he open bosom take in all mankind;
 "wherever he come, health triumph over disease,
" hope glad despair, and anguish melt to ease. 
 "be knowledge his? he lend his every art,
" to rear the genius, and to mould the heart;
 "fond pursue with boyle auspicious blaze
" truth through she masques, and nature through her maze;
 "to heedless justice give the well-poized scale,
" and raise commerce as he guide the sail. 
 "be power his orb? he live but to defend;
" the statesman only dignify the friend:
 "Disarms oppression, prune ambition wing,
" and stifle faction ere she dart her sting;
 "enriche every coffer but his own,
" and shield the cottage while he guard the throne;
 "see at his nod our plunder right restore,
" and Europe tremble when he grasp the sword. " 

thus sing the muse when fancy vigorous run,
 and warm the youth, ere reason form the man;
 life through opinion false perspective see,
 with mimic beauty glow in every scene;
 dress in a angel visionary form,
 vice aim to please, and madness learn to charm:
 rebellion soften into public love,
 and each enormous villain seem a Jove. 
double deceive, what lelius can i find
 to chase the phantom, or to free the mind? 
no lelius come, no seraph lend his aid,
 no pity genius whisper in the glade. 

it chance that virtue hear the untutored lay,
 still mad lisp with the voice of praise;
 she hear, as through the mall the goddess stray,
 when the gay world have people all the shade,
 mild as the softness of a vernal sky,
 youth flush her cheek, while caution arm her eye;
 half loose majestic flow her azure vest,
 a spotless ruby bleed upon her breast,
 at every step kind nature feel her power,
 soft blow the zephyr, and soft spring the flower;
 a bright freshness hang on every green,
 and a new Eden steal upon the scene,

awhile she pause, and with a frown survey
 the mingle swarm of tatter and brocade. 
when, as the goddess wave the ethereal spear,
 pride drop her smile, and artifice her tear;
 lust throw aside religion borrow grace,
 a leer satyr gloat in her face;
 the prude, who faint at the name of vice,
 now hug the bottle, and now grasp the dice;
 while torture with the town obscene ail,
 a saint stand melt over a luscious tale. 
here, the bribe glitter in a courtier hand;
 there, the grave patriot bellow — for a wand:
 full in his eye the enchant object hang,
 and die freedom gasp upon his tongue. 
all who to drury deadly stew resort,
 Rob at the change, or plunder in the court,
 strip of their masques in wild disorder rise,
 one with a halter, one without a nose;
 so odd mix, so excellent ill,
 such mot spectre of quevedo hell;
 they will make a Jesuit quit the absolve chair,
 a brothel tremble, and a conclave stare. 

so when, where bedlam air-dressed vision dwell,
 Tom stalk a straw-crowned monarch in his cell;
 just as he soar tremendous to a god,
 and the winge thunder only wait his nod;
 shudder, he hear his keeper surly tone,
 he hear, and horror wrap his totter throne;
 crown drop their lustre, sceptre lose their awe,
 robe fly to rag, and empire sink to straw. 

 "learn hence, fair virtue cry, mistaken youth,
" what various monster wear the guise of truth. 
 "deck with each grace, immortal merit show
" the cheek that redden, and the soul that glow;
 "with heaven own image beam in his eye,
" man smile a dagger, and he look a lie. " 
she speak, and lo! the long-misguided fire,
 with every number, sleep along the lyre. 

say then, my friend! who virtue be my pride,
 who candour soothe i, while thy precept guide;
 thou who quick eye have look through every age,
 view every scene, and study every sage;
 say, shall i praise the escutcheon proud record,
 when a lose Brutus sink into a lord? 
with fulsome sing-song after shadow run,
 and still mistake a meteor for a sun? 
shall i be silent, while from day to day
 Bellville in bagnios revel life away;
 flagitious drop the majesty of power
 in the mad mischief of the midnight hour;
 no flatterer leave to daub, no friend to aid,
 by strumpet plunder, and by wit betray? 

rouse at the thought, keen satire spurn her chain,
 spring with new life, and pant in every vein,
 on vice, impatient, wreak her gather rage,
 and bid the tyrant bleed through all the page. 
brood she in purple over the venal bar,
 strut in a gown, or blaze in a star? 
my pen shall trace she out from slave to slave,
 nor dare oblivion screen she in the grave. 

come then, you self-cursed atheist! who degrade
 truth to a sound, and scripture to a trade;
 you beard sycophant! who life supply
 with the warm sunshine of a minion eye:
 you french edition of a british fool;
 abroad a cypher, and at home a fool;
 you —

friend.

be you mad? or have you lose all grace? 
what, write a satire when you want a place! 
hold, hold, for God sake, ere your friend bestow
 a few stout cord; and send you to Monro. 
will you avoid the pedant learned sneer? 
awe the pert fop? or sooth a doctor ear? 
heedless of all the phantom sister play,
 from cloud-top Pindus to the latian shade,
 pursue deep science through her mazy road,
 hunt every page, and crawl from code to code;
 where musty system solid joy dispense,
 and wise smiglecius fill the void of sense;
 or proud some more important truth to learn,
 dream over the labour glossary of hearn:
 so you may live, approve, perhaps prefer,
 your wisdom grave measure by your beard. 

but soft — your aim to civilise mankind,
 to wake each social virtue of the mind;
 to strip from vice the gay disguise of art,
 and bare the villain lurk in the heart;
 for this your grasp the falchion, spread the shield,
 a pigmy quixote in the enlist field. 

time be, when satire delicate nice
 can rouse each virtue, and can blast each vice;
 truth learn to please from aesop fable tongue,
 and Rome grow virtuous when her Ennius sing. 
once lose to goodness, but now lose to shame,
 we court dishonour, as we laugh at fame;
 with the same rapture plunge in every crime,
 though fifty oldham stab in every rhime. 

a native sin each vigorous frenchman hail,
 polite partial to his own Versailles. 
there, toujours gai, he love a loose rein;
 his miss, la contesse, and his wine Champagne. 
Britain, more generous, every vice provide,
 that Europe ripen, and that Asia hide. 
the enormous harvest to our port consign
 load every ship, and busy every wind. 
soon a vast group of folly crowd the shore,
 as soon they cloy. — fly hence, and fetch-us more,
 quick spread the impatient sail from pole to pole,
 you zephyr, waft she! and you ocean, roll! 

strike who you please, and write whatever you will,
 harpax will cheat, and Phillis hide spadille:
 hircus in brothel impotent toil,
 and Verres murder merit with a smile:
 murder, secure of same, for vulgar eye
 will still adore he, though the good despise;
 at his rich coat and gorgeous chariot gaze,
 and lose at once the assassin in the blaze. 

even young himself, distinguish, love, care,
 mark by each eye, and hug to every breast,
 see he among this vicious race of man
 one rascal mend when he grasp the pen? 
still at the levee swarm the venal tribe,
 and still corruption long for every bribe. 

author.

what then? if vice unblushing hear the sage,
 shall reason struggle in the check of age? 
shall truth shut up in complaisance her heart,
 young lend a smile, and satire drop her dart? 
no, let the fiendlike head of Hydra grow,
 rise as he strike, and double from the blow;
 one honest drudge our Hercules have find,
 to sear the monster sprout in the wound. 

come, come, my friend; throw off this rise frown,
 nor curb my passion while you loose your own. 
oft have you bid proud thraso mend his life,
 who kick a sister, and who starve a wife;
 nay, insolent dare to tell her grace,
 that virtue make a goddess, not the face. 

friend.

when brisk spirit through the bosom roll,
 and life mad tumuit rush on the soul;
 each beardless Cato wing with awkward zeal
 his little arrow ere he learn to feel;
 fierce as old Appius, apes the insult air,
 the uplift eye-brow, and the lordly stare. 
so i — but now that age with smooth career
 waft cool notion on my sixtieth year;
 lose to each hope, each visionary joy,
 pomp that disturb, and vanity that cloy;
 heedless what wit cashier, what sool care,
 who live a hero, or who live a jest,
 i view the world romantic scene pass by,
 and stifle all my anger in a sigh. 

while thus my day steal on the wing of time,
 unstained by wit, and guiltless of a rhyme,
 unnumbered ill the dread satirist wait,
 stand fast, Olympus! and support he, fate! 
see! frantic dullness pant for the war,
 grasp the keen spear, and mount the imperial car,
 shrill clarion sound, attend fury yell,
 the lengthen echo howl through every cell;
 rouse by the inspire clang, each mighty son,
 congenial offspring of his fire, the Hun,
 slide from his garret formidable gay,
 a human vulture dart on his prey. 
all they who science load the encumber stall,
 who wind the wainscot, and who daub the wall,
 luxurious rogue, that revel once a week
 on the rich feast of visto and ox-cheek;
 from the soft lyric to the wretch who squall
 the mint-born ballad at the end of Paul,
 around the flag in martial pomp appear,
 curl in the van, and osborne in the rear. 
the impatient battle join, and lo! at once
 the same wild frenzy spread from dunce to dunce,
 fire with one soul, the shirtless legion run,
 one hurl a journal, and one dart a pun,
 in snip-snap prose vindictive lightning play,
 and loud hoarse thunder rattle through the lay. 
quick and more quick, the dire discordant din
 roll through each hall, and roar from inn to inn;
 wake the loud horror of the wrangle school,
 where Priscian bawl, and fool re-echo fool. 

but shall you all the mighty mad defeat,
 who howl in bedlam, and who stun the fleet,
 see the pert critic tremble to engage,
 wit blunt her sting, and envy drop her rage;
 yet can poor innocence to mercy awe
 those deadly pest, the harpy of the law? 
another p—n shield each worthless lord,
 arm the dread scourge, and whet the avenge sword,
 where he, great genius! throw his letter eye,
 truth stare a libel, honesty a lie,
 young embryo treason in each period shine,
 and fancy poison kill through every line. 
he sure will curb you, though my precept fail,
 no stoic bully when he smell a jail,
 conscious that wisdom mount her throne too late,
 when doom to warble ethics through a grate. 

author.

speak you of Claudius? let the minion rave,
 say Pitt a fool, and lyttelton a knave,
 call wit a libel, and yet never see
 sword in a brief, or poison in a fee. 
but from my soul all scandal i detest,
 truth form my number, as she warm my breast,
 learn i to triumph over a pimp' disdain,
 and bid i laugh when Claudius threat the chain. 

what, shall i strive to dignify disgrace? 
and hail a patriot lessen in a place? 
rear the proud trophy on a soldier grave,
 who live a coward, and who die a slave? 
shall i on vice pageantry attend,
 croud to her car, and at her altar bend? 
rather, where indian sun their ray unfold,
 and ripen half potosi into gold,
 let i beneath a Spaniard insult pine,
 crouch to the scourge, and drudge from mine to i. 

yet be there one, my friend! who shine confess
 with all that heaven stamp upon the breast,
 who, noble conscious of paternal fire,
 feed the bright blaze, and beam upon his sire. 
i be the task to swell from day to day
 the applaud paean, and the loud huzza;
 to bid our son with filial fondness warm,
 eye every grace, and copy every charm;
 explore his purpose, catch his god-like rage,
 and be the malton of another age. 

my verse, you say, will certain offend. 
who? not the man who virtue call her friend. 
virtue, like gold, of genuine worth possess,
 shine out more radiant when she dare the test. 
sword arm her bosom, rack her vigour raise,
 and all hell fire but give her strength to blaze. 
can truth than hurt she? wound she sacred ear? 
wake the keen pang? or rouse the impassion tear? 
it be true, the selfish mercenary train,
 who honour libel, and who title stain,
 strike with the face in satire mirror show,
 perhaps may tremble, and perhaps may frown. 
thanks to their rage, my day will happy flow,
 and my joy brighten when a knave my foe. 

yet think not that the muse, to spleen resign,
 aim monsterlike to swallow up mankind,
 bid her keen shaft with baleful vengeance fly,
 taint the pure breeze, and poison half the sky,
 or fond to spread destruction through the land,
 exult with Nero as she light the brand;
 with honest warmth she wish to control
 each deadly weed that blossom on the soul,
 that wild vigorous mock at virtue toil,
 that choke the scion, and that rob the soil;
 but sad conscious that just heaven have make
 each grace to border on its kindred shade;
 that in the gem some sully vein will run,
 and the disk darken while there shine a sun;
 the melt image gain upon her heart,
 and spite of justice half disarm the dart. 

oh! let i then in fable empire rove,
 where talk the forest, and where laugh the grove;
 attend the goddess through her airy scene,
 her picture borrow, and her moral glean;
 from wolf and lion draw the instructive tale,
 and hide the glare of reason in a veil. 

bless be the thought. here guiltless of offence,
 dispassion truth may sneer you into sense;
 on vicious man her whole artillery play,
 sublime grave or whimsical gay;
 through the wide world in moral vision range,
 glide through the court, and steal upon the change;
 lust rampant empress keenly-eyed pursue,
 or open in she paphos, or the stew;
 lethargic justice on the bench assail,
 edge the dull sword, and poise the unequal scale:
 with rabelais jest display the officious knave,
 in life mad vortex whirl to the grave;
 point at opinion self-embroidered vest,
 folly gay plume, and pride enormous crest,
 each frenzy mortify, each vice confound,
 and self-conviction only feel the wound. 
