hope, a allegorical sketch.

i be the comforter of they that mourn;
my scene well shadow, and my carol sweet,
cheer the poor passenger of life rude bourn,
till they be shelter in that last retreat,
where human toil and trouble be forget.
these sound i hear amid this mortal road,
when i have reach with pain one pleasant spot,
so that for joy some tear in silence flow;
i raise my eye, sickness have long depress,
and feel thy warmth, o sun! come cheer to my breast.

the storm of night have cease upon the plain,
when thoughtful in the forest-walk i stray,
to the long hollow murmur of the main
listen, and to the many leaf that make
a drowsy cadence, as the high tree wave;
when straight a beauteous scene burst on my sight;
smooth be the water that the lowland lave:
and lo! a form, as of some fairy sprite,
who hold in her right hand a bud spray,
and like a sea-maid sing she sweet warble lay.

soothe as steal the summer-wave she sing:
the grisly phantom of the night be go
to hear in shade forlorn the death-bell ring;
but thou who sickness have leave weak and wan,
turn from their spectre-terror the green sea
that whisper at my foot, the matin gale
that crisp its shine marge shall solace thou,
and thou my long-forgotten voice shall hail,
for i be hope, who weary heart confess
the soothe sprite that sing on life long wilderness.

as slow cease her tender voice, i stand
delight: the hard way, so late pass,
seem smooth; the ocean bright extend flood
before i stretch; the cloud that overcast
heaven melancholy vault hurry away,
drive seaward, and the azure hill appear;
the sunbeam shine upon their summit grey,
strange sadden sound no more by fit be hear,
but bird, in new leaf shroud, sing aloft,
and over the level sea spring heal air blow soft.

as when a traveller, who many day
have journey 'amid arabian desert still,
a dreary solitude far on survey,
and meet, nor flit bird, nor gush rill,
but near some marble ruin, gleam pale,
sigh mindful of the haunt of cheerful man,
and think he hear in every sickly gale
the bell of some approach caravan;
at length, emerge over the dim tract, see
Damascus' golden fane, and minaret, and tree:

so beat my bosom when my wind way
lead through the thicket to a shelter vale,
where the fair siren sit; a smooth clear bay
skirt with wood appear, where many a sail
go shine over the watery surface still,
lessen at last in the grey ocean flood;
and yonder, half-way up the front hill,
peep from forth the tree, a cottage stand,
above who peaceful umbrage, trail high,
a little smoke go up, and stain the cloudless sky.

i turn, and lo! a mountain seem to rise,
upon who top a spiry citadel
lift its dim-seen turret to the sky,
where some high lord of the domain may dwell;
and onward, where the eye scarce stretch its sight,
hill over hill in long succession rise,
touch with a soft and yet soft light,
and all be blend as in deep repose;
the wood, the sea, the hill that shine so fair,
till wood, and sea, and hill seem fade into air.

at once, methinks, i see a various throng
to this enchant spot their footstep bend;
all draw, sweet hope! by thy inspire song,
which melody scarce mortal seem to blend.
first buxom youth, with cheek of glow red,
come light trip over the morning dew,
he wear a harebell garland on his head,
and stretch his hand at the bright-bursting view:
a mountain fawn go bound by his side,
around who slender neck a silver bell be tie.

then say i: mistress of the magic song,
oh, pity it be that heart that know no guile
shall ever feel the pang of truth or wrong!
she heed not, but sing with lovely smile:
enjoy, o youth, the season of thy may;
hark, how the throstle in the hawthorn sing!
the hoary time, that rest night nor day,
over the earth shade may speed with noiseless wing;
but heed not thou; snatch the brief joy that rise,
and sport beneath the light of these unclouded sky.

his fine eye flash a unwonted fire,
then fancy over the glade delight go;
he strike at time a small and silver lyre,
or gaze upon the roll element;
sometime he take his mirror, which do show
the various landscape lovely than the life;
beam more bright the vivid tint do glow,
and so well mingle be the colour' strife,
that the fond heart, the beauteous shade once see,
will sigh for such retreat, for vale and wood so green!

gay be his aspect, and his airy vest,
as loose it flow, such colour do display,
as paint the cloud repose in the west,
or the moist rainbow radiant arch inlay;
and now he trip, like fairy of the wood,
and seem with dance spirit to rejoice,
and now he hang his head in pensive mood:
meantime, o hope! he listen to thy voice,
and while of joy and youth it cheerly sing,
he touch his answer harp, and over the valley spring.

pleasure, a frolic nymph, to the glad sound
come dance, as all tear she may forget;
and now she gaze with a sweet archness round,
and wanton display a silken net:
she win her way with fascinate air —
her eye illumine with a tender light,
her smile strange blandishment, her shade hair
that lengthen hang, her tooth as ivory white,
that peep from her moist lip, seem to inspire
tumultuous wish warm, and dream of fond desire.

what soft passion do thy bosom move,
when those melodious measure meet thy ear,
child of sincerity, and virtuous love!
thy eye do shine beneath a blissful tear
that still be turn towards the tranquil scene,
where the thin smoke rise from the embower cot;
and thou do think, that there, with smile serene,
in quiet shade, and every pang forget,
thou may sink on pure affection breast,
and listen to the wind that whisper thou to rest.

i think, o love, how seldom be thou find
without annoyance in this earthly state!
for, haply, thou do feed some rankle wound,
or on thy youth pale poverty do wait,
till year, on heavy wing, have roll away;
or where thou most do hope firm faith to see,
thou meet fickleness estrange and cold;
or if some true and tender heart there be,
on which, through every change, thy soul may trust,
death come with his fell dart, and smite it to the dust!

but lusty enterprise, with look of glee,
approach the droop youth, as he will say,
come to the high wood and the hill with i,
and cast thy sullen myrtle-wreath away.
upon a neigh courser he do sit,
that stretch its arch neck, in conscious pride,
and champ as with disdain a golden bit,
but hope her animate voice apply,
and enterprise with speed impetuous pass,
while the long vale return his wreathe bugle blast.

sudden, lift high his ponderous spear,
a mail man come forth with scornful pride,
i see he, tower in his proud career,
along the valley with a giant stride:
upon his helm, in letter of bright gold,
that to the sun meridian splendour shine,
ambition name far off i may behold.
meantime from earth there come a hollow moan;
but fame, who follow, her loud trumpet blow,
and to the murmur beach with eye a-flame he fly.

and now already have he gain the strand,
where a tall vessel ride with sail unfurled,
and soon he think to reach the farther land,
which to his eager eye seem like a world
that he by strength may win and make his own;
and in that citadel, which shine so bright,
seat he, a purple sovereign, on his throne.
so he go tilt over the water white,
and while he oft look back with stern disdain,
in loud tone, methinks, be hear the inspire strain:

by the shade of city old,
by many a river stain with gore,
by the sword of sesac bold,
who smite the nation from the shore
of ancient Nile to india farther plain,
by fame proud pillar, and by valour shield
by mighty chief in glorious battle slay,
assert thy sway; amid the bloody field
pursue thy march, and to the height sublime
of honour glitter cliff, a mighty conqueror climb!

then say i, in my heart: man, thou do rear
thy eye to heaven, and vaunt thy lofty worth;
the ensign of dominion thou do bear
over nature work; but thou do oft go forth,
urge by proud hope to ravage and destroy,
thou do build up a name by cruel deed;
while to the peaceful scene of love and joy,
sorrow, and crime, and solitude, succeed.
hence, when her war-song victory do sing,
destruction flap aloft her iron-hurtling wing.

but see, as one awaken from a trance,
with hollow and dim eye and stony stare,
captivity with falter step advance!
drip and knot be her coalblack hair;
for she have long be hide, as in the grave;
no sound the silence of her prison break,
nor one companion have she in her cave,
save terror dismal shape, that no word speak;
but to a stony coffin on the floor
with lean and hideous finger point evermore.

the lark shrill song, the early village chime,
the upland echo of the wind horn,
the far-heard clock that speak the pass time,
have never pierce her solitude forlorn;
at length, release from the deep dungeon gloom,
she feel the fragrance of the vernal gale;
she see more sweet the live landscape bloom,
and while she listen to hope tender tale,
she think her long-lost friend shall bless her sight,
and almost faint with joy amid the broad daylight.

and near the spot, as with reluctant foot,
slow despond melancholy draw,
the wind and rain her naked breast have beat,
sink be her eye, and sallow be her hue:
in the huge forest unrejoice shade
bewilder have she wander day by day,
and many a grisly fiend her heart dismay,
and cold and wet upon the ground she lie;
but now such sound with mellow sweetness steal,
as lap in dream of bliss her slow-consenting soul.

next, to the woody glen poor mania stray,
most pale and wild, yet gentle be her look;
a slender garland she of straw have make,
of flower and rush from the run brook;
but as she sad pass, the tender sound
of its sharp pang her wound heart beguile;
she drop her half-made garland on the ground,
and then she sigh, and then in tear she smile:
but in such sort, that pity will have say,
o god, be merciful to that poor hapless maid!

now rave she cry: the whelm main —
the wintery wave roll over his cold head;
i never shall behold his form again;
hence flatter fancy — he be dead, be dead!
perhaps on some wild shore he may be cast,
where on their prey barbarian howl rush,
oh, fierce they, than be the whelm blast!
hush, my poor heart! my wakeful sorrow, hush!
he live! i yet shall press he to my heart,
and cry, oh no, no, no, — we never more will part!

so sing she, when despair, from his cell,
hide further in the lone umbrageous wood,
where many a winter he have love to dwell,
come grim remorse; fix in deep thought he stand,
his sense pierce by the unwonted tone;
some stagnant blood-drop from his lock he shake;
he see the tree that wave, the sun that shine,
he cast around a agonise look;
then with a ghastly smile, that speak his pain,
he hie he to his cave in thick shade again.

and now the sun sink westward, and the sky
be hang with thousand lucid picture gay;
when gaze on the scene with placid eye,
a ancient man appear in amicé grey;
his sandal shoe be by long travel wear,
over hill and valley, many a weary mile,
yet droop he not, like one in year forlorn;
his pale cheek wear a sad, but tender smile;
it be sage experience, by his look confess,
and white as frost his beard descend to his breast.

thus say i: master, pleasant be this place,
and sweet be those melodious note i hear,
and happy they among man toil race
who, of their care forgetful, wander near;
i they delight, who sickness and slow pain
have bow almost to death with heavy hand;
the fairy scene refresh my heart again,
and, please, i listen to that music bland,
which seem to promise hour of joy to come,
and bid i tranquil seek my poor but peaceful home. 

he say: alas! these shadow soon may fly,
like the gay creature of the element;
yet do poor mortal still with rapture eye
behold like thou the picture they present;
and, charm by hope sweet music, on they fare,
and think they soon shall reach that blissful goal,
where never more the sullen knell of care
for bury friend and sever love shall toll:
so on they fare, till all their trouble cease,
and on a lap of earth they lie they down in peace.

but not there cease their immortal claim;
from golden cloud i hear a small voice say:
wisdom rejoice in a high aim,
nor heed the transient shadow of a day;
these earthly sound may die away, and all
these perishable picture sink in night,
but virtue from the dust her son shall call,
and lead they forth to joy, and life, and light;
though from their languid grasp earth comfort fly,
and with the silent worm their bury body lie.

for other scene there be; and in a clime
pure, and other strain to earth unknown,
where heaven high host, with symphony sublime,
sing unto he that sit on the throne.
enough for man, if he the task fulfil
which god ordain, and to his journey end
bear he right on, betide he good or ill;
then hope to soothe his death-bed shall descend,
nor leave he, till in mansion of the bless
he gain his destine home, his everlasting rest.
