Vacuna.

by mr. d.

sceptre of ease! who calm domain extend
over the freeze chronian, or where lag gale
fan to repose the southern realm. o! who
more slave obey than swarm about the court
 Pekin, or Agra — universal queen! 

i haply slumber all a summer day,
thy mean subject, often have thou deign
gracious to visit. if thy poppy then
be ever infuse into my gifted quill,
if ever my nod muse be bless with power,
to doze the reader with her opiate verse —
come, goddess; but be gentle; not as when
on studious head attendant thou be see
fast by the twinkle lamp, pore and pale
immerse in meditation, sleep great foe?
where the clue-guided casuist unwind
perplexity; or Halley from his tower
converse with the star: in other guise
thy presence i invoke. serene approach,
with forehead smooth, and saunter gait; put on
the smile unmeaning, or in sober mood
fix thy flat, muse, leaden eye: as look
Simplicius, when he stare and seem to think.
prompt by thou, reservo keep at home,
intent on book: he when alone apply
the needle reparation to his hose,
or studious slice paper. teach by thou
dullman take snuff, and ever and anon
turn over the page unread. other more sage,
place, year, and printer not unnoted, well
examine the whole frontispiece, and if
yet stricter their enquiry, even proceed
to leaf within, and curious there select
italic, or consult the margin, please
to find a hero or a tale: all else,
the observation, maxim, inference
disturb the brain with thought — it sure be long
to name thy several votary, power supine,
and all thy various haunt. why shall i speak
of coffee-house? or where the eunuch play,
or Roscius in his buskin? these and more
thy crowd temple, where thou sit enshrine
glorious, thy incense ambergris, and time
thy sacrifice. — about thou card and dice
lie scatter, and a thousand vassal beaux
officiate at thy worship. — nor mean while
be solitude less thy peculiar sphere;
there unattended you vouchsafe to shroud
your beauty, gentle potentate; with i
by vale or brook to loiter not displease:
hear the stream pebble roar, and the sweet bee
hum her fairy-tune, in praise of flower;
or clamorous rook, on age elm or oak,
aloft the caw legislator sit,
debate, in full senate, point of state.

my bower, my walk, my study all be thy,
for thou my yew project their shade: my green
spread she soft lap, my water whisper sleep.
here thou may reign secure, nor hostile thought,
nor argument, nor logic dire array
make inroad on thy kingdom peace. — what though
malicious tongue i harmless represent,
a traitor to thy throne: or that i hold
forbid correspondence with the nine,
plot with Phoebus, and thy foe! what though
of satire they impeach i, strain severe!
thou know my innocence: it be true indeed
i sometime scribble, but it be thou inspire:
in proof accept, o goddess, this my verse.
