death:

a poetical essay.

by dr. Porteus.

first print at Cambridge, 1759. 

friend to the wretch, who every friend forsake,
 i woo thou, death! in fancy fairy path
 let the gay songster rove, and gentle trill
 the strain of empty joy. — life and its joy
 i leave to those that prize they. — at this hour,
 this solemn hour, when silence rule the world,
 and weary nature make a general pause! 
wrap in night sable robe, through cloister drear
 and charnel pale, tenant by a throng
 of meager phantom shoot cross my path
 with silent glance, i seek the shadowy vale
 of death. — deep in a murky cave recess
 lave by oblivion listless stream, and fence
 by shelve rock and intermingle horror
 of yew' and cypress shade from all intrusion
 of busy noontide-beam, the monarch sit
 in unsubstantial majesty enthrone. 
at his right hand, near himself in place
 and frightfulness of form, his parent sin
 with fatal industry and cruel care
 busy herself in point all his sting,
 and tip every shaft with venom draw
 from her infernal store: around he range
 in terrible array and strange diversity
 of uncouth shape, stand his dread minister:
 foremost old age, his natural ally
 and firm friend: next he disease thick,
 a motley train; fever with cheek of fire;
 consumption wan; palsy, half warm with life,
 and half a clay-cold lump; joint-torturing gout,
 and ever-gnawing rheum; convulsion wild;
 swell dropsy; pant asthma; apoplex
 full-gorged. — there too the pestilence that walk
 in darkness, and the sickness that destroy
 at broad noonday. these and a thousand more,
 horrid to tell, attentive wait; and, when
 by heaven command death wave his ebon wand,
 sudden rush forth to execute his purpose,
 and scatter desolation over the earth. 

ill-fated man, for who such various form
 of misery wait, and mark their future prey! 
ah! why, all-righteous father, do thou make
 this creature man? why wake the unconscious dust
 to life and wretchedness? o better far
 still have he sleep in uncreated night,
 if this the lot of be! — be it for this
 thy breath divine kindle within his breast
 the vital flame? for this be thy fair image
 stamp on his soul in godlike lineament? 
for this dominion give he absolute
 over all thy creature, only that he may reign
 supreme in woe? from the bless source of good
 can pain and death proceed? can such foul ill
 fall from fair mercy hand? far be the thought,
 the impious thought! god never make a creature
 but what be good. he make a live man:
 the man of death be make by man himself. 
forth from his maker hand he spring to life,
 fresh with immortal bloom; no pain he know,
 no fear of death, no check to his desire
 save one command. that one command (which stand
 betwixt he and ruin, the test of his obedience,)
 urge on by wanton curiosity
 he break. — there in one moment be undo
 the fair of God work. the same rash hand
 that pluck in evil hour the fatal fruit,
 unbar the gate of hell, and let loose sin
 and death and all the family of pain
 to prey upon mankind. young nature see
 the monstrous crew, and shake through all her frame. 
then flee her new-born lustre, then begar. 
heaven cheerful face to lower, then vapour choke
 the trouble air, and form a veil of cloud
 to hide the will sun. the earth convulse
 with painful throe throw forth a bristly crop
 of thorn and brier; and insect, bird, and beast,
 that will before with admiration fond
 to gaze at man, and fearless crowd around he,
 now flee before his face, shun in haste
 the infection of his misery. he alone,
 who just may, the offend lord of man,
 turn not away his face, he full of pity
 forsake not in this uttermost distress
 his best-loved work. that comfort still remain,
 (that best, that great comfort in affliction)
 the countenance of god, and through the gloom
 shoot forth some kindly gleam, to cheer and warm
 the offender sink soul. hope send from heaven
 upraise his droop head, and show afar
 a happy scene of thing; the promise seed
 trample upon the serpent humble crest,
 death of his sting disarm, and the dank grave
 make pervious to the realm of endless day,
 no more the limit but the gate of life. 

cheere with the view, man go to till the ground
 from whence he rise; sentence indeed to toil
 as to a punishment, yet (even in wrath
 so merciful be heaven) this toil become
 the solace of his woe, the sweet employ
 of many a live-long hour, and sure guard
 against disease and death. — death though denounce
 be yet a distant ill, by feeble arm
 of age, his sole support, lead slow on. 
not then, as since, the short-lived son of man
 flock to his realm in countless multitude;
 scarce in the course of twice five hundred year
 one solitary ghost go shiver down
 to his unpeopled shore. in sober state,
 through the sequester vale of rural life,
 the venerable patriarch guileless hold
 the tenor of his way; labour prepare
 his simple fare, and temperance rule his board. 
tire with his daily toil, at early eve
 he sink to sudden rest; gentle and pure
 as breath of evening zephyr and as sweet
 be all his slumber; with the sun lie rose,
 alert and vigorous as he, to run
 his destine course. thus nerve with giant strength
 he stem the tide of time, and stand the shock
 of age roll harmless over his head. 
at life meridian point arrive, he stand,
 and look round see all the valley fill
 with nation from his loin; full-well content
 to leave his race thus scatter over the earth,
 along the gentle slope of life decline
 he bend his gradual way, till full of year
 he drop like mellow fruit into his grave. 

such in the infancy of time be man,
 so calm be life, so impotent be death. 
o have he but preserve these few remains,
 these shatter fragment of lose happiness,
 snatch by the hand of heaven from the sad wreck
 of innocence primaeval; still have he live
 great even in ruin; though fall, yet not forlorn;
 though mortal, yet not every where beset
 with death in every shape! but he, impatient
 to be complete wretched, hastes to fill up
 the measure of his woe. it be man himself
 bring death into the world, and man himself
 give keenness to his dart, quicken his pace,
 and multiply destruction on mankind. 

first envy, eldest-born of hell, embrue
 her hand in blood, and teach the son of man
 to make a death which nature never make,
 and god abhor, with violence rude to break
 the thread of life ere half its length be run,
 and rob a wretched brother of his being. 
with joy ambition see, and soon improve
 the execrable deed. it be not enough
 by subtle fraud to snatch a single life,
 puny impiety! whole kingdom fall
 to sit the lust of power; more horrid still,
 the foul stain and scandal of our nature
 become its boast. — one murder make a villain,
 million a hero. — prince be privilege
 to kill, and number sanctify the crime. 
ah! why will king forget that they be man? 
and man that they be brother? why delight
 in human sacrifice? why burst the tie
 of nature, that shall knit their soul together
 in one soft bond of amity and love? 
yet still they breathe destruction, still go on
 inhumanly ingenious to find out
 new pain for life, new terror for the grave,
 artificer of death! still monarch dream
 of universal empire grow up
 from universal ruin. — blast the design,
 great god of host, nor let thy creature fall
 unpitied victim at ambition shrine! 

yet say, shall tyrant learn at last to feel,
 and the loud din of battle cease to roar;
 shall dove-eyed peace over all the earth extend
 her olive branch, and give the world repose,
 will death be foil? will health, and strength, and youth
 defy his power? have he no art in store,
 no other shaft save those of war? — alas! 
even in the smile of peace, that smile which shed
 a heavenly sunshine over the soul, there bask
 that serpent luxury: war its thousand slay,
 peace its ten thousand: in the embattle plain
 though death exult, and clap his raven wing,
 yet reign he not even there so absolute,
 so merciless, as in yond frantic scene
 of midnight revel and tumultuous mirth,
 where, in the intoxicate draught conceal,
 or couch beneath the glance of lawless love,
 he snare the simple youth, who nought suspect
 mean to be bless — but find himself undo. 

down the smooth stream of life the stripling dart
 gay as the morn; bright glow the vernal sky,
 hope swell his sail, and fancy steer his course;
 safe glide his little bark along the shore
 where virtue take she stand; but if too far
 he launch forth beyond discretion mark,
 sudden the tempest scowl, the surge roar,
 blot his fair day, and plunge he in the deep. 
o sad but sure mischance! o happy far
 to lie like gallant howe midst indian wild
 a breathless corpse, cut off by savage hand
 in early prime, a generous sacrifice
 to freedom holy cause; than so to fail
 tern immature from life meridian joy,
 a prey to vice, intemperance, and disease. 

yet die even thus, thus rather perish still,
 you son of pleasure, by the almighty strike,
 than ever dare (though oft, alas! you dare)
 to lift against yourself the murderous steel,
 to wrest from God own hand the sword of justice,
 and be your own avenger. — hold, rash man,
 though with anticipate speed thou have range
 through every region of delight, nor leave
 one joy to gild the evening of thy day,
 though life seem one uncomfortable void,
 guilt at thy heel, before thy face despair,
 yet gay this scene, and light this load of woe,
 compare with thy hereafter. think, o think,
 and ere thou plunge into the vast abyss,
 pause on the verge awhile, look down and see
 thy future mansion. — why that start of horror? 
from thy slack hand why drop the uplift steel? 
do thou not think such vengeance must await
 the wretch, that with his crime all fresh about he
 rush irreverent, unprepared, uncalled,
 into his maker presence, throw back
 with insolent disdain his choice gift? 

live then, while heaven in pity lend thou life,
 and think it all too short to wash away
 by penitential tear and deep contrition
 the scarlet of thy crime. so shall thou find
 rest to thy soul, so unappalled shall meet
 death when he come, not wanton invite
 his linger stroke. be it thy sole concern
 with innocence to live, with patience wait
 the appoint hour; too soon that hour will come,
 though nature run her course; but nature god,
 if need require, by thousand various way,
 without thy aid, can shorten that short span,
 and quench the lamp of life. — o when he come,
 rouse by the cry of wickedness extreme
 to heaven ascend from some guilty land
 now ripe for vengeance; when he come array
 in all the terror of almighty wrath;
 forth from his bosom pluck his linger arm,
 and on the miscreant pour destruction down! 
who can abide his come? who can bear
 his whole displeasure? in no common form
 death then appear, but start into size
 enormous, measure with gigantic stride
 the astonish earth, and from his look throw round
 unutterable horror and dismay. 
all nature lend her aid. each element
 arm in his cause. open fly the door of heaven,
 the fountain of the deep their barrier break,
 above, below, the rival torrent pour,
 and drown creation, or in flood of fire
 descend a livid cataract, and consume
 a impious race. — sometime when all seem peace,
 wake the grim whirlwind, and with rude embrace
 sweep nation to their grave, or in the deep
 whelm the proud wooden world; full many a youth
 float on his watery bier, or lie unwept
 on some sad desert shore! — at dead of night
 in sullen silence stalk forth pestilence:
 contagion close behind taint all her step
 with poisonous dew; no smite hand be see,
 no sound be hear; but soon her secret path
 be mark with desolation; heap on heap
 promiscuous drop: no friend, no refuge near;
 all, all, be false and treacherous around,
 all that they touch, or taste, or breathe, be death. 

but ah! what mean that ruinous roar? why fail
 these totter foot? — earth to its centre feel
 the godhead power, and tremble at his touch
 through all its pillar, and in every poor,
 hurl to the ground with one convulsive heave
 precipitate dome, and town, and tower,
 the work of age. crush beneath the weight
 of general devastation, million find
 one common grave; not even a widow leave
 to wail her son: the house, that shall protect,
 entomb its master, and the faithless plain,
 if there he fly for help, with sudden yawn
 start from beneath he. — shield i, gracious heaven! 
o snatch i from destruction! if this globe,
 this solid globe, which thy own hand have make
 so firm and sure, if this my step betray;
 if my own mother earth from whence i spring
 rise up with rage unnatural to devour
 her wretched offspring, whither shall i fly? 
where look for succour? where, but up to thou,
 almighty father? save, o save thy suppliant
 from horror such as these! — at thy good time
 let death approach; i reck not — let he but come
 in genuine form, not with thy vengeance arm,
 too much for man to bear. o rather lend
 thy kindly aid to mitigate his stroke,
 and at that hour when all aghast i stand,
 (a tremble candidate for thy compassion,)
 on this world brink, and look into the next;
 when my soul start from the dark unknown
 cast back a wishful look, and fond cling
 to her frail prop, unwilling to be wrench
 from this fair scene, from all her custom joy,
 and all the lovely relative of life,
 then shed thy comfort over i; then put on
 the gentle of thy look. let no dark crime
 in all their hideous form then start up
 plant themselves round my couch in grim array,
 and stab my bleed heart with two edg'd-torture,
 sense of past guilt, and dread of future woe. 
far be the ghastly crew! and in their stead,
 let cheerful memory from her pure cell
 lead forth a goodly train of virtue fair
 cherish in early youth, now pay back
 with tenfold usury the pious care,
 and pour over my wound the heavenly balm
 of conscious innocence. — but chief, thou,
 who soft-eyed pity once lead down from heaven
 to bleed for man, to teach he how to live,
 and, oh! still hard lesson! how to die,
 disdain not thou to smooth the restless bed
 of sickness and of pain. — forgive the tear
 that feeble nature drop, calm all her fear,
 wake all her hope, and animate her faith,
 till my rapt soul anticipate heaven
 burst from the thraldom of encumber clay,
 and on the wing of ecstasy upbear
 spring into liberty, and light, and life. 
