parody on the city and country mouse.

a country vicar in his homely house,
 please with his lot, and happy in his spouse,
 with simple diet, at his humble board,
 once entertain the chaplain of a lord; —
 he give he (all he can) a little fish,
 with sauce of oyster, in no silver dish;
 and, for the crave stomach sure relief,
 the glory of old England, rare roast-beef,
 horse-radish and potato, Ireland pride;
 a pudding too the prudent dame supply:
 their cheer beverage be a pint of port
 (though small the quantum) of the better sort;
 but plenty of good beer, both small and stout,
 with wine of elder to prevent the gout. 
the vicar hope, by such a various treat,
 to tempt his scarf-embellished friend to eat;
 with nice bit provoke his guest to dine,
 he carve the haddock, and he serve the wine:
 content his own sharp stomach to regale
 with plain, substantial roast-meat and mild ale. 
our courtly chaplain, as we may suppose,
 at such old-fashioned commons curl his nose;
 he try in vain to piddle, and, in brief,
 pish at the pudding, and decline the beef;
 at length, their homely dinner finish quite,
 thus to the vicar speak the priest polite:

 'how can my brother in this paltry town
' live undistinguished, to the world unknown? 
 'and not exalt your tower genius high,
' than here to herd with country clown — or squire;
 'stun with the discord of hoarse caw rook,
' the roar of wind, the dissonance of brook,
 'which discontent through the valley stray,
' plaintive and murmur at their long delay. 
 'come, come with i, nor long here abide;
' you have friend in town, and i will be your guide:
 'soon great preferment to your share will fall,
' a good fat living, or perhaps — a stall. ' 

these weighty reason sway the vicar mind —
 to town he hie, but leave his wife behind: —
 next levee day he wait on his grace,
 with hundred more, who bow to get a place;
 shove in the crowd, he stand amaze to see
 lord who to Baal bend the supple knee,
 and doctor sage he can not but admire,
 who stoop profound low — to rise the high. 
so much of ermine, lace, beau, bishop, young and old,
 it be like a cloud of sable edge with gold:
 by turn his grace the servile train address,
 please with a smile, or in a whisper bless. 
sick of the scene, the vicar seek the door,
 determine never to see London more;
 but, as his friend have please the hour to fix,
 first go to dinner to my lord at six; —
 he knock — be usher to the room of state,
 (my lord abroad) and dinner serve in plate;
 which, though it seem but common soup and hash,
 be real callipee and callipash,
 (the relic of the gaudy day before)
 what indian eat, and Englishman adore;
 with bright champaign the courtier crown the feast,
 soothe his own pride, and gratify his guest:
 all this conspire our stoic to control,
 and warp the steady purpose of his soul —
 when lo! the cry of fire create amaze —
 "the next house, lady riot, in a blaze"—
 aghast the vicar stand, in wild affright,
 then brief thus address the priest polite:
 "adieu, my friend — your state i envy not —
"beef, liberty, and safety be my lot. "
