Pollio:

a elegiac ode.

write in the wood near R— castle, 1762. 

by the same.

the peaceful evening breathe her balmy store. 
the playful school-boy wanton over the green;
 where spread poplar shade the cottage-door,
 the villager in rustic joy convene. 

amid the secret wind of the wood,
 with solemn meditation let i stray;
 this be the hour, when, to the wise and good,
 the heavenly maid repay the toil of day. 

the river murmur, and the breathe gale
 whisper the gentle wave bough among,
 the star of evening glimmer over the dale,
 and lead the silent host of heaven along. 

how bright, emerge over yond broom-clad height,
 the silver empress of the night appear! 
yond limpid pool reflect a stream of light,
 and faint in its breast the woodland bear. 

the water tumble over their rocky bed,
 solemn and constant, from yond dell resound;
 the lonely hearth blaze over the distant glade;
 the bat, low-wheeling, skim the dusky ground. 

august and hoary, over the slope dale,
 the gothic abbey rear its sculpture tower;
 dull through the roof resound the whistle gale;
 dark solitude among the pillar lower. 

where yond old tree bend over a place of grave,
 and solemn shade a chapel sad remains,
 where yond scathe poplar through the window wave,
 and, twine round, the hoary arch sustain;

there oft, at dawn, as one forget behind,
 who long to follow, yet unknowing where,
 some hoary shepherd, over his staff recline,
 pore on the grave, and sigh a break prayer. 

high over the pine, that with their darken shade
 surround yond craggy bank, the castle rear
 its crumble turret: still its towery head
 a warlike mien, a sullen grandeur wear. 

so, midst the snow of age, a boastful air
 still on the war-worn veteran brow attend;
 still his big bone his youthful prime declare,
 though, tremble over the feeble crutch, he bend. 

wild round the gate the dusky wall-flower creep,
 where oft the knight the beauteous dame have lead;
 go be the bower, the grot a ruin heap,
 where bay and ivy over the fragment spread. 

it be here our sire exult from the fight,
 great in their bloody arm, march over the lea,
 eye their rescue field with proud delight! 
now lose to they! and, ah how change to i! 

this bank, the river, and the fan breeze,
 the dear idea of my Pollio bring;
 so shine the moon through these soft nod tree,
 when here we wander in the eve of spring. 

when april smile the flowery lawn adorn,
 and modest cowslip deck the streamlet side,
 when fragrant orchard to the roseate morn
 unfold their bloom, in heaven own colour die;

so fair a blossom gentle Pollio wear,
 these be the emblem of his healthful mind;
 to he the letter page display its lore,
 to he bright fancy all her wealth resign:

he, with her pure flame the muse endow,
 flame never to the illiberal thought ally;
 the sacred sister lead where virtue glow
 in all her charm; he see, he feel, and die. 

oh partner of my infant grief and joy! 
big with the scene now past my heart overflow,
 bid each endearment, fair as once, to rise,
 and dwell luxurious on her melt woe. 

oft with the rise sun, when life be new,
 along the woodland have i roam with thou;
 oft by the moon have brush the evening dew,
 when all be fearless innocence and glee. 

the saint well, where yond bleak hill decline,
 have oft be conscious of those happy hour;
 but now the hill, the river crown with pine,
 and faint well have lose their cheer power. 

for thou be go — my guide, my friend, oh where,
 where have thou flee, and leave i here behind! 
my tender wish, my heart to thou be bare,
 oh, now cut off each passage to thy mind! 

how dreary be the gulph, how dark, how void,
 the trackless shore that never be repast! 
dread separation! on the depth untried
 hope falter, and the soul recoil aghast. 

wide round the spacious heaven i cast my eye;
 and shall these star glow with immortal fire,
 still shine the lifeless glory of the sky,
 and can thy bright, thy live soul expire? 

far be the thought — the pleasure most sublime,
 the glow of friendship, and the virtuous tear,
 the tower wish that scorn the bound of time,
 chill in this vale of death, but languish here. 

so plant the vine on norway wintery land,
 the languid stranger feeble bud, and die:
 yet there be a clime where virtue shall expand
 with godlike strength, beneath her native sky. 

the lonely shepherd on the mountain side,
 with patience wait the rosy open day;
 the mariner at midnight darksome tide,
 with cheerful hope expect the morning ray. 

thus i, on life storm-beaten ocean tost,
 in mental vision view the happy shore,
 where Pollio beckon to the peaceful coast,
 where fate and death divide the friend no more. 

oh that some kind, some pity kindred shade,
 who now, perhaps, frequent this solemn grove,
 will tell the awful secret of the dead,
 and from my eye the mortal film remove! 

vain be the wish — yet sure not in vain
 man bosom glow with that celestial fire,
 which scorn earth luxury, which smile at pain,
 and wing his spirit with sublime desire. 

to fan this spark of heaven, this ray divine,
 still, oh my soul! still be thy dear employ;
 still thus to wander through the shade be thy,
 and swell thy breast with visionary joy. 

so to the dark-browed wood, or sacred mount,
 in ancient day, the holy seer retire,
 and, lead in vision, drink at siloe fount,
 while rise ecstasy their bosom fire;

restore creation bright before they rise,
 the burn desert smile as eden plain,
 one friendly shade the wolf and lambkin choose,
 the flowery mountain sing, "Messiah reign!" 

though faint rapture my cold breast inspire,
 yet, let i oft frequent this solemn scene,
 oft to the abbey shatter wall retire,
 what time the moonshine dim gleam between. 

there, where the cross in hoary ruin nod,
 and weep yew overshade the letter stone,
 while midnight silence wrap these drear abode,
 and sooth i wander over my kindred bone,

let kindle fancy view the glorious morn,
 when from the burst grave the just shall rise,
 all nature smile, and by angel bear,
 messiah cross far blaze over the sky. 
