the history of JOSEPH:

a poem

book i

celestial Muse that on the blissful plain
 art oft invoke, to guide the immortal strain;
 inspire by thou, the firstborn son of light
 hail the creation in a tuneful flight:
 please with thy voice, the sphere begin their round,
 the morning star dance to the charm sound;
 yet thou have often leave the crystal tower,
 to visit mortal in their humble bower. 

favour by thou the courtly swain of old,
 beneath mount Horeb sacred wonder tell,
 of boundless chaos, and primaeval night,
 the spring of motion and the seed of light. 
the sun stand still, to hear his radiant birth,
 with the formation of the balance earth. 
the moon on high check her nocturnal car,
 and listen stay, with every linger star. 
the hill around, and lofty Sinah hear
 by who command their tower head be rear. 
the flower their gay original attend;
 their tuft crown the grove, adore, bend. 
the fountain rise, the stream their course withhold,
 to hear the ocean wondrous source reveal. 
the bird sit silent on the branch near,
 the flock and herd their verdant food forbear. 
the swain forget their labour while he sing,
 how, from the dust, their great forefather spring:
 a vital call awake he from the ground,
 the move clay obey the almighty sound. 
thus sing in lofty strain the noble bard;
 the heaven and earth their own formation hear. 

but thou, propitious Muse, a gentle fire
 do breathe, and tune to soft note the lyre,
 when royal Lebanon hear the amorous king
 the beauty of his love egyptian sing:
 the sacred lay a mystic sense enfold,
 and thing divine in human type be tell. 
disdain not, gentle power, my song to grace,
 while i the path of heavenly justice trace;
 and twine a bloom garland for the youth,
 renown for honour, and unblemished truth. 

let other tell of ancient conquest win,
 and mighty deed by favour hero do;
 (Heros enslave to pride, and wild desire)
 a virgin Muse, a virgin theme require;
 where vice and wanton beauty quit the field,
 and guilty love to steadfast virtue yield. 

Jacob, with heaven peculiar favour bless,
 leave the fertile region of the east,
 (where haran, then a noble city, stand,
 between fair Tigris, and Euphrates flood)
 from Laban flee, and by divine command
 pursue his journey to his native land. 
load with wealth, his numerous camel bear
 his wife, his child, and his household store;
 of purchase slave he lead a endless train,
 his flock and herd engross the wide champain. 

the shepherd art be all his father know,
 his son the same industrious life pursue;
 the god his pious ancestor adore
 the almighty god, at Bethel, he implore:
 a altar there, with grateful vow he rear,
 where twice the radiant vision have appear;
 the power of hell the dreadful omen fear:
 each demon tremble in his hollow shrine,
 the rave priest amaze thing divine. 

in himmon vale a fane to Moloch stand,
 around it rise a consecrate wood;
 who mingle shade exclude noonday light,
 and make below uninterrupted night. 
pale taper hang around in equal row,
 the mansion of the sullen king disclose;
 seven brazen gate its horrid entrance guard;
 within the cry of infant ghost be hear;
 on seven high altar rise pollute fire,
 while human victim feed the ruddy spire. 
the place, gehenna call, resemble well
 the native gloom and dismal vault of hell. 
it be night, and goblin in the darkness dance,
 the priest in frantic vision lay entranced;
 while here convene the pagan terror sit,
 in solemn council, and mature debate,
 avert the storm impend over their state. 
the apostate prince with resentment fire,
 anxious, and bend on black design, conspire
 to find out scheme successful to efface
 great heber name, and crush the sacred race;
 from whence they know, the long predict king,
 the infernal empire destine foe shall spring;
 who conqueror over their vanquish force shall tread,
 and all their captive chief in triumph lead. 
the affair their deep policy command,
 and bring they hither, from remote land;
 from ur, Armenia, and iberia shore,
 from Nile, and Ophir rich with golden oar,
 and where the Adrian wave, and where the atlantic roar. 

Nesroth appear, his amber chariot draw
 with snowy steed: he at the rise dawn
 the syrian worship from his airy hill,
 who vale with wealth the fame araxis fill. 
Belus forsake his high frequent dome,
 and over the famous plain of Shinah come:
 Plegor descend his mount; to he be pay,
 with impious rite, libation for the dead. 
imperious Rimmon come, who mansion stand
 on the fair bank of pharphar lucid flood. 
Osiris leave his Nile, and thunder Baal
 the rock, whence arnon plentous water fall. 
mithra, who all the east adore, be there;
 and like his own resplendent planet fair,
 with yellow tress, and enchant eye
 dissemble beauty, will the fiend disguise. 
nor fail a deity of female name,
 Astarte, with her silver cressent come:
 Melita leave her babylonian bower;
 where wanton damsel, crown with blush flower,
 in all the summer various lustre gay,
 detest orgy to the goddess pay. 

these various power, their various scheme propose
 but none the assemble please, till mithra rise;
 (of a allure mien above the rest)
 who thus the apostate potentate address. 

mankind by will step to ruin move,
 their own wild passion their destruction prove,
 but the most fatal be forbid love. 
old Jacob boast a daughter young and fair,
 fond leah glory and peculiar care:
 her eye inflame the gaze pagan heart,
 young Shechem have already feel their dart;
 who late see she with her virgin train,
 near shalem, wander over the dewy plain. 
i will fill his youthful breast with mad desire,
 by fraud, or force, his wish to acquire. 
the come day he do a feast prepare,
 by i instruct how to hide the snare:
 fair Dinah be his sister promise guest,
 impatient love will soon complete the rest. 
the damsel wrong her brother will inflame
 to right, with hostile arm, the hebrew shame:
 by which provoke, the canaanites shall join
 with we t'abolish this detest line. 

revenge and bloody faction be my care,
 Moloch reply; thy be the soft affair:
 without instruction thou can act thy part,
 well-practised in the nice allure art;
 euphrates bank, the senac conscious shade,
 attest thy freedom with the assyrian maid:
 thy voice, applaud in the heavenly grove,
 be there devote to terrestrial love:
 thy sacred lyre to human subject string,
 no more with tiresome hallelujah ring;
 this grace thy hand, a quiver hang behind,
 nor fail thy sparkle eye to charm the beauteous kind. 
the bold example of thy loose amour,
 prevail on number of the heavenly power;
 who vain have the first probation stand,
 proof to ambition, obstinate good. 
long after i, with my associate, fall;
 thy friend enlarge the monarchy of hell;
 on soft motive you abhor the sky,
 allure by woman captivate eye:
 the son of god thus with the race of man
 be mingle; hence the giant stock begin. 
our plot require we now, and if it fail,
 i will, in my turn, the hate tribe assail;
 domestic faction may at last prevail. 
Joseph, his dote father life and joy,
 by well-concerted mean we must destroy;
 this youth, above the rest, excite my fear,
 divine presage in his face appear;
 officious Gabriel care to he confine,
 foretell a man for mighty thing design:
 he brother, act by my powerful fire,
 against his envy life shall all conspire. 
Joseph remove, old Jacob great prop,
 the race shall mourn, in he, their blast hope. 
here Moloch cease; the infernal spirit rise,
 crown the double plot with vast applause. 

book ii

young Shechem all the night impatient lie;
 and seek with eager eye the break day;
 with ardent long wait the promise hour,
 and fancy all his wish in his power;
 Aner, his friend, improve the fatal fire,
 and sooth, with flatter scene, his wild desire. 

Sidonia, guiltless of her brother snare,
 to grace her lovely hebrew guest prepare;
 who with her young companion now appear,
 too innocent for nice reserve, or fear. 
her artless look, nor timorous, nor assure,
 with easy charm the jebusite allure
 a rosy tincture paint her guiltless face:
 her eye, peculiar to her beauteous race,
 sparkle with life, and dart immortal grace. 
rich orient bracelet, round her snowy arm,
 and faultless neck, improve she native charm. 
the hivite princess entertain the maid,
 to hamor palace fatal betray;
 where, at the pomp of one surprise feast,
 she meet the luxury of all the east. 
her thought the proud magnificence admire,
 the people custom, and their strange attire;
 until modest rule, and the decline day,
 with leah charge forbid she long stay:
 but ah! too late, she find herself betray
 to shechem power, a lose defenceless maid;
 a captive in his treacherous court retain,
 by fraud seduce, and brutal force constrain,
 her name dishonour, and her nation stain. 

in vain with tender sigh he strive to move
 the injure fair to voluntary love;
 the strict rule of chastity she know,
 with all that to her great descent be due;
 but what with gentle art he fail to gain,
 his wild desire by violence obtain. 

the hateful tiding reach her father ear,
 and almost sink his venerable year:
 her brother rage, and for revenge combine:
 but guard with secret guile their black design. 

the town in feast consume the second day,
 and plunge at night in fearless riot lay. 
the restless shepherd ere the linger dawn,
 each hold his sword, for horrid action draw:
 surprise the city like a rise flood,
 rage through the street, and bathe their sword in blood. 
the hebrew, please with this successful fate,
 spring furious on, and force the palace gate:
 fierce Simeon through the bright apartment fly,
 and old and young, without distinction, slay. 

Shechem, with restless passion still inspire,
 be with the charm Israelite retire;
 and first by mad insult Levi find,
 without a pause he give the desperate wound. 
take thy dispatch, curse ravisher, for hell,
 he say; and down the bleed victim fall:
 he fatal mistress turn away her eye,
 with horror seize, and tremble with surprise. 
the swain her rove vanity upbraid,
 and to their tent the penitent convey. 
their father, grieve, reprove the bloody fact;
 but Judah thus defend the hostile act. 

shall they, a race uncircumcised and vile,
 with lawless mixture abram flock defile? 
our wife and sister in our sight constrain;
 while we, regardless of the shameful stain,
 stand tame by, and scarce of wrong complain? 
they first entrench on hospitable trust,
 and human faith; – our vengeance be but just. 

such justice never mingle with my fame,
 good Israel cry, nor spot my guiltless name! 
the realm around, who idol god revere,
 will this black deed with indignation hear;
 and all their policy and rage unite,
 to blot our odious memory from the light. 

so hell believe; – but heaven a sacred dread
 of Jacob son among the nation spread;
 while he at Bethel, with a pious flame,
 implore the great unutterable name. 
from thence to mamre peaceful plain retire,
 where kiriath-arba lift her golden spire:
 illustrious Arba build and name the place,
 the boast father of the giant race;
 for they design the monstrous plan appear,
 to heaven the threaten battlement be rear. 
in careless joy and plenty here they live,
 and to the neighbour swain protection give. 

beneath the hill, on which their city stand,
 ascend high a venerable wood;
 to solemn shade, which give a secret dread. 
conceal a vault structure for the dead,
 machpelah call, with wondrous labour wrought;
 this Abram of the giant nation buy:
 the cave, the wood, the spring, and border field,
 ephron, their prince, by public contract seal. 

here to their purchase right the shepherd drive
 their fleecy charge, and unmolested live;
 while frequent through the consecrate ground,
 inscription and old monument they find. 
wherever celestial vision have appear,
 the pious worshipper a altar rear;
 the mystic name to mortal long unknown,
 be deep figure on the polish stone;
 by mark engrave on arch rock, it be see,
 that heavenly power have there converse with man. 

remote from this a lofty pillar stand;
 this Jacob to the rural concourse show;
 here see, he say, the memory retain
 of abram conquest near Damascus gain. 

to distant land the eastern rule be spread,
 and Jordan bank a yearly tribute pay:
 the king of Sodom first contemn the yoke,
 Adnah and zeboim next the treaty break. 
at this the royal elamite enrage,
 the neighbour king, his great ally, engage;
 Arioch and mighty tidal join their force,
 conquest wherever they turn attend their course. 
the horim on mount Seir their valour prove,
 their troop the Emims from their fortress drive. 

in siddim vale the adverse prince stay,
 there Shibna, Bera and Shemeber lie. 
Amraphel early meet his doubtful foe,
 and for the victory his rank dispose;
 but scarce the encounter can be call a fight,
 so soon the troop of Sodom take their flight:
 the coward race, unused to charge a foe,
 their javelin, sword and shield at once forgo. 
some seek the wood, and some a shelter cave;
 some in the rock their breath, inglorious, save;
 while other, plunge down fair Jordan tide,
 from the stern look of war their face hide. 
the invader sheath their sword, and scorn to grace
 with martial death the despicable race. 
Bera alone and lot sustain the field,
 but press by number be compel to yield:
 these, with the riches of the town, a prey
 to paran hill the conqueror bear away. 

this Abram hear, and gather on the plain
 a valiant band, his own domestic train:
 he glad assistance Eshcol bring, a youth
 of public honour, and unblemished truth;
 with Aner, mamre, dauntless both and young,
 brother, all three from noble Amor spring. 

it be night, secure the victor army lie,
 scornful of foe, and fearless of surprise;
 by heaven command a sudden vapour spread,
 over all the host, and cloud their drowsy head;
 to the high throne of sense soft slumber climb,
 slacken their sinew, and benumb their limb;
 the captive eye alone its force repel,
 nor to the please violence will yield. 

now near the camp the brave confederate draw,
 and by the glimmer fire its posture see;
 the foremost rank, the swift invader slay,
 and soon the wake prisoner hear and know
 their active friend, that to their succour fly. 
Abram his nephew, he the rest untie;
 the sleep foe avenge sword supply:
 from file to file the fearless brother pass,
 and leave they breathless on the purple grass. 
the old patriarch feel new life in every vein,
 and scatter wide destruction over the plain. 
the terror grow, the clash of arm, and cry
 of wound man afflict the ambient sky. 
prince Arioch, startle at the noise, awake,
 and from his eye the fatal slumber shake. 
at oft-repeated call his legion arm,
 and mad haste to meet the loud alarm;
 but by a force more prevalent outdo,
 on certain fate with eager step they run;
 disorder and amaze, they quit the field,
 and, rave, to their unknown victor yield. 

the morning rise, and with her blush light
 expose their damage, and inglorius flight;
 the joyful shepherd seize the abandon spoil:
 and now return from their martial toil,
 a royal priest at Salem Abram meet,
 with present, and a benediction greet
 the hebrew band: – to heaven he lift his eye,
 and bless be that propitious power, he cry,
 who walk the crystal circuit of the sky;
 who hear the boast of mortal with disdain,
 contemn their force, and make their triumph vain! 
his mien be solemn, and his face divine,
 refulgent gem around his temple shine:
 he graceful robe, a bright celestial blue,
 trail behind, a train majestic draw. 
the tenth of all great Abram give the priest,
 the king and Amorites divide the rest. 
all please, the generous conqueror loud praise,
 and to his fame this last column raise. 

the swain be listen still, when Jacob cry,
 to yonder mountain now direct your eye;
 for there a bright scene of glory lie. 
it be there the wonder sun in Abram view
 the noble height of human fortitude;
 the pious man in guiltless sleep lie drown,
 when through his ear thunder this fatal sound. 

arise, and Isaac on my altar lie,
 with thy own hand the destine victim slay. 
he start, and cry, who can this thought inspire? 
can heaven this monstrous sacrifice require? 

the dreadful call again surprise his ear,
 and lo! the wellknown heavenly form appear. 
he bow, and at the purple dawn arise,
 and with his darling to Moriah go. 
astonish long he by the altar stand,
 then pile with tremble hand the sacred wood;
 half dead himself; the wonder youth he bind,
 who now his sire severe intention find. 

what thought, he ask, my father, have possess
 your soul? what horrid fury fill your breast? 
be i to hell a sacrifice design? 
some cruel demon must your reason blind;
 the unblemished sky abhor this bloody deed,
 no human victim on their altar bleed. 

it be heaven, the patriarch say, this fact require,
 it be heaven – be witness yond ethereal fire! 
yet, countless as the star, from thou must spring
 victorious nation, and the mystic king:
 it be past relief – yet by himself he swear,
 who from the dead thy relic can restore;
 what obstacle surmount almighty power? 

this say, the pious youth resign his life;
 bless Abram shake off all paternal strife,
 and forward thrust the consecrate knife. 
as lightning from the sky, a angel break,
 and ward with his hand the fatal stroke;
 when thus a voice stream downward from above,
 breathe divine beneficence and love. 

by my great self i swear, to bless thy race
 with endless favour and peculiar grace;
 thy sceptre son the spacious east shall sway,
 while vanquish king obedient tribute pay. 

here Jacob end, and to his tent retire;
 their fleecy charge the part swain require. 

book iii

mean time the pagan deity, displease
 to find the public storm so soon appease,
 studious attempt by new malicious way,
 among the hebrew civil jar to raise:
 Moloch already have provoke the strife,
 and kindle mischief threaten Joseph life. 

the lovely youth, fair Rachel boast son,
 complete form, his seventeenth year begin;
 his mother sparkle eye, and bloom grace,
 mix with severe stroke, adorn his face. 
not he that in sabea fragrant grove,
 (as poet sing) inflame the queen of love;
 nor Hylas, nor Narcissus look so gay,
 when the clear stream his rosy blush display. 

in all his conduct something noble shine
 which mean he for a greatness yet unknown. 
vision have oft his rise fate foretell:
 the last to Jacob thus his lip unfold,
 his brother by: – when sleep have close my eye,
 a corny field before my fancy fly;
 (still to my thought the yellow crop appear!) 
my brother with i reap the bend ear;
 industrious each a single sheaf have bind,
 when they with sudden motion my surround,
 and bow with prostrate reverence to the ground. 
but now my mind of rural business clear,
 above my head a wondrous scene appear;
 the moon and star at high noon shine bright,
 unconquered by the sun superior light;
 methinks i see the gaudy orb descend,
 and at my foot with humble homage bend. 

the shepherd hear his story with surprise:
 must we thy vassal be? proud Ashur cry,
 with rage and threaten malice in his eye. 

at mamre, Jacob and his favourite stay,
 the rest to dothan flowery meadow stray;
 infernal envy all their bosom fire,
 and black resolve and horrid thought inspire. 
at last young Joseph murder be design:
 hell with the monstrous treachery combine. 

he come to Dothan, by his father send,
 and heaven alone his ruin can prevent. 
their guiltless prey he stand, without defence,
 but inborn worth, and fearless innocence. 
his brother crime, his father hoary hair
 be all the subject that alarm his fear. 

the fatal stroke they now prepare to give,
 when reuben art the hopeless youth retrieve,
 by thus advise, – let your brother live. 
a thousand easy method yet remain,
 to render all his glorious project vain;
 but till we have determine the design,
 to yonder pit th'aspiring boy confine. 
to he they yield, and to their tent retire,
 the fiend below their own success admire. 

the night prevail, and draw her sable train,
 with silent pace, along the ethereal plain. 
by fit the dance star exert their beam;
 the silver crescent glimmer on the stream;
 the sluggish water, with a drowsy roar,
 and linger motion, roll along the shore;
 their murmur answer to the rustle breeze,
 that faint whisper through the nod tree;
 the peaceful echo, undisturbed with sound,
 lay slumber in the cavern hill around;
 frenzy and faction, love and envy sleep;
 a still solemnity all nature keep;
 devotion only wake, and to the sky
 direct the pris'ner pious vow and eye:
 to God high throne a winge petition fly,
 and from the sky commission Gabriel draw;
 one of the seven, who by appoint turn
 before the throne ambrosial incense burn. 

a sudden day, return on the night,
 vanquish the shade, and put the star to flight;
 the enlighten cave receive the shine guest,
 in all his heavenly pomp divine dress;
 he greet the youth, and thus his charge express. 

tomorrow thou must leave rich Jordan shore. 
and trace moriah sacred hill no more;
 a great and grateful nation yet unknown,
 save by thy care, shall thou their patron own;
 but let thy breast impenetrable prove
 to wanton beauty, and forbid love:
 this heaven enjoin. – the wonder shepherd bow;
 the angel mount on a radiant cloud. 

the morning now her lovely face display,
 and with a rosy smile dispel the shade. 
the faction rise, and close in council sit,
 on mean that must determine Joseph fate;
 nor long they sit, for on the neighbour road
 a train of camel with their spicy load,
 follow by midian merchant, travel by:
 heaven mark the way, the envious brother cry:
 whatever the ambitious dreamer thought portend,
 his hope with these to foreign land we will send. 

they stop the midianites, and soon agree,
 resolve no more his hate face to see. 
with look, which perfect inward anguish tell,
 and fall tear, he take this sad farewell. 

i go to wander on some barbarous clime,
 may heavenly justice never avenge this crime! 
be still indulgent to my father age,
 his grief for i with flatter hope assuage. 

they hear, they see the anguish of his soul,
 and scarce their struggle pity can control;
 touch with so sad a scene, they all begin
 to feel remorse for this unnatural sin,
 and half repent: but hate and envy prove
 their victor passion, and repress their love. 
they form a specious fraud to hide the deed
 from their old sire, and in the plot succeed. 
their brother be vary coat they still retain,
 and with a bleed kid the vestment stain;
 with this to mamre treacherous Simeon go,
 too well the lose old man the relic know. 
after a dismal pause, his sorrow break
 its violent way, and this sad language speak. 

my son! – alas, some savage monster prey! 
why have i live to this detest day? 
why have i linger thus? i shall have die,
 when thy more happy mother leave my side,
 my best-loved wife: – but all my Rachel face
 i can in thy resemble feature trace. 
torment thought! – o hide i from the light! 
its useless ray afflict my feeble sight:
 come lead i to the solitary grave,
 despair and woe that dark retirement crave;
 there shall i, stretch upon my dusty bed,
 forget the toil of life, and mingle with the dead. 

in vain his friend attempt to bring relief,
 in vain persuade inexorable grief;
 it be deep, and intermingle with his soul,
 nor time, nor counsel can its force control. 

book iv

mean while through savage wood, and desert vast,
 the captive with his midian master past. 
at last rich egypt pleasant coast be see,
 the level mead dress with immortal green;
 between they fertile Nile direct his course,
 and noble flow from his immortal source. 
along the border of the sacred flood,
 aspire grove and stately city stand:
 here ancient Tanais in her height appear,
 before amphion lute the theban wall have rear. 

the sun be devote city, radiant on,
 with roof emboss, and golden foliage shine;
 ere skilful Vulcan be at Lemnos name,
 or cynthia dart, or shield for Pallas frame. 

distinct from these, on the pelusian strand,
 Ansana crown with silver turret stand;
 raise to its height, as old tradition tell,
 by powerful magic, and secure by spell:
 the egyptian wizard here themselves immure,
 converse with hell, and practice rite impure. 

now mighty pyramid the sight surprise,
 on masre plain the spiral tower arise. 
Redousa here magnificent shroud
 its lofty head among surround cloud:
 by Saurid build, the dare structure stand
 the fury of the universal flood. 
phacat and samir point top ascend,
 and over the field their lengthen shade extend;
 their compass sacred to the dead remain,
 within eternal night and silence reign;
 no lightsome ray salute they from the sky,
 but glare lamp depend from on high,
 with sickly gleam the hollow space supply. 
here ancient king, embalm with wondrous cost,
 a long exemption from corruption boast:
 in artful figure some be sit place,
 with fruitless pomp, and idle ensign grace;
 while other stretch in sleep posture lie,
 on fold carpet of imperial dye:
 their hover ghost, please with this mimic pride,
 among the breathless carcase reside. 
but what prodigious thing within be show,
 be to the hebrew stranger yet unknown,
 astonish at their outward bulk alone. 

and now arrive where zoan wall enclose
 imperial tower, the midianites expose
 their fragrant traffic, with the handsome slave
 his mind beyond his year compose and grave;
 his aspect something speak divine great,
 something that mark he for a noble fate. 

a generous captain, chief of Pharaoh band,
 admire much the graceful captive, stand,
 then give the midianites their full demand. 
a sudden friendship in his breast he find,
 experience only by unvulgar mind:
 some heavenly being have prepare his thought,
 and on his heart the kind impression wrought. 

without regret, young stranger, follow i,
 say Potiphar, i now have ransom thou;
 from servitude this moment thou be free. 

the youth receive the favour with a grace,
 that answer all the promise of his face. 

front the royal house, a structure crown
 with turret stand, and palmy grove around;
 discourse, hither through the walk they go,
 both please alike, and equal content. 

the seat they reach, when for a costly vest
 the master call; in this the youth they dress:
 no more disparage with a slave attire,
 his faultless shape and feature all admire. 
his hair, like pale amber, from his crown
 in float curl and shine wave fall down. 
young Paris such surprise charm display,
 when first in gold and Tyrian silk array,
 he lay his crook aside, forget the swain,
 and bid adieu to ida flowery plain. 
then for his wife the captain bid they send,
 and show with boast joy his purchase friend. 

the fair Sabrina, late make his bride,
 be in her beauty celebrate pride. 
her large black eye shine with a sprightly fire,
 and love at every fatal glance inspire. 
the swarthy lustre of her charm face
 the full blow lily and the rose disgrace. 
her glossy hair outvy the raven wing,
 and curl about her neck in wanton ring. 
affect she take a careless view,
 and to her own apartment soon withdraw. 

Joseph belove and happy long remain,
 and from his lord successive favour gain;
 who now at home groan prosperous, and abroad,
 believe his guest some favourable god:
 he give he over his house the full command,
 intrust all his treasure to his hand. 

mean time Sabrina feed within her breast
 a secret fire, but shame its rage suppress,
 when first she see the charm hebrew eye,
 she feel, but well dissemble the surprise;
 but through her various art a inward care
 the languor of her pensive look declare. 

Cyrena find the change, (a syrian maid,
 wellborn, but from her native coast betray:)
 she see the change, but lead by nice law,
 be thoughtless still of its reproachful cause. 
her voice, her easy wit, her eloquence,
 can hold the wild passion in suspense. 
attend oft her mistress to a grove,
 their usual walk with please tale she strive
 to entertain her thought, and charm her grief;
 nor fail her art to give a short relief. 
her native clime the please subject prove,
 the syrian pomp, their custom, and their love:
 among the rest Sabrina hear her name
 Semiramis, a queen of ancient fame,
 and ask she now the story to relate;
 repose beneath a spread palm they sit. 

book v

the maid begin. – where fame Coaspes lave
 rich elam border with his sacred wave,
 along the field their tent the shepherd spread,
 by they the king unnumbered flock be feed. 

the silent dawn be misty yet and grey,
 and hoary moisture on the mountain lay. 
intent on rural care, with early haste,
 a peasant near a rocky cavern past;
 across his path be raise a mossy bed,
 over that a rich embroider mantle spread;
 this, lift up, reaveal a lovely child,
 which fair than the rosy morning smile:
 the wonder swain forget his country care,
 and back to simma house the infant bear. 

Simma his master be, though wealthy, just:
 the royal land and flock be make his trust:
 he riches still amass without a heir,
 and see now the child surpass fair,
 he take and breed she with indulgent care;
 in nothing he control her grow year,
 no cost to please her boundless fancy spare. 

when, by revolve moon, successive time
 have bring her beauty to its perfect prime,
 her shape be faultless, and in all her mien
 presage mark of majesty be see:
 no mortal ever can boast so fair a face,
 such radiant eye, and so divine a grace. 
a flowery wreath her beauteous temple crown,
 her snowy vest a crimson girdle bind:
 thus dress, she walk a goddess over the plain,
 admire and love by all the gaze swain;
 to she the fragrant tribute of the spring,
 with amorous zeal on bend knee they bring. 

not distant far from wealthy simma seat,
 heroic Menon own a fair retreat;
 his rank, and early worth, the high command
 of all the fame assyrian force have gain:
 in peaceful time the chief who all admire,
 to prove a soft happiness, retire;
 it be here Semiramis his wish fire,
 with ravish eye her heavenly face he view,
 and for the glorious prize to Simma sue;
 proffer with sacred rite his vow to bind:
 this honour please the haughty virgin mind;
 on mean term she have his suit deny;
 with virtue guard and a noble pride,
 the lover find success, but all his joy
 a sudden summons from the king destroy. 

bactria revolt, Ninus the tiding hear,
 himself in arm to meet the foe prepare. 
but three short day ungentle fate allow
 sad Menon, for his sigh and part vow:
 he curse his martial charge, and public fame,
 and loathe the encumbrance of a glorious name,
 which rend he now from all the joy of life,
 his love Semiramis, his charm wife. 

she hear the king command with less surprise,
 and, Menon, banish all your care, she cry:
 we can – it be impossible to part,
 love with heroic courage fire my heart. 
to follow you through rage sea i will go,
 over burn desert, or perpetual snow. 
by your example lead, i shall not fear
 the fly arrow, or the point spear;
 pierce with a fatal dart, be Menon by,
 it will be a soft, a easy thing, to die. 
the event be what it will, with you i will run
 to certain death, nor any danger shun;
 be witness to my vow, thou radiant sun! 
nor can the adventurous deed my conduct stain,
 secure with you the secret shall remain;
 i bold can defy all other eye,
 in threaten armour, and a martial guise. 

new pleasure fill the hero breast, to find
 such beauty, love, and steadfast virtue join. 
a thousand kind transport thing he say,
 a thousand vow of last passion make:
 then for a rich habiliment of war
 he send, and dress himself the smile fair. 

a costly helmet glitter on her head,
 on which a dove its silver pinion spread;
 a plume of white feather dance above,
 with every tremble breath of air they move. 
the embroider scarf that over her armour flow,
 with dazzle flame of gold and scarlet glow. 
her hand a javelin shake with mimic pride,
 a paint quiver rattle by her side. 
her height and mien adorn the warlike dress,
 more vigorous ray her charm eye express. 
the courser, of his beauteous burden proud,
 with golden trappings bound through the crowd. 

Menon, of syrian arm the grace and pride,
 keep near the lovely masquerader side. 
on dura plain the babylonian force
 in rank attend their mighty leader course. 
while Ninus, graceful as a martial god,
 exalt on his glitter chariot ride. 

the bactrian their approach foe disdain,
 resolve their fortress brave to maintain;
 and long the town with matchless courage hold,
 and oft to flight the armenian troop compel:
 until bold Semiramis, who danger seek,
 and fearless in the foremost rank have fight,
 observe a rock, which over a castle lean;
 the bactrian this be careless to defend,
 believe it from all access secure:
 she find a path among the cliff obscure;
 then with a choose band intrepid gain
 the top, and soon the unguarded fort obtain. 
the town thus make the fierce besieger prey,
 to she they give the conquest of the day. 
all praise the youth, (for such she be believe)
 her bold address each party have deceive;
 but Ninus most her fortitude admire,
 he view her bloom youth, her race enquire. 

Menon in dotage lose, with foolish pride,
 no more the fatal secret strive to hide;
 nor once imagine this unlucky boast,
 the joy of all his future life must cost. 
Ninus with other eye her beauty view,
 in other term his gratitude renew. 

to Babylon return, he yet conceal
 his grow flame, by menon worth withhold;
 too well he with a sad reflection know,
 what to his counsel, and his sword he owe;
 these generous tie at first his love oppose:
 but nothing can the increase rage restrain;
 by gentle mean he yet his end will gain. 

Menon, he say, my wish to procure,
 i will give thou city, and a boundless store
 of gold, and precious gem; and for a bride,
 a bloom princess to the crown ally:
 all this, and more, to gain her love i will give;
 without Semiramis i can live. 

resent Menon, with a handsome pride,
 refuse his offer, and the suit deny. 

the soft sex he next attempt to gain;
 she too reject his passion with disdain. 
what now avail the glory of the east? 
nor wealth, nor empire can procure his rest. 
tire with unheeded sigh, and fruitless prayer,
 he try more rigurous mean to ease his care;
 and threaten thus: – with my desire comply,
 or soon prepare to see your hero die. 

from Menon this she hide, who less severe
 observe she to the amorous king appear:
 he fondness with the jealous passion grow;
 no joy, no lightsome interval he know,
 the mingle frenzy give he no repose. 

she false! he cry, my fair, enchant wife! 
and can i yet protract this wretched life? 
this anxious heart, with hopeless grief oppress,
 in death cold shade shall find perpetual rest,
 he say; then all the hostile star defy,
 and plunge the fatal weapon in his side. 

a long adieu! Semiramis, he cry;
 with those love accent on his lip he die;
 she hear the part groan, and to his succour fly. 
sink on the floor she see her lover bleed,
 himself the author of the barbarous deed;
 but true to love, and virtue strict law,
 she neither know, nor can suspect the cause. 
seize with a sudden horror and surprise,
 she faint, and near the breathless carcase lie;
 her fright woman to her rescue haste,
 and wake the doubtful spark of life, at last. 
a hollow groan ensue; with feeble sight
 she meet the day, and loathe the flash light. 
a steadfast sorrow in her face appear,
 above the soft relief of female tear;
 silent as death, her word no utterance find,
 to tell the inward anguish of her mind:
 a fix, sedate, and rational despair
 compose her look, and settle in her air. 

in such a sullen calm the billow sleep,
 so smooth a aspect wear the gloomy deep;
 while treacherous wind their gather breath refrain,
 presage tempest on the trouble main. 

the impatient prince with just respect attend
 her ebb grief, and long his flame suspend;
 and long her steadfast thought relentless prove
 to proffer empire, and invite love;
 till fate itself her stubborn heart incline
 to take a crown, by all the star design,
 and fill a sphere proportion to her mind. 

Ninus be now of every wish possess,
 with sovereign rule, and bright pleasure bless:
 but ah! how short a boast have mortal joy? 
what sudden storm the flatter calm destroy? 
what human privilege, what lawless power
 can one short day retard the appoint hour? 

thrice through the midnight silence, from the ground,
 the startle monarch hear a warn sound;
 thrice menon ghost a frown spectre stand,
 and seem to beckon with his airy hand. 
a sudden faintness seize his tremble heart,
 while hasty life retire from every part;
 speechless and pale his eye-ball roll in death,
 while with reluctant pang he yield his breath. 

the mournful princess to his merit just,
 with wondrous pomp inter the royal dust:
 high on a mount his sepulchre she place,
 with marble spire, and point arch grace. 
she bid farewell to love deceitful flame;
 resolve to leave behind a glorious name,
 in costly structure of immortal fame. 

a lofty dome to Belus first she build:
 the inward roof with dazzle silver gilt;
 the god be fashion in a wondrous mould,
 with perfect art; his bulk be massy gold;
 his sacred utensil be all the same,
 while fragrant oil in golden socket flame. 

old Babel next with boundless cost she wall;
 and Babylon the spacious city call;
 its bound with fort and battlement be crown,
 and compass in a endless tract of ground,
 valley and level hill the vast extent surround:
 where front rank of palace be see. 
with stream, and grove, and paint mead between. 
Euphrates in its course the town divide,
 while through the midst his stately current glide. 
around the place a hundred gate unfold,
 through which a hundred glitter chariot roll;
 which all for state attend the queen command,
 when she her progress make through distant land. 
resolve to visit now the neighbour Medes,
 her train she over the lofty Sagris lead. 
at pompous Ecbatana now she stay,
 and all her own magnificence display. 
gay project here employ her active mind,
 garden, and seat of pleasure she design;
 luxurious nature with her art combine. 

not far from thence a plain extend lay,
 with stately grove and flowery verdure gay;
 the spread palm, the cedar, and the pine,
 arch above their mingle branch join. 

Semiramis now turn a ancient flood,
 with matchless labour, through the charm wood;
 the plenteous stream in various rill divide,
 while marble bound confine the crystal tide. 
in marble bason of a equal row,
 myrtle, and balm, and flowery Cassia grow. 
prodigious rock entire be hither bring,
 smooth arch through their craggy side be wrought:
 here artificial hill their summit rear,
 for shade retire grott around appear. 
in various bloom the valley stand below,
 from far the beauteous syrian rose glow. 
all that perfume the bless sabaean field
 grow here, with all that sacred Nysa yield. 
here breathe the fragrant calamus, and fir,
 cinnamon, frankincense, and weep myrrh. 
shrill bird among the spicy branch sing,
 their warble note along the valley ring:
 the wind and water with a gentle noise
 double the sound, and answer every voice. 

the queen a while have these diversion prove,
 and then her court to Babylon remove:
 but ah! what height of happiness be free
 from fickle chance, or certain destiny? 
the princess find a swift decay control
 the usual force and vigour of her soul;
 nor struggle nature can its force repel,
 while heaven and earth the public change foretell. 

she from the oracle enquire the event,
 the flatter priest this please answer send:
 that from the god she draw her heavenly race,
 and short must the immortal number grace. 
please with the glory of her future state,
 she yield without reluctance to her fate. 

Cyrena end her tale; the close day
 withdraw its splendour, and forbid their stay. 

book vi

still with impatient love Sabrina pine,
 and now to speak the fatal truth design;
 soothe by her own indulgent hope, which trace
 a secret passion in the hebrew face. 
he sigh, and when he think himself alone,
 oft seem some new misfortune to bemoan,
 in foreign accent, and a tongue unknown. 
her vanity a explanation find,
 and put a sense on every flatter sound,
 forgetful of her nuptial vow and fame,
 she fond thus betray her guilty flame. 

if yet my torment be to thou unknown,
 if yet my sigh the mystery have not show,
 insensible, – let this confession prove
 the strange excess, and grandeur of my love. 
yet have i still my wild desire suppress,
 have not thy eye a equal flame confess. 

let i be punish with the last disdain,
 he say, if ever i harbour thought so vain! 
i never sabrina favour so abuse,
 nor once your virtue in my heart accuse. 
shall i perfidious (heaven forbid!) offend
 my generous master, – i may say my friend;
 let scandal sink my name, when so unjust
 i prove, so false to hospitable trust! 

thus with a modest turn he will reclaim
 her amorous frenzy, and conceal her shame;
 nor wait her leave, but hasty withdraw. 
careless her limb upon a couch she throw,
 and curse her folly with a thousand tear;
 till iphicle, her artful nurse, appear;
 of so much grief she press to know the cause,
 at last the secret from her mistress draw. 

you wrong, the beldame cry, your own desert,
 for you have charm, the youth a human heart. 
your beauty may a savage breast inspire,
 at sight of you the cold age take fire. 
but where be the wonder that a bashful boy,
 shall, at the first address, be nice and coy? 
he love, no doubt, and languish like you,
 but fear the ambitious motive to pursue:
 nor shall your utmost wish want redress,
 i have a draught that give divine success;
 Nepenthe, which the immortal quaff above;
 these sacred drop reward chemis love. 

when totis, by his death, the full command
 of misraim leave in fair charoba hand,
 the rich Gebirus from Chaldea come
 with foreign pomp to seek the royal dame. 
chemis adorn his train, who charm face
 allure a goddess of the watery race;
 on nilus bank the young chaldean stand,
 when lo! merina rise from the flood,
 her chariot set with pearl, the wave divide,
 soft along the silver stream she glide. 
her robe with pearl and sparkle ruby shine,
 her bright eye express a light divine. 
nor from her humid bed the bloom day
 have ever ascend with a clear ray. 
her smile the rage tempest can appease,
 allay the wind, and calm the swell sea. 
she leave her crystal vault, and coral grove,
 her liquid kingdom, and immortal love,
 and over the grassy mead with chemis rove. 
at part give he this celestial spell,
 which every good procure, and can each ill repel. 
my mother from this youth derive her line,
 and this she leave i, as a gift divine,
 by all her ancestor preserve with care;
 one heavenly drop shall banish your despair. 

her flatter nurse charm she vain try,
 for Joseph still her hateful passion fly:
 but obstinate in love to gain her end,
 to fame Asana, iphicle she send. 

harpinus there a uncouth dwelling own,
 plant with yew and mournful cyprus round;
 who shadow every please thought control,
 and fill with deep anxiety the soul. 
hither black fiend at dead of night advance,
 the horn serim through the darkness dance:
 from earth, from air, and from the briny deep
 they come, and here nocturnal revel keep. 
from gloomy Acherusia, and the fen
 of Serbon, and the forest of Birdene;
 from Ophiodes, the serpent isle, they come,
 and syrtes, where fantastic spectre roam;
 from Chabnus, and the wild psebarian peak,
 who hoary cliff the cloud long order break. 

in hellish banquet, and obscene delight,
 the curse assembly here consume the night. 
the sicken moon her feeble light withhold,
 in sable cloud her argent horn she fold;
 the constellation quench their glimmer fire,
 and fright far to distant sky retire. 

amid these horror, in his echo cell,
 and wind vault, the necromancer dwell:
 pass from room to room, the brazen door
 resound, as when explode thunder roar. 
the day exclude thence, blue sulphur burn,
 with frightful splendour, in a thousand urn. 
the visard here employ his mighty spell,
 and great event by divination tell;
 inscribe mystic figure on the ground,
 and mutter word of a unlawful sound;
 which from their tomb the shiver ghost compel,
 and force they future secret to reveal. 
the star he know, when adverse, or benign;
 when with malignant influence they shine,
 or, dart prosperous ray, to love incline. 

the nurse a please answer here obtain,
 and thus sabrina droop thought sustain. 
a third succeed day shall crown your love,
 and every amorous star propitious prove. 

Sabrina feed the while her guilty flame,
 and now the third appoint morning come;
 when for the favour youth in haste she send
 the message with reluctance he attend. 
silent she sit; while wait her command,
 fix at a formal distance long he stand. 
her eye still fix on Joseph beauteous face;
 a close contempt, and inward hatred trace;
 yet desperate to complete her own disgrace. 

ungrateful youth! she cry, too well i find
 by these cold look, thy unrelenting mind:
 thy savage temper, and unconquered pride,
 by word of sacred import thou will hide,
 thou talk of holy tie, and rule severe,
 pretend some avenge god to fear. 
what god, alas! do cruelty command? 
or human bliss malicious withstand? 
such thought as these the heavenly power arraign,
 efface their goodness, and their justice stain. 
will they the generous principle control,
 who give this amorous bias to the soul? 
what nature be, they make it: nor can bind
 with servile law the freedom of the mind:
 be this our lot, happy the brutal kind,
 that unmolested through the forest rove,
 licentious in their choice, and unconfined in love! 
virtue! – a mere imaginary thing! 
torment it may, but can no pleasure bring. 
honour! – it be nothing but precarious fame,
 for empty breath, for a fantastic name. 
will thou my soft entreaty still deny,
 and see i languish, and unpitied die? 
consent at last to love enchant joy,
 while pleasure call thou with her tempt voice:
 these fold curtain shall our bliss conceal,
 that no intrude eye our theft reveal. 

delude fair! the noble youth reply,
 can we some artful labyrinth devise
 to hide our sin, and far from mortal sight
 retire, involve in all the shade of night;
 yet there, – expose to heaven unclouded view,
 its vengeance will our treachery pursue;
 distinguish plague will soon our guilt expose,
 while all your sex glory you must lose. 
to Potiphar alone your vow belong,
 in he a tender lover you must wrong. 
for i, where shall i hide my hate face,
 can i be conscious of a crime so base? 
no, let i through the yawn earth descend,
 rather than with such insolence offend
 the law of god, and kindness of my friend! 
my master favour, endless to recite,
 when i with such ingratitude requite;
 when with a thought so horrid and profane,
 my faith and spotless loyalty i stain;
 let wrathful lightning flash round my head,
 and bolt of rage thunder strike i dead! 
let execration, and eternal shame
 destroy my peace, and blast my hate name! 

these word with such a awful air he speak,
 celestial virtue sparkle in his look,
 his haughty mistress all her hope resign,
 and feel a different frenzy seize her mind:
 assist fiend the hellish thought suggest,
 and blot the tender passion from her breast. 
a crimson scarf with ornamental pride
 be over his graceful shoulder loose tie;
 this furious she snatch, while from the embrace
 he free himself, and quit the hate place. 

she call aloud, her voice Cyrena hear,
 and enter see her well-dissembled tear,
 a tale of proffer violence she feign,
 and of the hebrew arrogance complain,
 alarm at she repeat call, she say,
 the monster leave his curse design, and flee. 
his scarf the truth confirm: her lord the while
 return; her word his easy faith beguile:
 blind with rage he call the injure youth,
 and thus upbraid his violate truth. 

how can thou, wretch! belie a mind so base,
 with that undaunted air, and guiltless face? 
hypocrisy so steady and complete,
 a villain, cautious as thyself, may cheat;
 no wonder then thy practise saint show
 shall on my honest artless mind impose. 
my soul entire to thou i do resign;
 except my bed, whatever i have be thy. 
in fetter let the ungrateful slave be tie,
 some gloomy dungeon shall the monster hide. 

dungeon he say, and chain i can defy,
 but will not, curse with your displeasure, die. 
this sad reflection aggravate my fate;
 how shall i bear my generous master hate? 
oh stay! at last my vindication hear,
 while by the unutterable name i swear,
 my thought be all from this injustice clear. 

he cease, and still sabrina shame conceal,
 nor one accuse word her fraud reveal. 
now to a damp unwholesome vault convey,
 Joseph in ignominious chain be lay. 

book vii

it be night, and now advance the solemn hour;
 the keeper of the prison, from his tower,
 astonish, see a form divine bright,
 smile through the shade, and dissipate the night;
 with stream splendour trace all the way,
 it enter where the newcome prisoner lay. 

some god, he cry, who innocence defend,
 some god in that propitious light descend. 
this stranger sure, whatever the fact can be
 allege against he, from the guilt be free. 

the sacred vision to the youth appear,
 his spirit with celestial fragrance cheer. 
his heavenly smile will even despair control,
 and with immortal rapture fill the soul. 
his youthful brow a fair tiara crown,
 a fold zone his gaudy vestment bind,
 embroider high with amaranthus round. 
such wing the arabian phoenix never wear,
 sprinkle with gold and shade purple over. 
beneficent his aspect and address,
 his lip seraphic harmony express;
 his voice may stay the invade sleep of death,
 while these soft word flow with his balmy breath. 

from the unclouded realm of day above,
 from endless pleasure, and unbounded love,
 from paint field deck with immortal flower,
 from blissful valley, and ethereal bower,
 i come, commission by peculiar grace,
 with great presage to thy future race. 

this Gabriel speak; the pious hebrew breast
 prophetic flame and power divine confess;
 a awful silence, and profound suspense,
 close the tumultuous avenue of sense;
 the heavenly trance, each wander thought confine,
 collect the operation of the mind,
 while Gabriel all the inward scene design. 

before he, raise to high dominion, all
 his humble brother in prostration fall;
 his joyful eye again his father see,
 he take the blessing on his bend knee. 
vast in number Jacob son increase,
 poor vassal by the egyptian be distress,
 and by a royal tyrant yoke oppress:
 to heaven they cry, a aid that never fail,
 heaven hear the cry, the potent prayer prevail. 

a mighty prophet, by divine command;
 do bold before the rage monarch stand,
 and bring his great credential in his hand. 
across the ground his wondrous rod he throw;
 the rod transform a move serpent grow,
 unfold his speckle train, and over the pavement flow. 
a dazzle train of miracle ensue,
 which speak the prophet and his mission true. 

the spring, the stand lake, and run flood
 his powerful word convert to reek blood;
 the wound billow stain the verdant shore,
 advance slow with a mournful roar. 
infernal night her sable wing extend,
 and from the black unbottomed deep ascend:
 the seer denounce plague on man and beast;
 contagious torment soon the air infest;
 aloud he bid a sudden tempest rise,
 on rapid wing the storm obedient fly;
 the extend sky be rend from pole to pole,
 blue lightning flash, and dreadful thunder roll. 

nor yet the obdurate king the god revere,
 who every element obsequious fear;
 till vengeful stroke of power confess divine,
 with clear, but terrible conviction shine. 

the night be cover with unusual dread,
 while every star malignant influence shed. 
pale spectre through the street of zoan roam,
 from sepulchre amaze echo come;
 while, like a flame meteor, down the sky,
 with threaten speed the fatal angel fly. 
reluctant justice, with a grace severe,
 sit in his look, and triumph in his air. 
a crest helmet shade his awful brow;
 behind his military vesture flow,
 and like a evening ruddy meteor glow. 
he grasp his sword, unsheathed for certain fate,
 destruction, death, and terror on he wait;
 mortal the stroke, invisible the wound,
 while die groan with mingle shriek resound. 
from house to house the dreadful rumour run,
 while wretched father mourn their firstborn son. 

the alarm egyptian, at the break day,
 hurry the sacred multitude away;
 but Pharaoh soon his dare sin renew,
 blaspheme loud the rescue slave pursue;
 the fearful tribe stand tremble on the shore,
 the foe behind, a rage sea before. 

their glorious chief extend his powerful wand,
 and give the mighty signal from the strand;
 the obedient wave the mighty signal take,
 and part, crowd the distant surge back;
 on either hand, like crystal hill, they rise;
 between, a wide stupendous valley lie:
 with joyful shout the grateful hebrew pass,
 nor do the harden foe decline the chace;
 until heaven command the watery chain dissolve,
 and in the whelm deep their pride involve. 
while Israel through the desert take their way,
 lead by a cloud which march on by day;
 but rest cheere the encamp host by night,
 with lambent flame, and unexampled light. 

where lofty Sinah shade the neighbour plain,
 command now the sacred tribe remain;
 prepare with mystic rite, to hear with awe
 their saviour god pronounce their future law:
 close bound the mountain guard from all approach,
 that rash none the hallow place may touch. 

reluctant see appoint morning rise,
 and fiery splendor glow around the sky. 
while from the ethereal summit god descend,
 beneath his foot the starry convex bend. 
his radiant form majestic darkness hide,
 while on a tempest rapid wing he ride. 
the tremble earth his awful presence own,
 the forest flame, the cleave desert groan,
 each river back his wander current call,
 and rush down the subterranean fall,
 to the profound cave affright fly,
 reveal and bear each sandy channel lie. 
their stately head the ancient mountain sink,
 and to a level with the vale will shrink;
 again secure in their primaeval bed,
 beneath the wave will hide their fearful head.
 old Sinah quake at the tremendous weight,
 that press with awful foot his cloudy height;
 obscure with blackness, shade, and curl smoke,
 prodigious lightning from the darkness break;
 while rage thunder round the welkin fly,
 the ethereal trumpet sound loud and high. 

adore low the pious nation bend,
 and now the solemn voice of god attend:
 the angel shift the scene, and leave the rest
 inimitable all, and not to be express. 

the curtained tabernacle next he paint,
 nor colour for the gay pavilion want;
 the golden altar, with attend priest,
 their sacred pomp, and institute vest. 
then bring the favour tribe where Jordan flow:
 and all the wellknown border landskip show. 

a airy conquest on beth-horon's plain,
 the warlike son of Jacob now obtain:
 before the troop a glorious leader stand,
 a paint javelin balance in his hand;
 he bold thus the roll orb command. 

thou sun! to lengthen this victorious day,
 with linger beam on lofty Gibeah stay:
 and thou, fair morn! retard thy hasty flight,
 and gild the vale of Ajalon at night. 

this say, the fly army they pursue,
 and all the amorean king overthrow. 
the promise land entire gain, they spread
 their peaceful dwelling round moriah head. 

but with the night the please vision fly
 Gabriel unsealed the youthful prophet eye,
 his sense from the heavenly trance release,
 and all the sacred agitation cease. 
the thoughtful keeper early to the vault
 descend, and thence the injure prisoner bring;
 treat he with kindness, and a just regard,
 and give he all the freedom of the ward. 

of Pharaoh servant two be here detain,
 the steward, who his table do command,
 with he that fill the royal cup with wine;
 suspect both as traitor in design. 
Joseph, observe a deject air
 sit heavy in their eye, with friendly care
 enquire the cause, which free both reveal,
 mysterious dream of the past night they tell. 

and thus the first: – methinks a bulky vine
 grow up unpropped; three wave branch shine
 with purple grape, and to my hand incline:
 i press the tempt fruit without control,
 then give to Pharaoh hand the flow bowl. 

the next begin: – three canister replete
 with royal viand, and luxurious meat,
 oppress my droop head, while bird of prey
 with direful croak snatch the food away. 

unhappy man! thy dream from god be send,
 the hebrew say, and full of black portent:
 the third return day shall bring thy doom,
 when thou a prey to vulture shall become. 

then to the first, these joyful comment sound;
 before the sun have twice fulfil his round,
 thou with thy former honour shall be crown. 
but in the triumph of thy prosperous fate,
 kind remember my unhappy state,
 who by the black falsehood here be stay;
 to this the man a courtier promise make. 

book viii

but now sabrina guilty fire return,
 her bosom with the rage passion burn:
 she with a female tenderness relent,
 and all her former cruelty repent. 
by she accuse, in chain the captive lie,
 for who she fond languish and die. 
torment, and enrage, she often curse
 her pride, her folly, and revengeful lust. 
a deep remorse, from conscience of her sin,
 with constant horror vex her soul within. 
her thought ten thousand rack torment feel,
 yet in her treacherous crime obdurate still. 
her life and youthful spirit melt away,
 her beauty withereth with a swift decay:
 by day she wild rave, consume the night
 in thoughtless watch, and imagine fright:
 while airy terror glide before her sight. 
pale ghost with wide distort eye-ball stare,
 and burn spectre through the darkness glare,
 till force by fate, and torment more intense,
 to vindicate suspect innocence,
 to Potiphar the hide truth she tell,
 and all the faithless mystery reveal. 

and now he come – insult death! she cry,
 perpetual darkness swim before my eye. 
if there be god that human thing regard,
 my monstrous crime will meet a just reward. 
oh sacred virtue! at thy awful name
 i start, and all my former thought disclaim;
 for thou be no fantastic empty thing,
 from thou alone unmingled pleasure spring. 
the world, the boundless universe i will give,
 my first unblemished honour to retrieve:
 it be vain wish! – to some strange realm below,
 some dark uncomfortable coast i go. 

she speak, and gasp in the pang of death,
 with linger agony resign her breath:
 while Joseph by the courtier be forget;
 till fate the period of his freedom bring. 

the egyptian monarch from a short repose,
 and trouble vision, with the morning rise. 
the explain the doubtful omen in his breast,
 he summons every planetary priest:
 their order, which to different star belong,
 be soon assemble, a surprise throng;
 sullen their look, and vary be their vest,
 a wild devotion through the whole express. 

one wear a mantle of a leaden hue,
 trail behind a sweep length it draw;
 with poppy, aconite, and hellebore,
 mandrake, and nightshade, strange figure over;
 a triple twist of serpent curl round,
 with monstrous ornament the fold bind. 

with some a verdant forest seem to move,
 their flow robe with palmy branch weave. 
with panther, bear, and every savage beast
 express in lively colour, some be dress. 
on other eagle spread their wing; on some
 appear the ostrich hieroglyphic plume,
 while other wear a paint crocodile,
 with all the monstrous progeny of Nile. 

Nasar, a youth vow to the morning star,
 with bud rose have adorn his hair. 
his raiment of inestimable cost
 glitter with pearl, and imitate frost. 
overspread with landscape wrought in miniature,
 surprise scene the ravish sight allure:
 clear fountain, flowery walk, and myrtle grove,
 peacock with gaudy train, and shine dove. 

the prince with anxious look relate his dream,
 the doubtful sage search their heavenly scheme:
 but all their star be mute, the meaning fly
 in trackless darkness, and obscure disguise. 

the bearer of the cup do now reflect
 on his past danger, and his base neglect;
 and thus his royal master he address:
 be Pharaoh bounty, and my guilt confess,
 when with my fellow criminal detain,
 we by thy justice in the ward remain,
 a hebrew youth, unjust there confine,
 from nightly omen which perplex the mind,
 with clear conviction do our lot unfold;
 my honour, and the steward doom foretell. 
amid the solemn darkness of the night,
 his cell be glitter with ethereal light;
 for high favour by the immortal god,
 to visit he they leave their bright abode. 

Joseph, unfettered, they from prison bring,
 by heaven inspire, he stand before the king;
 who thus repeat his dream: methinks i stand
 on the fair border of our sacred flood:
 while, curious, i survey the spread stream,
 seven bulky ox from the river come,
 fat and well-favoured: over the verdant mead
 they proud range, and on the pasture feed;
 when just their number rise, of aspect four,
 ill-shaped, and meager, who the first devour. 
the scene be change, when spring in my walk,
 seven blade of corn adorn one bend stalk
 ripen and full; when lo! a second rear
 his blast top, with seven unfruitful ear;
 this swallow greedy the former store,
 as the lean ox do the fat before. 
i wake with great anxiety oppress,
 and for the meaning every god address. 

the almighty god over earth and sky supreme,
 the youthful prophet cry, have send this dream
 to Pharaoh, which discover future thing;
 what change on the world his pleasure bring. 
with one intent the sacred vision come,
 of both the hide meaning be the same. 

seven plenteous year begin their joyful round,
 the field with boundless harvest shall be crown;
 then seven unprosperous year shall these devour,
 and leave no remnant of the former store. 

but that the people and the king may live
 this counsel heaven commission i to give,
 that wasteful luxury shall be restrain,
 and wise intendant through the realm ordain:
 let these against the threaten ill. provide,
 lay up the corn, and over the store preside. 

this youth by some propitious power be send,
 the prince reply, our ruin to prevent;
 then bid they a imperial vestment bring,
 and from his finger draw a costly ring:
 and this, he say, a sacred pledge shall be
 of those bright honour i reserve for thou. 
my power, my kingdom, i to thou resign,
 the sovereign title only shall be i;
 to thou my noble favourite shall bow,
 our guardian god, our great preserver thou! 

his second chariot then the king ordain
 shall be prepare: white steed with scarlet reins
 the triumph draw; they champ the golden bit,
 and spurn the dusty ground with airy foot. 
on high with princely pomp the youth be place,
 with mark of power, and regal ensign grace;
 gay herald, bow the knee, before he cry,
 the crowd adore he as he pass by:
 nor here the royal favour be confine,
 great Pharaoh daughter be his bride design. 

the night have twice in sable triumph reign,
 and twice the circle light its empire gain:
 when from his high apartment Joseph see
 a lofty temple, through the wave tree,
 to Isis vow: he from the gild dome,
 ravish, behold a beauteous virgin come. 
a artless modesty improve her face,
 a elegant reserve, and matchless grace;
 a rosy tincture in her cheek appear,
 lovely as that the bloom morning wear:
 her eye a sprightly blue; her length of hair
 dishevel hang, like thread of silver fair. 
long string of jet and pearl, in mingle twist,
 adorn her well-shaped neck, and slender wrist. 
her robe be heavenly azure, sprinkle over
 with star; a crescent on her breast she wear. 

the wound hebrew for the virgin sigh,
 and feel a grow passion yet untried:
 her lovely image, on his mind impress,
 have fix her empire in his yield breast. 
but oh! what anguish do his soul invade,
 when he be tell, the love enchant maid
 at isis holy shrine devout bow,
 a virgin priestess to the goddess vow? 
this, this, he cry, must all my hope confound,
 helpless my grief, incurable my wound! 

mean time the fame uncontradicted go,
 that he the egyptian princess must espouse. 
pain and distress, he hear the spread news,
 and dread the offer, which he must refuse,
 or with dissemble vow the imperial maid abuse
 asenah power (that be the priestess name)
 will in his breast admit no rival flame. 

the royal maid no less unhappy prove,
 who long illustrious Orramel have love;
 a ethiopian prince, who faultless face
 and shape exceed all the tawny race. 
his feature noble turn, his pierce eye
 sparkle like star amid the gloomy sky;
 at once they dazzle, and engage the sight
 with awful lustre, and imperious light. 
black as a midnight cloud, his yield hair
 in easy curl wave to the gentle air. 

the princess, pain with secret discontent,
 her father purpose labour to prevent;
 in vain! the king obstruct her young desire,
 but first the pleasure of the god enquire. 

just Potiphera, a unblemished priest,
 his piety sincere, but ill address,
 while fragrant incense round the temple smoke,
 Osiris from the monarch he invoke. 
the fiend, in hope to cross the great design
 and awful will of providence divine,
 with penalty forbid the king intent,
 the hebrew future greatness to prevent:
 then name the fair Asenah for his bride,
 and blind with eternal fate comply:
 effect heaven predestinate end,
 while Joseph ruin envious hell intend;
 nor doubt the young idolatress will prove
 his snare, and soon seduce he with her love. 

the priest, yet tremble, near the altar stand,
 and dread the sacrilege the god command. 
my daughter name! he cry, to Isis vow
 by mystic rite, which no reverse allow! 
it must be so – the god pronounce it fit,
 the priest his will, the king must his submit. 

the maid reluctant leave the holy shrine,
 but yield obedience to the power divine. 
the gift, as heaven, the joyful youth regard,
 which thus bright virtue crown, and sacred truth reward. 

book ix

the jocund year with smile plenty crown,
 in shine circle now advance their round:
 unbounded crop reward the reaper toil,
 and rustic pleasure cheer the bank of Nile. 
the hebrew, late advance by royal grace,
 with dignity and splendour fill his place;
 still watchful for the public good, with care
 restrain excess, by penalty severe,
 while justice, truth, and temperate virtue, reign
 amid the height of plenty through the land:
 he prudent sway the grateful people bless,
 in all the calm serenity of peace. 

but soon the smile year their period run,
 a gloomy aera now its course begin:
 pale famine come, with her malignant train,
 dry up the spring, and taint the fertile plain:
 the tree decay, each flower, and balmy plant
 pine at their root, and vital humour want:
 no pearly moisture on the meadow lie;
 to fan the air no gentle breeze rise. 
the languid moon shed from her silent sphere
 no cool dew, the thirsty earth to cheer. 
a sultry night ensue a scorch day;
 while dismal sign the fiery cloud display. 

nor Egypt mourn alone her blast ground,
 pale famine stalk through all the region round:
 moriah plain, and hermon flowery hill
 wither and bare, the hot contagion feel:
 that fertile climate, by peculiar grace,
 design the lot of abraham future race. 
where long with peace, and fatal plenty gay,
 the pagan prince bear imperial sway,
 their crime not full: – while Jacob sojourn here
 a stranger, as his great forefather be:
 the common fate he share, with famine press,
 and for his numerous family distress:
 he send his son, by heavenly conduct lead,
 to egypt plenteous granary for bread:
 domestic want require their utmost haste,
 and zoan regal tower they reach at last. 

with soft Assyria, now in all her pride
 of wealth and grandeur, Pharaoh palace vie:
 more honour still the rise favourite grow,
 no bound his royal master kindness know:
 he graceful person, charm to the sight,
 majestic, yet more mild than morning light:
 he virtue, every grateful tongue employ,
 the people boast, their wonder, and their joy. 
all private view be to his soul unknown,
 he make the kingdom welfare still his own:
 the oppressor wrong be by his power redress,
 he guard the orphan, succour the distress;
 his fame to distant country fly abroad,
 while Egypt name he as her guardian god. 
assiduous still his officer attend,
 where neigh state their numerous envoy send:
 who for themselves, and pine race, implore
 the food of life from his abundant store. 

among the foremost of the suppliant crowd
 the hebrew swain with low submission bow;
 with stern regard each kindred face he view,
 their sight the late detest scene renew:
 their part malice and inhuman rage
 to just revenge his swell thought engage. 
long silent in a gloomy pause he stand;
 at last their country, business, name, demand. 

my lord, thy servant, (with a modest grace,
 Judah reply) be all of hebrew race:
 twelve brother late, a joyful father boast,
 till one, by some unhappy chance, be lose;
 the young with his age sire remain
 the darling, which his droop life sustain:
 to purchase corn we come, our fall breath,
 a infant race, to save from linger death. 

thy tale (he say) unfold its own disguise;
 by Pharaoh sacred life, you all be spy;
 then to the guard with stern command he turn,
 while yet resentment in his bosom burn;
 in close confinement be these man retain,
 till we some knowledge of their plot have gain. 

with just remorse, and secret horror strike,
 the conscious hebrew at each other look,
 in foreign accent, to the guard unknown,
 their length of unrepented sin they own;
 Joseph, not yet withdraw, their language hear,
 and hastes away, to hide the gush tear. 

oh! we be guilty of our brother blood,
 though heaven the intend fratricide withstand:
 with unrelenting hate, for sordid gold,
 the gentle youth to midianites we sell
 a slave, and such perhaps he still may live;
 almighty god, the monstrous crime forgive! 
unmoved we see the anguish of his breast,
 in mournful look, and flow tear express:
 unmoved, and lose to nature, virtue, sense,
 unmoved we hear his tender eloquence. 
such beauty, innocence, and bloom grace
 will have subdue in wild a savage race. 
what cave, what dungeon, shall such monster hide? 
we stand condemn, and heaven be justify. 

when Reuben, who the barbarous fact disclaim,
 in these sad term their former malice blame,
 will heaven your flow tear may wash away
 the bloody stain of that detest day;
 its horror, with eternal grief, i trace;
 the soft impression of my brother face
 dwell on my heart, the tragic scene i view,
 the mournful object be for ever new. 
methinks i see the anguish, the surprise,
 the melt sorrow in his lovely eye,
 while kneel, plead all the tender claim
 of kindred blood, he single call your name,
 and one by one invoke – what power i have,
 be all employ to save the guiltless lad:
 his filial love and goodness, free from art,
 touch every tender motion in my heart,
 when for his droop father hoary age
 he try your soft compassion to engage;
 i hear his cry, while round his suppliant hand,
 without remorse, you tie the cruel band;
 my soul be wound with the farewell groan,
 when to the yawn pit you force he down. 

what hellish frenzy do your bosom fire
 against such youth and virtue to conspire? 
what be his mighty crime? – a childish dream,
 a sleep fancy visionary scheme:
 he blood be avenge – while here we lie confine,
 our wretched offspring be with famine pine. 

their old brother just reproach they own,
 and humble now address the eternal throne,
 with penitence sincere they inly mourn,
 while thrice the day and tedious night return. 

mean time the thoughtful regent in his breast
 the first vindictive motion have suppress. 
when early for the hebrew train he send,
 and kindness in a stern disguise intend;
 conduct to his presence, prostrate all
 (as once their sheaf before his sheaf) they fall. 

the power that sit above the star i fear
 (he say) nor shall you find injustice here:
 to prove that you have no clandestine view,
 nor hostile aim, but be to honour true,
 one of your kindred number leave behind,
 the attend guard shall as a hostage bind;
 secure from wrong, the captive shall remain,
 if at set limit you return again:
 but be for ever exile from the place,
 nor ever hope again to see my face,
 unless you bring your young brother here,
 no more on egypt fatal coast appear:
 be this a proof your word have no disguise,
 or you by Pharaoh sacred life be spy. 

alas, my lord, in tent thy servant sleep,
 (the swain reply) our herd and bleat sheep
 engross our humble care, no martial claim
 disturb our mind, no wild ambitious aim;
 stranger to pompous court, the flowery field,
 and tuneful grove, to we their pleasure yield;
 unenvied there, secure from noise and strife,
 in harmless ease we spend a peaceful life;
 our costly banquet in some balmy shade,
 with nature simple luxury be make;
 no dream of grandeur, no aspire thought,
 thy servant to the memphian limit bring;
 distress with famine, to this friendly shore
 we come, your kind assistance to implore. 

this say, they find themselves dismiss at last
 with full supply, and to their country haste. 
when scarce arrive before their father tent,
 his busy thought presage some sad event;
 the captive son be miss – his fear t'expel,
 the unplease truth in soothe word they tell. 
with temper, every circumstance he hear,
 till the fond prop of his decline year,
 his Benjamin be name – that cruel part,
 in spite of all their well-meant flatter art,
 with pierce anguish wound his inmost soul;
 no plea of reason can its force control. 
his hoary head with weighty sorrow press,
 deject sink upon his pensive breast. 
the careful traveller now their sack untie,
 surprise, their coin restore again they spy. 

what can these mystery mean, good Jacob say,
 what fatal storm be break over my head? 
why be my life prolong? of bliss bereave? 
Joseph be not: – my single comfort leave,
 to distant clime a exile you will bear,
 against i all these sad event appear;
 but know, the flame of life shall quit my heart
 ere with the lovely bloom youth i part. 

content we then must sacrifice our life,
 our guiltless offspring and our tender wife,
 (Judah reply) condemn to perish here,
 and never again on egypt coast appear:
 the man, the mighty ruler of the land,
 with eye to heaven address, and lift hand,
 the man protest with a solemn grace,
 not one of we shall ever see his face,
 nor other proof our innocence shall clear,
 unless we bring our young brother there. 

and why will you that needless truth make know,
 or that you have a young brother own? 
the anxious parent say. – alas! can we,
 Reuben reply, the consequence foresee? 
or have the certainty be full know,
 can we, with specious lie, the fact disown? 
or strait question, by a man so great,
 conceal our public or domestic state? 
indeed he rough talk, but still their break
 some secret pity through his fierce look;
 however dark the past event appear,
 we have nothing from such clemency to fear;
 wherever with easy state he pass along,
 his virtue echo through the shout throng:
 then why, my honour sire, these vain delay? 
paternal care a thousand scruple raise;
 your Simeon bind, a slave unransomed lie,
 our time be elapse, and we condemn for spy:
 commit your darling to my faithful hand,
 of i again the sacred pledge demand. 
two lovely boy, adorn with every grace,
 secure i leave as surety in his place;
 if any negligence my honour stain,
 without compassion let they both be slay. 

half yield now he stand – their household strait
 Judah with artless eloquence repeat. 

with falter speech, and anguish in his eye,
 then go in peace, the vanquish patriarch cry:
 celestial providence your step attend,
 and angel guard from every ill defend;
 with double money for your corn advance,
 perhaps the restoration be a chance;
 but take some grateful present in your hand,
 the balmy product of your native land:
 and be the eternal majesty implore,
 (the god my great progenitor adore)
 to grant you favour in the ruler sight,
 and bring your injure innocence to light:
 but know, if mischief shall the lad attend,
 my hoary hair down to the grave you send. 

book x

their father blessing on their knee they take,
 and now to Memphis quick advance make,
 where safe arrive, but fearful of their doom,
 to Joseph steward hasty they come,
 disclose in humble term their late mistake,
 and render double all the money back. 

your father god (he say) your coin restore,
 it be just pay, then lead they to his lord. 

their gift, with prostrate homage, they present;
 his gracious smile their rise doubt prevent;
 forgetful of himself, with eager haste,
 he forward step, and Benjamin embrace:
 he heart expand with sympathetic joy,
 while in his arm he fold the wonder boy;
 fond nature struggle with the vain disguise,
 a brother sparkle in his radiant eye:
 scarce all his grandeur from the gentle youth
 (with mutual rapture touch) conceal the truth;
 and half disclose the kindred soul appear,
 till Joseph fly to hide the swell tear,
 that melt love and soft surprise excite,
 but recollect, soon return in sight. 

conduct they now into a spacious hall,
 where well-worn slave, obsequious to the call,
 to luxury inure, with artful care,
 a splendid banquet instant prepare;
 embroider carpet cover all the ground,
 while fragrant ointment spread their odour round,
 large silver laver, with officious care,
 the gay attendant round the circle bear. 

and now, with costly fare and sparkle wine
 of various sort, the load table shine,
 beneath a glitter canopy of state,
 in Tyrian robe, the graceful regent sit;
 with all the bounty of a royal feast
 he noble entertain each hebrew guest:
 their hostage free the mutual joy complete,
 in order place, they take their destine seat:
 with sprightly wine, and social converse gay,
 in guiltless mirth they spend the fleet day. 

in calm repose supine pass the night,
 till rise with the morning rosy light,
 they haste away, with full provision store,
 in every sack (as order by his lord)
 their coin the steward secret convey;
 a silver cup in Benjamin be lay. 

secure the suburb utmost bound be past,
 when with a feign concern and anxious haste,
 he overtake the hindmost of the train,
 and thus accost they in a angry strain. 

how can you thus, ungrateful and unjust,
 against the rule of hospitable trust,
 combine, the consecrate cup to steal,
 by which my lord do secret thing reveal. 

with what strange meaning be thy language fraught,
 surprise, they cry, we be guiltless, even in thought,
 and by the immortal god, we dare protest,
 such black design be stranger to our breast. 
our coin unasked exact we restore,
 how shall we then abuse thy injure lord,
 and base, gold or silver from he steal,
 while recent favour yet our thanks compel? 
if such enormous guilt our bosom stain,
 vassal for life thy servant shall remain;
 the wretch, convict of a crime so high,
 unpitied here before thy face shall die. 

content, he say, and search their burden round;
 at last, the cup in Benjamin be find:
 with wild despair, their fold vest they rend,
 and backward to the royal office go. 

the regent here, but oh! how change they find,
 no more the mild, beneficent and kind,
 but fierce ask, in a alter tone,
 what wrong be this your guilty hand have do? 
you well may know, where dress and learning shine,
 a man, like i, must certain divine. 

prostrate they fall, while Judah for the rest,
 with mingle sigh their mutual grief express. 

what can i say? – how shall thy servant speak? 
in what pathetic word my silence break? 
what energy of language shall i find,
 to paint the wild distraction of my mind? 
justice divine, with keen revenge begin
 to reckon up our lengthen score of sin;
 our secret crime this rigorous stroke demand;
 and, self-condemned, we here thy vassal stand. 

no, – cry the gracious regent, only he
 with who the cup be find, my slave shall be;
 return in peace, your needless fear resign,
 this youth, a public criminal, be i. 
when Judah thus, (still gentle draw near)
 be please, my lord, to lend a gracious ear,
 while i the tender circumstance repeat,
 and for my father hoary age entreat. 

two lovely boy, the pleasure of his life,
 and only offspring of a beauteous wife,
 the elder branch, by a untimely death,
 snatch from his arm, long since resign his breath. 
the young, who do now his care engage,
 the single prop of his decline age,
 the constant theme of every please thought,
 your strict command, my lord, have hither bring:
 our sire (thy servant) long refuse to grant
 the press suit, till force by meager want,
 and just concern, to clear our injure truth,
 he to my conduct give the gentle youth. 

but oh! what kill anguish pierce his heart,
 when thus compel with Benjamin to part:
 with all the eloquence that filial love
 can ever inspire to calm his fear i strive;
 but all in vain; on dismal thought intent,
 if mischief shall his bloom life prevent,
 my hoary hair, he say, with grief oppress,
 must to the gloomy grave descend for rest. 

and i, unhappy, whither shall i go
 to shun that dark distract scene of woe? 
my father wretchedness i can see,
 deprive of every future joy by i;
 for i, with all the argument i have,
 become myself a surety for the lad,
 and must again the precious pledge restore,
 or see my age parent face no more. 

my lord, you seem to have a tender heart,
 (though sometime force to act a rigurous part)
 this first, unfortunate offence, forgive,
 or let thy servant here a vassal live
 a bondslave, in my young brother be stead,
 condemn no more my native soil to tread. 

no long Joseph can his tear control,
 or hide the soft emotion of his soul,
 relent sign the watchful hebrew see,
 in haste he bid the attendant all withdraw. 
i be your brother Joseph, then he cry,
 with tear and melt goodness in his eye,
 that brother you to midian merchant sell
 on dothan plain – nor need the rest be tell. 

the cruel fact, alas, too well they know,
 and, with disorder look, each other view. 

he then demand – how fare my honour sire? 
confuse and mute they farther off retire;
 a guilty shame on every face be spread,
 come near, my brother, then he mild say,
 reflect not on yourself, with thought severe,
 it be not you, but god, that send i here;
 his goodness rule the circumstance and place,
 to save the stock of abraham sacred race;
 five year of cruel famine yet remain,
 while, destitute of hope, the careful swain
 shall neither sow nor reap – the burn soil,
 untilled shall lie, or mock his fruitless toil;
 but heaven have send i here, to save your life,
 your infant offspring, and your tender wife. 

the egyptian king, in every virtue great,
 ordain i second ruler in the state;
 the strength, the power, the wealth of all the land,
 without restraint, be trust to my hand. 

return, and in my father ear relate
 the plenty, pomp, and grandeur of my state:
 tell he, i long his hoary age to greet,
 and throw myself in rapture at his foot:
 let he come down to goshen healthful air,
 his whole domestic charge shall be my care. 

dismiss your fear – this painful silence break! 
you see a friend! you hear a brother speak! 
behold the tender motion of my heart,
 no more disguise with grandeur, or with art! 
regard i well, the kindred feature trace,
 you will find the print of nature in my face! 

then clasp round his young brother neck,
 no long strive the gush tear to check;
 the friendly ardor throw off all disguise,
 while nature sit triumphant in his eye;
 nor less delight transport the gentle youth,
 replete with goodness, innocence and truth;
 in mutual sympathy their soul be tie,
 and more by virtue than by birth ally. 

salute then the rest, with mild address,
 he clear their doubt and soften their distress;
 converse free, now they quit their fear,
 while Pharaoh, please, the new adventure hear;
 and in his clemency, and royal grace,
 command the viceroy some select place
 shall be assign on goshen rich champain
 his father numerous charge to entertain. 

the regent now, impatient of delay,
 with costly present send the man away;
 but with a sparkle babylonian vest
 his young friend be grace above the rest. 

make haste, he say, to bring my father down,
 tell he i live, and be my greatness know;
 take waggon, for convenience on the way,
 your wife and helpless child to convey;
 nor care to gather up your needless store,
 the wealth of zoan plenteous land be you. 

at Hebron soon their speedy journey end,
 the good old man their come now attend;
 where scarce arrive, at once they all relate
 the welcome news of Joseph prosperous state. 

why will you mock my woe with airy scheme,
 (he faint say) of gay fantastic dream? 

but soon the load carriage appear,
 recall his life, his droop spirit cheer. 

my Joseph live! (transport truth) he cry,
 i will see his face, and close my age eye:
 content, resign these poor remains of breath,
 and gentle rest in the calm shade of death. 
