the groan of the tankard.

of strange event i sing, and portent dire;
 the wondrous theme a reverent ear require;
 though strange the tale, the faithful muse believe,
 and what she say with pious awe receive. 

it be at the solemn, silent, noontide hour,
 when hunger rage with despotic power,
 when the lean student quit his hebrew root
 for the gross nourishment of english fruit,
 and throw unfinished airy system by
 for solid pudding and substantial pie,
 when hungry poet the glad summons own,
 and leave spare fast to dine with god alone;
 our sober meal dispatch with silent haste,
 the decent grace conclude the short repast:
 then urge by thirst we cast impatient eye
 where deep, capacious, vast, of ample size,
 the tankard stand, replenish to the brink
 with the cool beverage blue-eyed naiad drink. 
but lo! a sudden prodigy appear,
 and our chill heart recoil with startle fear;
 its yawn mouth disclose the deep profound,
 and in low murmur breathe a sullen sound;
 cold drop of dew do on the side appear;
 no finger touch it, and no hand be near;
 at length the indignant vase its silence break,
 first heave deep hollow groan, and then distinct speak. 

 "how change the scene! for what unpardoned crime
"have i survive to these degenerate time? 
 "i, who be wont the festal board to grace,
"and midst the circle lift my honest face,
 "white over with froth, like Etna crown with snow,
"which mantle over the brown abyss below,
 "where Ceres mingle with her golden store
"the rich spoil of either india shore,
 "the dulcet reed the western island boast,
"and spicy fruit from banda fragrant coast. 
 "at solemn feast the nectar draught i pour,
"and often journey round the ample board:
 "the portly alderman, the stately mayor,
"and all the furry tribe my worth declare;
 "and the keen sportsman oft, his labour do,
"to i retreat with the set sun,
 "deep draught imbibe, and conquer land and sea,
"and overthrow the pride of France by i. 

 "let mean clay contain the limpid wave,
"the clay for such a office nature give;
 "let china earth, enrich with colour stain,
"pencilled with gold, and streak with azure vein,
 "the grateful flavour of the indian leaf,
"or mocho sunburnt berry glad receive;
 "the noble metal claim more generous use,
"and mine shall flow with more exalt juice. 
 "do i for this my native bed resign,
"from the dark bowel of potosi mine? 
 "be i for this with violence tear away,
"and drag to region of the upper day? 
 "for this the rage of torture furnace bear,
"from foreign dross to purge the brighten over? 
 "for this have i endure the fiery test,
"and be i stamp for this with britain lofty crest? 

 "unblest the day, and luckless be the hour
"which doom i to a presbyterian power;
 "fate to serve the puritanic race,
"who slender meal be short than their grace;
 "who mope son no jovial orgy keep;
"where evening bring no summons but to sleep;
 "no carnival be even christmas here,
"and one long lent involve the meager year. 
 "bear i, you power! to some more genial scene,
"where on soft cushion loll the gouty Dean,
 "or rosy prebend, with cherubic face,
"with double chin, and paunch of portly grace,
 "who lull in downy slumber shall agree
"to own no inspiration but from i. 
 "or to some spacious mansion, gothic, old,
"where Comus sprightly train their vigil hold;
 "there oft exhaust, and replenish oft,
"oh! let i still supply the eternal draught;
 "till care within the deep abyss be drown,
"and thought grow giddy at the vast profound. "

more have the goblet speak, but lo! appear
 a ancient Sybil furrow over with year;
 her aspect sour, and stern ungracious look
 with sudden damp the conscious vessel strike;
 chill at she touch its mouth it slow close,
 and in long silence all its grief repose:
 yet still low murmur creep along the ground,
 and the air vibrate with the silver sound. 
