noon.

the sun have throw its noontide ray
 amid the flower, and scorch the plain,
 which pant for refresh rain;
 while gaudy fly their golden wing display,
 and bee cull sweet to cheer a wintery day:
 each beam that dart down
 chase linger shade,
 through the thick umbrage of the tree pervade,
 and universal splendour shed around:
 the slippery grass, burn brown with heat,
 unkind scorch the traveller foot. 

and now, oppress,
 while every creature languid hie to rest,
 amid the blaze Lysander bound along,
 bold as a lion, scorch by many a clime;
 far off be hear the echo of his song,
 responsive to his clear and artless rhyme:
 he seek no shade, nor grotto cool retreat,
 but on, amid the furzy heath, he press;
 the heart be warm passion through his pulse beat,
 and native fire inspire his manly breast. 
he seek the craggy shore which ocean lave,
 and, seat on a rock, survey the swell wave:
 the eminence the horizon scope command,
 the plain surround, and the burn strand. 
over the wild scene he throw a happy look,
 compare the present pleasure with the past;
 glad he turn each page of nature book,
 and pray the freedom of his soul may last. 
he roll his eye
 across the sea;
 now glance over the glassy wave,
 now mount to the sky,
 the immortal prize
 of valiant soul who find deep watery grave. 

thus as he sit, by strong reflection bind,
 up the rough rock ascend a sound,
 which pierce pervade his ear;
 it seem the frantic cry of woe,
 which struggle groan, without the aid of tear. 
the sound like lightning reach his heart; and flush
 with quick alarm he make no long stay,
 ardent down the craggy steep he rush,
 rough height he leap, impatient of delay,
 and towards the sufferer bend his eager way;
 till by the sea he reach some rocky cave,
 lash by the loud-resounding wave. 

there a wild female rent her golden hair,
 with rage passion blind;
 her sad young bosom bare,
 and frantic seem her stormy mind. 
swift towards the sea she fly,
 with direful cry;
 drive on by fierce despair,
 amid oozy wave to drown remain sense of care. 

touch by each generous thought,
 by strong humanity impress,
 the damsel in his arm he catch,
 and hold she, struggle, to his breast. 
 "why tremble thus thy soul, o wretched maid! 
" o agony! too pierce agony! 
 "be through thy miserable frame portray. 
" o can my breast relieve thy misery! 
 "just heaven! if thou have pity, ease her pain! 
" her heart will burst! she faint within my arm! -
 "upon my bosom she recline her charm;
" my fall tear bedew her cheek in vain! " 

he stretch she on the shore -
 he fetch cool water from the sea,
 and sprinkle she all over,
 and fan she with leaf collect the breeze:
 till on the heaven she open her azure eye,
 and, with return thought and grief, look up -
 "ah, wretched i!" she cry, with burst sigh,
 "I have plenteous drink at sorrow bitter cup! 
" to god i fly; no help on earth i find,
 "and from my soul will tear the mortal part;
" such sad disorder fill the human mind,
 "such deep affliction rive my guilty heart. 

 "i far in vice have stray;
" and, too severe,
 "the parent who adore the maid,
" no sigh from my repentant heart will hear:
 "till, rage in despair,
" i frantic resolve to die -
 "rather than (sad alternative!) to lie
" amid the street, and common insult share. " 

sting to the heart, she rise;
 tear stream from her fair eye;
 shame in her cheek revive the damask rise,
 and poignant sorrow burst in bitter sigh:
 she weep all silent:
 Lysander scarce can speak,
 though sometime, "cruelty! o cruelty!" 
forth from his lip will break. 

with generous passion swell his noble breast;
 passion too strong and deep to be express;
 pity and rage with equal strive beat,
 and sympathy, wrought high by natural heat:
 "by my true soul!" at length he cry,
 "as nature my director and my guide,
" my heart, chain by thy woe,
 "shall neither joy nor comfort know,
" till i have revenge thy wrong, and give thou ease,
 "and, by my love, have set thy trouble soul at peace. 
" O! let not misery overwhelm thy heart,
 "nor the fair path of life and joy decline;
" vengeance shall find the author of thy smart -
 "O! fearless rest thy droop soul on i,
" which, like the oak, round which the ivy stray,
 "with blessing yet may store thy future day." 

the damsel sorrow, like a furious storm,
 rack her celestial system with its rage;
 her desperate passion deadly warfare wage,
 and the mild radiance of her charm deform. 
at length the vivid fire rush to her heart,
 tingle in every vein, blaze from her eye,
 while sudden joy before her spirit rise,
 and over her cheek warm transient colour dart:
 fire by his zeal,
 ecstatic feeling tinge her frame;
 who glow the passion of her breast reveal
 bright blossom of a future ripen flame! 
