the transformation of Lycon and euphormius.

by WILLIAM Melmoth, ESQ.

deem not, you plaintive crew, that suffer wrong,
 ne thou, o man! who deal the tort, misween
 the equal god, who heaven sky-mansion throng,
 (though viewless to the eye they distant sheen)
 spectator reckless of our action be. 
turn the volume of grave sage old,
 where ancient saw in fable may be see,
 this truth i fond in paynim tale enrol;
 which for ensample dread my muse shall here unfold. 

what time arcadia floweret valley fame,
 Pelasgus, first of monarch old, obey,
 there wone a wight, and Lycon be he name,
 unawed by conscience, of no god afraid,
 ne justice rule his heart, ne mercy sway. 
some hold he kin to that abhor race,
 which heaven high tower with mad emprise assay;
 and some his cruel lineage do ytrace
 from fell Erynnis join in Pluto dire embrace. 

but he, predy, far other tale do feign,
 and claim alliance with the sister nine;
 and deem himself (what deem not pride so vain?) 
the peerless paragon of wit divine. 
vaunt that every foe shall rue its tine. 
right doughty wight! yet, sooth, without smart,
 all powerless fall the losel shaft malign:
 it be virtue arm to wield wit heavenly dart,
 point its keen barb with force, and send it to the heart. 

one only imp he have, pastora hight,
 who sweet amenance please each shepherd eye:
 yet please she not base lycon evil spright,
 though blame in she not malice moten spy,
 clear, without spot, as summer cloudless sky. 
hence poet feign, lycean Pan array
 in lycon form, inflame with passion high,
 deceive her mother in the covert glade,
 and from the steal embrace spring the heavenly maid. 

thus fable they: mean while the damsel fair
 a shepherd youth remark, as over the plain
 she deff pace elong so debonair:
 seem she as one of dian choose train. 
full many a fond excuse he know to feign,
 in sweet converse to while with she the day,
 until love unwares his heedless heart do gain. 
nor deem he, simple wight, no mortal may
 the blind god once harbour, when he list, foresay. 

now much he meditate if yet to speak,
 and now resolve his passion to conceal:
 but sure, quoth he, my silly heart will break,
 if aye i smother what i aye must feel. 
at length by hope embolden to reveal,
 the labour secret drop from his tongue. 
while frequent singult check his falter tale,
 in modest wise her head pastora hang:
 for never maid more chaste inspire shepherd song. 

what need i to recount in long detail
 the tender parley which these leman hold:
 how oft he vow his love she never shall fail;
 how oft the stream from forth her eye outwel,
 doubt if constancy yet ever dwell
 in heart of youthful wight: suffice to know,
 each rise doubt he in her bosom quell. 
so part they, more blithsome both, i trow:
 for rankle love conceal, i seem, be deadly woe. 

eftsoon to Lycon swift the youth do fare,
 (lag ever youth when Cupid urge his way?) 
and straight his gentle purpose do declare,
 and sooth the mount'naunce of his herd display. 
ne Lycon mean his suiten to foresay:
 "be thy, pastora (quoth the masker sly)
" and twice two thousand sheep her dower shall pay. " 
beat then the lover heart with joyaunce high;
 ne deem that aught his bliss can now betray,
 ne guess that foul deceit in lycon bosom lie. 

so forth he yode to seek his reverend sire;
 (the good euphormius shepherd he do call)
 how sweet pastora do his bosom fire,
 her worth, her promise flock, he tolden all. 
ah! never, my son, let Lycon thou enthrall,
 (reply the sage, in wise experience old)
 "smooth be his tongue, but full of guile withal,
" in promise faithless, and in vaunt bold:
 "ne ever lamb of his will bleat within thy fold." 

with word prophetic thus euphormius speak:
 and fact confirm what wisdom thus foretell:
 full many a mean devise do Lycon make,
 the hope day of spousal to withhold,
 frame new train when nought mote serve his old. 
nath'less he vow, Cyllene, cloud-top hill,
 shall soon down the lowly delve be roll,
 than he his plight promise nould fulfil:
 but when, predy, or where, the caitiff sayen will. 

while thus the tedious sun have journey round,
 ne ought mote now the lover heart divide,
 ne trust be there, ne truth in Lycon find;
 the maid with matron Juno for her guide,
 the youth by concord lead, in secret hie
 to Hymen sacred fane: the honest deed
 each god approve, and close the band be tie. 
certes, till happy moment shall succeed,
 no pry eye they ween their emprise mote aread. 

but pry eye of Lycon it be in vain
 (right practic in disguise) to hope beware. 
he trace their covert step to Hymen fane,
 and joy to find they in his long-laid snare. 
algates, in semblant ire, he begin to swear,
 and roaren loud as in displeasance high;
 then out he hurlen forth his daughter fair,
 forelore, the houseless child of misery,
 expose to kill cold, and pinch penury. 

ah! whither now shall sad pastora wend,
 to want abandon and by wrong oppress? 
who shall the wretched out-cast's teen befriend? 
live mercy then, if not in parent breast? 
at Jove right hand, to Jove for ever dear,
 yes, mercy live, the gentle goddess bless,
 aye at his foot she plead the cause distress,
 to sorrow plaint she turn his equal ear,
 and waft to heaven star-throne fair virtue silent tear. 

it be she that bid euphormius quell each thought
 that well mote rise to check his generous aid. 
though high the tort which Lycon he have wrought,
 though few the flock his humble pasture feed,
 when as he learn pastora hapless stead,
 his breast humane with wonted pity flow. 
he open his gate, the naked exile lead
 beneath his roof: a decent drapet throw
 over her cold limb, and sooth her undeserved woe. 

now loud-tongued rumor bruit round the tale:
 the astonish swain uneath can credence give,
 that in arcadia unambitious vale
 a faitour false as Lycon ever do live. 
but Jove (who in high heaven do mortal prive,
 and every deed in golden balance weigh)
 to earth his flame chariot baden drive,
 and down descend, enwrap in peerless blaze,
 to deal forth guerdon meet to good and evil way. 

where eurymmanthus, crown with many a wood,
 his silver stream through daisied vale do lead,
 stretch on the flowery marge, in reckless mood,
 proud Lycon seek by charm of jocund reed
 to lull the dire remose of tortious deed. 
he Jove accost, in reverend semblance dight
 of good euphormius, and begin mild aread
 of compact oft confirm, of say plight,
 of nature tender tie, of sacred rule of right. 

with lofty eye, half loath to look so low,
 he Lycon view, and with swell surquedry
 'ganrude treat his sacred eld: when now
 forth stand the god confess that rule the sky,
 in sudden sheen of dread divinity:
 "and know, false man," the lord of thunder say,
 "not unobserved by heaven all-persent eye
" thy cruel deed: nor shall be unappay:
 "go! be in form that best beseem thy thew, array." 

while yet he speak the afraid tremble wight
 transmew to blatant beast, with hideous howl
 rush headlong forth, in well-deserved plight,
 mid dragon, minotaur, and fiend to prowl,
 a wolf in form as erst a wolf in soul! 
to Pholoë, forest wild, he hie away,
 the horrid haunt of savage monster soul. 
there helpless innocence be still his prey,
 thief of the bleat fold, and shepherd dire dismay. 

though Jove to good euphormius cot do wend,
 where peaceful dwell the man of virtue high,
 each shepherd praise and eke each shepherd friend,
 in every act of sweet humanity. 
he Jove approach in mild majesty,
 grect all hail! then bid he join the throng
 of glit'rand light that gild the glow sky. 
there shepherd nightly view his orb yhong,
 where bright he shine eterne, the bright star among. 
