stanza

to Della Crusca.

hush, be each rude note! — soft silence spread,
 with ermine hand, thy cobweb robe around;
 attention! pillow my recline head,
 while eager i catch the golden sound. 

ha! what a tone be that, which float near,
 seem harmony full soul — who be the lyre? 
which seize thus on my enrapture ear,
 chill with its force, yet melt i with its fire. 

ah dull of heart! thy minstrel touch not know,
 what bard but Della Crusca boast such skill? 
from he alone, those melt note can flow —
 he, only know adroit thus to trill. 

well have i leave the groves, which sigh wave
 amid november blast their naked arm,
 while their red leaf fall flutter to their grave,
 and give again to dust May vernal charm. 

well have i leave the air-embosomed hill,
 where sprightly health in verdant buskin play;
 forsake fallow mead, and circle mill,
 and thyme-dressed heath, where the soft flock yet stray. 

obscure smoke, and air impure i greet,
 with the coarse din that trade and folly form,
 for here the muse son again i meet —
 i catch his note amid the vulgar storm. 

his note now bear i, pensive, to the plain,
 clothe by a verdure draw from britain heart;
 who hero bleed superior to their pain,
 sink, crown with glory, and contemn the smart. 

soft, as he lead i round the ensanguine field,
 the laureled shade forsake their grassy tomb,
 the burst sod its pallid inmate yield,
 and over the immortal waste their spirit roam. 

obedient to the muse the act revive
 which time long pass have veil from mortal ken,
 embattle squadron rush, as when alive,
 and shadowy falchion gleam over shadowy man. 

ah, who be thou, who thus with frantic air
 fly fearless to support that bleed youth;
 bind his deep gash with thy glow hair,
 and dy beside he, to attest thy truth? 

 "his sister i; a orphan pair, we grieve
" for parent long at rest within the grave,
 "by a false guardian of our wealth bereave —
" the little all parental care can save. 

 "chill look the world, and chilly grow our heart,
" oh! where shall poverty expect a smile? 
 "gross, lawless love, assume its ready art,
" and all beset be i, with fraud and guile. 

 "my Henry seek the war, and drop the tear
" of love fraternal as he bid farewell;
 "but fear, soon make i rise above my fear —
" i follow — and fate toll our mutual knell. " 

chaste maiden rest; and bright spring the green
 that decorate the turf thy bloom will feed! 
and oh, in soft mercy it be i ween,
 to worth like thy, a brother grave decree. 

the dreadful shriek of death now dart around,
 the hollow wind repeat each torture sigh,
 deep bitter groan, still deep groan resound,
 while father, brother, lover, husband die! 

turn from this spot, bless bard! thy mental eye;
 to hamlet, city, empire bend its beam! 
it will there such multiply death descry,
 that all before thou will but a abstract seem. 

why waste thy tear over this contract plain? 
the sky which canopy the son of breath,
 see the whole earth one scene of mortal pain,
 the vast, the universal bed of death! 

where, do not husband, father, die moan? 
where, do not mother, sister, orphan weep? 
where, be not hear the last expire groan,
 or the deep throttle of the deathful sleep! 

if, as philosophy do often muse,
 a state of war, be natural state to man,
 battle the sickness bravery will choose —
 noble disease in nature various plan! 

let vulgar soul stoop to the fever rage,
 or slow, beneath pale atrophy depart,
 with gout and scrophula weak variance wage,
 or sink, with sorrow canker at the heart;

these, be to common mind, the unwished decree! 
the firm select a illness more sublime;
 by languid pain, scorn their high soul to free,
 but seek the sword swift edge, and spurn at time. 
