[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night vi. the infidel reclaim. in two part.

contain the nature, proof, and importance of immortality.

part i.

where, among other thing, glory and riches be particular consider.

humble inscribe to the right honourable Henry Pelham, first lord-commissioner of the treasury, and chancellor of the exchequer.

she (for i know not yet her name in heaven)
 not early, like narcissa, leave the scene;
 nor sudden, like Philander. what avail? 
this seem mitigation but inflame;
 this fancy medicine heighten the disease. 
the long know, the close still she grow;
 and gradual part be a gradual death. 
it be the grim tyrant engine, which extort
 by tardy pressure still-increasing weight,
 from hard heart, confession of distress. 

o the long, dark approach through year of pain,
 death gallery, (may i dare to call it so,)
 with dismal doubt and sable terror hang;
 sick hope be pale lamp its only glimmer ray! 
there fate my melancholy walk ordain,
 forbid selflove itself to flatter there. 
how oft i gaze, prophetical sad! 
how oft i see she dead, while yet in smile! 
in smile she sink her grief, to lessen i. 
she speak i comfort, and increase my pain. 
like powerful army trench at a town,
 by slow and silent, but resistless, sap,
 in his pale progress gentle gain ground,
 death urge his deadly siege; in spite of art,
 of all the balmy blessing nature lend
 to succour frail humanity. you star,
 (not now first make familiar to my sight,)
 and thou, o moon, bear witness! many a night
 he tear the pillow from beneath my head,
 tie down my sore attention to the shock,
 by ceaseless depredation on a life
 dear than that he leave i. dreadful post
 of observation, dark every hour! 
less dread the day that drive i to the brink,
 and point at eternity below;
 when my soul shudder at futurity;
 when, on a moment point, they important die
 of life and death spin doubtful, ere it fall,
 and turn up life; my title to more woe. 

but why more woe? more comfort let it be. 
nothing be dead but that which wish to die;
 nothing be dead but wretchedness and pain;
 nothing be dead but what encumber, gall,
 block up the pass, and bar from real life. 
where dwell that wish most ardent of the wise? 
too dark the sun to see it; high star
 too low to reach it; death, great death alone,
 over star and sun triumphant, land we there. 

nor dreadful our transition; though the mind,
 a artist at create self-alarm,
 rich in expedient for inquietude,
 be prone to paint it dreadful. who can take
 death portrait true? the tyrant never sit. 
our sketch all random stroke, conjecture all;
 close shut the grave, nor tell one single tale. 
death, and his image rise in the brain,
 bear faint resemblance; never be alike:
 fear shake the pencil; fancy love excess;
 dark ignorance be lavish of her shade:
 and these the formidable picture draw. 

but grant the worst; it be past; new prospect rise,
 and drop a veil eternal over her tomb. 
far other view our contemplation claim;
 view that overpay the rigour of our life,
 view that suspend our agony in death. 
wrap in the thought of immortality,
 wrap in the single, the triumphant thought,
 long life may lapse, age unperceived come on,
 and find the soul unsated with her theme. 
its nature, proof, importance, fire my song. 
o that my song can emulate my soul! 
like she, immortal. no! — the soul disdain
 a mark so mean; far noble hope inflame;
 if endless age can outweigh a hour,
 let not the laurel, but the palm, inspire. 

thy nature, immortality, who know? 
and yet who know it not? it be but life
 in strong thread of bright colour spin,
 and spin for ever; dip by cruel fate
 in Stygian dye, how black, how brittle here! 
how short our correspondence with the sun,
 and, while it last, inglorious! our best deed,
 how want in their weight! our high joy,
 small cordial to support we in our pain,
 and give we strength to suffer. but how great
 to mingle interest, converse, amity,
 with all the son of reason, scatter wide
 through habitable space, wherever bear,
 however endow; to live free citizen
 of universal nature; to lay hold,
 by more than feeble faith, on the supreme! 
to call heaven rich unfathomable mine
 (mine which support archangel in their state)
 our own! to rise in science as in bliss,
 initiate in the secret of the sky! 
to read creation, read its mighty plan
 in the bare bosom of the deity! 
the plan and execution to collate! 
to see, before each glance of pierce thought,
 all cloud, all shadow, blow remote, and leave
 no mystery — but that of love divine,
 which lift we on the seraph flame wing,
 from earth Aceldama, this field of blood,
 of inward anguish, and of outward ill,
 from darkness and from dust, to such a scene;
 love element, true joy illustrious home,
 from earth sad contrast (now deplore) more fair! 
what exquisite vicissitude of fate! 
bless absolution of our black hour! 

Lorenzo, these be thought that make man man,
 the wise illumine, aggrandise the great. 
how great, (while yet we tread the kindred clod,
 and every moment fear to sink beneath
 the clod we tread, soon tread by our son,)
 how great, in the wild whirl of time be pursuit,
 to stop, and pause; involve in high presage,
 through the long vista of a thousand year,
 to stand contemplate our distant self,
 as in a magnify mirror see,
 enlarge, ennoble, elevate, divine! 
to prophesy our own futurity,
 to gaze in thought on what all thought transcend! 
to talk, with fellow-candidate, of joy
 as far beyond conception as desert,
 ourselves they astonish talker, and the tale! 
Lorenzo, swell thy bosom at the thought? 
the swell become thou; it be a honest pride. 
revere thyself, — and yet thyself despise. 
his nature no man can overrate, and none
 can under-rate his merit. take good heed,
 nor there be modest where thou shall be proud;
 that almost universal error shun. 
how just our pride, when we behold those height! 
not those ambition paint in air, but those
 reason point out, and ardent virtue gain,
 and angel emulate. our pride, how just! 
when mount we? when these shackle cast? when quit
 this cell of the creation? this small nest,
 stick in a corner of the universe,
 wrap up in fleecy cloud and finespun air? 
finespun to sense, but gross and feculent
 to soul celestial; soul ordain to breathe
 ambrosial gale, and drink a pure sky;
 great triumphant on time be farther shore,
 where virtue reign, enrich with full arrears,
 while pomp imperial beg a alm of peace. 

in empire high, or in proud science deep,
 you bear of earth, on what can you confer,
 with half the dignity, with half the gain,
 the gust, the glow of rational delight,
 as on this theme, which angel praise and share? 
man fate and favour be a theme in heaven. 

what wretched repetition cloy we here! 
what periodic potion for the sick,
 distemper body, and distemper mind! 
in a eternity what scene shall strike,
 adventure thicken, novelty surprise! 
what web of wonder shall unravel there! 
what full day pour on all the path of heaven,
 and light they almighty footstep in the deep! 
how shall the bless day of our discharge
 unwind, at once, the labyrinth of fate,
 and straighten its inextricable maze! 

if inextinguishable thirst in man
 to know, how rich, how full, our banquet there! 
there, not the moral world alone unfold;
 the world material, late see in shade,
 and in those shade by fragment only see,
 and see those fragment by the labour eye,
 unbroken, then, illustrious and entire,
 its ample sphere, its universal frame,
 in full dimension, swell to the survey,
 and enter, at one glance, the ravish sight. 
from some superior point, (where, who can tell? 
suffice it, it be a point where god reside,)
 how shall the strange man illumine eye,
 in the vast ocean of unbounded space,
 behold a infinite of float world
 divide the crystal wave of ether pure,
 in endless voyage, without port! the least
 of these disseminate orb, how great! 
great as they be, what number these surpass,
 huge as leviathan to that small race,
 those twinkle multitude of little life,
 he swallow unperceived! stupendous these! 
yet what be these stupendous to the whole? 
as particle, as atom ill-perceived;
 as circulate globule in our vein;
 so vast the plan. fecundity divine! 
exuberant source! perhaps i wrong thou still. 

if admiration be a source of joy,
 what transport hence! yet this the least in heaven. 
what this to that illustrious robe he wear
 who toss this mass of wonder from his hand,
 a specimen, a earnest of his power? 
it be to that glory, whence all glory flow,
 as the mead mean floweret to the sun
 which give it birth. but what this sun of heaven? 
this bliss supreme of the supreme bless? 
death, only death, the question can resolve. 
by death, cheap-bought they idea of our joy;
 the bare idea! solid happiness
 so distant from its shadow chase below. 

and chase we still the phantom through the fire,
 over bog, and brake, and precipice, till death? 
and toil we still for sublunary pay,
 defy the danger of the field and flood? 
or, spiderlike, spin out our precious all,
 our more than vital spin (if no regard
 to great futurity) in curious web
 of subtle thought, and exquisite design,
 (fine net-work of the brain!) to catch a fly,
 the momentary buzz of vain renown,
 a name, a mortal immortality? 

or, (mean still,) instead of grasp air,
 for sordid lucre plunge we in the mire? 
drudge, sweat, through every shame, for every gain,
 for vile contaminate trash; throw up
 our hope in heaven, our dignity with man,
 and deify the dirt, mature to gold? 
ambition, avarice! the two demon these,
 which goad through every slough our human herd,
 hard travel from the cradle to the grave. 
how low the wretch stoop! how steep they climb! 
these demon burn mankind; but most possess
 lorenzo bosom, and turn out the sky. 
be it in time to hide eternity? 
and why not in a atom on the shore
 to cover ocean? or a mote, the sun? 
glory and wealth! have they this blind power? 
what, if to they i prove Lorenzo blind? 
will it surprise thou? be thou then surprise:
 thou neither know: their nature learn from i. 

Mark well, as foreign as these subject seem,
 what close connexion tie they to my theme. 
first, what be true ambition? the pursuit
 of glory, nothing less than man can share. 
be they as vain as gaudy-minded man,
 as flatulent with fume of self-applause,
 their art and conquest animal may boast,
 and claim their laurel crown as well as we;
 but not celestial. here we stand alone;
 as in our form, distinct, pre-eminent:
 if prone in thought, our stature be our shame,
 and man shall blush his forehead meet the sky. 
the visible and present be for brute,
 a slender portion, and a narrow bound! 
these reason, with a energy divine,
 overleap, and claim the future and unseen;
 the vast unseen, the future fathomless! 
when the great soul buoy up to this high point,
 leave gross nature sediment below,
 then, and then only, Adam offspring quit
 the sage and hero of the field and wood,
 assert his rank, and rise into man. 
this be ambition: this be human fire. 

can part or place (two bold pretender!) make
 Lorenzo great, and pluck he from the throng? 

genius and art, ambition boast wing,
 our boast but ill deserve. a feeble aid! 
daedalian enginry! if these alone
 assist our flight, fame flight be glory fall. 
heart-merit want, mount we never so high,
 our height be but the gibbet of our name. 
a celebrate wretch when i behold,
 when i behold a genius bright and base,
 of tower talent, and terrestrial aim;
 methinks i see, as throw from her high sphere,
 the glorious fragment of a soul immortal,
 with rubbish mix, and glitter in the dust. 
strike at the splendid, melancholy sight
 at once compassion soft, and envy, rise —
 but wherefore envy? talent angel-bright,
 if want worth, be shine instrument
 in false ambition hand, to finish fault
 illustrious, and give infamy renown. 

great ill be a achievement of great power:
 plain sense but rare lead we far astray. 
reason the mean, affection choose our end;
 mean have no merit, if our end amiss. 
if wrong our heart, our head be right in vain;
 what be a pelham head to pelham heart? 
heart be proprietor of all applause. 
right end and mean make wisdom; worldly-wise
 be but half-witted, at its high praise. 

let genius then despair to make thou great;
 nor flatter station. what be station high? 
it be a proud mendicant; it boast, and beg;
 it beg a alm of homage from the throng,
 and oft the throng deny its charity. 
monarch and minister be awful name;
 whoever wear they, challenge our devoir. 
religion, public order, both exact
 external homage, and a supple knee,
 to being pompous set up, to serve
 the mean slave: all more be merit due,
 her sacred and inviolable right;
 nor ever pay the monarch, but the man. 
our heart never bow but to superior worth,
 nor ever fail of their allegiance there. 
fool, indeed, drop the man in their account,
 and vote the mantle into majesty. 
let the small savage boast his silver fur;
 his royal robe unborrowed and unbought,
 his own, descend fair from his sire. 
shall man be proud to wear his livery,
 and soul in ermine scorn a soul without? 
can place or lessen we or aggrandise? 
pigmy be pigmy still, though perch on Alps;
 and pyramid be pyramid in vale. 
each man make his own stature, build himself:
 virtue alone outbuild the pyramid;
 her monument shall last when egypt fall. 

of these sure truth do thou demand the cause? 
the cause be lodge in immortality. 
hear, and assent. thy bosom burn for power;
 what station charm thou? i will install thou there;
 it be thy. and be thou great than before? 
then thou before waste something less than man. 
have thy new post betray thou into pride? 
that treacherous pride betray thy dignity;
 that pride defame humanity, and call
 the being mean which staff or string can raise. 
that pride, like hood hawk, in darkness soar,
 from blindness bold, and tower to the sky. 
it be bear of ignorance, which know not man
 a angel second; nor his second long. 
a Nero, quit his imperial throne,
 and court glory from the tinkle string,
 but faint shadow and immortal soul,
 with empire self, to pride or rapture fire. 
if noble motive minister no cure,
 even vanity forbid thou to be vain. 

high worth be elevate place: it be more;
 it make the post stand candidate for thou;
 make more than monarch, make a honest man;
 though no exchequer it command, it be wealth;
 and though it wear no ribbon, it be renown;
 renown, that will not quit thou, though disgrace,
 nor leave thou pendent on a master smile. 
other ambition nature interdict;
 nature proclaim it most absurd in man,
 by point at his origin and end;
 milk and a swath, at first, his whole demand;
 his whole domain, at last, a turf or stone;
 to who, between, a world may seem too small. 

soul true great dart forward, on the wing
 of just ambition, to the grand result,
 the curtain fall; there see the buskin chief
 unshod behind this momentary scene,
 reduce to his own stature, low or high,
 as vice, or virtue, sink he, or sublime;
 and laugh at this fantastic mummery,
 this antic prelude of grotesque event,
 where dwarf be often stilt, and betray
 a littleness of soul by world overrun,
 and nation lay in blood. dread sacrifice
 to christian pride! which have with horror shock
 the dark pagan, offer to their god. 

o thou most christian enemy to peace! 
again in arm? again provoke fate? 
that prince, and that alone, be true great,
 who draw the sword reluctant, glad sheathe;
 on empire build what empire far outweigh,
 and make his throne a scaffold to the sky. 

why this so rare? because forget of all
 the day of death; that venerable day,
 which sit as judge; that day which shall pronounce
 on all our day, absolve they or condemn. 
Lorenzo, never shut thy thought against it;
 be levee never so full, afford it room,
 and give it audience in the cabinet. 
that friend consult (flattery apart)
 will tell thou fair if thou be great or mean. 

to dote on aught may leave we, or be leave, —
 be that ambition? then let flame descend,
 point to the centre their invert spire,
 and learn humiliation from a soul
 which boast her lineage from celestial fire. 
yet these be they the world pronounce wise;
 the world which cancel nature right and wrong,
 and cast new wisdom: even the grave man lend
 his solemn face to countenance the coin. 
wisdom for part be madness for the whole. 
this stamp the paradox, and give we leave
 to call the wise weak, the rich poor,
 the most ambitious unambitious, mean;
 in triumph mean, and abject on a throne. 
nothing can make it less than mad in man,
 to put forth all his ardour, all his art,
 and give his soul her full unbounded flight,
 but reach he who give her wing to fly. 
when blind ambition quite mistake her road,
 and downward pore for that which shine above,
 substantial happiness, and true renown;
 then, like a idiot, gaze on the brook,
 we leap at star, and fasten in the mud;
 at glory grasp, and sink in infamy. 

ambition! powerful source of good and ill! 
thy strength in man, like length of wing in bird,
 when disengage from earth, with great ease
 and swift flight, transport we to the sky:
 by toy entangle, or in guilt bemir,
 it turn a curse; it be our chain and scourge
 in this dark dungeon, where confine we lie,
 close-grated by the sordid bar of sense;
 all prospect of eternity shut out;
 and, but for execution, never set free. 

with error in ambition just charge,
 find we Lorenzo wise in his wealth? 
what, if thy rental i reform, and draw
 a inventory new to set thou right? 
where thy true treasure? gold say, "not in i;"
 and, "not in i,"the diamond. gold be poor;
 india insolvent: seek it in thyself;
 seek in thy naked self, and find it there;
 in be so descend, form, endow;
 sky-born, sky-guided, sky-returning race! 
erect, immortal, rational, divine! 
in sense, which inherit earth and heaven;
 enjoy the various riches nature yield;
 far noble! give the riches they enjoy;
 give taste to fruit, and harmony to grove,
 their radiant beam to gold, and gold bright sire;
 take-in, at once, the landscape of the world,
 at a small inlet, which a grain may close,
 and half-create the wondrous world they see. 
our sense, as our reason, be divine. 
but for the magic organ powerful charm,
 earth be a rude, uncoloured chaos still. 
object be but they occasion: we they exploit;
 we be the cloth, the pencil, and the paint,
 which nature admirable picture draw,
 and beautify creation ample dome. 
like Milton eve, when gaze on the lake,
 man make the matchless image man admire. 
say then, shall man, his thought all send abroad,
 (superior wonder in himself forget,)
 his admiration waste on object round,
 when heaven make he the soul of all he see? 
absurd, not rare! so great, so mean, be man! 

what wealth in sense such as these! what wealth
 in fancy fire to form a fair scene
 than sense survey! in memory firm record! 
which, shall it perish, can this world recall
 from the dark shadow of overwhelm year,
 in colour fresh, original bright,
 preserve its portrait, and report its fate! 
what wealth in intellect, that sovereign power,
 which sense and fancy summons to the bar;
 interrogate, approve, or reprehend;
 and from the mass those underling import,
 from their material sift, and refine,
 and in truth be balance accurate weigh,
 form art and science, government and law;
 the solid basis and the beauteous frame,
 the vital and the grace, of civil life;
 and, manner (sad exception!) set aside,
 strike out, with master-hand, a copy fair
 of his idea, who indulgent thought,
 long, long ere chaos teem, plan human bliss! 

what wealth in soul that soar, dive, range around,
 disdain limit or from place or time:
 and hear at once, in thought extensive, hear
 the almighty fiat, and the trumpet sound! 
bold on creation outside walk, and view
 what be, and be, and more than ever shall be;
 command, with omnipotence of thought,
 creation new in fancy field to rise! 
soul, that can grasp whatever they almighty make,
 and wander wild through thing impossible! 
what wealth in faculty of endless growth,
 in quenchless passion violent to crave,
 in liberty to choose, in power to reach,
 and in duration, (how thy riches rise!) 
duration to perpetuate — boundless bliss! 

ask you, what power reside in feeble man
 that bliss to gain? be virtue, then, unknown? 
virtue, our present peace, our future prize! 
man unprecarious, natural estate,
 improvable at will, in virtue lie;
 its tenure sure; its income be divine. 

high-built abundance, heap on heap! for what? 
to breed new want, and beggar we the more! 
then, make a rich scramble for the throng. 
soon as this feeble pulse, which leap so long
 almost by miracle, be tire with play,
 like rubbish from disploding engine throw,
 our magazine of hoard trifle fly;
 fly diverse; fly to foreigner, to foe;
 new master court, and call the former fool
 (how just!) for dependence on their stay. 
wide scatter, first, our plaything; then our dust. 

do court abundance for the sake of peace? 
learn, and lament thy self-defeated scheme:
 riches enable to be rich still;
 and rich still what mortal can resist? 
thus wealth (a cruel task-master) enjoin
 new toil, succeed toil, a endless train! 
and murder peace, which teach it first to shine. 
the poor be half as wretched as the rich,
 who proud and painful privilege it be
 at once to bear a double load of woe;
 to feel the sting of envy and of want,
 outrageous want, both Indies can cure. 

a competence be vital to content. 
much wealth be corpulence, if not disease:
 sick, or encumber, be our happiness. 
a competence be all we can enjoy. 
o be content where heaven can give no more! 
more, like a flash of water from a lock,
 quicken our spirit movement for a hour;
 but soon its force be spend, nor rise our joy
 above our native temper common stream. 
hence disappointment lurk in every prize,
 as bee in flower, and sting we with success. 

the rich man who deny it, proud feign,
 nor know the wise be privy to the lie. 
much learning show how little mortal know;
 much wealth, how little worldling can enjoy:
 at best it baby we with endless toy,
 and keep we child till we drop to dust. 
as monkey at a mirror stand amaze,
 they fail to find what they so plain see:
 thus man, in shine riches, see the face
 of happiness, nor know it be a shade;
 but gaze, and touch, and peep, and peep again
 and wish, and wonder it be absent still. 

how few can rescue opulence from want! 
who live to nature rare can be poor;
 who live to fancy never can be rich. 
poor be the man in debt; the man of gold,
 in debt to fortune, tremble at her power:
 the man of reason smile at she and death. 
o what a patrimony this! a being
 of such inherent strength and majesty,
 not world possess can raise it; world destroy
 can injure; which hold on its glorious course,
 when thy, o nature! end; too bless to mourn
 creation obsequy. what treasure this! 
the monarch be a beggar to the man. 

immortal! age past, yet nothing go! 
morn without eve! a race without a goal,
 unshorten by progression infinite! 
futurity for ever future! life
 begin still where computation end! 
it be the description of a deity! 
it be the description of the mean slave:
 the mean slave dare, then, Lorenzo scorn? 
the mean slave thy sovereign glory share. 
proud youth, fastidious of the low world! 
man lawful pride include humility;
 stoop to the low; be too great to find
 inferior: all immortal! brother all! 
proprietor eternal of thy love! 

immortal! what can strike the sense so strong,
 as this the soul? it thunder to the thought;
 reason amaze; gratitude overwhelm. 
no more we slumber on the brink of fate;
 rouse at the sound, they exult soul ascend,
 and breathe her native air; a air that feed
 ambition high, and fan ethereal fire;
 quick kindle all that be divine within we,
 nor leave one loiter thought beneath the star. 

have not lorenzo bosom catch the flame? 
immortal! be but one immortal, how
 will other envy! how will throne adore! 
because it be common, be the blessing lose? 
how this tie up the bounteous hand of heaven! 
o vain, vain, vain, all else! eternity! 
a glorious and a needful refuge, that,
 from vile imprisonment in abject view. 
it be immortality, it be that alone,
 amid life pain, abasement, emptiness,
 the soul can comfort, elevate, and fill. 
that only, and that ample, this perform,
 lift we above life pain, her joy above;
 their terror those, and these their lustre, lose:
 eternity depend cover all;
 eternity depend all achieve;
 set earth at distance; cast she into shade;
 blend her distinction; abrogate her power:
 the low, the lofty, joyous, and severe,
 Fortune dread frown and fascinate smile,
 make one promiscuous and neglect heap,
 the man beneath; if i may call he man,
 who immortality full force inspire. 
nothing terrestrial touch his high thought:
 sun shine unseen, and thunder roll unheard,
 by mind quite conscious of their high descent,
 their present province, and their future prize;
 divine dart upward every wish,
 warm on the wing, in glorious absence lose! 

doubt you this truth? why labour your belief? 
if earth whole orb, by some due-distanced eye,
 be see at once, her tower Alps will sink,
 and level Atlas leave a even sphere. 
thus earth, and all that earthly mind admire,
 be swallow in eternity vast round. 
to that stupendous view when soul awake,
 so large of late, so mountainous to man,
 time be toy subside; and equal all below. 

enthusiastic this? then all be weak,
 but rank enthusiast. to this godlike height
 some soul have soar, or martyr never have bleed:
 and all may do what have by man be do. 
who, beat by these sublunary storm,
 boundless, interminable joy can weigh,
 unraptured, unexalted, uninflamed? 
what slave, unblessed, who from tomorrow dawn
 expect a empire? he forget his chain,
 and, throne in thought, his absent sceptre wave. 

and what a sceptre wait we! what a throne! 
her own immense appointment to compute,
 or comprehend her high prerogative,
 in this her dark minority, how toil,
 how vain pant, the human soul divine! 
too great the bounty seem for earthly joy. 
what heart but tremble at so strange a bliss? 

in spite of all the truth the muse have sing,
 never to be prize enough, enough revolve! 
be there who wrap the world so close about they,
 they see no farther than the cloud; and dance
 on heedless vanity fantastic toe,
 till, stumble at a straw, in their career,
 headlong they plunge, where end both dance and song? 
be there, Lorenzo? be it possible? 
be there on earth (let i not call they man)
 who lodge a soul immortal in their breast;
 unconscious as the mountain of its over;
 or rock, of its inestimable gem? 
when rock shall melt, and mountain vanish, these
 shall know their treasure; treasure then no more. 

be there (still more amaze!) who resist
 the rise thought? who smother, in its birth,
 the glorious truth? who struggle to be brute? 
who through this bosom-barrier burst their way;
 and, with reverse ambition, strive to sink? 
who labour downwards through they oppose power
 of instinct, reason, and the world against they,
 to dismal hope, and shelter in the shock
 of endless night, night dark than the grave? 
who fight the proof of immortality? 
with horrid zeal and execrable art,
 work all their engine, level their black fire,
 to blot from man this attribute divine,
 (than vital blood far dear to the wise,)
 blasphemer, and rank atheist to themselves? 

to contradict they, see all nature rise! 
what object, what event, the moon beneath,
 but argue, or endear, a after-scene? 
to reason prove, or wed it to desire? 
all thing proclaim it needful; some advance
 one precious step beyond, and prove it sure. 
a thousand argument swarm round my pen,
 from heaven, and earth, and man. indulge a few,
 by nature, as her common habit, wear;
 so press providence a truth to teach,
 which truth untaught, all other truth be vain. 

thou! who all-providential eye survey,
 who hand direct, who spirit fill and warm
 creation, and hold empire far beyond! 
eternity inhabitant august;
 of two eternity amaze lord! 
one past, ere man or angel have begin:
 aid! while i rescue from the foe assault
 thy glorious immortality in man:
 a theme for ever, and for all, of weight,
 of moment infinite! but relish most
 by those who love thou most, who most adore. 

nature, thy daughter, everchanging birth
 of thou the great immutable, to man
 speak wisdom; be his oracle supreme;
 and he who most consult she be most wise. 
Lorenzo, to this heavenly delphos haste;
 and come back all-immortal, all-divine:
 look nature through, it be revolution all;
 all change, no death. day follow night; and night,
 the die day; star rise, and set, and rise;
 earth take they example. see, the summer gay,
 with her green chaplet and ambrosial flower,
 droop into pallid autumn: winter grey,
 horrid with frost, and turbulent with storm,
 blow autumn and his golden fruit away;
 then melt into the spring: soft spring, with breath
 favonian, from warm chamber of the south
 recall the first. all, to reflourish, fade;
 as in a wheel, all sink, to reascend:
 emblem of man, who pass, not expire. 

with this minute distinction, emblem just, —
 nature revolve, but man advance: both
 eternal; that a circle, this a line;
 that gravitate, this soar. the aspire soul,
 ardent and tremulous, like flame, ascend;
 zeal and humility her wing to heaven. 
the world of matter, with its various form,
 all die into new life. life, bear from death,
 roll the vast mass, and shall for ever roll. 
no single atom, once in being, lose,
 with change of counsel charge the most high. 

what hence infer Lorenzo? can it be? 
matter immortal? and shall spirit die? 
above the noble, shall less noble rise? 
shall man alone, for who all else revive,
 no resurrection know? shall man alone,
 imperial man! be sow in barren ground,
 less privilege than grain on which he feed? 
be man, in who alone be power to prize
 the bliss of being, or with previous pain
 deplore its period, by the spleen of fate,
 severe doom death single unredeemed? 

if nature revolution speak aloud,
 in her gradation hear her loud still. 
look nature through; it be neat gradation all. 
by what minute degree her scale ascend! 
each middle nature join at each extreme,
 to that above it join, to that beneath. 
part into part reciprocal shoot
 abhor divorce. what love of union reign! 
here, dormant matter wait a call to life;
 half-life, half-death, join there: here, life and sense;
 there, sense from reason steal a glimmer ray;
 reason shine out in man. but how preserve
 the chain unbroken upward, to the realm
 of incorporeal life? those realm of bliss
 where death have no dominion? grant a make
 half-mortal, half-immortal; earthy part,
 and part ethereal: grant the soul of man
 eternal; or in man the series end. 
wide yawn the gap; connexion be no more;
 check reason halt; her next step want support;
 strive to climb, she tumble from her scheme;
 a scheme analogy pronounce so true:
 analogy, man sure guide below. 

thus far all nature call on thy belief. 
and will Lorenzo, careless of the call,
 false attestation on all nature charge,
 rather than violate his league with death? 
renounce his reason, rather than renounce
 the dust belove, and run the risk of heaven? 
o what indignity to deathless soul! 
what treason to the majesty of man,
 of man immortal hear the lofty style: —
 "if so decree, they almighty will be do. 
let earth dissolve, yond ponderous orb descend,
 and grind we into dust: the soul be safe;
 the man emerge; mount above the wreck. 
as tower flame from nature funeral pyre;
 over devastation, as a gainer, smile;
 his charter, his inviolable right,
 well-pleased to learn from thunder impotence,
 death pointless dart, and hell defeat storm."

but these chimeras touch not thou, Lorenzo! 
the glory of the world thy sevenfold shield. 
other ambition than of crown in air,
 and superlunary felicity,
 thy bosom warm. i will cool it, if i can;
 and turn those glory that enchant, against thou. 
what tie thou to this life proclaim the next. 
if wise, the cause that wound thou be thy cure. 

come, my ambitious! let we mount together,
 (to mount, Lorenzo never can refuse,)
 and from the cloud, where pride delight to dwell,
 look down on earth. — what see thou? wondrous thing! 
terrestrial wonder, that eclipse the sky. 
what length of labour land! what load sea! 
load by man for pleasure, wealth, or war! 
sea, wind, and planet, into service bring,
 his art acknowledge, and promote his end. 
nor can they eternal rock his will withstand:
 what level mountain, and what lift vale! 
over vale and mountain sumptuous city swell,
 and gild our landscape with their glitter spire. 
some amid the wonder wave majestic rise;
 and Neptune hold a mirror to their charm. 
far great still! (what can mortal might?) 
see wide dominion ravish from the deep:
 the narrow deep with indignation foam. 
or southward turn: to delicate and grand
 the fine art there ripen in the sun. 
how the tall temple, as to meet their god,
 ascend the sky! the proud triumphal arch
 show we half heaven beneath its ample bend. 
high through mid-air, here stream be teach to flow;
 whole river, there, lay by in basin, sleep. 
here, plain turn ocean; there, vast ocean join
 through kingdom channel deep from shore to shore,
 and change creation take its face from man. 
beat thy brave breast for formidable scene. 
where fame and empire wait upon the sword? 
see field in blood; hear naval thunder rise, —
 britannia voice, that awe the world to peace! 
how yond enormous mole project break
 the mid-sea furious wave! their roar amid,
 out-speaks the deity, and say, "o main! 
thus far, nor farther! new restraint obey."
earth disembowele! measure be the sky! 
star be detect in their deep recess! 
creation widen! vanquish nature yield! 
her secret be extort! art prevail! 
what monument of genius, spirit, power! 

and now, Lorenzo, rapture at this scene,
 who glory render heaven superfluous! say,
 who footstep these? — immortal have be here. 
can less than soul immortal this have do? 
earth cover over with proof of soul immortal,
 and proof of immortality forget. 

to flatter thy grand foible, i confess,
 these be ambition work; and these be great:
 but this the least immortal soul can do:
 transcend they all. — "but what can these transcend?"
do ask i, what? — one sigh for the distress. 
 "what then for infidel?"— a deep sigh. 
it be moral grandeur make the mighty man:
 how little they who think aught great below! 
all our ambition death defeat, but one;
 and that it crown. — here cease we; but, ere long,
 more powerful proof shall take the field against thou,
 strong than death, and smile at the tomb. 
