Flora to Pompey.

by the same.

ere death these close eye for ever shade,
(that death thy cruelty have welcome make)
receive, thou yet love man! this one adieu,
this last farewell to happiness and you.
my eye overflow with tear, my tremble hand
can scarce the letter form, or pen command:
the dance paper swim before my sight,
and scarce myself can read the word i write.

think you behold i in this lose estate,
and think yourself the author of my fate:
how vast the change! your Flora now become
the general pity, not the boast of Rome.
this form, a pattern to the sculptor art,
this face, the idol once of Pompey heart,
(who picture beauty Rome think fit to place
the sacred temple of her god to grace)
be charm now no more; the bloom be flee,
the lily languid, and the rose dead.
soon shall some hand the glorious work deface,
where grecian pencil tell what Flora be:
no long my resemblance they impart,
they lose their likeness, when i lose thy heart.

oh! that those hour can take their turn again,
when Pompey, labour with a jealous pain,
his Flora thus bespeak: "say, my dear love!
"shall all these rival unsuccessful prove?
"in vain, for ever, shall the roman youth
"envy my happiness, and tempt thy truth?
"shall neither tear nor prayer thy pity move?
"ah! give not pity, it be akin to love.
"will Flora be not fair in such excess,
"that i may fear, though not adore she less. "

fool that i be, i seek to ease that grief,
nor know indifference follow the relief:
experience teach the cruel truth too late,
i never dread, till i find my fate.
it be mine to ask if Pompey self can hear,
unmoved, his rival unsuccessful prayer;
to make thou swear he will not thy pity move;
alas! such pity be no kin to love.

it be thou thyself (ungrateful as thou be!)
bid i unbend the rigour of my heart:
you chide my faith, reproach my be true,
(unnatural thought!) and labour to subdue
the constancy my soul maintain for you;
to other arm your mistress you condemn,
too cool a lover, and too warm a friend.

how can thou thus my lavish heart abuse,
to ask the only thing it can refuse?
nor yet upbraid i, Pompey, what i say,
for it be my merit that i can obey;
yet this allege against i as a fault,
thy rage foment, and my ruin wrought.
just god! what tie, what conduct can prevail
over fickle man, when truth like i can fail?

urge not, to gloss thy crime, the name of friend,
we know how far those sacred law extend;
since other hero have not blush to prove
how weak all passion when oppose to love:
nor boast the virtuous conflict of thy heart
when generous pity take geminius part;
it be all heroic fraud, and roman art.
such flight of honour may amuse the crowd,
but by a mistress never can be allow;
keep for the senate, and the grave debate,
that infamous hypocrisy of state:
there word be virtue, and your trade deceit.

no riddle be thy change, nor hard to explain;
Flora be fond, and Pompey be a man:
no long then a specious tale pretend,
nor plead fictitious merit to your friend:
by nature false, you follow her decree,
nor generous be to he, but false to i.

you say you melt at geminius tear,
you say you feel his agonize care:
gross artifice, that this from he can move,
and not from Flora, who you say you love:
you can not bear to hear your rival sigh,
yet bear unmoved to see your mistress die.
inhuman hypocrite! nor thus can he
my wrong, and my distress, obdurate, see.
he, who receive, condemn the gift you make,
and join with i the giver to upbraid,
forget he be oblige, and mourn i be betray.
he love too well that cruel gift to use,
which Pompey love too little to refuse:
fain will he call my vagrant lord again,
but i the kind ambassador restrain;
i scorn to let another take my part,
and to myself will owe or lose thy heart.

can nothing ever rekindle love in thou?
can nothing ever extinguish it in i?
that i can tear thou from this injure breast!
and where you give my person, give the rest,
at once to grant and punish thy request.
that i can place thy worthy rival there!
no second insult need my fondness fear;
he view not Flora with her Pompey eye,
he love like i, he dote, despair, and die.

come to my arm, thou dear deserve youth!
thou prodigy of man! thou man with truth!
for he, i will redouble every care,
to please, for he, these fade charm repair;
to crown his vow, and sharpen thy despair.

oh! it be illusion all! and idle rage!
no second passion can this heart engage;
and short, Pompey, shall thy Flora prove,
death may dissolve, but nothing change she love.
