a pindaric on his majesty birthday. by mr. prior sing before their majesty at Whitehall, the four of November 1690. 

a prophecy by Apollo. 

as through britania rage sea,
 our great defender plough his glorious way,
 to make our wish, and his fame complete,
 to fix a new our sink state,
 and fill the great decree of fate. 
Apollo turn the Mistick book,

in which record lie the certain doom
 of time unborn, and year to come;
 auspicious omen thence he take,
 Lawrel adorn his brow, and joy his look;
 aloud he bless the happy day,
 who lustre twice return must see,
 truth restore, and Albion free. 
aloud he bid the mighty month proceed,
 all deck with fair success, and crown with happy deed. 
he smile, and strike the lyre and say,

heaven have reverse britania doom:
 her promise day appear, her better fate be come. 
the gentle star, who joyful ray,
 enliven this auspicious day,
 when holland bless the hero birth,
 do with diffusive goodness shed,
 it be large gift, over britain rise head,
 and thence, around the joyful earth. 

you sacred muse, who harmonious lay
 be destine to record his praise. 
prepare with solemn joy, prepare
 the cheerful consort of the war:
 awake the trumpet, rouse the drum,
 the king, the conqueror, the hero come,
 with shine arm he deck the list field,
 io Britannia! they, Ierne yield,
 io Britannia! bless the conqueror,
 put all thy glory on, exert thy power;
 and greet thy william happy toil,
 assert the sea, defend the isle,
 and on the low world look safe down,
 thy self a world alone. 

see on the continent appear,
 engage troop and ready war. 
on foreign plain the british army shine,
 WILLIAM lead on, and victory pursue,
 and on sein bank the hero well renew
 the glory of the Boyne. 
deliver Gallia dread now no more,
 tyrannic may, and lawless power,
 obey her ancient conqueror. 
over Europe free victorious WILLIAM reign,
 and sullen war, and vanquisheed pride,
 behind his chariot wheel be tie
 in everlasting chain. 

bid the drum and trumpet cease,
 and tune the soft instrument of peace;
 all that through speak pipe convey
 sound of delight, and image of joy;
 all that by artful charm, or vocal wire,
 in happy number gentle can express,
 all the pleasure, all the bliss,
 that william care deserve, or mary love require. 

Maria now no long fear
 the doubtful chance of horrid war;
 no long arm thy hero with thy prayer;
 to battle he no more shall ride,
 no more for thou, and his britania bleed. 
saturnian age be renew, and golden time succeed:
 the shin year begin their happy race,
 with conquest crown, and bless with peace. 

fair plenty open wide her bounteous hand,
 and throw her gift over all the land. 
virtue do with heaven conspire,
 to make britania joy entire,
 while WILLIAM, and while MARY reign. 
astrea have forsake the star,
 and join her throne to they,
 nor shall return from earth again,
 while WILLIAM, and while MARY reign. 
