the athenian

(1.)

we yield! we yield! the palm, bright maid! be thy! 
how vast a genius sparkle in each line! 
how noble all! how loyal! how divine! 
sure thou by heaven-inspired, be send
 to make the king and nation foe repent,
 to melt each stubborn rebel down,
 or the almighty hover vengeance show,
 arm with his glitter spear and dreadful bow,
 and yet more dreadful frown. 
ah will they hear! ah will they try
 the exhaustless mercy yet in store
 from earth and heaven offend majesty,
 both calm ask, why will they die? 
ah! will they yet repent, and sin no more! 

(2.)

how bless, how happy we,
 can all we write one convert make,
 how glad new affront can take
 one convert to dear virtue, and dear loyalty? 
though the full crop reserve for thou. 
oh virgin! touch thy lyre:
 what fiend so stubborn to refuse
 the soft, yet powerful charm of thy celestial muse? 
what gentle thought will they inspire! 
how will thy voice, how will thy hand,
 black rebel-legion to the deep command! 
black rebel-legion murmur take their flight,
 and sink away to conscious shade of everlasting night:
 while those they leave, amaze stand,
 and scarce believe themselves, themselves to find
 clothe, calm, and in a better mind. 

(3.)

begin, begin, thy noble choice,
 great William claim thy lyre, and claim thy voice,
 all like himself the hero show,
 which none but thou can do. 
at Landen paint he, spear and trophy round,
 and twenty thousand death upon the slippery ground:
 now, now the dreadful shock begin,
 fierce luxemburg come thunder on:
 they charge, retreat, return and fly,
 advance, retire, kill, conquer, dye! 
tell i, some god, what god be those
 enwrap in cloud of smoke and foe,
 who oft the totter day restore? 
it be William and Bavaria, say no more! 
William — that love, that dreadful name! 
Bavaria! rival of his fame. 
a third come close behind, who shall he be? 
it be Ormond! mighty Ormond! sure it be he:
 it be noble fight — they must prevail;
 ah no, our sin weigh down the doubtful scale. 
ah thankless England, they engage for thou,
 or never can have miss the victory:
 with high disdain from the moist field they go,
 and dreadful retreat, yet face the tremble foe. 

(4.)

thus sing, bright maid! thus and yet loud sing,
 thy god and king! 
cherish that noble flame which warm thy breast,
 and be by future world admire and bless:
 the present age short-lived glory scorn,
 and into wide eternity be bear! 
there chaste orinda soul shall meet with thy,
 more noble, more divine;
 and in the heaven of poetry for ever shine:
 there all the glorious few,
 to loyalty and virtue true,
 like she and you. 
it be that, it be that alone must make you true great,
 not all your beauty equal to your wit,
 (for sure a soul so fine
 will never possess a body less divine)
 not all mortality so loud boast,
 which withereth soon and fade,
 can ought avail when hurry to the uncomfortable coast,
 where wander wide lament ghost,
 and thin unbodied shade. 
it be virtue only with you go,
 and guard you through ten thousand foe;
 hold fast of that, it will soon direct your flight
 to endless fame and endless light;
 if that you lose, you sink away,
 and take eternal leave of day. 
then fly false man, if you will a angel prove,
 and consecrate to heaven your noble love. 
