the house of superstition. a vision.

by mr. Denton.

i 

when sleep all-soothing hand with fetter soft
 tie down each sense, and lull to balmy rest;
 the internal power, creative fancy oft
 brood over her treasure in the formful breast. 
thus when no long daily care engage,
 the busy mind pursue the darling theme;
 hence angel whisper to the slumber sage,
 and god of old inspire the hero dream;
 hence as i sleep, these image arise,
 to fancy eye, and join this fairy scene compose. 

ii.

as when fair morning dry she pear tear,
 the mountain lift over mist its lofty head;
 thus new to sight a gothic dome appear
 with the grey rust of roll year overspread. 
here superstition hold her dreary reign,
 and her lip-laboured orison she ply
 in tongue unknown, when morn bedew the plain,
 or evening skirt with gold the western sky;
 to the dumb stock she bend, or sculpture wall,
 and many a cross she make, and many a bead let fall. 

iii.

near to the dome a magic pair reside
 prompt to deceive, and practise to confound;
 here hoodwinked ignorance be see to bide
 stretch in darksome cave along the ground. 
no object ever awake his stupid eye,
 nor voice articulate arrest his ear,
 save when beneath the moon pale spectre rise,
 and haunt his soul with visionary fear:
 or when hoarse wind incaverned murmur round,
 and babble echo wake, and iterate the sound. 

iv.

where bough entwine form a artful shade,
 and in faint glimmer just admit the light,
 there error sit in borrow white array,
 and in truth be form deceive the transient sight. 
a thousand glory wait she open day,
 her beam lustre when fair truth impart;
 thus error will pour forth a spurious ray,
 and cheat the unpractised mind with mimic art;
 she cleave with magic wand the liquid sky,
 bid airy form appear, and scene fantastic rise. 

v. 

a porter deaf, decrepit, old, and blind
 sit at the gate, and lift a liberal bowl
 with wine of wondrous power to lull the mind,
 and check each vigorous effort of the soul:
 whoever unawares shall ply his thirsty lip,
 and drink in gulp the luscious liquer down,
 shall hapless from the cup delusion sip,
 and object see in feature not their own;
 each way-worn traveller that hither come,
 he lave with copious draught, and prejudice his name. 

vi.

within a various race be see to win,
 prop of her age, and pillar of her state,
 which erst be nurture by the wither crone,
 and bear to tyranny, her grisly mate:
 the first appear in pomp of purple pride,
 with triple crown erect, and throne high;
 two golden key hang dangle by his side
 to lock or open the portal of the sky;
 crouch and prostrate there (ah! sight unmeet!) 
the crown head will bow, and lick his dusty foot. 

vii.

with bend arm he on a book recline
 fast lock with iron clasp from vulgar eye;
 heaven gracious gift to light the wander mind,
 to lift fall man, and guide he to the sky! 
a man no more, a god he will be think,
 and amaze mortal blind must obey:
 with slight of hand he lie wonder wrought,
 and near he loathsome heap of relique lay:
 strange legend will he read, and figment dire
 of limbus prison shade, and purgatory fire. 

viii.

there meager penance sit, in sackcloth clad,
 and to his breast close hug the viper, sin,
 yet oft with brandish whip will gaul, as mad,
 with voluntary stripe his shrivel skin. 
count large heap of over-abounding good
 of saint that die within the church pale,
 with gentle aspect there indulgence stand,
 and to the needy culprit will retail;
 there too, strange merchandise! he pardon sell,
 and treason will absolve, and murder purge with gold. 

ix.

with shave crown in a sequester cell
 a lazy lubbard there be see to lay;
 no work have he, save some few bead to tell,
 and indolent snore the hour away. 
the nameless joy that bless the nuptial bed,
 the mystic rite of Hymen hallow tie
 impure he deem, and from they start with dread,
 as crime of foul stain, and deep dye:
 no social hope have he, no social fear,
 but spend in lethargy devout the linger year. 

x. 

gnash his tooth in mood of furious ire
 fierce persecution sit, and with strong breath
 wake into live flame large heap of fire,
 and feast on murder, massacre, and death. 
near he be place procrustes iron bed
 to stretch or mangle to a certain size;
 to see their writhe pain each heart must bleed,
 to hear their doleful shriek and pierce cry;
 yet he behold they with unmoistened eye,
 their writhe pain his sport, their moan his melody. 

xi.

a gradual light diffuse over the gloom,
 and slow approach with majestic pace;
 a lovely maid appear in beauty bloom,
 with native charm, and unaffected grace:
 her hand a clear reflect mirror show,
 in which all object their true feature wear,
 and on her cheek a blush indignant glow
 to see the horrid sorcery practise there;
 she snatch the volume from the tyrant rage,
 unlock its iron clasp, and open the heavenly page. 

xii.

 "my name be truth, and you, each holy seer,
" that all my step with ardent gaze pursue,
 "unveil, she say, the sacred mystery here,
" give the celestial boon to public view. 
 "though blatant obloquy with leprous mouth
" shall blot your fame, and blast the generous deed,
 "yet in revolve year some liberal youth
" shall crown your virtuous act with glory meed,
 "your name adorn in gilpin polish page,
 "with each historic grace, shall shine through every age. 

xiii.

 "with furious hate though fierce relentless power
" exert of torment all her horrid skill;
 "though your life meet too soon the fatal hour
" scorch in flame, or writhe on the wheel;
 "yet when the dragon in the deep abyss
 "shall lie, fast bind in adamantine chain,
" you with the lamb shall rise to ceaseless bliss,
 "first-fruit of death, and partner of his reign;
" then shall repay the momentary tear
 "the great sabbatic rest, the millenary year." 
