the body-politic.

if in the body-politic you see
 rebellion, rapine, bloodshed, anarchy,
 that state you say be lose! so when you find
 the body human with distemper mind,
 the blood corrupt, and the fever high,
 you doubt not to pronounce — that man must die. 

now in the way of fable we will suppose
 rebellion in the human frame arise;
 each member loud sound forth his merit,
 and cry, to obey the head show want of spirit,
 it be time the limb shall now assert their part,
 and overturn the empire of the heart. 

the stubborn knee declare no more they will bend
 for god or king, nor any strength will lend
 to bear a head of such unwieldy size;
 to hear and see require not ear and eye;
 all part be equal, and have each a right
 the assume the gift of hear and of sight. 

whereat the foot step forth with furious sound
 stamp and swear they will not touch the ground;
 henceforth aloft they will rise erect in air,
 and make the daintier hand the burden bear. 

this say, the hand indignant catch the alarm,
 and struggle try to separate from the arm;
 aloud they clap, and summon all to fight
 to fix their freedom, and enforce their right. 
and now convulsion seize on every part,
 loud beat each pulse, and terror shake the heart;
 within be hear a horrid noise and rout,
 the inside claim the right to be the out. 
the lung protest they will not draw the breath;
 they care not if it bring on instant death;
 it be better all be lose than they deny
 the right to hold a share in the outside. 

the stomach roar he soon will stop digestion,
 if ever his outside right be call in question:
 the vein declare they will not perform their part,
 nor long throw the blood up to the heart;
 the heart may feed itself, or yield it be place
 to those, who will fill it with a better grace. 

on this the liver writhe himself around,
 and swear that long, though rot and unsound,
 he will seek that place; he now will seize the throne. 
for he be fit to rule, and he alone. 
this rouse the spleen, who on the vital feed,
 plan by craft the downfal of the head;
 but now overcharge with envy, rage, and guile,
 in haste he rise, and overset the boil. 

thus all within be agony and strife,
 each fresh convulsion seem to threaten life;
 the limb distort rise — they give the blow,
 and soon the head (so honour once) lay low. 
and now behold the body wretched state,
 teach by this sad example, ere too late,
 that such each body-politic must be,
 where foul rebellion reign and anarchy. 
