to the reverend and learned dr. Webster, occasion by his dialogue on anger and forgiveness.

ode viii.

i 

it be when the omniscient creative power
 display his wonder by a mortal hand,
 and, delegate at the appoint hour,
 great Moses lead away his choose band;
 when israel host, with all their store,
 past through the ruby-tinctured crystal shore,
 the wilderness of water and of land:
 then persecution rage in heaven own cause,
 and right on neighbour kingdom to infringe,
 strict justice for the breach of nature law,
 strict justice, who be full-sister to revenge:
 the legislator hold the scythe of fate,
 wherever his legion chance to stray,
 death and destruction mark their bloody way;
 immoderate be their rage, for mortal be their hate. 

ii.

but when the king of righteousness arise,
 and on the illumine east serene smile,
 he shine with meek mercy on his foe,
 bright as the sun, but as the moonbeam mild;
 from anger, fall revenge, and discord free,
 he bid war hellish clangor cease,
 in pastoral simplicity and peace,
 and show to man that face, which Moses can not see. 

iii.

well have thou, Webster, picture christian love,
 and copy our great master fair design,
 but livid envy will the light remove,
 or crowd thy portrait in a nook malign —
 the muse shall hold it up to popular view —
 where the more candid and judicious few
 shall think the bright original they see,
 the likeness noble lose in the identity. 

iv.

oh have thou live in better day than these,
 ever to excel by all be deem a shame! 
alas! thou have no modern art to please,
 and to deserve be all thy empty claim.
 else thou'dst be place, by learning, and by wit,
 there, where thy dignify inferior sit —
 oh they be in their generation wise,
 each path of interest they have sage tread, —
 to live — to thrive — to rise — and still to rise —
 better to bow to man, than kneel to god. 

v. 

behold! — where poor unmansioned merit stand,
 all cold, and cramp with penury and pain;
 speechless through want, she rear the implore hand,
 and beg a little bread, but beg in vain;
 while bribery and dullness, pass by,
 bid she, in sound barbarian, starve and die. 
 "away (they cry (we never see thy name)
" or in preferment list, or that of fame;
 "away — nor here the fate thou earne bewail,
" who can not buy a vote, nor have a soul for sale. 

vi.

oh indignation, wherefore be thou give,
 if drowsy patience deaden all thy rage? —
 yet we must bear — such be the will of heaven;
 and, Webster, so prescribe thy candid page. 
then let we hear thou preach seraphic love,
 guide our disgust thought to thing above;
 so our free soul, feed with divine repast,
 (unmindful of low mortal mean employ)
 shall taste the present, recollect the past,
 and strong hope for every future joy. 
