A LETTER to CORINNA from a CAPTAIN in Country Quarters.

MY earliest flame, to whom I owe
All that a captain needs to know;
Dress, and quadrille, and air, and chat,
Lewd songs, loud laughter, and all that;
Arts that have widows oft subdued,
And never fail'd to win a prude;
Think, charmer, how I live forlorn
At quarters, from Corinna torn.
Nor more distress the cornet feels
From gruel, and Ward's popish pills.
What shall I do now you're away,
To kill that only foe, the day?
The landed 'squire, and dull freeholder,
Are sure no comrades for a soldier;
To drink with parsons all day long,
Misaubin tells me wou'd be wrong:
Sober advice, and Curl's Dutch whore
I've read, 'till I can read no more.
At noon I rise, and strait alarm
A sempstress' shop, or country farm;
Repuls'd, my next pursuit is a'ter
The parson's wife, or landlord's daughter:
At market oft for game I search,
Oft at assemblies, oft at church,
And plight my faith and gold to-boot;
Yet demme if a soul will do't —
In short our credit's sunk so low,
Since troops were kept o'foot for shew,
She that for soldiers once run mad,
Is turn'd republican, egad!
And when I boast my feats, the shrew
Asks who was slain the last review.
Know then, that I and captain Trueman
Resolve to keep a miss — in common:
Not her, among the batter'd lasses,
Such as our friend Toupét caresses,
But her, a nymph of polish'd sense,
Which pedants call impertinence:
Train'd up to laugh, and drink, and swear,
And railly with the prettiest air —
Amidst our frolicks and carouses
How shall we pity wretched spouses!
But where can this dear soul be found,
In garret high, or under ground?
If so divine a fair there be,
Charming Corinna, thou art she.
But oh! what motives can persuade
Belles, to prefer a rural shade,
In this gay month, when pleasures bloom,
The park, the play — the drawing room —
Lo! birthnights upon birthnights tread,
Term is begun, the lawyer fee'd;
My friend the merchant, let me tell ye,
Calls in his way to Farinelli;
Add that my sattin gown and watch
Some unfledg'd booby 'squire may catch,
Who, charm'd with his delicious quarry,
May first debauch me, and then marry;
Never was season more befitting
Since conv—ns last were sitting.
And shall I leave dear Charing-cross,
And let two boys my charms ingross?
Leave play-house, temple, and the rummer?
A country friend might serve in summer!

The town's your choice — yet, charming fair,
Observe what ills attend you there.
Captains, that once admir'd your beauty,
Are kept by quality on duty;
Cits, for attoning alms disburse
A tester — templars, something worse:
My lord may take you to his bed,
But then he sends you back unpaid;
And all you gain from generous cully,
Must go to keep some Irish bully.
Pinchbeck demands the tweezer case,
And Monmouth-street the gown and stays;
More mischiefs yet come crowding on,
Bridewell, — West Indies — and Sir John —
Then oh! to lewdness bid adieu,
And chastly live, confin'd to two.
