a letter to Corinna from a captain in country quarter.

my early flame, to who i owe
all that a captain need to know;
dress, and quadrille, and air, and chat,
lewd song, loud laughter, and all that;
art that have widow oft subdue,
and never fail to win a prude;
think, charmer, how i live forlorn
at quarter, from Corinna tear.
nor more distress the cornet feel
from gruel, and ward popish pill.
what shall i do now you be away,
to kill that only foe, the day?
the land esquire, and dull freeholder,
be sure no comrade for a soldier;
to drink with parson all day long,
misaubin tell i will be wrong:
sober advice, and curl dutch whore
i have read, until i can read no more.
at noon i rise, and strait alarm
a sempstress shop, or country farm;
repulse, my next pursuit be a'ter
the parson wife, or landlord daughter:
at market oft for game i search,
oft at assembly, oft at church,
and plight my faith and gold to-boot;
yet demme if a soul will do it —
in short our credit's sink so low,
since troop be keep o'foot for show,
she that for soldier once run mad,
be turn republican, egad!
and when i boast my feat, the shrew
ask who be slay the last review.
know then, that i and captain Trueman
resolve to keep a miss — in common:
not she, among the batter lass,
such as our friend toupét caress,
but she, a nymph of polish sense,
which pedant call impertinence:
train up to laugh, and drink, and swear,
and real with the pretty air —
amid our frolick and carouse
how shall we pity wretched spouse!
but where can this dear soul be find,
in garret high, or under ground?
if so divine a fair there be,
charm Corinna, thou be she.
but oh! what motive can persuade
bell, to prefer a rural shade,
in this gay month, when pleasure bloom,
the park, the play — the draw room —
lo! birth-night upon birth-night tread,
term be begin, the lawyer fee;
my friend the merchant, let i tell you,
call in his way to farinelli;
add that my satin gown and watch
some unfledged booby esquire may catch,
who, charm with his delicious quarry,
may first debauch i, and then marry;
never be season more befit
since conv—ns last be sit.
and shall i leave dear charing-cross,
and let two boy my charm ingross?
leave playhouse, temple, and the rummer?
a country friend may serve in summer!

the town be your choice — yet, charm fair,
observe what ill attend you there.
captain, that once admire your beauty,
be keep by quality on duty;
cit, for aton alm disburse
a tester — templar, something worse:
my lord may take you to his bed,
but then he send you back unpaid;
and all you gain from generous cully,
must go to keep some irish bully.
Pinchbeck demand the tweezer case,
and Monmouth-street the gown and stay;
more mischief yet come crowd on,
Bridewell, — west Indies — and sir John —
then oh! to lewdness bid adieu,
and chastely live, confine to two.
