on mr. howard account of lazaretto.

mortal! who, arm with holy fortitude,
the path of good right onward have pursue;
may he, to who eternal throne on high
the sufferer of the earth with anguish cry,
be thy protector! on that dreary road
that lead thou patient to the last abode
of wretchedness, in peril and in pain,
may he thy step direct, thy heart sustain! 
'amid scene, where pestilence in darkness fly;
in cavern, where desert misery lie;
so safe beneath his shadow thou may go,
to cheer the dismal waste of human woe.

o charity! our helpless nature pride,
thou friend to he who know no friend beside,
be there in morning breath, or the sweet gale
that steal over the tire pilgrim of the vale,
cheer with fragrance fresh his weary frame,
aught like the incense of thy sacred flame?
be aught in all the beauty that adorn
the azure heaven, or purple light of morn;
be aught so fair in evening linger gleam,
as from thy eye the meek and pensive beam
that fall like sad moonlight on the hill
and distant grove, when the wide world be still!
thy be the ample view, that unconfined
stretch to the utmost walk of human kind:
thy be the spirit that with wide plan
brother to brother bind, and man to man.

but who for thou, o charity! will bear
hardship, and cope with peril and with care!
who, for thy sake, will social sweet forgo
for scene of sickness, and the sight of woe!
who, for thy sake, will seek the prison gloom,
where ghastly guilt implore her linger doom;
where penitence unpitied sit, and pale,
that never tell to human ear her tale;
where agony, half-famished, cry in vain;
where dark despondence murmur over her chain;
where gaunt disease be waste to the bone,
and hollow-eyed despair forget to groan!
approve mercy mark the vast design,
and proud cry — Howard, the task be thy! 

already 'amid the darksome vault profound,
the inner prison deep beneath the ground,
console have thy tender look appear:
in horror realm the voice of peace be hear!

be the sad scene disclose; fearless unfold
the grate door — the inmost cell behold!
thought shrink from the dread sight; the paly lamp
burns faint amid the infectious vapour damp;
beneath its light full many a livid mien,
and haggard eye-ball, through the dusk be see.
in thought i see thou, at each hollow sound,
with humid lid oft anxious gaze around.
but oh! for he who, to yond vault confine,
have bid a long farewell to human kind;
his waste form, his cold and bloodless cheek,
a tale of sad sorrow seem to speak:
of friend, perhaps now mingle with the dead;
of hope, that, like a faithless flatterer, flee
in the utmost hour of need; or of a son
cast to the bleak world mercy; or of one
who heart be break, when the stern behest
tear he from pale affection bleed breast.
despair, from his cold and flinty bed,
with fearful mutter he have raise his head:
what pity spirit, what unwonted guest,
stray to this last retreat, these shade unblest?
from life and light shut out, beneath this cell
long have i bid the cheer sun farewell.
i hear for ever close the jealous door,
i mark my bed on the forsake floor,
i have no hope on earth, no human friend:
let i unpitied to the dust descend!
cold be his freeze heart — his eye be rear
to heaven no more — and on his sable beard
the tear have cease to fall. thou can not bring
back to his mournful heart the morn of spring; —
thou can not bid the rose of health renew
upon his waste cheek its crimson hue;
but at thy look, (ere yet to hate resign,
he murmur his last curse on mankind),
at thy kind look one tender thought shall rise,
and his full soul shall thank thou ere he die!

oh you, who list to pleasure vacant song,
as in her silken train you troop along;
who, like rank coward, from affliction fly,
or, while the precious hour of life pass by,
lie slumber in the sun! awake, arise,
to these instructive picture turn your eye;
the awful view with other feeling scan,
and learn from Howard what man owe to man!

these, virtue! be thy triumph, that adorn
fitly our nature, and bespeak we bear
for lofty action; not to gaze and run
from clime to clime; nor flutter in the sun,
drag a drone flight from flower to flower,
like summer insect in a gaudy hour;
nor yet over lovesick tale with fancy range,
and cry — it be pitiful, it be wondrous strange!
but on life vary view to look around,
and raise expire sorrow from the ground: —
and he who thus have bear his part assign
in the sad fellowship of human kind,
or for a moment soothe the bitter pain
of a poor brother, have not live in vain!

but it be not that compassion shall bestow
a unavailing tear on want or woe:
lo! fair order rise from thy plan,
befriend virtue, and adorn man. 
that comfort cheer the dark abode of pain,
where wan disease pray for relief in vain;
that mercy soothe the hard behest of law;
that misery smile upon her bed of straw;
that the dark felon clan no more, combine,
murmur in murderous league against mankind;
that to each cell, a mild yet mournful guest,
contrition come, and calm the labour breast,
while long-forgotten tear of virtue flow;
thou, generous friend of all — to thou we owe!
to thou, that pity see her view expand
to many a cheerless haunt, and distant land!
while warm philanthropy extend her ray,
wide as the world, and general as the day!

Howard! i view those deed, and think how vain
the triumph of weak man, the feeble strain
that flattery bring to conquest crimson car,
amid the banner host, and the proud tent of war!

from realm to realm the hideous war-fiend hie
wide over the waste earth; before he fly
affright, on pinion fleet than the wind;
while death and desolation fast behind
the havoc of his echo march pursue:
meantime his step be bathe in the warm dew
of bloodshed, and of tear; — but his dread name
shall perish — the loud clarion of his fame
one day shall cease, and, wrap in hideous gloom,
forgetfulness bestride his shapeless tomb!

but bear thou fearless on; — the god of all,
to who the afflict kneel, the friendless call,
from his high throne of mercy shall approve
the holy deed of mercy and of love:
for when the vanity of life brief day
oblivion hurry wing shall sweep away,
each act by charity and mercy do,
high over the wreck of time, shall live alone,
immortal as the heaven, and beauteous bloom
to other world, and realm beyond the tomb.
