on the death of my dear daughter Eliza Maria Chudleigh: a dialogue between Lucinda and Marissa.

Marissa.

o my Lucinda! o my dear friend!
must my affliction never, never end!
have heaven for i no pity leave in store,
must i! o must i never be happy more,
philinda loss have almost break my heart,
from she, alas! i do but late part:
and must there still be new occasion find
to try my patience, and my soul to wound?
must my love daughter too be snatch away,
must she so soon the call of fate obey?
in her first dawn, replete with youthful charm,
she be flee, she be flee from my desert arm.
long do she struggle, long the war maintain,
but all the effort of life, alas! be vain.
can art have save she she have still be mine,
both art and care together do combine,
but what be proof against the will divine!
methinks i still her die conflict view,
and the sad sight do all my grief renew:
rack by convulsive pain she meek lie,
and gaze on i with implore eye,
with eye which beg relief, but all in vain,
i see, but can, can ease her pain:
she must the burden unassisted bear,
i can with she in her torture share:
will they be i, and she stand easy by;
for what one love, sure it be not hard to die.
see, how she labour, how she pant for breath,
she be lovely still, she be sweet, she be sweet in death!
pale as she be, she beauteous do remain,
her close eye their lustre still retain:
like set sun, with undiminished light,
they hide themselves within the verge of night.
she be go! she be go! she sigh her soul away!
and can i! can i any long stay!
my life, alas! have ever tiresome be,
and i few happy, easy day have see;
but now it do a great burden grow,
i will throw it off and no more sorrow know,
but with she to calm peaceful region go.
stay thou, dear innocence, retard thy flight,
o stop thy journey to the realm of light,
stay till i come: to thou i will swift move,
attract by the strong passion, love.

Lucinda.

no more, no more let i such language hear,
i can, i can the pierce accent bear:
each word you utter stab i to the heart:
i can from life, not from Marissa part:
and be your tenderness as great as i,
while i be leave, you will not thus repine.
my friend be riches, health, and all to i,
and while they be i, i can wretched be.

Marissa.

if i on you can happiness bestow,
i still the toil of life will undergo,
will still content my lot sustain,
and never more of my hard fate complain:
but since my life to you will useless prove,
o let i hasten to the joy above:
farewell, farewell, take, take my last adieu,
may heaven be more propitious still to you
may you live happy when i be in my grave,
and no misfortune, no affliction have:
if to sad object you will some pity lend,
and give a sigh to a unhappy friend,
think of Marissa, and her wretched state,
how she be be use by her malicious fate,
recount those storm which she have long sustain,
and then rejoice that she the port have gain,
the welcome haven of eternal rest,
where she shall be for ever, ever bless;
and in her mother, and her daughter arm,
shall meet with new, with unexperienced charm.
o how i long those dear delight to taste;
farewell, farewell; my soul be much in haste.
come death and give the kind release blow;
i be tire with life, and overcharge with woe:
in thy cool, silent, unmolested shade,
o let i be by their dear relic lay;
and there with they from all my trouble free,
enjoy the blessing of a long tranquillity.

Lucinda.

o thou dear sufferer, on my breast recline
thy droop head, and mix thy tear with i:
here rest a while, and make a truce with grief,
consider; sorrow bring you no relief.
in the great play of life we must not choose,
nor yet the mean character refuse.
like soldier we our general must obey,
must stand our ground, and not to fear give way,
but go undaunted on till we have win the day.
honour be ever the reward of pain,
a lazy virtue no applause will gain,
all such as to uncommon height will rise,
and on the wing of fame ascend the sky,
must learn the gift of fortune to despise.
they to themselves their bliss must still confine,
must be unmoved, and never once repine:
but few to this perfection can attain,
our passion often will the ascendant gain,
and reason but alternate do reign;
disguise by pride, we sometime seem to bear
a haughty port, and scorn to shed a tear;
while grief within still act a tragic part,
and play the tyrant in the bleed heart.
your sorrow be of the severe kind,
and can be whole to your soul confine:
loss like you, may be allow to move
a generous mind, that know what it be to love.
who that her innate worth have understand,
will not lament a mother so divine good?
and who, alas! without a flood of tear,
can lose a daughter in her bloom year:
a only daughter, such a daughter too,
as do deserve to be belove by you;
who will all that can she to the world commend,
a wit that do she tender age transcend,
invite sweetness, and a sprightly air,
look that have something pleasing severe,
the serious and the gay be mingle there:
these merit all the tear that you have shed,
and can complaint recall they from the dead,
can sorrow their dear live again restore,
i here with you for ever will deplore:
but since the intense grief will prove in vain,
and these lose blessing can be you again,
recall your wander reason to your aid,
and hear it calm when it do persuade;
it will teach you patience, and the useful skill
to rule your passion, and command your will;
to bear affliction with a steady mind,
still to be easy, please, and still resign,
and look as if you do not inward trouble find.

Marissa.

i know, Lucinda, this i ought to do,
but oh! it be hard my frailty to subdue:
my headstrong passion will resistance make,
and all my firm resolution shake:
i for my daughter death do long prepare,
and hope i shall the stroke with temper bear,
but when it come, grief quick do prevail,
and i soon find my boast courage fail:
yet still i strive, but it be, alas! in vain,
my sorrow do at length the ascendant gain:
but i be resolve i will no long yield;
by reason lead, i will once more take the field,
and there from my insult passion try
to gain a full, a glorious victory:
which till i have do, i never will give over,
but still fight on, and think of peace no more;
with a unwearied courage still contend,
till death, or conquest, do my labour end.
