of friendship. to Celia.

o Celia! you, who ray of friendly fire,
 constant as those of nature, never expire;
 if in your breast no weighty care you find,
 nor better thought employ your generous mind;
 vouchsafe a ear: these number be your due;
 i sing of friendship, and i sing to you:
 friendship! a theme, which all mankind profess,
 no virtue more admire, none practise less;
 for most have learn the grecian sage text,
 "to love one day, as if to hate the next." 
they change, forsake, as serve their selfish end,
 nor be their dress vary more than friend. 

you therefore, who be worthy friendship name,
 and cherish in your breast the genuine flame,
 attend to what a faithful muse impart,
 a muse unpractised in fallacious art:
 though young in life, that life have make she know,
 a friendly aspect oft conceal a foe;
 that, though so many seem friend abound,
 for one that be true, a thousand false be find. 

when first you strive a faithful friend to find,
 explore the secret motive of his mind;
 nor, rash credulous, his friendship trust,
 before you know, what passion rule he most:
 but, as a horseman check the courser speed,
 till he have try the temper of his steed;
 so check the reins of friendship, till you prove,
 what sway the person, interest, or love. 

avoid the fop impertinent vain,
 and shun the slave, who flatter you for gain;
 beware of he, who sell you for a jest;
 but, most of all, beware the leaky breast:
 (who hope to keep his wine the season round,
 must first be sure his cask be sweet and sound)
 nor shall a formal fool your friendship claim,
 though wealth and honour dignify his name. 
let knave and fool in kindred vice join;
 choose you a friend, where sense and virtue shine;
 who passion move by reason rule alone,
 much better, if agree with your own. 
the hart and lion at a distance keep;
 wolf company with wolf, and sheep with sheep:
 so we, by nature sympathetic power,
 most love those temper, that resemble we. 

yet, if it be too difficult to find
 a friend so just mould to your mind,
 among the virtuous few select the best;
 and such be he, who fail be the least:
 let he a modest freedom always claim,
 to praise your virtue, or your vice blame;
 nor be displease his mild reproof to hear;
 for friend may often kind be severe;
 the best sometime each other may control,
 yet not destroy the harmony of soul. 
rough note in music never shall be find,
 except adapt to improve the sound. 

when mutual faith the friendly knot have tie,
 and when that mutual faith be true try,
 prey not upon yourself; nor be oppress
 with conscious pain, that struggle in your breast:
 for, as the flame, in Aetna close pen,
 convulse the mountain, labour for a vent;
 thus in the soul uneasy thought confine,
 for want of passage, rack the suffering mind. 
unveil your bosom to your other part;
 your friend shall share the burden of your heart,
 alleviate every ill your soul sustain,
 double your pleasure, and divide your pain. 

be zealous for your friend, whenever you know
 their reputation censure by a foe;
 nor with a faint excuse degrade your friend;
 the man, who cold praise, discommend. 
or be they just censure for a crime? 
reprove they mild at some proper time:
 in private chide all fail which you find,
 in public praise the beauty of their mind;
 place all their virtue in the clear light,
 omit their fault, or touch they very slight;
 as painter, when they draw a beauteous face,
 contract a blemish, heighten every grace. 

neither let passion, pride, or private end,
 or change fortune, make you change your friend. 
who vary oft, a faithless temper show,
 or, at the best, ill judgement, when he choose. 
some person with themselves so disagree,
 they be fix to nothing but inconstancy;
 with each new day, new resolution come,
 expel the former, and usurp their room:
 succeed billow thus the foremost throng,
 tide roll on tide, and wave urge wave along. 
not but we may with a new friend engage,
 before we see a old one quit the stage;
 yet shall not think the new our old exceed,
 as jockey value most their young steed. 
one maxim will in wine and friendship hold,
 alike the better both for be old. 

but must we then be bind in deathless band,
 and still obey whatever a friend command? 
aid he to gain what he unjust crave? 
no — leave the man, who truth and virtue leave. 
shall furious Catiline some plot devise,
 to ruin thousand, that himself may rise;
 the law of honour, truth, and conscience show,
 it be friendship to the world to be his foe. 
or, shall a friend base betray his trust,
 to pardon he be to yourself unjust:
 for, as the wool, with crimson colour over,
 never acquire its native whiteness more;
 so he who break his faith, will never obtain
 your credit, nor his innocence again. 
if otherwise he disoblige his friend,
 (for where be the perfect man, who never offend?) 
try if his ear will kind reproof endure;
 and, if the balm of counsel work a cure,
 overlook the failure: all offend, that live;
 let foe resent a trespass, friend forgive. 
yet let the pardon friend not, many time,
 proceed in folly, and repeat his crime. 
though pure gold a vast extent will bear,
 yet pure gold will break, if stretch too far:
 and friend may bear some slip from wisdom rule;
 but who can pardon the persist fool? 

among the various cause, that conspire
 to cool our love, and quench the friendly fire,
 vile avarice assume the great power,
 a god which base ignoble soul adore:
 to pleasure he, a tide of break vow
 (needful libation!) on his altar flow:
 yet, never satisfy, he crave for more;
 and keep his votary, in plenty, poor:
 who worship he, will break the friendly band,
 whenever the sordid, selfish god command. 

other there be, induce by thirst of praise,
 (and even the great man this passion sway)
 who quit their friend for honour of the state,
 and turn their love into the rank hate. 
nor be it wonder these desert their friend,
 since all be foe, who will not serve their end:
 for wild ambition like a torrent roar,
 which, when obstruct, climb the oppose shore;
 till to the top the labour flood attain,
 swell over the bank, and foam along the plain. 
not but we may a honest fame embrace;
 nay, friend shall aid we in the glorious chace. 
man have some principle of heavenly fire,
 that warm his breast, and prompt he to aspire;
 wake he to action of superior kind,
 and keep alive the faculty of mind;
 for sloth beget a lethargy of soul,
 as want of motion taint the clear pool:
 yet, if, too fond and covetous of fame,
 we blow that native spark into a flame,
 it quick rise to a firy storm,
 and burn the fabric it be design to warm. 
what band of nature can restrain its course? 
what friendly office suppress its force? 
see how its rage the young numidian fire,
 the worst of child to the best of sire! 
deep, through his brother blood, he wade his way,
 and leap over gratitude to regal sway. 
young caesar tutor by his pupil die,
 while Tully fall by he he help to rise;
 friend, father, brother, uncle, yield to fate,
 to make three tyrant infamous great! 

o! grant i, gracious heaven, wherever i go,
 to be a faithful friend, or generous foe;
 nor let i pant so much for empty praise,
 as to obtain it by dishonest way;
 nor wrong my friend, though it be to gain a throne;
 nor ruin other fame, to raise my own. 

he who be only learn in book, will find
 a hard lesson, when he learn mankind;
 a volume gild over with smile art,
 where few can read the mean of the heart. 
we often take our flatterer for friend;
 one will suspect the man who still commend,
 who, like the sharp in the roman play,
 or right or wrong, assent to all you say;
 bend here or there, which way his lord incline,
 as reed submit to every different wind. 
nor be it strange such parasite prevail,
 when greedy ear devour their flatter tale:
 while thraso love to hear his praise tell,
 gnatho will give he praise, and take his gold. 
but you, who walk by wisdom safe rule,
 (for it be but labour lose to counsel fool)
 detest the wretch, who never can courage find
 to speak the genuine dictate of his mind;
 but, like the siren sweet, pernicious song,
 at once will charm and ruin with his tongue. 

yet some there be, in social band ally,
 who, with blunt truth, err on the other side;
 void of good-nature, and good-breeding too,
 they sour censure every thing you do. 
o! never flatter even a monarch pride,
 nor, with the sternness of a cynic, chide;
 but, when you will a err friend reprove,
 let gentle caution show, the motive love:
 do not begin with rashness to exclaim;
 but rather hint the fault, before you blame. 
it be not enough your admonition just;
 prudence must guide it, or the labour lose:
 friend shall allure, and charm we into sense;
 harsh counsel not reform, but give offence. 
nature, impatient of severe reproof,
 love mild instruction, but abhor the rough:
 as fruit and flower improve with gentle rain;
 but fade, if rapid storm overflow the plain. 

some man be friend, when fortune fill the sail,
 and waft you on with favourable gale;
 but quit the totter ship, and make to shore,
 when storm descend, and adverse surge roar. 
long as in credit, power, or place you stand,
 their fawn, formal friendship you command:
 with twenty squeeze, and a hundred bow,
 as many compliment, as many vow,
 they swear your interest shall be their own,
 and wish the time to make it better know;
 like false hot courser, wait for the chace,
 which foam, and neigh, and proud spurn the grass,
 intent to run; but droop their jade crest,
 and fail you most, when most you want their haste. 

we make a prostitute of friendship name,
 if only complaisance support our claim. 
and yet there be, of this polite degree,
 who treat you still with force civility;
 in each oblige art so well refine,
 though ever false, they never seem unkind. 
not that my muse will decency offend;
 for it be good-breeding polish a friend:
 nor shine it less, with truth and virtue join,
 than comely feature with a noble mind:
 but those, who friendship most in speech dwell,
 neglect the fruit, and trifle with the shell. 
true friendship more intrinsic worth afford,
 define by action better than by word;
 a warm affection, that can never cool,
 concord of mind, and music of the soul;
 which tune the jar string of life to love,
 show man below, how angel live above. 
there be in friendship such attractive charm,
 it draw esteem from those it never warm. 
see how pacuvius tragic scene can move
 the people praise with fictitious love! 
when on the stage two doubtful prince strive,
 each seek death, to keep his friend alive:
 now Pylades deceive the monarch eye;
 faithful, yet fraudulent, resolve to die:
 Orestes now display the friendly cheat,
 invite the threaten sword, and court his fate. 
move with their generous love, the audience rise;
 with social flame each change bosom glow;
 all feel the sacred power of friendship law,
 and the stage rock, and thunder with applause. 

i know the muse may give to some offence,
 (though rather man of wit, than man of sense)
 who counsel be; "be not engage too far;
" the great friendship bring the great care:
 "our own concern have plague enough in store;
" who join in friendship, only make they more:
 "the care and trouble, which your friend endure,
" be all by sympathy adopt you. " 

what base, ungenerous, selfish soul be these? 
mere quack, who turn even health into disease;
 and but the dark side of friendship find,
 to all its radiant beam and beauty blind. 
two faithful friend, in any state, may gain
 comfort to heighten joy, or lessen pain:
 if weighty care the pensive mind invade,
 they make the burden light with mutual aid;
 if profit, or if pleasure cheer the soul,
 the blessing common, each enjoy the whole:
 if business call they to some distant place,
 swift-pinioned love contract the lengthen space;
 each keep the other image in his breast,
 as wax preserve the form a seal impress. 

hail, sacred friendship! by who cheere ray
 all joy increase, without it fade away:
 even hymen torch, though burn ever so bright,
 aid by friendship, shine with double light. 
this you, o Celia! by experience find,
 who nuptial friend live always in your mind:
 no length of time, no distance, ever rase
 his love idea from your tender breast:
 your friendly flame admit of no decay;
 but glow, unclouded, with augment ray,
 and make your bridal lamp much bright blaze. 
that faint, pale, languid lamp, in age, expire,
 except it be feed with friendship constant fire:
 these to the winter of our year extend;
 and, when the lover cool, they warm the friend. 
when all the transient joy of youth be over,
 when all the charm of beauty charm no more;
 Surviving friendship give we fresh supply
 of last bliss, and more substantial joy;
 which sweeten all the trouble age have bring,
 and make the dregs of life a cordial draught. 
