independence.

happy the bard (though few such bard we find)
 who, above controlment, dare to speak his mind,
 dare, unabashed, in every place appear,
 and nothing fear, but what he ought to fear. 
he fashion can tempt, he abject need
 can compel, he pride can mislead
 to be the slave of greatness, to strike sail,
 when, sweep onward with her peacock tail,
 quality, in full plumage, pass by;
 he view she with a fix, contemptuous eye,
 and mock the puppet, keep his own due state,
 and be above converse with the great. 

perish those slave, those minion of the quill,
 who have conspire to seize that sacred hill
 where the nine sister pour a genuine strain,
 and sink the mountain level with the plain;
 who, with mean, private view, and servile art,
 no spark of virtue live in their heart,
 have base turn apostate, have debase
 their dignity of office, have disgrace,
 like eli son, the altar where they stand,
 and cause their name to stink through all the land,
 have stoop to prostitute their venal pen
 for the support of great, but guilty man,
 have make the bard, of their own vile accord,
 inferior to that thing we call a lord. 

what be a lord? do that plain, simple word
 contain some magic spell? as soon as hear,
 like a alarm bell on night dull ear,
 do it strike loud, and more strong appear
 than other word? whether we will or no,
 through reason court do it unquestioned go
 even on the mention, and of course transmit
 notion of something excellent, of wit
 please, though keen, of humour free, though chaste,
 of sterling genius with sound judgement grace,
 of virtue far above temptation reach,
 and honour, which not malice can impeach? 
believe it not — it be nature first intent,
 before their rank become their punishment,
 they shall have pass for man, nor blush to prize
 the blessing she bestow — she give they eye,
 and they can see — she give they ear — they hear —
 the instrument of stir, and they stir —
 like we, they be design to eat, to drink,
 to talk, and (every now and then) to think. 
till they, by pride corrupt, for the sake
 of singularity, disclaim that make,
 till they, disdain nature vulgar mode,
 fly off, and strike into another road,
 more fit quality, and to our view
 come forth a species altogether new,
 something we have not know, and can not know,
 like nothing of God make here below,
 nature exclaim with wonder — lord be thing,
 which, never make by i, be make by king. 

a lord (nor let the honest, and the brave,
 the true, old noble, with the fool and knave
 here mix his fame; curse be that thought of i,
 which with a B— and F— shall Grafton join)
 a lord (nor here let censure rash call
 my just contempt of some, abuse of all,
 and, as of late, when Sodom be my theme,
 slander my purpose, and my muse blaspheme,
 because she stop not, rapid in her song,
 to make exception as she go along,
 though well she hope to find, another year,
 a whole minority exception here)
 a mere, mere lord, with nothing but the name,
 wealth all his worth, and title all his fame,
 live on another man, himself a blank,
 thankless he live, or must some grandsire thank,
 for smuggle honour, and ill-gotten pelf;
 a bard owe all to nature, and himself. 

god, how my soul be burn up with disdain,
 when i see man, who Phoebus in his train
 may view with pride, lackey the heel of those
 who genius rank among her great foe! 
and what be the cause? why these same son of scorn,
 no thanks to they, be to a title bear,
 and can not help it; by chance hither send,
 and only deity by accident. 
have fortune on our get chance to shine
 their birthright honour have be you, or i. 
it be a mere random stroke, and shall the throne
 eye thou with favour, proud and lordly grow,
 thou, though a bard, may be their fellow yet,
 but Felix never can be make a wit. 
no, in good faith — that be one of those few thing
 which fate have place beyond the reach of king. 
bard may be lord, but it be not in the card,
 play how we will, to turn lord into bard. 

a bard — a lord — why let they hand in hand
 go forth as friend, and travel through the land,
 observe which word the people can digest
 most ready, which go to market best,
 which get most credit, whether man will trust
 a bard because they think he may be just,
 or on a lord will choose to risque their gain,
 though privilege in that point still remain. 

a bard — a lord — let reason take her scale,
 and fair weigh those word, see which prevail,
 which in the balance light kick the beam,
 and which by sink we the victor deem. 

it be do, and Hermes, by command of Jove,
 summons a synod in the sacred grove,
 god throng with god to take their chair on high,
 and sit in state, the senate of the sky,
 while, in a kind of parliament below,
 man stare at those above, and want to know
 what they be transact; reason take she stand
 just in the midst, a balance in her hand,
 which over and over she try, and find it true;
 from either side, conduct full in view,
 a man come forth, of figure strange and queer;
 we now and then see something like they here. 

the first be meager, flimsy, void of strength,
 but nature kind have make up in length,
 what she in breadth deny; erect and proud,
 a head and shoulder tall than the crowd,
 he deem they pygmy all; loose hang his skin
 over his bare bone; his face so very thin,
 so very narrow, and so much beat out,
 that physiognomist have make a doubt,
 proportion lose, expression quite forget,
 whether it can be call a face, or not;
 at end of it however, unblessed with beard,
 some twenty fathom length of chin appear;
 with leg, which we may well conceive that fate
 mean only to support a spider weight,
 firm he strive to tread, and with a stride
 which show at once his weakness and his pride,
 shake himself to piece, seem to cry,
 observe good people, how i shake the sky. 

in his right hand a paper do he hold,
 on which, at large, in character of gold,
 distinct, and plain for those who run to see,
 saint Archibald have write l, o, r, d. 
this, with a air of scorn, he from afar
 twirl into reason scale, and on that bar,
 which from his soul he hate, yet admire,
 quick turn his back, and as he come retire. 
the judge to all around his name declare;
 each goddess titter, each god laugh, Jove stare,
 and the whole people cry, with one accord,
 good heaven bless we all, be that a lord! 

such be the first — the second be a man,
 who nature build on quite a different plan;
 a bear, who from the moment he be bear,
 his dam despise, and leave unlicked in scorn;
 a Babel, which, the power of art outdo,
 she can not finish when she have begin;
 a utter chaos, out of which no might
 but that of god can strike one spark of light. 

broad be his shoulder, and from blade to blade
 a H— may at full length have lay;
 vast be his bone, his muscle twist strong,
 his face be short, but broad than it be long,
 his feature, though by nature they be large,
 contentment have contrive to overcharge
 and bury meaning, save that we may spy
 sense lower on the penthouse of his eye;
 his arm be two twin oak, his leg so stout
 that they may bear a mansion house about,
 nor be they, look but at his body there,
 design by fate a much less weight to bear. 

over a brown cassock, which have once be black,
 which hang in tatter on his brawny back,
 a sight most strange, and awkward to behold
 he throw a cover of blue and gold. 
just at that time of life, when man by rule,
 the fop lay down, take up the grave fool,
 he start up a fop, and, fond of show,
 look like another Hercules, turn beau. 
a subject, meet with only now and then,
 much fit for the pencil than the pen;
 Hogarth will draw he (envy must allow)
 even to the life, be Hogarth live now. 

with such accoutrement, with such a form,
 much like a porpoise just before a storm,
 onward he roll; a laugh prevail around,
 even Jove be see to simper; at the sound
 (nor be the cause unknown, for from his youth
 himself he study by the glass of truth)
 he join their mirth, nor shall the god condemn
 if, while they laugh at he, he laugh at they. 
judge reason view he with a eye of grace,
 look through his soul, and quite forget his face,
 and, from his hand receive, with fair regard
 place in her other scale the name of bard. 

then (for she do as judge ought to do,
 she nothing of the case beforehand know
 nor wish to know, she never stretch the law,
 nor, base to anticipate a cause,
 compel solicitor no long free,
 to show those brief she have no right to see)
 then she with equal hand her scale hold out,
 nor do the cause one moment hang in doubt,
 she hold her scale out fair to public view;
 the lord, as spark fly upward, upward fly,
 more light than air, deceitful in the weight;
 the bard, preponderate, keep his state,
 reason approve, and with a voice, who sound
 shake earth, shake heaven, on the clear ground. 
pronounce for the bard a full decree,
 cry — those must honour they, who honour i,
 they from this present day, wherever i reign,
 in their own right, precedence shall obtain,
 merit rule here, be it enough that birth
 intoxicate, and sway the fool of earth. 

nor think that here, in hatred to a lord,
 i have forge a tale, or alter a record;
 search when you will (i be not now in sport)
 you will find it register in reason court. 

nor think that envy here have string my lyre,
 that i depreciate what i most admire,
 and look on title with a eye of scorn
 because i be not to a title bear. 
by he that make i, i be much more proud,
 more inly satisfy, to have a crowd
 point at i as i pass, and cry, — that be he —
 a poor, but honest bard, who dare be free
 amid corruption, than to have a train
 of flicker levee slave, to make i vain
 of thing i ought to blush for; to run, fly,
 and live but in the motion of my eye;
 when i be less than man, my fault to adore,
 and make i think that i be something more. 

recall past time, bring back the day of old,
 when the great noble bear his honour bold,
 and in the face of peril, when he dare
 thing which his legal Bastard, if declare,
 may well discredit; faithful to his trust,
 in the extreme point of justice, just,
 well-knowing all, and love by all he know,
 true to his king, and to his country true,
 honest at court, above the bait of gain,
 plain in his dress, and in his manner plain,
 moderate in wealth, generous but not profuse,
 well worthy riches, for he know their use,
 possess much, and yet deserve more,
 deserve those high honour, which he wear
 with ease to all, and in return gain fame,
 which all man pay, because he do not claim,
 when the grim war be place in dread array,
 fierce as the lion roar for his prey,
 or lioness of royal whelp foredo,
 in peace, as mild as the depart sun,
 a general blessing wheresoever he turn,
 patron of learning, nor himself unlearned,
 ever awake at pity tender call,
 a father of the poor, a friend to all,
 recall such time, and from the grave bring back
 a worth like this, my heart shall bend, or crack,
 my stubborn pride give way, my tongue proclaim,
 and every muse conspire to swell his fame,
 till envy shall to he that praise allow,
 which she can deny to temple now. 

this justice claim, nor shall the bard forget,
 delight with the task, to pay that debt,
 to pay it like a man, and in his lay,
 sound such worth, prove his own right to praise. 
but let not pride and prejudice misdeem,
 and think that empty title be my theme,
 title, with i, be vain, and nothing worth,
 i reverence virtue, but i laugh at birth. 
give i a lord, that be honest, frank, and brave,
 i be his friend, but can be his slave. 
though none indeed but blockhead will pretend
 to make a slave, where they may make a friend. 
i love his virtue, and will make they know,
 confess his rank, but can forget my own. 
give i a lord, who, to a title bear,
 boast nothing else, i will pay he scorn with scorn. 
what, shall my pride (and pride be virtue here)
 tame make way, if such a wretch appear? 
shall i uncover stand, and bend my knee
 to such a shadow of nobility,

a shred, a remnant; he may rot unknown
 for any real merit of his own,
 and never have come forth to public note,
 have he not wear by chance his father coat? 
to think a M— worth my least regard
 be treason to the majesty of bard. 

by nature form (when for her honour sake
 she something more than common strive to make,
 when, overlook each minute defect,
 and all too eager to be quite correct,
 in her full heat and vigour, she impress
 her stamp most strong on the favour breast)
 the bard (nor think too light that i mean
 those little, piddle witling, who overween
 of their small part, the murphys of the stage,
 the mason and the whitehead of the age,
 who all in rapture their own work rehearse,
 and drawl out measure prose, which they call verse)
 the real bard, who native genius fire,
 who every maid of castaly inspire,
 let he consider wherefore he be mean,
 let he but answer nature great intent,
 and fair weigh himself with other man,
 will never debase the glory of his pen,
 will in full state, like a true monarch, live,
 nor bate one inch of his prerogative. 

methinks i see old Wingate frown here,
 (Wingate may in the season be a peer,
 though now, against his will, of figure sick,
 he be force to diet on arithmetic,
 even while he envy every Jew he meet,
 who cry old clothes to sell about the street)
 methinks (his mind with future honour big,
 his Tyburn Bob turn to a dress bag wig)
 i hear he cry — what do this jargon mean? 
be ever such a damn dull blockhead see? 
majesty — bard — prerogative — disdain
 have get into, and turn the fellow brain;
 to Bethlem with he — give he whip and straw —
 i be very sensible he be mad in law. 
a saucy groom who trade in reason, thus
 to set himself upon a par with we;
 if this here be suffer, and if that there fool
 may when he please send we all to school,
 why then our only business be outright
 to take our cap, and bid the world good night. 
i have keep a bard myself this twenty year,
 but nothing of this kind in he appear. 
he, like a thorough truebred spaniel, lick
 the hand which cuff he, and the foot which kick,
 he fetch, and he carry, black my shoe,
 nor think it a discredit to his muse,
 a creature of the right chameleon hue,
 he wear my colour, yellow or true blue,
 just as i wear they; it be all one to he,
 whether i change through conscience, or through whim. 
now this be something like, on such a plan
 a bard may find a friend in a great man;
 but this proud coxcomb — zounds, i think that all
 of this queer tribe have be like my old PAUL. 

injurious thought! accurse be the tongue
 on which the vile insinuation hang,
 the heart where it be engender, curse be those,
 those bard, who not themselves alone expose,
 but i, but all, and make the very name
 by which they be call, a stand mark of shame. 

talk not of custom — it be the coward plea,
 current with fool, but pass not with i;
 an old stale trick, which guilt have often try
 by number to overpower the better side. 
why tell i then that from the birth of rhyme,
 no matter when, down to the present time,
 as by the original decree of fate,
 bard have protection seek among the great,
 conscious of weakness, have apply to they
 as vine to elm, and twine round their stem,
 flourish on high; to gain this wish support
 even Virgil to Maecenas pay his court. 
as to the custom it be a point agree,
 but it be a foolish diffidence, not need,
 from which it rise; have bard but true know
 that strength, which be most proper their own,
 without a lord, unprop, they may have stand,
 and overtop those giant of the wood. 

but why, when present time my care engage,
 must i go back to the Augustan age? 
why, anxious for the living, be i lead
 into the mansion of the ancient dead? 
can they find patron not where but at Rome,
 and must i seek Maecenas in the tomb? 
name but a Wingate, twenty fool of note
 start up, and from report Maecenas quote;
 under his colour lord be proud to fight,
 forget that Maecenas be a knight;
 they mention he as if to use his name
 be in some measure to partake his fame,
 though Virgil, be he living, in the street
 may rot for they, or perish in the fleet. 
see how they redden, and the charge disclaim —
 Virgil, and in the fleet — forbid it shame. 
hence, you vain boaster, to the fleet repair,
 and ask, with blush ask, if Lloyd be there. 

patron, in day of yore, be man of sense,
 be man of taste, and have a fair pretence
 to rule in letter — some of they be hear
 to read off-hand, and never spell a word;
 some of they too, to such a monstrous height
 be learning rise, for themselves can write,
 and keep their secretary, as the great
 do many other foolish thing, for state. 

our patron be of quite a different strain,
 with neither sense nor taste, against the grain,
 they patronize for fashion sake — no more —
 and keep a bard, just as they keep a whore. 
M— (on such occasion i be loath
 to name the dead) be a rare proof of both. 
some of they will be puzzle even to read,
 nor can deserve their clergy by their creed;
 other can write, but such a pagan hand
 a Willes shall always at our elbow stand;
 many, if beg, a chancellor, of right,
 will order into keep at first sight. 
those who stand fair to the public view
 take to themselves the praise to other due,
 they rob the very spital, and make free
 with those alas who have least to spare — we see,
 — have not have a word to say,
 since wind and wave bear singlespeech away. 

patron in day of yore, like patron now,
 expect that the bard shall make his bow
 at come in, and every now and then
 hint to the world that they be more than man,
 but, like the patron of the present day,
 they never bilk the poet of his pay. 
Virgil love rural ease, and, far from harm,
 Maecenas fix he in a neat, snug farm,
 where he may, free from trouble, pass his day
 in his own way, and pay his rent in praise. 
Horace love wine, and, through his friend at court,
 can buy it off the key in every port;
 Horace love mirth, Maecenas love it too,
 they meet, they laugh, as Goy and i may do,
 nor in those moment pay the least regard
 to which be minister, and which be bard. 

not so our patron — grave as grave can be,
 they know themselves, they keep up dignity;
 bard be a forward race, nor be it fit
 that man of fortune rank with man of wit;
 wit if familiar make, will find her strength —
 it be best to keep her weak, and at arm length. 
it be well enough for bard, if patron give,
 from hand to mouth, the scanty mean to live. 
such be their language, and their practice such,
 they promise little, and they give not much. 
let the weak bard, with prostitute strain,
 praise that proud Scot, who all good man disdain;
 what be his reward? why, his own fame undo,
 he may obtain a patent for the run
 of his lord kitchen, and have ample time,
 with offal feed, to court the cook in rhyme,
 or (if he strive true patriot to disgrace)
 may at the second table get a place,
 with somewhat great slave allow to dine,
 and play at crambo over his gill of wine. 

and be there bard, who on creation file
 stand rank as man, who breathe in this fair isle
 the air of freedom, with so little gall,
 so low a spirit, prostrate thus to fall
 before these idol, and without a groan
 bear wrong may call forth murmur from a stone? 
better, and much more noble, to abjure
 the sight of man, and in some cave, secure
 from all the outrage of pride, to feast
 on nature salad, and be free at least. 
better (though that, to say the truth, be worse
 than almost any other modern curse)
 discard all sense, divorce the thankless muse,
 critic commence, and write in the review,
 write without tremor, Griffiths can read;
 no fool can fail, where Langhorne can succeed. 

but (not to make a brave and honest pride
 try those mean first, she must disdain when try)
 there be a thousand way, a thousand art,
 by which, and fair, man of real part
 may gain a live, gain what nature crave;
 let those, who pine for more, live, and be slave. 
our real want in a small compass lie,
 but lawless appetite with eager eye,
 keep in a constant fever, more require,
 and we be burn up with our own desire. 
hence our dependence, hence our slavery spring;
 bard, if content, be as great as king. 
ourselves be to ourselves the cause of ill;
 we may be independent, if we will. 
the man who suit his spirit to his state
 stand on a equal footing with the great,
 mogul themselves be not more rich, and he,
 who rule the english nation, not more free. 
chain be not forge more durable and strong
 for bard than other, but they have wear they along,
 and therefore wear they still, they have quite forget
 what freedom be, and therefore prize she not. 
can they, though in their sleep, can they but know
 the blessing which from independence flow,
 can they but have a short and transient gleam
 of liberty, though it be but in a dream,
 they will no more in bondage bend their knee,
 but, once make Freemen, will be always free. 
the muse if she one moment freedom gain,
 can never more submit to sing in chain. 
breed in a cage, far from the seathered throng,
 the bird repay his keeper with his song,
 but, if some playful child set wide the door,
 abroad he fly, and think of home no more,
 with love of liberty begin to burn,
 and rather starve than to his cage return. 

hail independence — by true reason teach,
 how few have know, and prize thou as they ought. 
some give thou up for riot; some, like boy,
 resign thou, in their childish mood, for toy
 ambition some, some avarice mislead,
 and in both case independence bleed;
 abroad, in quest of thou, how many roam
 nor know they have thou in their reach at home;
 some, though about their path, their bed about,
 have never have the sense to find thou out;
 other, who know of what they be possess,
 like fearful miser, lock thou in a chest,
 nor have the resolution to produce
 in these bad time, and bring thou forth for use. 
hail, independence — though thy name scarce know,
 though thou, alas! art out of fashion grow,
 though all despise thou, i will not despise,
 nor live one moment long than i prize
 thy presence, and enjoy; by angry fate
 bow down, and almost crush, thou come, though late,
 thou come upon i, like a second birth,
 and make i know what life be true worth. 
hail, independence — never may my cot,
 till i forget thou, be by thou forget;
 thither, o thither, oftentimes repair;
 Cotes, who thou love too, shall meet thou there;
 all thought, but what arise from joy, give over;
 peace dwell within, and law shall guard the door. 

overween bard! law guard thy door, what law? 
the law of ENGLAND — to controul, and awe
 those saucy hope, to strike that spirit dumb,
 behold, in state, administration come. 

why let her come, in all her terror too;
 i dare to suffer all she dare to do. 
i know her malice well, and know her pride,
 i know her strength, but will not change my side. 
this melt mass of flesh she may control
 with iron rib, she can chain my soul. 
no — to the last resolve her worst to bear,
 i be still at large, and independent there. 

where be this minister? where be the band
 of ready slave, who at his elbow stand
 to hear, and to perform his wicked will? 
why, for the first time, be they slow to ill? 
when some grand act against law be to be do,
 do — sleep; do bloodhound — run
 to L—, and worry those small deer
 when he may do more precious mischief here? 
do — turn tail? do he refuse to draw
 illegal warrant, and to call they law? 
do —, at g—d kick, from g—d run,
 with that cold lump of unbaked dough, his son,
 and, he more honest rival, catch to cheat
 purchase a burial place where three way meet? 
believe it not; — be — still,
 and never sleep, when he shall wake to ill;
 — do less mischief by the bye,
 the great one till the term in petto lie;
 — live, and, to the strict justice true,
 scorn to defraud the hangman of his due. 

o my poor country — weak and overpower
 by thy own son — eat to the bone — devour
 by viper, which, in thy own entrails breed,
 prey on thy life, and with thy blood be feed,
 with unavailing grief thy wrong i see,
 and, for myself not feel, feel for thou. 
i grieve, but can despair — for, lo, at hand
 freedom present a choice, but faithful band
 of loyal patriot, man who great dare
 in such a noble cause, man fit to bear
 the weight of empire; fortune, rank, and sense,
 virtue and knowledge, league with eloquence,
 march in their rank; freedom from file to file
 dart her delight eye, and with a smile
 approve her honest son, while down her cheek,
 as it be by stealth (her heart too full to speak)
 one tear in silence creep, one honest tear,
 and seem to say, why be not Granby here. 

o you brave few, in who we still may find
 a love of virtue, freedom, and mankind,
 go forth — in majesty of woe array,
 see, at your foot your country kneel for aid,
 and, (many of her child traitor grow,)
 kneel to those son she still can call she own,
 seem to breathe her last in every breath,
 she kneel for freedom, or she beg for death —
 fly then, each duteous son, each english chief,
 and to your droop parent bring relief. 
go forth — nor let the siren voice of ease
 tempt you to sleep, while tempest swell the sea;
 go forth — nor let hypocrisy, who tongue
 with many a fair, false, fatal art be hang,
 like Bethel fawn prophet, cross your way,
 when your great errand brook not of delay;
 nor let vain fear, who cry to all she meet,
 tremble and pale — a lion in the street —
 damp your free spirit; let not threat affright,
 nor bribe corrupt, nor flattery delight. 
be as one man — concord success ensure —
 there be not a english heart but what be you. 
go forth — and virtue, ever in your sight,
 shall be your guide by day, your guard by night —
 go forth — the champion of your native land,
 and may the battle prosper in your hand —
 it may, it must — you can be withstand —
 be your heart honest, as your cause be good. 
