the lover:

a ballad.

to mr. C—.

by the same.

i 

at length, by much importunity press,
take, C—, at once the inside of my breast.
this stupid indifference so often you blame,
be not owe to nature, to fear, or to shame.
i be not as cold as a virgin in lead,
nor be Sunday sermon so strong in my head:
i know but too well how time fly along,
that we live but few year, and yet few be young.

ii.

but i hate to be cheat, and never will buy
long year of repentance for moment of joy.
oh! be there a man (but where shall i find
good sense and good-nature so equal join?)
will value his pleasure, contribute to i;
not mean will boast, nor lewd design,
not over severe, yet not stupid vain,
for i will have the power, though not give the pain.

iii.

no pedant, yet learn; nor rake-helly gay,
or laugh because he have nothing to say;
to all my whole sex, oblige and free,
yet never be fond of any but i;
in public preserve the decorum that be just,
and show in his eye he be true to his trust;
then rare approach, and respectful bow,
but not fulsome pert, nor fopish low.

iv.

but when the long hour of public be past,
and we meet with champagne and a chicken at last,
may every fond pleasure that moment endear;
be banish afar both discretion and fear!
forget or scorn the air of the crowd,
he may cease to be formal, and i to be proud,
till lose in the joy, we confess that we live,
and he may be rude, and yet i may forgive.

v. 

and that my delight may be solid fix,
let the friend and the lover be handsome mix,
in who tender bosom my soul may confide,
who kindness can sooth i, who counsel can guide.
from such a dear lover, as here i describe,
no danger shall fright i, no million shall bribe;
but till this astonish creature i know,
as i long have live chaste, i will keep myself so.

vi.

i never will share with the wanton coquet,
or be catch by a vain affectation of wit.
the toaster and songster may try all their art,
but never shall enter the pass of my heart.
i loath the lewd rake, the dress fopling despise:
before such pursuer the nice virgin fly:
and as Ovid have sweet in parable tell,
we harden like tree, and like river grow cold.
