liberty:

a elegy.

inscribe to miss loggin.

by the same.

feign to be write from the happy valley of ambara.

to you, Eliza, be these lay consign,
 who bless in freedom fair dominion live;
 while i, alas! be pompous confine,
 bereave of every joy the world can give. 

in vain for i the blush flowret bloom,
 and spring eternal deck the fragrant shade;
 in vain the dewy myrtle breathe perfume,
 and sound angelic echo through the glade. 

the marble palace, and glitter spire,
 what be they? pageant glare, and empty show:
 ah! how unequal to my fond desire,
 which tell i — freedom make a heaven below. 

pensive i range these ever-verdant grove,
 and sigh responsive to the murmur stream;
 while woodland warbler chant their happy love,
 dear liberty be wretched myra theme. 

the velvet lawn diversify with flower,
 in sweet succession every morn the same;
 fresh gale that breathe through amaranthine bower,
 and every charm inventive art can frame,

here fond vie to crown this favour place:
 and here, to smooth captivity a prey,
 each royal child of abyssinian race
 consume the vacant inauspicious day. 

though festive mirth awake the laugh morn,
 and guiltless revel lead the dance hour;
 though purl rill the fertile mead adorn,
 and the wild rock its spicy produce pour:

yet what be these to fill a boundless mind? 
though gay each scene appear, it be still the same;
 variety — in vain i hope to find;
 variety, thou dear, but distant name! 

with pleasure cloy, and sick of tasteless ease,
 no sweet alternative my spirit cheer;
 joy oft repeat lose their power to please,
 and harmony grow discord to my ear. 

bless freedom! how i long with thou to rove,
 where vary nature all her charm display;
 to range the sun-burnt hill, the rift grove,
 and trace the silver current wind maze! 

free as the winge inhabitant of air,
 who distant clime and various season see,
 region — though not, like soft ambara, fair;
 yet bless with change, and crown with liberty. 

vain wish! these rock, who summit pierce the sky,
 with frown aspect tell i — hope be vain:
 till, free by death, the pure spirit fly,
 here wretched myra destine to remain. 
