a summer day.

the dark-blue cloud of night, in dusky line
 draw wide and streaky over the pure sky,
 wear faint morning purple on their skirt. 
the star that full and bright shine in the west,
 but dim twinkle to the steadfast eye,
 and see and vanish and see again,
 like die taper wink in the socket,
 be by degree shut from the face of heaven;
 the fitful lightning of the summer cloud,
 and every less flame that shine by night;
 the wander fire that seem, across the marsh,
 a beam candle in a lonely cot,
 cheer the hope of the benight hind,
 till, swift than the very change of thought,
 it shift from place to place, elude his sight,
 and make he wonder rub his faithless eye;
 the humble glowworm and the silver moth,
 that cast a doubtful glimmer over the green, —
 all die away. 
for now the sun, slow move in his glory,
 above the eastern mountain lift his head;
 the web of dew spread over the hoary lawn,
 the smooth, clear bosom of the settle pool,
 the polish ploughshare on the distant field,
 catch fire from he and dart their new get beam
 upon the gaze rustic dazzle sight. 

the waken bird upon the branch hop,
 peck their soft down, and bristle out their feather,
 then stretch their throat and trill their morning song,
 while dusky crow, high swing over head,
 upon the topmost bough, in lordly pride,
 mix their hoarse croak with the linnet note,
 till in a gather band of close array,
 they take their flight to seek their daily food. 
the villager wake with the early light,
 that through the window of his cot appear,
 and quit his easy bed; then over the field
 with lengthen active stride betake his way,
 bear his spade or hoe across his shoulder,
 see glance as he move, and with good will
 his daily work begin. 
the sturdy sun-burnt boy drive forth the cattle,
 and, please with power, bawl to the lag kine
 with stern authority, who fain will stop
 to crop the tempt bush as they pass. 
at every open door, in lawn or lane,
 half naked child, half awake be see
 scratch their head and blink to the light,
 till, rouse by degree, they run about,
 roll on the sward and in some sandy nook
 dig cave, and house build, full oft deface
 and oft begin again, a daily pastime. 
the housewife, up by time, her morning care
 tend busy; from tub of curdle milk
 with skilful patience draw the clear green whey
 from the press bosom of the snowy curd,
 while her brown comely maid, with tucked-up sleeve
 and swell arm, assist she. work proceed,
 pot smoke, pail rattle, and the warm confusion
 still more confuse become, till in the mould
 with heavy hand the well-squeezed curd be place. 

so go the morning till the powerful sun,
 high in the heaven, send down his strengthen beam,
 and all the freshness of the morn be flee. 
the idle horse upon the grassy field
 roll on his back; the swain leave off his toil,
 and to his house with heavy step return,
 where on the board his ready breakfast place
 look most invite, and his good mate
 serve he with cheerful kindness. 
upon the grass no long hang the dew;
 forth hie the mower with his glitter scythe,
 in snowy shirt bedight and all unbrace. 
he move athwart the mead with sideling bend,
 and lay the grass in many a swathey line;
 in every field in every lawn and meadow
 the rouse voice of industry be hear;
 the haycock rise and the frequent rake
 sweep on the fragrant hay in heavy wreath. 
the old and young, the weak and strong be there,
 and, as they can, help on the cheerful work. 
the father jeer his awkward half-grow lad,
 who trail his tawdry armful over the field,
 nor do he fear the jeer to repay. 
the village oracle and simple maid
 jest in their turn and raise the ready laugh;
 all be companion in the general glee;
 authority, hard favour, frown not there. 
some, more advance, raise up the lofty rick,
 while on its top do stand the parish toast
 in loose attire and swell ruddy cheek. 
with taunt and harmless mockery she receive
 the tossed-up heap from fork of simple youth,
 who, stare on she, take his aim awry,
 while half the load fall back upon himself. 
loud be her laugh, her voice be hear afar;
 the mower busy on the distant lawn,
 the carter trudge on his dusty way,
 the shrill sound know, their bonnet toss in the air
 and roar across the field to catch her notice:
 she wave her arm to they, and shake her head,
 and then renew her work with double spirit. 
thus do they jest and laugh away their toil
 till the bright sun, now past his middle course,
 shoot down his fierce beam which none may brave. 
the stout arm feel listless, and the swart
 and brawny-shouldered clown begin to fail. 
but to the weary, lo — there come relief! 
a troop of welcome child over the lawn
 with slow and wary step approach, some bear
 in basket oaten cake or barley scone,
 and gusty cheese and stoup of milk or whey. 
beneath the branch of a spread tree,
 or by the shady side of the tall rick,
 they spread their homely fare, and seat round,
 taste every pleasure that a feast can give. 

a drowsy indolence now hang on all;
 each creature seek some place of rest, some shelter
 from the oppressive heat; silence prevail;
 nor low nor bark nor chirp bird be hear. 
in shady nook the sheep and kine convene;
 within the narrow shadow of the cot
 the sleepy dog lie stretch upon his side,
 nor heed the footstep of the passer by,
 or at the sound but raise half a eyelid,
 then give a feeble growl and sleep again;
 while puss compose and grave on threshold stone
 sit wink in the light. 
no sound be hear but hum of the bee,
 for she alone retire not from her labour,
 nor leave a meadow flower unsought for gain. 

heavy and slow, so pass the sultry hour,
 till gentle bend on the ridge top
 the droop seedy grass begin to wave,
 and the high branch of the aspen tree
 Shiver the leaf and gentle rustle make. 
cool breathe the rise breeze, and with it wake
 the languid spirit from its state of stupor. 
the lazy boy spring from his mossy lair
 to chase the gaudy butterfly, who oft
 light at his foot as if within his reach,
 spread upon the ground its mealy wing,
 yet still elude his grasp, and high in air
 take many a circle flight, tempt his eye
 and tire his young limb. 
the drowsy dog, who feel the kindly air
 that pass over he lift his shaggy ear,
 begin to stretch he, on his leg half-raised,
 till full wake with bristle cocked-up tail,
 he make the village echo to his bark. 

but let we not forget the busy maid,
 who by the side of the clear pebbly stream
 spread out her snowy linen to the sun,
 and shed with liberal hand the crystal shower
 over many a favourite piece of fair attire,
 revolve in her mind her gay appearance,
 so nice trick, at some approach fair. 
the dimple half-checked smile and mutter lip
 her secret thought betray. with shiny foot,
 there, little active band of truant boy
 sport in the stream and dash the water round,
 or try with wily art to catch the trout,
 or with their finger grasp the slippery eel. 
the shepherd-lad sit sing on the bank
 to while away the weary lonely hour,
 weave with art his point crown of rush,
 a guiltless easy crown, which, have make,
 he place on his head, and skip about,
 a chant rhyme repeat, or call full loud
 to some companion lonely as himself,
 far on the distant bank; or else delight
 to hear the echo sound of his own voice,
 return answer from some neighbour rock,
 or roofless barn, hold converse with himself. 

now weary labourer perceive well please
 the shadow lengthen, and the oppressive day
 with all its toil fast wear to a end. 
the sun, far in the west, with level beam
 gleam on the cock of hay, on bush or ridge,
 and field be chequer with fantastic shape,
 or tree or shrub or gate or human form,
 all lengthen out in antic disproportion
 upon the darken ground. their task be finish,
 their rake and scatter garment gather up,
 and all right glad to their home return. 

the village, lone and silent through the day,
 receive from the field its merry band,
 send forth its evening sound, confuse but cheerful;
 yelp of cur, and voice stern and shrill,
 and true-love ballad in no plaintive strain,
 by household maid at open window sing;
 and low of the home-returning kine,
 and herd dull drone trump and tinkle bell,
 tie to the collar of the master-sheep,
 make no contemptible variety
 to ear not over nice. 
with careless lounge gait the favour youth
 upon his sweetheart open window lean,
 divert she with joke and harmless taunt. 
close by the cottage door with placid mien,
 the old man sit upon his seat of turf. 
his staff with crooked head lay by his side,
 which oft some tricky youngling steal away,
 and straddle over it, show his horsemanship
 by raise cloud of sand; he smile thereat,
 but seem to chide he sharp:
 his silver lock upon his shoulder fall,
 and not ungraceful be his stoop of age. 
no stranger pass he without regard,
 and neighbour stop to wish he a good even,
 and ask he his opinion of the weather. 
they fret not at the length of his remark
 upon the various season he remember;
 for well he know the many diverse sign
 that do foretell high wind, or rain, or drought,
 or aught that may affect the rise crop. 
the silken-clad who courtly breed boast,
 their own discourse still sweet to their ear,
 may at the old man lengthen story fret,
 impatient, but here it be not so. 

from every chimney mount the curl smoke,
 muddy and grey, of the new evening fire;
 on every window smoke the family supper,
 set out to cool by the attentive housewife,
 while cheerful group, at every door convene,
 bawl across the narrow lane the parish news,
 and oft the burst laugh disturb the air. 
but see who come to set they all agape;
 the weary-footed pedlar with his pack;
 stiff he bend beneath his bulky load,
 cover with dust, slipshod and out at elbow;
 his greasy hat set backward on his head;
 his thin straight hair, divide on his brow,
 hang lank on either side his glisten cheek,
 and woe-begone yet vacant be his face. 
his box he open and display his ware. 
full many a vary row of precious stone
 cast forth their dazzle lustre to the light,
 and ruby ring and china button, stamp
 with love device, the desire maid
 and simple youth attract; while stream garter,
 of many colour, fasten to a pole,
 aloft in air their gaudy stripe display,
 and from afar the distant straggler lure. 
the child leave their play and round he flock;
 even sober, age grand-dame quit her seat,
 where by the door she twine her lengthen thread,
 her spindle stop, and lay her distaff by,
 then join with step sedate the curious throng. 
she praise much the fashion of her youth,
 and scorn each useless nonsense of the day;
 yet not ill-pleased the glossy ribbon view,
 unrolled and change hue with every fold,
 just measure out to deck her grandchild head. 

now red but languid the last beam appear
 of the depart sun, across the lawn,
 gild each sweepy ridge on many a field,
 and from the opening of the distant hill
 a level brightness pour, sad though bright;
 like farewell smile from some dear friend they seem,
 and only serve to deepen the low vale,
 and make the shadow of the night more gloomy. 
the vary noise of the cheerful village
 by slow degree now faint die away,
 and more distinct distant sound be hear
 that gentle steal down the river bed,
 or through the wood come on the ruffle breeze. 
the white mist rise from the mead, and from
 the dapple skirt of the sober sky
 look out with steady gleam the evening star. 
the lover, skulk in some neighbour copse,
 (who half-seen form, show through the dusky air
 large and majestic, make the traveller start,
 and spread the story of a haunt grove,)
 curse the owl, who loud ill-omened hoot
 with ceaseless spite take from his listen ear
 the wellknown footstep of his darling maid,
 and fretful chase from his face the night-fly,
 that, buzz round his head, do often skim
 with flutter wing across his glow cheek;
 for all but he in quiet balmy sleep
 forget the toil of the oppressive day;
 shut be the door of every scatter cot,
 and silence dwell within. 
