to the reverend dr. Ayscough at Oxford. 

write from Paris in the year 1728. 

by the same.

say, dear friend, how roll thy hour away?
what please study cheat the tedious day?
do thou the sacred volume oft explore
of wise antiquity immortal lore,
where virtue by the charm of wit refine,
at once exalt and polish the mind?
how different from our modern guilty art,
which please only to corrupt the heart;
who curse refinement odious vice adorn,
and teach to honour what we ought to scorn!
do thou in sage historian joy to see
how roman greatness rise with liberty;
how the same hand that tyrant dare controul,
their empire stretch from Atlas to the pole;
till wealth and conquest into slave refine
the proud luxurious master of mankind?
do thou in letter Greece each charm admire,
each grace, each virtue freedom can inspire;
yet in her trouble state see all the woe
and all the crime that giddy faction know;
till rent by party, by corruption sell,
or weak careless, or too rash bold,
she sink beneath a mitigate doom,
the slave and tutoress of protect Rome?

do calm philosophy her aid impart,
to guide the passion, and to mend the heart?
teach by her precept, have thou learn the end
to which alone the wise their study bend;
for which alone by nature be design
the power of thought — to benefit mankind?
not like a cloister drone, to read and doze,
in undeserving, undeserved repose;
but reason influence to diffuse; to clear
the enlighten world of every gloomy fear;
dispel the mist of error, and unbind
those pedant chain that clog the free-born mind,
happy who thus his leisure can employ!
he know the pure hour of tranquil joy;
nor vex with pang that busy bosom tear,
nor lose to social virtue please care;
safe in the port, yet labour to sustain
those who will float on the tempestuous main.

so Locke the day of studious quiet spend;
so Boyle in wisdom find divine content;
so Cambray, worthy of a happy doom,
the virtuous slave of louis and of Rome.

good Wor'ster thus support his droop age,
far from court-flatt'ry, far from party rage;
he, who in youth a tyrant frown defy,
firm and intrepid on his country side,
her bold champion then, and now her mild guide.
o generous warmth! o sanctity divine!
to emulate his worth, my friend, be thy:
learn from his life the duty of the gown;
learn not to flatter, nor insult the crown;
nor base servile court the guilty great,
nor raise the church a rival to the state:
to error mild, to vice alone severe,
seek not to spread the law of love by fear.
the priest, who plague the world, can never mend:
no foe to man be ever to god a friend:
let reason and let virtue faith maintain,
all force but they be impious, weak, and vain.
i other care in other clime engage,
care that become my birth, and suit my age;
in various knowledge to improve my youth,
and conquer prejudice, worst foe to truth;
by foreign art domestic fault to mend,
enlarge my notion, and my view extend;
the useful science of the world to know,
which book can never teach, or pedant show.

a nation here i pity, and admire,
who noble sentiment of glory fire,
yet teach by custom force, and bigot fear,
to serve with pride, and boast the yoke they bear:
who noble bear to cringe, and to command,
in court a mean, in camp a generous band;
from each low tool of power content receive
those law, their dread arm to Europe give.
who people vain in want, in bondage bless,
though plunder, gay; industrious, though oppress;
with happy folly rise above their fate,
the jest and envy of each wise state.

yet here the muse deign awhile to sport
in the short sunshine of a favour court:
here Boileau strong in sense, and sharp in wit,
who from the ancient, like the ancient write,
permission gain inferior vice to blame,
by flatter incense to his master fame.
here Moliere, first of comic wit, excel
whatever Athenian theatre behold;
by keen, yet decent satire skill to please,
with moral mirth unite, strength with ease.
now charm, i hear the bold Corneille inspire
heroic thought with shakespeare force and fire;
now sweet Racine with mild influence move
the soften heart to pity and to love.

with mingle pain and pleasure i survey
the pompous work of arbitrary sway;
proud palace, that drain the subject store,
raise on the ruin of the oppress and poor;
where even mute wall be teach to flatter state,
and paint triumph stile ambition great.
with more delight those please shade i view,
where condé from a envious court withdraw;
where, sick of glory, faction, power and pride,
(sure judge how empty all, who all have try)
beneath his palm the weary chief repose,
and life great scene in quiet virtue close.

with shame that other fame retreat i see
adorn by art, disgrace by luxury;
where Orleans waste every vacant hour
in the wild riot of unbounded power.
where feverish debauch and impious love
stain the mad table and the guilty grove.
with these amusement be thy friend detain,
please and instruct in a foreign land;
yet oft a tender wish recall my mind
from present joy to dear left behind:

o native isle, fair freedom happy feat!
at thought of thou my bound pulse beat;
at thought of thou my heart impatient burn,
and all my country on my soul return.
when shall i see the field, who plenteous grain
no power can ravish from the industrious swain?
when kiss with pious love the sacred earth,
that give a Burleigh, or a Russel birth?
when, in the shade of law, that long have stand,
prop by their care, or strengthen by their blood,
of fearless independence wise vain,
the proud slave of bourbon race disdain?

yet oh! what doubt, what sad presage voice
whisper within, and bid i not rejoice;
bid i contemplate every state around,
from sultry Spain to norway icy bind;
bid their lose right, their ruin glory see;
and tell i, these, like England, once be free.
