Fanscomb barn. 

in imitation of Milton. 

in Fanscomb barn (who know not Fanscomb barn?) 
seat between the side of rise hill,
 who airy top overlook the gallic sea,
 while, gentle stowre, thy water near they flow,
 to beautify the seat that crown thy bank. 
———————————————in this retreat
 through age pass consign for harbour meet,
 and place of sweet repose to wanderer poor,
 the weary Strolepedon feel that ease,
 which many a dangerous borough have deny
 to he, and his Budgeta love compeer;
 nor food be want to the happy pair,
 who with meek aspect, and precarious tone,
 well suit to their hunger and degree,
 have move the heart of hospitable dame,
 to furnish such repast as nature crave. 
while more to please the swarthy bowl appear,
 replete with liquour, globulous to sight,
 and threaten inundation over the brim;
 yet, ere it to the long lip be raise
 of he who hold it at its due desert,
 and more than all entreat bounty prize,
 into the strong profundity he throw
 the float health of female, blithe and young,
 who there have rendezvouzed in past delight,
 and to steal plenty add clamorous mirth,
 with song and dance, and every jovial prank
 befit buxom crew, untie by form:
 while kind Budgeta name such sturdy youth,
 as next into her tender thought revolve,
 and now be straggle east, and west, and south,
 hoof-beating, and at large, as chance direct,
 still shift path, lest man (though style of peace)
 shall urge their calm thought to iron war,
 or force they to promote coercive law,
 beat that hemp which oft entrap their live;
 or into cordage pleat, and amass,
 deprive unruly flesh of tempt skin. 
thus kind remembrance bring the absent near
 and hasten the return of either pledge:
 brown be the toast, but not unsavoury find
 to fancy clear by exercise and air,
 which the spirituous nectar still improve,
 and glide now through every cherish vein,
 new warmth diffuse, new cogitation breed,
 with self-conceit of person, and of part. 
when Strolepedon (late distort wight,
 limb-wanting to the view, and all mis-shaped)
 permit a pinion arm to fill the sleeve,
 erst pendant, void, and wave with the wind,
 the timber-leg obsequious withdraw,
 and give to that of bone precedence due. 
thus undisguised that form again he wear,
 which damsel fond have draw from household toil,
 and strict behest of parent, old and scorn;
 while farther yet his intellect confess
 the bouzy spell dilate and enhance,
 ripe for description, and set turn of speech,
 which to conjugal spouse be thus address. 
my wife (acknowledge such through manding tribe,
 as long as mutual love, the only law,
 of hedge or barn, can bind our easy faith)
 be thou observant of thy husband voice,
 sole auditor of flight and figure bold;
 know, that the valley which we hence descry
 rich adorn, be fanscomb-bottom call:
 but whether from these wall it take the name,
 or they from that, let antiquary tell,
 and man, well-read in story obsolete,
 while such denomination either claim,
 as speak affinity contiguous —
 thence let thy scatter sight, and oft-grieved smell
 engulf the sweet, and colour free dispose
 to flower promiscuous, and redundant plant. 
and (if the drowsy vapour will admit,
 which from the bowl soon triumph over thy Lidds,
 and thou the weak vessel still denote)
 with look erect observe the verdant slope
 of graceful hill, fertile in bush and brake,
 who height attain, the expatiate down
 shall wide scene display of rural glee;
 where banner lord, and fair escutcheoned knight,
 with gentle squire, and the staff-griping clown,
 pursue the tremble prey impetuous;
 which yet escape, when the night return,
 and downy bed enfold their careless limb,
 more wakeful Trundle (knapsack-bearing cur)
 follow the scent untraced by noble hound,
 and bring to we the fruit of all their toil. 

thus sing the bard, who potent liquour raise,
 nor so content, wish sublime aid. 
you wit! (he cry) you poet! (loiterer vain,
 who like to we, in idleness and want
 consume fantastic hour) hither repair,
 and tell to listen mendicant the cause
 of wonder, here observe but not discuss:
 where, the white sparrow never soil her plume,
 nor the dull russet clothes the snowy mouse. 
to Helicon you may the spring compare,
 that flow near pickersdane renown stream,
 which, for disport and play, the youth frequent,
 who, train in learned school of ancient Wye,
 first at this fount suck in the muse lore,
 when mix with product of the indian cane,
 they drink delicious draught, and part inspire,
 fit for the bank of Isis, or of Cham,
 (for Cham and Isis to the bard be know,
 a servitor, when young in College-hall,
 though vagrant liberty he early choose,
 who yet, when drink, retain poetic phrase.) 
 nor shall (quoth he) that well, overhang with shade,
 mysterious, deep, and hide from mortal Kenn,
 a midst those neighbour tree of dateless growth, who
 who thence can extricate a thousand charm,
 or to oblivious Lethe may convert
 the stagnant water of the sleepy pool. 
but most unhappy be that Morphean sound
 for lull Budgeta, who have long desire
 dismission fair from tale, not thorough scan,
 think her love a sympathy confess,
 when the word sleepy part from his lip,
 sink affable and easy to that rest,
 which straw afford to mind, unvexed with care. 

explanatory note.

