the eagle, the sow, and the cat. 

the queen of bird, t'encrease the regal stock,
 have hatch her young one in a stately oak,
 who middle-part be by a cat possess,
 and near the root with litter warm dress,
 a teem sow have make her peaceful nest. 
(thus palace be cram from roof to ground. 
and animal, as various, in they find.) 
when to the sow, who no misfortune fear,
 puss with her fawn compliment appear,
 rejoice much at her delivery past,
 and that she escape so well, who breed so fast. 
then every little Piglin she commend,
 and liken they to all their swinish friend;
 bestow good wish, but with sigh imply,
 that some dark fear do in her bosom rise. 
such tempt flesh, she cry, will eagle spare? 
methinks, good neighbour, you shall live in care:
 since i, who bring not forth such dainty bit,
 tremble for my unpalatable chit;
 and have i but foresee, the eagle bed
 be in this fatal tree to have be spread;
 i soon will have kittened in the road,
 than make this place of danger my abode. 
i hear she young one late cry for pig,
 and pity you, that be so near, and big. 
in friendship this i secret reveal,
 lest Pettitoes shall make the ensue meal;
 or else, perhaps, yourself may be their aim,
 for a sow pap have be a dish of fame. 
no more the sad, affright mother hear,
 but overturn all with boisterous fear,
 she from her helpless young in haste depart,
 while puss ascend, to practise farther art.
 the antichamber pass, she scratch the door:
 the eagle, never alarm so before,
 bid she come in, and look the cause be great,
 that make she thus disturb the royal seat;
 nor think, of mouse and rat some pest'r tale
 shall, in excuse of insolence, prevail. 
alas! my gracious lady, quoth the cat,
 i think not of such vermin; mouse, or rat
 to i be tasteless grow; nor dare i stir
 to use my phang, or to expose my fur. 
a foe intestine threaten all around,
 and even this lofty structure will confound;
 a pestilential sow, a meazeled pork
 on the foundation have be long at work,
 help by a rabble, issue from her womb,
 which she have foster in that low room;
 who now for acorn be so mad bend,
 that soon this tree must fall, for their content. 
i will have fetch some for the unruly elf;
 but it be the mob delight to help themselves:
 while your high brood must with the mean drop,
 and steep by their fall, as next the top;
 unless you soon to Jupiter repair,
 and let he know, the case demand his care. 
oh! may the trunk but stand, until you come back! 
but hark! already sure, i hear it crack. 
away, away — the eagle, all aghast,
 soar to the sky, nor falter in her haste:
 while crafty puss, now over the eyry reign,
 replenish her maw with treacherous gain. 
the sow she plunder next, and live alone;
 the pig, the eaglet, and the house her own. 

curse sycophant! how wretched be the fate
 of those, who know you not, till it be too late! 
