the repulse to Alcander. 

what be it you mean, that i be thus approach,
 dare you to hope, that i may be debauch? 
for your seduce word the same imply,
 in beg pity with a soft surprise,
 for one who love, and sigh, and almost die. 
in every word and action do appear,
 something i hate and blush to see or hear;
 at first your love for vast respect be tell,
 till your excess of manner grow too bold,
 and do your base, design thought unfold. 
when a salute do seem to custom due,
 with too much ardour you will my lip pursue;
 my hand, with which you play, you will kiss and press,
 nay every look have something of address. 
you god! i cry, sure he design to woo,
 for thus do amorous phylaster do. 
the youth who passion none can disapprove,
 when HYMEN wait to complete his love;
 but now, when sacred law and vow confine
 i to another what can you design? 
at first, i can not see the lewd abuse,
 but frame a thousand thing for your excuse. 
i know that Bacchus sometime do inspire
 a sudden transport, though not last fire;
 for he no less than Cupid can make kind,
 and force a fondness which be never design;
 or think you will travel far, and it may chance,
 to be the foreign mode of complaisance. 
till you so oft your amorous crime repeat,
 that to permit you will make mine as great;
 nor stop you here but languish speak,
 that love which i endeavour to mistake:
 what see you in i, that can make you vain,
 or any thing expect, but just disdain? 
i must confess i be not quite so nice,
 to damn all little gallantry for vice;
 (but i see now my charity misplace,
 if none but sullen saint can be think chaste:)
 yet know, base man, i scorn your lewd amour,
 hate they from all, not only cause they be you. 
oh sacred love! let not the world profane,
 thy transport, thus to sport, and entertain;
 the beau, with some small artifice of his own,
 can make a treat, for all the wanton town:
 i think my self secure, within these shade,
 but your rude love, my privacy invade,
 affront my virtue, hazard my just fame,
 why shall i suffer, for your lawless flame? 
for oft it be know, through vanity and pride,
 man boast those favour which they be deny:
 or other malice, which can soon discern;
 perhaps may see in you some kind concern. 
so scatter false suggestion of their own,
 that i love too: oh! stain to my renown;
 no, i will be wise, avoid your sight in time,
 and shun at once the censure and the crime. 
