on the peace of Aix la Chapelle, mdccxlviii.

by mr. Hurd.

be still my fear, suggest no false alarm;
 the poet rapture and the lyric fire
 be vain: enough that inclination warm;
 no foreign influence need the will muse inspire. 

the will muse, adventurous in her flight,
 to thou, love peace, shall raise the untaught strain;
 her thy fair triumph and thy art delight,
 thy festive branch she bear and join thy social train. 

high on some wave wear cliff she view serene,
 safe on the deep, the freight navy ride;
 old ocean joy to see the peaceful scene,
 and bid his billow roll with a exult tide. 

or, where augusta turret cleave the sky,
 she love to mix with art inventive band,
 see industry in form unnumbered rise,
 to scatter blessing wide, and civilise the land;

or fly, with transport, to her native plain,
 see corn-clad field, fresh lawn, and pasture fair,
 see plenty vindicate her ancient reign,
 and pour forth all her charm to crown the various year. 

but chief the muse to academic grove
 her kindred train and best-loved art invite;
 through cam overshadow bower entranced she rove,
 whence sacred science stream, and genius spread his light. 

 "here will i rest, she cry; my laurel here
" eternal bloom; here hang my golden lyre,
 "which erst my Spenser tune to shepherd ear,
" and lofty Milton smite with genuine epic fire. 

 "and o! if aught my fond presage show,
" on these love bower while peace her influence shed,
 "some hand again shall snatch it from the bough,
" wake each high-sounding string, and charm the echo glade. 

 "then shall be sing the glorious deed of war,
" how virtue strive, where envious fortune fail:
 "expect fame the conflict view from far,
" and britain valour crown, though gallia host prevail. 

 "yet then, even then [the indignant verse shall tell]
" a sure vengeance rise to whelm the foe;
 "when hellborn faction issue from her cell,
" and on her impious head draw half the destine blow. 

 "but, hark! the loud triumphant strain declare,
" how britain majesty unrivaled rose,
 "when all the glory of the naval war
" beam round her conquer flag, and circle anson brow. " 

till thus the power by freedom son obey:
 "let blood-stained glory swell the tyrant breast;
" be my compassion heal wing to spread,
 "to sheath the waste sword, and give the nation rest:

 "then (as the muse enrapture shall display)
" war impious roar, and faction murmur cease;
 "he gracious eye shed lustre on the day,
" and lend the quicken beam to cheer the art of peace. " 
