to a lady, in answer to a letter write in a very fine hand.

by the same.

while well-wrote line our wonder eye command,
the beauteous work of Chloe artful hand,
throughout the finish piece we see display
the exact image of the lovely maid;
such be her wit, and such her form divine,
this pure, as flow the style through every line,
that, like each letter, exquisite fine.

see with what be the sable current stain
in wander maze all the milkwhite plain!
thus over the meadow wrap in silver snow
unfreeze brook in dark meander flow;
thus jetty curl in shine ringlet deck
the ivory plain of lovely Chloe neck:
see, like some virgin, who unmeaning charm
receive new lustre from a lover arm,
the yield paper pure, but vacant breast,
by her fair hand and flow pen impress,
at every touch more animate grow,
and with new life and new idea glow;
fresh beauty from the kind defiler gain,
and shine each moment bright from its stain.

let mighty love no long boast his dart,
that strike unerring, aim at mortal heart;
Chloe, your quill can equal wonder do,
wound full as sure, and at a distance too:
arm with your feather weapon in your hand,
from pole to pole you send your great command;
to distant clime in vain the lover fly,
your pen overtake he, if he escape your eye;
so those, who from the sword in battle run,
but perish victim to the distant gun.

beauty a short-lived blaze, a fade flower,
but these be charm no age can devour;
these, far superior to the bright face;
triumph alike over time, as well as space,
when that fair form, which thousand now adore,
by year decay, shall tyrannize no more,
these lovely line shall future age view,
and eye unborn, like we, be charm by you.

how oft do i admire with fond delight
the curious piece, and wish like you to write!
alas, vain hope! that might as well aspire
to copy paulo stroke, or titian fire:
even now your splendid line before i lie,
and i in vain to imitate they try;
believe i, fair, i be practise this art,
to steel your hand, in hope to steal your heart.
