the origin of the sail.

 "sweet maid! on who my wish rest,
 my morning think, my midnight dream,
 o grant lysander fond request,
 and let those eye with mercy beam! 

 "thy coy delay at length give over,
 and let i claim thy nuptial vow! 
bid that cold bosom, cold no more,
 with mutual passion ardour glow. 

 "to yonder isle amid the sea,
 which sportive lave those mountains foot,
 belove Euphrasia, haste with i,
 and there the priest of HYMEN meet. 

 "there, spicy grove thick foliage spread
 the timid virgin blush to hide;
 there, gale which tender languor shed
 diffuse the rich perfume wide. 

 "o! bless retreat for happy love! 
and see the sun descend beam
 now rich gild each distant grove,
 and shed around soft roseate gleam. 

 "then let this bark for thou design,
 for thou by anxious fondness dress,
 yond beauteous island strive to find,
 and bear we over the ocean breast." 

here pause the youth, and round her waist
 his arm with timid boldness throw;
 while from his grasp, with blush haste,
 the please yet frown fair withdraw. 

 "and will thou scorn my suit?" he say,
 while in despair his hand he wring .... 
 "behold!" reply the yield maid,
 and to the bark she, sigh, spring. 

there, fond seat by her side,
 the youth her flutter spirit cheer,
 and over the eve-empurpled tide
 to find the priest of HYMEN steer. 

but too, too slow for lovers haste
 the sluggish bark appear to move;
 still lengthen seem the watery waste,
 to thy fond glance, eager love! 

at length with fruitless wish tire,
 the fretful youth to Cupid pray;
 who, pity power! a thought inspire
 the ardent suppliant will to aid. 

to hide her face from love keen gaze,
 over which consent soft languor spread,
 within she veil's luxuriant maze
 euphrasia wrap her beauteous head. 

but now that veil the youth unbind,
 then to the bark with ardour tie .... 
see! its fold catch the pass wind,
 and lo, to land the vessel fly! 

but not alone, youth love of heaven! 
thy glow bosom bless that hour;
 the thought, to crown thy wish give,
 still charm with never-ending power:

and grateful age yet unborn
 shall bless euphrasia float veil;
 thence dawn on art a bright morn,
 for thence she frame the swell sail. 
