speech of the chorus,

in the same tragedy, to dissuade Medea from her purpose of put her child to death, and fly for protection to Athens.

o haggard queen! to Athens do thou guide
 thy glow chariot, steep in kindred gore;
 or seek to hide thy damn parricide
 where peace and mercy dwell for evermore? 

the land where truth, pure, precious, and sublime,
 woo the deep silence of sequester bower,
 and warrior, matchless since the first of time,
 rear their bright banner over unconquered tower! 

where joyous youth, to music mellow strain,
 twine in the dance with nymph for ever fair,
 while spring eternal, on the lilied plain,
 wave amber radiance through the field of air? 

the tuneful nine, so sacred legend tell,
 first wake their heavenly lyre these scene among;
 still in your greenwood bower they love to dwell;
 still in your vale they swell the choral song! 

for there the tuneful, chaste, pierian fair,
 the guardian nymph of green Parnassus, now
 spring from Harmonia, while her graceful hair
 wave in bright auburn over her polish brow! 

antistrophe i 

where silent vale, and glade of green array,
 the murmur wreath of cool cephisus lave,
 there, as the muse have sing, at noon of day,
 the queen of beauty bow to taste the wave! 

and bless the stream, and breathe across the land,
 the soft sweet gale that fan yond summer bower;
 and there the sister love, a smile band,
 crown with the fragrant wreath of rosy flower! 

 "and go," she cry, "in yonder valley rove,
 with beauty torch the solemn scene illume;
 wake in each eye the radiant light of love,
 breathe on each cheek young passion tender bloom! 

entwine, with myrtle chain, your soft controul,
 to sway the heart of freedom darling kind! 
with glow charm enrapture wisdom soul,
 and mould to grace ethereal virtue mind. " 

strophe ii.

the land where heaven own hallow water play,
 where friendship bind the generous and the good,
 say, shall it hail thou from thy frantic way,
 unholy woman! with thy hand embrue

in thy own child gore? — oh! ere they bleed,
 let nature voice thy ruthless heart appal! 
pause at the bold, irrevocable deed —
 the mother strike — the guiltless babe shall fall! 

think what remorse thy madden thought shall sting,
 when die pang their gentle bosom tear,
 where shall thou sink, when linger echo ring
 the scream of horror in thy torture ear? 

no! let thy bosom melt to pity cry, —
 in dust we kneel — by sacred heaven implore —
 o! stop thy lift arm, ere yet they die,
 nor dip thy horrid hand in infant gore! —

antistrophe ii.

say, how shall thou that barbarous soul assume? 
undamp by horror at the dare plan,
 have thou a heart to work thy child doom? 
or hand to finish what thy wrath begin? 

when over each babe you look a last adieu,
 and gaze on innocence that smile asleep,
 shall no fond feeling beat, to nature true,
 charm thou to pensive thought — and bid thou weep? 

when the young suppliant clasp their parent dear,
 heave the deep sob, and pour the artless prayer, —
 ay! thou shall melt; — and many a heart-shed tear
 gush over the harden feature of despair! 

nature shall throb in every tender string, —
 thy tremble heart the ruffian task deny; —
 thy horror-smitten hand afar shall fling
 the blade, undrenched in blood eternal dye! 

chorus.

hallow earth! with indignation
 Mark oh, mark the murderous deed! 
radiant eye of wide creation
 watch the damn parricide! 

yet, ere colchia rugged daughter
 perpetrate the dire design,
 and consign to kindred slaughter
 child of thy golden line! 

shall the hand with murder gory
 cause immortal blood to flow? 
sun of heaven! — array in glory! —
 rise, — forbid, — avert the blow! —

in these vale of placid gladness
 let no rueful maniac range;
 chase afar the fiend of madness,
 wrest the dagger from revenge! 

say, have thou, with fond affection,
 rear thy smile race in vain;
 foster nature fond affection,
 tender care, and please pain? 

have thou, on the trouble ocean,
 brave the tempest loud and strong,
 where the wave, with wild commotion,
 roar cyanean rock among? 

do thou roam the path of danger
 hymenaean joy to prove? 
spare, o sanguinary stranger,
 pledge of thy sacred love! 

shall not heaven, with indignation,
 watch thou over the barbarous deed? 
shall thou cleanse, with expiation,
 monstrous, murderous, parricide? 
