on the immensity of the supreme be.

by the same.

once more i dare to rouse the sound string
 the poet of my god — awake my glory,
 awake my lute and harp — myself shall wake,
 soon as the stately night-exploding bird
 in lively lay sing welcome to the dawn. 

list you! how nature with ten thousand tongue
 begin the grand thanksgiving, hail, all hail,
 you tenant of the forest and the field! 
my fellow subject of the eternal king,
 i glad join your matin, and with you
 confess his presence, and report his praise. 

o thou, who or the lambkin, or the dove,
 when offer by the lowly, meek, and poor,
 prefer to pride whole hecatomb, accept
 this mean essay, nor from thy treasure-house
 of glory immense the orphan mite exclude. 

what though the almighty regal throne be raise
 high over yond azure heaven exalt dome
 by mortal eye unkenn'd — where east nor west
 nor south, nor bluster north have breath to blow;
 albeit he there with angel, and with saint
 hold conference, and to his radiant host
 even face to face stand visible confess:
 yet know that nor in presence or in power
 shine he less perfect here; it be man dim eye
 that make the obscurity. he be the same,
 alike in all his universe the same. 

whether the mind along the spangle sky
 measure her pathless walk, studious to view
 thy work of vaster fabric, where the planet
 weave their harmonious round, their march direct
 still faithful, still inconstant to the sun;
 or where the comet through space infinite
 (though whirl world oppose, and globe of fire)
 dart, like a javelin, to his destine goal. 
or where in heaven above the heaven of heaven
 burn bright sans, and goodly planet roll
 with satellite more glorious — thou be there. 

or whether on the ocean boisterous back
 thou ride triumphant, and with outstretched arm
 curb the wild wind and discipline the billow,
 the suppliant sailor find thou there, his chief,
 his only help — when thou rebuke the storm —
 it cease — and the vessel gentle glide
 along the glassy level of the calm. 

o! can i search the bosom of the sea,
 down the great depth descend; there thy work
 will also speak thy residence; and there
 will i thy servant, like the still profound,
 astonish into silence muse thy praise! 
behold! behold! the unplanted garden round
 of vegetable coral, sea-flower gay,
 and shrub of amber from the pearl-paved bottom
 rise rich vary, where the finny race
 in blithe security their gambol play:
 while high above their head leviathan,
 the terror and the glory of the main,
 his pastime take with transport, proud to see
 the ocean vast dominion all his own. 

hence through the genial bowel of the earth
 easy may fancy pass; till at thy mine
 gani or raolconda she arrive,
 and from the adamant imperial blaze
 form weak idea of her maker glory. 
next to Pegu or Ceylon let i rove,
 where the rich ruby (deem by sage old
 of sovereign virtue) sparkle even like Sirius,
 and blush into flame. thence will i go
 to undermine the treasure-fertile womb
 of the huge pyrenean, to detect
 the agat and the deep-intrenched gem
 of kindred jasper — nature in they both
 delight to play the mimic on herself;
 and in their vein she oft portray the form
 of lean hill, of tree erect, and stream
 now steal soft on, now thunder down
 in desperate cascade with flower and beast
 and all the live landskip of the vale:
 in vain thy pencil claudio, or Poussin,
 or thy, immortal Guido, will essay
 such skill to imitate — it be the hand
 of god himself — for god himself be there. 

hence with the ascend spring let i advance
 through bed of magnet, mineral, and spar,
 up to the mountain summit, there to indulge
 the ambition of the comprehensive eye,
 that dare to call the horizon all her own. 
behold the forest, and the expansive verdure
 of yonder level lawn, who smooth-shorn sod
 no object interrupt, unless the oak
 his lordly head uprear, and branch arm
 extend — behold in regal solitude,
 and pastoral magnificence he stand
 so simple! and so great! the underwood
 of mean rank a awful distance keep. 
yet thou be there, yet god himself be there
 even on the bush (though not as when to Moses
 he shine in burn majesty reveal)
 nevertheless conspicuous in the linnet throat
 be his unbounded goodness — thou her maker,
 thou her preserver chant she in her song;
 while all the emulative vocal tribe
 the grateful lesson learn — not other voice
 be hear, no other sound — for in attention
 bury, even babble echo bold her peace. 

now from the plain, where the unbounded prospect
 give liberty her utmost scope to range,
 turn we to yond enclosure, where appear
 chequer variety in all her form,
 which the vague mind attract and still suspend
 with sweet perplexity. what be yond tower,
 the work of labour man and clumsy art,
 see with the ring-dove nest — on that tall beech
 her pensile house the feather artist build —
 the rock wind molest she not; for see,
 with such due poize the wondrous fabric hang,
 that, like the compass in the bark, it keep
 true to itself, and steadfast even in storm. 
thou idiot that assert, there be no god,
 view and be dumb for ever —
 go bid Vitruvius or Palladio build
 the bee his mansion, or the ant her cave —
 go call Correggio, or let Titian come
 to paint the hawthorn bloom, or teach the cherry
 to blush with just vermillion — hence away —
 hence you profane! for god himself be here. 
vain be the attempt, and impious to trace
 through all his work the artificer divine —
 and though nor shine sun, nor twinkle star
 bedeck the crimson curtain of the sky;
 though neither vegetable, beast, nor bird
 be extant on the surface of this ball,
 nor lurk gem beneath; though the great sea
 sleep in profound stagnation, and the air
 have leave no thunder to pronounce its maker;
 yet man at home, within himself, may find
 the deity immense, and in that frame
 so fearful, so wonderful make,
 see and adore his providence and power —
 i see, and i adore — o god most bounteous! 
o infinite of goodness and of glory! 
the knee, that thou have shape, shall bend to thou,
 the tongue, which thou have tune, shall chant thy praise,
 and, thy own image, the immortal foul,
 shall consecrate herself to thou for ever. 
