the shunammite.

to mrs. Stanley.

deign, heavenly muse, to assist my song:
 to heavenly muse heavenly theme belong. 
but chief thou, o god, my soul inspire,
 and touch my lip with thy celestial fire:
 if thou delight in flowery carmel shade,
 or Jordan stream; from thence i crave thy aid:
 instruct my tongue, and my low accent raise,
 to sing thy wonder, and display thy praise:
 thy praise let all the son of Judah hear,
 and to my song the distant tribe repair. 

so pray the shunammite; heaven hear the dame;
 the distant tribe around her listen come,
 to hear the amaze tale; while thus her tongue,
 move by some heavenly power, begin the song. 

attend, you seed of Abram, and give ear,
 while i jehovah glorious act declare:
 how life from death, and joy from sadness spring,
 if he assist the muse, the muse shall sing. 
my lord and i, to who all-bounteous heaven
 his blessing with no spare hand have give,
 like faithful steward of our wealthy store,
 still lodge the stranger, and relieve the poor. 
and as Elisha, by divine command,
 come preach virtue to a sinful land;
 he often deign to lodge within our gate,
 and oft receive a hospitable treat:
 a decent chamber for he we prepare;
 and he, the generous labour to reward,
 honour in camp, or court, to we propose;
 which i refuse, and thus my mind disclose:

heaven king have place we in a fertile land,
 where he shower down his gift with copious hand:
 already we enjoy a affluent store;
 why shall we be solicitous for more? 
give martial camp, and kingly court to they,
 who place their only bliss in fleet fame:
 there let they live in golden chain of state;
 and be unhappy, only to be great. 
but let we in our native soil remain,
 nor barter happiness for sordid gain. 
here may we feed the indigent in peace,
 or cloth the bare with the superfluous fleece,
 and give the weary faint pilgrim ease. 
this we prefer to pomp, and formal show,
 which only serve to varnish over our woe;
 refulgent ornament, which dress the proud,
 object of wonder to the gaze crowd;
 yet seldom give content, or solid rest,
 to the vain man, by who they be possess. 

all blessing, but a child, have heaven supply;
 and only that the almighty have deny:
 which when the holy prescient sage have hear,
 he say, and i before he strait appear:
 and, as my foot approach his awful room,
 i see his face divine look assume;
 not such a wildness, and fanatic mien,
 with which, some say, the Delphic priest be see;
 when they, for mystery of fate, explain
 the odd chimera of a frantic brain;
 but with a grave majestic air he stand,
 while more than human in his aspect glow;
 celestial grace sit on his radiant look,
 and power diffusive shine, before he speak. 
then thus: "hail, generous soul! thy pious care
" be not forget, nor fruitless be thy prayer:
 "propitious heaven, thy virtuous deed to crown,
" shall make thy barren womb conceive a son. " 
so speak the seer; and, to complete my joy,
 as he have speak, i bear the promise boy. 

soon to my friend the welcome news be know,
 who crowd in apace to see my son,
 hail, with kind salute, the recent child;
 and, with their pious hymn, my pain beguile. 
when all have say, i move my joyful tongue;
 and thus to heaven address my grateful song:

 "o god, what eloquence can sing thy praise? 
" or who can fathom thy stupendous way? 
 "all thing obey at thy divine command;
" thou make a fruitful field of barren land:
 "obdurate rock a fertile glebe shall be,
" and bring forth copious crop, if bid by thou;
 "arabian desert shall with plenty smile,
" and curl vine adorn the sterile soil. 

as thus she speak, her audience raise their voice;
 and interrupt her song, as they rejoice:
 "o god, we glad hear thy mighty power,
" with joyful heart thy gracious name adore:
 "all nature be subservient to thy word;
" and shift her wonted course, to please her lord. 
 "we, for thy servant joy, our thanks express;
" as grow the child, so may her bliss increase:
 "and may the guardian angel, who preside
" over the bless, his future action guide;
 "make spotless virtue crown his vital date,
" and hoary honour end his life but late;
 "then safe bear" — the dame here wave her hand;
 the people straight obey her mute command:
 all silent stand, and all attentive look,
 wait her word, while thus she, mournful, speak:

all pleasure be imperfect here below;
 our sweet joy be mix with bitter woe:
 the draught of bliss, when in our goblet cast,
 be dash with grief; or spill, before we taste. 
ere twice four year be measure by my son,
 (so soon, alas! the great blessing go)
 in harvest-time he to the reaper go,
 to view the beard sheaf, erect in row,
 like a embattle army in the field;
 a new delightful prospect to the child! 
but either there the scorch sun display
 his heat intense, and on his vital prey;
 or else some sudden apoplectic pain,
 with rack torture, seize his tender brain;
 his spirit fail, he straight begin to faint,
 and to his father vain make complaint:
 the glow rose be quick see to fade;
 at once his beauty, and his life, decay. 

soon, at my house, the dismal news i hear;
 soon, at my house, the die child appear:
 embrace he i, with fond affection, run;
 and, o! say i, what pain afflict my son? 
he try to speak; but, falter, give a groan;
 no perfect word proceed from his tongue;
 but on his lip the break accent hang. 
all mean i use, that may allay his pain;
 all mean i use, but use they all in vain. 
yet, while he live, my soul will not despair;
 nor, till he cease to breathe, i cease my prayer:
 delude hope now stop the fall tear;
 now his increase pain increase my fear:
 by hope and fear alternate be i toss,
 till hope, in a sad certainty, be lose:
 short, and more short, he draw his pant breath,
 (too sure presage of his approach death!) 
till soon the blood, congeal, cease to flow;
 he drop his head with a decline bow:
 thrice, from my breast, to raise himself he try,
 and thrice sink down again; then, groan, die. 

thus, when with care we have nurse a tender vine,
 and teach the docile branch where to twine;
 a eastern gale, or some pernicious frost,
 nip the young tree, and all our labour lose. 

with horror chill, awhile i speechless stand,
 view the child, and tremble as i view:
 my eye discharge their humid store apace,
 and tear succeed tear down my face:
 scarce my heart the load of grief sustain;
 at length, recover speech, i thus complain:

o fleet joy! inconstant as the wind! 
which only for a moment please the mind;
 then fly, and leave a weight of woe behind! 
but yet in vain i thus lament and mourn;
 the soul, once flee, shall never more return;
 and the fair body now must be convey
 to earth dark bosom, and eternal shade —
 yet let i not prescribe a bind to heaven;
 it be by a miracle the child be give;
 nor can i think the wonder be more great,
 shall the depart soul resume her seat. 
what if i to mount Carmel haste away,
 to he who do his mystic birth display? 
his powerful word the barren fruitful make;
 his powerful word, perhaps, may raise the dead. 
the famous Tishbite raise a widow son;
 Elisha have as wondrous action do. 
when he to Jordan rapid torrent come;
 and, with the mantle, smite the impetuous stream;
 obsequious to the stroke, the wave divide;
 and raise a liquid wall on either side! 
at Jericho long have the barren soil
 deceive the husbandman, and mock his toil;
 yet, at his word, it grow a fertile field,
 and poisonous spring do wholesome Waters yield. 
nor can he only such great blessing send;
 but curse, if invoke, his call attend:
 else how at Bethel bring he vengeance down,
 as a just scourge, on that opprobrious town? 
again, when Moab peace with Israel break,
 and vain strive to quit the servile yoke;
 our powerful king lead forth embattle host
 through edom sultry wild, and air adust;
 where the confederate troop no water find,
 dry be the spring, and sterile be the ground;
 the captain wonted strength and courage fail,
 when thirst and foe at once their host assail:
 the king to he their joint petition make,
 and faint soldier crave his timely aid;
 nor crave in vain: the powerful word he speak,
 and flow water form a spacious lake;
 the shine stream advance their humid train,
 till edom wild become a liquid plain:
 not in more plenty do the water run
 out of the rock, when strike by amram son. 
and who can that amaze deed forget,
 which he perform to pay the widow debt? 
who quantity of oil one pot contain;
 yet numerous vessel fill, before it be drain. 
sure he, who such stupendous act have do,
 if god propitious prove, can raise my son. 

so say, up i catch the child with speed;
 and lay he on the sacred prophet bed;
 then call my servant to prepare the steed. 
pensive and sad, my mourn husband say,
 it be now in vain to crave elisha aid:
 no god today the prophet do inspire;
 nor can he answer, what thou will inquire. 

rather than sink, say i, attempt to raise
 my hope, nor talk of ceremonial day;
 his god be present still, and hear he when he pray. 
thus say, urge my steed with eager haste,
 swift as a mountain Roe, the plain i pass;
 over hill and Dales my journey i pursue;
 nor slack my pace, till carmel mount i view;
 on who delightful brow, in cool retreat,
 among the curl vine, the prophet sit;
 who twine arm a verdant arbour make;
 the verdant arbour form a grateful shade;
 the fan zephyr gentle play around,
 and shake the tremble leaf, and sweep the ground;
 down humble at his foot i prostrate fall,
 submiss; and, weep, tell the mournful tale. 

strive to compose thy anxious soul, say he;
 tear can revoke jehovah fix decree:
 we live and die, and both, as he think fit,
 who may command; but mortal must submit. 
this fate the king, as well as peasant, find;
 nor be it evil, but to evil mind —
 yet if from heaven i can my suit obtain,
 thy lifeless son shall yet revive again. 

thus say, with look divine, his staff he view,
 as if some powerful charm he will infuse:
 then call his servant hasty, and say,
 on the child face let this be quick lay. 

o thou, say i, on who my hope depend,
 do not this work to servant care commend:
 if thou thyself with i refuse to go,
 here, to the listen vine, i will vent my woe;
 still prostrate lie, lament for my son,
 till every hill prove vocal to my moan. 
more have i say, but grief the word suppress;
 yet sigh, and silent tear, explain the rest. 
at length he from his verdant seat arise,
 and hasty down the mountain go:
 to Shunem we, with speed, our way pursue;
 the city soon appear within our view;
 and the obedient servant, at the gate,
 return sad, without success, we meet:
 the beauteous child by death still vanquish lay;
 still death insult over the beauteous prey;
 till to the house the sacred seer be come,
 and, with supernal power, approach the room. 

by the dead child, awhile, he pensive stand;
 then from the chamber put the mourn crowd:
 that do, to god he make his ardent prayer,
 and breathe upon the child with vital air:
 and now the soul resume her pristine seat;
 and now the heart again begin to beat;
 life purple current over the body spread,
 while death, repulse, inglorious recede. 

thus, when a prowl wolf have steal a lamb,
 he stern guard it from the bleat dam;
 but if the keeper come, he quit his prey,
 and lower, with reluctance, make away. 

and now the prophet, to my longing arm,
 resign the child, with more than wonted charm:
 the blush rose shine fresh in his face,
 and beauty smile with a superior grace. 

so, when heaven lamp, that rule the genial day,
 behind the sable moon pursue his way;
 affright mortal, when th'eclipse be over,
 believe he more illustrious than before. 

here end the dame; and the promiscuous throng,
 with hallelujah, thus conclude the song:
 "holy and good be thou, lord god of host,
" and all thy work be wonderful and just:
 "both life and death be in thy powerful hand;
" both life and death obey thy great command:
 "by thy great power the heaven and earth be awe;
" then let the heaven and earth adore their god. 
 "thou glorious sun, that measure all our day,
" rise and set, still advance his praise:
 "thou moon, and you less glitter orb, that dance
" round this terrestrial globe, his praise advance:
 "you sea, for ever wave to and fro,
" praise, when you ebb, and praise he, when you flow:
 "you wander river, and each purling stream,
" as you pursue your course, his praise proclaim:
 "you dew, and mist, and humid vapour, all,
" praise, when you rise; and praise he, when you fall:
 "but chief Israel, who do daily view
" he powerful work, his daily praise renew. " 
