to the memory of the honourable miss Caroline campbel.

how soft the morn! how sweet the early day! 
what bloom tint the open cloud display! 
delusive shade! the bleak storm oft rise,
 and cloud the brightness of the pure sky. 
in blush spring the bud leaf may fall,
 and you, you fair, receive a early call;
 ah! Caroline! how promise thy bloom! 
how change, how sad, how sink in sorrow gloom! 
how fair thy prospect! charm maid, how bright,
 which death relentless veil in endless night;
 blight those sweet hope admire friend have form,
 chill that soft friendship which thy bosom warm. 
why do not pity power thy virtue save,
 preserve our hope from disappointment grave? 
form with each grace that can enrich the mind,
 with wit, with sentiment, and sense refine;
 the gentle soul inform her glow breast,
 heaven meek image on her form impress;
 the soft mercy, purity, and truth,
 adorn her name, give lustre to her youth:
 heaven, that with virtue do her heart endow,
 send she a pattern for her sex below. 
you fair companion of her open bloom,
 weep over her dust, and profit at her tomb;
 she once be all the human kind adore;
 "now view her relic, and be vain no more." 
what now alas! avail her noble birth,
 her easy manner, her distinguish worth! 
silent and cold as yond pale marble bust,
 reduce her honour to unconscious dust. 
and shall no more thy friend behold thy face,
 no more be charm by thy persuasive grace! 
and shall no more thy accent cheer the maid,
 who now invoke thy love, thy honour shade? 
transport hope! in realm of bright day,
 thy soul shall gain that spark, that quicken ray,
 to wake, reanimate thy sleep clay. 
ecstatic thought! in those bright realm above
 i will hail thy virtue with a angel love;
 when a few fleet year shall set i free,
 my soul, unshackled, then shall fly to thou;
 but if on earth i long must reside,
 oh! then bless Caroline be still my guide! 
and shall thy spirit know what pass here,
 oh! deign to dry the hapless Mary tear;
 be that, sweet maid, thy sacred, soft employ,
 till she shall meet thou for eternal joy. 
