a hymn on the season.

these, as they change, almighty father! these,
 be but the vary god. the roll year
 be full of thou. forth in the please spring
 thy beauty walk, thy tenderness and love. 
wide-flush the field; the soften air be balm;
 echo the mountain round; the forest live;
 and every sense, and every heart be joy. 
then come thy glory in the summer-month,
 with light, and heat, severe. prone, then thy sun
 shoot full perfection through the swell year. 
and oft thy voice in awful thunder speak;
 and oft at dawn, deep noon, or fall eve,
 by brook and grove, in hollow-whispering gale. 
a yellow-floating pomp, thy bounty shine
 in autumn unconfined. throw from thy lap,
 profuse over nature, fall the lucid shower
 of beamy fruit; and, in a radiant stream,
 into the store of sterile winter pour. 
in winter dreadful thou! with cloud and storm
 around thou throw, tempest over tempest roll,
 horrible blackness! on the whirlwind wing,
 ride sublime, thou bid the world be low,
 and humble nature with thy northern blast. 

mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
 deep-felt, in these appear! a simple train,
 yet so harmonious mix, so fit join,
 one follow one in such enchant sort,
 shade, unperceived, so soften into shade,
 and all so form such a perfect whole,
 that as they still succeed, they ravish still. 
but wonder oft, with brute unconscious gaze,
 man mark thou not, mark not the mighty hand,
 that, ever-busy, wheel the silent sphere;
 work in the secret deep; shoot, steam, thence
 the fair profusion that overspread the spring;
 fling from the sun direct the flame day;
 feed every creature; hurl the tempest forth;
 and, as on earth this grateful change revolve,
 with transport touch all the spring of life. 

nature, attend; join every live soul,
 beneath the spacious temple of the sky,
 in adoration join; and, ardent, raise
 a universal hymn! to he, you gale,
 breathe soft; who spirit teach you to breathe. 
oh talk of he in solitary gloom! 
where, over the rock, the scarcely-waving pine
 fill the brown void with a religious awe. 
and you, who bold note be hear afar,
 who shake the astonish world, lift high to heaven
 the impetuous song, and say from who you rage. 
his praise, you brook, attune, you tremble rill;
 and let i catch it as i muse along. 
you headlong torrent, rapid, and profound;
 you soft flood, that lead the humid maze
 along the vale; and thou, majestic main,
 a secret world of wonder in thyself,
 sound his tremendous praise; who great voice
 or bid you roar, or bid your roar fall,
 roll up your incense, herb, and fruit, and flower,
 in mingle cloud to he; who sun elate,
 who hand perfume you, and who pencil paint
 you forest, bend; you harvest, wave to he:
 breathe your still song into the reaper heart,
 homeward, rejoice with the joyous moon. 
you that keep watch in heaven, as earth asleep
 unconscious lie, effuse your mild beam,
 you constellation, while your angle strike,
 amid the spangle sky, the silver lyre. 
great source of day! best image here below
 of thy creator, ever dart wide,
 from world to world, the vital ocean round,
 on nature write with every beam his praise. 
the thunder roll: be hush the prostrate world;
 while cloud to cloud return the dreadful hymn. 
bleat out afresh, you hill; you mossy rock,
 retain the sound: the broad responsive low,
 you valley, raise; for the great shepherd reign;
 and yet again the golden age return. 
wild of creature, be not silent here;
 but, hymn horrid, let the desert roar. 
you woodland all, awake: a general song
 burst from the grove; and when the restless day,
 expire, lay the warble world asleep,
 sweet of bird! sweet Philomela, charm
 the listen shade; and through the midnight hour;
 trill, prolong the wildly-luscious note;
 that night, as well as day, may vouch his praise. 
you chief, for who the whole creation smile;
 at once the head, the heart, and mouth of all,
 crown the great hymn! in swarm city vast,
 concourse of man, to the deep organ join
 the long-resounding voice, oft-breaking clear,
 at solemn pause, through the swell base;
 and, as each mingle frame increase each,
 in one unite ardor rise to heaven. 
or if you rather choose the rural shade,
 to find a fane in every sacred grove;
 there let the shepherd flute, the virgin chaunt,
 the prompt seraph, and the poet lyre,
 still sing the god of season, as they roll. 
for i, when i forget the darling theme,
 whether the blossom blow, the summer-ray,
 russet the plain, delicious autumn gleam;
 or winter rise in the redden east;
 be my tongue mute, may fancy paint no more,
 and, dead to joy, forget my heart to beat. 

shall fate command i to the farther verge
 of the green earth, to hostile barbarous clime,
 river unknown to song; where first the sun
 gild indian mountain, or his set beam
 flame on the atlantic isle; it be nought to i;
 since god be ever present, ever feel,
 in the void waste, as in the city full;
 roll the same kindred season round the world,
 in all apparent, wise, and good in all;
 since he sustain, and animate the whole;
 from seem evil still educe good,
 and better thence again, and better still,
 in infinite progression. — but i lose
 myself in he, in light ineffable! 
come then, expressive silence, muse his praise. 
