chatterton will.

1770. 

burgum i thank thou, thou have let i see,
 that Bristol have impress her stamp on thou,
 thy generous spirit emulate the mayor,
 thy generous spirit with thy bristol pair. 
god! what will burgum give, to get a name
 and snatch his blunder dialect from shame? 
what will he give, to hand his memory down
 to time remote boundary? — a crown. 
will you ask more, his swell face look blue;
 futurity he rate at two pound two. 
well burgum, take thy laurel to thy brow;
 with a rich saddle decorate a sow,
 strut in iambic, totter in a ode,
 promise, and never pay, and be the mode. 

Catcott, for thou, i know thy heart be good,
 but ah! thy merit seldom understand;
 too bigotted to whimsy, which thy youth
 receive to venerate as gospel truth,
 thy friendship never can be dear to i,
 since all i be be opposite to thou. 
if ever obligate to thy purse
 Rowley discharge all; my first chief curse
 for have i never know the antique lore
 i never have venture from my peaceful shore,
 to be the wreck of promise and hope
 a boy of learning, and a bard of trope;
 but happy in my humble sphere have move
 untroubled, unsuspected, unbeloved. 

to Barrett next, he have my thanks sincere,
 for all the little knowledge i have here. 
but what be knowledge? can it here succeed? 
when scarce twenty in the town can read. 
can knowledge bring in interest to maintain
 the wild expense of a poet brain;
 disinterest burgum never mean
 to take my knowledge for his gain per cent. 
when wild squander every thing i get,
 on book, and learning, and the lord know what. 
can burgum then, my critic, patron, friend
 without security attempt to lend? 
no, that will be imprudent in the man;
 accuse he of imprudence, if you can. 
he promise, i confess, and seem sincere;
 few keep a honorary promise here. 
i thank thou, Barrett, thy advice be right,
 but it be ordain by fate that i shall write. 
spite of the prudence of this prudent place,
 i write my mind, nor hide the author face. 
HARRIS ere long, when reek from the press
 my number make his self-importance less,
 will wrinkle up his face, and damn the day
 and drag my body to the triple way —
 poor superstitious mortal! wreak your hate
 upon my cold remains —

codicil.

