on the death of mrs. ANNE Gillison.

the deep-toned bell arrest my listen ear,
and pensive sadness shade the open year;
chain to a bed of languor, and of pain,
my lyre untune have lose its wonted strain.
yet all its tremble string over anna urn,
again will vibrate, with my heart will mourn.
friend of the good, farewell! my friend adieu!
the heart you often cheere, must mourn for you,
ever be see your hospitable door,
open to cheer the friendless, feed the poor.
oft on my solitary hour this knell,
by brood fancy hear, shall sound — farewell!
where adulation sooth a rise name,
the comment mark perhaps a dubious aim,
but from the tomb be cold suspicion flee,
no pity melt, or flattery sooth the dead.
so free — to virtue and affection true,
the mourning muse this finish course will view,
for point contend be the bigot find,
declare zeal and rest in a sound.
truth uncontested here can force impart
to stamp the christian duty on the heart.
benevolence thence give her open smile,
sincerity her tongue that speak no guile;
forgiveness there through transient anger shine,
the heart that free from harm, suspect none,
the tear of wealth in smile of ease may end,
but ah! when poverty have lose a friend,
remembrance, that in prosperous day may sleep,
must with the sick and poor sad vigil keep.
grateful to feel heart and friendly eye,
oh quick let the shelter pile arise,
where misery most forlorn for year to come,
screen from the world contempt, shall find a home.
when winter rage, there in future day,
revered tradition shall repeat her praise.
while round their blaze fire these sit and tell,
what they have hear of she who build that cell.
ambitious each to rescue from the grave,
how good she be, what charity she give;
by faithful record shall her memory shine,
and still fresh olive round the cypress twine.

minister angel of the grace of heaven,
to you the poor, the rich and good be give:
if faithful thus, their treasure they employ,
your present comfort yield their future joy.
when at the voice of all-commanding power,
what brave the wreck of time shall be no more;
and in one general ruin shall resolve,
"this globe, and all which it inherit shall dissolve."
unfading honour then, and joy unknown,
which cloud of witness for they have sow.
shall he, who bright example they pursue,
with these approve word reward imperfect good;
"i be a hunger and you give i bread. " —
