cerdick,

translate from the saxon.

the rose-crowned dawn dance on the top of the lofty hill. arise, o cerdick, from thy mossy bed, for the noise of the chariot be hear in the valley.

you saxon, draw the sword, prepare the fly dart of death: swift as the glance sight meet the foe upon the brow of the hill, and cast the warrior headlong into the roar stream.

the sword of the saxon appear on the high rock, like the lake of death reflect the beam of the morning sun.

the briton begin to ascend the ragged fragment of the shrink rock: thick as the hail in the howl storm, drive down the mountain side, the son of the tempest; the chariot, and the horse roll in confusion to the blood-stained vale.

son of war, descend, let the river be swell with the smoke stream of life, and the mountain of the slay ascend to the star.

they fall beneath the spear of cerdick.

sledda be a flame of fire. kenbert scatter the never-erring shaft of death. aelle be a tempest, a cloud burst in blood, a winter wind blast the soul: his knee be encircle with lifewarm gore, his white robe be like the morning sky. ceaulin spear be exalt like the star of the evening; his fall enemy rise in hill around he.

the action of cerdick astonish the soul; the foe be melt from the field, and the god have lose their sacrifice.

cerdick lean upon his spear, he sing the praise of the god: let the image be fill with the body of the dead, for the foe be sweep away like purple bloom of the grape, no more to be see. the sacred flame ascend the cloud, the warrior dance around it. the evening slow throw her dusky vale over the face of the sun.

cerdick arise in his tent.

you son of war, who shake the silver javelin and the point shield, arise from the soft slumber of the night, assemble to council at the tent of cerdick.

from the dark-brown spring, from the verdant top of the impend rock, from the flowery vale, and the coppice heath, the chief of the war arise.

graceful as the flower that overlook the silver stream, the mighty cerdick stand among the warrior: attention seal up their lip.

why will you sleep, you saxon, while the hang mountain of fortune tremble over our head; let we gird on the reek sword, and wrap in flame the town of doranceastre: strong as the foundation of the earth, swift as the impetuous stream, deadly as the corrupt air, sudden as the whirlwind pierce to the hide bed of the sea, arm in the red lightning of the storm, will we come upon the foe. prepare the sword and shield, and follow the descendant of Woden.

as when the sable cloud incessant descend in river of rain to the wood-crowned hill, the foundation of the ground be loosen, and the forest gentle slide to the valley, such be the appearance of the warrior, move to the city of doranceastre: the spear appear like the star of the black night, their spread shield like the evening sky.

turn your eye, o you saxon, to the distant mountain: on the spread top a company be see; they be like the locust of the east, like a dark-brown cloud expand in the wind: they come down the hill like the stone of hail; the javelin nod over the helm; death sport in their shadow. they be child of Woden: see the god of battle fan the air, the red sword wave in their banner. you son of battle, wait their approach, let their eye be feast with the chaplet of victory.

it be Kenrick! i see the lightning on his shield! his eye be two star, his arm be the arrow of death! he drink the blood of the foe, as the ray of the summer sun drink the soft steal brook: he move like the moon, attend by the star; his blood-stained robe fly around he, like the white cloud of the evening, tinge with the red beam of the sink sun.

see the chaplet hang on his helm: shade he, o you son of war, with the point shield.

Kenrick approach; the shield of the brave hang over his head. he speak; attention dance on the ear.

son of Woden, receive a conquer son; the body of the slay rise in mountain; the ash of the town choke up the river; the roar stream of Severn be fill with the slaughter son of thunder; the warrior hang upon the cliff of the red rock; the mighty man, like the sacrifice of yesterday, will be see no more; the brier shall hide the plain; the grass dwell in the desolate habitation; the wolf shall sleep in the palace, and the fox in the temple of the god; the sheep shall wander without a shepherd, and the goat be scatter in the high mountain, like the furrow on the bank of the swell flood; the enemy be sweep away; the god be glut with blood, and peace arise from the solitary grove.

joy wanton in the eye of cerdick. by the power that send the tempest, the red lightning, and roar thunder; by the god of war, who delight be in blood, and who prey upon the soul of the brave; by the power of the great deep, i swear that Kenrick shall sit on my throne, guide the sanguine spear of war, and the glitter sceptre of peace.

cerdick gird his son with the sword of royalty: the warrior dance around he; the clang shield echo to the distant vale; the fire ascend the sky; the town of doranceastre increase the flame, and the great image be red with the blood of the captive: the cry of the burn foe be drown in the song of joy; the ash of the image be scatter in the air, the bone of the foe be break to dust.

great be the valour of cerdick, great be the strength of Kenrick.

