Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

in six book.

book i 

Cuchullin sit by tura wall; by the tree of the rustle leaf. — his spear lean against the mossy rock. his shield lie by he on the grass. as he think of mighty carbar, a hero who he slay in war; the scout of the ocean come Moran the son of fithil.

rise, say the youth, Cuchullin, rise; i see the ship of swaran. Cuchullin, many be the foe: many the hero of the dark-rolling sea.

Moran! reply the blue-eyed chief, thou ever tremble, son of fithil: thy fear have much increase the foe. perhaps it be the king of the lonely hill come to aid i on green ullin plain.

i see their chief, say Moran, tall as a rock of ice. his spear be like that blast fir. his shield like the rise moon. he sit on a rock on the shore: like a cloud of mist on the silent hill. — many, chief of man! i say, many be our hand of war. — well be thou name, the mighty man, but many mighty man be see from tura wall of wind. — he answer, like a wave on a rock, who in this land appear like i? hero stand not in my presence: they fall to earth beneath my hand. none can meet swaran in the fight but Fingal, king of stormy hill. once we wrestle on the heath of malmor, and our heel overturn the wood. rock fall from their place; and rivulet, change their course, flee murmur from our strife. three day we renew our strife, and hero stand at a distance and tremble. on the four, Fingal say, that the king of the ocean fall; but swaran say, he stand. let dark Cuchullin yield to he that be strong as the storm of malmor.

no: reply the blue-eyed chief, i will never yield to man. dark Cuchullin will be great or dead. go, fithil son, and take my spear: strike the sound shield of cabait. it hang at tura rustle gate; the sound of peace be not its voice. my hero shall hear on the hill.

he go and strike the bossy shield. the hill and their rock reply. the sound spread along the wood: deer start by the lake of roe. curach leap from the sound rock; and Connal of the bloody spear. crugal breast of snow beat high. the son of favi leave the dark-brown hind. it be the shield of war, say ronnar, the spear of Cuchullin, say Lugar. — son of the sea put on thy arm! calmar lift thy sound steel! puno! horrid hero, rise: cairbar from thy red tree of cromla. bend thy white knee, o Eth; and descend from the stream of Lena. — ca-olt stretch thy white side as thou move along the whistle heath of Mora: thy side that be white as the foam of the trouble sea, when the dark wind pour it on the murmur rock of cuthon.

now i behold the chief in the pride of their former deed; their soul be kindle at the battle of old, and the action of other time. their eye be like flame of fire, and roll in search of the foe of the land. — their mighty hand be on their sword; and lightning pour from their side of steel. — they come like stream from the mountain; each rush roar from his hill. bright be the chief of battle in the armour of their father. — gloomy and dark their hero follow, like the gather of the rainy cloud behind the red meteor of heaven. — the sound of crash arm ascend. the grey dog howl between. — unequal burst the song of battle; and rock cromla echo round. on lena dusky heath they stand, like mist that shade the hill of autumn: when break and dark it settle high, and lift its head to heaven.

hail, say Cuchullin, son of the narrow vale, hail you hunter of the deer. another sport be draw near: it be like the dark roll of that wave on the coast. or shall we fight, you son of war! or yield green inisfail to lochlin! o Connal speak, thou first of man! thou breaker of the shield! thou have often fight with lochlin; shall thou lift up thy father spear?

Cuchullin! calm the chief reply, the spear of Connal be keen. it delight to shine in battle, and to mix with the blood of thousand. but though my hand be bend on war, my heart be for the peace of Erin. behold, thou first in cormac war, the sable fleet of swaran. his mast be as numerous on our coast as reed in the lake of lego. his ship be like forest clothe with mist, when the tree yield by turn to the squally wind. many be his chief in battle. Connal be for peace. — Fingal will shun his arm the first of mortal man: Fingal that scatter the mighty, as stormy wind the heath; when the stream roar through echo cona: and night settle with all her cloud on the hill.

fly, thou chief of peace, say calmar the son of Matha; fly, Connal, to thy silent hill, where the spear of battle never shine; pursue the dark-brown deer of cromla: and stop with thy arrow the bound roe of Lena. but, blue-eyed son of Semo, Cuchullin, ruler of the war, scatter thou the son of lochlin, and roar through the rank of their pride. let no vessel of the kingdom of snow bind on the dark-rolling wave of inistore.

o you dark wind of Erin rise! and roar you whirlwind of the heath! amid the tempest let i die, tear in a cloud by angry ghost of man; amid the tempest let calmar die, if ever chace be sport to he so much as the battle of shield.

calmar! slow reply the chief, i never flee, o matha son. i be swift with my friend in battle, but small be the fame of Connal. the battle be win in my presence, and the valiant overcome. but, son of Semo, hear my voice, regard the ancient throne of Cormac. give wealth and half the land for peace, till Fingal come with battle. or, if war be thy choice, i lift the sword and spear. my joy shall be in the midst of thousand, and my soul brighten in the gloom of the fight.

to i, Cuchullin reply, pleasant be the noise of arm: pleasant as the thunder of heaven before the shower of spring. but gather all the shine tribe that i may view the son of war. let they move along the heath, bright as the sunshine before a storm; when the west wind collect the cloud and the oak of Morven echo along the shore.

but where be my friend in battle? the companion of my arm in danger? where be thou, white-bosomed cathbat? where be that cloud in war, duchomar: and have thou leave i, o Fergus! in the day of the storm? Fergus, first in our joy at the feast; son of rossa! arm of death! come thou like a roe from malmor. like a hart from the echo hill? — hail thou son of rossa! what shade the soul of war?

four stone, reply the chief, rise on the grave of cathbat. — these hand have lay in earth duchomar, that cloud in war. cathbat, thou son of torman, thou be a sun-beam on the hill. — and thou, o valiant duchomar, like the mist of marshy lano; when it sail over the plain of autumn and bring death to the people. morna! thou fair of maid! calm be thy sleep in the cave of the rock. thou have fall in darkness like a star, that shoot athwart the desert, when the traveller be alone, and mourn the transient beam. say, say semo blue-eyed son, say how sell the chief of Erin? fell they by the son of lochlin, strive in the battle of hero? or what confine the chief of cromla to the dark and narrow house?

cathbat, reply the hero, fall by the sword of duchomar at the oak of the noisy stream. duchomar come to tura cave, and speak to the lovely morna.

morna, fair among woman, lovely daughter of cormac-cairbar. why in the circle of stone; in the cave of the rock alone? the stream murmur hoarse. the old tree groan be in the wind. the lake be trouble before thou, and dark be the cloud of the sky. but thou be like snow on the heath; and thy hair like the mist of cromla; when it curl on the rock, and it shine to the beam of the west. — thy breast be like two smooth rock see from branno of the stream. thy arm like two white pillar in the hall of the mighty Fingal.

from whence, the white-armed maid reply, from whence, duchomar the most gloomy of man? dark be thy brow and terrible. red be thy roll eye. do swaran appear on the sea? what of the foe, duchomar?

from the hill i return, o morna, from the hill of the dark-brown hind. three have i slay with my bend yew. three with my long bound dog of the chace. — lovely daughter of Cormac, i love thou as my soul. — i have slay one stately deer for thou. — high be his branchy head; and fleet his foot of wind.

duchomar! calm the maid reply, i love thou not, thou gloomy man. — hard be thy heart of rock, and dark thy terrible brow. but cathbat, thou son of torman, thou be the love of morna. thou be like a sun-beam on the hill in the day of the gloomy storm. see thou the son of torman, lovely on the hill of his hind? here the daughter of Cormac wait the come of cathbat.

and long shall morna wait, duchomar say, his blood be on my sword. — long shall morna wait for he. he fall at branno stream. high on cromla i will raise his tomb, daughter of cormac-cairbar; but fix thy love on duchomar, his arm be strong as a storm. —

and be the son of torman fall? say the maid of the tearful eye. be he fall on his echo hill; the youth with the breast of snow? he that be first in the chace of the hill; the foe of the stranger of the ocean. — duchomar thou be dark indeed, and cruel be thy arm to morna. but give i that sword, my foe; i love the blood of caithbat.

he give the sword to her tear; but she pierce his manly breast. he fall, like the bank of a mountain-stream; stretch out his arm and say;

daughter of cormac-cairbar, thou have slay duchomar. the sword be cold in my breast: morna, i feel it cold. give i to moina the maid; duchomar be the dream of her night. she will raise my tomb; and the hunter shall see it and praise i. but draw the sword from my breast; morna, the steel be cold.

she come, in all her tear, she come, and draw it from his breast. he pierce her white side with steel; and spread her fair lock on the ground. her burst blood sound from her side: and her white arm be stain with red. roll in death she lie and tura cave answer to her sigh. —

peace, say Cuchullin, to the soul of the hero; their deed be great in danger. let they ride around i on cloud; and show their feature of war: that my soul may be strong in danger; my arm like the thunder of heaven. — but be thou on a moonbeam, o morna, near the window of my rest; when my thought be of peace; and the din of arm be over. — gather the strength of the tribe, and move to the war of Erin. — attend the car of my battle; and rejoice in the noise of my course. — place three spear by my side; and follow the bound of my steed. that my soul may be strong in my friend, when the battle darken round the beam of my steel.

as rush a stream of foam from the dark shady steep of cromla; when the thunder be roll above, and dark-brown night on half the hill. so fierce, so vast, and so terrible rush on the son of Erin. the chief like a whale of ocean, who all his billow follow, pour valour forth as a stream, roll his might along the shore.

the son of lochlin hear the noise as the sound of a winterstream. swaran strike his bossy shield, and call the son of Arno. what murmur roll along the hill like the gather fly of evening? the son of inisfail descend, or rustle wind roar in the distant wood. such be the noise of gormal before the white top of my wave arise. o son of Arno, ascend the hill and view the dark face of the heath.

he go, and tremble, swift return. his eye roll wild round. his heart beat high against his side. his word be falter, break, slow.

rise, son of ocean, rise chief of the dark-brown shield. i see the dark, the mountain-stream of the battle. the deep-moving strength of the son of Erin. — the car, the car of battle come, like the flame of death; the rapid car of Cuchullin, the noble son of Semo. it bend behind like a wave near a rock; like the golden mist of the heath. its side be emboss with stone, and sparkle like the sea round the boat of night. of polish yew be its beam, and its seat of the smoothe bone. the side be replenish with spear; and the bottom be the foot-stool of hero. before the right side of the car be see the snort horse. the highmaned, broad-breasted, proud, high-leaping strong steed of the hill. loud and resound be his hoof; the spread of his mane above be like that stream of smoke on the heath. bright be the side of the steed, and his name be Sulin-Sifadda.

before the left side of the car be see the snort horse. the thin-maned, high-headed, strong-hooffed, fleet, bound son of the hill: his name be dusronnal among the stormy son of the sword. — a thousand thong bind the car on high. hard polish bit shine in a wreath of foam. thin thong bright-studded with gem, bend on the stately neck of the steed. — the steed that like wreath of mist fly over the streamy vale. the wildness of deer be in their course, the strength of the eagle descend on her prey. their noise be like the blast of winter on the side of the snowheaded gormal.

within the car be see the chief; the strong stormy son of the sword; the hero name be Cuchullin, son of Semo king of shell. his red cheek be like my polish yew. the look of his blue-rolling eye be wide beneath the dark arch of his brow. his hair fly from his head like a flame, as bend forward he wield the spear. fly, king of ocean, fly; he come, like a storm, along the streamy vale.

when do i fly, reply the king, from the battle of many spear? when do i fly, son of Arno, chief of the little soul? i meet the storm of gormal when the foam of my wave be high; i meet the storm of the cloud and shall i fly from a hero? be it Fingal himself my soul shall not darken before he. — rise to the battle, my thousand; pour round i like the echo main. gather round the bright steel of your king; strong as the rock of my land; that meet the storm with joy, and stretch their dark wood to the wind.

as autumn dark storm pour from two echo hill, towards each other approach the hero. — as two dark stream from high rock meet, and mix and roar on the plain; loud, rough and dark in battle meet lochlin and inisfail. chief mix his stroke with chief, and man with man; steel, clang, sound on steel, helmet be cleave on high. blood burst and smoke around. — string murmur on the polish yew. dart rush along the sky. spear fall like the circle of light that gild the stormy face of the night.

as the trouble noise of the ocean when roll the wave on high; as the last peal of the thunder of heaven, such be the noise of battle. though cormac hundred bard be there to give the war to song; feeble be the voice of a hundred bard to send the death to future time. for many be the fall of the hero; and wide pour the blood of the valiant.

mourn. you son of the song, the death of the noble sithallin. — let the sigh of fiöna rise on the dark heath of her lovely ardan. — they fall, like two hind of the desert, by the hand of the mighty swaran; when, in the midst of thousand he roar; like the shrill spirit of a storm, that sit dim, on the cloud of gormal, and enjoy the death of the mariner.

nor sleep thy hand by thy side, chief of the isle of mist; many be the death of thy arm, Cuchullin, thou son of Semo. his sword be like the beam of heaven when it pierce the son of the vale; when the people be blast and fall, and all the hill be burn around. — dusronnal snort over the body of hero; and sifadda bathe his hoof in blood. the battle lie behind they as grove overturn on the desert of cromla; when the blast have pass the heath load with the spirit of night.

weep on the rock of roar wind, o maid of inistore, bend thy fair head over the wave, thou fair than the ghost of the hill; when it move in a sun-beam at noon over the silence of Morven. he be fall! thy youth be low; pale beneath the sword of Cuchullin. no more shall valour raise the youth to match the blood of king. — trenar, lovely trenar die, thou maid of inistore. his grey dog be howl at home, and see his pass ghost. his bow be in the hall unstring. no sound be in the heath of his hind.

as roll a thousand wave to the rock, so swaran host come on; as meet a rock a thousand wave, so Inisfail meet swaran. death raise all his voice around, and mix with the sound of shield. — each hero be a pillar of darkness, and the sword a beam of fire in his hand. the field echo from wing to wing, as a hundred hammer that rise by turn on the red son of the furnace. who be these on lena heath that be so gloomy and dark? who be these like two cloud and their sword like lightning above they? the little hill be trouble around, and the rock tremble with all their moss. — who be it but ocean son and the carborne chief of Erin? many be the anxious eye of their friend, as they see they dim on the heath. now night conceal the chief in her cloud, and end the terrible fight. it be on cromla shaggy side that dorglas place the deer; the early fortune of the chace, before the hero leave the hill. — a hundred youth collect the heath; ten hero blow the fire; three hundred choose the polish stone. the feast be smoke wide.

Cuchullin, chief of erin war, resume his mighty soul. he stand upon his beamy spear, and speak to the son of song; to carril of other time, the gray-haired son of kinfena. be this feast spread for i alone and the king of lochlin on ullin shore; far from the deer of his hill, and sound hall of his feast? rise, carril of other time, and carry my word to swaran; tell he from the roar of water, that Cuchullin give his feast. here let he listen to the sound of my grove amid the cloud of night. — for cold and bleak the bluster wind rush over the foam of his sea. here let he praise the tremble harp, and hear the song of hero.

old carril go, with soft voice, and call the king of dark-brown shield. rise from the skin of thy chace, rise, swaran king of grove. — Cuchullin give the joy of shell; partake the feast of erin blue-eyed chief. he answer like the sullen sound of cromla before a storm. though all thy daughter, Inisfail! shall extend their arm of snow; raise high the heave of their breast, and soft roll their eye of love; yet, fix as lochlin thousand rock, here swaran shall remain; till morn, with the young beam of my east, shall light i to the death of Cuchullin. pleasant to my ear be lochlin wind. it rush over my sea. it speak aloft in all my shrowd, and bring my green forest to my mind; the green forest of gormal that often echo to my wind, when my spear be red in the chace of the boar. let dark Cuchullin yield to i the ancient throne of Cormac, or erin torrent shall show from their hill the red foam of the blood of his pride.

sad be the sound of swaran voice, say carril of other time: —

sad to himself alone, say the blue-eyed son of Semo. but, carril, raise thy voice on high, and tell the deed of other time. send thou the night away in song; and give the joy of grief. for many hero and maid of love, have move on inisfail. and lovely be the song of woe that be hear on albion rock; when the noise of the chace be over, and the stream of cona answer to the voice of Ossian.

in other day, carril reply, come the son of ocean to Erin. a thousand vessel bound over the wave to ullin lovely plain. the son of Inisfail arise to meet the race of dark-brown shield. cairbar, first of man, be there, and grudar, stately youth. long have they strive for the spot bull, that low on golbun echo heath. each claim he as their own; and death be often at the point of their steel.

side by side the hero fight, and the stranger of ocean flee. who name be fair on the hill than the name of cairbar and grudar! — but ah! why ever low the bull on golbun echo heath; they see he leap like the snow. the wrath of the chief return.

on lubar grassy bank they fight, and grudar like a sun-beam, fall. fierce cairbar come to the vale of the echo tura, where brassolis, fair of his sister, all alone, raise the song of grief. she sing of the action of grudar, the youth of her secret soul. — she mourn he in the field of blood; but still she hope for his return. her white bosom be see from her robe, as the moon from the cloud of night. her voice be soft than the harp to raise the song of grief. her soul be fix on grudar; the secret look of her eye be he. — when shall thou come in thy arm, thou mighty in the war? —

take, brassolis, cairbar come and say, take, brassolis, this shield of blood. fix it on high within my hall, the armour of my foe. her soft heart beat against her side. distract, pale, she fly. she find her youth in all his blood; she die on cromla heath. here rest their dust, Cuchullin; and these two lonely yew spring from their tomb, and wish to meet on high. fair be brassolis on the plain, and grudar on the hill. the bard shall preserve their name, and repeat they to future time.

pleasant be thy voice, o carril, say the blue-eyed chief of Erin; and lovely be the word of other time. they be like the calm shower of spring; when the sun look on the field, and the light cloud fly over the hill. o strike the harp in praise of my love, the lonely sun-beam of dunscaich. strike the harp in the praise of Bragela; she that i leave in the isle of mist, the spouse of semo son. do thou raise thy fair face from the rock to find the sail of Cuchullin? — the sea be roll far distant, and its white foam shall deceive thou for my sail. retire, for it be night, my love, and the dark wind sigh in thy hair. retire to the hall of my feast, and think of the time that be past: for i will not return till the storm of war be cease. o Connal, speak of war and arm, and send she from my mind, for lovely with her ravenhair be the white-bosomed daughter of sorglan.

Connal, slow to speak, reply, guard against the race of ocean. send thy troop of night abroad, and watch the strength of swaran. — Cuchullin! i be for peace till the race of the desert come; till Fingal come, the first of man, and beam, like the sun, on our field.

the hero strike the shield of his alarm — the warrior of the night move on. the rest lie in the heath of the deer, and sleep amid the dusky wind. — the ghost of the late dead be near, and swim on gloomy cloud. and far distant, in the dark silence of Lena, the feeble voice of death be hear.


Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

book ii.

Connal lie by the sound of the mountain stream, beneath the age tree. a stone, with its mos, support his head. shrill through the heath of Lena, he hear the voice of night. at distance from the hero he lie, for the son of the sword fear no foe.

my hero see in his rest a dark-red stream of fire come down from the hill. crugal sit upon the beam, a chief that late fall. he fall by the hand of swaran, strive in the battle of hero. his face be like the beam of the set moon; his robe be of the cloud of the hill: his eye be like two decay flame. dark be the wound of his breast.

crugal, say the mighty Connal, son of dedgal fame on the hill of deer. why so pale and sad, thou breaker of the shield? thou have never be pale for fear. — what disturb the son of the hill?

dim, and in tear, he stand and stretch his pale hand over the hero. — faint he raise his feeble voice, like the gale of the reedy lego.

my ghost, o Connal, be on my native hill; but my corpse be on the sand of Ullin. thou shall never talk with crugal, or find his lone step in the heath. i be light as the blast of cromla, and i move like the shadow of mist. Connal, son of colgar, i see the dark cloud of death: it hover over the plain of Lena. the son of green Erin shall fall. remove from the field of ghost. — like the darken moon he retire, in the midst of the whistle blast. stay, say the mighty Connal, stay my dark-red friend. lay by that beam of heaven, son of the windy cromla. what cave of the hill be thy lonely house? what green-headed hill be the place of thy rest? shall we not hear thou in the storm? in the noise of the mountain-stream? when the feeble son of the wind come forth, and ride on the blast of the desert.

the soft-voiced Connal rise in the midst of his sound arm. he strike his shield above Cuchullin. the son of battle wake.

why, say the ruler of the car, come Connal through my night? my spear may turn against the sound; and Cuchullin mourn the death of his friend. speak, Connal, son of colgar, speak, thy counsel be like the sun of heaven.

son of Semo, reply the chief, the ghost of crugal come from the cave of his hill. — the star him-twinkled through his form; and his voice be like the sound of a distant stream. — he be a messenger of death. — he speak of the dark and narrow house. Sue for peace, o chief of dunscaich; or fly over the heath of Lena.

he speak to Connal, reply the hero, though star dim-twinkled through his form. son of colgar, it be the wind that murmur in the cave of Lena. — or if it be the form of crugal, why do thou not force he to my sight. have thou inquire where be his cave? the house of the son of the wind? my sword may find that voice, and force his knowledge from he. and small be his knowledge, Connal, for he be here to day. he can not have go beyond our hill, and who can tell he there of our death?

ghost fly on cloud and ride on wind, say connal voice of wisdom. they rest together in their cave, and talk of mortal man.

then let they talk of mortal man; of every man but erin chief. let i be forget in their cave; for i will not fly from swaran. — if i must fall, my tomb shall rise amid the fame of future time. the hunter shall shed a tear on my stone; and sorrow dwell round the high-bosomed bragela. i fear not death, but i fear to fly, for Fingal see i often victorious. thou dim phantom of the hill, show thyself to i! come on thy beam of heaven, and show i my death in thy hand, yet i will not fly, thou feeble son of the wind. go, son of colgar, strike the shield of caithbat, it hang between the spear. let my hero rise to the sound in the midst of the battle of Erin. though Fingal delay his come with the race of the stormy hill; we shall fight, o colgar son, and die in the battle of hero.

the sound spread wide; the hero rise, like the break of a blue-rolling wave. they stand on the heath, like oak with all their branch round they; when they echo to the stream of frost, and their wither leaf rustle to the wind.

high cromla head of cloud be grey; the morning tremble on the half-enlighten ocean. the blue, grey mist swim slow by, and hide the son of inisfail.

rise you, say the king of the dark-brown shield, you that come from lochlin wave. the son of Erin have flee from our arm — pursue they over the plain of Lena. — and, morla, go to cormac hall and bid they yield to swaran; before the people shall fall into the tomb; and the hill of Ullin be silent. — they rise like a flock of sea-fowl when the wave expel they from the shore. their sound be like a thousand stream that meet in cona vale, when after a stormy night, they turn their dark eddy beneath the pale light of the morning.

as the dark shade of autumn fly over the hill of grass; so gloomy, dark, successive come the chief of lochlin echo wood. tall as the stag of Morven move on the king of grove. his shine shield be on his side like a flame on the heath at night. when the world be silent and dark, and the traveller see some ghost sport in the beam.

a blast from the trouble of ocean remove the settle mist. the son of Inisfail appear like a ridge of rock on the shore.

go, morla, go, say lochlin king, and offer peace to these. offer the term we give to king when nation bow before we. when the valiant be dead in war, and the virgin weep on the field.

great morla come, the son of swart, and stately stride the king of shield. he speak to erin blue-eyed son, among the less hero.

take swaran peace, the warrior speak, the peace he give to king when the nation bow before he. leave ullin lovely plain to we, and give thy spouse and dog. thy spouse high-bosomed, heave fair. thy dog that overtake the wind. give these to prove the weakness of thy arm, and live beneath our power.

tell swaran, tell that heart of pride, that Cuchullin never yield. — i give he the dark-blue roll of ocean, or i give his people grave in Erin. but never shall a stranger have the lovely sun-beam of dunscaich; or ever deer fly on lochlin hill before the nimble-footed luath.

vain ruler of the car, say morla, will thou fight the king; that king who ship of many grove can carry off thy isle? so little be thy green-hilled Ullin to the king of stormy wave.

in word i yield to many, morla; but this sword shall yield to none. Erin shall own the sway of Cormac, while Connal and Cuchullin live. o Connal, first of mighty man, thou have hear the word of morla; shall thy thought then be of peace, thou breaker of the shield? spirit of fall crugal! why do thou threaten we with death? thy narrow house shall receive i in the midst of the light of renown. — exalt, you son of Inisfail, exalt the spear and bend the bow; rush on the foe in darkness, as the spirit of stormy night.

then dismal, roar, fierce, and deep the gloom of battle roll along; as mist that be pour on the valley, when storm invade the silent sunshine of heaven. the chief move before in arm, like a angry ghost before a cloud; when meteor enclose he with fire; and the dark wind be in his hand. — carril, far on the heath, bid the horn of battle sound. he raise the voice of the song, and pour his soul into the mind of hero.

where, say the mouth of the song, where be the fall crugal? he lie forget on earth, and the hall of shell be silent. — sad be the spouse of crugal, for she be a stranger in the hall of her sorrow. but who be she, that, like a sun-beam, fly before the rank of the foe? it be degrena, lovely fair, the spouse of fall crugal. her hair be on the wind behind. her eye be red; her voice be shrill. green, empty be thy crugal now, his form be in the cave of the hill. he come to the ear of rest, and raise his feeble voice; like the hum of the mountain-bee, or collect fly of evening. but degrena fall like a cloud of the morn; the sword of lochlin be in her side. cairbar, she be fall, the rise thought of thy youth. she be fall, o cairbar, the thought of thy youthful hour.

fierce cairbar hear the mournful sound, and rush on like ocean whale; he see the death of his daughter; and roar in the midst of thousand. his spear meet a son of lochlin, and battle spread from wing to wing. as a hundred wind in lochlin grove, as fire in the fir of a hundred hill; so loud, so ruinous and vast the rank of man be hew down. — Cuchullin cut off hero like thistle, and swaran waste Erin. curach fall by his hand, and cairbar of the bossy shield. morglan lie in last rest; and ca-olt tremble as he die. his white breast be stain with his blood; and his yellow hair stretch in the dust of his native land. he often have spread the feast where he fall; and often raise the voice of the harp: when his dog leap around for joy; and the youth of the chace prepare the bow.

still swaran advance, as a stream that burst from the desert. the little hill be roll in its course; and the rock half-sunk by its side.

but Cuchullin stand before he like a hill, that catch the cloud of heaven. — the wind contend on its head of pine; and the hail rattle on its rock. but, firm in its strength, it stand and shade the silent vale of cona.

so Cuchullin shade the son of Erin, and stand in the midst of thousand. blood rise like the fount of a rock, from pant hero around he. but Erin fall on either wing like snow in the day of the sun.

o son of Inisfail, say grumal, lochlin conquer on the field. why strive we as reed against the wind? fly to the hill of dark-brown hind. he flee like the stag of Morven, and his spear be a tremble beam of light behind he. few flee with grumal, the chief of the little soul: they fall in the battle of hero on lena echo heath.

high on his car, of many gem, the chief of Erin stand; he slay a mighty son of lochlin, and speak, in haste, to Connal.

o Connal, first of mortal man, thou have teach this arm of death! though erin son have flee, shall we not fight the foe? o carril, son of other time, carry my live friend to that bushy hill. — here, Connal, let we stand like rock, and save our fly friend.

Connal mount the car of light. they stretch their shield like the darken moon, the daughter of the starry sky, when she move, a dun circle, through heaven. sithfadda pant up the hill, and stronnal haughty steed. like wave behind a whale behind they rush the foe.

now on the rise side of cromla stand erin few sad son; like a grove through which the flame have rush hurry on by the wind of the stormy night. — Cuchullin stand beside a oak. he roll his red eye in silence, and hear the wind in his bushy hair; when the scout of ocean come, Moran the son of fithil. — the ship, he cry, the ship of the lonely isle! there Fingal come the first of man, the breaker of the shield. the wave foam before his black prow. his mast with sail be like grove in cloud.

blow, say Cuchullin, all you wind that rush over my isle of lovely mist. come to the death of thousand, o chief of the hill of hind. thy sail, my friend, be to i like the cloud of the morning; and thy ship like the light of heaven; and thou thyself like a pillar of fire that give light in the night. o Connal, first of man, how pleasant be our friend! but the night be gather around; where now be the ship of Fingal? here let we pass the hour of darkness, and wish for the moon of heaven.

the wind come down on the wood. the torrent rush from the rock. rain gather round the head of cromla. and the red star tremble between the fly cloud. sad, by the side of a stream who sound be echo by a tree, sad by the side of a stream the chief of Erin sit. Connal son of colgar be there, and carril of other time.

unhappy be the hand of Cuchullin, say the son of Semo, unhappy be the hand of Cuchullin since he slay his friend. — ferda, thou son of damman, i love thou as myself.

how, Cuchullin, son of Semo, fall the breaker of the shield? well i remember, say Connal, the noble son of damman. tall and fair he be like the rainbow of the hill.

ferda from Albion come, the chief of a hundred hill. in muri's hall he learn the sword, and win the friendship of Cuchullin. we move to the chace together; and one be our bed in the heath.

deugala be the spouse of cairbar, chief of the plain of Ullin. she be cover with the light of beauty, but her heart be the house of pride. she love that sun-beam of youth, the noble son of damman. cairbar, say the white-armed woman, give i half of the herd. no more i will remain in your hall. divide the herd, dark cairbar.

let Cuchullin, say cairbar, divide my herd on the hill. his breast be the seat of justice. depart, thou light of beauty. i go and divide the herd. one bull of snow remain. i give that bull to cairbar. the wrath of deugala rise.

son of damman, begin the fair, Cuchullin pain my soul. i must hear of his death, or lubar stream shall roll over i. my pale ghost shall wander near thou, and mourn the wound of my pride. pour out the blood of Cuchullin or pierce this heave breast.

deugala, say the fair-haired youth, how shall i slay the son of Semo? he be the friend of my secret thought, and shall i lift the sword? she weep three day before he, on the four he consent to fight.

i will fight my friend, deugala! but may i fall by his sword. can i wander on the hill and behold the grave of Cuchullin? we fight on the hill of muri. our sword avoid a wound. they slide on the helmet of steel; and sound on the slippery shield. deugala be near with a smile, and say to the son of damman, thy arm be feeble, thou sun-beam of youth. thy year be not strong for steel. — yield to the son of Semo. he be like the rock of malmor.

the tear be in the eye of youth. he falter say to i, Cuchullin, raise thy bossy shield. defend thou from the hand of thy friend. my soul be load with grief: for i must slay the chief of man.

i sigh as the wind in the chink of a rock. i lift high the edge of my steel. the sun-beam of the battle fall; the first of cuchullin friend. —

unhappy be the hand of Cuchullin since the hero fall.

mournful be thy tale, son of the car, say carril of other time. it send my soul back to the age of old, and to the day of other year. — often have i hear of Comal who slay the friend he love; yet victory attend his steel; and the battle be consume in his presence.

Comal be a son of Albion; the chief of a hundred hill. his deer drink of a thousand stream. a thousand rock reply to the voice of his dog. his face be the mildness of youth. his hand the death of hero. one be his love, and fair be she! the daughter of mighty conloch. she appear like a sun-beam among woman. and her hair be like the wing of the raven. her dog be teach to the chace. her bowstring sound on the wind of the forest. her soul be fix on Comal. often meet their eye of love. their course in the chace be one, and happy be their word in secret. — but gormal love the maid, the dark chief of the gloomy ardven. he watch her lone step in the heath; the foe of unhappy Comal.

one day, tire of the chace, when the mist have conceal their friend, Comal and the daughter of conloch meet in the cave of Ronan. it be the wonted haunt of Comal. its side be hang with his arm. a hundred shield of thong be there; a hundred helm of sound steel.

rest here, he say, my love galvina; thou light of the cave of Ronan. a deer appear on mora brow. i go; but i will soon return. i fear, she say, dark grumal my foe; he haunt the cave of Ronan. i will rest among the arm; but soon return, my love.

he go to the deer of Mora. the daughter of conloch will try his love. she clothe her white side with his armour, and stride from the cave of Ronan. he think it be his foe. his heart beat high. his colour change, and darkness dim his eye. he draw the bow. the arrow fly. galvina fall in blood. he run with wildness in his step and call the daughter of conloch. no answer in the lonely rock. where be thou, o my love! he see, at length, her heave heart beat around the arrow he throw. o conloch daughter, be it thou? he sink upon her breast.

the hunter find the hapless pair; he afterwards walk the hill. but many and silent be his step round the dark dwelling of his love. the fleet of the ocean come. he fight, the stranger flee. he search for his death over the field. but who can kill the mighty Comal! he throw away his dark-brown shield. a arrow find his manly breast. he sleep with his love galvina at the noise of the sound surge. their green tomb be see by the mariner, when he bound on the wave of the north.


Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

book iii.

pleasant be the word of the song, say Cuchullin, and lovely be the tale of other time. they be like the calm dew of the morning on the hill of roe, when the sun be faint on its side, and the lake be settle and blue in the vale. o carril, raise again thy voice, and let i hear the song of tura: which be sing in my hall of joy, when Fingal king of shield be there, and glow at the deed of his father.

Fingal! thou man of battle, say carril, early be thy deed in arm. lochlin be consume in thy wrath, when thy youth strive with the beauty of maid. they smile at the fair-blooming face of the hero; but death be in his hand. he be strong as the water of lora. his follower be like the roar of a thousand stream. they take the king of lochlin in battle, but restore he to his ship. his big heart swell with pride; and the death of the youth be dark in his soul. — for none ever, but Fingal, overcome the strength of the mighty starno.

he sit in the hall of his shell in lochlin woody land. he call the gray-haired snivan, that often sing round the circle of loda: when the stone of power hear his cry, and the battle turn in the field of the valiant.

go; gray-haired snivan, starno say, to ardven sea-surrounded rock. tell to Fingal king of the desert; he that be the fair among his thousand, tell he i give he my daughter, the lovely maid that ever heave a breast of snow. her arm be white as the foam of my wave. her soul be generous and mild. let he come with his brave hero to the daughter of the secret hall.

snivan come to albion windy hill: and fair-haired Fingal go. his kindle soul fly before he as he bound on the wave of the north.

welcome, say the dark-brown starno, welcome, king of rocky Morven; and you his hero of might; son of the lonely isle! three day within my hall shall you feast; and three day pursue my boar, that your fame may reach the maid that dwell in the secret hall.

the king of snow design their death, and give the feast of shell. Fingal, who doubt the foe, keep on his arm of steel. the son of death be afraid, and flee from the eye of the hero. the voice of sprightly mirth arise. the tremble harp of joy be string. bard sing the battle of hero; or the heave breast of love. — Ullin, fingal bard, be there; the sweet voice of the hill of cona. he praise the daughter of the snow; and morven high-descended chief. — the daughter of the snow overhear, and leave the hall of her secret sigh. she come in all her beauty, like the moon from the cloud of the east. — loveliness be around she as light. her step be like the music of song. she see the youth and love he. he be the steal sigh of her soul. her blue eye roll on he in secret: and she bless the chief of Morven.

the third day with all its beam, shine bright on the wood of boar. forth move the dark-browed starno; and Fingal, king of shield. half the day they spend in the chace; and the spear of Fingal be red in the blood of gormal.

it be then the daughter of starno, with blue eye roll in tear, come with her voice of love and speak to the king of Morven.

Fingal, high-descended chief, trust not starno heart of pride. within that wood he have place his chief; beware of the wood of death. but, remember, son of the hill, remember agandecca: save i from the wrath of my father, king of the windy Morven!

the youth, with unconcern, go on; his hero by his side. the son of death fall by his hand; and gormal echo around.

before the hall of starno the son of the chace convene. the king dark brow be like cloud. his eye like meteor of night. bring hither, he cry, agandecca to her lovely king of Morven. his hand be stain with the blood of my people; and her word have not be in vain. —

she come with the red eye of tear. she come with her loose raven lock. her white breast heave with sigh, like the foam of the streamy lubar. starno pierce her side with steel. she fall like a wreath of snow that slide from the rock of Ronan; when the wood be still, and the echo deepen in the vale.

then Fingal eye his valiant chief, his valiant chief take arm. the gloom of the battle roar, and lochlin flee or die. — pale, in his bound ship he close the maid of the raven hair. her tomb ascend on ardven, and the sea roar round the dark dwelling of agandecca.

bless be her soul, say Cuchullin, and bless be the mouth of the song. — strong be the youth of Fingal, and strong in his arm of age. lochlin shall fall again before the king of echo Morven. shew thy face from a cloud, o moon; light his white sail on the wave of the night. and if any strong spirit of heaven sit on that low-hung cloud; turn his dark ship from the rock, thou rider of the storm!

such be the word of Cuchullin at the sound of the mountain-stream, when calmar ascend the hill, the wound son of Matha. from the field he come in his blood. he lean on his bend spear. feeble be the arm of battle! but strong the soul of the hero!

welcome! o son of Matha, say Connal, welcome be thou to thy friend! why burst that break sigh from the breast of he that never fear before?

and never, Connal, will he fear, chief of the point steel. my soul brighten in danger, and exult in the noise of battle. i be of the race of steel; my father never fear.

cormar be the first of my race. he sport through the storm of the wave. his black skiff bound on ocean, and travel on the wing of the blast. a spirit once embroil the night. sea swell and rock resound. wind drive along the cloud. the lightning fly on wing of fire. he fear and come to land: then blush that he fear at all. he rush again among the wave to find the son of the wind. three youth guide the bound bark; he stand with the sword unsheathe. when the low-hung vapour pass, he take it by the curl head, and search its dark womb with his steel. the son of the wind forsake the air. the moon and star return.

such be the boldness of my race; and calmar be like his father. danger fly from the uplift sword. they best succeed who dare.

but now, you son of green-valleyed Erin, retire from lena bloody heath. collect the sad remnant of our friend, and join the sword of Fingal. i hear the sound of lochlin advance arm; but calmar will remain and fight. my voice shall be such, my friend, as if thousand be behind i. but, son of Semo, remember i. remember calmar lifeless corpse. after Fingal have waste the field, place i by some stone of remembrance, that future time may hear my fame; and the mother of calmar rejoice over the stone of my renown.

no: son of Matha, say Cuchullin, i will never leave thou. my joy be in the unequal field: and my soul increase in danger. Connal, and carril of other time, carry off the sad son of Erin; and when the battle be over, search for our pale corpse in this narrow way. for near this oak we shall stand in the stream of the battle of thousand.

o fithil son, with foot of wind, fly over the heath of Lena. tell to Fingal that Erin be enthrall, and bid the king of Morven hasten. o let he come like the sun in a storm, when he shine on the hill of grass.

morning be grey on cromla; the son of the sea ascend. calmar stand forth to meet they in the pride of his kindle soul. but pale be the face of the warrior; he lean on his father spear. that spear which he bring from lara hall, when the soul of his mother be sad. — but slow now the hero fall like a tree on the plain of cona. dark Cuchullin stand alone like a rock in a sandy vale. the sea come with its wave, and roar on its harden side. its head be cover with foam, and the hill be echo around. — now from the grey mist of the ocean, the white-sailed ship of Fingal appear. high be the grove of their mast as they nod, by turn, on the roll wave.

swaran see they from the hill, and return from the son of Erin. as ebb the resound sea through the hundred isle of inistore; so loud, so vast, so immense return the son of lochlin against the king of the desert hill. but bend, weep, sad, and slow, and drag his long spear behind, Cuchullin sink in cromla wood, and mourn his fall friend. he fear the face of Fingal, who be wont to greet he from the field of renown.

how many lie there of my hero! the chief of Inisfail! they that be cheerful in the hall when the sound of the shell arise. no more shall i find their step in the heath, or hear their voice in the chace of the hind. pale, silent, low on bloody bed be they who be my friend! o spirit of the lately-dead, meet Cuchullin on his heath. converse with he on the wind, when the rustle tree of tura cave resound. there, far remote, i shall lie unknown. no bard shall hear of i. no grey stone shall rise to my renown. mourn i with the dead, o Bragela! depart be my fame.

such be the word of Cuchullin when he sink in the wood of cromla.

Fingal, tall in his ship, stretch his bright lance before he. terrible be the gleam of the steel: it be like the green meteor of death, set in the heath of malmor, when the traveller be alone, and the broad moon be darken in heaven.

the battle be over, say the king, and i behold the blood of my friend. sad be the heath of Lena; and mournful the oak of cromla: the hunter have fall there in their strength; and the son of Semo be no more. — ryno and Fillan, my son, sound the horn of fingal war. ascend that hill on the shore, and call the child of the foe. call they from the grave of lamdarg, the chief of other time.

be your voice like that of your father, when he enter the battle of his strength. i wait for the dark mighty man; i wait on lena shore for swaran. and let he come with all his race; for strong in battle be the friend of the dead.

fair ryno fly like lightning; dark Fillan as the shade of autumn. on lena heath their voice be hear; the son of ocean hear the horn of fingal war. as the roar eddy of ocean return from the kingdom of snow; so strong, so dark, so sudden come down the son of lochlin. the king in their front appear in the dismal pride of his arm. wrath burn in his dark-brown face: and his eye roll in the fire of his valour.

Fingal behold the son of starno; and he remember agandecca. — for swaran with the tear of youth have mourn his white-bosomed sister. he send Ullin of the song to bid he to the feast of shell. for pleasant on fingal soul return the remembrance of the first of his love.

Ullin come with age step, and speak to starno son. o thou that dwell afar, surround, like a rock, with thy wave, come to the feast of the king, and pass the day in rest. to morrow let we sight, o swaran, and break the echo shield.

today, say starno wrathful son, we break the echo shield: tomorrow my feast will be spread; and Fingal lie on earth.

and tomorrow let his feast be spread, say Fingal with a smile; for today, o my son, we shall break the echo shield. — Ossian, stand thou near my arm. Gaul, lift thy terrible sword. Fergus, bend thy crooked yew. throw, Fillan, thy lance through heaven. — lift your shield like the darken moon. be your spear the meteor of death. follow i in the path of my fame; and equal my deed in battle.

as a hundred wind on Morven; as the stream of a hundred hill; as cloud fly successive over heaven; or, as the dark ocean assault the shore of the desert: so roar, so vast, so terrible the army mix on lena echo heath.

the groan of the people spread over the hill; it be like the thunder of night, when the cloud burst on cona; and a thousand ghost shriek at once on the hollow wind.

Fingal rush on in his strength, terrible as the spirit of trenmor; when, in a whirlwind, he come to Morven to see the child of his pride — the oak resound on their hill, and the rock fall down before he. bloody be the hand of my father when he whirl the lightning of his sword. he remember the battle of his youth, and the field be waste in his course.

ryno go on like a pillar of fire. — dark be the brow of Gaul. Fergus rush forward with foot of wind; and Fillan like the mist of the hill. — myself, like a rock, come down, i exult in the strength of the king. many be the death of my arm; and dismal be the gleam of my sword. my lock be not then so grey; nor tremble my hand of age. my eye be not close in darkness; nor fail my foot in the race.

who can relate the death of the people; or the deed of mighty hero; when Fingal, burn in his wrath, consume the son of lochlin? groan swell on groan from hill to hill, till night have cover all. pale, stare like a herd of deer, the son of lochlin convene on Lena. we sit and hear the sprightly harp at lubar gentle stream. Fingal himself be next to the foe; and listen to the tale of bard. his godlike race be in the song, the chief of other time. attentive, lean on his shield, the king of Morven sit. the wind whistle through his age lock, and his thought be of the day of other year. near he on his bend spear, my young, my lovely Oscar stand. he admire the king of Morven: and his action be swell in his soul.

son of my son, begin the king, o Oscar, pride of youth, i see the shine of thy sword and glory in my race. pursue the glory of our father, and be what they have be; when trenmor live, the first of man, and trathal the father of hero. they fight the battle in their youth, and be the song of bard.

o Oscar! bend the strong in arm: but spare the feeble hand. be thou a stream of many tide against the foe of thy people; but like the gale that move the grass to those who ask thy aid. — so trenmor live; such trathal be; and such have Fingal be. my arm be the support of the injure; and the weak rest behind the lightning of my steel.

Oscar! i be young like thou, when lovely fainasóllis come: that sun-beam! that mild light of love! the daughter of craca king! i then return from cona heath, and few be in my train. a white-sailed boat appear far off; we see it like a mist that ride on ocean blast. it soon approach; we see the fair. her white breast heave with sigh. the wind be in her loose dark hair: her rosy cheek have tear.

daughter of beauty, calm i say, what sigh be in that breast? can i, young as i be, defend thou, daughter of the sea? my sword be not unmatched in war, but dauntless be my heart.

to thou i fly, with sigh she reply, o prince of mighty man! to thou i fly, chief of the generous shell, supporter of the feeble hand! the king of craca echo isle own i the sun-beam of his race. and often do the hill of cromala reply to the sigh of love for the unhappy fainasóllis. sora chief behold i fair; and love the daughter of craca. his sword be like a beam of light upon the warrior side. but dark be his brow; and tempest be in his soul. i shun he on the roll sea; but sora chief pursue.

rest thou, i say, behind my shield; rest in peace, thou beam of light! the gloomy chief of Sora will fly, if fingal arm be like he soul. in some lone cave i may conceal thou, daughter of the sea! but Fingal never fly; for where the danger threaten, i rejoice in the storm of spear.

i see the tear upon her cheek. i pity craca fair.

now, like a dreadful wave afar, appear the ship of stormy borbar. his mast high-bended over the sea behind their sheet of snow. white roll the water on either side. the strength of ocean sound. come thou, i say, from the roar of ocean, thou rider of the storm. partake the feast within my hall. it be the house of stranger.

the maid stand tremble by my side; he draw the bow: she fall. unerring be thy hand, i say, but feeble be the foe.

we fight, nor weak be the strife of death. he sink beneath my sword. we lay they in two tomb of stone; the hapless lover of youth.

such have i be in my youth, o Oscar; be thou like the age of Fingal. never search for the battle, nor shun it when it come.

Fillan and Oscar of the dark-brown hair; you child of the race; fly over the heath of roar wind; and view the son of lochlin. far off i hear the noise of their fear, like the storm of echo cona. go: that they may not fly my sword along the wave of the north. — for many chief of erin race lie here on the dark bed of death. the child of the storm be low; the son of echo cromla.

the hero fly like two dark cloud: two dark cloud that be the chariot of ghost; when air dark child come to frighten hapless man.

it be then that Gaul, the son of morni, stand like a rock in the night. his spear be glitter to the star; his voice like many stream.

son of battle, cry the chief, o Fingal, king of shell! let the bard of many song sooth erin friend to rest. and, Fingal, sheath thy sword of death; and let thy people fight. we wither away without our fame; for our king be the only breaker of shield. when morning rise on our hill, behold at a distance our deed. let lochlin feel the sword of morni son, that bard may sing of i. such be the custom heretofore of fingal noble race. such be thy own, thou king of sword, in battle of the spear.

o son of morni, Fingal reply, i glory in thy fame. — fight; but my spear shall be near to aid thou in the midst of danger. raise, raise the voice, son of the song, and lull i into rest. here will Fingal lie amid the wind of night. — and if thou, agandecca, be near, among the child of thy land; if thou sit on a blast of wind among the high-shrowded mast of lochlin; come to my dream, my fair one, and show thy bright face to my soul.

many a voice and many a harp in tuneful sound arise. of fingal noble deed they sing, and of the noble race of the hero. and sometime on the lovely sound be hear the name of the now mournful Ossian.

often have i fight, and often win in battle of the spear. but blind, and tearful, and forlorn i now walk with little man. o Fingal, with thy race of battle i now behold thou not. the wild roe feed upon the green tomb of the mighty king of Morven. — bless be thy soul, thou king of sword, thou most renown on the hill of cona!


Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

book iv.

who come with her song from the mountain, like the bow of the showery Lena? it be the maid of the voice of love. the white-armed daughter of toscar. often have thou hear my song, and give the tear of beauty. do thou come to the battle of thy people, and to hear the action of Oscar? when shall i cease to mourn by the stream of the echo cona? my year have pass away in battle, and my age be darken with sorrow.

daughter of the hand of snow! i be not so mournful and blind; i be not so dark and forlorn when everallin love i. everallin with the dark-brown hair, the white-bosomed love of Cormac. a thousand hero seek the maid, she deny her love to a thousand; the son of the sword be despise; for graceful in her eye be Ossian.

i go in suit of the maid to lego sable surge; twelve of my people be there, the son of the streamy Morven. we come to branno friend of stranger: branno of the sound mail. — from whence, he say, be the arm of steel? not easy to win be the maid that have deny the blue-eyed son of Erin. but bless be thou, o son of Fingal, happy be the maid that wait thou. though twelve daughter of beauty be i, thy be the choice, thou son of fame! — then he open the hall of the maid, the dark-haired everallin. joy kindle in our breast of steel and bless the maid of branno.

above we on the hill appear the people of stately Cormac. eight be the hero of the chief; and the heath flame with their arm. there colla, durra of the wound, there mighty toscar, and tago, there frestal the victorious stand; dairo of the happy deed, and dala the battle bulwark in the narrow way. — the sword flame in the hand of Cormac, and graceful be the look of the hero.

eight be the hero of Ossian; Ullin stormy son of war; mullo of the generous deed; the noble, the graceful scelacha; oglan, and Cerdal the wrathful, and dumariccan brow of death. and why shall ogar be the last; so wide renown on the hill of ardven?

ogar meet dala the strong, face to face, on the field of hero. the battle of the chief be like the wind on ocean foamy wave. the dagger be remember by ogar; the weapon which he love; nine time he drown it in dela side. the stormy battle turn. three time i break on cormac shield: three time he break his spear. but, unhappy youth of love! i cut his head away. — five time i shake it by the lock. the friend of Cormac flee.

whoever will have tell i, lovely maid, when then i strive in battle; that blind, forsake, and forlorn i now shall pass the night; firm ought his mail to have be, and unmatched his arm in battle.

now on lena gloomy heath the voice of music die away. the unconstant blast blow hard, and the high oak shake its leaf around i; of everallin be my thought, when she, in all the light of beauty, and her blue eye roll in tear, stand on a cloud before my sight, and speak with feeble voice.

o Ossian, rise and save my son; save Oscar prince of man, near the red oak of lubar stream, he fight with lochlin son. — she sink into her cloud again. i clothe i with my steel. my spear support my step, and my rattle armour ring. i hum, as i be wont in danger, the song of hero of old. like distant thunder lochlin hear; they flee; my son pursue.

i call he like a distant stream. my son return over Lena. no further pursue the foe, though Ossian be behind thou. — he come; and lovely in my ear be oscar sound steel. why do thou stop my hand, he say, till death have cover all? for dark and dreadful by the stream they meet thy son and Fillan. they watch the terror of the night. our sword have conquer some. but as the wind of night pour the ocean over the white sand of Mora, so dark advance the son of lochlin over lena rustle heath. the ghost of night shriek afar; and i have see the meteor of death. let i awake the king of Morven, he that smile in danger; for he be like the sun of heaven that rise in a storm.

Fingal have strate from a dream, and lean on Trenmor shield; the dark-brown shield of his father; which they have lift of old in the battle of their race.

my hero have see in his rest the mournful form of agandecca; she come from the way of the ocean, and slow, lonely, move over Lena. her face be pale like the mist of cromla; and dark be the tear of her cheek. she often raise her dim hand from her robe; her robe which be of the cloud of the desert: she raise her dim hand over Fingal, and turn away her silent eye.

why weep the daughter of starno, say Fingal, with a sigh? why be thy face so pale, thou daughter of the cloud?

she depart on the wind of Lena; and leave he in the midst of the night. — she mourn the son of her people that be to fall by fingal hand.

the hero start from rest, and still behold she in his soul. — the sound of oscar step approach. the king see the grey shield on his side. for the faint beam of the morning come over the water of Ullin.

what do the foe in their fear, say the rise king of Morven? or fly they through ocean foam, or wait they the battle of steel? but why shall Fingal ask? i hear their voice on the early wind. — fly over lena heath, o Oscar, and awake our friend to battle.

the king stand by the stone of lubar; and thrice rear his terrible voice. the deer start from the fountain of cromla; and all the rock shake on their hill. like the noise of a hundred mountain-stream, that burst, and roar, and foam: like the cloud that gather to a tempest on the blue face of the sky; so meet the son of the desert, round the terrible voice of Fingal. for pleasant be the voice of the king of Morven to the warrior of his land: for often have he lead they to battle, and return with the spoil of the foe.

come to battle, say the king, you child of the storm. come to the death of thousand. comhal son will see the fight. — my sword shall wave on that hill, and be the shield of my people. but never may you need it, warrior; while the son of morni fight, the chief of mighty man. — he shall lead my battle; that his fame may rise in the song.

o you ghost of hero dead! you rider of the storm of cromla! receive my fall people with joy, and bring they to your hill. — and may the blast of Lena carry they over my sea, that they may come to my silent dream, and delight my soul in rest.

Fillan and Oscar, of the dark-brown hair! fair ryno, with the point steel! advance with valour to the fight; and behold the son of morni. let your sword be like he in the strife: and behold the deed of his hand. protect the friend of your father: and remember the chief of old. my child, i will see you yet, though here you shall fall in Erin. soon shall our cold, pale ghost meet in a cloud, and fly over the hill of cona.

now like a dark and stormy cloud, edge round with the red lightning of heaven, and fly westward from the morning beam, the king of hill remove. terrible be the light of his armour, and two spear be in his hand. — his grey hair fall on the wind. — he often look back on the war. three bard attend the son of fame, to carry his word to the hero. — high on cromla side he sit, wave the lightning of his sword, and as he wave we move.

joy rise in oscar face. his cheek be red. his eye shed tear. the sword be a beam of fire in his hand. he come, and smile, speak to Ossian.

o ruler of the fight of steel! my father, hear thy son. retire with morven mighty chief; and give i ossian fame. and if here i fall; my king, remember that breast of snow, that lonely sun-beam of my love, the white-handed daughter of toscar. for with red cheek from the rock, and bend over the stream, her soft hair fly about her bosom as she pour the sigh for Oscar. tell she i be on my hill a lightly-bounding son of the wind; that hereafter, in a cloud, i may meet the lovely maid of toscar.

raise, Oscar, rather raise my tomb. i will not yield the fight to thou. for first and bloody in the war my arm shall teach thou how to fight. but, remember, my son, to place this sword, this bow, and the horn of my deer, within that dark and narrow house, who mark be one grey stone. Oscar, i have no love to leave to the care of my son; for graceful evirallin be no more, the lovely daughter of branno.

such be our word, when gaul loud voice come grow on the wind. he wave on high the sword of his father, and rush to death and wound.

as wave white-bubbling over the deep come swell, roar on; as rock of ooze meet roar wave: so foe attack and fight. man meet with man, and steel with steel. shield sound, man fall. as a hundred hammer on the son of the furnace, so rise, so ring their sword.

Gaul rush on like a whirlwind in ardven. the destruction of hero be on his sword. swaran be like the fire of the desert in the echo heath of gormal. how can i give to the song the death of many spear? my sword rise high, and flame in the strife of blood. and, Oscar, terrible be thou, my best, my great son! i rejoice in my secret soul, when his sword flame over the slay. they flee amain through lena heath: and we pursue and slay. as stone that bind from rock to rock; as axe in echo wood; as thunder roll from hill to hill in dismal break peal; so blow succeed to blow, and death to death, from the hand of Oscar and i.

but swaran close round morni son, as the strength of the tide of inistore. the king half-rose from his hill at the sight, and half-assumed the spear. go, Ullin, go, my age bard, begin the king of Morven. remind the mighty Gaul of battle; remind he of his father. support the yield fight with song; for song enliven war. tall Ullin go, with step of age, and speak to the king of sword.

son of the chief of generous steed! high-bounding king of spear. strong arm in every perilous toil. hard heart that never yield. chief of the point arm of death. cut down the foe; let no white sail bind round dark inistore. be thy arm like thunder. thy eye like fire, thy heart of solid rock. whirl round thy sword as a meteor at night, and lift thy shield like the flame of death. son of the chief of generous steed, cut down the foe; destroy. — the hero heart beat high. but swaran come with battle. he cleave the shield of Gaul in twain; and the son of the desert flee.

now Fingal arise in his might, and thrice he rear his voice. cromla answer around, and the son of the desert stand still. — they bend their red face to earth, ashamed at the presence of Fingal. he come like a cloud of rain in the day of the sun, when slow it roll on the hill, and field expect the shower. swaran behold the terrible king of Morven, and stop in the midst of his course. dark he lean on his spear, roll his red eye around. silent and tall he seem as a oak on the bank of lubar, which have its branch blast of old by the lightning of heaven. — it bend over the stream, and the grey moss whistle in the wind: so stand the king. then slow he retire to the rise heath of Lena. his thousand pour around the hero, and the darkness of battle gather on the hill.

Fingal, like a beam from heaven, shine in the midst of his people. his hero gather around he, and he send forth the voice of his power. raise my standard on high, — spread they on lena wind, like the flame of a hundred hill. let they sound on the wind of Erin, and remind we of the fight. you son of the roar stream, that pour from a thousand hill, be near the king of Morven: attend to the word of his power. Gaul strong arm of death! o Oscar, of the future fight; Connal, son of the blue blade of Sora; Dermid of the dark-brown hair, and Ossian king of many song, be near your father arm.

we rear the sun-beam of battle; the standard of the king. each hero soul exult with joy, as, wave, it fly on the wind. it be stud with gold above, as the blue wide shell of the nightly sky. each hero have his standard too; and each his gloomy man.

behold, say the king of generous shell, how lochlin divide on Lena. — they stand like break cloud on the hill, or a half consume grove of oak; when we see the sky through its branch, and the meteor pass behind. let every chief among the friend of Fingal take a dark troop of those that frown so high; nor let a son of the echo grove bind on the wave of inistore.

mine, say Gaul, be the seven chief that come from lano lake. — let inistore dark king, say Oscar, come to the sword of ossian son. — to i the king of iniscon, say Connal, heart of steel! or mudan chief or i, say brown-haired Dermid, shall sleep on clay-cold earth. my choice, though now so weak and dark, be Terman battle king; i promise with my hand to win the hero dark-brown shield. — bless and victorious be my chief, say Fingal of the mild look; swaran, king of roar wave, thou be the choice of Fingal.

now, like a hundred different wind that pour through many vale; divide, dark the son of the hill advance, and cromla echo around.

how can i relate the death when we close in the strife of our steel? o daughter of toscar! bloody be our hand! the gloomy rank of lochlin fall like the bank of the roar cona. — our arm be victorious on Lena: each chief fulfil his promise. beside the murmur of branno thou do often sit, o maid; when thy white bosom rise frequent, like the down of the swan when slow she sail the lake, and sidelong wind be blow. — thou have see the sun retire red and slow behind his cloud; night gather round on the mountain, while the unfrequent blast roar in narrow vale. at length the rain beat hard; and thunder roll in peal. lightning glance on the rock. spirit ride on beam of fire. and the strength of the mountain-stream come roar down the hill. such be the noise of battle, maid of the arm of snow. why, daughter of the hill, that tear? the maid of lochlin have cause to weep. the people of their country fall, for bloody be the blue blade of the race of my hero. but i be sad, forlorn, and blind; and no more the companion of hero. give, lovely maid, to i thy tear, for i have see the tomb of all my friend.

it be then by fingal hand a hero fall, to his grief. — gray-haired he roll in the dust, and lift his faint eye to the king. and be it by i thou have fall, say the son of Comhal, thou friend of agandecca! i have see thy tear for the maid of my love in the hall of the bloody starno. thou have be the foe of the foe of my love, and have thou fall by my hand? raise, Ullin, raise the grave of the son of Mathon; and give his name to the song of agandecca; for dear to my soul have thou be, thou darkly-dwelling maid of ardven.

Cuchullin, from the cave of cromla, hear the noise of the trouble war. he call to Connal chief of sword, and carril of other time. the gray-haired hero hear his voice, and take their aspen spear.

they come, and see the tide of battle, like the crowd wave of the ocean; when the dark wind blow from the deep, and roll the billow through the sandy vale.

Cuchullin kindle at the sight, and darkness gather on his brow. his hand be on the sword of his father: his red-rolling eye on the foe. he thrice attempt to rush to battle, and thrice do Connal stop he. chief of the isle of mist, he say, Fingal subdue the foe. seek not a part of the fame of the king; himself be like the storm.

then, carril, go, reply the chief, and greet the king of Morven. when lochlin fall away like a stream after rain, and the noise of the battle be over. then be thy voice sweet in his ear to praise the king of sword. give he the sword of caithbat, for Cuchullin be worthy no more to lift the arm of his father.

but, o you ghost of the lonely cromla! you soul of chief that be no more! be you the companion of Cuchullin, and talk to he in the cave of his sorrow. for never more shall i be renown among the mighty in the land. i be like a beam that have shine, like a mist that flee away; when the blast of the morning come, and brighten the shaggy side of the hill. Connal! talk of arm no more: depart be my fame. — my sigh shall be on cromla wind; till my footstep cease to be see. — and thou, white-bosomed Bragela, mourn over the fall of my fame; for, vanquish, i will never return to thou, thou sun-beam of dunscaich.


Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

book v.

now Connal, on cromla windy side, speak to the chief of the noble car. why that gloom, son of Semo? our friend be the mighty in battle. and renown be thou, o warrior! many be the death of thy steel. often have Bragela meet with blue-rolling eye of joy; often have she meet her hero, return in the midst of the valiant; when his sword be red with slaughter, and his foe silent in the field of the tomb. pleasant to her ear be thy bard, when thy action rise in the song.

but behold the king of Morven; he move below like a pillar of fire. his strength be like the stream of lubar, or the wind of the echo cromla; when the branchy forest of night be overturn.

happy be thy people, o Fingal, thy arm shall fight their battle: thou be the first in their danger; the wise in the day of their peace. thou speak and thy thousand obey; and army tremble at the sound of thy steel. happy be thy people, Fingal, chief of the lonely hill.

who be that so dark and terrible come in the thunder of his course? who be it but starno son to meet the king of Morven? behold the battle of the chief: it be like the storm of the ocean, when two spirit meet far distant, and contend for the roll of the wave. the hunter hear the noise on his hill; and see the high billow advance to ardven shore.

such be the word of Connal, when the hero meet in the midst of their fall people. there be the clang of arm! there every blow, like the hundred hammer of the furnace! terrible be the battle of the king, and horrid the look of their eye. their dark-brown shield be cleave in twain; and their steel fly, break, from their helmet. they fling their weapon down. each rush to his hero grasp. their sinewy arm bend round each other: they turn from side to side, and strain and stretch their large spread limb below. but when the pride of their strength arise, they shake the hill with their heel; rock tumble from their place on high; the green-headed bush be overturn. at length the strength of swaran fall; and the king of the grove be bind.

thus have i be on cona; but cona i behold no more, thus have i see two dark hill remove from their place by the strength of the burst stream. they turn from side to side, and their tall oak meet one another on high. then they fall together with all their rock and tree. the stream be turn by their side, and the red ruin be see afar.

son of the king of Morven, say the noble Fingal, guard the king of lochlin; for he be strong as his thousand wave. his hand be teach to the battle, and his race of the time of old. Gaul, thou first of my hero, and Ossian king of song, attend the friend of agandecca, and raise to joy his grief. — but, Oscar, Fillan, and ryno, you child of the race! pursue the rest of lochlin over the heath of Lena; that no vessel may hereafter bound on the dark-rolling wave of inistore.

they fly like lightning over the heath. he slow move as a cloud of thunder when the sultry plain of summer be silent. his sword be before he as a sun-beam, terrible as the stream meteor of night. he come towards a chief of lochlin, and speak to the son of the wave.

who be that like a cloud at the rock of the roar stream? he can bound over its course; yet stately be the chief! his bossy shield be on his side; and his spear like the tree of the desert. youth of the dark-brown hair, be thou of fingal foe?

i be a son of lochlin, he cry, and strong be my arm in war. my spouse be weep at home, but orla will never return.

or fight or yield the hero, say Fingal of the noble deed? foe do not conquer in my presence; but my friend be renown in the hall. son of the wave, follow i, partake the feast of my shell, and pursue the deer of my desert.

no: say the hero, i assist the feeble: my strength shall remain with the weak in arm. my sword have be always unmatched, o warrior: let the king of Morven yield.

i never yield, orla, Fingal never yield to man. draw thy sword and choose thy foe. many be my hero.

and do the king refuse the combat, say orla of the dark-brown hair? Fingal be a match for orla: and he alone of all his race.

but, king of Morven, if i shall fall; as one time the warrior must die; raise my tomb in the midst, and let it be the great on Lena. and send, over the dark-blue wave, the sword of orla to the spouse of his love; that she may show it to her son, with tear, to kindle his soul to war.

son of the mournful tale, say Fingal, why do thou awaken my tear? one day the warrior must die, and the child see their useless arm in the hall. but, orla, thy tomb shall rise, and thy white-bosomed spouse weep over thy sword.

they fight on the heath of Lena, but feeble be the arm of orla. the sword of Fingal descend, and cleave his shield in twain. it fall and glitter on the ground, as the moon on the stream of night.

king of Morven, say the hero, lift thy sword, and pierce my breast. wound and faint from battle my friend have leave i here. the mournful tale shall come to my love on the bank of the streamy loda; when she be alone in the wood; and the rustle blast in the leaf.

no; say the king of Morven, i will never wound thou, orla. on the bank of loda let she see thou escape from the hand of war. let thy gray-haired father, who, perhaps, be blind with age, hear the sound of thy voice in his hall. — with joy let the hero rise, and search for his son with his hand.

but never will he find he, Fingal; say the youth of the streamy loda. — on lena heath i shall die; and foreign bard will talk of i. my broad belt cover my wound of death. and now i give it to the wind.

the dark blood pour from his side, he fall pale on the heath of Lena. Fingal bend over he as he die, and call his young hero.

Oscar and Fillan, my son, raise high the memory of orla. here let the dark-haired hero rest far from the spouse of his love. here let he rest in his narrow house far from the sound of loda. the son of the feeble will find his bow at home, but will not be able to bend it. his faithful dog howl on his hill, and his boar, which he use to pursue, rejoice. fall be the arm of battle; the mighty among the valiant be low!

exalt the voice, and blow the horn, you son of the king of Morven: let we go back to swaran, and send the night away on song. Fillan, Oscar, and ryno, fly over the heath of Lena. where, ryno, be thou, young son of fame? thou be not wont to be the last to answer thy father.

ryno, say Ullin first of bard, be with the awful form of his father. with trathal king of shield, and trenmor of the mighty deed. the youth be low, — the youth be pale, — he lie on lena heath.

and fall the swift in the race, say the king, the first to bend the bow? thou scarce have be know to i; why do young ryno fall? but sleep thou soft on Lena, Fingal shall soon behold thou. soon shall my voice be hear no more, and my footstep cease to be see. the bard will tell of fingal name; the stone will talk of i. but, ryno, thou be low indeed, — thou have not receive thy fame. Ullin, strike the harp for ryno; tell what the chief will have be. farewell, thou first in every field. no more shall i direct thy dart. thou that have be so fair; i behold thou not — farewell.

the tear be on the cheek of the king, for terrible be his son in war. his son! that be like a beam of fire by night on the hill; when the forest sink down in its course, and the traveller tremble at the sound.

who fame be in that dark-green tomb, begin the king of generous shell? four stone with their head of moss stand there; and mark the narrow house of death. near it let my ryno rest, and be the neighbour of the valiant. perhaps some chief of fame be here to fly with my son on cloud. o Ullin, raise the song of other time. bring to memory the dark dweller of the tomb. if in the field of the valiant they never flee from danger, my son shall rest with they, far from his friend, on the heath of Lena.

here, say the mouth of the song, here rest the first of hero. silent be lamderg in this tomb, and Ullin king of sword. and who, soft smile from her cloud, show i her face of love? why, daughter, why so pale be thou, first of the maid of cromla? do thou sleep with the foe in battle, gelchossa, white-bosomed daughter of tuathal? — thou have be the love of thousand, but lamderg be thy love. he come to selma mossy tower, and, strike his dark buckler, speak:

where be gelchossa, my love, the daughter of the noble tuathal? i leave she in the hall of Selma, when i fight with the gloomy ulfadda. return soon, o lamderg, she say, for here i be in the midst of sorrow. her white breast rise with sigh. her cheek be wet with tear. but i see she not come to meet i; and to sooth my soul after battle. silent be the hall of my joy; i hear not the voice of the bard. — bran do not shake his chain at the gate, glad at the come of lamderg. where be gelchossa, my love, the mild daughter of the generous tuathal?

lamderg! say ferchio the son of aidon, gelchossa may be on cromla; she and the maid of the bow pursue the fly deer.

ferchio! reply the chief of cromla, no noise meet the ear of lamderg. no sound be in the wood of Lena. no deer fly in my sight. no pant dog pursue. i see not gelchossa my love, fair as the full moon set on the hill of cromla. go, ferchio, go to allad the gray-haired son of the rock. his dwelling be in the circle of stone. he may know of gelchossa.

the son of aidon go; and speak to the ear of age. allad! thou that dwell in the rock: thou that tremble alone, what see thy eye of age?

i see, answer allad the old, Ullin the son of cairbar. he come like a cloud from cromla; and he hum a surly song like a blast in a leafless wood. he enter the hall of Selma. — lamderg, he say, most dreadful of man, fight or yield to Ullin. lamderg, reply gelchossa, the son of battle, be not here. he fight ulfada mighty chief. he be not here, thou first of man. but lamderg never yield. he will fight the son of cairbar.

lovely art thou, say terrible Ullin, daughter of the generous tuathal. i carry thou to cairbar hall. the valiant shall have gelchossa. three day i remain on cromla, to wait that son of battle, lamderg. on the four gelchossa be i, if the mighty lamderg fly.

allad! say the chief of cromla, peace to thy dream in the cave. ferchio, sound the horn of lamderg that Ullin may hear on cromla. lamderg, like a roar storm, ascend the hill from Selma. he hum a surly song as he go, like the noise of a fall stream. he stand like a cloud on the hill, that vary its form to the wind. he roll a stone, the sign of war. Ullin hear in cairbar hall. the hero hear, with joy, his foe, and take his father spear. a smile brighten his dark-brown cheek, as he place his sword by his side. the dagger glitter in his hand. he whistle as he go.

gelchossa see the silent chief, as a wreath of mist ascend the hill. — she strike her white and heave breast; and silent, tearful, fear for lamderg.

cairbar, hoary chief of shell, say the maid of the tender hand; i must bend the bow on cromla; for i see the dark-brown hind.

she haste up the hill. in vain! the gloomy hero fight. — why shall i tell the king of Morven how wrathful hero fight! — fierce Ullin fall. young lamderg come all pale to the daughter of generous tuathal.

what blood, my love, the soft-haired woman say, what blood run down my warrior side? — it be ullin blood, the chief reply, thou fair than the snow of cromla! gelchossa, let i rest here a little while. the mighty lamderg die.

and sleep thou so soon on earth, o chief of shady cromla? three day she mourn beside her love. — the hunter find her dead. they raise this tomb above the three. thy son, o king of Morven, may rest here with hero.

and here my son will rest, say Fingal, the noise of their fame have reach my ear. Fillan and Fergus! bring hither orla; the pale youth of the stream of loda. not unequaled shall ryno lie in earth when orla be by his side. weep, you daughter of Morven; and you maid of the streamy loda. like a tree they grow on the hill; and they have fall like the oak of the desert; when it lie across a stream, and withereth in the wind of the mountain.

Oscar! chief of every youth! thou see how they have fall. be thou, like they, on earth renown. like they the song of bard. terrible be their form in battle; but calm be ryno in the day of peace. he be like the bow of the shower see far distant on the stream; when the sun be set on Mora, and silence on the hill of deer. rest, young of my son, rest, o ryno, on Lena. we too shall be no more; for the warrior one day must fall.

such be thy grief, thou king of hill, when ryno lie on earth. what must the grief of Ossian be, for thou thyself be go. i hear not thy distant voice on cona. my eye perceive thou not. often forlorn and dark i sit at thy tomb; and feel it with my hand. when i think i hear thy voice; it be but the blast of the desert. — Fingal have long since fall asleep, the ruler of the war.

then Gaul and Ossian sit with swaran on the soft green bank of lubar. i touch the harp to please the king. but gloomy be his brow. he roll his red eye towards Lena. the hero mourn his people.

i lift my eye to cromla, and i see the son of generous Semo. — sad and slow he retire from his hill towards the lonely cave of tura. he see Fingal victorious, and mix his joy with grief. the sun be bright on his armour, and Connal slow follow. they sink behind the hill like two pillar of the fire of night: when wind pursue they over the mountain, and the flame heath resound. beside a stream of roar foam his cave be in a rock. one tree bend above it; and the rush wind echo against its side. here rest the chief of dunscaich, the son of generous Semo. his thought be on the battle he lose; and the tear be on his cheek. he mourn the departure of his fame that flee like the mist of cona. o Bragela, thou be too far remote to cheer the soul of the hero. but let he see thy bright form in his soul; that his thought may return to the lonely sun-beam of dunscaich.

who come with the lock of age? it be the son of the song. hail, carril of other time, thy voice be like the harp in the hall of tura. thy word be pleasant as the shower that fall on the field of the sun. carril of the time of old, why come thou from the son of the generous Semo?

Ossian king of sword, reply the bard, thou best raise the song. long have thou be know to carril, thou ruler of battle. often have i touch the harp to lovely evirallin. thou too have often accompany my voice in branno hall of generous shell. and often, amid our voice, be hear the mild evirallin. one day she sing of cormac fall, the youth that die for her love. i see the tear on her cheek, and on thy, thou chief of man. her soul be touch for the unhappy, though she love he not. how fair among a thousand maid be the daughter of the generous branno!

bring not, carril, i reply, bring not her memory to my mind. my soul must melt at the remembrance. my eye must have their tear. pale in the earth be she the softly-blushing fair of my love.

but sit thou on the heath, o bard, and let we hear thy voice. it be pleasant as the gale of spring that sigh on the hunter ear; when he waken from dream of joy, and have hear the music of the spirit of the hill.


Fingal, a ancient epic poem.

book vi.

the cloud of night come roll down and rest on cromla dark-brown steep. the star of the north arise over the roll of the wave of Ullin; they show their head of fire through the fly mist of heaven. a distant wind roar in the wood; but silent and dark be the plain of death.

still on the darken Lena arise in my ear the tuneful voice of carril. he sing of the companion of our youth, and the day of former year; when we meet on the bank of lego, and send round the joy of the shell. cromla, with its cloudy steep, answer to his voice. the ghost of those he sing come in their rustle blast. they be see to bend with joy towards the sound of their praise.

be thy soul bless, o carril, in the midst of thy eddy wind. o that thou will come to my hall when i be alone by night! — and thou do come, my friend, i hear often thy light hand on my harp; when it hang on the distant wall, and the feeble sound touch my ear. why do thou not speak to i in my grief, and tell when i shall behold my friend? but thou pass away in thy murmur blast; and thy wind whistle through the grey hair of Ossian.

now on the side of Mora the hero gather to the feast. a thousand age oak be burn to the wind. — the strength of the shell go round. and the soul of warrior brighten with joy. but the king of lochlin be silent, and sorrow redden in the eye of his pride. he often turn towards Lena and remember that he fall.

Fingal lean on the shield of his father. his grey lock slow wave on the wind, and glitter to the beam of night. he see the grief of swaran, and speak to the first of bard.

raise, Ullin, raise the song of peace, and sooth my soul after battle, that my ear may forget the noise of arm. and let a hundred harp be near to gladden the king of lochlin. he must depart from we with joy. — none ever go sad from Fingal. Oscar! the lightning of my sword be against the strong in battle; but peaceful it lie by my side when warrior yield in war.

trenmor, say the mouth of the song, live in the day of other year. he bound over the wave of the north: companion of the storm. the high rock of the land of lochlin, and its grove of murmur sound appear to the hero through the mist; — he bind his white-bosomed sail. — trenmor pursue the boar that roar along the wood of gormal. many have flee from its presence; but the spear of trenmor slay it.

three chief that behold the deed, tell of the mighty stranger. they tell that he stand like a pillar of fire in the bright arm of his valour. the king of lochlin prepare the feast, and call the bloom trenmor. three day he feast at gormal windy tower; and get his choice in the combat.

the land of lochlin have no hero that yield not to trenmor. the shell of joy go round with song in praise of the king of Morven; he that come over the wave, the first of mighty man.

now when the four grey morn arise, the hero launch his ship; and walk along the silent shore wait for the rush wind. for loud and distant he hear the blast murmur in the grove.

cover over with arm of steel a son of the woody gormal appear. red be his cheek and fair his hair. his skin like the snow of Morven. mild roll his blue and smile eye when he speak to the king of sword.

stay, trenmor, stay thou first of man, thou have not conquer lonval son. my sword have often meet the brave. and the wise shun the strength of my bow.

thou fair-haired youth, trenmor reply, i will not fight with lonval son. thy arm be feeble, sun-beam of beauty. retire to gormal dark-brown hind.

but i will retire, reply the youth, with the sword of trenmor; and exult in the sound of my fame. the virgin shall gather with smile around he who conquer trenmor. they shall sigh with the sigh of love, and admire the length of thy spear; when i shall carry it among thousand, and lift the glitter point to the sun.

thou shall never carry my spear, say the angry king of Morven. — thy mother shall find thou pale on the shore of the echo gormal; and, look over the dark-blue deep, see the sail of he that slay her son.

i will not lift the spear, reply the youth, my arm be not strong with year. but with the feather dart, i have learn to pierce a distant foe. throw down that heavy mail of steel; for trenmor be cover all over. — i first, will lay my mail on earth. — throw now thy dart, thou king of Morven.

he see the heave of her breast. it be the sister of the king. — she have see he in the hall of gormal; and love his face of youth. — the spear drop from the hand of trenmor: he bend his red cheek to the ground, for he have see she like a beam of light that meet the son of the cave, when they revisit the field of the sun, and bend their ache eye.

chief of the windy Morven, begin the maid of the arm of snow; let i rest in thy bound ship, far from the love of corlo. for he, like the thunder of the desert, be terrible to inibaca. he love i in the gloom of his pride, and shake ten thousand spear.

rest thou in peace, say the mighty trenmor, behind the shield of my father. i will not fly from the chief, though he shake ten thousand spear.

three day he wait on the shore; and send his horn abroad. he call corlo to battle from all his echo hill. but corlo come not to battle. the king of lochlin descend. he feast on the roar shore; and give the maid to trenmor.

king of lochlin, say Fingal, thy blood flow in the vein of thy foe. our family meet in battle, because they love the strife of spear. but often do they feast in the hall; and send round the joy of the shell. — let thy face brighten with gladness, and thy far delight in the harp. dreadful as the storm of thy ocean, thou have pour thy valour forth; thy voice have be like the voice of thousand when they engage in battle. raise, tomorrow, thy white sail to the wind, thou brother of agandecca. bright as the beam of noon she come on my mournful soul. i have see thy tear for the fair one, and spare thou in the hall of starno; when my sword be red with slaughter, and my eye full of tear for the maid. — or do thou choose the fight? the combat which thy father give to trenmor be thy: that thou may depart renown like the sun set in the west.

king of the race of Morven, say the chief of the wave of lochlin; never will swaran fight with thou, first of a thousand hero! i have see thou in the hall of starno, and few be thy year beyond my own. — when shall i, i say to my soul, lift the spear like the noble Fingal? we have fight heretofore, o warrior, on the side of the shaggy malmor; after my wave have carry i to thy hall, and the feast of a thousand shell be spread. let the bard send he who overcome to future year, for noble be the strife of heathy malmor.

but many of the ship of lochlin have lose their youth on Lena. take these, thou king of Morven, and be the friend of swaran. and when thy son shall come to the mossy tower of gormal; the feast of shell shall be spread, and the combat offer on the vale.

nor ship, reply the king, shall Fingal take, nor land of many hill. the desert be enough to i with all its deer and wood. rise on thy wave again, thou noble friend of agandecca. spread thy white sail to the beam of the morning, and return to the echo hill of gormal.

bless be thy soul, thou king of shell, say swaran of the dark-brown shield. in peace thou be the gale of spring. in war the mountain-storm. take now my hand in friendship, thou noble king of Morven.

let thy bard mourn those who fall. let Erin give the son of lochlin to earth; and raise the mossy stone of their fame. that the child of the north hereafter may behold the place where their father fight. and some hunter may say, when he lean on a mossy tomb, here Fingal and swaran fight, the hero of other year. thus hereafter shall he say, and our fame shall last for ever.

swaran, say the king of the hill, today our fame be great. we shall pass away like a dream. no sound will be in the field of our battle. our tomb will be lose in the heath. the hunter shall not know the place of our rest. our name may be hear in the song, but the strength of our arm will cease.

o ossran, carril, and Ullin, you know of hero that be no more. give we the song of other year. let the night pass away on the sound, and morning return with joy.

we give the song to the king, and a hundred harp accompany our voice. the face of swaran brighten like the full moon of heaven, when the cloud vanish away, and leave her calm and broad in the midst of the sky.

it be then that Fingal speak to carril the chief of other time. where be the son of Semo; the king of the isle of mist? have he retire, like the meteor of death, to the dreary cave of tura?

Cuchullin, say carril of other time, lie in the dreary cave of tura. his hand be on the sword of his strength. his thought on the battle which he lose. mournful be the king of spear, for he have often be victorious. he send the sword of his war to rest on the side of Fingal. for, like the storm of the desert, thou have scatter all his foe. take, o Fingal, the sword of the hero; for his fame be depart like mist when it fly before the rustle wind of the vale.

no: reply the king, Fingal shall never take his sword. his arm be mighty in war; and tell he his fame shall never fail. many have be overcome in battle, that have shine afterwards like the sun of heaven.

o swaran, king of the resound wood, give all thy grief away. — the vanquish, if brave, be renown; they be like the sun in a cloud when he hide his face in the south, but look again on the hill of grass.

grumal be a chief of cona. he seek the battle on every coast. his soul rejoice in blood; his ear in the din of arm. he pour his warrior on the sound craca; and craca king meet he from his grove; for then within the circle of brumo he speak to the stone of power.

fierce be the battle of the hero, for the maid of the breast of snow. the fame of the daughter of craca have reach grumal at the stream of cona; he vow to have the white-bosomed maid, or die on the echo craca. three day they strive together, and grumal on the four be bind.

far from his friend they place he in the horrid circle of brumo; where often, they say, the ghost of the dead howl round the stone of their fear. but afterwards he shine like a pillar of the light of heaven. they fall by his mighty hand, and grumal have his fame.

raise, you bard of other time, raise high the praise of hero; that my soul may settle on their fame; and the mind of swaran cease to be sad.

they lie in the heath of Mora; the dark wind rustle over the hero. — a hundred voice at once arise, a hundred harp be string; they sing of other time, and the mighty chief of former year.

when now shall i hear the bard; or rejoice at the fame of my father? the harp be not string on Morven; nor the voice of music raise on cona. dead with the mighty be the bard; and fame be in the desert no more.

morning tremble with the beam of the cast, and glimmer on gray-headed cromla. over Lena be hear the horn of swaran, and the son of the ocean gather around. — silent and sad they mount the wave, and the blast of Ullin be behind their sail. white, as the mist of Morven, they float along the sea.

call, say Fingal, call my dog, the long-bounding son of the chace. call white-breasted bran; and the surly strength of Luath. — Fillan, and ryno — but he be not here; my son rest on the bed of death. Fillan and Fergus, blow my horn, that the joy of the chace may arise; that the deer of cromla may hear and start at the lake of roe.

the shrill sound spread along the wood. the son of heathy cromla arise. — a thousand dog fly off at once, gray-bounding through the divide heath. a deer fall by every dog, and three by the white-breasted bran. he bring they, in their flight, to Fingal, that the joy of the king may be great.

one deer fall at the tomb of ryno; and the grief of Fingal return. he see how peaceful lie the stone of he who be the first at the chace. — no more shall thou rise, o my son, to partake of the feast of cromla. soon will thy tomb be hide, and the grass grow rank on thy grave. the son of the feeble shall pass over it, and shall not know that the mighty lie there.

Ossian and Fillan, son of my strength, and Gaul king of the blue blade of war, let we ascend the hill to the cave of tura, and find the chief of the battle of Erin. — be these the wall of tura, grey and lonely they rise on the heath? the king of shell be sad, and the hall be desolate. come let we find the king of sword, and give he all our joy.

but be that Cuchullin, o Fillan, or a pillar of smoke on the heath? the wind of cromla be on my eye, and i distinguish not my friend.

Fingal! reply the youth, it be the son of Semo. gloomy and sad be the hero; his hand be on his sword. hail to the son of battle, breaker of the shield!

hail to thou, reply Cuchullin, hail to all the son of Morven. delightful be thy presence, o Fingal, it be like the sun on cromla; when the hunter mourn his absence for a season, and see he between the cloud. thy son be like star that attend thy course, and give light in the night.

it be not thus thou have see i, o Fingal, return from the war of the desert; when the king of the world have flee, and joy return to the hill of hind.

many be thy word, Cuchullin, say connan of the small renown. thy word be many, son of Semo, but where be thy deed in arm? why do we come, over the ocean, to aid thy feeble sword? thou fly to thy cave of sorrow, and connan fight thy battle; resign to i these arm of light; yield they, thou son of Erin.

no hero, reply the chief, ever seek the arm of Cuchullin; and have a thousand hero seek they it be in vain, thou gloomy youth. i flee not to the cave of sorrow, as long as erin warrior live.

youth of the feeble arm, say Fingal, connan, say no more. Cuchullin be renown in battle, and terrible over the desert. often have i hear thy fame, thou stormy chief of Inisfail. spread now thy white sail for the isle of mist, and see Bragela lean on her rock. her tender eye be in tear, and the wind lift her long hair from her heave breast. she listen to the wind of night to hear the voice of thy rower; to hear the song of the sea, and the sound of thy distant harp.

and long shall she listen in vain; Cuchullin shall never return. how can i behold Bragela to raise the sigh of her breast? Fingal, i be always victorious in the battle of other spear!

and hereafter thou shall be victorious, say Fingal king of shell. the fame of Cuchullin shall grow like the branchy tree of cromla. many battle await thou, o chief, and many shall be the wound of thy hand.

bring hither, Oscar, the deer, and prepare the feast of shell; that our soul may rejoice after danger, and our friend delight in our presence.

we sit, we feast, and we sing. the soul of Cuchullin rise. the strength of his arm return; and gladness brighten on his face.

Ullin give the song, and carril raise the voice. i, often, join the bard, and sing of battle of the spear. — battle! where i often fight; but now i fight no more. the fame of my former action be cease; and i sit forlorn at the tomb of my friend.

thus they pass the night in the song; and bring back the morning with joy. Fingal arise on the heath, and shake his glitter spear in his hand. — he move first towards the plain of Lena, and we follow like a ridge of fire.

spread the sail, say the king of Morven, and catch the wind that pour from Lena. — we rise on the wave with song, and rush, with joy, through the foam of the ocean

