the sylph of summer. 

god say, let there be light, and there be light!
at once the glorious sun, at his command,
from space illimitable, void and dark,
spring jubilant, and angel hierarchy,
who long hosannah peal from orb to orb,
sing, glory be to thou, god of all world!

then beautiful the ball of this terrene
roll in the beam of first-created day,
and all its element obey the voice
of he, the great creator; air, and fire,
and earth, and water, each its ministry
perform, while chaos from his ebon throne
leap up; and so magnificent, and deck,
and mantle in its ambient atmosphere,
the live world begin its state!
to thou,
spirit of air, i lift the venturous song,
who viewless presence fill the live scene,
who element ten thousand thousand wing
fan joyous; over who field the morning cloud
ride high; who rule the lightning-shaft obey,
and the deep thunder long-careering march!

the wind too be thy subject; from the breeze,
that, like a child upon a holiday,
on the high mountain van pursue the down
of the grey thistle, ere the autumnal shower
steal soft, and mar his pastime; to the king
of hurricane, that sound his mighty shell,
and bid tornado sweep the western world.

sylph of the summer gale, on thou i call!
oh, come, when now gay June be in her car,
waft the breath of rose as she move;
come to this garden bower, which i have hang
with tendril, and the fragrant eglantine,
and mandrake, rich with many mantling star!

it be pleasant, when thy breath be on the leaf
without, to rest in this embower shade,
and mark the green fly, circle to and fro,
over the still water, with his dragon wing,
shoot from bank to bank, now in quick turn,
then swift athwart, as be the gazer glance,
pursue still his mate; they, with delight,
as if they move in morris, to the sound
harmonious of this ever-dripping rill,
now in advance, now in retreat, now round,
dart through their mazy ring, and seem to say:
the summer and the sun be we!
but thou,
sylph of the summer gale, delay a while
thy airy flight, while here francesca lean,
and, charm by ossian harp, seem in the breeze
to hear malvina plaint; thou to her ear
come unperceived, like music of the song
from cona vale of stream; then with the bee,
that sound his horn, busy from flower to flower,
speed over the yellow meadow, breathe ripe
their summer incense; or amid the furze,
that paint with bloom intense the upland croft,
with momentary essence tinge thy wing;
or in the grassy lane, one after one,
lift light the nod foxglove purple bell.
thence, to the distant sea, and where the flag
hang idle down, without a wavy curl,
thou hoverest over the top-mast, or do raise
the full and flow main-sail: steady,
the helmsman cry, as now thy breath be hear
among the stir cordage over his head;
so, steady, he cry, as right he steer,
speed our proud ship along the world of wave.

sylph, may thy favour breath more gentle blow,
more gentle round the temple and the cheek
of he, who, leave home and friend behind,
in silence muse over the ocean lean,
and watch every pass shade that mark
the southern channel fast-retiring line;
then, as the ship roll on, keep a long look
fix on the lessen lizard, the last point
of that delightful country, where he leave
all his fond hope behind: it lessen still;
still, still it lessen, and now disappear!
he turn, and only see the wave that rock
boundless. how many anxious morn shall rise,
how many moon shall light the farther sea,
over what new scene and region shall he stray,
a weary man, still think of his home,
ere he again that shore shall view, and greet
with blissful throng hope and start tear,
of heartfelt welcome, and of warm love!

perhaps, ah! never! so do thou go forth,
my poor lose brother! 

the air of morning as entice play,
and gentle, round thou, and their whisper
may sooth (if aught can sooth) a bode heart;
for thou be bind to visit scene of death,
where the sick gale (alas! unlike the breeze
that bear the gently-swelling sail along)
be taint with the breath of pestilence,
that smite the silent camp, and night and day
sit mock on the putrid carcase.
thou too do perish! as the southwest blow,
thy bone, perhaps, now whiten on the coast
of old algarva. i, meantime, these shade
of village solitude, hope erewhile
to welcome thou from many a toil restore,
still deck, and now thy empty urn alone
i meet, where, sway in the summer gale,
the willow whisper in my evening walk. 

sylph, in thy airy robe, i see thou float,
a rainbow over thy head, and in thy hand
the magic instrument, that, as thy wing,
lucid, and paint like the butterfly,
wave to and from, most musical ring;
sometime in joyance, as the flaunt leaf
of the white poplar, sometime sad and slow,
as bear pensive air from pity grave.

soft child of air, thou tend on his sway,
as gentle Ariel at the bid hie
of mighty Prospero; yet other wind
throng to his visard 'hest, inspire some,
some melancholy, and yet soothe much
the droop wanderer in the fade copse;
some terrible, with solitude and death
attendant on their march: — the wild simoom,
ride on whirl spire of burn sand,
that move along the nubian wilderness,
and bury deep the silent caravan; —
monsoon, upstart from his half-year sleep,
upon the vernal shore of Hindostan,
and tempest with sound of torrent rain,
and hail, the darken main; — and red Sameel,
blast and wither, like a rivele leaf,
the pilgrim as he roam; — Sirocco sad,
that pant, all summer, on the cloudless shore
of faint Parthenope; — deep in the mine
oft lurk the lurid messenger of death,
the ghastly fiend that blow, when the pale light
quiver, and leave the gasp wretch to die; —
the imp, that when the hollow curfew knoll,
wander the misty marish, light it
at night with errant and fantastic flame.
spirit of air, these be thy minister,
that wait thy will; but thou be all in all,
and dead without thou be the flower, the leaf,
the wave forest rivele, the great sea
still, the lithe bird of heaven extinct, and cease
the soul of melt music.
this fair scene
live in thy tender touch, for so it seem;
while universal nature own thy sway;
from the mute insect on the summer pool,
that with long cobweb leg, firm as on earth
the ostrich skim, flit idle to and fro,
make no dimple on the watery mass;
to the huge grampus, spout, as he roll,
a cataract, amid the cold clear sky,
and furrow far and wide the northern deep.

thy presence permeate and fill the whole!
as the poor butterfly, that, paint gay,
with mealy wing, red, amber, white, or drop
with golden stain, float over the yellow corn,
idle, as bend on pastime, while the morn
smile on his devious voyage; if enclose
in the exhaust prison, whence thy breath
with suction slow be draw, he feel the change
how dire! in palsy inanition drop!
weak flag his weary wing, and weak yet;
his frame with tremulous convulsion move
a moment, and the next be still in death.

so be the great and glorious world itself;
the tenant of its continent, all cease!
a wide, a motionless, a putrid waste,
its sea! how droop the languid mariner,
when not a breath, along the sluggish main,
stray on the sultry surface as it sleep;
when far away the wind be fly, to dash
the congregate ocean on the cape
of southern Africa, leave the while
the flood vast surface noiseless, waveless, white,
beneath mozambique long-reflected wood,
a gleam mirror, spread from east to west,
where the still ship, as on a bed of glass,
sit motionless. awake, you hurricane!
you wind that harrow up the wintery waste,
awake! for thunder in his sound car,
flash thick lightning from the roll wheel,
and the red volley, charge with instant death,
be music to this linger, sicken calm,
the same eternal sunshine; still, all still,
without a vapour, or a sound.
if thus,
beneath the burn, breathless atmosphere,
faint nature sicken droop; who shall ascend
the height, where silence, since the world begin,
have sit on cimborazzo high peak,
a thousand toise over the cloud career,
soar in fine ether? far below,
he see the mountain burn at his foot,
who smoke never reach his forehead; never there,
though the black whirlwind shake the distant shore,
the pass gale have murmur; never there
the eagle cry have echo; never there
the solitary condor weary wing
have yet ascend!
let the rise thought
beyond the confine of this vapoury vault
be lift, to the boundless void of space,
how dread, how infinite! where other world,
ten million and ten million league aloft,
in other precinct with their shadow roll.
there roam the sole erratic comet, bear
with lightning speed, yet twice three hundred year
its destine course accomplish.
then whirl,
far from the attractive orb of central fire,
back through the dim and infinite abyss,
dread flame visitant, ere thou return,
empire may rise and fail; the palace,
that shine on earth, may vanish like the dew
of morning, scarce illumine ere they fly.
dread flame visitant, who that pursue
thy long and lonely voyage, even in thought,
(till thought itself seem in the effort lose,)
but tremble exclaim, there be a god:
there be a god who light ten thousand sun,
round which revolve world wheel amid world.
he launch thy voyage through the vast abyss,
he hear his universe, through all its orb,
as with one voice, proclaim,
there be a god!  

lift above this dim diurnal sphere,
so fancy, rise with her theme, ascend,
and voyage the illimitable void,
where comet flame, see other world and sun
emerge, and on this earth, like a dim speck,
look down: nor in the wonderful and vast
of the dread scene magnificent, she view
alone the almighty ruler, but the web
that shine in summer time, and only see
in the slant sunbeam, wake a moral thought. 

in autumn, when the thin long spider gain
the leafy bush top, he from his seat
shoot the soft filament, like thread of air,
scarce see, into the sky; and thus sustain,
bold ascend into the breezy void,
dependent on the tremble line he weave,
insidious, and intent on scene of spoil
and death: — so mount ambition, and aloft
on his proud summit meditate new scene
of plunder and dominion, till the breeze
of fortune change, that blow to empty air
his feeble, frail support, and once again
leave he a reptile, struggle in the dust!

but what the world itself, what in his view
who dread omnipotence be over all!
a twinkle air-thread in the vast of space.
and what the work of that proud insect, man!
his mausoleum, fane, and pyramid,
frown in the dusk of long-revolving year,
while generation, as they rise and drop,
each follow each to silence and to dust,
point as they pass, and say, it be a god
that make they: but nor date, nor name
oblivion show; cloud only, roll on,
and wrap dark as it roll, the work
of man!
now raise on contemplation wing,
the blue vault, fervent with unnumbered star,
he range: speed, as with a angel flight,
from orb to orb; see distant sun illume
the boundless space, then bend his head to earth,
so poor be all he know! 
over sanguine field
now ride he, arm and crest like the god
of fable battle; where he point, pale death
stride over welter carcase; nor leaf, —
but still a horrid shadow, step by step,
stalk mock after he, till now the noise
of roll acclamation, and the shout
of multitude on multitude, be past:
the scene of all his triumph, wormy earth,
close upon his perishable pride;
for "dust he be, and shall to dust return"!
but conscience, a small voice from heaven reply,
conscience shall meet he in another world.

let man, then, walk meek, humble, pure, and just;
though meek, yet dignify; though humble, raise,
the heir of life and immortality;
conscious that in this awful world he stand,
he only of all live thing, ordain
to think, and know, and feel, there be a god!  

child of the air, though most i love to hear
thy gentle summons whisper, when the spring,
at the first carol of the village lark,
look out and smile, or June be in her car;
not undelightful be the pure air
in winter, when the keen northeast be high,
when frost fantastic his cold garland weave
of brittle flower, or soft-succeeding snow
gather without apace, and heavy load
the berry sweetbrier, cling to my pane.
the blackbird, then, that mark the ruddy pod
peep through the snow, though silent be his song,
yet, press by cold and hunger, venture near.
the robin group, familiar, muster round
the garden-shed, where, at his dinner set,
the labour hind strew here and there a crumb
from his brown bread; then heedless of the wind
that blow without, and sweep the shiver snow,
see from his break tube the smoke ascend
on a invert barrow, as in state
he sit, though poor, the monarch of the scene,
as ponder deep the garden future state,
his kingdom; the rude instrument of death
lie at his foot, fashion with simple skill,
with which he hope to snare the prowl race,
the mouse, rapacious of his vernal hope.

so seat, on the spring he ruminate,
and solemn as a sophi, move nor hand,
nor eye, till haply some more venturous bird,
(the crumb exhaust that he late strew
upon the groundsill,) with often dip beak,
and sidelong look, as ask large dole,
come hop to his foot: and say, you great,
you mighty monarch of this earthly scene,
what noble view can elevate the heart
of a proud patriot king, than thus to chase
the bold rapacious spoiler from the field,
and with a eye of merciful regard
to look on humble worth, wet from the storm,
and chill by indigence!
but thought like these
ill suit the radiant summer rosy prime,
and the still temper of the calm blue sky.
the sunny shower be past; at interval
the silent glitter drop descend; and mark,
upon the blue bank of yond western cloud,
that loom direct against the emerge orb,
how bright, how beautiful the rainbow hue
steal out, how stately bend the graceful arch
above the hill, and tinge at his foot
the mead and tree! fancy may think young hope
pant for the vision, and with ardent eye
pursue the unreal shade, and spread her hand,
weep to see it fade, as all her dream
have fade.
these, o air! be but the toy,
that sometime deck thy fairy element;
so oft the eye observant love to trace
the colour, and the shadow, and the form,
that wander over the veer atmosphere.
see, in the east, the rare parhelia shine
in mimic glory, and so seem to mock
(fix parallel to the ascend orb)
the majesty, the splendour, and the shape,
of the sole luminary that inform
the world with light and heat! the halo-ring
bend over all!
with desultory shaft,
and long and arrowy glance, the night-light shoot
pale coruscation over the northern sky;
now lance to the cope, in sheet of flame,
now waver wild, as the reflect wave,
on the arch roof of the umbrageous grot.
hence superstition dream of armament,
of fiery conflict, and of bleed field
of slaughter; so on great Jerusalem,
ere yet she fall, the flame meteor glare;
a wave sword ensanguine seem to point
to the devote city, and a voice
be hear, depart, depart! 
the atmosphere,
that with the ceaseless hurry of its cloud,
encircle the round globe, resemble oft
the pass sunshine, or the gloom that stray
over every human spirit.
thin light streak
of thought pass vapoury over the vacant mind,
and fade to nothing. now fantastic gleam
play, flash or expire, of gay hope,
or deep despair; then cloud of sadness close
in one dark settle gloom, and all the man
droop, in despondence lose.
aërial tint
please most the pensive poet: and the view
he form, though evanescent, and as vain
as the air mockery, seem to his eye
even as substantial image, and shape,
till in a hurry rack they all dissolve.

so in the cloudless sky, amusive shine
the soft and mimic scenery; distant hill
that, in refract light, hang beautiful
beneath the golden car of eve, ere yet
the daylight linger fade.
hence, on the height
of Apennine, far stretch to the south,
the goat-herd, while the wester sun, far off,
hang over the hazy ocean brim, behold
in the horizon faintly-glowing verge
a landscape, like the rainbow, rise, with rock
that soften shine, and shore that trend away,
beneath the wind wood of Sicily,
and Etna, smoulder in the still pale sky;
and dim Messina, with her spire, and bay
that wind among the mountain, and the tower
of Faro, gleam on the tranquil strait;
unreal all, yet on the air impress,
from light refract ray, the shadow seem
the certain scene: the hind astonish view,
yet most delight, till at once the light
change, and all have vanish!
but to he,
how different in still air the unreal view,
who wander in arabian solitude,
when, faint with thirst, he see illusive stream
shine in the arid desert!
all around,
a silent waste of dark grey sand be spread,
like ash; not a speck in heaven appear,
but the red sun, high in his burn noon,
shoot down intolerable fire: no sound
of beast, or blast, or move insect, stir
the horrid stillness. oh! what hand will guide
the pilgrim, pant in the trackless dust,
to where the pure and sparkle fountain cheer
the green oasis. see, as now his lip
hang parch and quiver, see before he spread
the long and level lake!
he gaze; still
he gaze, till he drop upon the sand,
and to the vision stretch, as he faint,
his feeble hand. 
come, sylph of summer, come!
return to these green pasture, that, remote
from fiery blast, or deadly blister frost,
beneath the temperate atmosphere rejoice!

a crown of flame, a javelin in his hand,
like the red arrow that the lightning shoot
through night, impetuous steed, and burn wheel,
that, as they whirl, flash to the cope of heaven,
proclaim the angel of the world of fire!

the ocean-king, lord of the water, ride
high on his hiss car, who concave skirr
the azure deep beneath he, flash wide,
as to the sun the dark-green wave upturn,
and foam far behind: sea-horse breast
the bicker surge, with nostril sound far,
and eye that flash above the wave, and neck,
who mane, like breaker whiten in the wind,
toss through the break foam: he kingly bear
his trident sceptre high; around he play
nereid, and sea-maid, sing as he ride
their choral song: huge triton, welter on,
with scaly train, at time his wreathe shell
sound, that the cavern of old ocean shake!

but mild thou, soft daughter of the air,
sylph of the summer, come! the silent shower
be past, and 'amid the drip fern, the wren
peep, till the sun look through the cloud again.

oh, come, and breathe thy gentle influence,
and send a homefelt quiet to my heart,
soothe as i hear, by fit, thy whisper run,
stir the tall acacia's pendent leaf,
and through yond hazel alley rustle soft
upon the vacant ear! 
yond eastern down,
that weather-fence the blossom of the vale,
where wind from hill to hill the mighty Dike,
of Woden name, with many a antique mound,
the warrior grave, bid exercise awake,
and health, the breeze of morning to inhale:
meantime, remote from storm, the myrtle bloom
beneath my southern sash.
the hurricane
may rend the pine of snowy Labrador,
the blast whirlwind of the desert sweep
the nubian wilderness — we fear they not;
nor yet, my country, do thy breeze bear,
from citron, or the bloom orange-grove,
as in rousillon jasmine-bordered vale,
incense at eve.
but temperate air be thy,
England; and as thy climate, so thy son
partake the temper of thy isle; not rude,
nor soft, voluptuous, nor effeminate;
sincere, indeed, and hardy, as become
those who can lift their look elate, and say,
we strike for injure freedom; and yet mild,
and gentle, when the voice of charity
plead like a voice from heaven: and, thanks to god,
the chain that fetter afric groan race,
the murderous chain, that, link by link, drop blood,
be sever; we have lose that foul reproach
to all our virtuous boast!
humanity,
England, be thy! not that false substitute,
that meretricious sadness, which, all sigh
for lark or lambkin, yet can hear unmoved
the bloody orgy of blood-boltered France;
thy be consistent, manly, rational,
nor need the false glow of sentiment
to melt it into sympathy, but mild,
and look with a gentle eye on all;
thy manner open, social, yet refine,
be temper with reflection; gaiety,
in her long-lighted hall, may lead the dance,
or wake the sprightly chord; yet nature, truth,
still warm the ingenuous heart: there be a blush
with those most gay, and lovely; and a tear
with those most manly!
temperate liberty
have yet the fair altar on thy shore;
such, and so warm with patriot energy,
as raise its arm when a false Stuart flee;
yet mingle with deep wisdom cautious lore,
that when it bid a Papal tyrant pause
and tremble, hold the undeviating reins
on the fierce neck of headlong anarchy.

thy church, (nor here let zealot bigotry,
vaunt, condemn all altar but its own),
thy church, majestic, but not sumptuous,
sober, but not austere, with lenity
temper her fair preeminence, sustain
her liberal charity, yet decent state.

the tempest be abroad; the fearful sound
of armament, and gather tumult, fill
the ear of anxious Europe. if, o god!
it be thy will, that in the storm of death,
when we have lift the brave sword in vain,
we too shall sink, sustain we in that hour!
meantime be i, in cheerful privacy,
to wait thy will, not sanguine, nor depress;
in even course, nor splendid, nor obscure,
to steal through life among my villager!
the hum of the discordant crowd, the buzz
of faction, the poor fly that thread the air
self-pleased, the wasp that point its tiny sting
unfelt, pass by i like the idle wind
that i regard not; while the summer sylph,
that whisper through the laurel, wake the thought
of quietude, and homefelt happiness,
and independence, in a land i love!
