the pleasure of melancholy.

write in the year 1745. 

by mr. THOMAS Warton.

mother of muse, contemplation sage,
who grotto stand upon the topmost rock
of teneriff: amid the tempestuous night,
on which, in calm meditation hold,
thou hear with howl wind the beat rain
and drift hail descend; or if the sky
unclouded shine, and through the blue serene
pale Cynthia roll her silver-axled car,
whence gaze steadfast on the spangle vault
rapture thou sit, while murmur indistinct
of distant billow sooth thy pensive ear
with hoarse and hollow sound; secure, self-bl,
there oft thou listen to the wild uproar
of fleet encounter, that in whisper low
ascend the rocky summit, where thou dwell
remote from man, converse with the sphere!
o lead i, queen sublime, to solemn gloom
congenial with my soul; to cheerless shade,
to ruin seat, of twilight cell and bower,
where thoughtful melancholy love to muse,
her favourite midnight haunt. the laugh scene
of purple spring, where all the wanton train
of smile and grace seem to lead the dance
in sportive round, while from their hand they shower
ambrosial bloom and flower, no long charm;
Tempe, no more i court thy balmy breeze,
adieu green vale! you broider mead, adieu!

beneath yond ruin abbey moss-grown pile
oft let i sit, at twilight hour of eve,
where through some western window the pale moon
pour her long-levelled rule of stream light;
while sullen sacred silence reign around,
save the lone screech-owl note, who build his bower
amid the moulder cavern dark and damp,
or the calm breeze, that rustle in the leaf
of flaunt ivy, that with mantle green
invest some waste tower. or let i tread
in neighbour walk of pine, where muse of old
the cloister brother: through the gloomy void
that far extend beneath their ample arch
as on i pace, religious horror wrap
my soul in dread repose. but when the world
be clad in midnight raven-coloured robe,
'amid hollow charnel let i watch the flame
of taper dim, shed a livid glare
over the wan heap; while airy voice talk
along the glimmer wall: or ghostly shape
at distance see, invite with beckon hand
my lonesome step, through the far-winding vault.
nor undelightful be the solemn noon
of night, when haply wakeful from my couch
i start: lo, all be motionless around!
roar not the rush wind; the son of man
and every beast in mute oblivion lie;
all nature be hush in silence and in sleep.
o then how fearful be it to reflect,
that through the still globe awful solitude,
no being wake but i! until steal sleep
my droop temple bath in opiate dew.
nor then let dream, of wanton folly bear,
my sense lead through flowery path of joy;
but let the sacred genius of the night
such mystic vision send, as Spenser see,
when through bewilder fancy magic maze,
to the fell house of busyrane, he lead
the unshaken britomart; or Milton know,
when in abstract thought he first conceive
all heaven in tumult, and the Seraphim
come tower, arm in adamant and gold.

let other love soft summer evening smile,
as, listen to the distant waterfall,
they mark the blush of the streaky west;
i choose the pale December foggy gloom.
then, when the sullen shade of evening close,
where through the room a blindly-glimmering gleam
the die ember scatter, far remote
from mirth mad shout, that through the illumine roof
resound with festive echo, let i sit,
bless with the lowly cricket drowsy dirge.
then let my thought contemplative explore
this fleet state of thing, the vain delight,
the fruitless toil, that still our search elude,
as through the wilderness of life we rove.
this sober hour of silence will unmask
false folly smile, that like the dazzle spell
of wily Comus cheat the unweeting eye
with blear illusion, and persuade to drink
that charm cup, which reason mintage fair
unmould, and stamp the monster on the man.
eager we taste, but in the luscious draught
forget the poisonous dregs that lurk beneath.

few know that elegance of soul refine,
who soft sensation feel a quick joy
from melancholy scene, than the dull pride
of tasteless splendour and magnificence
can ever afford. thus Eloise, who mind
have languish to the pang of melt love,
more genuine transport find, as on some tomb
recline, she watch the taper of the dead;
or through the pillared isle, amid pale shrine
of image saint, and intermingle grave,
muse a veil votaress: than Flavia feel,
as through the maze of the festive ball,
proud of her conquer charm, and beauty blaze,
she float amid the silken son of dress,
and shine the fair of the assemble fair.

when azure noontide cheer the daedal globe,
and the bless regent of the golden day
rejoice in his bright meridian bower,
how oft my wish ask the night return,
that best befriend the melancholy mind!
hail, sacred night! thou too shall share my song!
sister of ebon-sceptered he-cat, hail!
whether in congregate cloud thou wrap
thy viewless chariot, or with silver crown
thy beam head encircle, ever hail!
what though beneath thy gloom the forceress-train,
far in obscure haunt of lapland-moor,
with rhyme uncouth the bloody cauldron bless;
though murder wan, beneath thy shroud shade
summons her slow-eyed votary to devise
of secret slaughter, while by one blue lamp
in hideous conference sit the listen band,
and start at each low wind, or wakeful sound:
what though thy stay the pilgrim curse oft,
as all benight in arabian waste
he hear the wilderness around he howl
with roam monster, while on his hoar head
the black-descending tempest ceaseless beat;
yet more delightful to my pensive mind
be thy return, than bloomy morn approach,
even then, in youthful prime of open may,
when from the portal of the saffron east
she shed fresh rose, and ambrosial dew.
yet not ungrateful be the morn approach,
when drop wet she come, and clad in cloud,
while through the damp air scowl the lour south,
blacken the landscape face, that grove and hill
in formless vapour undistinguished swim:
the afflict songster of the sadden grove
hail not the sullen gloom; the wave elm
that hoar through time, and range in thick array,
enclose with stately row some rural hall,
be mute, nor echo with the clamour hoarse
of rook rejoice on their airy bough;
while to the shed the drip poultry crowd,
a mournful train; secure the village-hind
hang over the crackle blaze, nor tempt the storm;
fix in the unfinished furrow rest the plough:
ring not the high wood with enliven shout
of early hunter: all be silence drear;
and deep sadness wrap the face of thing.

through pope soft song though all the grace breathe,
and happy art adorn his attic page;
yet do my mind with sweet transport glow,
as at the root of mossy trunk recline,
in magic spenser wildly-warbled song
i see desert Una wander wide
through wasteful solitude, and lurid heath
weary, forlorn; than when the fate fair,
upon the bosom bright of silver Thames,
launch in all the lustre of brocade,
amid the splendor of the laugh sun.
the gay description pall upon the sense,
and cold strike the mind with feeble bliss.

you youth of albion beauty-blooming isle,
who brow have wear the wreath of luckless love,
be there a pleasure like the pensive mood,
who magic wont to sooth your soften soul?
o tell how rapturous the joy, to melt
to melody assuasive voice; to bend
the uncertain step along the midnight mead,
and pour your sorrow to the pity moon,
by many a slow trill from the bird of woe
oft interrupt; in embower wood
by darksome brook to muse, and there forget
the solemn dullness of the tedious world,
while fancy grasp the visionary fair:
and now no more the abstract ear attend
the water murmur lapse, the entrance eye
pierce no long through the extend row
of thick-ranged tree; until haply from the depth
the woodman stroke, or distant-tinkling team,
or heifer rustle through the brake alarm
the illude sense, and mar the golden dream.
these be delight that absence drear have make
familiar to my soul, ever since the form
of young sapphira, beauteous as the spring,
when from her vi'let-woven couch awake
by frolic zephyr hand, her tender cheek
graceful she lift, and blush from her bower,
issue to cloth in gladsome-glistering green
the genial globe, first meet my dazzle sight:
these be delight unknown to mind profane,
and which alone the pensive soul can taste.

the taper choir, at the late hour of prayer,
oft let i tread, while to the accord voice
the many-sounding organ peal on high,
the clear slow-dittyed chaunt, or vary hymn,
until all my soul be bathe in ecstasy,
and lap in paradise. or let i sit
far in sequester isle of the deep dome,
there lonesome listen to the sacred sound,
which, as they lengthen through the gothic vault,
in hollow murmur reach my ravish ear.
nor when the lamp expire yield to night,
and solitude return, will i forsake
the solemn mansion, but attentive hear
the due clock swing slow with sweepy sway,
measure time be flight with momentary sound.

nor let i fail to cultivate my mind
with the soft thrill of the tragic muse,
divine Melpomene, sweet pity nurse,
queen of the stately step, and flow pall.
now let Monimia mourn with stream eye
her joy incestuous, and pollute love:
now let soft Juliet in the gape tomb
print the last kiss on her true Romeo lip,
his lip yet reek from the dread draught.
or jaffeir kneel for one forgive look.
nor seldom let the moor of desdemone
pour the misguided threat of jealous rage.
by soft degree the manly torrent steal
from my swell eye; and at a brother woe
my big heart melt in sympathize tear.

what be the splendor of the gaudy court,
its tinsel trappings, and its pageant pomp?
to i far happy seem the banish lord
amid siberia unrejoice wild
who pine all lonesome, in the chamber hoar
of some high castle shut, who window dim
in distant ken discover trackless plain,
where winter ever whirl his icy car;
while still-repeated object of his view,
the gloomy battlement, and ivy spire
that crown the solitary dome, arise;
while from the topmost turret the slow clock,
far hear along the inhospitable waste,
with sad-returning chime awake new grief;
even he far happy seem than be the proud,
the potent satrap who he leave behind
'amid Moscow golden palace, to drown
in ease and luxury the laugh hour.

illustrious object strike the gazer mind
with feeble bliss, and but allure the sight,
nor rouse with impulse quick the unfeeling heart.
thus see by shepherd from hymettus brow,
what daedal landscape smile! here balmy grove,
resound once with Plato voice, arise,
amid who umbrage green her silver head
the unfading olive lift; her vine-clad hill
lay forth their purple store, and sunny vale
in prospect vast their level lap expand,
amid who beauty glister Athens tower.
though through the blissful scene Ilissus roll
his sage-inspiring flood, who wind marge
the thick-wove laurel shade; though roseate morn
pour all her splendor on the empurple scene;
yet feel the hoary hermit true joy,
as from the cliff that over his cavern hang
he view the pile of fall Persepolis
in deep arrangement hide the darksome plain.
unbounded waste! the moulder obelisc
here, like a blast oak, ascend the cloud;
here parian dome their vault hall disclose
horrid with thorn, where lurk the unpitying thief,
whence flit the twilight-loving bat at eve,
and the deaf adder wreathe her spot train,
the dwelling once of elegance and art.
here temple rise, amid who hallow bound
spire the black pine; while through the naked street,
once haunt of tradeful merchant, spring the grass:
here column heap on prostrate column, tear
from their firm base, increase the moulder mass.
far as the sight can pierce, appear the spoil
of sink magnificence! a blend scene
of mole, fane, arch, dome, and palace,
where, with his brother horror, ruin sit.

o come then, melancholy, queen of thought!
o come with saint look, and steadfast step,
from forth thy cave embower with mournful yew,
where to the distant curfeu's solemn sound
listen thou sit, and with thy cypress bind
thy votary hair, and seal he for thy son.
but never let Euphrósyne beguile
with toy of wanton mirth my fix mind,
nor in my path her primrose-garland cast.
though amid her train the dimple Hebe bear
her rosy bosom to the enamour view;
though Venus, mother of the smile and love,
and Bacchus, ivy-crowned, in citron-bower
with she on nectar-streaming fruitage feast:
what though it be she to calm the lower sky,
and at her presence mild the embattle cloud
disperse in air, and over the face of heaven
new day diffusive gleam at her approach;
yet be these joy that melancholy give,
than all her witless revel happy far;
these deep-felt joy, by contemplation teach.

then ever, beauteous contemplation, hail!
from thou begin, auspicious maid, my song,
with thou shall end: for thou be fair far
than be the nymph of cirrha mossy grot;
to lofty rapture thou can wake the thought,
than all the fable poet boast power.
hail, queen divine! who, as tradition tell,
once, in his evening-walk a druid find,
far in a hollow glade of mona wood;
and piteous boar with hospitable hand
to the close shelter of his oaken bower.
there soon the sage admire mark the dawn
of solemn muse in your pensive thought;
for when a smile babe, you love to lie
oft deep listen to the rapid roar
of wood-hung meinai, stream of Druids old,
that lave his hallow haunt with dash wave.
