the abode of genius

sir John rupee from India sail. 
rich than any king of Wales. 
enormous diamond, pearl untold,
 with many a pound of powder gold. 
enrich his store; here, paint glass. 
there, muslin lay; a weighty mass! 
beside of many curious thing,
 fit only for the use of king. 
with heavy ballot, great and small,
 but he, the heavy of they all,
 look up, and smile, with self-applause,
 "it be well the nabob have no law;
 soon shall these shine trifle bear
 a whisper to my sovereign ear,
 that John rupee will be a peer. 
these too shall bring i cook from France,
 these too shall teach i how to dance,
 these too" – must yield in this same hour,
 cry death, to my superior power. 
for while the knight lay out his wealth
 in project to destroy his health,
 death soon, in habit apoplectic,
 take care the knight shall not be leave sick,
 and thus his grand design be soil –
 by death be spoiler ever spoil. 
a heir, the only one he have,
 in circumstance rather bad,
 be sell, at a country fair,
 tape, candle, snuff, and suchlike ware;
 when the glad tiding reach his ear,
 turn colour, hem, and 'round he stare,
 cry, "bet – our bet, what must we do
 with all those thing, for i do know?" 
 "why, law," she answer, "there be the vicar,
" will tell we for a drap of lequor. " 
" no, no, "say Tim," i understand
 "that have i genius at command – – –
" why, fetch he then, you sorry elf; "
" that be right, "say Tim," i will go myself. " 
the story run, that France and Spain
 send Tim, sans genius, home again. 
and there a friend, one lucky day,
 advise he quite another way:
" go north, "he cry," the air be keen
 "and clear, where genius may be see." 
now Tim and bet, in hack post chaise,
 set out for Scotland in two day;
 resolve to travel day and night,
 to find this genius, clever spright! 
who be to set all matter right. 
without one break wheel or bone,
 from Kent to Coventry, jog on
 the clumsy pair; but Fortune smile
 which can far wise head beguile,
 there quick change it to a frown,
 as they, their horse at the crown. 
it be Sunday; and the boy never fail,
 to keep the sabbath strict – with ale. 
ah luckless man, in Warwickshire,
 who lot be to be drive in by beer. 
(say prudence, whisper in my ear,
 and do not thou, gay trifler, fear
 thy muse so weak, so young, shall now
 be stick, or smother in a slough? 
pshaw; prithee friend, i cry, begone,
 and let i with my tale have do.) 
the road be bad, the way be deep,
 both bet and Tim be fast asleep,
 night long have take place of day,
 the driver long have lose his way,
 when some most awkward bank or ditch,
 it be dark, and so they know not which,
 overturn the sleeper in the dirt,
 the chaise be break, but they not hurt,
 soon scramble out, but where to go
 they can not think, they do not know
 bet cry, because she can not see;
 Tim soon creep half way up a tree,
 from whence a glimmer light he spy
 sure, that be a house, our bet, he cry;
 then, arm in arm, they walk together,
 to seek a shelter from the weather
 some fifty yard they go and find
 a small brick house, a wood behind,
 a field before, a garden gate,
 secure with care, a garden gate,
 secure with care, for now it be late:
 they call — a female voice reply — who be there? 
with stick and lantern then draw near. 
and let the tremble traveller in:
 my master, sir, be not within. 
say mrs. mary, for it be she,
 a house-keeper of fifty-three. 
quick their downfall they recite. 
 "oh dear! you must sleep here tonight,"
 add mrs. mary; "walk in here;"
 then leave they, and with friendly care
 return with ham, cold chicken, cheese,
 and any wine that you shall please. 
now round the room with scorn Tim gaze,
 high on a desk be music raise,
 here book in burly chaos lay,
 and there some poem late make;
 with these, a inkhorn and a fiddle,
 a half write eclogue, and a riddle. 
no stucco, glass, nor gilding see,
 but all be plain, and neat, and clean. 
Tim swear at all delay, but eat,
 while bet sit grumble over her meat:
 "it be hard they be no farther get;
 to be detain too in a cot,
 where genius never show his face,
 it be sure a mortal cruel case! 
why maybe, Tim, we may not get
 to mr. genius three day yet;
 i wonder where this genius be,
 will he be you, and you be he?" 
when lo! a voice, sweet, shrill, and clear,
 cry — "who want genius? i be here." 
they stare, amaze — where — where — why here,
 lay snug in jenner elbow chair. 
