on the marriage of the earl of A— with the countess of s

triumphant beauty never look so gay,
 as on the morning of a nuptial day. 
love then within a large circle move,
 new grace add, and every charm improve;
 while HYMEN do his sacred rite prepare,
 the busy nymph attend the tremble fair;
 who vein be swell with a unusual heat,
 and eager pulse with strange motion beat;
 alternate passion various thought impart,
 and painful joy distend her throb heart:
 her fear be great, and her desire be strong,
 the minute fly too fast — yet stay too long:
 now she be ready, — the next moment not:
 all thing be do — then something be forget:
 she fear, — yet wish the strange work be do:
 delay, — yet be impatient to be go. 
disorder thus from every thought arise,
 what love persuade, i know not what deny. 

achates choice do his firm judgement prove,
 and show at once he can be wise and love;
 because it from no spurious passion come,
 but be the product of a noble flame:
 bold without rudeness, without blaze bright,
 pure as fix star, and uncorrupt as light;
 by just degree it to perfection grow,
 a early ripeness, but a last too. 
so the bright sun ascend to his noon,
 move not too slow, nor be there too soon. 

but though Achates be unkind drive
 from his own land, he be banish into heaven;
 for sure the rapture of cosmelia love
 be next, if only next, to those above:
 thus power divine do with his foe engage,
 reward his virtue, and defeat their rage;
 for first it do to fair cosmelia give
 all that a human creature can receive:
 whatever can raise our wonder or delight,
 transport the soul, or gratify the sight,
 then in the full perfection of her charm,
 lodge the bright virgin in achates arm. 

what angel be, be in cosmelia see,
 their awful glory, and their god-like mien;
 for in her aspect all the grace meet,
 all that be noble, beautiful, or sweet;
 there every charm in lofty triumph sit,
 scorn poor defect, and to no fault submit;
 there symmetry, complexion, air, unite,
 sublime noble, and amaze bright. 
so, new finish by the hand divine
 before her fall, do the first woman shine:
 but eve in one great point she do excel;
 cosmelia never err at all, she fall. 
from she, temptation in despair withdraw,
 nor more assault, who it can never subdue. 

virtue confirm, and regular bring
 to full maturity by serious thought,
 her action with a watchful eye survey,
 each passion guide, and every motion sway:
 not the least failure in her conduct lie,
 so gay modest, and so free wise. 

her judgement sure, impartial, and refine,
 with wit that be clear, and penetrate join,
 over all the effort of her mind preside,
 and to the noble end her labour guide:
 she know the best, and do the best pursue,
 and tread the maze of life without a clew;
 that the weak only and the waver lack,
 when they be mistake, to conduct they back:
 she do amid ten thousand way prefer
 the right, as if not capable to err. 

her fancy strong, vivacious, and sublime,
 seldom betray her converse to a crime;
 and though it move with a luxuriant heat,
 it be never precipitous, but always great:
 for each expression, every teem thought,
 be to the scan of her judgement bring;
 which wise separate the fine gold,
 and cast the image in a beauteous mould. 

no trifle word debase her eloquence,
 but all be pathetic, all be sterling sense,
 refine from drossy chat, and idle noise,
 with which the female conversation cloy;
 so well she know what be understand by few,
 to time her thought, and to express they too;
 that what she speak do to the soul transmit
 the fair idea of delightful wit. 

illustrious bear, and as illustrious breed,
 by great example to wise action lead;
 much to the fame her lineal hero bear
 she owe, but to her own high genius more;
 and, by a noble emulation move,
 excel their virtue, and her own improve,
 till they arrive to that celestial height,
 scarce angel great be, or saint so bright. 

but if cosmelia can yet lovely be,
 of noble birth, or more a deity,
 Achates merit her, though none but he,
 who generous soul abhor a base disguise,
 resolve in action, and in council wise
 too well confirm and fortify within,
 for threat to force, or flattery to win. 
unmoved, amid the hurricane he stand,
 he dare be guiltless, and he will be good. 

since the first pair in paradise be join,
 two heart be never so happy combine. 
Achates, life to fair cosmelia give,
 in fair cosmelia, great Achates live:
 each, be to other, the divine bliss;
 he, be her heaven, and she, be more than he,
 oh, may the kind influence above
 protect their person, and indulge their love. 
