[the season:] summer.

from yonder field of aether fair disclose,
 child of the sun! illustrious summer come
 in pride of youth, and feel through nature depth. 
he come, attend by the sultry hour,
 and ever-fanning breeze, on his way;
 while, from his ardent look, the turn spring
 avert her blushful face; and earth, and sky,
 all-smiling, to his hot dominion leave. 

hence, let i haste into the mid-wood shade,
 where scarce a sun-beam wander through the gloom;
 and on the dark-green grass, beside the brink
 of haunt stream that by the root of oak
 Rowls over the rocky channel, lie at large,
 and sing the glory of the circle year. 

come, inspiration! from thy hermit seat
 by mortal seldom find: may fancy dare,
 from thy fix serious muse, and rapture eye
 shoot on surround heaven, to steal one look,
 creative of the poet, every power
 exalt to a ecstasy of soul. 

and thou, the muse honour! and her friend! 
in who the human grace all unite:
 pure light of mind, and tenderness of heart;
 genius, and wisdom; the gay social sense,
 by decency chastize; goodness and wit,
 in seldom-meeting harmony combine;
 unblemished honour, and a active zeal,
 for britain glory, liberty, and man;
 o Dodington! attend my rural song,
 stoop to my theme, inspirit every line,
 and teach i to deserve thy best applause. 

with what a perfect world-revolving power
 be first the unwieldy planet launch along
 the illimitable void! thus to remain,
 amid the flux of many thousand year,
 that oft have sweep the busy race of man,
 and all their labour monument away,
 unrest, changless, matchless, in their course;
 to night and day, with the delightful round
 of season, faithful; not eccentric once:
 so poise, and perfect be the vast machine. 

when now no more the alternate twin be fire,
 and cancer redden with the solar blaze,
 short be the doubtful empire of the night;
 and soon, observant of approach day,
 the meek-eyed morn appear, mother of dew! 
at first faint-gleaming in the dapple east:
 till far over aether shoot the tremble glow;
 and, from before the lustre of her face,
 white break the cloud away. with tardy step,
 brown night retire. young day pour in apace,
 and open all the lawny prospect wide. 
the drip rock, the mountain misty top
 swell on the eye, and brighten with the dawn. 
blue through the dusk the smoke current shine;
 and from the bladed field the fearful hare
 limp awkward; while along the forest glade
 the wild deer trip, and often turn gaze
 at early passenger. music awake,
 the native voice of undissembled joy;
 and thick around the woodland hymn arise. 
rouse by the cock, the soon-clad shepherd leave
 his mossy cottage, where with peace he dwell;
 and from the crowd fold in order drive
 his flock, to taste the verdure of the morn. 

false luxurious, will not man awake,
 and, start from the bed of sloth, enjoy
 the cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
 to meditation due, and sacred song. 
and be there ought in sleep can charm the wise? 
to lie in dead oblivion, lose half
 the fleet moment of too short a life? 
total extinction of the enlighten soul! 
or else to feverish vanity alive,
 wilder, and toss through distemper dream? 
who will in such a gloomy state remain,
 long than nature crave; when every muse,
 and every bloom pleasure wait without,
 to bless the wildy-devious morning walk? 

but yonder come the powerful king of day,
 rejoice in the east. the lessen cloud,
 the kindle azure, and the mountain brim
 tip with aetherial gold, his near approach
 betoken glad: and now apparent all,
 aslant the dew-bright earth, and colour air,
 he look in boundless majesty abroad;
 and shed the shine day, that burnish play
 on rock, and hill, and tower, and wander stream,
 high-gleaming from afar. prime chearer light! 
of all material being first, and best! 
efflux divine! nature resplendent robe! 
without who vest beauty all be wrap
 in unessential gloom; and thou, red sun,
 in who wide circle world of radiance lie,
 exhaustless brightness, may i sing of thou! 

who will the blessing, first and last, recount,
 that in a full effusion from thou flow,
 as soon may number, at the height of noon,
 the ray that radiate from thy cloudless sphere,
 a universal glory dart round. 

it be by thy secret, strong, attractive force,
 as with a chain indissoluble bind. 
thy system roll entire; from the far bourn
 of slow-paced Saturn to the scarce see disk
 of mercury, lose in excessive blaze. 

informer of the planetary train! 
without who vital and effectual glance,
 they will be brute, uncomfortable mass,
 and not as now the green abode of life! 
how many form of being wait on thou! 
inhale gladness; from the unfettered mind,
 by thou sublime, to that day-living race,
 the mix myriad of thy set beam. 

the vegetable world be also thy,
 parent of season! from who rich-stained ray,
 reflect various, various colour rise:
 the freshen mantle of the youthful year;
 the wild embroidery of the watery vale;
 with all that cheer the sense, and charm the heart. 

the branch grove thy lusty product stand,
 diffuse, and deep; to quench the summer noon,
 and crowd a shade for the retreat swain,
 when on his russet field you look direct. 

fruit be thy bounty too, with juice replete,
 acid, or mild; and from thy ray receive
 a flavour, please to the taste of man. 
by thou concoct blush; and, by thou
 full mature, into the verdant lap
 of industry the mellow plenty fall. 

extensive harvest wave at thy command;
 and the bright ear, consolidate by thou,
 bend unwithold to the reaper hand. 

even winter speak thy power; who every blast,
 overcast with tempest, or severe sharp
 with breathe frost, be eloquent of thou,
 and make we languish for thy vernal gleam. 
shot to the bowel of the teem earth,
 the ripen over confess all thy power. 
hence labour draw his tool; hence wave war
 flame on the day; hence busy commerce bind
 the round of nation in a golden chain;
 and hence the sculpture palace, sumptuous, shine
 with glitter silver, and refulgent gold. 

the unfruitful rock itself impregn by thou,
 in dark retirement, form the lucid stone;
 collect light, compact; that polish bright,
 and all its native lustre let abroad,
 shine proud on the bosom of the fair. 

at thou the ruby light his deepen glow,
 a bleed radiance, grateful to the view. 
from thou the saphire, solid aether, take
 his hue cerulean; and, of evening tinct,
 the purple-streaming amethyst be thy. 
with thy own smile the yellow topaz burn. 
nor deep verdure die the robe of spring,
 when first she give it to the southern gale,
 than the green emerald show. but, all combine,
 thick through the whiten opal play thy beam;
 or, fly several from its surface, form
 a tremble variance of revolve hue,
 as the site vary in the gazer hand. 

the very dead creation, from thy touch,
 assume a mimic life. by thou refine,
 in brisk measure, the relucent stream
 frisk over the mead. the precipice abrupt,
 project horror on the blacken flood,
 soften at thy return. the desert joy
 wild, through all his melancholy bound. 
rude ruin glitter; and the briny deep,
 see from some point promontory top,
 reflect, from every fluctuate wave,
 a glance extensive as the day. but these,
 and all the much transport muse can sing,
 be to thy beauty, dignity, and use,
 unequal far, great delegate source,
 of light, and life, and grace, and joy below! 

how shall i then attempt to sing of he,
 who, light himself, in uncreated light
 invest deep, dwell awful retire
 from mortal eye, or angel pure ken;
 who single smile have, from the first of time,
 fill, overflow, all those lamp of heaven,
 that beam for ever through the boundless sky:
 but, shall he hide his face, the astonish sun,
 and all the extinguish star, will loosen reel,
 wide from their sphere, and chaos come again. 

and yet, be every faulter tongue of man,
 almighty poet! silent in thy praise;
 thy matchless work in each exalt line,
 and all the full harmonic universe,
 will vocal, or expressive, thou attest,
 the cause, the glory, and the end of all! 

to i be nature volume wide display;
 and to peruse the broad illumine page,
 or, haply catch inspiration thence,
 some easy passage, rapture, to translate,
 my sole delight; as through the fall gloom
 pensive i muse, or with the rise day
 on fancy eagle-wing excursive soar. 

fierce-flaming up the heaven, the pierce sun
 melt into limpid air the high-raised cloud,
 and morning mist, that hover round the hill
 in party-coloured band; till all unveiled
 the face of nature shine, from where earth seem,
 far-stretched around, to meet the bend sphere. 

half in a blush of cluster rose lose,
 dew-dropping coolness to the shade retire;
 and tyrant heat, dispread through the sky,
 by sharp degree, his burn influence reign
 on man, and beast, and herb, and tepid stream. 

who can unpitying see the flowery race,
 shed by the morn, their new-flushed bloom resign,
 before the unbating beam? so fade the fair,
 when fever revel through their azure vein. 
but one, the follower of the sun, they say,
 sad when he set shut up her yellow leaf. 
weep all night; and, when he warm return,
 point her enamour bosom to his ray. 

home, from his morning task, the swain retreat;
 his flock before he step to the fold:
 while the full-uddered mother swallow around
 the cheerful cottage then expect food,
 the food of innocence, and health! the daw,
 the rook and magpie, to the grey-grow oak
 (that the calm village, in their verdant arm,
 shelter, embrace) direct their lazy flight;
 where on the mingle bough they sit embower,
 all the hot noon, till cool hour arise. 
faint, underneath, the homely fowl convene;
 and, in a corner of the buzz shade,
 the house dog, with the employless grey-hound, lie,
 outstretch, and sleepy. in his slumber one
 attack the nightly thief, and one exult
 over hill and dale; till, waken by the wasp,
 they bootless snap. nor shall the muse disdain
 to let the little noisy summer-race
 live in she lie, and flutter through her song,
 not mean, though simple; to the sun ally,
 from he their high descent, direct, they draw. 

wake by his warm ray, the reptile young
 come winge abroad; by the light air upbear,
 light, and full of life. from every chink,
 and secret corner, where they sleep away
 the wintery gloom, by myriad, all at once,
 swarm, they pour: green, speckle, yellow, grey,
 black, azure, brown; more than the assist eye
 of pore virtuoso can discern. 
ten thousand form! ten thousand different tribe! 
people the blaze. to sunny water some
 by fatal instinct fly; where on the pool
 they, sportive, wheel; or, sail down the stream,
 be snatch immediate by the spring trout,
 often beguile. some through the green-wood glade
 delight to stray; there lodge, amuse, and feed,
 in the fresh leaf. luxurious, other make
 the mead their choice, and visit every flower,
 and every latent herb; but careful still
 to shun the maze of the sound bee,
 as over the bloom he sweep. some to the house,
 the fold, and dairy, hungry, bend their flight;
 sip round the pail, or taste the curdle cheese:
 oft, inadvertent, by the boil stream
 be pierce to death; or, welter in the bowl,
 with powerless wing around they wrap, expire. 

but chief to heedless fly the window prove
 a constant death; where, gloomy retire,
 the villain spider live, cunning, and fierce,
 mixture abhor! amid a mangle heap
 of carcass, in eager watch he sit,
 overlook all his wave snare around. 
within a inch the dreadless wanderer oft
 pass, as oft the ruffian show his front. 
the prey at last ensnare, he dreadful dart,
 with rapid glide, along the lean line;
 and, fix in the fly his cruel fang,
 stride backward grim please: the flutter wing,
 and shrill sound declare extreme distress,
 and ask the help, hospitable hand. 

echo the live surface of the ground;
 nor undelightful be the ceaseless hum,
 to he who muse through the wood at noon;
 or drowsy shepherd, as he lie recline,
 with half-shut eye, beneath the float shade
 of willow grey, close-crowding over the brook. 

let no presume impious railer tax
 creative wisdom, as if ought be form
 in vain, or not for admirable end. 
shall little, haughty ignorance pronounce
 his work unwise; of which the small part
 exceed the narrow vision of his mind? 
thus on the concave of a sound dome,
 on swell column heave, the pride of art! 
wander a critic fly; his feeble ray
 extend a inch around, yet blind bold
 he dare dislike the structure of the whole. 
and live the man, who universal eye
 have sweep at once the unbounded scheme of thing;
 mark their dependence so, and firm accord,
 as with falter accent to conclude
 that this avail nought? have any see
 the mighty chain of being, lessen down
 from infinite perfection to the brink
 of dreary nothing, desolate abyss! 
recoil giddy thought: or with sharp glance,
 such as remotely-wafting spirit use,
 behold the glory of the little world? 
till then alone let zealous praise ascend,
 and hymn of heavenly wonder, to that power,
 whole wisdom shine as lovely on our mind,
 as on our smile eye his servant-sun. 

thick in yond stream of light, a thousand way,
 upward and downwards, thwart, and convolve,
 the quiver kingdom sport; with tempest-wing,
 till winter sweep they from the face of day. 
even so luxurious man, unheeding, pass
 a idle summer-life in fortune shine,
 a season glitter! in soft-circling robe,
 which the hard hand of industry have wrought,
 the human insect glow; by hunger feed,
 and cheere by toil thirst, they roll about
 from toy to trifle, vanity to vice;
 till blow away by death, oblivion come
 behind, and strike they from the book of life. 

now swarm the village over the jovial mead;
 the rustic youth, brown with meridian toil,
 healthful, and strong; full as the summer-rose
 blow by prevail sun, the bloom maid,
 half-naked, swell on the sight, and all
 her kindle grace burn over her cheek. 
even stoop age be here; and infant-hand
 trail the long rake, or with the fragrant load
 overcharge, amid the soft oppression roll. 
wide fly the ted grain; all in a row
 advance broad, or wheel round the field,
 they spread the tawny harvest to the sun,
 that cast refreshful round a rural smell:
 or, as they rake the green-appearing ground,
 and drive the dusky wave along the mead,
 rise the russet haycock thick behind,
 in order gay. while hear from dale to dale,
 wake the breeze, resound the blend voice
 of happy labour, love, and social glee. 

it be rage noon; and, vertical, the sun
 shoot through the expand air a torrid gleam. 
over heaven and earth, far as the dart eye
 can pierce, a dazzle deluge reign; and all
 from pole to pole be undistinguished blaze. 
down to the dusty earth the sight, overpower,
 stoop for relief; but thence ascend stream,
 and keen reflection pain. burn to the heart
 be the refreshless field; their arid hue
 add a new fever to the sicken soul:
 and over their slippery surface wary tread
 the foot of thirsty pilgrim, often dip
 in a cross rill, present to his wish
 a live draught: he feel before he drink! 
echo no more return the sandy sound
 of sharpen scythe; the mower, sink, heap
 over he the humid hay, with flower perfume;
 and scarce a chirp grasshopper be hear
 through the dumb mead. distressful nature pant. 
the desert redden; and the stubborn rock,
 split to the centre, sweat at every poor. 
the very stream look languid from afar;
 or, through the fervid glade, impetuous hurl
 into the shelter of the crackle grove. 

all-conquering heat, oh intermit thy wrath! 
and on my throb temple potent thus
 beam not so hard! incessant still you flow,
 and still another fervent flood succeed,
 pour on the head profuse. in vain i sigh,
 and restless turn, and look around for night;
 night be far off; and hot hour approach. 
who can endure! the too resplendent scene
 already darken on the dizzy sight,
 and double object dance; unreal sound
 sing deep around; a weight of sultry dew
 hang deathful on the limb; shiver the nerve;
 the supple sinew sink; and on the heart,
 misgive, horror lay his heavy hand. 
thrice happy he! that on the sunless side
 of a romantic mountain, forest-crowned,
 beneath the whole collect shade recline:
 or in the gelid cavern, woodbine-wrought,
 and fresh bedew with ever-spouting stream,
 sit cool calm; while all the world without,
 unsatisfied, and sick, toss in noon. 
emblem instructive of the virtuous man,
 who keep his tempere mind serere, and pure,
 and all his passion apt harmonise,
 amid a jar world, with vice inflame. 

welcome, you shade! you bowery thicket, hail! 
you lofty pine! you venerable oak! 
you ash wild, resound over the steep! 
delicious be your shelter to the soul,
 as to the hunt hart the sally spring,
 or stream full-flowing, that his swell side
 lave, as he float along the herbaged brink. 
cold through the nerve, your please comfort glide;
 the heart beat glad; the fresh-expanded eye,
 and ear resume their watch; the sinew knit;
 and life shoot swift through every lighten limb. 

all in the adjoin brook, that shrill along
 the vocal grove, now fret over a rock,
 now scarce move through a reedy pool,
 now start to a sudden stream, and now
 gentle diffuse into a limpid plain;
 a various group the herd and flock compose;
 rural confusion! on the grassy bank
 some ruminate lie; while other stand
 half in the flood, and often bend sip
 the circle surface. in the middle droop
 the strong laborious ox, of honest front,
 which incompose he shake; and from his side
 the troublous insect lash with his tail,
 return still. amid his subject safe,
 slumber the monareh-swain; his careless arm
 throw round his head on downy moss sustain;
 here lay his scrip, with wholesome viand fill;
 and there his sceptre-crook, and watchful dog. 

light fly his slumber, if perchance a flight
 of angry hornet fasten on the herd;
 that startle scatter from the shallow brook,
 in search of lavish stream. toss the foam,
 they scorn the keeper voice, and scour the plain,
 through all the bright severity of noon;
 while, from their labour breast, a hollow moan
 proceed, run low-bellowing round the hill. 

oft in this season too the horse provoke,
 while his big sinew, full of spirit, swell,
 tremble with vigour, in the heat of blood,
 spring the high fence; and over the field effuse,
 dart on the gloomy flood, with steady eye,
 and heart estrange to fear: his nervous chest,
 luxuriant, and erect, the seat of strength! 
bear downth oppose stream: quenchless his thirst,
 he take the river at redouble draught;
 and with wide nostril, snort, skim the wave. 

still let i pierce into the midnight depth
 of yonder grove, of wild, large growth;
 that, high embower in the middle air,
 nod over the mount beneath. at every step,
 solemn, and slow, the shadow black fall,
 and all be awful, silent gloom around. 

these be the haunt of meditation, these
 the scene where ancient bard the inspire breath,
 ecstatic feel, and, from this world retire,
 converse with angel, and immortal form,
 on heavenly errant bend: to save the fall
 of virtue struggle on the brink of vice;
 in wake whisper, and repeat dream,
 to hint pure thought, and warn the favour soul,
 for future trial fate to prepare;
 to prompt the poet, who devote give
 his muse to better theme; to sooth the pang
 of die saint; and from the patriot breast,
 (backward to mingle in detest war,
 but foremost when engage) to turn the death;
 and numberless such office of love,
 daily, and nightly, zealous to perform. 

shake sudden from the bosom of the sky,
 a thousand shape or glide athwart the dusk,
 or stalk majestic on. arouse, i feel
 a sacred terror, and severe delight,
 creep through my mortal frame; and thus, methinks,
 those accent murmur in the abstract ear,
 pronounce distinct.  "be not of we afraid,
" poor kindred man, thy fellow-creature, we
 "from the same parent-power our being draw,
" the, same our lord, and law, and great pursuit. 
 "once some of we, like thou, through stormy life,
" toil, tempest-beaten, ever we can attain
 "this holy calm, this harmony of mind,
" where purity and peace immingle charm. 
 "then fear we not; but with responsive song,
" oft in these dim recess, undisturbed
 "by noisy folly, and discordant vice,
" of nature sing with we, and nature god. 
 "and frequent at the middle waste of night,
" or all day long, in desert still, be hear,
 "now here, now there, now wheel in mid-sky,
" around, or underneath, aerial sound,
 "send from angelic harp, and voice join. 
" a happiness bestow by we, alone,
 "on contemplation, or the hallow ear
" of poet, swell to seraphic strain. " 

thus up the mount, in visionary muse,
 i stray, regardless whither; till the stun
 of a near fall of water every sense
 wake from the charm of thought: swift-shrinking back,
 i stand aghast, and view the break scene. 

smooth to the shaggy brink a spread flood
 roll fair and placid; till collect all,
 in one big glut, as sink the shelve ground,
 the impetuous torrent, tumble down the steep,
 thunder and shake the astonish country round. 
now a blue watery sheet; anon disperse,
 a hoary mist; then gather in again,
 a dart stream aslant the hollow rock,
 this way, and that torment; dash thick,
 from seep to seep, with wild, infract course,
 and restless roar to the humble vale. 

with the rough prospect tire, i turn my gaze,
 where, in long vista, the soft-murmuring main
 dart a green lustre, tremble through the tree;
 or to yond silver-streaming thread of light,
 a showery radiance, beam through the bough. 
invite from the rock, to who dark cliff
 he cling, the steep-ascending eagle soar,
 with upward pinion through the attractive gleam:
 and, give full his bosom to the blaze,
 gain on the sun; while all the feathery race,
 smite with afflictive noon, disorder droop,
 deep in the thicket; or, from bower to bower
 responsive, force a interrupt strain. 
the stock-dove only through the forest cooe,
 mournful hoarse; oft cease from his plaint,
 short interval of weary woe! again
 the sad idea of his murder mate,
 strike from his side by savage fowler guile,
 across his fancy come; and then resound
 a loud song of sorrow through the grove. 

beside the dewy border let i sit,
 all in the freshness of the humid air;
 there on that rock by nature chisel carve
 a ample chair, moss-lined, and over head
 by flower umbrage shade; where the bee
 stray diligent, and with the extract sweet
 of honey-suckle load his little thigh. 

and what a various prospect lie around! 
of hill, and vale, and wood, and lawn, and spire,
 and town betwixt, and gild stream; till all
 the stretch landskip into smoke decay. 

happy Britannia! where the queen of art,
 inspire vigour, liberty abroad
 walk through the land of hero, unconfined
 and scatter plenty with unsparing hand. 

rich be the soil, and merciful the sky;
 thy stream unfailing in the summer drought;
 unmatched thy guardian-oak; thy valley float
 with golden wave; and on thy mountain flock
 bleat, numberless; while, rove round their side,
 bellow the blacken herd in lusty drove. 
beneath, thy meadow flame, and rise unqelled,
 against the mower scythe. on every hand,
 thy villa shine. thy country teem with wealth,
 and property assure it to the swain,
 please, and unwearied, in his certain toil. 

full be thy city with the son of art;
 and trade, and joy, in every busy street,
 mingle be hear: even drudgery himself,
 as at the car he sweat, or dusty hew
 the palace-stone, look gay. thy crowd port,
 where rise mast a endless prospect yield,
 with labour burn, and echo to the shout
 of hurry sailor, as he hearty wave
 his last adieu, and loosen every sheet,
 resign the spread vessel to the wind. 

bold, firm, and graceful, be thy generous youth,
 by hardship sinew, and by danger fire,
 scatter the nation where they go; and first,
 or in the list plain, or wintery sea. 
mild be thy glory too, as over the plan
 of thrive peace thy thoughtful sire preside;
 in genius, and substantial learning high;
 for every virtue, every worth renowned,
 sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
 yet like the muster thunder when provoke;
 the dread of tyrant, and the sole resource
 of such as under grim oppression groan. 

thy son of glory many! thy a more,
 as Cato firm, as Aristides just,
 like rigid Cincinnatus noble poor,
 a dauntless soul, erect, who smile on death. 
frugal, and wise, a Walsingham be thy;
 a drake, who make thou mistress of the deep,
 and bear thy name in thunder round the world. 
then flame thy spirit high; but who can speak
 the numerous worthy of the maiden reign? 
in Raleigh mark their every glory mix,
 Raleigh, the scourge of Spain! who breast with all
 the sage, the patriot, and the hero burn. 
nor sink his vigour, when a coward-reign
 the warrior fetter, and at last resign,
 to glut the vengeance of a vanquish foe. 
then deep through fate his mind retort saw,
 and with his prison-hour enrich the world;
 yet find no time, in all the long research,
 so glorious, or so base, as those he prove,
 in which he conquer, and in which he bleed. 
a hambden thy, of unsubmitting soul;
 who stem the torrent of a downward age,
 to slavery prone; and bid thou rise again,
 in all thy native pomp of freedom fierce. 
nor can the muse the gallant Sidney pass,
 the plume of war! with every laurel crown,
 the lover myrtle, and the poet bay. 
nor he of late name, firm to the cause
 of liberty, her rough determine friend,
 the british Brutus; who unite blood
 with Russel, thy, thou patriot wise, and calm,
 stain the sad annal of a giddy reign;
 aim at lawless power, though mean sink
 in loose inglorious sloth. high thy renown
 in sage too, far as the sacred light
 of science spread, and wake the muses song. 
thy be a Bacon form of happy mould,
 when nature smile, deep, comprehensive, clear,
 exact, and elegant; in one rich soul,
 Plato, the Stagyrite, and Tully join. 
the generous Ashley thy, the friend of man;
 who scan his nature with a brother eye,
 his weakness prompt to shade, to raise his aim,
 to touch the fine movement of the mind,
 and with the moral beauty charm the heart. 
what need i name thy Boyle, who pious search
 still seek the great creator in his work,
 by sure experience lead? and why thy Locke,
 who make the whole internal world his own? 
let comprehensive Newton speak thy fame,
 in all philosophy. for solemn song,
 be not wild Shakespear nature boast, and thy? 
and every great amiable muse
 of elder age in thy Milton meet? 
his be the treasure of two thousand year,
 seldom indulge to man; a god-like mind,
 unlimited, and various, as his theme;
 astonish as chaos; as the bloom
 of blow Eden fair; soft as the talk
 of our grand parent, and as heaven sublime. 

may my song soften as, thy daughter, i,
 Britannia, hail! for beauty be their own,
 the feeling heart simplicity of life,
 and elegance, and taste: the faultless form,
 shape by the hand of harmony; the cheek,
 where the live crimson, through the native white
 soft-shooting, over the face diffuse bloom,
 and every nameless grace; the part lip,
 like the red rose-bud, moist with morning-dew,
 breathe delight; and, under flow jet,
 or sunny ringlet, or of circle brown,
 the neck slight-shaded, and the swell breast;
 the look resistless, pierce to the soul,
 and by the soul inform, when, dress in love,
 she sit high smile in the conscious eye. 

island of bliss! amid the subject sea,
 that thunder round thy rocky coast, set up,
 at once the wonder, terror, and delight,
 of distant nation; who remote shore
 can soon be shake by thy naval arm;
 not to be shake thyself, but all assault
 baffle, like thy hoar cliff the loud sea-wave. 

o thou! by who almighty nod the scale
 of empire rise, or alternate fall,
 send forth the save virtue round the land,
 in bright patrol: white peace, and social love;
 the tender-looking charity, intent
 on gentle deed, and shed tear through smile;
 undaunted truth, and dignity of mind;
 courage compose, and keen; sound temperance,
 healthful in heart and look; clear chastity,
 with blush redden as she move along,
 disorder at the deep regard she draw;
 rough industry; activity untried,
 with copious life inform, and all awake:
 while, in the radiant front, superior shine
 that first paternal virtue, public zeal,
 who cast over all a equal, wide survey,
 and ever muse on the common weal,
 still labour glorious with some brave design. 

thus far transport by my country love,
 noble digressive from my theme, i have aim
 to sing her praise in ambitious verse;
 while, slight to recount, i simple mean,
 the various summer-horror, which infest
 kingdom that scorch below severe sun:

kingdom on which, direct, the flood of day
 oppressive fall, and give the gloomy hue,
 and feature gross; or worse, to ruthless deed,
 wan jealousy, red rage, and fall revenge,
 their hasty spirit prompt. ill-fated race! 
although the treasure of the sun be they,
 rock rich in gem, and mountain big with mine;
 whence, over sand of gold, the Niger roll
 his amber wave; while on his balmy bank,
 or in the spicy abyssinian vale,
 the citron, orange, and pomegranate, drink
 intolerable day, yet in their coat
 a cool juice contain. peaceful beneath,
 lean the huge elephant; and in his shade
 a multitde of beauteous creature play,
 and bird of bold note rejoice around. 

and oft amid their aromatic grove,
 touch by the torch of noon, the gummy bark,
 smoulder, begin to roll the dusky wreath. 
instant, so swift the ruddy ruin spread,
 a cloud of incense shadow all the land;
 and, over a thousand thunder tree at once,
 riot with lawless rage the run blaze:
 but cief shall foment wind assist,
 and double blend the circulate wave
 of flame tempestuous; or direct on,
 far-streaming, drive they through the forest length. 

but other view await; where heaven above
 glow like a arch of brass; and all below,
 the brown-burnt earth a mass of iron lie;
 of fruit, and flower, and every verdure spoil;
 barren, and bare, a joyless, weary waste;
 thin-cottaged; and in time of try need,
 abandon by the vanish brook; like one
 of fade fortune by his treacherous friend. 

such be thy horrid desert, Barca; such
 zaara, thy hot inhospitable sand;
 continuous rise often with the blast,
 till the sun see no more; and unknit earth,
 shake by the south into the darken air,
 fall in new hilly kingdom over the waste. 

hence late expose (if distant fame say true)
 a smother city from the sandy wave
 emergent rose; with olive-field around,
 fresh wood, recline herd, and silent flock,
 amuse all, and incorrupted see. 
for by the nitrous penetrate salt,
 mix copious with the sand, pierce, and preserve,
 each object harden gradual into stone,
 its posture fix, and its colour keep. 
the statue-folk, within, unnumbered crowd
 the street, in various attitude surprise
 by sudden fate, and live on every face
 the passion catch, beyond the sculptor art. 
here lean soft, the marble-lover stand,
 delight even in death; and each for each
 feel alone, with that expressive look,
 which perfect nature only know to give. 
and there the father agonize bend
 fond over his weep wife, and infant train
 aghast, and tremble, though they know not why. 
the stiffen vulgar stretch their arm to heaven,
 with horror start; while in council deep
 assemble full, the hoaryheaded sire
 sit sadly-thoughtful of the public fate. 
as when old Rome, beneath the rage Gaul,
 sink her proud turret resolute on death,
 around the Forum sit the grey divan
 of senator, majestic, motionless,
 with ivory-staff, and in their awful robe
 dress like the fall father of mankind;
 amaze, and shiver, from the solemn sight
 the red barbarian shrink, and deem they god. 

it be here that thirst have fix his dry domain;
 and walk his wide, malignant round, in search
 of pilgrim lose; or on the merchant tomb
 triumphant sit, who for a single cruise
 of unavailing water pay so dear:
 nor can the gold his hard associate save. 

here the green serpent gather up his train,
 in orb immense; then dart out anew,
 progressive, rattle through the wither brake;
 and, roll frightful, guard the scanty fount,
 if fount there be: or of diminshed size,
 but mighty mischief, on the unguarded swain
 steal, full of rancour. here the savage race
 roam, licence by the shade hour of blood. 
and foul misdeed, when the pure day have shut
 his sacred eye. the rabid tiger then,
 the fiery panther, and the whisker pard,
 (bespeckle fair, the beauty of the waste)
 in dire divan, surround their shaggy king,
 majestic, stalk over the burn sand,
 with plant step; while a obsequious crowd
 of grin form at humble distance wait. 
these all together join from darksome cave,
 where over gnaw bone they slumber out the day,
 by supreme hunger smite, and thirst intense,
 at once their mingle voice raise to heaven;
 and with imperious and repeat roar,
 demand food, the wilderness resound,
 from Atlas eastward to the fright Nile. 

unhappy he! who from the first of joy,
 society, cut off, be leave alone
 amid this world of death. ceaseless he sit,
 sad on the jut eminence, and view
 the roll main, that ever toil below;
 still fond form in the farther verge,
 where the round aether mix with the wave,
 ship, dim-discovered, drop from the cloud. 
at evening, to the set sun he turn
 a mournful eye, and down his die heart
 sink helpless; while the wonted roar be up,
 and hiss continual through the tedious night. 

yet here, even here, into these black abode
 of monstor, unappalled, from stoop Rome,
 and haughty Caesar, liberty retire,
 with Cato lead through numidian wild:
 disdainful of campania fertile plain,
 and all the green delight of Italy;
 when for they she must bend the servile knee,
 and fawn take the blessing once her own. 

what need i mention those inclement sky,
 where frequent, over the sicken city, plague,
 the fierce son of nemesis divine,
 collect a close, incumbent night of death;
 uninterrupted by the live wind,
 forbid to blow a wholesome breeze; and stain
 with many a mixture, by the sun suffuse,
 of angry aspect? princely wisdom then
 deject his watchful eye; and from the hand
 of droop justice, ineffectual, fall
 the sword, and balance. mute the voice of joy;
 and hush the murmur of the busy world. 
empty the street, with uncouth verdure clad,
 and range at open noon by beast of prey,
 and bird of bloody beak. the sullen door
 no visit know, nor hear the wail voice
 of fervent want. even soul-attracted friend,
 and relative endear for many a year,
 savage by woe, forget the social tie,
 the close engagement of the kindred heart;
 and, sick in solitude, successive die,
 untended, and unmourned. while to complete
 the scene of desolation, wide around,
 deny all retreat, the grim guard stand,
 and give the fly wretch a better death. 

much of the force of foreign summer still,
 of growl hill that shoot the pillared flame,
 of earthquake, and pale famine, can i sing;
 but equal scene of horror call i home. 

for now, slow-settling, over the lurid grove,
 unusual darkness brood; and grow gain
 the broad possession of the sky, surcharge
 with wrathful vapour, from the damp abrupt,
 where sleep the mineral generation, draw. 
thence nitre, sulphur, vitriol, on the day
 steam, and ferment in yond baleful cloud,
 extensive over the world a redden gloom! 
in dreadful promptitude to spring, await
 the high command. a bode silence reign
 dread through the dun expanse, save the dull sound,
 that from the mountain, previous to the storm,
 Rowls over the tremble earth, disturb the flood,
 and stir the forest-leaf without a breath. 
prone, to the low vale, the aerial tribe
 descend: the tempest-loving raven scarce
 dare wing the dubious dusk. in rueful gaze
 the cattle stand, and on the scowl heaven
 cast a deplore eye; by man forsake,
 who to the crowd cottage hie he fast,
 or seek the shelter of the downward cave. 

it be dumb amaze, and listen terror all;
 when to the quick eye the livid glance
 appear far south, emissive through the cloud;
 and, by the powerful breath of god inflate,
 the thunder raise his tremendous voice;
 at first low-muttering; but at each approach,
 the lightning flash a large curve, and more
 the noise astound: till over head a sheet
 of various flame disclose wide, then shut
 and open wide, shut and open still
 expansive, wrap aether in a blaze. 
follow the loosen, aggravate roar,
 enlarge, deepen, mingle, peal on peal
 crush horrible, convulse heaven and earth. 

down come a deluge of sonorous hail,
 in the white, heavenly magazine congeal;
 and often fatal to the unsheltered head
 of man, or rough beast. wide-rent the cloud
 pour a whole flood; and yet, its rage unquenched,
 the inconquerable lightning struggle through,
 ragged, and fierce, or in red whirl ball,
 and strike the shepherd, as he shudder sit,
 presage ruin, amid the rocky clift. 
his inmost marrow feel the glide flame;
 he die; and, like a statue grime with age,
 his live deject posture still remain;
 his russet singe, and rend his hang hat;
 against his crook his sooty cheek recline;
 while, whine at his foot, his half-slunged dog,
 importunate kind, and fearful, pat
 on his insensate master for relief. 

black from the stroke, above, the mountain-pine,
 a lean shatter trunk, stand scathe to heaven,
 the talk of future age; and, below,
 a lifeless group the blast cattle lie:
 here the soft flock, with that same harmless look,
 they wear alive, and ruminate still,
 in fancy eye; and there the frown bull,
 and ox half-raised. a little further, burn
 the guiltless cottage; and the haughty dome
 stoop to the base. in one immediate flash,
 the forest fall; or, flame out, display
 the savage-hunts, unpierced by day before,
 scar be the mountain brow; and from, the cliff
 tumble the smite rock. the desert shake,
 and gleam, and grumble, through his deep den. 

guilt dubious hear, with deeply-troubled thought;
 and yet not always on the guilty head
 fall the devote flash. young celadon
 and his Amelia be a matchless twain:
 with equal virtue form, and equal grace,
 the same, distinguish by their sex alone:
 she the mild lustre of the bloom morn,
 and he the radiance of the rise day. 

they love. but such their guileless passion be,
 as in the dawn of time alarm the heart
 of innocence, and undissembling truth. 
it be friendship, heighten by the mutual wish,
 the enchant hope, and sympathetic glow,
 strike from the charmsul eye. devote all
 to love, each be to each a dear self;
 supreme happy in the awaken power
 of give joy. alone, amid the shade,
 still in harmonious intercourse they live
 the rural day, and talk the flow heart,
 or sigh, and look unutterable thing. 

thus pass their life, a clear unite stream,
 by care unrnffle; till in evil hour
 the tempest catch they on the tender walk,
 heedless how far. her breast presageful heave
 unwonted sigh, and steal oft a look
 of the big gloom, on celadon her eye
 fall tearful, wet her disorder cheek. 
in vain assure love, and confidence
 in heaven repress her fear; it grow, and shake
 her frame near dissolution. he perceive
 the unequal conflict, and as angel look
 on die saint, his eye compassion shed,
 with love illumine high.  "fear not, he say,
" fair innocence! thou stranger to offence,
 "and inward storm! he, who yond sky involve
" in frown of darkness, ever smile on thou,
 "with full regard. over thou the secret shaft
" that waste at midnight, or the undreaded hour
 "of noon, fly hurtless; and that very voice,
" which thunder terror through the conscious heart,
 "with tongue of seraph whisper peace to thy. 
" it be safety to be near thou sure, and thus
 "to clasp perfection! " from his void embrace,
 (mysterious heaven!) that moment, in a heap
 of pallid ash fall the beauteous maid. 
but who can paint the lover, as he stand,
 strike by severe amazement, hate life,
 speechless, and fix in all the death of woe! 
so, faint resemblance, on the marble-tomb,
 the well-dissembled mourner stoop stand,
 for ever silent, and for ever sad. 

as from the face of heaven the shatter cloud
 tumultuous rove, the interminable blue,
 delightful swell into the general arch,
 that cope the nation. nature from the storm
 shine out afresh; and through the lighten air
 a high lustre and a clear calm,
 diffusive, tremble; while, as if in sign
 of danger past, a glitter robe of joy,
 set off abundant by the level ray,
 invert the field, yet drop from distress. 

it be beauty all, and grateful song around,
 join to the low of kine, and numerous bleat
 of flock thick-nibbling through the clovered vale. 
and shall the hymn be mar by thankless man,
 most-favoured; who with voice articulate
 shall lead the chorus of this low world? 
shall ho, so soon forgetful of the hand
 that hush the thunder, and expand the sky,
 after the tempest puff his idle vow,
 and a new dance of vanity begin,
 scarce ever the pant forsake the feeble heart? 

cheere by the set beam, the sprightly youth
 speed to the wellknown pool, who crystal depth
 a sandy bottom show. a while he stand
 gaze the invert landskip, half afraid
 to meditate the blue profound below;
 then plunge headlong down the circle flood. 
his ebon tress, and his rosy cheek
 instant emerge; and through the flexile wave,
 at each short breathe by his lip repel,
 with arm and leg accord well, he make,
 as humour lead, a easy-winding path;
 while, from his polish side, a dewy light
 effuse on the please spectator round. 

it be then beneath a secret-waving shade,
 where wind into lovely solitucte
 run out the ramble dale that Damon sit,
 thoughtful, and fix in philosophic muse:
 Damon, who still amid the savage wood,
 and lonely lawn, the force of beauty scorn,
 firm, and to false philosophy devote. 
the brook run babble by; and sigh weak,
 the breeze among the bend willow play:
 when sacharissa to the cool retreat,
 with Amoret, and musidora steal. 
warm in their cheek the sultry season glow;
 and, rob in loose array, they come to bathe
 their fervent limb in the refresh stream. 
tall, and majestic, sacharissa rise,
 superior tread, as on ida top
 (so grecian bard in wanton fable sing)
 high-shone the sister and the wife of Jove. 
another Pallas musidora seem,
 meek-eyed, sedate, and gain every look
 a sure conquest of the slide heart. 
while, like the cyprian goddess, Amoret,
 delicious dress in rosy-dimpled smile,
 and all one softness, melt on the sense. 
nor Paris pant strong, when aside
 the rival-goddesse the veil divine
 cast unconfined, and give he all their charm,
 than, Damon, thou, the stoic now no more,
 but man deep-felt, as from the snowy leg,
 and slender foot, the invert silk they draw;
 as the soft touch dissolve the virgin-zone;
 and, through the part robe, the alternate breast,
 with youth wild-throbbing, on thy lawless gaze
 luxuriant rose. yet more enamour still,
 when from their naked limb of glow white,
 in fold loose-floating feel the faint lawn;
 and fair expose they stand, shrink from themselves;
 with fancy blush; at the doubtful breeze
 arouse, and start, like the fearful fawn. 
so stand the statue that enchant the world,
 her full proportion such, and bashful so
 bend ineffectual from the rove eye. 
then to the flood they rush; the plunge fair
 the part flood with close wave receive;
 and, every beauty soften, every grace
 flushing afresh, a mellow lustre shed:
 as shine the lily through the crystal mild;
 or as the rose amid the morning-dew
 put on a warm glow. in various play,
 while thus they wanton; now beneath the wave,
 but ill conceal; and now with stream lock
 rise again; the latent Damon draw
 such draught of love and beauty to the soul,
 as put his harsh philosophy to flight,
 the joyless search of long-deluded year;
 and musidora fix in his heart,
 inform, and humanise he into man. 

this be the pure exercise of health. 
the kind refresher of the summer-heat;
 nor when, the brook pellucid, winter keen,
 will i weak-shivering linger on the brink. 
thus life redouble, and be oft preserve
 by the bold swimmer, in the swift illapse
 of accident disastrous. hence the limb
 knit into force; and the same roman arm,
 that rise victorious over the conquer earth,
 first learn, while tender, to subdue the wave. 
even from the body purity the mind
 receive a secret, sympathetic aid. 

low walk the sun, and broaden by degree,
 just over the verge of day. the rise cloud,
 that shift perpetual in his vivid train,
 their watery mirror, numberless, oppose,
 unfold the hide riches of his ray;
 and chase a change of colour round the sky. 
it be all one blush from east to west! and now,
 behind the dusky earth, he dip his orb;
 now half immerse; and now a golden curve
 give one faint glimmer, and then disappear. 

for ever run a enchant round,
 pass the day, deceitful, tedious, void;
 as fleet the vision over the formful brain,
 this moment hurry all the impassion soul,
 the next in nothing lose. it be so to he,
 the dreamer of this earth, a cheerless blank:
 a sight of horror to the cruel wretch;
 who, roll in inhuman pleasure deep,
 the whole day long have make the widow pine;
 and snatch the morsel from her orphan mouth. 
to give his dog. but to the tuneful mind,
 who make the hopeless heart to sing for joy,
 diffuse kind beneficence around,
 boastless, as now descend the silent dew;
 to he the long review of order life
 be inward rapture, only to be feel. 

confess from yonder slow-extinguished cloud,
 all aether sadden, sober evening take
 her wonted station in the middle air;
 a thousand shadow at her beck. first this
 she send on earth; then that of deep die
 steal soft behind; and then a deep still,
 in circle follow circle, gather round,
 to close the face of thing. a fresh breeze
 begin to wave the wood, and stir the stream,
 sweep with shadowy gust the field of corn;
 while the quail clamour for his run mate. 

his fold flock secure, the shepherd home
 hie, merry-hearted; and by turn relieve
 the ruddy milkmaid of her brim pail;
 the beauty, who perhaps his witless heart,
 unknowing what the joy-mixt anguish mean,
 love fond, by the sincere language show
 of cordial glance, and oblige deed. 
onward they pass, over many a pant height,
 and valley sink, and unfrequented; where
 at fall of eve the fairy people throng,
 in various game, and revelry to pass
 the summer-night, as village-story tell. 
but far about they wander from the grave
 of he, who his ungentle fortune urge
 against himself to lift the hate hand
 of violence; by man cast out from life,
 and after death, to which they drive his hope,
 into the broad way side. the ruin tower
 be also shun; who hoary chamber hold,
 so night-struck fancy dream, the yell ghost. 

among the crooked lane, on every hedge,
 the glowworm light his lamp; and, through the dark,
 twinkle a move gem. on evening heel,
 night follow fast; not in her winter-robe
 of massy stygian woof, but loose array
 in mantle dun. a faint erroneous ray,
 glance from the imperfect surface of thing,
 fling half a image on the strain eye. 
while waver wood, and village, and stream,
 and rock, and mountain-top, that long retain
 the ascend gleam, be all one swim scene,
 doubtful if see: whence sudden vision turn
 to heaven; where Venus, in the sterry front,
 shine eminent; and from her genial rise,
 when day-light sicken, till it spring afresh,
 shed influence on earth, to love, and life,
 and every form of vegetation kind. 
as thus the effulgence tremulous i drink,
 with glad peruse, the lambent lightning shoot
 across the sky; or horizontal dart
 over half the nation, in a minute space,
 conglobed, or long. astonishment succeed,
 and silence, ever the various talk begin. 

the vulgar stare; amazement be their joy,
 and mystic faith, a fond sequacious herd! 
but scrutinous philosophy look deep,
 with pierce eye, into the latent cause;
 nor can she swallow what she do not see. 
with thou, serene philosophy! with thou,
 and thy high praise, let i crown my song! 
effusive source of evidence, and truth! 
a lustre shed over the ennoble mind,
 strong than summer-noon; and pure as that,
 who mild vibration sooth the part soul,
 new to the dawn of celestial day. 
hence through her nourish power, enlarge by thou,
 she soar spurn, with elevate pride,
 the tangle mass of care, and low desire,
 that bind the flutter crowd; and, angel-winged,
 the height of science, and of virtue gain,
 where all be calm and clear; with nature round
 or in the starry region, or the abyss,
 to reason, and to fancy eye display:
 the first up-tracing from the vast inane,
 the chain of cause and effect to he,
 who, all-sustaining, in himself, alone
 possess be; while the last receive
 the whole magnificence of heaven and earth. 
and every beauty, delicate or bold,
 obvious or more remote, with lively sense,
 a world swift-painted on the attentive mind. 

tutor by thou, hence poetry exalt
 her voice to age; and inform the page
 with music, image, sentiment, and think,
 never to die! the treasure of mankind,
 their high honour, and their true joy! 

without thou what be unassisted man? 
a savage roam through the wood and wild,
 in quest of prey; and with the unfashioned furr
 rough-clad; devoid of every honest art,
 and elegance of life. nor home, nor joy
 domestic, mix of tenderness and care,
 nor moral excellence, nor social bliss,
 nor law be he; nor property; nor swain,
 to turn the furrow; nor mechanic hand
 harden to toil; nor sailor bold; nor trade,
 mother severe of infinite delight! 
nothing, save rapine, indolence, and guile,
 and woe on woe, a still-revolving train! 
who horrid circle have make human life
 than nonexistence worse. but teach by thou
 we be the plan of policy, and peace;
 to live like brother, and conjunctive all
 embellish life. while thus laborious croud
 ply the tough oar, philosophy direct,
 star-led, the helm; or like the liberal breath
 of urgent heaven, invisible, the sail
 swell out, and bear the inferior world along. 

nor to this evanescent speck of earth
 poor confine, the radiant tract on high
 be her exalt range; intent to gaze
 creation through; and, from that full complex
 of never-ending wonder, to conceive
 of the sole be right, who speak the word,
 and nature move complete. with inward view,
 thence on the ideal kingdom swift she turn
 her eye; and instant, at her virtual glance,
 the obedient phantom vanish or appear;
 compound, divide, and into order shift,
 each to his rank, from plain perception up
 to notion quite abstract; where first begin
 the world of spirit, action all, and life
 immediate, and unmixed. but here the cloud,
 so will eternal providence, sit deep. 
enough for we we know that this dark state,
 in wayward passion lose, and vain pursuit,
 this infancy of being, can prove
 the final issue of the work of god;
 by love and wisdom inexpressive form,
 and ever rise with the rise mind. 
