Peruvian tale.

alzira.

tale i 

where the pacific deep in silence lave
 the western shore, with slow, and languid wave,
 there, lose PERUVIA! bloom thy culture bower,
 thy valley fragrant with perennial flower;
 there, far above, the pine unbending rose,
 along the pathway of thy mountain snow;
 the palm fling high in air their feather head,
 while each broad leaf a ample shadow spread;
 the orange, and the rich ananas bloom,
 and humid balsam ever shed perfume;
 the bark, revive shrub! ah, not in vain
 thy rosy blossom tinge peruvia plain;
 you foster gale around those blossom blow,
 you balmy dew-drop over the tendril flow! 
lo, as the health-diffusing plant aspire,
 disease relent, and hover death retire;
 affection see new lustre light the eye,
 and feel her vanish peace again be nigh. 
the Pacas, and vicunna sport around,
 and the meek Lamas, burden, press the ground. 
the mocking-bird his vary note essay,
 and charm the grove with imitative lay;
 the plaintive humming-bird unfold his wing
 of vivid plumage to the ray of spring;
 then sink, soft burden, on the humid flower,
 his food, the dew-drop of the morning hour. 

nor less, PERUVIA, for thy favour clime,
 the virtue rise unsullied and sublime;
 there melt charity, with ardour warm,
 spread her wide mantle over the shiver form;
 cheere with the festal song her rural toil,
 while in the lap of age she pour the spoil;
 there the mild inca, ATALIBA sway,
 his high behest the will heart obey;
 descendant of a sceptre, sacred race,
 who origin from glow sun they trace. 
love soft emotion now his soul possess,
 and fix alzira image in his breast. 
in that bless clime affection never know
 a selfish purpose, or a thought untrue;
 not as on europe shore, where wealth and pride,
 from mourning love the venal breast divide;
 yet love, if there from sordid shackle free,
 one faithful bosom yet belong to thou;
 on that fond heart the pure bliss bestow,
 or give, for thou can give, a charm to woe;
 ah, never may that heart in vain deplore
 the pang that torture when belove no more. 
and from that agony the spirit save,
 when unrelenting yawn the untimely grave;
 when death dissolve the tie for ever dear,
 when frantic passion pour her part tear;
 with all the waste pain she only feel,
 hang on the quiver lip that silence seal;
 view fondness struggle in the close eye,
 and mark it mingle in the falter sigh;
 as the love form, while fold to her breast,
 breathe the last moan that give its struggle rest;
 leave she to pine in grief that none can share,
 and find the world a desert to despair. 

bright be the lustre of the orient ray
 that joyful wake alzira nuptial day;
 her auburn hair spread loose on the wind,
 the virgin train with rosy chaplet bind;
 while the fresh flower that form her bridal wreathe
 seem deep hue and rich scent to breathe. 
the gentle tribe now seek the hallow fane,
 where warble vestal pour the choral strain;
 there age ZORAI his alzira press,
 with love parental, to his anxious breast;
 priest of the sun! within the sacred shrine
 his fervent spirit breathe the strain divine;
 with careful hand the guiltless offer spread,
 with pious zeal the clear libation shed. 
nor vain the incense of erroneous praise
 when meek devotion soul the tribute pay;
 on wing of purity behold it rise,
 while bend mercy waft it to the sky! 
PERUVIA! o delightful land in vain
 the virtue flourish on thy beauteous plain;
 for soon shall burst the unrelenting storm
 over thy mild head, and crush thy prostrate form! 
recording fame shall mark thy desperate fate,
 and distant age weep for ill so great! 
now over the deep dull night her mantle fling,
 dim on the wave the moon faint crescent hang;
 peruvia genius seek the liquid plain,
 soothe by the languid murmur of the main;
 when sudden clamour the illusion break,
 wild on the surface of the deep it speak;
 a rise breeze expand her flow veil,
 aghast with fear, she spy a fly sail —
 the lofty mast impend, the banner wave,
 the ruffle surge the incumbent vessel lave;
 with eager eye she view her destine foe
 lead to her peaceful shore the adventurous prow;
 tremble she kneel, with wild, disorder air,
 and pour with frantic energy her prayer:
 "o, you avenge spirit of the deep! 
mount the blue lightning wing, over ocean sweep;
 loud from your central cave the shell resound,
 that summons death to your abyss profound;
 call the pale spectre from his dark abode,
 to print the billow, swell the blacken flood,
 rush over the wave, the roughen deep deform,
 howl in the blast, and animate the storm —
 relentless power! for not one quiver breeze
 have ruffle yet the surface of the sea —
 swift from your rocky steep you condor stray,
 wave your black plume, and cleave the aerial way;
 proud in terrific force your wing expand,
 press the firm earth, and darken all the strand;
 bid the stern foe retire with wild affright,
 and shun the region veil in partial night. 
vain hope, devote land! i read thy doom,
 my sad prophetic soul can pierce the gloom;
 i see, i see my love, my favour clime
 consume, and waste in its early prime. 
but not in vain this beauteous land shall bleed,
 too late shall europe race deplore the deed. 
region abhor! be gold the tempt bane,
 the curse that desolate thy hostile plain;
 may pleasure tinge with venom drop the bowl,
 and luxury unnerve the sicken soul. " 

ah, not in vain she pour the impassion tear;
 ah, not in vain she call the power to hear! 
when bear from lose peruvia bleed land,
 the guilty treasure beam on europe strand;
 each sweet affection flee the taint shore,
 and virtue wander, to return no more. 

alzira.

tale ii.

flush with impatient hope, the martial band,
 by stern Pizarro lead, approach the land;
 no terror arm his hostile brow, for guile
 seek to betray with candour open smile. 
too artless for distrust, the monarch spring
 to meet his latent foe on friendship wing. 
on as he move, with dazzle splendour crown,
 his feather chief the golden throne surround;
 the wave canopy its plume display,
 who wave hue reflect the morning ray;
 with native grace he hail the warrior train,
 who stand majestic on peruvia plain,
 in all the savage pomp of armour dress,
 the frown helmet, and the nod crest. 
yet theme of joy pizarro lip impart,
 and charm with eloquence the simple heart;
 unfold to the monarch wonder thought
 all that inventive art the rude have teach. 
and now he bid the muse spirit rise
 above the circle of surround sky;
 present the page that shed religion light
 over the dark mist of intellectual night:
 while, thril with awe, the monarch tremble stand,
 he drop the hallow volume from his hand. 
sudden, while frantic zeal each breast inspire,
 and shudder demon fan the rise fire,
 the bloody signal wave, the banner play,
 the naked sabre flash their stream ray;
 the trumpet roll its animate sound,
 and the loud cannon rend the vault around;
 while fierce in sanguine rage, the son of Spain
 rush on peru unarmed, defenceless train! 
the fiend of slaughter urge their dire career,
 and virtue guardian spirit drop a tear! 
mild ZORAI fall, deplore human strife,
 and close with prayer his consecrate life! —
 in vain peruvia chief undaunted stand,
 shield their love prince, and bathe his robe in blood; —
 touch with heroic ardour, cling around,
 and high of soul, receive each fatal wound;
 drag from his throne, and hurry over the plain,
 the wretched monarch swell the captive train;
 with iron grasp the frantic prince they bear,
 and feel their triumph in his wild despair. —
 deep in the gloomy dungeon lone domain,
 lose ATALIBA wear the gall chain;
 the earth cold bed refuse oblivious rest,
 while throb the woe of thousand at his breast;
 alzira desolate moan he hear,
 and with the monarch blend the lover tear. 
soon have alzira feel affliction dart
 pierce her soft soul, and rend her bleed heart;
 its quick pulsation pause, and chill with dread,
 a livid hue her fade cheek overspread;
 no tear the mourner shed, she breathe no sigh,
 her lip be mute, and close her languid eye;
 faint, and slow heave her shiver breast,
 and her calm passion seem in death to rest. —
 at length revive, amid rise heap of slay,
 she press with hurry step the crimson plain;
 the dungeon gloomy depth she fearless seek,
 for love with scorn of danger arm her thought:
 she reach the cell where ATALIBA lie,
 where human vulture haste to seize their prey. —
 in vain her treasure wealth PERUVIA give,
 this dear treasure from their grasp to save;
 alzira! lo, the ruthless murderer come,
 this moment seal thy ataliba doom. 
ah, what avail the shriek that anguish pour? 
the look that mercy lenient aid implore? 
tear from thy cling arm, thy throb breast,
 the fatal cord his agony suppress! —
 in vain the livid corpse she firm clasp,
 and pour her sorrow over the form she grasp,
 the murderer soon their struggle victim tear
 from the lose object of her soul despair! 
the swell pang unable to sustain,
 distraction throb in every beat vein;
 its sudden tumult seize her yield soul,
 and in her eye distemper glance roll —
 "they come!" the mourner cry with pant breath,
 "to give the lose alzira rest in death! 
one moment more, you bloody form, bestow,
 one moment more for ever care my woe —
 lo! where the purple evening shed her light
 on bless remains! o! hide they, pity night! 
slow in the breeze i see the verdure wave,
 that shroud with tuft grass my lover grave;
 hark! on its wander wing in mildness blow
 the murmur gale, nor wake his deep repose —
 and see, yond hoary form still linger there! 
dishevel by rude wind his silver hair;
 over his chill bosom fall the winter rain,
 i feel the big drop on my wither brain. 
not for himself that tear his bosom steep,
 for his lose child it flow — for i he weep! 
no more the dagger point shall pierce thy breast,
 for calm and lovely be thy silent rest;
 yet still in dust these eye shall see thou roll,
 still the sad thought shall waste alzira soul —
 what bleed phantom move along the storm? 
it be my ataliba wellknown form! 
approach! alzira breast no terror move,
 her fear be all for ever lose in love. 
safe on the hang cliff i now can rest,
 and press its point pillow to my breast —
 he weep! in heaven he weep! — i feel his tear —
 it chill my tremble heart, yet still it be dear. 
to he all joyless be the realm above,
 that pale look speak of pity and of love! 
ah come, descend in yonder bend cloud,
 and wrap alzira in thy misty shroud!" 
as roll her wander glance wild around,
 she snatch a reek sabre from the ground;
 firm she lift hand the weapon press,
 and deep she plunge it in her pant breast! 
 "it be but a few short moment that divide" —
 she falter say — then sink on earth and die! 

Zilia.

tale iii.

now stern Pizarro seek the distant plain,
 where beauteous Cuzco lift her golden fane. 
the meek peruvian gaze in wild dismay,
 nor bar the dark oppressor sanguine way;
 and soon on Cuzco, where the dawn light
 of glory shine, foretell day more bright,
 where the young art have shed unfold flower,
 a scene of spread desolation lower! 
while bury deep in everlasting shade,
 that lustre sicken, and those blossom fade. 
and yet, devote land, not gold alone,
 or dire ambition wake thy rise groan;
 for lo! a fierce fiend, with joy elate,
 feast on thy suffering, and impel thy fate:
 fanatic fury rear her sullen shrine,
 where vulture prey, where venom adder twine;
 her savage arm with purple torrent stain
 thy rock temple, and thy fall fane;
 her blaze torch flash the mount fire,
 she grasp the sabre, and she light the pyre;
 her voice be thunder rend the still air,
 her glance the baleful lightning lurid glare;
 her lip unhallowed breathe their impious strain,
 and pure religion sacred voice profane;
 who precept pity be mild deed approve,
 who law be mercy, and who soul be love. 
and see, fanatic fury wake the storm —
 she wear the stern valverda hideous form;
 his bosom never feel another woe,
 no shriek of anguish break its dark repose. 
the temple nod — a age form appear —
 he beat his breast, he rend his silver hair —
 VALVERDA drag he from the bless abode,
 where his meek spirit humble seek its god;
 see, to his aid his child, soft Zilia, spring,
 and steep in tear the robe to which she cling! 
now burst from peruvia fright throng,
 two warlike youth impetuous rush along;
 one grasp his twang bow with furious air,
 while in his trouble eye sit fierce despair;
 but all in vain his err weapon fly,
 pierce by a thousand wound, on earth he lie. 
his droop head the tremble Zilia raise,
 and on the youth in speechless anguish gaze;
 while he who fond share his danger fly,
 and from his bleed breast a poignard draw. 
 "deep in my faithful bosom let i hide
 the fatal steel that will our soul divide," —
 he quick exclaim — the die warrior cry
 "ah yet forbear! — by all the sacred tie
 that bind our heart, forbear!" — in vain he speak,
 friendship with frantic zeal impel the stroke! 
 "thyself for ever lose, thou hope in vain,"
 the youth reply, "my spirit to detain;
 from thou my soul, in childhood early year,
 catch the light pleasure and the pass tear;
 thy friendship then my young affection bless
 the first pure passion of my infant breast;
 and still in death i feel its strong controul,
 its sacred impulse wing my fleet soul,
 that only linger here till thou depart,
 who image live upon my faint heart!" —
 in vain the generous youth, with pant breath,
 pour these last murmur in the ear of death;
 he read the fatal truth in zilia eye,
 and give to friendship his expire sigh. —
 but now with rage valverda glance roll,
 and mark the vengeance rankle in his soul;
 he bend his gloomy brow — his lip impart
 the brood purpose of his venom heart;
 he bid the hoary priest in mutter strain
 abjure his faith, forsake his native fane,
 while yet the linger pang of torture wait,
 while yet valverda power suspend his fate. 
 "vain man," the victim cry, "to hoary year
 know death be mild, and virtue feel no fear;
 cruel of spirit, come! let torture prove
 the power i serve in life in death i love." 
he cease — with rugged cord his limb they bind,
 and drag the age sufferer on the ground;
 they grasp his feeble frame, his tress tear;
 his robe they rend, his shrivel bosom bare. 
ah, see his uncomplaining soul sustain
 the sting of insult and the dart of pain! 
his steadfast spirit feel one pang alone,
 a child despair awake one bitter groan —
 the mourner kneel to catch his part breath,
 to soothe the agony of linger death:
 no moan she breathe, no tear have power to flow,
 still on her lip expire the unuttered woe;
 yet ah, her livid cheek, her steadfast look,
 the desolate soul deep anguish speak —
 mild victim! close not yet thy languid eye;
 pure spirit! claim not yet thy kindred sky;
 a pity angel come to stay thy flight,
 Las Casas bid thou view return light;
 ah, let that sacred drop, to virtue dear,
 efface thy wrong — receive his precious tear;
 see his flush cheek with indignation glow,
 while from his lip the tone of pity flow. —
 "oh, suffering lord!" he cry, "who stream blood,
 be pour for man — earth drink the sacred flood,
 who mercy in the mortal pang forgive
 the murderous band, thy love alone can save;
 forgive — thy goodness burst each narrow bound
 which feeble thought, and human hope surround;
 forgive the guilty wretch, who impious hand
 from thy pure altar fling the flame brand;
 in human blood that hallow altar steep,
 libation dire! while groan nature weep;
 the limit of thy mercy dare to scan,
 the object of thy love, his victim, — man. 
while yet i linger, lo, the sufferer die,
 i see his frame convulse, — i hear his sigh! 
whoever control the purpose of my heart,
 first in this breast shall plunge his guilty dart." 
with hurry step he fly, with eager hand
 he break the fetter, burst the cruel band. 
as the fall angel hear with awful fear,
 the cherub grave rebuke, in grace severe,
 and flee, while horror plume his impious crest,
 the form of virtue as she stand confess;
 so fierce VALVERDA sullen move along,
 abash, and follow by the hostile throng. 
at length the hoary victim, free from chain,
 Las Casas gentle lead to safe plain;
 his search eye explore a secret cave,
 who shaggy side the languid billow lave;
 "there rest secure," he cry, "the christian god
 will hover near, will guard the lone abode." 
oft to the gloomy cell his step repair,
 while night chill breeze wave his silvered hair;
 oft in the tone of love, the word of peace,
 he bid the bitter tear of anguish cease;
 bid droop hope uplift her languid eye,
 and point to bliss that dwell beyond the sky. 
yet ah! in vain his pious care will save
 the age sufferer from the open grave;
 for deep the pang of torture pierce his frame,
 and sink his waste life expire flame;
 to his cold lip Las CASAS' hand he press,
 he faint clasp his Zilia to his breast;
 then cry, "the god, who now my vow adore,
 my heart through life obey, unknowing more;
 his mild forgiveness then my soul shall prove,
 his mercy share, Las CASAS' god be love. " 
he speak no more, his zilia hopeless moan
 be hear responsive to his die groan. 
" victim of impious zeal, "Las Casas cry,
" accept, depart shade, a christian sigh;
 and thou, soft mourner, tender, droop form,
 what power shall guard thou from the fearful storm? " 
" weep not for i, "she cry," for zilia breast
 soon in the shelter earth shall find its rest;
 seek not the victim of despair to save,
 i ask but death — i only wish a grave. 
witness, thou mangle form, that earth retain,
 witness a murder lover cold remains;
 i live my father pang to soothe, to share,
 i bear to live, though life be all despair. 
ah! still my lover die moan i hear,
 in every pulse i feel his part tear —
 i faint — a icy coldness chill each vein,
 no more these feeble limb their load sustain;
 spirit of pity! catch my fleet breath,
 a moment stay — and close my eye in death. 
Las Casas, thou thy god in mercy give,
 to soothe my pang, to find the wretch a grave. " 
she cease, her spirit flee to pure sphere,
 Las Casas bath the pallid corpse with tear;
 fly, minister of good! nor linger shed
 those fruitless sorrow over the unconscious dead;
 i view the sanguine flood, the waste flame,
 i hear a suffering world Las Casas claim. 

Cora.

tale iv.

now the stern partner of pizarro toil,
 almagro, lure by hope of golden spoil,
 to distant chili ever-verdant mead,
 through path untrod, a band of warrior lead;
 over the high Andes freeze steep they go,
 and wander amid eternal hill of snow:
 in vain the vivify orb of day
 dart on the impervious ice his fervent ray;
 cold, keen as chain the ocean of the pole,
 numb the shrink frame, and chill the vigorous soul;
 at length they reach luxuriant chili plain,
 where end the dreary bound of winter reign. 
when first the brave chilese, with eager glance,
 behold the hostile son of Spain advance,
 their threaten sabre red with purple stream,
 their lance quiver in the solar beam,
 with pale surprise they see the impend storm,
 where lower danger wear a unknown form;
 but soon their spirit, sting with generous shame,
 renounce each terror, and for vengeance flame;
 pant high with sacred freedom ardent glow,
 and meet intrepid the superior foe. 
long unsubdued by stern almagro train,
 their valiant tribe unequal fight maintain;
 long victory hover doubtful over the field,
 and oft she force iberia band to yield;
 oft love from Spain proud head her laurel bough,
 and bid it blossom on peruvia brow;
 when sudden tiding reach almagro ear,
 that shake the warrior soul with doubt and fear. 
of murder ataliba royal race
 there yet remain a youth of bloom grace,
 who pine, the captive of relentless Spain,
 and long in Cuzco drag her gall chain;
 capac, who lofty soul indignant bear
 the rankle fetter, and revenge prepare. 
but since his dare spirit must forgo
 the hope to rush upon the tyrant foe,
 lead by his parent orb, that give the day,
 and fierce as dart the keen meridian ray,
 he vow to bend unseen his hostile course,
 then on the victor rise with latent force,
 as sudden from its cloud, the brood storm,
 burst in the thunder voice, the lightning form. 
for this, from stern Pizarro he obtain
 the boon, enlarge, to seek the neighbour plain,
 for one bless day, and with his friend unite,
 to crown with solemn pomp a ancient rite;
 share the dear pleasure of the social hour,
 and amid their fetter twine one festal flower. 
so speak the prince — far other thought possess,
 far other purpose animate his breast:
 for now peruvia noble he command
 to lead, with silent step, her martial band
 forth to the destine spot, prepare to dare
 the fierce shock of dire, unequal war;
 while every sacred human interest plead,
 and urge the firm soul to lofty deed. 
now capac hail the eventful morning light,
 rise with its dawn, and pant for the fight;
 but first with fondness to his heart he press
 the tender Cora, partner of his breast,
 who with her lord have seek the dungeon gloom,
 and waste there in grief her early bloom. 
 "no more," he cry, "no more my love shall feel
 the mingle agony i fly to heal; —
 i go, but soon exult shall return,
 and bid my faithful Cora cease to mourn;
 for o, amid each pang my bosom know,
 what waste, what wound it most be cora woe! 
sweet be the love that crown our happy hour,
 and shed new fragrance over a path of flower:
 but sure divide sorrow more endear
 the tie that passion seal with mutual tear! 
he pause. fast-flowing drop bedew her eye,
 while thus in mournful accent she reply: —
" still let i feel the pressure of thy chain,
 still share the fetter which my love detain;
 the pierce iron to my soul be dear,
 nor will its sharpness wind while thou be near. 
look on our helpless babe, in misery nurse —
 my child! my child, thy mother heart will burst! 
o, wherefore bid the rage battle rise,
 nor hear this harmless sufferer feeble cry? 
look on those blade that pour a crimson flood,
 and plunge their cruel edge in infant blood! " 
she can no more — he see with tender pain
 her grief, and lead she to a shelter fane. 
now high in air his feather standard wave,
 and soon from shroud wood and hollow cave
 to cuzco gate advance increase throng,
 and, such their ardour, rouse by sense of wrong,
 that vain will pizarro veteran force
 arrest the torrent in its rage course;
 danger and death peruvia son disdain,
 and half their captive city soon regain. 
when stern almagro hear the voice of fame
 the triumph of PERUVIA loud proclaim,
 unconquered chili vale he swift forsake,
 and his bold course to distant Cuzco take. 
but now he shun the Andes freeze snow,
 the arrowy gale that on their summit blow;
 a burn desert undismayed he pass,
 and meet the ardour of the fiery blast. 
as over the sultry waste they slow move,
 the keen pang of rage thirst they prove;
 no cool fruit its grateful juice distil,
 nor flow one balmy drop from crystal rill;
 for nature sicken in the parch beam
 that shrink the vernal bud and dry the stream;
 while horror, as his giant stature grow,
 over the drear void his spread shadow throw. 
almagro band now pale and faint stray,
 while death oft bar the sink warrior way;
 at length the chief divide his martial force,
 and bid Alphonso by a separate course
 lead over the hideous desert half his train —
 "and search," he cry, "this vast, untrodden plain,
 perchance some fruitage, wither in the breeze,
 the pain of lessen number may appease;
 or heaven in pity from some genial shower
 on the parch lip one precious drop may pour." 
not far the troop of young Alphonso go,
 when sudden from a rise hill ascent
 they view a valley feed by fertile spring,
 which Andes from his snowy summit fling;
 where summer flower humect odour shed,
 and wild bloom, a waste by beauty spread. 
and now Alphonso and his martial band
 on the rich border of the valley stand;
 they quaff the limpid stream with eager haste,
 and the pure juice that swell the fruitage taste;
 then give to balmy rest the night still hour,
 fan by the cool gale that shut the flower. 
soon as the purple beam of morning glow,
 refresh from all their toil, the warrior rise;
 and see the gentle native of the mead
 search the clear current for the golden seed,
 which from the mountain height with headlong sweep
 the torrent bear in many a shine heap;
 iberia son behold with anxious brow
 the tempt lure, then breathe the unpitying vow
 over those fair lawn to pour a sanguine flood,
 and die those lucid stream with guiltless blood. 
thus while the humming-bird, in beauty dress,
 enchant offspring of the ardent west,
 attune his tender song to note of love,
 mild as the murmur of the morning dove,
 while his rich plumage glow with bright hue,
 and with soft bill he sip the scent dew,
 the savage condor on terrific wing,
 from Andes freeze steep relentless spring;
 and, quiver in his fang, his helpless prey
 drop his weak wing, and sigh his soul away. 

aciloe.

tale v. 

in this sweet scene, to all the virtue kind,
 mild zamor own the rich gift of mind;
 for over his tuneful breast the heavenly muse
 shed from her sacred spring inspire dew;
 she love to breathe her hallow strain where art
 have never veil the soul, or warp the heart;
 where fancy glow with all her native fire,
 and passion live on the exult lyre. 
nature, in terror rob or beauty dreast,
 can thrill with dear enchantment zamor breast;
 he love the languid sigh the zephyr pour,
 he love the placid rill that feed the flower —
 but more the hollow sound the wild wind form,
 when black upon the billow hang the storm;
 the torrent roll from the mountain steep,
 its white foam tremble on the darken deep —
 and oft on Andes height with earnest gaze
 he view the sink sun reflect ray
 glow like unnumbered star, that seem to rest
 sublime upon his ice-encircled breast. 
oft his wild warble charm the festal hour,
 rise in the vale, and languish in the bower;
 the heart be reponsive tone he well can move,
 who song be nature, and who theme be love. 

aciloe beauty his fond soul confess,
 yet more aciloe virtue warm his breast. 
ah stay, you tender hour of young delight,
 suspend, you moment, your impatient flight;
 prolong the charm when passion pure controul
 unfold the first affection of the soul! 
this gentle tribe aciloe sire obey,
 who still in wisdom and in mercy sway. 
from he the dear illusion long have flee
 that over the morn of life enchantment shed;
 but virtue calm remembrance cheere his breast,
 and life be joy serene, and death be rest:
 bright be the blush summer glow ray,
 yet not unlovely autumn tempere day. 

now stern iberia ruthless son advance,
 roll the fierce eye, and shake the point lance. 
peruvia tribe behold the hostile throng
 with desolate fury pour along;
 the hoary chief to the dire conflict lead
 his death-devoted train — the battle bleed. 
aciloe search eye can now no more
 the form of zamor or her sire explore;
 while destine all the bitterness to prove
 of anxious duty and of mourn love,
 each name that be dear wake her burst sigh,
 throb at her soul, and tremble in her eye. 
now pierce by wound, and breathless from the fight,
 her friend, the valiant Omar, strike her sight: —
 "Omar," she cry, "you bleed, unhappy youth! 
and sure that look unfold some fatal truth;
 speak, pity speak, my frantic fear forgive,
 say, do my father, do my zamor live?" —
 "all, all be lose!" the die Omar say,
 "and endless grief be thy, dear, wretched maid;
 i see thy age sire a captive bound,
 i see thy zamor press the crimson ground!" —
 he can no more, he yield his fleet breath,
 while all in vain she seek repose in death. 
but o, how far each other pang above
 throb the wild agony of hopeless love! 
that woe, for which in vain will comfort shed
 her heal balm, or time in pity spread
 the veil that throw a shade over other care,
 for here, and here alone, profound despair
 cast over the suffering soul a last gloom,
 and slow lead her victim to the tomb. 

now rude tumultuous sound assail her ear,
 and soon alphonso victor train appear;
 then, as with linger step he move along,
 she see her father amid the captive throng;
 she see with dire dismay, she wild fly,
 her snowy arm around his form she throw; —
 "he bleed!" she cry; "i hear his moan of pain! 
my father will not bear the gall chain! 
cruel Alphonso, let not helpless age
 feel thy hard yoke, and meet thy barbarous rage;
 or, o, if ever mercy move thy soul,
 if ever thou have feel her bless controul,
 grant my sad heart desire, and let i share
 the fetter which a father ill can bear." 
while the young warrior, as she falter speak,
 with fix attention and with ardent look
 hang on her tender glance, that love inspire,
 the rage of conquest yield to mild fire. 
yet as he gaze enrapture on her form,
 her virtue awe the heart her beauty warm;
 and while impassion tone his love reveal,
 he ask with holy rite his vow to seal. 
 "hopse thou," she cry, "those sacred tie shall join
 this bleed heart, this tremble hand to thy? 
to thy, who ruthless heart have cause my pain,
 who barbarous hand the blood of zamor stain! 
can thou, the murderer of my peace, control
 the grief that swell, the pang that rend my soul? —
 that pang shall death, shall death alone remove,
 and cure the anguish of despair love." 

at length, to madness sting by fix disdain,
 Alphonso now to fury give the rein;
 and with relentless mandate doom her sire,
 stretch on the bed of torture to expire;
 but o, what form of language can impart
 the frantic grief that wring aciloe heart! 
when to the height of hopeless sorrow wrought,
 the faint spirit feel a pang of thought,
 which, never paint in the hue of speech,
 live at the soul, and mock expression reach! 
at length she falter cry, "the conflict over,
 my heart, my break heart can bear no more! 
yet spare his feeble age — my vow receive,
 and o, in mercy bid my father live!" 
 "will thou be i?" the enamour chief reply —
 "yes, cruel! — see, he die! my father die! —
 save, save my father!" — "dear, unhappy maid,"
 the charm Alphonso cry, "be swift obey —
 unbind his chain — ah, calm each anxious pain,
 aciloe voice no more shall plead in vain;
 place near his child, thy age sire shall share
 our joy, still cherish by thy tender care. " —
 "no more," she cry, "will fate that bliss allow;
 before my lip shall breathe the impartial vow,
 some faithful guide shall lead his age foot
 to distant scene that yield a safe retreat;
 where some soft heart, some gentle hand will shed
 the drop of comfort on his hoary head. 
my zamor, if thy spirit hover near,
 forgive!" — she cease, and shed no more a tear. 

now night descend, and steep each weary breast,
 save sad aciloe, in the balm of rest. 
her age father beauteous dwelling stand
 near the cool shelter of a wave wood;
 but now the gale that bend its foliage die,
 soft on the silver turf its shadow lie;
 while slow wander over the vale below,
 the gaze moon look pale as silent woe. 
the sacred shade, amid who fragrant bower
 zamor oft soothe with song the evening hour,
 pour to the lunar orb his magic lie,
 more mild, more pensive than her muse ray,
 that shade with tremble step the mourner seek,
 and thus she breathe her tender, plaintive thought: —
 "ah where, dear object of these pierce pain,
 where rest thy murder form, thy love remains? 
on what sad spot, my zamor, flow the wound
 that purple with thy stream blood the ground? 
o, have aciloe in that hour be nigh,
 have thou but fix on i thy close eye, —
 tell with faint voice, it be death worst pang to part,
 and drop thy last cold tear upon my heart! 
a pang less bitter then will waste this breast,
 that in the grave alone shall seek its rest. 
soon as some friendly hand in mercy lead
 my age father safe to chili mead,
 death shall for ever seal the nuptial tie,
 the heart belove by thou be fix to die. " —
 she cease, when dim through her flow tear
 she see her zamor form, his voice she hear. 
 "it be he!" she cry, "he move upon the gale! 
my zamor sigh be deep — his look be pale —
 i faint —" his arm receive her sink frame, —
 he call his love by every tender name;
 he stay her fleet spirit — life anew
 warm her cold cheek — his tear her cheek bedew. 
 "thy zamor live," he cry: "as on the ground
 i senseless lay, some child of pity bind
 my bleed wound, and bear i from the plain, —
 but thou be lose, and i have live in vain!" 
 "forgive," she cry, in accent of despair,
 zamor, forgive thy wrong, and o forbear,
 the mild reproach that fill thy mournful eye,
 the tear that wet thy cheek — i mean to die. 
can i behold my age sire endure
 the pain his wretched child have power to cure? 
still, still my father, stretch in death, i see,
 his grey lock tremble while he gaze on i;
 my zamor, soft, breathe not so loud a sigh,
 some listen foe may pitiless deny
 this part hour — hark, sure some step i hear,
 zamor again be lose — for now it be near.  "—
 she pause, when sudden from the shelter wood
 a venerable form before they stand:
" fear not, soft maid, "he cry," nor think i come
 to seal with deep misery thy doom;
 to bruise the break heart that sorrow rend,
 ah, not for this Las Casas hither bend —
 he come to bid those rise sorrow cease,
 to pour upon thy wound the balm of peace. 
i rove with dire almagro ruthless train,
 through scene of death, to chili verdant plain;
 their wish to bathe that verdant plain in gore,
 then from its bosom drag the golden over:
 but i to check the stream of human blood,
 or mingle drop of pity with the flood;
 when from those fair, unconquered vale they flee
 this languid frame be stretch upon the bed
 of pale disease; when, helpless and alone,
 the chilese espy their friend, the murderer go,
 with eager fondness round my couch they draw,
 and my cold hand with gush tear bedew;
 by day they soothe my pain with sweet delight,
 and give to watch the dull hour of night;
 for i their generous bosom joy to prove
 the care of pity, and the toil of love —
 at length for i the pathless wild they trace,
 and soft bear i over its dreary waste;
 then part, at my foot they bend, and clasp
 these age knee — my soul yet feel their grasp! 
now over the vale with painful step i stray,
 and reach this shelter grove; here, hapless maid,
 my listen ear have catch thy pierce wail,
 my heart have tremble to thy move tale.  "—
" and be thou he? "the mournful pair exclaim,
" how dear to misery soul Las CASAS' name! 
spirit benign, who every grief can share,
 who pity stoop to make the wretch its care,
 weep not for we — in vain thy tear shall flow
 for cureless evil, and for hopeless woe! "—
" come, "he reply," mild sufferer, to the fane
 where rest Alphonso with his martial train;
 my voice shall urge his soul to generous deed,
 and bid he hear when truth and nature plead. " 
while in meek tone Las Casas thus express
 his pious purpose, over aciloe breast
 a dawn ray of cheer comfort stream,
 but faint the hope that on her spirit beam;
 faint as when ebb life must soon depart,
 the pulse that tremble while it warm the heart. 

before Alphonso now the lover stand,
 the age sufferer join the mournful band;
 while, with the look that guardian seraph wear,
 when send to calm the throb of mortal care,
 the story of their woe Las Casas tell,
 then cry," the wretched zamor here behold —
 hope thou, fond man, a passion to control
 fix in the breast, and weave in the soul? 
ah, know, mistake youth, thy power in vain
 will bind thy victim in the nuptial chain;
 that faithful heart will rend the gall tie,
 that heart will break, that tender frame will die! 
then, by each sacred name to nature dear,
 by faithful passion agonize tear,
 by all the waste pang that tear her breast,
 by the deep groan that give the sufferer rest,
 let mercy plead voice thy bosom move,
 and fear to burst the bond of plight love! " 
he pause — now zamor moan Alphonso hear;
 now see the cheek of age bedew with tear. 
pallid and motionless aciloe stand,
 fix be her lift eye, and clasp her hand;
 her heart be chill — her faint heart — for there
 hope slow sink in cold and dark despair. 
alphonso soul be move —" no more, "he cry,
" my hapless flame shall heart like you divide. 
live, tender spirit, soft aciloe live,
 and all the wrong of madden rage forgive! 
go from this desolate region far,
 these plain, where avarice spread the waste of war;
 go where pure pleasure gild the peaceful scene,
 go where mild virtue shed her ray serene! " 

in vain the enrapture lover will impart
 the rise joy that swell, that pain the heart;
 Las CASAS' foot in tear aciloe steep,
 look on her sire and smile, then turn and weep;
 then smile again, while her flush cheek reveal
 the mingle tumult of delight she feel; —
 so fall the crystal shower of fragrant spring,
 and over the pure, clear sky, soft-shadow fling;
 then paint the droop cloud from which they flow
 with the warm colour of the lucid bow. 
now over the barren desert zamor lead
 aciloe and her sire to chili mead;
 there many a wander wretch, condemn to roam
 by hard oppression, find a shelter home:
 zamor to pity tune the vocal shell,
 brighten the tear of anguish as it fall. 
do ever the human bosom throb with pain
 the heavenly muse have seek to soothe in vain? 
she, who can still with harmony its sigh,
 and wake the sound at which affection die! 

Cora.

tale vi.

at length Almagro and alphonso train,
 each peril past, unite on cuzco plain;
 capac resolve beneath the shroud of night
 to pierce the hostile camp, and brave the fight;
 though weak the wrong peruvians arrowy shower
 to the dire weapon stern Iberia pour,
 fierce be the unequal contest, for the soul,
 when raise by some high passion strong controul,
 new string the nerve, and over the glow frame
 breathe the warm spirit of heroic flame. 

but from the scene where rage slaughter burn,
 the timid muse with silent horror turn;
 the blend sound of grief she pant hear,
 where anguish dim a mother eye with tear;
 or where the maid, who give to love soft power
 her faithful spirit, weep the part hour;
 and o, till death shall ease the tender woe,
 that soul must languish, and those tear must flow;
 for never with the thrill that rapture prove,
 her voice again shall hail the youth she love! 
her earnest eye no more his form shall view,
 her quiver lip have breathe the last adieu! 

now night, that pour upon the hollow gale
 the din of battle, drop her mournful veil. 
the sun rise lovely from the sleep flood,
 and morning glitter over the field of blood;
 where, bathe in gore, peruvia vanquish train
 lay cold and senseless on the sanguine plain. 
the generous capac see his warrior yield,
 and flee indignant from the conquer field. 
a wretched throng from Cuzco now repair,
 who tread amid slaughter heap in mute despair;
 over some love corpse the shroud of earth to spread,
 and breathe some ritual that may soothe the dead. 
no moan be hear, for agony suppress
 the fond complaint which ease the swell breast;
 each hope for ever lose, they only crave
 the deep repose that wrap the shelter grave: —
 so the meek lama, lure by some decoy
 of man, from all his unembittered joy,
 erewhile as free as rove the wander breeze,
 meet the hard burden on his bend knee;
 over rock and mountain, dark and waste he go,
 nor shun the path where no fresh herbage grow;
 till, wear with toil, on earth he prostrate lie,
 heed not the barbarous lash, and scornful die. 
swift over the field of death sad Cora fly,
 her infant to his mother bosom grow;
 she seek her wretched lord, who flee the plain
 with the last remnant of his vanquish train:
 through the long glen, or forest gloomy shade,
 a dreary solitude, the mourner stray;
 her timid heart can now each danger dare,
 her droop soul be arm by deep despair —
 long, long she wander, till oppress with toil,
 her tremble footstep track with blood the soil. 

where over a ample vale a mountain rise,
 low at its base her faint form she throw:
 "and here, my child," she cry, with pant breath,
 "here let we wait the hour of linger death;
 this famish bosom can no more supply
 the stream that nourish life — my babe must die! 
in vain i strive to cherish, for thy sake,
 my fail strength; but when my heart-string break,
 when my cold bosom can no long warm,
 my stiffen arm no more enfold thy form,
 soft on this bed of leaf my child shall sleep —
 close to his mother corpse, he will not weep! 
o! weep not then, my tender babe — though near,
 i shall not hear thy moan, nor see thy tear;
 hope not to move i by thy mournful cry,
 nor seek with earnest look my answer eye." 
as thus the die cora plaint arise,
 over the fair valley sudden darkness throw
 a hideous horror; through the wound air
 howl the shrill voice of nature in despair;
 the bird dart scream through the fluid sky,
 and, dash upon the cliff hard surface, die;
 high over their rocky bound the billow swell,
 then to their deep abyss affright fall;
 earth groan heave with dire convulsive throe,
 while yawn gulf its central cave disclose. 
now rush a fright throng with tremble pace
 along the vale, and seek the mountain base;
 purpose its perilous ascent to gain,
 and shun the ruin lower over the plain. 
they reach the spot where Cora clasp her child,
 and gaze on present death with aspect wild:
 they pity pause — she lift her mournful eye,
 and view her lord! — he hear his cora sigh —
 he meet her look — their melt soul unite,
 overwhelm, and agonise with wild delight. 
at length she faint cry, "we yet must part! 
short be these rise joy — i feel my heart,
 my suffering heart be cold, and mist arise,
 that shroud thy image from my close eye! 
o, save my child! — our helpless infant save,
 and shed a tear upon thy cora grave." 
the flutter pulse of life now cease to play,
 and in his arm a pallid corpse she lie! 
over her dear form he hang in speechless pain,
 and still on Cora call — but call in vain;
 scarce can his soul in one short moment bear
 the wild extreme of transport and despair. 

now over the west in melt softness stream
 a lustre, mild than the morning beam;
 a pure dawn dispel the fearful night,
 and nature glow in all the bloom of light;
 then first the mourner, wake from his trance,
 cast on his smile babe a eager glance:
 then rise the hollow voice on fancy ear,
 the part word he hear, or seem to hear! 
that seek with anxious tenderness to save
 that dear memorial from the close grave;
 he clasp the object of his love last care,
 and vow for he the load of life to bear. 
he journey over a dreary length of way,
 to plain where freedom shed her hallow ray;
 there, over the pathless wood, and mountain hoar,
 his faithful band the lifeless Cora bear:
 you who never pine in sorrow hopeless pain,
 deem not the toil that soothe its anguish vain;
 perchance the conscious spirit hover near,
 and love fond tribute to the dead be dear. 
not long iberia sully trophy wave,
 her guilty warrior press the untimely grave;
 for avarice rise from the cave of earth,
 wake all her savage spirit into birth:
 bid proud almagro feel her baleful flame,
 and cuzco treasure from Pizarro claim. 
now fierce in hostile rage each warlike train. 
purple with kindred blood peruvia plain;
 while pensive on the hill, who lofty brow
 overhang with wave wood the vale below,
 peruvia hapless tribe in scatter throng,
 behold the fiend of strife avenge their wrong:
 till, fetter in pizarro iron chain,
 almagro swell the victor captive train. 
in vain his plead voice, his suppliant eye,
 conjure his conqueror by the holy tie
 that seal their mutual league with sacred force,
 when first to clime unknown they bend their course;
 when danger rise horror lower afar,
 the storm of ocean, and the toil of war,
 the sad remains of waste life to spare,
 the shrivel bosom, and the silvered hair —
 almagro die — the victor barbarous pride
 to his pale corpse funereal rite deny;
 chill by the heavy dew of night it lie,
 and wither in the sultry beam of day;
 till indian bosom, touch with generous woe,
 pay the last duty to a prostrate foe. 
with unrelenting hate the conqueror view
 almagro band, and vengeance still pursue. 
condemn the victim of his power to stray
 in droop poverty chill, thorny way;
 to pine with famine agony severe,
 and all the linger form of death to fear;
 till, by despair impel, the rival train,
 rush to the haughty victor splendid fane;
 swift on their foe with rage impetuous dart,
 and plunge their dagger in his guilty heart. 
how unavailing now the treasure over
 that make peruvia rifle bosom poor! 
he fall — unpitied, and will vain buy
 with Andes mine, the tribute of a sigh. 

now faint with virtue toil, Las CASAS' soul
 seek, with exult hope, her heavenly goal: —
 but whence descend, in stream of lambent light,
 that lovely vision on the rapture sight? 
it be sensibility! she stand confess:
 with tremble step she move, and pant breast;
 to yond desert grave, lo, swift she fly,
 where her love victim, mild Las Casas lie! 
i see her deck the solitary haunt
 with chaplet twine from every weep plant:
 its odour soft the simple violet shed,
 the shrink lily hang its droop head;
 a moan zephyr sigh within the bower,
 and bend the frail stem of the pliant flower:
 "hither," she cry, her melt tone i hear,
 it vibrate full on fancy wakeful ear;
 "you to who yield heart my power endear,
 the transport blend with delicious tear,
 the bliss that swell to agony the breast,
 the sympathy that rob the soul of rest;
 hither, with fond devotion, pensive come,
 kiss the pale shrine, and murmur over the tomb;
 bend on the hallow turf the tearful eye,
 and breathe the precious incense of a sigh. 
Las CASAS' tear have moisten misery grave,
 his sigh have moan the wretch he fail to save! 
he, while conflict pang his bosom tear,
 have seek the lonely cavern of despair,
 where desolate she pine, and pour her thought
 to the dread verge of wild distraction wrought. 
while drop of mercy bathe his hoary cheek,
 he pour, by heaven inspire, its accent meek;
 in truth clear mirror bid the mourner view
 pierce the deep veil which error dark draw,
 and vanquish empire with a smile resign,
 while bright world in fair perspective shine." 
she pause — yet still the sweet enthusiast bend
 over the cold turf, and still her tear descend. 

ah, weak PERUVIA! oft thy murmur sigh,
 thy stifle groan in fancy ear arise;
 she view, as slow the year of bondage roll,
 on solemn day when sorrow mock controul,
 thy captive son their antique garb assume,
 and wake remember image of gloom. 
lo! ataliba murder form appear,
 the mournful object of eternal tear! 
wild over the scene indignant glance dart,
 and pang convulsive seize the throb heart —
 distraction soon each burn breast inflame,
 and from the tyrant foe a victim claim! 

but now, disperse desolation night,
 a ray benignant cheer my gladden sight! 
a bloom chieftain of Peruvian race,
 who soar soul its high descent can trace,
 the feather standard rear on chili plain,
 and lead to glorious strife his generous train. 
and see, Iberia bleed! while victory twine
 her fair garland round peruvia shrine;
 the gape wound of earth disclose no more
 the lucid silver, and the blaze over;
 a bright radiance gild the pass hour,
 while freedom break the rod of lawless power;
 on Andes icy steep exult glow,
 and print with rapid step the eternal snow;
 while, roll in dust her graceful foot beneath,
 fade the dark laurel of iberia wreath! —
 Peru! the timid muse who mourn thy woe,
 who pity rob so long of dear repose,
 the muse who pensive soul with anguish wring,
 her early lyre for thou have tremble string;
 shed the vain tear, and breathe the powerless sigh,
 which in oblivion with her song must die;
 pant with the wish thy deed may rise to fame;
 bright on some high-toned harp immortal frame,
 while on the string of ecstasy it pour
 thy future triumph over unnumbered shore. 
