ode to the Hon. C. y. 

by the same.

CHARLES, son of Yorke, who on the mercy-seat
of justice state the bound of right and wrong;
not like the vulgar law-bewildered throng,
who in the maze of error, hope to meet
truth, or hope rather to delude with lie
and airy phantom, under truth disguise.

some wrap in precedent, or point decree,
or lop or stretch the law to form precise:
some, who the pedantry of rule despise,
plain sense adopt, from legal fetter free;
sense without science, fleet, unconfined,
be empty guess, and shift with every wind.

but he, thy sire, with more discern toil,
range the wide field, sagacious to explore
where lie disperse or hide the precious over;
then form into a whole the gather spoil,
law, reason, equity, which now unite,
reflect each on each a friendly light.

bless in a guide, a pattern so complete,
tread, as thou do his footstep; for not rude
thy genius, not uncultured, unsubdued.
yet there be interval and season meet,
to smooth the brow of thought; nor thou disdain
fit hour of vacance with the muse train.

let mean spirit, cast in common mould,
who feed on husk of learned lore, refuse
to hear the lesson of the warble muse;
nor know that bard, the lawgiver of old,
by soothe song to moral truth beguile
man, till then fierce, a lawless race, and wild.

what mean the lyre, by which the fable sage
draw beast to listen, and make rock advance
around he as he play, in mystic dance?
what, but the muse? who soften human rage.
parent of concord, she prepare the plan
of social life, and man attune to man.

she teach the sphere to move in fair array,
each in their orbit heark'n to her strain;
else will they wander over the etherial plain
licentious, but that she direct their way:
she awe to temper, by her magic spell,
the war element, and power of hell.

they err, who think the muse not ally
to Themis; both be of celestial birth:
both give peace, order, harmony to earth;
both by one heavenly fountain be supply;
and man and angel hymn, in general choir,
what law ordain, and what the nine inspire.
