the ecstasy.

i 

mount, mount, my soul on high,
 cut through the spacious sky;
 scale the great mountainous heap that be,
 betwixt the upper world, and thou. 
stop not, till thou the utmost region know,
 leave all the glitter world below:
 then take thy noble flight,
 into the sacred magazine of light,
 view the bright, the empyrean throne
 of the great, the almighty one. 
all the miriades of shine host survey,
 with the seraphic blaze throng;
 celebrate their eternal day,
 with a eternal song. 
in vain my dazzle soul will gaze around,
 (the beatific Glorys so confound)
 it must be quite disrobe, ever tread this holy ground. 

ii.

descend you dare spirit, think it be fair,
 if thou may traverse the inferior air,
 content with humble curiosity,
 view the expand the sky,
 with radiant world, it be rich deck,
 by the almighty architect. 
mount Charles wain,
 drive over all the ætherial plain,
 and to augment thy speed,
 with blaze comet lash the restive steed. 
make they neigh aloud and foam,
 till all the sky a milky way become;
 what though they fret and rage,
 to pass their wonted stage. 
make they Praunce over all the amaze place,
 quite to the empty space,
 and as you go, see what inhabitant there be,
 in every world, of every star;
 their shape, their manner and their state,
 write in journal as you go,
 and to the inquire earth relate;
 by drop it below. 
when weary with your universal round,
 let the sphere harmonious sound,
 refresh and charm your spirit, till they be
 fit to fly back to their first venture one immensity
 but oh! the harmony too soft, too sweet,
 the eternal strain too ravish great,
 i can bear such transport yet,
 well then, i will leave these mighty height and go
 and overlook the little globe below. 

iii.

in this amphibious ball, be vast variety,
 to entertain my curiosity:
 here the great water of the mighty deep,
 their fix amaze bound do keep;
 in vain they rage and roar,
 but dare not touch on the restrain shore. 
here finny herd of the small sort,
 safe play and sport;
 wanton in the flood, with no more danger then
 the pastime of leviathan. 
here do in triumph ride,
 the stately trophy of britania pride:
 her ship which to the Indies trade,
 such noble fabric be make;
 and so numerous appear,
 the fright native do our traffic fear,
 and doubt we will invade. 
secure too in these,
 they visit the antipode. 
from Britain they, the courteous race begin,
 a piece of complaisance unknown,
 to all but civil drake, and the oblige sun. 
Neptune with pompous pride do bear
 those glorious terror; ship of war. 
the float towr they in battalion draw;
 keep all the circle realm in awe. 
yet these vast body, the soft water bear:
 so the great bird of Jove, mount in the trackless air. 
on the smooth flood, the swell billow rise,
 as if the liquid mountain touch the sky:
 then quick they plunge, with a impetuous have,
 and seem to speak destruction as they pass,
 yet arm with avarice and curiosity,
 man scorn the danger, of the threaten sea. 

iv.

next on the solid part, i cast my eye,
 do vast scorch desert spy;
 which untamed beast, and monster breed,
 by they alone inhabit,
 i see huge mountain of uncommon earth,
 some belch with terror forth;
 a sulphurous smoke,
 loud as amaze thunder speak,
 from the unexhausted bowel come,
 ash and stone, evacuate by flame;
 remote from these be frigid mountain too;
 thick clothe in fleecy snow. 
some by restringent air congeal as hard,
 as if with adamantine bar:
 stupendious rock of hideous stone i find,
 who dangerous head, lean over the threaten ground. 
deep in earth centre, far from human sight,
 i search with intellectual light;
 (pierce to the gloomy ray,
 where subterrenean fire, in silence play,
 like the faint glimpse of a imprison day.) 
where unmolested stream with gentle force,
 press, to their primeveal source;
 and sometime upward, gush through poreous earth,
 give to the heal bath, a useful birth;)
 in its more wealthy part, the mineral lie,
 and ponderous metal, shine nerve display:
 in her bright bowel, radiant gem remain,
 till cruel man dissect, and rend her saphir vains. 
with grief and wonder i behold,
 the noble, but mischievous gold;
 oh! with what toil, and mighty pain,
 man the enchant mettle gain. 
this tyrant clay lord it over human kind,
 though they themselves in dirt, at first the monarch find;
 let their stupidity, no more upbraid,
 who worship god, which their own hand have make,
 since we be by gold to great crime betray. 
our country, faith, friend, honour for its sell,
 nay, heaven and love, be sacrifice to gold;
 we be worse idolater, than they,
 who only homage give; since we mischevious obey. 

v. 

then the habitable world appear,
 by art, vast town and pompous temple fear
 the please field, awhile detain my sight
 with a serene delight:
 the flowery mead, with various colour die,
 and smile nature, in her verdant pride;
 here ancient wood, and bloom groves,
 (fit recess, for celestial love,)
 where purling stream, glide with delightful have,
 on who cool bank, be spread willow place:
 the cheerful bird sing on the shade bough,
 in such glad note, as nature do bestow. 
the bleat flock and herd, overspread the plain,
 and recompense the joyful peasant pain. 
here the unenvied village stand,
 raise of native clay, and neighbour wood. 
the inhabitant as void of pride, or art,
 bless with plain diet, and a honest heart;
 these plough the ground, and sow the pregnant grain,
 reap joyful; the plenteous crop again:
 innocent slave, to who rude care we owe,
 the chief support of life, and utmost need below. 
remot help be spring to luxury,
 rich wine and spice, and the Tyrian die,
 do not our want, but wantonness supply. 
here in his humble Cott, the rustic lie,
 know not the curse, of be great or wise;
 ambition, treachery, and fear,
 be stranger here. 
secure and quiet they go plod on,
 happy, because too mean to be undo. 

vi.

then i espy from far,
 troop of shine man, engage in war,
 their artful weapon, be with rage employ,
 and man, by man, be savage destroy:
 poor mercenary slave they die,
 but seldom know for why;
 oh! what confusion here i can bear,
 these horrid groan that reach my distant ear
 from slaugher heap, of die accent there. 
sometime waste town in flame appear,
 huge castle mount, and shatter in the air,
 but ah! what pity it be,
 mankind shall glory in such art as these;
 then to the populous city, i repair,
 find they be little less ensnare;
 though not alarm with mighty noise of war,
 yet curse with grate, private jar,
 envy and strife, self-interest, and deceit,
 extravagance and noise, her fate complete. 
then i survey the splendid court,
 find pageant folly, revel and sport,
 base falsehood, lust, ambition, emnity,
 soft wanton interval, and luxury,
 destructive flattery, and hateful pride,
 and all the city sin beside. 
think i, what shall i do,
 if i must live again below,
 for i remember that i have be there,
 and a return to earth, do fear. 
grant you bless power, say i,
 if i must downwards fly;
 i may descend upon the bloom plain,
 bless with the harmless nymph, and humble Swain,
 there let i ever undisturbed remain. 
