the fly.

 a eclogue.

when in the river cow for coolness stand,
 and sheep for breeze seek the lofty land,
 a youth who aesop teach that every tree
 each bird and insect speak as well as he:
 walk calm muse in a shade way
 where flower hawthorn break the sunny ray,
 and thus instruct his moral pen to draw
 a scene that obvious in the field he see. 

near a low ditch, where shallow Waters meet,
 which never learn to glide with liquid foot,
 who naiad never prattle as they play,
 but screen with hedge slumber out the day,
 there stand a slender fern aspire shade,
 who answer branch regular lay
 put forth their answer bough, and proud rise
 three story upward, in the nether sky. 

for shelter here, to shun the noonday heat,
 a airy nation of the fly retreat;
 some in soft air their silken pinion ply,
 and some from bough to bough delight fly,
 some rise, and circle light to perch again;
 a please murmur hum along the plain. 
so, when a stage invite to pageant show,
 (if great and small be like) appear the beau,
 in box some with spruce pretension sit,
 some change from seat to seat within the pit,
 some roam the scene, or turn cease to roam;
 prelude music fill the lofty dome. 

when thus a fly (if what a fly can say
 deserve attention) raise the rural lay. 

where late aminter make a nymph a bride,
 joyful i fly by young favonia side,
 who, mindless of the feast, go to sip
 the balmy pleasure of the shepherd lip. 
i see the wanton, where i stoop to sup,
 and half resolve to drown i in the cup;
 until brush by careless hand, she soar above:
 cease, beauty, cease to vex a tender love. 

thus end the youth, the buzz meadow ring,
 and thus the rival of his music sing. 

when sun by thousand shine in orb of dew,
 i waft soft with zephyretta fly;
 see the clean pail, and seek the milky cheer,
 while little Daphne seize my rove dear. 
wretch that i be! i may have warn the dame,
 yet sit indulge as the danger come,
 but the kind Huntress leave her free to soar:
 ah! guard, you lover, guard a mistress more. 

thus from the fern, who high-projecting arm,
 the fleet nation bend with dusky swarm,
 the swain their love in easy music breathe,
 when tongue and tumult stun the field beneath. 
black ant in team come darken all the road,
 some call to march, and some to lift the load;
 they strain, they labour with incessant pain
 press by the cumbrous weight of single grains. 
the fly strike silent gaze with wonder down:
 the busy burgher reach their earthy town;
 where lie the burden of a wintery store,
 and thence unwearied part in search more. 
yet one grave sage a moment space attend,
 and the small city lofty point ascend,
 wipe the salt dew that trickle down his face,
 and thus harangue they with the grave grace. 

you foolish nursling of the summer air,
 these gentle tune and whine song forbear;
 your tree and whisper breeze, your grove and love. 
your cupid quiver, and his mother dove,
 let bard to business bend their vigorous wing,
 and sing but seldom, if they love to sing:
 else, when the flouret of the season fail,
 and this your ferny shade forsake the vale,
 though one will save you, not one grain of wheat
 shall pay such songster idle at my gate. 

he cease: the fly, incorrigible vain,
 hear the may'r speech, and fall to sing again. 
