berrathon: a poem.

bend thy blue course, o stream, round the narrow plain of lutha. let the green wood hang over it from their mountain: and the sun look on it at noon. the thistle be there on its rock, and shake its beard to the wind. the flower hang its heavy head, wave, at time, to the gale. why do thou awake i, o gale, it seem to say, i be cover with the drop of heaven? the time of of my fade be near, and the blast that shall scatter my leaf. tomorrow shall the traveller come, he that see i in my beauty shall come; his eye will search the field, but they will not find i? — so shall they search in vain, for the voice of cona, after it have fail in the field. the hunter shall come forth in the morning, and the voice of my harp shall not be hear.  "where be the son of carborne Fingal?"the tear will be on his cheek.

then come thou, o Malvina, with all thy music, come; lay Ossian in the plain of lutha: let his tomb rise in the lovely field. — Malvina! where be thou, with thy song: with the soft sound of thy step? — son of Alpin be thou near? where be the daughter of toscar?

i pass, o son of Fingal, by tar-lutha mossy wall. the smoke of the hall be cease: silence be among the tree of the hill. the voice of the chace be over. i see the daughter of the bow. i ask about Malvina, but they answer not. they turn their face away: thin darkness cover their beauty. they be like star, on a rainy hill, by night, each look faint through her mist.

pleasant be thy rest, o lovely beam! soon have thou set on our hill! the step of thy departure be stately, like the moon on the blue, tremble wave. but thou have leave we in darkness, first of the maid of lutha! we sit, at the rock, and there be no voice; no light but the meteor of fire! son have thou set, Malvina, daughter of generous toscar!

but thou rise like the beam of the east, among the spirit of thy friend, where they sit in their stormy hall, the chamber of the thunder. — a cloud hover over cona: its blue curl side be high. the wind be beneath it, with their wing; within it be the dwelling of Fingal. there the hero sit in darkness; his airy spear be in his hand. his shield half cover with cloud, be like the darken moon; when one half still remain in the wave, and the other look sickly on the field.

his friend sit around the king, on mist; and hear the song of Ullin: he strike the half-viewless harp; and raise the feeble voice. the less hero, with a thousand meteor, light the airy hall. Malvina rise, in the midst; a blush be on her cheek. she behold the unknown face of her father, and turn aside her humid eye.

art thou come so soon, say Fingal, daughter of generous toscar? sadness dwell in the hall of lutha. my age son be sad. i hear the breeze of cona, that be wont to lift thy heavy lock. it come to the hall, but thou be not there; its voice be mournful among the arm of thy father. go with thy rustle wing, o breeze! and sigh on malvina tomb. it rise yonder beneath the rock, at the blue stream of lutha. the maid be depart to their place; and thou alone, o breeze mourn there.

but who come from the dusky west, support on a cloud? a smile be on his grey, watery face; his lock of mist fly on the wind: he bend forward on his airy spear: it be thy father, Malvina! why shine thou, so soon, on our cloud, he say, o lovely light of lutha! — but thou be sad, my daughter, for thy friend be pass away. the son of little man be in the hall; and none remain of the hero, but Ossian king of spear.

and do thou remember Ossian, carborne toscar son of conloch? the battle of our youth be many; our sword go together to the field. they see we come like two fall rock; and the son of the stranger flee. there come the warrior of cona, they say; their step be in the path of the vanquish.

draw near, son of Alpin, to the song of the age. the action of other time be in my soul: my memory beam on the day that be past. on the day of the mighty toscar, when our path be in the deep. draw near, son of Alpin, to the last sound of the voice of cona.

the king of Morven command, and i raise my sail to the wind. toscar chief of lutha stand at my side, as i rise on the dark-blue wave. our course be to sea-surrounded berrathon, the isle of many storm. there dwell, with his lock of age, the stately strength of larthmor. larthmor who spread the feast of shell to comhal mighty son, when he go to starno hall, in the day of agandecca. but when the chief be old, the pride of his son arise, the pride of fair-haired uthal, the love of a thousand maid. he bind the age larthmor, and dwell in his sound hall.

long pine the king in his cave, beside his roll sea. day do not come to his dwelling; nor the burn oak by night. but the wind of ocean be there, and the part beam of the moon. the red star look on the king, when it tremble on the western wave. snitho come to selma hall: snitho companion of Larthmor youth. he tell of the king of berrathon: the wrath of Fingal rise. thrice he assume the spear, resolve to stretch his hand to uthal. but the memory of his action rise before the king, and he send his son and toscar. our joy be great on the roll sea; and we often half-unsheathed our sword. for never before have we fight alone, in the battle of the spear. night come down on the ocean; the wind depart on their wing. cold and pale be the moon. the red star lift their head. our course be slow along the coast of berrathon; the white wave tumble on the rock.

what voice be that, say toscar, which come between the sound of the wave? it be soft but mournsul, like the voice of depart bard. but i behold the maid, she sit on the rock alone. her head bend on her arm of snow: her dark hair be in the wind. hear, son of Fingal, her song, it be smooth as the glide water of lavath. — we come to the silent bay, and hear the maid of night.

how long will you roll around i, blue-tumbling water of ocean? my dwelling be not always in cave, nor beneath the whistle tree. the feast be spread in torthóma hall; my father delight in my voice. the youth behold i in the step of my loveliness, and they bless the dark-haired nina-thoma. it be then thou do come, o uthal! like the sun of heaven. the soul of the virgin be thy, son of generous larthmor! but why do thou leave i alone in the midst of roar water. be my soul dark with thy death? do my white hand lift the sword? why then have thou leave i alone, king of high fin-thormo!

the tear start from my eye, when i hear the voice of the maid. i stand before she in my arm, and speak the word of peace. — lovely dweller of the cave, what sigh be in that breast? shall Ossian lift his sword in thy presence, the destruction of thy foe? — daughter of torthóma, rise, i have hear the word of thy grief. the race of Morven be around thou, who never injure the weak. come to our dark-bosomed ship, thou bright than that set moon. our course be to the rocky berrathon, to the echo wall of fin-thormo. — she come in her beauty, she come with all her lovely step. silent joy brighten in her face, as when the shadow fly from the field of spring; the blue-stream be roll in brightness, and the green bush bend over its course.

the morning rise with its beam. we come to rothma bay. a boar rush from the wood; my spear pierce his side. i rejoice over the blood, and foresee my grow fame. — but now the sound of Uthal train come from the high fin-thormo; they spread over the heath to the chance of the boar. himself come slow on, in the pride of his strength. he lift two point spear. on his side be the hero sword. three youth carry his polish bow: the bound of five dog be before he. his hero move on, at a distance, admire the step of the king. stately be the son of larthmor! but his soul be dark. dark as the trouble face of the moon, when it foretell the storm.

we rise on the heath before the king; he stop in the midst of his course. his hero gather around, and a gray-haired bard advance. whence be the son of the stranger! begin the bard of the song; the child of the unhappy come to berrathon; to the sword of carborne uthal. he spread no feast in his hall: the blood of stranger be on his stream. if from selma wall you come, from the mossy wall of Fingal, choose three youth to go to your king to tell of the fall of his people. perhaps the hero may come and pour his blood on Uthal sword; so shall the fame of fin-thormo arise, like the grow tree of the vale.

never will it rise, o bard, i say in the pride of my wrath. he will shrink in the presence of Fingal, who eye be the flame of death. the son of Comhal come, and the king vanish in his presence; they be roll together, like mist, by the breath of his rage. shall three tell to Fingal, that his people fall? yes! — they may tell it, bard! but his people shall fall with fame.

i stand in the darkness of my strength; toscar draw his sword at my side. the foe come on like a stream: the mingle sound of death arise. man take man, shield meet shield; steel mix its beam with steel. — dart hiss through air; spear ring on mail; and sword on break buckler bind. as the noise of a age grove beneath the roar wind, when a thousand ghost break the tree by night, such be the din of arm. — but uthal fall beneath my sword; and the son of berrathon flee. — it be then i see he in his beauty, and the tear hang in my eye. thou be fall, young tree, i say, with all thy beauty round thou. thou be fall on thy plain, and the field be bare. the wind come from the desert, and there be no sound in thy leaf! lovely art thou in death, son of carborne larthmor.

nina-thoma sit on the shore, and hear the sound of battle. she turn her red eye on lethmal the gray-haired bard of Selma, for he have remain on the coast, with the daughter of torthóma. son of the time of old! she say, i hear the noise of death. thy friend have meet with uthal and the chief be low! o that i have remain on the rock, enclose with the tumble wave! then will my soul be sad, but his death will not reach my ear. be thou fall on thy heath, o son of high fin-thormo! thou do leave i on a rock, but my soul be full of thou. son of high fin-thormo! be thou fall on thy heath?

she rise pale in her tear, and see the bloody shield of uthal; she see it in ossian hand; her step be distract on the heath. she fly; she find he; she fall. her soul come forth in a sigh. her hair be spread on his face. my burst tear descend. a tomb arise on the unhappy; and my song be hear.

rest, hapless child of youth! and the noise of that mossy stream. the virgin will see your tomb, at the chace, and turn away their weep eye. your fame will be in the song; the voice of the harp will be hear in your praise. the daughter of Selma shall hear it; and your renown shall be in other land. — rest, child of youth, at the noise of the mossy stream.

two day we remain on the coast. the hero of berrathon convene. we bring larthmor to his hall; the feast of shell be spread. — the joy of the age be great; he look to the arm of his father; the arm which he leave in his hall, when the pride of uthal arise — we be renown before larthmor, and he bless the chief of Morven; but he know not that his son be low, the stately strength of uthal. they have tell, that he have retire to the wood, with the tear of grief; they have tell it, but he be silent in the tomb of rothma heath.

on the four day we raise our sail to the roar of the northern wind. larthmor come to the coast, and his bard raise the song. the joy of the king be great, he look to rothma gloomy heath; he see the tomb of his son; and the memory of uthal rise. — who of my hero, he say, lie there: he seem to have be of the king of spear? be he renown in my hall, before the pride of uthal rise?

you be silent, you son of berrathon, be the king of hero low? — my heart melt for thou, o uthal; though thy hand be against thy father. — o that i have remain in the cave! that my son have dwell in fin-thormo! — i may have hear the tread of his foot, when he go to the chace of the boar. — i may have hear his voice on the blast of my cave. then will my soul be glad: but now darkness dwell in my hall.

such be my deed, son of Alpin, when the arm of my youth be strong; such be the action of toscar, the carborne son of conloch. but toscar be on his fly cloud; and i be alone at lutha: my voice be like the last sound of the wind, when it forsake the wood. but Ossian shall not be long alone, he see the mist that shall receive his ghost. he behold the mist that shall form his robe, when he appear on his hill. the son of little man shall behold i, and admire the stature of the chief of old. they shall creep to their cave, and look to the sky with fear; for my step shall be in the cloud, and darkness shall roll on my side.

lead, son of Alpin, lead the age to his wood. the wind begin to rise. the dark wave of the lake resound. bend there not a tree from Mora with its branch bare? it bend, son of Alpin, in the rustle blast. my harp hang on a blast branch. the sound of its string be mournful. — do the wind touch thou, o harp, or be it some pass ghost! — it be the hand of Malvina! but bring i the harp, son of Alpin; another song shall rise. my soul shall depart in the sound; my father shall hear it in their airy hall. — their dim face shall hang, with joy, from their cloud; and their hand receive their son.

the age oak bend over the stream. it sigh with all its moss. the wither fern whistle near, and mix, as it wave, with ossian hair. — strike the harp and raise the song: be near, with all your wing, you wind. bear the mournful sound away to fingal airy hall. bear it to fingal hall, that he may hear the voice of his son; the voice of he that praise the mighty. — the blast of north open thy gate, o king, and i behold thou sit on mist, dim gleam in all thy arm. thy form now be not the terror of the valiant: but like a watery cloud; when we see the star behind it with their weep eye. thy shield be like the age moon: thy sword a vapour half-kindled with fire. dim and feeble be the chief, who travel in brightness before. —

but thy step be on the wind of the desert, and the storm darken in thy hand. thou take the sun in thy wrath, and hide he in thy cloud. the son of little man be afraid; and a thousand shower descend. —

but when thou come forth in thy mildness; the gale of the morning be near thy course. the sun laugh in his blue field; and the grey stream wind in its valley. — the bush shake their green head in the wind. the roe bind towards the desert.

but there be a murmur in the heath! the stormy wind abate! i hear the voice of Fingal. long have it be absent from my ear! — come, Ossian, come away, he say: Fingal have receive his fame. we pass away, like flame that have shine for a season, our departure be in renown. though the plain of our battle be dark and silent; our fame be in the four grey stone. the voice of Ossian have be hear; and the harp be string in Selma. — come Ossian, come away, he say, and fly with thy father on cloud.

and come i will, thou king of man! the life of Ossian fail. i begin to vanish on cona; and my step be not see in Selma. beside the stone of Mora i shall fall asleep. the wind whistle in my grey hair, shall not waken i. — depart on thy wing, o wind: thou can not disturb the rest of the bard. the night be long, but his eye be heavy; depart, thou rustle blast.

but why be thou sad, son of Fingal? why grow the cloud of thy soul? the chief of other time be depart; they have go without their fame. the son of future year shall pass away; and another race arise. the people be like the wave of ocean: like the leaf of woody Morven, they pass away in the rustle blast, and other leaf lift their green head. —

do thy beauty last, o ryno? stand the strength of carborne Oscar? Fingal himself pass away; and the hall of his father forget his step. — and shall thou remain, age bard! when the mighty have fail? — but my fame shall remain, and grow like the oak of Morven; which lift its broad head to the storm, and rejoice in the course of the wind.

