Cynthia,

a elegiac poem.

by the same.

beneath a age oak embower shade,
who spread arm with grey moss fringe be,
around who trunk the clasp ivy stray;
a love-lorn youth oft pensive will repair.

fast by, a naïd teach her stream to glide,
which through the dale a wind channel wear;
the silver willow deck its verdant side,
the whisper sedge wave along the shore.

here oft, when morn peep over the dusky hill;
here oft when eve bedew the misty vale;
careless he lay he all beside the rill,
and pour in strain like these his artless tale.

ah! will he say — and then a sigh will heave:
ah Cynthia! sweet than the breath of morn,
soft as the gentle breath that fan at eve,
of thou bereave how shall i live forlorn?

ah! what avail this sweet solemn bower
that silent stream where dimple eddy play;
yond thy my bank bedeck with many a flower,
where maple-tuft exclude the beam of day.

rob of my love, for how can these delight,
though lavish spring her smile around have cast!
despair, alas! that whelm the soul in night,
dim the sad eye and deaden every taste.

as droop the lily at the blight gale;
or crimson-spoted cowslip of the mead,
who tender stalk (alas! their stalk so frail)
some hasty foot have bruise with heedless tread:

as droop the woodbine, when some village hind
have fell the sapling elm it fond bind;
no more it gad dance in the wind,
but trail its fade beauty on the ground:

so droop my soul, dear maid, downcast and sad,
for ever! ah! for ever tear from thou;
bereave of each sweet hope, which once it have,
when love, when treacherous love first smile on i.

return bless day, return you laugh hour,
which lead i up the roseate steep of youth;
which strew my simple path with vernal flower,
and bid i court chaste science and fair truth.

you know, the curl breeze, or gild fly
that idle wanton in the noontide air,
be not so free, be not so gay as i,
for ah! i know not then or love, or care.

witness you wing daughter of the year,
if ever a sigh have learn to heave my breast
if ever my cheek be conscious of a tear,
until Cynthia come and rob my soul of rest!

o have you see, bathe in the morning dew,
the bud rose its infant bloom display;
when first its virgin tint unfold to view,
it shrink and scarce trust the blaze of day.

so soft, so delicate, so sweet she come,
youth damask glow just dawn on her cheek:
i gaze, i sigh, i catch the tender flame,
feel the fond pang, and droop with passion, weak.

yet not unpitied be my pain the while;
for oft beside yond sweetbriar in the dale,
with many a blush, with many a melt smile,
she sit and listen to the plaintive tale.

ah i! i fond dream of pleasure rare,
nor deem so sweet a face with scorn can glow;
how can you cruel then pronounce despair,
chill the warm hope, and plant the thorn of woe?

what though no treasure canker in my chest,
nor crowd of suppliant vassal hail i lord!
what though my roof can boast no princely guest,
nor surfeit lurk beneath my frugal board!

yet shall content, that shun the gild bed,
with smile peace, and virtue there forget,
and rose-lipped health, which haunt the straw-built shed,
with cherub joy, frequent my little cot:

lead by chaste love, the decent band shall come,
o charmer will thou deign my roof to share?
nor shall the muse scorn our simple dome,
or knit in mystic dance, the grace fair.

the woodland nymph, and gentle say, at eve
forth from the drip cave and mossy dell,
shall round our hearth fantastic measure weave,
and shield from mischief by their guardian spell.

come then bright maid, and quit the city throng,
have rural joy no charm to win the soul?
— she proud, alas! deride my lowly song,
scorn the fond vow, and spurn the russet steal.

then love begone, thy thriftless empire yield,
in youthful toil i will lose the unmanly pain:
with echo horn i will rouse the jocund field,
urge the keen chace, and sweep along the plain.

or all in some lone moss-grown tower sublime
with midnight lamp i will watch pale Cynthia round,
explore the choice roll of ancient time,
and heal with wisdom balm my hapless wound.

or else i will roam — ah no! that sigh profound,
tell i that stubborn love disdain to yield;
nor flight, nor wisdom balm can heal the wound,
nor pain forsake i in the jocund field.
