a ode, humble inscribe to the queen. on the glorious success of her majesty arm, 1706. 

write in imitation of Spencer style.

i 

when great Augustus govern ancient Rome,
 and send his conquer band to foreign war;
 abroad when dread, and belove at home,
 he see his fame increase with his year;
 Horace, great bard (so fate ordain) arise;
 and bold, as be his countryman in fight,
 snatch their fair action from degrade prose,
 and set their Battels in eternal light:
 high as their trumpet tune his lyre he string;
 and with his prince arm he moralise his song. 

ii.

when bright Eliza rule britannia state,
 wide distribute her high command;
 and bold wise, and fortunate great,
 free the glad nation from tyrannic band;
 a equal genius be in Spenser find:
 to the high theme he match his noble lay:
 he travel England over on fairy ground,
 in mystic note to sing his monarch praise:
 recite wondrous truth in please dream,
 he deck Eliza head with gloriana beam. 

iii.

but, great Anna! while thy arm pursue
 path of renown, and climb ascent of fame,
 which nor Augustus, nor Eliza know;
 what poet shall be find to sing thy name? 
what number shall record, what tongue shall say
 thy war on land, thy triumph on the main? 
o fair model of imperial sway! 
what equal pen shall write thy wondrous reign? 
who shall attempt and feat of arm rehearse,
 not yet by story tell, nor parallel by verse? 

iv.

i all too mean for such a task i weet:
 yet if the sovereign lady deign to smile,
 i will follow Horace with impetuous heat,
 and cloth the verse in spenser native style. 
by these example right teach to sing,
 and smite with pleasure of my country be praise,
 stretch the plume of a uncommon wing,
 high as Olympus i my flight will raise:
 and late time shall in my number read
 anna immortal fame, and marlbrô hardy deed. 

v. 

as the strong eagle in the silent wood,
 mindless of warlike rage, and hostile care,
 play round the rocky cliff, or crystal flood;
 until by Jove high behest call out to war,
 and charge with thunder of his angry king,
 his bosom with the vengeful message glow:
 upward the noble bird direct his wing;
 and tower round his master earth-born foe,
 swift he collect his fatal stock of ire;
 lift his fierce talon high, and dart the fork fire. 

vi.

sedate and calm thus victor marlbrô sit,
 shade with laurel, in his native land;
 until Anna call he from his soft retreat,
 and give her second thunder to his hand. 
then leave sweet repose, and gentle ease,
 with ardent speed he seek the distant foe:
 march over hill and vale, over rock and sea,
 he meditate, and strike the wondrous blow. 
our thought fly slow than our general fame:
 grasp he the bolt? (we ask) when he have hurl the flame. 

vii.

when fierce bavar on judoign's spacious plain
 do from afar the british chief behold;
 betwixt despair, and rage, and hope, and pain,
 something within his war bosom roll:
 he view that favourite of indulgent fame,
 who whilom he have meet on ister shore:
 too well, alas! the man he know the same,
 who prowess there repel the Boyan power;
 and send they tremble through the fright land,
 swift as the whirlwind drive arabia scatter sand. 

viii.

his former loss he forget to grieve;
 absolve his fate, if with a kind ray
 it now will shine, and only give he leave
 to balance the account of blenheim day. 
so the fell lion in the lonely glade,
 his side still smart with the hunter spear,
 though deep wound, no way yet dismay,
 roar terrible, and meditate new war;
 in sullen fury traverse the plain,
 to find the venturous foe, and battle he again. 

ix.

misguided prince! no long urge thy fate,
 nor tempt the hero to unequal war;
 famed in misfortune, and in ruin great,
 confess the force of marlbrô strong star. 
those laurel groves (the merit of thy youth)
 which thou from Mahomet do great gain,
 while bold assertor of resistless truth,
 thy sword do godlike liberty maintain,
 must from thy brow their fall honour shed;
 and their transplant wreath must deck a worthy head. 

x. 

yet cease the way of providence to blame,
 and human fault with human grief confess:
 it be thou be change; while heaven be still the same:
 from thy ill council date thy ill success. 
impartial justice hold her equal scale;
 till strong virtue do the weight incline:
 if over thou thy glorious foe prevail;
 he now defend the cause, that once be thy. 
righteous the war, the champion shall subdue;
 for Jove great handmaid power, must Jove decree pursue. 

xi.

hark! the dire trumpet sound their shrill alarm:
 auverquerque, branch from the renowned nassaw,
 hoary in war, and bend beneath his arm,
 his glorious sword with dauntless courage draw. 
when anxious Britain mourn her part lord,
 and all of William that be mortal die;
 the faithful hero have receive this sword
 from his expire master much-loved side. 
oft from it be fatal ire have louis fly,
 whereve great William lead, or maese and Sambre run. 

xii.

but brandish high, in a ill-omened hour
 to thou, proud Gaul, behold thy just fear,
 the master sword, disposer of thy power:
 it be that which Cæsar give the british peer. 
he take the gift: nor ever will i sheath
 this steel, (so anna high behest ordain)
 the general say, unless by glorious death
 absolve, until conquest have confirm your reign. 
return like these our mistress bid we make,
 when from a foreign prince a gift her briton take. 

xiii.

and now fierce Gallia rush on her foe,
 her force augment by the Boyan band:
 so volga stream, increase by mountain snow,
 roll with new fury down through russia land. 
like two great rock against the rage tide,
 (if virtue force with nature we compare)
 unmoved the two unite chief abide,
 sustain the impulse, and receive the war. 
round their firm side in vain the tempest beat;
 and still the foam wave with lessen power retreat. 

xiv.

the rage disperse, the glorious pair advance,
 with mingle anger, and collect may,
 to turn the war, and tell aggress France,
 how britain son and britain friend can fight. 
on conquest fix, and covetous of fame,
 behold they rush through the Gallic host. 
through stand corn so run the sudden flame,
 or eastern wind along sicilia coast. 
they deal their terror to the adverse nation:
 pale death attend their arm, and ghastly desolation. 

XV. 

but while with fierce ire Bellona glow,
 and Europe rather hope than fear her fate;
 while Britain press her afflict foe;
 what horror damp the strong, and quell the great? 
whence look the soldier cheek dismay and pale? 
erst ever dreadful, know they now to dread? 
the hostile troop, i ween, almost prevail;
 and the pursuer only not recede. 
alas! their lessen rage proclaim their grief! 
for anxious, lo! they crowd around their fall chief! 

xvi.

i thank thou, fate, exclaim the fierce bavar;
 let boya trumpet grateful iö sound:
 i see he fall, their thunderbolt of war: —
 ever to vengeance sacred be the ground —
 vain wish! short joy! the hero mount again
 in great glory, and with full light:
 the evening star so fall into the main,
 to rise at morn more prevalent bright. 
he rise safe: but near, too near his side,
 a good man grievous loss, a faithful servant die. 

xvii.

propitious Mars! the battle be regain:
 the foe with lessen wrath dispute the field:
 the briton fight, by favour god sustain:
 freedom must live; and lawless power must yield. 
vain now the tale which fab'le poet tell,
 that waver conquest still desire to rove! 
in marlbrô camp the goddess know to dwell:
 long as the hero life remain her love. 
again France fly: again the duke pursue:
 and on ramillia plain he blenheim fame renew. 

xviii.

great thanks, o captain great in arm! receive
 from thy triumphant country be public voice:
 thy country great thanks can only give
 to Anne, to she who make those arm her choice. 
recording schellenberg, and blenheim toil,
 we dread lest thou shall those toil repeat:
 we view the palace charge with Gallic spoil;
 and in those spoil we think thy praise complete:
 for never greek, we deem, nor roman knight,
 in character like these do ever his act indite. 

xix.

yet mindless still of ease, thy virtue fly
 a pitch to old and modern time unknown:
 those goodly deed which we so high prize,
 imperfect seem, great chief, to thou alone. 
those height, where William virtue may have stay,
 and on the subject world look safe down,
 by marlbrô pass, the prop and step be make,
 sublime yet to raise his queen renown:
 still gain more, still slight what he gain,
 nought do the hero deem, while ought undo remain. 

xx.

when swift-winged rumor tell the mighty Gaul,
 how lessen from the field bavar be flee;
 he weep the swiftness of the champion fall;
 and thus the royal Treaty-Breaker say:
 and live he yet, the great, the lose bavar,
 ruin to Gallia, in the name of friend? 
tell i, how far have fortune be severe? 
have the foe glory, or our grief a end? 
remain there, of the fifty thousand lose,
 to save our threaten realm, or guard our shatter coast? 

xxi.

to the close rock the fright raven fly,
 soon as the rise eagle cut the air:
 the shaggy wolf unseen and tremble lie,
 when the hoarse roar proclaim the lion near. 
ill-starred do we our fort and line forsake,
 to dare our british foe to open fight:
 our conquest we by stratagem shall make:
 our triumph have be found in our flight. 
it be we, by craft and by surprise to gain:
 it be they, to meet in arm, and battle in the plain. 

xxii.

the ancient father of this hostile brood,
 their boast brute, undaunted snatch his god
 from burn Troy, and Xanthus red with blood,
 and fix on silver Thames his dire abode;
 and this be troynovante, he say, the seat
 by heaven ordain, my son, your last place:
 superior here to all the bolt of fate
 live, mindful of the author of your race,
 who neither Greece, nor war, nor want, nor flame,
 nor great peleides arm, nor Juno rage can tame. 

xxiii.

their tudor hence, and stuart offspring flow:
 hence Edward, dreadful with his sable shield,
 TALBOT, to gallia power eternal foe,
 and Seymour, fame in council, or in field:
 hence Nevil, great to settle or dethrone,
 and drake, and ca'ndish, terror of the sea:
 hence butler son, over land and ocean know,
 Herbert, and Churchill war progeny:
 hence the long roll which Gallia shall conceal:
 for, oh! who vanquish, love the victor fame to tell? 

xxiv.

envy Britannia, sturdy as the oak,
 which on her mountain-top she proud bear,
 elude the ax, and sprout against the stroke;
 strong from her wound, and great by her war. 
and as those tooth, which Cadmus sow in earth,
 produce new youth, and furnish fresh supply:
 so with young vigor, and succeed birth,
 her loss more than recompense arise;
 and every age she with a race be crown,
 for letter more polite, in Battels more renowned. 

xxv.

obstinate power, who nothing can repel;
 not the fierce saxon, nor the cruel Dane,
 nor deep impression of the norman steel,
 nor europe force amass by envious Spain,
 nor France on universal sway intent,
 oft break league, and oft renew war,
 nor (frequent bane of weaken government)
 their own intestine feud, and mutual jar;
 those feud and jar, in which i trust more,
 than in my troop, and fleet, and all the Gallic power. 

xxvi.

to fruitful Rheims, or fair lutetia gate
 what tiding shall the messenger convey? 
shall the loud herald our success relate,
 or mitred priest appoint the solemn day? 
alas! my praise they no more must sing;
 they to my statue now must bow no more:
 break, repulse be their immortal king:
 fall, fall for ever be the Gallic power —
 the woman chief be master of the war:
 earth she have free by arm, and vanquish heaven by prayer. 

xxvii.

while thus the ruin foe despair commend
 thy council and thy deed, victorious queen,
 what shall thy subject say, and what thy friend? 
how shall thy triumph in our joy be see? 
oh! deign to let the old of the nine
 recite Britannia great, and Gallia free:
 oh! with her sister sculpture let she join
 to raise, great Anne, the monument to thou;
 to thou, of all our good the sacred spring;
 to thou, our dear dread; to thou, our soft king. 

xxviii.

let Europe save the column high erect,
 than trajan high, or than antonine;
 where sembling be may carve the fair effect,
 and full achievement of thy great design. 
in a calm heaven, and a serener air,
 sublime the queen shall on the summit stand,
 from danger far, as far remove from fear,
 and point down to earth her dread command. 
all wind, all storm that threaten human woe,
 shall sink beneath her foot, and spread their rage below. 

xxix.

there fleet shall strive by wind and water toss;
 until the young austrian on iberia strand,
 great as Æneas on the latian coast,
 shall fix his foot: and this, be this the land,
 great Jove, where i for ever will remain
 (the empire other hope shall say) and here
 vanquish, entomb i will lie, or crown i will reign —
 o virtue, to thy british mother dear! 
like the fame trojan suffer and abide;
 for Anne be thy, i ween, as Venus be his guide. 

xxx.

there, in eternal character engrave,
 Vigo, and Gibraltar, and Barcelone,
 their force destroy, their privilege save,
 shall anna terror, and her mercy own:
 Spain, from th'usurper bourbon arm retrieve,
 shall with new life and grateful joy appear,
 number the wonder which that youth achieve,
 who Anna clad in arm, and send to war;
 who Anna send to claim iberia throne;
 and make he more than king, in call he her son. 

xxxi.

there Ister please, by blenheim glorious field
 roll, shall bid his eastern wave declare
 Germania save by britain ample shield,
 and bleed Gaul afflict by her spear:
 shall bid they mention marlbrô, on that shore
 lead his islander, renowned in arm,
 through clime, where never british chief before
 or pitch his camp, or sound his alarm:
 shall bid they bless the queen, who make his stream
 glorious as those of boyn, and safe as those of Thames. 

xxxii.

brabantia, clad with field, and crown with tower,
 with decent joy shall her deliverer meet;
 shall own thy arm, great queen, and bless thy power,
 lay the key beneath thy subject foot. 
flandria, by plenty make the home of war,
 shall weep her crime, and bow to Charles restore;
 with double vow shall bless thy happy care,
 in have draw, and have sheathe the sword. 
from these their sister province shall know
 how Anne support a friend, and how forgive a foe. 

xxxiii.

bright sword, and crest Helms, and point spear
 in artful pile around the work shall lie;
 and shield indent deep in ancient war,
 blazon with sign of Gallic heraldry;
 and standard with distinguish honour bright,
 mark of high power and national command,
 which valois' son, and bourbon boar in fight,
 or give to foix', or montmorancy hand:
 great spoil, which Gallia must to Britain yield,
 from cressy battle save, to grace ramillia field. 

xxxiv.

and as fine art the space may dispose,
 the know thought and curious eye shall see
 thy emblem, gracious queen, the british rose,
 type of sweet rule, and gentle majesty:
 the northern thistle, who no hostile hand
 unhurt too rude may provoke, i ween;
 hibernia harp, device of her command,
 and parent of her mirth, shall there be see:
 thy vanquish lily, France, decay and tear,
 shall with disorder pomp the last work adorn. 

XXXV. 

beneath, great queen, oh! very far beneath,
 near to the ground, and on the humble base,
 to save her self from darkness, and from death,
 that Muse desire the last, the low place;
 who though unmeet, yet touch the tremble string;
 for the fair fame of Anne and albion land,
 who dare of war and martial fury sing:
 and when thy will, and when thy subject hand
 have quell those war, and bid that fury cease;
 hang up her grateful harp to conquest, and to peace. 
