charity.

fair and foremost of the train that wait
 on man most dignify and happy state,
 whether we name thou charity or love,
 chief grace below, and all in all above,
 prosper (i press thou with a powerful plea)
 a task i venture on, impel by thou:
 oh never see but in thy bless effect,
 nor feel but in the soul that heaven select,
 who seek to praise thou, and to make thou know
 to other heart, must have thou in his own. 
come, prompt i with benevolent desire,
 teach i to kindle at thy gentle fire,
 and though disgrace and slight, to redeem
 a poet name, by make thou the theme. 
god work ever on a social plan,
 by various tie attach man to man:
 he make at first, though free and unconfined,
 one man the common father of the kind,
 that every tribe, though place as he see best,
 where sea or desert part they from the rest,
 differ in language, manner, or in face,
 may feel themselves ally to all the race. 
when cook — lament, and with tear as just
 as ever mingle with heroic dust,
 steer britain oak into a world unknown,
 and in his country glory seek his own,
 wherever he find man, to nature true,
 the right of man be sacred in his view:
 he soothe with gift and greet with a smile
 the simple native of the newfound isle,
 he spurn the wretch that slight or withstand
 the tender argument of kindred blood,
 nor will endure that any shall control
 his free-born brother of the southern pole. 
but though some noble mind a law respect,
 that none shall with impunity neglect,
 in base soul unnumbered evil meet,
 to thwart its influence and its end defeat. 
while cook be love for savage life he save,
 see Cortez odious for a world enslave! 
where waste thou then sweet charity, where then
 thou tutelary friend of helpless man? 
be thou in monkish cell and nunn'ry find,
 or build hospital on english ground? 
no — Mammon make the world his legatee
 through fear not love, and heaven abhor the fee:
 wherever find (and all man need thy care)
 nor age nor infancy can find thou there. 
the hand that siew until it can slay no more,
 be glue to the sword-hilt with indian gore;
 their prince as just seat on his throne,
 as vain imperial Philip on his own,
 trick out of all his royalty by art,
 that strip he bare, and break his honest heart,
 die by the sentence of a shave priest,
 for scorn what they teach he to detest. 
how dark the veil that intercept the blaze
 of heaven mysterious purpose and way;
 god stand not, though he seem to stand aloof,
 and at this hour the conqueror feel the proof. 
the wreath he win draw down a instant curse,
 the fret plague be in the public purse,
 the canker spoil corrode the pine state,
 starve by that indolence their mine create. 
oh can their ancient incas rise again,
 how will they take up israel taunt strain! 
be thou too fall Iberia, do we see
 the robber and the murderer weak as we? 
thou that have waste earth, and dare despise
 alike the wrath and mercy of the sky,
 thy pomp be in the grave, thy glory lay
 low in the pit thy avarice have make. 
we come with joy from our eternal rest,
 to see the oppressor in his turn oppress. 
be thou the god the thunder of who hand
 roll over all our desolate land,
 shake principality and kingdom down,
 and make the mountain tremble at his frown? 
the sword shall light upon thy boast power,
 and waste they, as thy sword have waste we. 
it be thus omnipotence his law fulfil,
 and vengeance execute what justice will. 
again — the band of commerce be design
 the associate all the branch of mankind,
 and if a boundless plenty be the robe,
 trade be the golden girdle of the globe:
 wise to promote whatever end he mean,
 god open fruitful nature various scene,
 each climate need what other clime produce,
 and offer something to the general use;
 no land but listen to the common call,
 and in return receive supply from all;
 this genial intercourse and mutual aid,
 cheer what be else a universal shade,
 call nature from her ivy-mantled den,
 and soften human rockwork into man. 
ingenious art with her expressive face
 step forth to fashion and refine the race,
 not only fill necessity demand,
 but overcharge her capacious hand;
 capricious taste itself can crave no more,
 than she supply from her abound store;
 she strike out all that luxury can ask,
 and gain new vigour at her endless task. 
she be the spacious arch, the shapely spire,
 the painter pencil and the poet lyre;
 from she the canvas borrow light and shade,
 and verse more last, hue that never fade. 
she guide the finger over the dance key,
 give difficulty all the grace of ease,
 and pour a torrent of sweet note around,
 fast as the thirst ear can drink the sound. 
these be the gift of art, and art thrive most
 where commerce have enrich the busy coast:
 he catch all improvement in his flight,
 spread foreign wonder in his country sight,
 import what other have invent well,
 and stir his own to match they, or excel. 
it be thus reciprocate each with each,
 alternate the nation learn and teach;
 while providence enjoin to every soul
 a union with the vast terraqueous whole. 
heaven speed the canvas gallant unfurled
 to furnish and accommodate a world;
 to give the pole the produce of the sun,
 and knit the unsocial climate into one. —
 soft air and gentle heave of the wave
 impel the fleet who errand be to save,
 to succour waste region, and replace
 the smile of opulence in sorrow face. —
 let nothing adverse, nothing unforeseen,
 impede the bark that plough the deep serene,
 charge with a freight transcend in its worth
 the gem of India, nature rare birth,
 that fly like Gabriel on his lord command,
 a herald of God love, to pagan land. —
 but ah! what wish can prosper, or what prayer,
 for merchant rich in cargo of despair,
 who drive a loathsome traffic, gage and span,
 and buy the muscle and the bone of man? 
the tender tie of father, husband, friend,
 all bond of nature in that moment end,
 and each endure while yet he draw his breath,
 a stroke as fatal as the scythe of death. 
the sable warrior, frantic with regret
 of she he love, and never can forget,
 lose in tear the far recede shore,
 but not the thought that they must meet no more;
 deprive of she and freedom at a blow,
 what have he leave that he can yet forgo? 
yes, to deep sadness sullen resign,
 he feel his body bondage in his mind,
 put off his generous nature, and to suit
 his manner with his fate, put on the brute. 
oh most degrade of all ill that wait
 on man, a mourner in his best estate! 
all other sorrow virtue may endure,
 and find submission more than half a cure;
 grief be itself a medicine, and bestow
 the improve the fortitude that bear the load,
 to teach the wanderer, as his woe increase,
 the path of wisdom, all who path be peace. 
but slavery! — virtue dread it as her grave,
 patience itself be meanness in a slave:
 or if the will and sovereignty of god
 bid suffer it awhile, and kiss the rod,
 wait for the dawn of a bright day,
 and snap the chain the moment when you may. 
nature imprint upon whatever we see
 that have a heart and life in it, be free;
 the beast be charter — neither age nor force
 can quell the love of freedom in a horse:
 he break the cord that hold he at the rack,
 and conscious of a unincumbered back,
 snuff up the morning air, forget the rein,
 loose fly his forelock and his ample mane,
 responsive to the distant neigh he neigh,
 no stop, till overleap all delay,
 he find the pasture where his fellow graze. 
can thou, and honour with a christian name,
 buy what be woman-born, and feel no shame? 
trade in the blood of innocence, and plead
 expedience as a warrant for the deed? 
so may the wolf who famine have make bold
 to quit the forest and invade the fold;
 so may the ruffian who with ghostly glide,
 dagger in hand, steal close to your bed-side;
 not he, but his emergence force the door,
 he find it inconvenient to be poor. 
have god then give its sweetness to the cane
 unless his law be trample on — in vain? 
build a brave world, which can yet subsist,
 unless his right to rule it be dismiss? 
impudent blasphemy! so folly plead,
 and avarice be judge, with ease succeed. 
but grant the plea, and let it stand for just,
 that man make man his prey, because he must,
 still there be room for pity to abate
 and sooth the sorrow of so sad a state. 
a briton know, or if he know it not,
 the scripture place within his reach, he ought,
 that soul have no discriminate hue,
 alike important in their maker view,
 that none be free from blemish since the fall,
 and love divine have pay one price for all. 
the wretch that work and weep without relief,
 have one that notice his silent grief,
 he from who hand alone all power proceed,
 rank its abuse among the foul deed,
 consider all injustice with a frown,
 but mark the man that tread his fellow down. 
begone, the whip and bell in that hard hand,
 be hateful ensign of usurp command,
 not Mexico can purchase king a claim
 to scourge he, weariness his only blame. 
remember, heaven have a avenge rod;
 to smite the poor be treason against god. 
trouble be grudge and hardly brook,
 while life sublime joy be overlook. 
we wander over a sun-burnt thirsty soil
 murmur and weary of our daily toil,
 forget to enjoy the palmtree offer shade,
 or taste the fountain in the neighbour glade:
 else who will lose that have the power to improve
 the occasion of transmute fear to love? 
oh it be a godlike privilege to save,
 and he that scorn it be himself a slave. —
 inform his mind, one flash of heavenly day
 will heal his heart and melt his chain away;
 'beauty for ash' be a gift indeed,
 and slave, by truth enlarge, be double free:
 then will he say, submissive at thy foot,
 while gratitude and love make service sweet,
 my dear deliverer out of hopeless night,
 who bounty buy i but to give i light,
 i be a bondman on my native plain,
 sin forge, and ignorance make fast the chain;
 thy lip have shed instruction as the dew,
 teach i what path to shun, and what pursue;
 farewell my former joy! i sigh no more
 for africa once love, benight shore,
 serve a benefactor i be free,
 at my best home if not exile from thou. 
some man make gain a fountain, whence proceed
 a stream of liberal and heroic deed,
 the swell of pity, not to be confine
 within the scanty limit of the mind,
 disdain the bank, and throw the golden sand,
 a rich deposit, on the border land:
 these have a ear for his paternal call,
 who make some rich for the supply of all,
 God gift with pleasure in his praise employ,
 and Thornton be familiar with the joy. 
oh can i worship aught beneath the sky,
 that earth have see or fancy can devise,
 thy altar, sacred liberty, shall stand,
 build by no mercenary vulgar hand,
 with fragrant turf and flower as wild and fair
 as ever dress a bank or scent summer air. 
due as ever on the mountain height
 the peep of morning shed a dawn light;
 again, when evening in her sober vest
 draw the grey curtain of the fade west,
 my soul shall yield thou willing thanks and praise
 for the chief blessing of my fair day:
 but that be sacrilege — praise be not thy,
 but he who give thou and preserve thou mine:
 else i will say, and as i speak, bid fly
 a captive bird into the boundless sky,
 this triple realm adore thou — thou be come
 from Sparta hither, and be here at home;
 we feel thy force still active, at this hour
 enjoy immunity from priestly power,
 while conscience, happy than in ancient year,
 own no superior but the god she fear. 
propitious spirit! yet expunge a wrong
 thy right have suffer, and our land, too long,
 teach mercy to ten thousand heart that share
 the fear and hope of a commercial care;
 prison expect the wicked, and be build
 to bind the lawless and to punish guilt,
 but shipwreck, earthquake, battle, fire and flood,
 be mighty mischief, not to be withstand,
 and honest merit stand on slippery ground,
 where covert guile and artifice abound:
 let just restraint for public peace design,
 chain up the wolf and tiger of mankind,
 the foe of virtue have no claim to thou,
 but let insolvent innocence go free. 
patron, of else the most despise of man,
 accept the tribute of a stranger pen;
 verse, like the laurel its immortal meed,
 shall be the guerdon of a noble deed,
 i may alarm thou, but i fear the shame
 (charity choose as my theme and aim)
 i must incur, forget howard name. 
bless with all wealth can give thou, to resign
 joy double sweet to feeling quick as thy,
 to quit the bliss thy rural scene bestow,
 to seek a noble amid scene of woe,
 to traverse sea, range kingdom, and bring home
 not the proud monument of Greece or Rome,
 but knowledge such as only dungeon teach,
 and only sympathy like thy can reach;
 that grief, sequester from the public stage,
 may smooth her feather and enjoy her cage,
 speak a divine ambition, and a zeal
 the bold patriot may be proud to feel. 
oh that the voice of clamor and debate,
 that plead for peace until it disturb the state,
 be hush in favour of thy generous plea,
 the poor thy client, and heaven smile thy fee. 
philosophy that do not dream or stray,
 walk arm in arm with nature all his way,
 compass earth, dive into it, ascend
 whatever steep enquiry recommend,
 see planetary wonder smooth roll
 round other system under she control,
 drink wisdom at the milky stream of light
 that cheer the silent journey of the night,
 and bring at his return a bosom charge,
 with rich instruction, and a soul enlarge. 
the treasure sweet of the capacious plan
 that heaven spread wide before the view of man,
 all prompt his please pursuit, and to pursue
 still prompt he, with a pleasure always new:
 he too have a connect power, and draw
 man to the centre of the common cause,
 aid a dubious and deficient sight
 with a new medium and a pure light. 
all truth be precious if not all divine,
 and what dilate the power must needs refine,
 he read the sky, and watch every change,
 provide the faculty a ampler range,
 and win mankind, as his attempt prevail,
 a proudc station on the general scale. 
but reason still unless divine teach,
 whatever she learn, learn nothing as she ought;
 the lamp of revelation only, show,
 what human wisdom can but oppose,
 that man in nature rich mantle clad,
 and grace with all philosophy can add,
 though fair without, and luminous within,
 be still the progeny and heir of sin. 
thus teach down fall the plumage of his pride,
 he feel his need of a unerring guide,
 and know that fall he shall rise no more,
 unless the power that bid he stand, restore. 
this be indeed philosophy; this know,
 make wisdom, worthy of the name, his own;
 and without this, whatever he discuss,
 whether the space between the star and we,
 whether he measure earth, compute the sea,
 weigh sunbeam, carve a fly, or spit a flea,
 the solemn trifler with his boast skill
 toil much, and be a solemn trifler still,
 blind be he bear, and his misguided eye
 grow dim in trifle study, blind he die. 
self-knowledge true learn, of course imply
 the rich possession of a noble prize,
 for self to self, and god to man reveal,
 (two theme to nature eye for ever seal)
 be teach by ray that fly with equal pace
 from the same centre of enlight'ning-grace. 
here stay thy foot, how copious and how clear
 the overflow well of charity spring here! 
hark! it be the music of a thousand rill,
 some through the grove, some down the slope hill,
 wind a secret or a open course,
 and all supply from a eternal source. 
the tie of nature do but feeble bind,
 and commerce partial reclaim mankind,
 philosophy without his heavenly guide,
 may blow up self-conceit and nourish pride,
 but while his province be the reason part,
 have still a veil of midnight on his heart:
 it be truth divine exhibit on earth,
 give charity her being and her birth. 
suppose (when thought be warm and fancy flow,
 what will not argument sometime suppose)
 a isle possess by creature of our kind,
 endue with reason, yet by nature blind. 
let supposition lend her aid once more,
 and land some grave optician on the shore,
 he clap his lens, if haply they may see,
 close to the part where vision ought to be,
 but find that though his tube assist the sight,
 they can give it, or make darkness light. 
he read wise lecture, and describe aloud
 a sense they know not, to the wonder crowd,
 he talk of light and the prismatic hue,
 as man of depth in erudition use,
 but all he gain for his harangue be — well —
 what monstrous lie some traveller will tell. 
the soul who sight all-quickening grace renew,
 take the resemblance of the good she view,
 as diamond strip of their opaque disguise,
 reflect the noonday glory of the sky. 
she speak of he, her author, guardian, friend,
 who love know no beginning, know no end,
 in language warm as all that love inspire,
 and in the glow of her intense desire
 pant to communicate her noble fire. 
she see a world stark blind to what employ
 her eager thought, and feed her flow joy,
 though wisdom hail they, heedless of her call,
 fly to save some, and feel a pang for all:
 herself as weak as her support be strong,
 she feel that frailty she deny so long,
 and from a knowledge of her own disease,
 learn to compassionate the sick she see. 
here see, acquit of all vain pretence,
 the reign of genuine charity commence;
 though scorn repay her sympathetic tear,
 she still be kind, and still she persevere;
 the truth she love, a sightless world blaspheme,
 it be childish dotage, a delirious dream,
 the danger they discern not, they deny,
 laugh at their only remedy, and die:
 but still a soul thus touch, can never cease
 whoever threaten war to speak of peace,
 pure in her aim and in her temper mild,
 her wisdom seem the weakness of a child,
 she make excuse where she may condemn,
 revile by those that hate she, pray for they;
 suspicion lurk not in her artless breast,
 the worst suggest, she believe the best;
 not soon provoke, however sting and tease,
 and if perhaps make angry, soon appease,
 she rather wave than will dispute her right,
 and injure, make forgiveness her delight. 
such be the portrait a apostle draw,
 the bright original be one he know,
 heaven hold his hand, the likeness must be true. 
when one that hold communion with the sky,
 have fill his urn where these pure water rise,
 and once more mingle with we mean thing,
 it be even as if a angel shake his wing;
 immortal fragrance fill the circuit wide,
 that tell we whence his treasure be supply. 
so when a ship well freight with the store
 the sun mature on india spicy shore,
 have drop her anchor and her canvas furl,
 in some safe haven of our western world,
 it be vain enquiry to what port she go,
 the gale inform we, load with the scent. 
some seek, when queasy conscience have its qualm,
 to lull the painful malady with alm;
 but charity not feign, intend alone
 another good — they centre in their own;
 and too short-lived to reach the realm of peace,
 must cease for ever when the poor shall cease. 
Flavia, most tender of her own good name,
 be rather careless of a sister fame,
 her superfluity the poor supply,
 but if she touch a character, it die. 
the seem virtue weigh against the vice,
 she deem all safe, for she have pay the price,
 no charity but alm aught value she,
 except in porcelain on her mantle-tree. 
how many deed with which the world have ring,
 from pride in league with ignorance have spring? 
but god o'erule all human folly still,
 and bend the tough material to his will. 
a conflagration or a wintery flood,
 have leave some hundred without home or food,
 extravagance and avarice shall subscribe,
 while fame and self-complacence be the bribe. 
the brief proclaim, it visit every pew,
 but first the 'squire, a compliment but due:
 with slow deliberation he untie
 his glitter purse, that envy of all eye,
 and while the clerk just puzzle out the psalm,
 slide guinea behind guinea in his palm,
 until find what he may have find before,
 a small piece amid the precious store,
 pinch close between his finger and his thumb,
 he half exhibit, and then drop the sum;
 gold to be sure! — throughout the town it be tell
 how the good esquire give never less than gold. 
from motive such as he, though not the best,
 spring in due time supply for the distress,
 not less effectual than what love bestow,
 except that office clip it as it go. 
but lest i seem to sin against a friend,
 and wind the grace i mean to recommend,
 (though vice deride with a just design
 imply no trespass against love divine)
 once more i will adopt the grave stile,
 a teacher shall be spare of his smile. 
unless a love of virtue light the flame,
 satyr be more than those he brand, to blame,
 he hide behind a magisterial air
 his own offence, and strip other bare,
 affect indeed a most humane concern
 that man if gentle tutor will not learn,
 that muleish folly not to be reclaim
 by soft method, must be make ashamed,
 but (i may instance in saint Patrick dean)
 too often rail to gratify his spleen. 
most sat'rist be indeed a public scourge,
 their mild physic be a farrier purge,
 their acrid temper turn as soon as stir
 the milk of their good purpose all to curd,
 their zeal beget as their work rehearse,
 by lean despair upon a empty purse;
 the wild assassin start into the street,
 prepare to poignard whomsoever they meet;
 no skill in swordsmanship however just,
 can be secure against a madman thrust,
 and even virtue so unfair match,
 although immortal, may be prick or scratch. 
when scandal have new mint a old lie,
 or tax invention for a fresh supply,
 it be call a satyr, and the world appear
 gather around it with erect ear;
 a thousand name be toss into the crowd,
 some whisper soft, and some twang aloud,
 just as the sapience of a author brain
 suggest it safe or dangerous to be plain. 
strange! how the frequent interject dash,
 quicken a market and help off the trash,
 the important letter that include the rest,
 serve as a key to those that be suppress,
 conjecture gripe the victim in his paw,
 the world be charm, and scrib. escape the law. 
so when the cold damp shade of night prevail,
 worm may be catch by either head or tail,
 forcible draw from many a close recess,
 they meet with little pity, no redress;
 plunge in the stream they lodge upon the mud,
 food for the famish rover of the flood. 
all zeal for a reform that give offence
 to peace and charity, be mere pretence:
 a bold remark, but which if well apply,
 will humble many a tower poet pride:
 perhaps the man be in a sportive fit,
 and have no other play-place for his wit;
 perhaps enchant with the love of fame,
 he seek the jewel in his neighbour shame;
 perhaps — whatever end he may pursue,
 the cause of virtue can not be his view. 
at every stroke wit flash in our eye,
 the turn be quick, the polish point surprise,
 but shine with cruel and tremendous charm,
 that while they please possess we with alarm:
 so have i see, (and hasten to the sight
 on all the wing of holiday delight)
 where stand that monument of ancient power,
 name with emphatic dignity, the tower,
 gun, halbert, sword and pistol, great and small,
 in starry form dispose upon the wall;
 we wonder, as we gaze stand below,
 that brass and steel shall make so fine a show;
 but though we praise the exact designer skill,
 account they implement of mischief still. 
no work shall find acceptance in that day
 when all disguise shall be rend away,
 that square not true with the scripture plan,
 nor spring from love to god, or love to man. 
as he ordain thing sordid in their birth
 to be resolve into their parent earth,
 and though the soul shall seek superior orb,
 whatever this world produce, it absorb,
 so self start nothing but what tend apace
 home to the goal where it begin the race. 
such as our motive be our aim must be,
 if this be servile, that can never be free;
 if self employ we, whatsoever be wrought,
 we glorify that self, not he we ought:
 such virtue have need prove their own reward,
 the judge of all man owe they not regard. 
true charity, a plant divine nurse,
 feed by the love from which it rise at first,
 thrive against hope and in the rude scene,
 storm but enliven its unfading green;
 exuberant be the shadow it supply,
 its fruit on earth, its growth above the sky. 
to look at he who form we and redeem,
 so glorious now, though once so disesteem,
 to see a god stretch forth his human hand,
 the uphold the boundless scene of his command,
 to recollect that in a form like we,
 he bruise beneath his foot the infernal power,
 captivity lead captive rose to claim
 the wreath he win so dear, in our name,
 that throne above all height, he condescend
 to call the few that trust in he his friend,
 that in the heaven of heaven, that space he deem
 too scanty for the exertion of his beam,
 and shine as if impatient to bestow
 life and a kingdom upon worm below;
 that sight impart a never-dying flame,
 though feeble in degree, in kind the same;
 like he, the soul thus kindle from above,
 spread wide her arm of universal love,
 and still enlarge as she receive the grace,
 include creation in her close embrace. 
behold a christian — and without the fire
 the founder of that name alone inspire,
 though all accomplishment, all knowledge meet,
 to make the shine prodigy complete,
 whoever boast that name — behold a cheat. 
be love in these the world last dote year
 as frequent, as the want of it appear,
 the church warm, they will no long hold
 such freeze figure, stiff as they be cold;
 relent form will lose their power or cease,
 and even the dip and sprinkle, live in peace;
 each heart will quit its prison in the breast,
 and flow in free communion with the rest. 
the statesman skill in project dark and deep,
 may burn his useless Machiavelli, and sleep;
 his budget often fill yet always poor,
 may swing at ease behind his study door,
 no long prey upon our annual rent,
 nor scare the nation with its big content:
 disband legion free may depart,
 and slay man will cease to be a art. 
no learned disputant will take the field,
 sure not to conquer, and sure not to yield,
 both side deceive if right understand,
 pelt each other for the public good. 
do charity prevail, the press will prove
 a vehicle of virtue, truth and love,
 and i may spare myself the pain to show
 what few can learn, and all suppose they know. 
thus have i seek to grace a serious lay
 with many a wild indeed, but flowery spray,
 in hope to gain what else i must have lose,
 the attention pleasure have so much engross. 
but if unhappy deceive i dream,
 and prove too weak for so divine a theme,
 let charity forgive i a mistake
 that zeal not vanity have chance to make,
 and spare the poet for his subject sake. 
