[the season:] spring.

come, gentle spring, aethereal mildness, come,
 and from the bosom of yond drop cloud,
 while music wake around, veil in a shower
 of shadow rose, on our plain descend. 

o Hertford, fit, or to shine in court,
 with unaffected grace; or walk the plain,
 with innocence and meditation join
 in soft assemblage, listen to my song,
 that thy own season paint; when nature all
 be bloom, and benevolent like thou. 

and see where surly winter pass off,
 far to the north, and call his ruffian blast;
 his blast obey, and quit the howl hill,
 the shatter forest, and the ravage vale:
 while soft gale succeed, at who kind touch,
 dissolve snow in livid torrent lose,
 the mountain lift their green head to the sky. 

as yet the tremble year be unconfirmed,
 and winter oft at eve resume the breeze,
 chill the pale morn, and bid his drive fleet
 deform the day delightless; so that scarce
 the bittern know the time, with bill ingulph
 to shake the sound marsh; or from the shore
 the plover they, to scatter over the heath,
 and sing their wild note to the listen waste. 

at last from Aries roll the bounteous sun,
 and the bright bull receive he. then no more
 the expansive atmosphere be cramp with cold,
 but full of life, and vivify soul,
 lift the light cloud sublime, and spread they thin,
 fleecy, and white, over all-surrounding heaven. 

forth fly the tepid air; and unconfined
 unbind earth, the move softness stray. 
joyous the impatient husbandman perceive
 relent nature, and his lusty steer,
 drive from their stall, to where the well-used blow
 lie in the furrow loosen from the frost. 
there, unrefuse to the harness yoke,
 they lend their shoulder, and begin their toil,
 cheere by the simple song, and soar lark. 
meanwhile incumbent over the shine share
 the master lean, remove the obstruct clay,
 wind the whole work, and sidelong lay the glebe. 

white through the neighbour field the sower stalk
 with measure step, and liberal throw the grain
 into the faithful bosom of the ground. 
the harrow follow harsh, and shut the scene. 

be gracious, heaven! for now laborious man
 have do his due. you foster breeze, blow! 
you soften dew, you tender shower, descend! 
and temper all, thou world-reviving sun,
 into the perfect year! nor, you who live
 in luxury and ease, in pomp and pride,
 think these lose theme unworthy of your ear. 
it be such as these the rural Maro sing,
 to the full roman court, in all its height
 of elegance and taste. the sacred blow
 employ the king and father of mankind,
 in ancient time. and some, with who compare
 you be but the being of a summer day,
 have hold the scale of justice, shake the lance
 of mighty war, then with descend hand,
 unused to little delicacy, seize
 the blow, and great independent live. 

you generous briton, cultivate the blow! 
and over your hill, and long withdraw vale,
 let autumn spread his treasure to the sun,
 luxuriant, and unbounded. as the sea,
 far through his azure, turbulent extent,
 your empire own, and from a thousand shore
 waft all the pomp of life into your port;
 so with superior boon may your rich soil,
 exuberant, nature better blessing pour
 over every land, the naked nation cloth,
 and be the exhaustless granary of a world. 

nor through the lenient air alone, this change
 delicious breathe; the penetrative sun,
 his force deep dart to the dark retreat
 of vegetation, set the steam power
 at large, to wander over the verdant earth,
 in various hue, but chief thou, gay green! 
thou smile nature universal robe! 
unite light and shade! where the sight dwell
 with grow strength, and ever-new delight! 

from the moist meadow to the brown-browed hill,
 lead by the breeze, the vivid verdure run,
 and swell, and deepen to the cherish eye. 
the hawthorn whiten; and the juicy grove
 put forth their bud, unfold by degree,
 till the whole leafy forest stand display,
 in full luxuriance, to the sigh gale;
 while the deer rustle through the twine brake,
 and the bird sing conceal. at once array
 in all the colour of the flush year,
 by nature swift and secret-working hand,
 the garden glow, and fill the liberal air
 with lavish fragrance; while the promise fruit
 lie yet a little embryo, unperceived,
 within its crimson fold. now from the town
 bury in smoke, and sleep, and noisome damp,
 oft let i wander over the dewy field,
 where freshness breathe, and dash the lucid drop
 from the bend bush, as through the fume maze
 of sweetbriar hedge i pursue my walk;
 or taste the smell of dairy; or ascend
 some eminence, Augusta, in thy plain,
 and see the country far diffuse around
 one boundless blush, one white empurple shower
 of mingle blossom; where the rapture eye
 travel from joy to joy, and hide beneath
 the fair profusion, yellow autumn spy. 

if brush from russian wild a cut gale
 rise not, and scatter from his foggy wing
 the bitter mildew, or dry-blowing breathe
 untimely frost; before who baleful blast,
 the full-blown spring through all her foliage shrink,
 into a smutty, wide-dejected waste. 
for oft engender by the hazy north,
 myriad on myriad, insect army waft
 keen in the poison breeze; and wasteful eat
 through bud, and bark, into the blacken core,
 their eager way. a feeble race! scarce see,
 save by the pry eye? yet famine wait
 on their corrosive course, and kill the year. 
sometime over city as they steer their flight,
 where rise vapour melt their wing away,
 gaze by the astonish crowd, the horrid shower
 descend. and hence the skilful farmer chaff. 
and blaze straw before his orchard burn;
 till, all involve in smoke, the latent foe
 from every cranny suffocate fall;
 or onion, steam hot, beneath his tree
 expose, fatal to the frosty tribe:
 nor, from their friendly task, the busy bill
 of little troop bird instinctive scare. 

these be not idle philosophic dream,
 full nature swarm with life. the unfaithful fen
 in putrid steam emit the livid cloud
 of pestilence. through subterranean cell,
 where search sunbeam never find a way,
 earth animate heave. the flowery leaf
 want not its soft inhabitant. the stone,
 hard as it be, in every wind poor
 hold multitude. but chief the forest-bough,
 which dance unnumbered to the inspire breeze,
 the downy orchard, and the melt pulp
 of mellow fruit the nameless nation feed
 of evanescent insect. where the pool
 stand mantle over with green, invisible,
 amid the float verdure million stray. 
each liquid too, whether of acid taste,
 potent, or mild, with various form abound. 
nor be the lucid stream, nor the pure air,
 though one transparent vacancy they seem,
 devoid of they. even animal subsist
 on animal, in infinite descent;
 and all so fine adjust, that the loss
 of the least species will disturb the whole. 
stranger than this the inspective glass confirm
 and to the curious give the amaze scene
 of lessen life; by wisdom kind hide
 from eye, and ear of man: for if at once
 the world in world enclose be push to light,
 see by his sharpen eye, and by his ear
 intense bend hear, from the choice cate,
 the fresh viand, and the bright wine,
 he will turn abhorrent, and in dead of night,
 when silence sleep over all, be stun with noise. 

the northeast spend his rage, and now shut up
 within his iron cave, the effusive south
 warm the wide air, and over the void of heaven
 breathe the big cloud with vernal shower distented. 
at first a dusky wreath they seem to rise,
 scarce stain aether; but by fast degree,
 in heap on heap, the double vapour sail
 along the load sky, and mingle thick
 sit on the horizon round a settle gloom. 
not such as wintery storm on mortal shed,
 oppress life, but lovely, gentle, kind,
 and full of every hope, and every joy,
 the wish of nature. gradual sink the breeze
 into a perfect calm; that not a breath
 be hear to quiver through the close wood,
 or rustle turn the many-twinkling leaf
 of aspen tall. the uncurling flood, diffuse
 in glassy breadth, seem through delusive lapse
 forgetful of their course. it be silence all,
 and please expectation. herd and flock
 drop the dry sprig, and mute-imploring eye
 the fall verdure. hush in short suspense,
 the plumy people streak their wing with oil,
 and wait the approach sign to strike at once
 into the general choir. even mountain, vale,
 and forest seem, expansive, to demand
 the promise sweetness. man superior walk
 amid the glad creation, muse praise,
 and look lively gratitude. at last
 the cloud consign their treasure to the field,
 and, soft shake on the dimp pool
 prelusive drop, let all their moisture flow,
 in large effusion over the freshen world,
 it be scarce to patter hear, the steal shower,
 by such as wander through the forest-walk,
 beneath the umbrageous multitude of leaf. 
but who can hold the shade, while heaven descend
 in universal bounty, shed herb,
 and fruit, and flower, on nature ample lap? 
imagination fire prevent their growth,
 and while the verdant nutriment distil,
 behold the kindle country colour round. 

thus all day long the full-distended cloud
 indulge their genial store, and well-showered earth
 be deep enrich with vegetable life;
 till, in the western-sky, the downward sun
 look out illustrious from amid the flush
 of break cloud, gay-shifting to his beam. 
the rapid radiance instantaneous strike
 the illumine mountain through the forest stream,
 shake on the flood, and in a yellow mist,
 far smoke over the interminable plain,
 in twinkle myriad light the dewy gem. 
moist, bright, and green, the landskip laugh around. 
full swell the wood; their every music wake,
 mix in wild consort with the warble brook
 increase, the unnumbered bleat of the hill,
 the hollow swallow responsive from the vale,
 whence blend all the sweeten zephyr spring. 
mean time refract from yond eastern cloud,
 bestride earth, the grand aethereal bow
 shoot up immense! and every hue unfold,
 in fair proportion run from the red,
 to where the violet fade into the sky. 
here, mighty Newton, the dissolve cloud
 be, as they scatter round, thy numerous prism,
 untwist to the philosophic eye
 the various twine of light, by thou pursue
 through the white mingle maze. not so the swain,
 he wonder view the bright enchantment bend,
 delightful, over the radiant field, and run
 to catch the fall glory; but amaze
 behold the amusive arch before he fly,
 then vanish quite away. still night succeed,
 a soften shade, and saturate earth
 await the morning beam, to give again,
 transmute soon by nature chemistry,
 the bloom blessing of the former day. 

then spring the live herb, profuse wild,
 over all the deep-green earth, beyond the power
 of botanist to number up their tribe;
 whether he steal along the lonely dale
 in silent search; or through the forest, rank
 with what the dull incurious weed account,
 burst his blind way; or climb the mountain rock,
 fire by the nod verdure of its brow. 
with such a liberal hand have nature fling
 their seed abroad, blow they about in wind,
 innumerous mix they with the nurse mould,
 the moisten current, and prolific rain. 

but who their virtue can declare? who pierce
 with vision pure into these secret store
 of life, and health, and joy? the food of man
 while yet he live in innocence, and tell
 a length of golden year, unfleshed in blood,
 a stranger to the savage art of life,
 death, rapine, carnage, surfeit, and disease,
 the lord, and not the tyrant of the world. 

then the glad morning wake the gladden race
 of uncorrupted man, nor blush to see
 the sluggard sleep beneath her sacred beam. 
for their light slumber gentle fume away,
 and up they rise as vigorous as the sun,
 or to the culture of the will glebe,
 or to the cheerful tendance of the flock. 
mean time the song go round; and dance, and sport,
 wisdom; and friendly talk successive steal
 their hour away. while in the rosy vale
 love breathe his infant sigh, from anguish free,
 replete with bliss, and only weep for joy. 
nor yet injurious act, nor surly deed
 be know among these happy son of heaven;
 for reason and benevolence be law. 
harmonious nature too look smile on. 
clean shine the sky, cool with eternal gale,
 and balmy spirit all. the youthful sun
 shoot his best ray; and still the gracious cloud
 drop fatness down; as over the swell mead
 the herd and flock commix play secure. 
which when, emergent from the gloomy wood,
 the glare lion see, his horrid heart
 be meeken, and he join his sullen joy. 
for music hold the whole in perfect peace:
 soft sigh the flute; the tender voice be hear,
 warble the joyous heart; the woodland round
 apply their choir; and wind and water flow
 in consonance. such be these prime of day. 

this to the poet give the golden age;
 when, as they sing in elevate phrase,
 the sailor-pine have not the nation yet
 in commerce mix; for every country teem
 with every thing. spontaneous harvest wave,
 still in a sea of yellow plenty round. 
the forest be the vineyard, where untaught
 to climb, unpruned and wild, the juicy grape
 burst into flood of wine. the knot oak
 shake from his bough the long transparent stream
 of honey, creep through the mat grass,
 the uncultivated thorn a ruddy shower
 of fruitage shed, on such as sit below,
 in bloom ease, and from brown labour free,
 save what the copious gather, grateful give. 
the river foam with nectar; or diffuse,
 silent, and soft, the milky maze devolve. 
nor have the spongy, full-expanded fleece,
 yet drink the Tyrian dye. the stately ram
 shine through the mead, in native purple clad,
 or mild saffron; and the dance lamb
 the vivid crimson to the sun disclose. 
nothing have power to hurt the savage soul,
 yet untransfused into the tiger heart,
 burn not his bowel, nor his gamesome paw
 drive on the fleecy partner of his play:
 while from the flowery brake the serpent roll
 his fair spire, and play his pointless tongue. 

but now whatever these gaudy fable mean,
 and the white minute which they shadow out,
 be find no more amid those iron time,
 those dregs of life! in which the human mind
 have lose that harmony ineffable,
 which warm the soul of happiness; and all
 be off the poise within; the passion all
 have burst their bound; and reason half extinct,
 or impotent, or else approve, see
 the foul disorder. anger storm at large,
 without a equal cause; and fall revenge
 support the fall rage. close envy bite
 with venom tooth; while weak, unmanly fear,
 full of frail fancy, loosen every power. 
even love itself be bitterness of soul,
 a please anguish pine at the heart. 
hope sicken with extravagance; and grief,
 of life impatient, into madness swell;
 or in dead silence waste the weep hour. 
these, and a thousand mix emotion more,
 from everchanging view of good and ill,
 form infinite various, vex the mind
 with endless storm. whence, inly-rankling, grow
 the selfish thought, a listless inconcern,
 cold, and avert from our neighbour good;
 then dark disgust, and malice, wind wile,
 sneak deceit, and coward villainy:
 at last deep-rooted hatred, lewd reproach,
 convulsive wrath, and thoughtless fury, quick
 to deed of vile aim. even nature self
 be deem, vindictive, to have change her course. 

hence in old time, they say, a deluge come;
 when the dispart orb of earth, that arch
 the imprison deep around, impetuous rush,
 with ruin inconceivable, at once
 into the gulph, and over the high hill
 wide-dashed the wave, in undulation vast:
 until, from the centre to the stream cloud,
 a shoreless ocean tumble round the globe. 

the season since, as hoar tradition tell,
 have keep their constant chase; the winter keen
 pour out his waste of snow; and summer shoot
 his pestilential heat; great spring before
 green all the year; and fruit and blossom blush
 in social sweetness on the self-same bough. 
clear be the temperate air; a even calm
 perpetual reign, save what the zephyr bland
 breathe over the blue expanse; for then nor storm
 be teach to blow, nor hurricane to rage;
 sound sleep the water: no sulphureous gloom
 swell in the sky, and send the lightning forth:
 while sickly damp, and cold autumnal fog,
 sit not pernicious on the spring of life. 
but now, from clear to cloudy, moist to dry,
 and hot to cold, in restless change revolve,
 our droop day be dwindle down to nought,
 the fleet shadow of a winter sun. 

and yet the wholesome herb neglect die
 in lone obscurity, unprized for food;
 although the pure, exhilarate soul
 of nutriment, and health, salubrious breathe,
 by heaven infuse, along its secret tube. 
for, with hot ravine fire, ensanguine man
 be now become the lion of the plain,
 and worse. the wolf, who from the nightly fold
 fierce-drag the bleat prey, never drink her milk,
 nor wear her warm fleece: nor have the steer,
 at who strong chest the deadly tiger hang,
 ever plough for he. they too be tempere high,
 with hunger sting, and wild necessity,
 nor lodge pity in their shaggy breast. 
but man, who nature form of mild clay,
 with every kind emotion in his heart,
 and teach alone to weep; while from her lap
 she pour ten thousand delicacy, herb,
 and fruit, as numerous as the drop of rain,
 and beam that give they birth: shall he, fair form! 
who wear sweet smile, and look erect on heaven,
 ever stoop to mingle with the prowl herd,
 and dip his tongue in blood? the beast of prey,
 it be true, deserve the fate in which he deal. 
he, from the thicket, let the hardy youth
 provoke, and foam through the awaken wood
 with every nerve pursue. but you, you flock,
 what have you do? you peaceful people, what,
 to merit death? you, who have give we milk
 in luscious stream, and lend we your own coat
 against the winter cold? who usefulness
 in live only lie? and the plain ox,
 that harmless, honest, guileless animal,
 in what have he offend? he, who toil,
 patient and ever-ready; clothes the land
 with all the pomp of harvest; shall he bleed,
 and wrestle groan beneath the cruel hand
 even of the clown he feed? and that perhaps
 to swell the riot of the gather feast,
 win by his labour? thus the feeling heart
 will tender suggest: but it be enough,
 in this late age, adventurous to have touch,
 light on the number of the samian sage. 
high heaven beside forbid the dare strain,
 who wise will have fix we in a state,
 that must not yet to pure perfection rise. 

but yonder breathe prospect bid the muse
 throw all her beauty forth, that daub all
 will be to what i gaze; for who can paint
 like nature? can imagination boast,
 amid his gay creation, hue like she? 
and can he mix they with that matchless skill,
 and lie they on so delicate fine,
 and lose they in each other, as appear
 in every bud that blow? if fancy then
 unequal fail beneath the lovely task;
 ah what shall language do? ah where find word
 tinge with so many colour? and who power
 to life approach, may perfume my lay
 with that fine oil, these aromatic gale,
 which inexhaustive flow continual round? 

yet, though successless, will the toil delight. 
come then, you virgin, and you youth, who heart
 have feel the rapture of refine love;
 oh come, and while the rosy-footed may
 steal blush on, together let we walk
 the morning dew, and gather in their prime
 fresh-blooming flower, to deck the braid hair,
 and the white bosom that improve their sweet. 

see, where the wind vale her lavish store,
 irriguous, spread. see, how the lily drink
 the latent rill, scarce ooze through the grass
 of growth luxuriant; or the humid bank
 profuse climb. turgent, in every pore
 the gummy moisture shine; new lustre lend,
 and feed the spirit that diffusive round
 refresh ail the dale. long let we walk,
 where the breeze blow from yond extend field
 of blossom bean: Arabia can boast
 a full gale of joy than, liberal, thence
 breathe through the sense, and take the ravish soul. 
nor be the meadow worthless of our foot,
 full of fresh verdure, and unnumbered flower,
 the negligence of nature, wide, and wild;
 where undisguised by mimic art, she spread
 unbounded beauty to the boundless eye. 
it be here that their delicious task the bee,
 in swarm million, tend. around, athwart,
 this way, and that, the busy nation fly,
 cling to the bud, and with insert tube,
 its soul, its sweetness, and its manna suck. 
the little chemist thus, all-moving heaven
 have teach: and oft, of bold wing, he dare
 the purple heath, or where the wild-thyme grow,
 and yellow load he with the luscious spoil. 

at length the finish garden to the view
 its vistas open, and its alley green. 
snatch through the verdant maze, the hurry eye
 distract wander; now the bowery walk
 of covert close, where scarce a speck of day
 fall on the lengthen gloom, protract dart;
 now meet the bend sky, the river now
 dimple along, the breezy-ruffled lake,
 the forest run round, the rise spire,
 the aethereal mountain, and the distant main. 
but why so far excursive? when at hand,
 along the blush border, dewy-bright,
 and in yond mingle wilderness of flower,
 fair-handed spring unbosom every grace;
 throw out the snowdrop, and the crocus first,
 the daily, primrose, violet dark blue,
 dew-bending cowslip, and of nameless dye
 anemony, auriculas a tribe
 peculiar powder with a shine sand,
 renunculas, and iris many-hued. 
then come the tulip-race, where beauty play
 her gay freak: from family diffuse
 to family, as fly the father-dust,
 the vary colour run; and while they break
 on the charm florist eye, he curious stand,
 and new-flushed glory all ecstatic mark. 
nor hyacinth be want, nor junquil
 of potent fragrance, nor narcissus white,
 nor stripe carnation, nor enamel pink,
 and shower from every bush the damask-rose. 
infinite number, delicacy, smell,
 with hue on hue expression can paint,
 the breath of nature, and her endless bloom. 

hail, mighty be! universal soul
 of heaven and earth! essential presence, hail! 
to thou i bend the knee; to thou my thought
 continual climb; who, with a master-hand,
 have the great whole into perfection touch. 
by thou, the various vegetative tribe,
 wrap in a filmy net, and clad with leaf,
 draw the live aether, and imbibe the dew. 
by thou dispose into congenial soil,
 stand each attractive plant, and suck, and swell
 the juicy tide; a twine mass of tube. 
at thy command, the vernal sun awake
 the torpid sap, detrude to the root
 by wintery wind, that now, in fluent dance,
 and lively fermentation, mount, spread
 all this innumerous-coloured scene of thing. 

ascend from the vegetable world
 to high life, with equal wing ascend,
 my pant muse; and hark, how loud the wood
 invite you forth in all your gay trim. 
lend i your song, you nightingale! oh pour
 the mazy-running soul of melody
 into my vary verse! while i deduce,
 from the first note the hollow cuckoo sing,
 the symphony of spring, and touch a theme
 unknown to fame, the passion of the groves. 

just as the spirit of love be send abroad,
 warm through the vital air, and on their heart
 harmonious seize, the gay troop begin,
 in gallant thought, to plume the paint wing;
 and try again the long-forgotten strain,
 at first faint-warbled. but no soon grow
 the soft infusion prevalent, and wide,
 than, all alive, at once their joy overflow
 in music unconfined. upspring the lark,
 shrill-voiced, and loud, the messenger of morn;
 ever yet the shadow fly, he mount sing
 amid the dawn cloud, and from their haunt
 call up the tuneful nation. every copse
 thick-wove, and tree irregular, and bush
 bend with dewy moisture, over the head
 of the coy quirister that lodge within,
 be prodigal of harmony. the thrush
 and wood-lark, over the kind-contending throng
 superior hear, run through the sweet length
 of note; when listen Philomela deign
 to let they joy, and purpose, in thought
 elate, to make her night excel their day. 
the blackbird whistle from the thorny brake;
 the mellow bullfinch answer from the grove:
 nor be the linnet, over the flower furze
 pour out profuse, silent. join to these
 thousand beside, thick as the cover leaf
 they warble under, or the nitid hue
 that speck they over, their modulation mix
 mellifluous. the jay, the rook, the daw,
 and each harsh pipe, discordant hear alone,
 here aid the consort: while the stock-dove breathe
 a melancholy murmur through the whole. 

it be love create their gaiety, and all
 this waste of music be the voice of love;
 which even to bird, and beast, the tender art
 of please teach. hence the glossy kind
 try every win way inventive love
 can dictate, and in flutter courtship pour
 their little soul before she. wide around,
 respectful, first in airy ring they rove,
 endeavour by a thousand trick to catch
 the cunning, conscious, half-averted glance
 of their regardless charmer. shall she seem
 soften the least approvance to bestow,
 their colour burnish, and by hope inspire
 they brisk advance; then on a sudden strike
 retire disorder; then again approach;
 and throw out the last effort of love,
 in fond rotation spread the spot wing,
 and shiver every feather with desire. 

connubial league agree, to the deep wood
 they haste away, each as their fancy lead,
 pleasure, or food, or secret safety prompt;
 that nature great command may be obey,
 nor all the sweet sensation they perceive
 indulge in vain. some to the holly-hedge
 nestle repair, and to the thicket some;
 some to the rude protection of the thorn
 resolve to trust their young. the clested tree
 offer its kind concealment to a few,
 their food its insect, and its moss their nest. 
other apart far in the grassy dale
 their humble texture weave. but most delight
 in unfrequented gloom, or shaggy bank,
 steep, and divide by a babble brook,
 who murmur sooth they all the live-long day,
 when for a season fix. among the root
 of hazel, pendant over the plaintive stream,
 they frame the first foundation of their dome,
 dry sprig of tree, in artful manner lay,
 and bind with clay together. now it be nought
 but hurry hurry through the busy air,
 beat by unnumbered wing. the swallow sweep
 the slimy pool, to build his hang house
 ingenious intent. oft from the back
 of herd and flock a thousand tug bill
 pluck hair, and wool; and oft, when unobserved,
 steal from the barn the straw; till soft, and warm,
 clean, and complete, their habitation grow. 

as thus the patient dam assiduous sit,
 not to be tempt from her tender task,
 or by sharp hunger, or by smooth delight,
 though the whole loosen spring around her blow,
 her sympathize lover take his stand
 high on opponent bank, and ceaseless sing
 the tedious time away; or else supply
 her place a moment, while she sudden flit
 to pick the scanty meal. the appoint time
 with pious toil fulfil, the callow young
 warm, and expand into perfect life,
 their brittle bondage break, and come to light,
 a helpless family, demand food
 with constant clamour. oh what passion then,
 what melt sentiment of kindly care
 seize the new parent heart? away they fly
 affectionate, and undesiring bear
 the most delicious morsel to their young,
 which equal distribute, again
 the search begin. so pitiful, and poor,
 a gentle pair on providential heaven
 cast, as they weep eye their clamant train,
 check their own appetite, and give they all. 

nor be the courage of the fearful kind,
 nor be their cunning less, shall some rude foot
 their woody haunt molest; stealthy aside
 into the centre of a neighbour bush
 they drop, and whirr thence alarm, deceive
 the ramble school-boy. hence around the head
 of traveller, the white-winged plover wheel
 her sound flight, and then direct on
 in long excursion skim the level lawn,
 to tempt you from her nest. the wild-duck hence
 over the rough moss, and over the trackless waste
 the heath-hen flutter, as if hurt, to lead
 the hot pursue spaniel far astray. 

be not the muse ashamed, here to bemoan
 her brother of the grove, by tyrant man
 inhuman catch, and in the narrow cage
 from liberty confine, and boundless air. 
dull be the pretty slave, their plumage dull,
 ragged, and all its brighten lustre lose;
 nor be that luscious wildness in their note
 that warble from the beech. oh then desist,
 you friend of harmony! this barbarous art
 forbear, if innocence and music can
 win on your heart, or piety persuade. 

but let not chief the nightingale lament
 her ruin care, too delicate frame
 to brook the harsh confinement of the cage. 
oft when return with her load bill,
 the astonish mother find a vacant nest,
 by the hard hand of unrelenting clown
 rob, to the ground the vain provision fall;
 her pinion ruffle, and low-drooping scarce
 can bear the mourner to the poplar shade;
 where, all abandon to despair, she sing
 her sorrow through the night; and, on the bough
 sad-sitting, still at every die fall
 take up again her lamentable strain
 of wind woe, till wide around the wood
 sigh with her song, and with her wail resound. 

and now the feather youth their former bound
 ardent disdain, and weigh oft their wing,
 demand the free possession of the sky. 
but this glad office more, and then dissolve
 parental love at once; for needless grow,
 unlavish wisdom never work in vain. 
it be on some evening, sunny, grateful, mild,
 when nought but balm be breathe through the wood,
 with yellow lustre bright, that the new tribe
 visit the spacious heaven, and look abroad
 on nature common, far as they can see,
 or wing, their range, and pasture. over the bough
 dance about, still at the giddy verge
 their resolution fail; their pinion still,
 in loose libration stretch, the void abrupt
 tremble refuse: till down before they fly
 the parent-guide, and chide, exhort, command,
 or push they off. the surge air receive
 the plumy burden; and their self-taught wing
 winnow the wave element. on ground
 alight, bold up again they lead
 farther and farther on the lengthen flight;
 till vanish every fear, and every power
 rouse into life, and action in the void
 the exoner parent see their soar race,
 and once rejoice never know they more. 

high from the summit of a craggy cliff,
 hang over the green sea, grudge at its base,
 the royal eagle draw his young, resolve
 to try they at the sun. strong-pounced, and bright
 as burnish day, they up the blue sky wind,
 leave dull sight below, and with fix gaze
 drink in their native noon: the father-king
 clap his glad pinion, and approve the birth. 

and shall i wander to the rural fear,
 who age oak, and venerable gloom,
 invite the noisy rook; with pleasure there,
 i may the various polity survey
 of the mix household kind. the careful hen
 call all her chirp family around,
 feed, and defend by the fearless cock,
 who breast with ardour flame, as on he walk
 graceful, and crow defiance. in the pond,
 the finely-checkered duck, before her train,
 row garrulous. the stately-sailing swan
 give out his snowy plumage to the gale,
 and, arch proud his neck, with oary foot
 bear forward fierce, and beat you from the bank,
 protective of his young. the turkey nigh,
 loud-threatening, redden; while the peacock spread
 his every-coloured glory to the sun,
 and swim in float majesty along. 
over the whole homely scene, the coo dove
 fly thick in amorous chace, and wanton roll
 the glance eye, and turn the changeful neck. 

while thus the gentle tenant of the shade
 indulge their pure love, the rough world
 of brute below, rush furious into flame,
 and fierce desire. through all his lusty vein
 the bull, deep-scorched, receive the rage fire. 
of pasture sick, and negligent of food,
 scarce see, he wade among the yellow broom,
 while over his brawny back the ramble spray
 luxuriant shoot; or through the mazy wood
 deject wander, nor the entice bud
 crop, though it press on his careless sense:
 for, wrap in mad imagination, he
 roar for the fight, and idle butt, feign
 a rival gore in every knotty trunk. 
such shall he meet, the bellow war begin;
 their eye flash fury; to the hollow earth,
 whence the sand fly, they mutter bloody deed,
 and groan vast the impetuous battle mix:
 while the fair heifer, redolent, in view
 stand kindle up their rage. the tremble steed,
 with this hot impulse seize in every nerve,
 nor hear the rein, nor heed the sound whip;
 blow be not feel; but toss high his head,
 and by the wellknown joy, to distant plain
 attract strong, all wild, he burst away;
 over rock, and wood, and craggy mountain fly,
 and neigh, on the aerial summit take
 the inform gale; then steep-descending, cleave
 the headlong torrent foam down the hill,
 even where the madness of the straiten stream
 turn in black eddy round: such be the force
 with which his frantic heart, and sinew swell. 

nor, undelighted by the boundless spring,
 be the broad monster of the boil deep:
 from the deep ooze, and gelid cavern rouse,
 they flounce, and tumble in unwieldy joy. 
dire be the strain, and dissonant, to sing
 the cruel rapture of the savage kind:
 how the red lioness, her whelp forget
 amid the thoughtless fury of her heart;
 the lank rapacious wolf; the unshapely bear;
 the spot tiger, fell of the fell;
 and all the terror of the libyan swain,
 by this new flame their native wrath sublime,
 roam the resound waste in fierce band,
 and growl their horrid love. but this the theme
 i sing, transport, to the british fair,
 forbid, and lead i to the mountain-brow,
 where sit the shepherd on the grassy turf,
 inhale, healthful, the descend sun. 
around he feed his many-bleating flock
 of various cadence; and his sportive lamb,
 this way, and that, convolve in friskful glee,
 their little frolick play. and now the race
 invite they forth; when swift the signal give,
 they start away, and sweep the massy mound
 that run around the hill; the rampart once
 of iron war, in ancient barbarous time,
 when disunite Britain ever bleed,
 lose in eternal broil; ever yet she grow
 to this deep-laid, indissoluble state,
 where wealth and commerce lift their golden head,
 and over our labour, liberty and law
 illustrious watch, the wonder of a world! 

what be this mighty breath, you curious say,
 which, in a language rather feel than hear,
 instruct the fowl of heaven; and through their breast
 these art of love diffuse? what, but god? 
inspire god! who boundless spirit all,
 and unremitted energy pervade,
 adjust, sustain, and agitate the whole. 
he ceaseless work alone, and yet alone
 seem not to work, with such perfection frame
 be this complex, amaze scheme of thing. 
but though conceal, to every pure eye
 the inform author in his work appear;
 his grandeur in the heaven: the sun, and moon,
 whether that fire the day, or fall, this
 pour out a lucid softness over the night,
 be but a beam from he. the glitter star,
 by the deep ear of meditation hear,
 still in their midnight watch sing of he. 
he nod a calm. the tempest blow his wrath,
 root up the forest and overturn the main. 
the thunder be his voice; and the red flash
 his speedy sword of justice. at his touch
 the mountain flame. he take the solid earth,
 and rock the nation. nor in these alone,
 in every common instance god be see;
 and to the man who cast his mental eye
 abroad unnoticed wonder rise. but chief
 in thou, boon spring, and in thy soft scene,
 the smile god appear; while water, earth,
 and air attest his bounty, which instil
 into the brute this temporary thought,
 and annual melt their undesigning heart
 profuse thus in tenderness, and joy. 

still let my song a noble note assume,
 and sing the infusive force of spring on man;
 when heaven and earth, as if contend, vie
 to raise his being, and serene his soul,
 can he forbear to smile with nature? can
 the stormy passion in his bosom roll,
 while every gale be peace, and every grove
 be melody? hence, from the bounteous walk
 of flow spring, you sordid son of earth,
 hard, and unfeeling, of another woe,
 or only lavish to yourself; away. 
but come, you generous breast, in who wide thought,
 of all his work, creative bounty, most,
 divine burn; and on your open front,
 and liberal eye, sit, from his dark retreat
 invite modest want. nor only fair,
 and easy of approach; your active search
 leave no cold wintery corner unexplored,
 like silent-working heaven, surprise oft
 the lonely heart with unexpected good. 
for you the rove spirit of the wind
 blow spring abroad; for you the team cloud
 descend in buxom plenty over the world;
 and the sun spread his genial blaze for you,
 you flower of human race! in these green day,
 sad-pining sickness lift her languid head;
 life flow afresh; and young-eyed health exalt
 the whole creation round. contentment walk
 the sunny glade, and feel a inward bliss
 spring over his mind, beyond the power of king
 to purchase. pure serenity apace
 induce thought, and contemplation still. 
by small degree the love of nature work,
 and warm the bosom; till at last arrive
 to rapture, and enthusiastic heat,
 we feel the present deity, and taste
 the joy of god, to see a happy world. 

it be harmony, that world-attuning power,
 by which all being be adjust, each
 to all around, impel, and impel,
 in endless circulation, that inspire
 this universal smile. thus the glad sky,
 the wide rejoice earth, the wood, the stream,
 with every life they hold, down to the flower
 that paint the lowly vale, or insect-wing
 wave over the shepherd slumber, touch the mind
 to nature tune, with a light-flying hand,
 invisible; quick-urging, through the nerve,
 the glitter spirit in a flood of day. 

hence from the virgin check, a fresh bloom
 shoot, less and less, the live carnation round;
 her lip blush deep sweet; she breathe of youth;
 the shine moisture swell into her eye,
 in bright flow; her wish bosom heave
 with palpitation wild; kind tumult seize
 her vein, and all her yield soul be love. 
from the keen gaze her lover turn away,
 full of the dear ecstatic power, and sick
 with sigh languishment. ah then, you fair! 
be great cautious of your slide heart;
 dare not the infectious sigh; the plead eye,
 in meek submission dress, deject, and low,
 but full of tempt guile. let not the tongue,
 prompt to deceive, with adulation smooth,
 gain on your purpose will. nor in the bower,
 where woodbine flaunt, and rose shed a couch,
 while evening draw her crimson curtain round,
 trust your soft minute with betray man. 

and let the aspire youth beware of love,
 of the smooth glance beware; for it be too late,
 when on his heart the torrent softness pour. 
then wisdom prostrate lie; and fade fame
 dissolve in air away: while the fond soul
 be wrap in dream of ecstasy, and bliss;
 still paint the illusive form; the kindle grace;
 the entice smile; the modest-seeming eye,
 beneath who beauteous beam, bely heaven,
 lurk searchless cunning, cruelty, and death:
 and still, false-warbling in his cheat ear,
 her siren voice, enchant, draw he on,
 to guileful shore, and mead of fatal joy. 

even present in the very lap of love
 inglorious lay; while music flow around,
 perfume, and oil, and wine, and wanton hour,
 amid the rose fierce repentance rear
 her snaky crest: a quick return twinge
 shoot through the conscious heart; where honour still,
 and great design against the oppressive load
 of luxury, by fit, impatient heave. 

but absent, what fantastic pang arouse,
 rage in each thought, by restless muse feed,
 chill the warm cheek, and blast the bloom of life? 
neglect fortune fly; and slide swift,
 prone into ruin, fall his scorn affair. 
it be nought but gloom around. the darken sun
 lose his light. the rosy-bosomed spring
 to weep fancy pine; and yond bright arch
 of heaven, low-bend into a dusky vault. 
all nature fade extinct; and she alone
 hear, feel, and see, possess every thought,
 fill every sense, and pant in every vein. 
book be but formal dullness, tedious friend,
 and sad amid the social band he sit,
 lonely and inattentive. from the tongue
 the unfinished period fall: while, bear away
 on swell thought, his waft spirit fly
 to the vain bosom of his distant fair;
 and leave the semblance of a lover, fix
 in melancholy site, with head decline,
 and love-dejected eye. sudden he start,
 shake from his tender trance, and restless run
 to glimmer shade, and sympathetic gloom,
 where the dun umbrage over the fall stream
 romantic hang; there through the pensive dusk
 stray, in heart-thrilling meditation lose,
 indulge all to love: or on the bank
 throw, amid droop lily, swell the breeze
 with sigh unceasing, and the brook with tear. 
thus in soft anguish he consume the day,
 nor quit his deep retirement, till the moon
 peep through the chamber of the fleecy east,
 enlighten by degree, and in her train
 lead on the gentle hour; then forth he walk,
 beneath the tremble languish of her beam,
 with soften soul, and woo the bird of eve
 to mingle woe with he: or while the world,
 and all the son of care, lie hush in sleep,
 associate with the midnight shadow drear;
 and, sigh to the lonely taper, pour
 his idly-tortured heart into the page,
 mean for the move messenger of love;
 where rapture burn on rapture, every line
 with rise frenzy fire. but if on bed
 delirious fling, sleep from his pillow fly. 
all night he toss, nor the balmy power
 in any posture find; till the grey morn
 lift her pale lustre on the pale wretch,
 exanimate by love: and then perhaps
 exhaust nature sink a while to rest,
 still interrupt by distract dream,
 that over the sick imagination rise,
 and in black colour paint the mimic scene. 
oft with the enchantress of his soul he talk;
 sometime in croud distress; or if retire
 to secret-winding, flower-enwoven bower,
 far from the dull impertinence of man,
 just as he, credulous, his thousand care
 begin to lose in blind oblivious love,
 snatch from she yield hand, he know not how,
 through forest huge, and long untraveled heath
 with desolation brown, he wander waste,
 in night and tempest wrap; or shrink aghast,
 back, from the bend precipice; or wade
 the turbid stream below, and strive to reach
 the farther shore; where succourless, and sad,
 wild as a bacchanal she spread her arm,
 but strive in vain, bear by the outrageous flood
 to distance down, he ride the ridgy wave,
 or whelm beneath the boil eddy sink. 
then a weak, wail lamentable cry
 be hear, and all in tear he wake, again
 to tread the circle of revolve woe. 
these be the charm agony of love,
 who misery delight. but through the heart
 shall jealousy its venom once diffuse,
 it be then delightful misery no more,
 but agony unmixed, incessant rage,
 corrode every thought, and blast all
 love paradise. you fairy prospect then
 you bed of rose, and you bower of joy,
 farewell! you gleam of depart peace,
 shine out your last! the yellow tinge plague
 internal vision taint, and in a night
 of livid gloom imagination wrap. 
ay then instead of love-enlivened cheek,
 of funny feature, and of ardent eye
 with flow rapture bright, dark look succeed,
 suffuse, and glare with untender fire,
 a cloud aspect, and a burn cheek,
 where the whole poison soul, malignant, sit,
 and frighten love away. ten thousand fear
 invent wild, ten thousand frantic view
 of horrid rival, hang on the charm
 for which he melt in fondness, eat he up
 with fervent anguish, and consume pine. 
in vain reproach lend their idle aid,
 deceitful pride, and resolution frail,
 give a moment ease. reflection pour,
 afresh, her beauty on his busy thought,
 her first endearment, twine round the soul,
 with all the witchcraft of ensnare love. 

strait the fierce storm involve his mind anew,
 flame through the nerve, and boil along the vein;
 while anxious doubt distract the torture heart;
 for even the sad assurance of his fear
 be peace to what he feel. thus the warm youth,
 who love delude into his thorny wild,
 through flowery-tempting path, or lead a life
 of feavered rapture, or of cruel care;
 his bright aim extinguish all, and all
 his lively moment run down to waste. 

but happy they! the happy of their kind! 
who gentle star unite, and in one fate
 their heart, their fortune, and their being blend. 
it be not the coarse tie of human law,
 unnatural oft, and foreign to the mind,
 that bind their peace, but harmony itself,
 attune all their passion into love;
 where friendship full-exert his soft power,
 perfect esteem enliven by desire
 ineffable, and sympathy of soul,
 think meeting think, and will prevent will,
 with boundless confidence; for nought but love
 can answer love, and render bliss secure. 
let he, ungenerous, who, alone intent
 to bless himself, from sordid parent buy
 the loathe virgin, in eternal care,
 well-merited, consume his night and day:
 let barbarous nation, who inhuman love
 be wild desire, fierce as the sun they feel;
 let eastern tyrant from the light of heaven
 seclude their bosom-slave, mean possess
 of a mere, lifeless, violate form:
 while those who love cement, in holy faith,
 and equal transport, free as nature, live,
 disdain fear; for what be the world to they,
 its pomp, its pleasure, and its nonsense all! 
who in each other clasp whatever fair
 high fancy form, and lavish heart can wish,
 something than beauty dear, shall they look
 or on the mind, or mind-illumined face,
 truth, goodness, honour, harmony, and love,
 the rich bounty of indulgent heaven. 
meantime a smile offspring rise round,
 and mingle both their grace. by degree,
 the human blossom blow; and every day,
 soft as it roll along, show some new charm,
 the father lustre, and the mother bloom. 
then infant reason grow apace, and call
 for the kind hand of a assiduous care:
 delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
 to teach the young idea how to shoot,
 to pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
 to breathe the inspire spirit, and to plant
 the generous purpose in the glow breast. 
oh speak the joy! you who the sudden tear
 surprise often, while you look around,
 and nothing strike your eye but sight of bliss,
 all various nature press on the heart,
 obedient fortune, and approve heaven. 
these be the blessing of divine love;
 and thus their moment fly. the season thus,
 as ceaseleless round a jar world they roll,
 still find they happy; and consent spring
 shed her own rosy garland on their head:
 till evening come at last, cool, gentle, calm;
 when after the long vernal day of life,
 enamour more, as soul approach soul,
 together, down they sink in social sleep. 
