[nereid:] eclogue iv.

mur. 

from this high cliff be a unusual view,
 and here our eye uncommon scene pursue. 
i see the verdure of yond distant plain,
 where bleat flock be feed by tuneful swain. 
but ah! how wretched be those earth-born slave,
 compare with we, who cut through shine wave? 
they be expose to cold, expose to heat,
 in different season mourn a different fate;
 uneasy still the wretched caitiff move
 to breezy mountain, or to shelter groves. 
while we no clthe need, no change of rule,
 the sea in winter warm, in summer cool. 
i have see the labour ploughman daily toil
 for a new crop to fit the stubborn soil,
 while heaven supply our want without our sweat,
 we never be hungry, but we have to eat. 
why shall we thus by partial heaven be bless;
 with neither grief, nor doubt, nor toil oppress;
 while those on earth of happiness despair,
 in pain, and anguish die, and live in care? 

pal. 

i have hear (for thus the wise Melampus say)
 two different kind of man by heaven be make,
 the one to swim, and sport in briny sea,
 the other to range on earth, or sit at ease,
 under the covert of the shadow tree. 
to each a guardian spirit be assign
 to guide their passion, and inform their mind:
 but he on earth, ingrate! will wild rove,
 despise his maker, and abuse his love. 
enrage at this the guardian Dæmon fly,
 and bid he his own blind will pursue;
 thus earthy man desert by their guide
 can rule their giddy thought, nor stem the come tide;
 but still be doom slave to their darling lust,
 be all deceitful, cruel, and unjust;
 restless desire their weary soul distract,
 they know not what they be, nor, — why they act. 
while we content with what the god approve,
 do nought but ever sing, and — ever love. 

mur. 

but see —
 the tide swell on the shore, and forward creep,
 and with new slime besmear the sandy heap. 
what make this constant flux, i have often think
 the cause be wondrous, and in vain i seek. 

pal. 

the cause be wondrous plain; the wise will prove
 the nature of a fluid be to move:
 in every liquid there be a constant roll;
 a eddy, though unseen, disturb the whole. 
the glide part with secret motion flow;
 be they at rest, they will to hardness grow. 
as wash leave in rock, by Winters frost
 be fix to solid ice, and all the motion lose. 

mur. 

happy be those who know the secret cause
 of strange effect, and nature hide law. 
but leave the rock; for rise fog appear,
 and cold land-breeze chill the trouble air. 
