the newspaper.

the newspaper.

a time like this, a busy, bustle time,
 suit ill with writer, very ill with rhyme:
 unheard we sing, when party-rage run strong,
 and mighty madness check the flow song:
 or, shall we force the peaceful muse to wield
 her feeble arm amid the furious field,
 where party-pen a wordy war maintain,
 poor be her anger, and her friendship vain;
 and oft the foe who feel her sting, combine,
 till serious vengeance pay a idle line:
 for party-poet be like wasp, who dart
 death to themselves, and to their foe but smart. 

hard then our fate: if general theme we choose,
 neglect await the song, and chill the muse;
 or shall we sing the subject of the day,
 tomorrow wonder puff our praise away. 
more bless the bard of that poetic time,
 when all find reader who can find a rhyme;
 green grow the bay on every teem head,
 and cibber be enthrone, and settle read. 
sing, droop muse, the cause of thy decline;
 why reign no more the once-triumphant nine? 
alas! new charm the waver many gain,
 and rival sheet the reader eye detain;
 a daily swarm, that banish every muse,
 come fly forth, and mortal call they news:
 for these, unread, the noble volume lie;
 for these, in sheet unsoiled, the muse die;
 unbought, unblest, the virgin copy wait
 in vain for fame, and sink, unseen, to fate. 

since, then, the town forsake we for our foe,
 the smoothe number for the harsh prose;
 let we, with generous scorn, the taste deride,
 and sing our rival with a rival pride. 

you gentle poet, who so oft complain
 that foul neglect be all your labour gain;
 that pity only check your grow spite
 to err man, and prompt you still to write;
 that your choice work on humble stall be lay,
 or vain grace the window of the trade;
 be you my friend, if friendship ever can warm
 those rival bosom who the muse charm:
 think of the common cause wherein we go,
 like gallant greek against the trojan foe;
 nor let one peevish chief his leader blame,
 till, crown with conquest, we regain our fame;
 and let we join our force to subdue
 this bold assume but successful crew. 

i sing of news, and all those vapid sheet
 the rattle hawker vend through gape street;
 whatever their name, whatever the time they fly,
 damp from the press, to charm the reader eye:
 for, soon as morning dawn with roseate hue,
 the herald of the morn arise too;
 post after post succeed, and, all day long,
 gazette and ledger swarm, a noisy throng. 
when evening come, she come with all her train
 of ledger, chronicle, and post again,
 like bat, appear, when the sun go down,
 from hole obscure and corner of the town. 
of all these trifler, all like these, i write;
 Oh! like my subject can my song delight,
 the crowd at lloyd one poet name shall raise,
 and all the alley echo to his praise. 

in shoal the hour their constant number bring,
 like insect wake to the advance spring;
 which take their rise from grub obscene that lie
 in shallow pool, or thence ascend the sky:
 such be these base ephemeras, so bear
 to die before the next revolve morn. 

yet thus they differ: insect-tribe be lose
 in the first visit of a winter frost;
 while these remain, a base but constant breed,
 who swarm son their short-lived sire succeed;
 no change season make their number less,
 nor Sunday shine a sabbath on the press! 

then lo! the saint monitor be bear,
 who pious face some sacred text adorn:
 as artful sinner cloak the secret sin,
 to veil with seem grace the guile within;
 so moral essay on his front appear,
 but all be carnal business in the rear;
 the fresh-coined lie, the secret whisper last,
 and all the glean of the six day past. 

with these retire, through half the sabbath-day,
 the London lounger yawn his hour away:
 not so, my little flock! your preacher fly,
 nor waste the time no worldly wealth can buy;
 but let the decent maid and sober clown
 pray for these idler of the sinful town:
 this day, at least, on noble theme bestow,
 nor give to woodfall, or the world below. 

but, Sunday past, what number flourish then,
 what wondrous labour of the press and pen! 
diurnal most, some thrice each week afford,
 some only once, — o avarice of word! 
when thousand starve mind such manna seek,
 to drop the precious food but once a week. 

endless it be to sing the power of all,
 their name, their number; how they rise and fall:
 like baneful herb the gazer eye they seize,
 rush to the head, and poison where they please:
 like idle fly, a busy, buzz train,
 they drop their maggot in the trifler brain:
 that genial soil receive the fruitful store,
 and there they grow, and breed a thousand more. 

now be their art display, how first they choose
 a cause and party, as the bard his muse;
 inspire by these, with clamorous zeal they cry,
 and through the town their dream and omen fly:
 so the sibylline leaf be blow about,
 disjointed scrap of fate involve in doubt;
 so idle dream, the journal of the night,
 be right and wrong by turn, and mingle wrong with right. —
 some champion for the right that prop the crown,
 some sturdy patriot, swear to pull they down;
 some neutral power, with secret force fraught,
 wish for war, but will to be buy:
 while some to every side and party go,
 shift every friend, and join with every foe;
 like sturdy rogue in privateer, they strike
 this side and that, the foe of both alike;
 a traitor-crew, who thrive in trouble time,
 fear for their force, and court for their crime. 

chief to the prosperous side the number sail,
 fickle and false, they veer with every gale;
 as bird that migrate from a freeze shore,
 in search of warm clime, come skim over,
 some bold adventurer first prepare to try
 the doubtful sunshine of the distant sky;
 but soon the grow summer certain sun
 win more and more, till all at last be win:
 so, on the early prospect of disgrace,
 fly in vast troop this apprehensive race;
 instinctive tribe! their fail food they dread,
 and buy, with timely change, their future bread. 

such be our guide: how many a peaceful head,
 bear to be still, have they to wrangle lead! 
how many a honest zealot steal from trade,
 and factious tool of pious pastor make! 
with clew like these they thread the maze of state,
 these oracle explore, to learn our fate;
 please with the guide who can so well deceive,
 who can lie so fast as they believe. 

oft lend i, loath, to some sage friend a ear,
 (for we who will not speak be doom to hear);
 while he, bewilder, tell his anxious thought,
 infectious fear from taint scribbler catch,
 or idiot hope; for each his mind assail,
 as lloyd court-light or stockdale gloom prevail. 
yet stand i patient while but one declaim,
 or give dull comment on the speech he maim:
 but oh! you muse, keep your votary foot
 from tavern-haunt where politician meet;
 where rector, doctor, and attorney pause,
 first on each parish, then each public cause:
 indite road, and rate that still increase;
 the murmur poor, who will not fast in peace;
 election zeal and friendship, since decline;
 a tax commute, or a tithe in kind;
 the dutch and german kindle into strife;
 dull port and poacher vile! the serious ill of life. 

here come the neighbour justice, please to guide
 his little club, and in the chair preside. 
in private business his command prevail,
 on public theme his reason turn the scale;
 assent silence soothe his happy ear,
 and, in or out, his party triumph here. 

nor here the infectious rage for party stop,
 but flit along from palace to shop;
 our weekly journal over the land abound,
 and spread their plague and influenza round;
 the village, too, the peaceful, pleasant plain,
 breed the Whig farmer and the Tory swain;
 Brookes 'and saint Alban boast not, but, instead,
 stare the red ram, and swing the rodney head: —
 hither, with all a patriot care, come he
 who own the little hut that make he free;
 who yearly forty shilling buy the smile
 of mighty man, and never waste the while;
 who feel his freehold worth, and look elate,
 a little prop and pillar of the state. 

here he delight the weekly news to con,
 and mingle comment as he blunder on;
 to swallow all their vary author teach,
 to spell a title, and confound a speech:
 till with a muddle mind he quit the news,
 and claim his nation license to abuse;
 then join the cry, "that all the courtly race
" be venal candidate for power and place; "
yet feel some joy, amid the general vice,
 that his own vote will bring its wonted price. 

these be the ill the teem press supply,
 the poisonous spring from learning fountain rise:
 not there the wise alone their entrance find,
 impart useful light to mortal blind;
 but, blind themselves, these err guide hold out
 allure light to lead we far about;
 screen by such mean, here scandal whet her quill,
 here slander shoot unseen, whenever she will;
 here fraud and falsehood labour to deceive,
 and folly aid they both, impatient to believe. 

such, son of Britain! be the guide you trust;
 so wise their counsel, their report so just! —
 yet, though we can call their moral pure,
 their judgement nice, or their decision sure;
 merit they have to mighty work unknown,
 a style, a manner, and a fate their own. 

we, who for long fame with labour strive,
 be pain to keep our sickly work alive;
 studious we toil, with patient care refine,
 nor let our love protect one languid line. 
severe ourselves, at last our work appear,
 when, ah! we find our reader more severe;
 for, after all our care and pain, how few
 acquire applause, or keep it if they do! —
 not so these sheet, ordain to happy fate,
 praise through their day, and but that day their date;
 their careless author only strive to join
 as many word as make a even line;
 as many line as fill a row complete;
 as many row as furnish up a sheet:
 from side to side, with ready type they run
 the measure end, and the work be do;
 oh, bear with ease, how envy and how bless! 
your fate today and your tomorrow rest. 
to you all reader turn, and they can look
 please on a paper, who abhor a book;
 those who never deign their bible to peruse,
 will think it hard to be deny their news;
 sinner and saint, the wise with the weak,
 here mingle taste, and one amusement seek;
 this, like the public inn, provide a treat,
 where each promiscuous guest sit down to eat;
 and such this mental food, as we may call
 something to all man, and to some man all. 

next, in what rare production shall we trace
 such various subject in so small a space? 
as the first ship upon the water bear
 incongruous kind who never meet before;
 or as some curious virtuoso join,
 in one small room, moth, mineral, and coin,
 bird, beast, and fish; nor refuse place
 to serpent, toad, and all the reptile race
 so here, compress within a single sheet,
 great thing and small, the mean and mighty meet,
 it be this which make all europe business know,
 yet here a private man may place his own;
 and, where he read of lord and commons, he
 may tell their honour that he sell rappee. 

add next the amusement which the motley page
 afford to either sex and every age:
 lo! where it come before the cheerful fire, —
 damp from the press in smoky curl aspire
 (as from the earth the sun exhale the dew),
 ere we can read the wonder that ensue:
 then eager every eye survey the part,
 that bring its favourite subject to the heart;
 grave politician look for fact alone,
 and grave add conjecture of their own:
 the sprightly nymph, who never break her rest. 
for totter crown, or mighty land oppress,
 find broil and battle, but neglect they all
 for song and suit, a birthday, or a ball:
 the keen warm man overlook each idle tale
 for "money want," and "estate on sale;"
 while some with equal mind to all attend,
 please with each part, and grieve to find a end. 

so charm the news; but we, who far from town
 wait till the postman bring the packet down,
 once in the week, a vacant day behold,
 and stay for tiding, till they be three day old:
 that day arrive; no welcome post appear,
 but the dull morn a sullen aspect wear:
 we meet, but ah! without our wonted smile,
 to talk of headache, and complain of bile;
 sullen we ponder over a dull repast,
 nor feast the body while the mind must fast. 

a master-passion be the love of news,
 not music so command, nor so the muse:
 give poet claret, they grow idle soon;
 feed the musician, and he be out of tune;
 but the sick mind, of this disease possess,
 fly from all cure, and sicken when at rest. 

now sing, my muse, what various part compose
 these rival sheet of politics and prose. 

first, from each brother hoard a part they draw,
 a mutual theft that never fear a law;
 whatever they gain, to each man portion fall,
 and read it once, you read it through they all:
 for this their runner ramble day and night,
 to drag each lurk deed to open light;
 for daily bread the dirty trade they ply,
 coin their fresh tale, and live upon the lie:
 like bee for honey, forth for news they spring, —
 industrious creature! ever on the wing;
 home to their several cell they bear the store,
 cull of all kind, then roam abroad for more. 

no anxious virgin fly to "fair tweedside;"
 no injure husband mourn his faithless bride;
 no duel doom the fiery youth to bleed;
 but through the town transpire each ven'trous deed. 

shall some fair frail-one drive her prance pair
 where rival peer contend to please the fair;
 when, with new force, she aid her conquer eye,
 and beauty deck, with all that beauty buy;
 quick we learn who heart her influence feel,
 who acre melt before her glow wheel. 

to these a thousand idle theme succeed,
 deed of all kind, and comment to each deed. 
here stock, the state-barometer, we view,
 that rise or fall, by cause know to few;
 promotion ladder who go up or down;
 who wed, or who seduce, amuse the town;
 what new-born heir have make his father bless;
 what heir exult, his father now at rest;
 that ample list the tyburn-herald give. 
and each know knave, who still for Tyburn live. 

so grow the work, and now the printer try
 his power no more, but lean on his ally. 

when lo! the advertise tribe succeed,
 pay to be read, yet find but few will read;
 and chief the illustrious race, who drop and pill
 have patent power to vanquish human ill:
 these, with their cure, a constant aid remain,
 to bless the pale composer fertile brain;
 fertile it be, but still the noble soil
 require some pause, some interval from toil;
 and they at least a certain ease obtain
 from katterfelto skill, and Graham glow strain. 

i too must aid, and pay to see my name
 hang in these dirty avenue to fame;
 nor pay in vain, if aught the muse have see,
 and sing, can make these avenue more clean;
 can stop one slander ere it find its way,
 and give to public scorn its helpless prey. 
by the same aid, the stage invite her friend,
 and kind tell the banquet she intend;
 thither from real life the many run,
 with Siddons weep, or laugh with Abingdon;
 please in fictitious joy or grief, to see
 the mimic passion with their own agree;
 to steal a few enchant hour away
 from self, and drop the curtain on the day. 

but who can steal from self that wretched wight,
 who darling work be try, some fatal night? 
most wretched man! when, bane to every bliss,
 he hear the serpent-critic rise hiss;
 then groan succeed; nor traitor on the wheel
 can feel like he, or have such pang to feel. 
nor end they here: next day he read his fall
 in every paper; critic be they all:
 he see his brand name, with wild affright,
 and hear again the catcall of the night. 

such help the stage afford: a large space
 be fill by puff and all the puff race. 
physic have once alone the lofty style,
 the wellknown boast, that cease to raise a smile:
 now all the province of that tribe invade,
 and we abound in quack of every trade. 

the simple barber, once a honest name,
 Cervantes found, Fielding raise his fame:
 barber no more — a gay perfumer come,
 on who soft cheek his own cosmetic bloom;
 here he appear, each simple mind to move,
 and advertise beauty, grace and love. 
— "come, fade bell, who will your youth renew,
" and learn the wonder of olympian dew;
 "restore the rose that begin to faint,
" nor think celestial wash vulgar paint;
 "your former feature, air, and art assume,
" circassian virtue, with circassian bloom. 
 "come, batter beaux, who lock be turn to grey,
" and crop discretion lie badge away;
 "read where they vend these smart engage thing,
" these flaxen frontlet with elastic spring;
 "no female eye the fair deception see,
" not nature self so natural as these. " 

such be their art, but not confine to they,
 the muse impartial must her son condemn:
 for they, degenerate! join the venal throng,
 and puff a lazy Pegasus along:
 more guilty these, by nature less design
 for little art that suit the vulgar kind. 
that barber 'boy, who will to trade advance,
 wish we to call they, smart friseurs from France;
 that he who build a chophouse, on his door
 paint "the true old original blue boar!" —

these be the art by which a thousand live,
 where truth may smile, and justice may forgive: —
 but when, amid this rabble rout, we find
 a puff poet to his honour blind:
 who sly drop quotation all about
 packet or post, and point their merit out;
 who advertise what reviewer say,
 with sham edition every second day;
 who dare not trust his praise out of sight,
 but hurry into fame with all his might;
 although the verse some transient praise obtain,
 contempt be all the anxious poet gain. 

now puff exhaust, advertisement past,
 their correspondent stand expose at last;
 these be a numerous tribe, to fame unknown,
 who for the public good forgo their own;
 who volunteer in paper-war engage,
 with double portion of their party rage:
 such be the bruti, decii, who appear
 woo the printer for admission here;
 who generous soul can condescend to pray
 for leave to throw their precious time away. 

Oh! cruel woodfall! when a patriot draw
 his gray-goose quill in his dear country cause,
 to vex and maul a ministerial race,
 can thy stern soul refuse the champion place? 
alas! thou know not with what anxious heart
 he long his best-loved labour to impart;
 how he have send they to thy brother round,
 and still the same unkind reception find:
 at length indignant will he damn the state,
 turn to his trade, and leave we to our fate. 

these roman soul, like Rome great son, be know
 to live in cell on labour of their own. 
thus Milo, can we see the noble chief,
 feed, for his country good, on leg of beef:
 Camillus copy deed for sordid pay,
 yet fight the public battle twice a day:
 even now the godlike Brutus view his score
 scrol on the bar-board, swing with the door;
 where, tipple punch, grave Cato self you will see,
 and amor patriæ vend smuggle tea. 

last in these rank, and least, their art disgrace,
 neglect stand the muse 'mean race;
 scribbler who court contempt, who verse the eye
 disdainful view, and glance swift by:
 this poet corner be the place they choose,
 a fatal nursery for a infant Muse;
 unlike that corner where true poet lie,
 these can live, and they shall never die;
 hapless the lad who mind such dream invade,
 and win to verse the talent due to trade. 

Curb then, o youth! these rapture as they rise,
 keep down the evil spirit and be wise;
 follow your call, think the muse foe,
 nor lean upon the pestle and compose. 

i know your day-dream, and i know the snare
 hide in your flowery path, and cry "beware!" 
thoughtless of ill, and to the future blind,
 a sudden couplet rush on your mind;
 here you may nameless print your idle rhyme,
 and read your firstborn work a thousand time;
 the infection spread, your couplet grow apace,
 stanza to delia dog or celia face:
 you take a name; philander ode be see,
 print, and praise, in every magazine:
 diarian sage greet their brother sage,
 and your dark page please the enlighten age. —
 alas! what year you thus consume in vain,
 rule by this wretched bias of the brain! 

go! to your desk and counter all return;
 your sonnet scatter, your acrostic burn;
 trade, and be rich; or, shall your careful sire
 bequeathe you wealth, indulge the noble fire:
 shall love of fame your youthful heart betray,
 pursue fair fame, but in a glorious way,
 nor in the idle scene of fancy painting stray. 

of all the good that mortal man pursue,
 the muse have least to give, and give to few;
 like some coquettish fair, she lead we on,
 with smile and hope, till youth and peace be go;
 then, wed for life, the restless wrangle pair
 forget how constant one, and one how fair:
 meanwhile, ambition, like a bloom bride,
 bring power and wealth to grace her lover side;
 and though she smile not with such flatter charm,
 the brave will soon win she to their arm. 

then wed to she, if virtue tie the band,
 go spread your country fame in hostile land;
 her court, her senate, or her arm adorn,
 and let her foe lament that you be bear:
 or weigh her law, their ancient right defend,
 though host oppose, be they and reason friend;
 arm with strong power, in their defence engage,
 and rise the Thurlow of the future age. 
