ethelgar,

a saxon poem.

it be not for thou, o man! to murmur at the will of the almighty. when the thunder roar, the lightning shine on the rise wave, and the black cloud sit on the brow of the lofty hill; who then protect the fly deer, swift as a sable cloud, tost by the whistle wind, leap over the roll flood, to gain the hoary wood: while the lightning shine on his chest, and the wind ride over his horn? when the wolf roar; terrible as the voice of the Severn; move majestic as the nod forest on the brow of michel-stow; who then command the sheep to follow the swain, as the beam of light attend upon the morning? — know, o man! that god suffer not the least member of his work to perish, without answer the purpose of their creation. the evil of life, with some, be blessing: and the plant of death heal the wound of the sword. — do the sea of trouble and affliction overwhelm thy soul, look unto the lord, thou shall stand firm in the day of temptation, as the lofty hill of kinwulf; in vain shall the wave beat against thou; thy rock shall stand.

comely as the white rock; bright as the star of the evening; tall as the oak upon the brow of the mountain; soft as the shower of dew, that fall upon the flower of the field, ethelgar arise, the glory of exanceastre: noble be his ancestor, as the palace of the great kenric; his soul, with the lark, every morning ascend the sky; and sport in the cloud: when steal down the steep mountain, wrap in a shower of spangle dew, evening come creep to the plain, close the flower of the day, shake her pearly shower upon the rustle tree; then be his voice hear in the grove, as the voice of the nightingale upon the hawthorn spray; he sing the work of the lord; the hollow rock join in his devotion; the star dance to his song; the roll year, in various mantle dress, confess he man. — he see egwina of the vale; his soul be astonish, as the briton who flee before the sword of kenric; she be tall as the tower elm; stately as a black cloud burst into thunder; fair as the wrought bowel of the earth; gentle and sweet as the morning breeze; beauteous as the sun; blush like the vine of the west; her soul as fair as the azure curtain of heaven. she see ethelgar; her soft soul melt as the fly snow before the sun. the shrine of saint Cuthbert unite they. the minute flee on the golden wing of bliss. nine horn moon have deck the sky, when aelgar see the light; he be like a young plant upon the mountain side, or the sun hide in a cloud; he feel the strength of his fire; and, swift as the lightning of heaven, pursue the wild boar of the wood. the morn awake the sun; who, step from the mountain brow, shake his ruddy lock upon the shine dew; aelgar arise from sleep; he seize his sword and spear, and issue to the chace. as water swift fall down a craggy rock, so rage young aelgar through the wood; the wild boar bite his spear, and the fox die at his foot. from the thicket a wolf arise, his eye flame like two star; he roar like the voice of the tempest; hunger make he furious, and and he flee like a fall meteor to the war. like a thunderbolt tear the black rock, aelgar dart his spear through his heart. the wolf rage like the voice of many water, and seize aelgar by by the throat, he seek the region of the bless. — the wolf die upon his body. — ethelgar and egwina weep. — they weep like the rain of the spring; sorrow sit upon they as the black cloud upon the mountain of death: but the power of god settle their heart.

the golden sun arise to the high of his power; the apple perfume the gale; and the juicy grape delight the eye. ethelgar and egwina bend their way to the mountain side, like two star that move through the sky. the flower grow beneath their foot; the tree spread out their leaf; the sun play upon the roll brook; the wind gentle pass along. dark, pitchy cloud veil the face of the sun; the wind roar like the noise of a battle; the swift hail descend to the ground; the lightning break from the sable cloud, and gild the dark brown corner of the sky; the thunder shake the lofty mountain; the tall tower nod to their foundation; the bend oak divide the whistle wind; the break flower flee in confusion round the mountain side. ethelgar and egwina seek the sacred shade, the bleak wind roar over their head, and the water run over their foot. swift from the dark cloud the lightning come; the sky blush at the sight. egwina stand on the brow of the lofty hill, like a oak in the spring; the lightning dance about her garment, and the blast flame blacken her face: the shade of death swim before her eye; and she fall breathless down the black steep rock: the sea receive her body, and she roll down with the roar water.

ethelgar stand terrible as the mountain of maindip; the wave of despair harrow up his soul, as the roar Severn plough the sable sand; wild as the evening wolf, his eye shine like the red vapor in the valley of the dead: horror sit upon his brow; like a bright star shoot through the sky, he plunge from the lofty brow of the hill, like a tall oak break from the roar wind. saint Cuthbert appear in the air; the black cloud flee from the sky; the sun gild the spangle meadow; the lofty pine stand still; the violet of the vale gentle move to the soft voice of the wind; the sun shine on the bubble brook. the saint, array in glory, catch the fall mortal; as the soft dew of the morning hang upon the lofty elm, he bear he to the sandy beech, while the sea roar beneath his foot. ethelgar open his eye, like the grey orb of the morning, fold up the black mantle of the night — know, o man! say the member of the bless, to submit to the will of god; he be terrible as the face of the earth, when the water sink to their habitation; gentle as the sacred cover of the oak; secret as the bottom of the great deep; just as the ray of the morning. learn that thou be a man, nor repine at the stroke of the almighty, for god be as just as he be great. the holy vision disappear as the atom fly before the sun. ethelgar arise, and bend his way to the college of kenewalein; there he flourish as a hoary oak in the wood of Arden.

