Written from Dublin, to a Lady in the Country.

A wretch, in smoaky Dublin pent,
 Who rarely sees the Firmament,
 You graciously invite, to view
 The Sun's enliv'ning Rays with you;
 To change the Town for flow'ry Meads,
 And sing beneath the sylvan Shades. 

You're kind in vain — It will not be —
 Retirement was deny'd to me;
 Doom'd by inexorable Fate,
 To pass thro' crouded Scenes I hate. 
O with what Joy could I survey
 The rising, glorious Source of Day! 

Attend the Shepherd's fleecy Care,
 Transported with the vernal Air;
 Behold the Meadow's painted Pride,
 Or see the limpid Waters glide;
 Survey the distant, shaded Hills,
 And, pensive, hear the murm'ring Rills. 

Thro' your Versailles with Pleasure rove,
 Admire the Gardens, and the Grove;
 See Nature's bounteous Hand adorn
 The blushing Peach, and blooming Thorn;
 Beheld the Birds distend their Throats,
 And hear their wild, melodious Notes. 

Delighted, thro' your Pastures roam,
 Or see the Kine come lowing home;
 Whose od'rous Breaths a Joy impart,
 That sooths the Sense, and glads the Heart;
 With Pleasure view the frothing Pails,
 And silent hear the creaking Rails;
 See whistling Hinds attend their Ploughs,
 Who never hear of broken Vows;
 Where no Ambition to be great,
 E'er taught the Nymph, or Swain, Deceit. 

Thus thro' the Day, delighted, run;
 Then raptur'd view the setting Sun;
 The rich, diffufive God behold,
 On distant Mountains pouring Gold,
 Gilding the beauteous, rising Spire,
 While Crystal Windows glow with Fire;
 Gaze, till he quit the Western Skies,
 And long to see his Sister rise;
 Prefer the silent, Silver Moon
 To the too radiant, noisy Noon. 

Or Northward turn, with new Delight,
 To mark what Triumphs wait the Night;
 When Shepherds think the Heav'ns foreshow
 Some dire Commotions here below;
 When Light the human Form assumes,
 And Champions meet with nodding Plumes,
 With Silver Streamers, wide unfurl'd,
 And gleaming Spears amaze the World. 

Thence to the higher Heav'ns I soar,
 And the great Architect adore;
 Behold what Worlds are hung in Air,
 And view ten thousand Empires there;
 Then prostrate to Jehovah fall,
 Who into Being spake them all. 
