to mr. J. H. at the temple, occasion by a translation of a epistle of Horace.

1730. 

by the reverend mr. S—, of Magdalen college, OXFORD.

time fly — so you and Horace sing,
from whence you many a moral bring,
to teach we how to steer our life,
the enjoy our bottle and our wife.

young man, i will approve your notion,
and whole be at your devotion.
i hate your sour, cant rascal,
that talk of ember-week and paschal;
black villain, who desire to wean we,
from bacchus pleasure, and from Venus',
to gain themselves a large share,
and fob we off with fast and prayer:
and tell we none to Elysium go,
who do not plague themselves below.
can misery raise the grateful heart,
or tuneful song of praise impart?

the great creator work we view
and trace it out by wisdom clue;
nothing be good but what be true. 
with cautious and with thankful eye
we scan the great variety:
each good within our reach we taste,
and call our neighbour to the feast.
our soul do generous disown
all pleasure that be confine to one;
the only rational employment
be, to receive and give emjoyment:
to every pleasure we attend,
not to enjoy be to offend.

but still, amid the various crowd
of good, that call with voice loud,
our natural genius, education,
parent, companion, or our station,
direct we to some single choice,
in which we chief must rejoice.

pleasure be lady — some we court
to pass away a hour in sport:
we like they all for this or that,
for silence some, and some for chat;
for every one, as Cowley sing,
or arrow yield, or bow, or string.
but, after all this ramble life,
each man must have his proper wife. 
you know my meaning — some one good,
feel, hear, or see, or understand,
will captivate the heart affection,
and bring the rest into subjection.

pray mind the tenor of my song;
it hold together, though it be long.

you have make a early choice, and wise one;
the best i know within the horizon.
my lady law be rich and handsome:
may she be worth you a king ransom!
but i must tell you, (you will excuse
my friendly, though plain deal muse)
in her own hand be all her dower;
there be not a groat within your power;
and yet you be whore with the nine;
with they you breakfast, sup and dine,
with they you spend your day and night —
be it fit she shall bear such slight?
beggarly, balladsinging carrion,
can they advance you to the baron?
you have make i too a old Tom Dingle,
and i, forsooth, must try to jingle.

your lady will not do you wrong;
she own you be tender yet, and young —
she will wink at now and then a song:
but still expect to share the time,
which now be all bestow on rhime.
read in the morning Hobbes de homine,
at noon, even sport with your Melpomene.

youngster, i have something more to say,
to wean you from this itch of play.
in his Officiis old Marc Tully,
among certain point he handle full,
(a book i ever must delight in
far beyond all that since be write!) —
he tell we there, our parent praise
their child virtue ought to raise:
their worth and praise shall prick we on
to labour after like renown.

who but thy father have be able,
since Hercules, to cleanse a stable?
about his ear how strange a rattle!
who ever stand so tough a battle?
he have tame the most unruly cattle. —
just two such job as yet remain
to be dispatch by you and B—.
your father with herculean club
the tyrant of our soul do drub;
b — for our body, you our chattel,
must undertake the self-same battle.
the world on you have fix their eye,
it be you must quell these tyranny:
so shall some title, now unknown,
bangorian-like your labour crown.
ravish, methinks, in thought i see
the universal liberty. 

but after all, i know what be in you:
you will do it, a thousand to one guinea.
time fly — the work and pleasure great;
begin, before it grow too late.
where the play stand the statute lodge;
and dance not, until you dance a judge;
then, though you be not half so taper,
my lord, you will cut a high caper.
