the death of Cuchullin: a poem.

be the wind on fingal shield? or be the voice of past time in my hall? sing on, sweet voice, for thou be pleasant, and carry away my night with joy. sing on, o Bragela, daughter of carborne songlan!

it be the white wave of the rock, and not cuchullin sail. often do the mist deceive i for the ship of my love! when they rise round some ghost, and spread their grey skirt on the wind. why do thou delay thy come, son of the generous Semo? — four time have autumn return with its wind, and raise the sea of togorma, since thou have be in the roar of battle, and bragela distant far. — hill of the isle of mist! when will you answer to his hound? — but you be dark in your cloud, and sad bragela call in vain. night come roll down: the face of ocean fail. the heath-cock head be beneath his wing: the hind sleep with the hart of the desert. they shall rise with the morning light, and feed on the mossy stream. but my tear return with the sun, my sigh come on with the night. when will thou come in thy arm, o chief of mossy tura?

pleasant be thy voice in ossian ear, daughter of carborne sorglan! but retire to the hall of shell; to the beam of the burn oak. — attend to the murmur of the sea: it roll at dunscaich wall: let sleep descend on thy blue eye, and the hero come to thy dream.

Cuchullin sit at lego lake, at the dark roll of water. night be around the hero; and his thousand spread on the heath: a hundred oak burn in the midst, the feast of shell be smoke wide. — carril strike the harp, beneath a tree; his grey lock glitter in the beam; the rustle blast of night be near, and lift his age hair. — his song be of the blue togorma, and of its chief, cuchullin friend.

why be thou absent, Connal, in the day of the gloomy storm? the chief of the south have convene against the carborne Cormac: the wind detain thy sail, and thy blue water roll around thou. but Cormac be not alone: the son of Semo fight his battle. semo son his battle fight! the terror of the stranger! he that be like the vapour of death, slow bear by sultry wind. the sun redden in its presence, the people fall around.

such be the song of carril, when a son of the foe appear; he throw down his pointless spear, and speak the word of torlath: torlath the chief of hero, from lego sable surge: he that lead his thousand to battle, against carborne Cormac. Cormac who be distant far, in temora echo hall: he learn to bend the bow of his father; and to lift the spear. nor long do thou lift the spear, mildly-shining beam of youth! death stand dim behind thou, like the darken half of the moon behind its grow light.

Cuchullin rise before the bard, that come from generous torlath; he offer he the shell of joy, and honour the son of song. sweet voice of lego! he say, what be the word of torlath? come he to our feast or battle, the carborne son of cantéla?

he come to thy battle, reply the bard, to the sound strife of spear. — when morning be grey on lego, torlath will fight on the plain: and will thou meet he, in thy arm, king of the isle of mist? terrible be the spear of torlath! it be a meteor of night. he lift it, and the people fall: death sit in the lightning of his sword.

do i fear, reply Cuchullin, the spear of carborne torlath? he be brave as a thousand hero; but my soul delight in war. the sword rest not by the side of Cuchullin, bard of the time of old! morning shall meet i on the plain, and gleam on the blue arm of semo son. — but sit thou, on the heath, o bard! and let we hear thy voice: partake of the joyful shell; and hear the song of temora.

this be no time, reply the bard, to hear the song of joy; when the mighty be to meet in battle like the strength of the wave of lego. why be thou so dark, slimora! with all thy silent wood? no green star tremble on thy top; no moonbeam on thy side. but the meteor of death be there, and the grey watery form of ghost. why be thou dark, slimora! with thy silent wood?

he retire, in the sound of his song; carril accompany his voice. the music be like the memory of joy that be past, pleasant and mournful to the soul. the ghost of depart bard hear it from slimora side. soft sound spread along the wood, and the silent valley of night rejoice. — so, when he sit in the silence of noon, in the valley of his breeze, the hum of the mountain bee come to ossian ear: the gale drown it often in its course; but the pleasant sound return again.

raise, say Cuchullin, to his hundred bard, the song of the noble Fingal: that song which he hear at night, when the dream of his rest descend: when the bard strike the distant harp, and the faint light gleam on selma wall. or let the grief of Lara rise, and the sigh of the mother of calmar, when he be seek, in vain, on his hill; and she behold his bow in the hall. — carril, place the shield of caithbat on that branch; and let the spear of Cuchullin be near; that the sound of my battle may rise with the grey beam of the east.

the hero lean on his father shield: the song of Lara rise. the hundred bard be distant far: carril alone be near the chief. the word of the song be he; and the sound of his harp be mournful.

ALCLETHA with the age lock! mother of carborne calmar! why do thou look towards the desert, to behold the return of thy son? these be not his hero, dark on the heath: nor be that the voice of calmar: it be but the distant grove, Alcletha! but the roar of the mountain wind!

who bound over lara stream, sister of the noble calmar? do not alclétha behold his spear? but her eye be dim! be it not the son of Matha, daughter of my love?

it be but a age oak, Alcletha! reply the lovely weep alona; it be but a oak, alclétha, bend over lara stream. but who come along the plain? sorrow be in his speed. he lift high the spear of calmar. alclétha, it be cover with blood!

but it be cover with the blood of foe, sister of carborne calmar! his spear never return unstained with blood, nor his bow from the strife of the mighty. the battle be consume in his presence: he be a flame of death, alona! — youth of the mournful speed! where be the son of Alcletha? do he return with his fame? in the midst of his echo shield? — thou be dark and silent! — calmar be then no more. tell i not, warrior, how he fall, for i can hear of his wound. —

why do thou look towards the desert, mother of carborne calmar? —

such be the song of carril, when Cuchullin lie on his shield: the bard rest on their harp, and sleep fall soft around. — the son of Semo be awake alone; his soul be fix on the war. — the burn oak begin to decay; faint red light be spread around. — a feeble voice be hear: the ghost of calmar come. he stalk in the beam. dark be the wound in his side. his hair be disorder and loose. joy sit dark on his face; and he seem to invite Cuchullin to his cave.

son of the cloudy night! say the rise chief of Erin; why do thou bend thy dark eye on i, ghost of the carborne calmar? will thou frighten i, o matha son! from the battle of Cormac? thy hand be not feeble in war; neither be thy voice for peace. how be thou change, chief of Lara! if thou now do advise to fly! — but, calmar, i never flee. i never fear the ghost of the desert. small be their knowledge, and weak their hand; their dwelling be in the wind. — but my soul grow in danger, and rejoice in the noise of steel. retire thou to thy cave; thou be not calmar ghost; he delight in battle, and his arm be like the thunder of heaven.

he retire in his blast with joy, for he have hear the voice of his praise. the faint beam of the morning rise, and the sound of caithbat buckler spread. green ullin warrior convene, like the roar of many stream. — the horn of war be hear over lego; the mighty torlath come.

why do thou come with thy thousand, Cuchullin, say the chief of lego. i know the strength of thy arm, and thy soul be a unextinguished fire. — why fight we not on the plain, and let our host behold our deed? let they behold we like roar wave, that tumble round a rock: the mariner hasten away, and look on their strife with fear.

thou rise, like the sun, on my soul, reply the son of Semo. thy arm be mighty, o torlath! and worthy of my wrath. retire, you man of Ullin, to slimora shady side; behold the chief of Erin, in the day of his fame. — carril! tell to mighty Connal, if Cuchullin must fall, tell he i accuse the wind which roar on togorma wave. — never be he absent in battle, when the strife of my fame arise. — let this sword be before Cormac, like the beam of heaven: let his counsel sound in temora in the day of danger. —

he rush, in the sound of his arm, like the terrible spirit of loda, when he come in the roar of a thousand storm, and scatter battle from his eye. — he sit on a cloud over lochlin sea: his mighty hand be on his sword, and the wind lift his flame lock. — so terrible be Cuchullin in the day of his fame. — torlath fall by his hand, and lego hero mourn. — they gather around the chief like the cloud of the desert. — a thousand sword rise at once; a thousand arrow fly; but he stand like a rock in the midst of a roar sea. — they fall around; he stride in blood: dark slimora echo wide. — the son of Ullin come, and the battle spread over lego. — the chief of Erin overcome; he return over the field with his fame. —

but pale he return! the joy of his face be dark. he roll his eye in silence. — the sword hang, unsheathe, in his hand, and his spear bend at every step.

carril, say the king in secret, the strength of Cuchullin fail. my day be with the year that be past: and no morning of i shall arise. — they shall seek i at temora, but i shall not be find. Cormac will weep in his hall, and say, "where be tura chief?"— but my name be renown! my fame in the song of bard. — the youth will say in secret, o let i die as Cuchullin die; renown clothe he like a robe; and the light of his fame be great. draw the arrow from my side; and lie Cuchullin beneath that oak. place the shield of caithbat near, that they may behold i amid the arm of my father. —

and be the son of Semo fall, say carril with a sigh? — mournful be tura wall; and sorrow dwell at dunscaich. — thy spouse be leave alone in her youth, the son of thy love be alone. — he shall come to Bragela, and ask she why she weep. — he shall lift his eye to the wall, and see his father sword. — who sword be that? he will say: and the soul of his mother be sad. who be that, like the hart of the desert, in the murmur of his course? — his eye look wild round in search of his friend. — Connal, son of colgar, where have thou be, when the mighty fell? do the sea of togorma roll round thou? be the wind of the south in thy sail? the mighty have fall in battle, and thou be not there. — let none tell it in Selma, nor in morven woody land; Fingal will be sad, and the son of the desert mourn.

by the dark roll wave of lego they raise the hero tomb. — luath, at a distance, lie, the companion of Cuchullin, at the chace. — bless be thy soul, son of Semo; thou be mighty in battle. — thy strength be like the strength of a stream: thy speed like the eagle wing. — thy path in the battle be terrible: the step of death be behind thy sword. — bless be thy soul, son of Semo; carborne chief of dunscaich!

thou have not fall by the sword of the mighty, neither be thy blood on the spear of the valiant. — the arrow come, like the sting of death in a blast: nor do the feeble hand, which draw the bow, perceive it. peace to thy soul, in thy cave, chief of the isle of mist!

the mighty be disperse at temora: there be none in cormac hall. the king mourn in his youth, for he do not behold thy come. the sound of thy shield be cease: his foe be gather round. soft be thy rest in thy cave, chief of erin war!

bragela will not hope thy return, or see thy sail in ocean foam. — her step be not on the shore: nor her ear open to the voice of thy rower. — she sit in the hall of shell, and see the arm of he that be no more. — thy eye be full of tear, daughter of carborne sorglan! — bless be thy soul in death, o chief of shady cromla!

