LONDON.

it be a goodly sight through the clear air,
 from Hampstead heathy height, to see at once
 England vast capital in fair expanse,
 tower, belfry, lengthen street and structure fair. 
saint Paul high dome amid the vassal band
 of neighbour spire, a regal chieftain stand,
 and over field of ridgy roof appear,
 with distance soft tint, side by side,
 in kindred grace, like twain of sister dear,
 the tower of Westminster, her abbey pride;
 while, far beyond, the hill of Surrey shine
 through thin soft haze, and show their wavy line. 
view thus, a goodly sight! but when survey
 through denser air when moisten wind prevail,
 in her grand panoply of smoke array,
 while cloud aloft in heavy volume sail,
 she be sublime. — she seem a curtain gloom
 connect heaven and earth, — a threaten sign of doom. 
with more than natural height, rear in the sky
 it be then saint Paul arrest the wonder eye;
 the low part in swathe mist conceal,
 the high through some half-spent shower reveal,
 so far from earth remove, that well, i trow,
 do not its form man artful structure show,
 it may some lofty alpine peak be deem,
 the eagle haunt with cave and crevice seam. 
stretch wide on either hand, a rugged skreen,
 in lurid dimness, near street be see
 like shoreward billow of a trouble main,
 arrest in their rage. through drizzly rain,
 cataract of tawny sheen pour from the sky,
 black furnace-smoke in curl column rise,
 and many-tinted vapour, slow pass
 over the wide drape of that picture mass. 

so show by day this grand imperial town,
 and, when over all the night black stole be throw,
 the distant traveller do with wonder mark
 her luminous canopy athwart the dark,
 cast up, from myriad of lamp that shine
 along her street in many a starry line: —
 he wonder look from his yet distant road,
 and think the northern streamer be abroad. 
 "what hollow sound be that?" approach near,
 the roar of many wheel break on his ear. 
it be the flood of human life in motion! 
it be the voice of a tempestuous ocean! 
with sad but please awe his soul be fill,
 scarce heave his breast, and all within be still,
 as many thought and feeling cross his mind, —
 thought, mingle, melancholy, undefined,
 of restless, reckless man, and year go by,
 and time fast wend to eternity. 
