[Psyche] Canto iii.

Canto iii.

on, who be thou who dare of love complain? 
he be a gentle spirit and injure none! 
his foe be we; from they the bitter pain,
 the keen, deep anguish, the heartrending groan,
 which in his mild reign be never know. 
his tear be soft than the April shower,
 white-handed innocence support his throne,
 his sigh be sweet as breath of early flower,
 affection guide his step, and peace protect his bower. 

but scarce admittance he on earth can find,
 oppose by vanity, by fraud ensnare,
 suspicion fright he from the gloomy mind,
 and jealousy in vain his smile have share,
 who sullen frown the gentle godhead scare;
 from passion rapid blaze in haste he fly,
 his wing alone the fierce flame have spare;
 from he ambition turn his scornful eye,
 and avarice, slave to gold, a generous lord deny. 

but chief inconstancy his power destroy;
 to mock his lovely form, a idle train
 with magic skill she dress in transient toy,
 by these the selfish votary she can gain
 who love more simple band can never detain. 
ah! how shall Psyche through such mortal foe
 the fate end of all her toil attain? 
sad she ponder over her hopeless woe,
 till on the pillowy turf she sink to short repose. 

but, as the careless lamb who playful chance
 thoughtless of danger have entice to rove,
 amid her gambol cast a sudden glance
 where lurk her wily foe within the grove,
 anxious to fly, but still afraid to move,
 all hopeless of escape — so look the maid,
 such dread her half-awakened sense prove,
 when rouse from sleep before her eye dismay
 a knight all arm appear close amid the embower shade. 

tremble she gaze, until the strange knight
 temper with mild courtesy, the awe
 which majesty inspire, low in her sight
 obeisance make; nor will he near draw,
 till, half subdue surprise and fear, he see
 pale terror yield to the rosy grace,
 the pure congeal blood begin to thaw,
 and flow through her crystal vein apace
 suffuse with mantling blush her mild celestial face. 

gentle approach then with fair speech
 he proffer service to the lonely dame,
 and pray she that she may not so impeach
 the honour of his youth yet spotless fame,
 as aught to fear which may his knighthood shame;
 but if her unprotected step to guard,
 the glory of her champion he may claim,
 he ask no other guerdon or reward,
 than what bright honour self may to his deed award. 

doubt, and muse much within her mind,
 with half suspicious, half confide eye,
 awhile she stand; her thought bewilder find
 no utterance, unwilling to deny
 such proffer aid, yet bashful to reply
 with quick assent, since though conceal his face
 beneath his helm, yet may she well espy
 and in each fair proportion plain trace
 the symmetry of form, and perfect youthful grace. 

hard be it to describe the nameless charm
 that over each limb, in every action play,
 the softness of that voice, which can disarm
 the hand of fury of its deadly blade:
 in shine armour be the youth array,
 and on his shield a bleed heart he bear,
 his lofty crest light plume of azure shade,
 there shine a wound dragon bathe in gore,
 and bright with silver beam the silken scarf he wear. 

his milkwhite steed with glitter trappings blaze,
 who reins a beauteous boy attendant hold,
 on the fair squire with wonder Psyche gaze,
 for scarce he seem of age to bear the shield,
 far less a ponderous lance, or sword to wield;
 yet well this little page his lord have serve,
 his youthful arm have many a foe repel,
 his watchful eye from many a snare preserve,
 nor ever from his step in any danger swerve. 

grace with the gift of a perpetual youth,
 no lapse of year have power his form to change;
 Constance be name the boy, who matchless truth
 though oft entice with other lord to range
 nor fraud, nor force can from that knight estrange;
 his mantle of celestial blue be make,
 and its bright texture wrought with art so strange
 that the fresh brilliant gloss can never fade,
 and lustre yet unknown to psyche eye display. 

thus while she gaze, behold with horrid roar
 a lion from the neighbour forest rush,
 a golden chain around his neck he bear,
 which rich glow with carbuncle blush,
 while his fierce eye-ball fiery rage have flush:
 forth step the youth before the affright fair,
 who in his mighty paw already crush
 seem in the terror of her wild despair,
 and her mute quiver lip a deathlike paleness wear. 

but scarce the kingly beast the knight behold,
 when crouch low, submissive at his foot,
 his wrath extinguish, and his valour quell,
 he seem with reverence and obeisance sweet
 he as his long acknowledge lord to greet. 
while, in acceptance of the new command,
 well please the youth receive the homage meet,
 then seize the splendid chain with steady hand
 full confident to rule, and every foe withstand. 

and, when at length recover from her fear
 the timid Psyche mount his docile steed,
 much pray, she tell to his attentive ear
 (as on her purpose journey they proceed)
 the doubtful course the oracle decree:
 and how observant of her friendly guide,
 she still pursue its flight, with all the speed
 her faint strength have hitherto supply:
 what pathless wild she cross! what forest darkling wide! 

which have hear, the courteous knight begin
 with counsel sweet to sooth her wound heart;
 divine eloquent, persuasion run
 the herald of his word ere they depart
 his lip, which well may confidence impart,
 as he reveal how he himself be bind
 by solemn vow, that neither force nor art
 his helmet shall unloose, till he have find
 the bower of happiness, that long seek fairy ground. 

i too (he say) divide from my love,
 the offend power of Venus deprecate,
 like thou, through path untrodden, sad rove
 in search of that fair spot prescribe by fate,
 the bless term of my afflict state,
 where i the mistress of my soul shall find,
 for who dear sake no toil to i seem great,
 nor any danger to my search assign
 can from its purpose fright my ardent longing mind. 

 "Psyche! thy soft and sympathise heart
 shall share the rapture of thy loyal knight;
 he too, in thy content shall bear a part,
 bless witness of thy new restore delight;
 my vow of true allegiance here i plight,
 never to forsake thou till thy peril end,
 thy step to guard, in thy protection fight,
 by counsel aid, and by my arm defend,
 and prove myself in all, thy champion and thy friend." 

so on they go, her cheerless heart revive
 by promise succour in her doubtful way;
 and much of hope she to herself derive,
 from the warm eagerness his lip display
 in their pursuit to suffer no delay:
 "and sure, (she soft sigh) my dear lord,
 thy watchful love still guide i as i stray,
 not chance alone can such a aid afford,
 lo! beast of prey confess the heaven-assisted sword." 

now from his crystal urn, with chill hand,
 vesper have sprinkle all the earth with dew,
 a misty veil obscure the neighbour land,
 and shut the fade landscape from their view;
 a beat path they eager pursue,
 (for now refreshment and repose they need
 as Psyche weary of long travel grow)
 where by a river bank it seem to lead,
 along its sinuous course they heedless proceed. 

at length the lordly beast that bear the knight
 explore the river depth, with sudden bound:
 Psyche, who hear the plunge with strange affright,
 her champion reassure with welcome sound,
 that he the other bank have safe find;
 and, while he speak, emerge from the shade,
 a joyous goodly train appear around,
 of many a gallant youth and white robe maid,
 who grateful, welcome give, and courteous greeting pay. 

quick through the tree a thousand torch blaze
 the gloom to banish, and the scene disclose
 to Psyche all irresolute, amaze:
 a bridge with stately arch at distance rise,
 thither at once the gay assembly go,
 not unattended by the charm knight,
 invite Psyche to partake repose,
 point where shine their bower illumine bright,
 their bower so pass fair, the bower of loose delight. 

at length with timid foot the bridge she pass,
 and to her guardian knight cling fearful,
 while many a doubt glance around she cast,
 if still her watchful dove she may espy;
 feeble it seem on labour wing to fly,
 till, dazzle by the sudden glare around,
 in painful trance it close its dizzy eye,
 and have it not fair psyche bosom find,
 its droop pinion soon have touch the unhallowed ground. 

hence there arise within her heart sore dread
 which no allure pleasure can dispel;
 the splendid hall with luscious banquet spread,
 the soft-breathed flute which in sweet concert swell,
 with melody of song unspeakable;
 nor the light dance troop in rose dress,
 can chase the terror which she dare not tell,
 while fond cherish in her anxious breast
 she strive in vain to sooth the flutter bird to rest. 

on a soft downy couch the guest be place,
 and close behind they stand their watchful page,
 but much his strict attendance there disgrace,
 and much be scorn his green and tender age,
 his calm fix eye, and steady aspect sage:
 but he nor rude disdain, nor mockery,
 nor soothe blandishment can ever engage
 the wanton maze of their sport to try,
 or from his lord to turn his firm adhere eye. 

white bosome nymph around with loosen zone
 all on the guest obsequious tend,
 some sing of love with soft expire tone,
 while psyche melt eye the strain commend;
 some over their head the canopy suspend,
 some hold the sparkle bowl, while some with skill
 ambrosial shower and balmy juice blend,
 or the gay lamp with liquid odour fill
 who many colour fire divine sweet distil. 

and now a soft light they seem to shed,
 and sweet music usher in their queen:
 her languid step by wing boy be lead,
 who in their semblance may have cupid be;
 close wrap in veil her follow train be see;
 herself look lovely in her loose attire,
 her smile eye give lustre to the scene,
 and still, wherever they turn their wanton fire,
 each thrill nerve confess the rapture they inspire. 

the stranger guest she view with welcome glad,
 and crown the banquet with reception sweet,
 to fill the glow bowl her nymph she bad,
 and graceful rise from her splendid seat
 she will herself present the sparkle treat;
 when lo! the dove alarm with sudden start,
 spurn the bright cup and dash it at her foot,
 for well he know it be mix with treacherous art
 to sting his psyche breast with agonize smart. 

regardless of her supplicate tear
 each eye with vengeful rage the insult see,
 her knight protection now in vain appear;
 the offend sovereign anxious to appease,
 a thousand hand prepare the dove to seize:
 nor be this all, for as the tumult rise,
 sudden more thick than swarm of summer bee,
 the secret den their venom hoard disclose,
 and horror at the sight her vital spirit freeze. 

hiss aloud with undulation dire,
 their fork tongue unnumbered serpent show,
 their taint breath emit poisonous fire,
 all turn on Psyche as their mortal foe;
 but he, who arm be never weak or slow,
 now rush before she with resistless spring,
 on either side the oft-repeated blow
 repulse the malice of their deadly sting,
 while spark of wrathful fire from their fierce jaw they fling. 

 "fly, Psyche! these be slander hellish brood! 
contest i know be vain," her champion cry. 
her passage now the oppose train withstand;
 strike with disgust their hideous form she spy,
 for lo! each silken veil be throw aside,
 and foul deformity, and filth obscene,
 with monstrous shape appear on every side;
 but vanish be their fair and treacherous queen,
 and with her every charm that deck the enchant scene. 

meanwhile the dove have soar above their reach,
 but hover still in anxious psyche sight,
 precursor of escape, it seem to teach
 whither she safe may direct her flight,
 and find a passport in her foes despite;
 one rugged path there lay with brier overgrow,
 then dark and dismal with the shade of night,
 thither the dove on rapid wing have fly,
 conspicuous amid the gloom its silver plumage shine. 

yet she delay, overcome by terror power,
 and scarce her faint form the knight can shield,
 when lo! still active in the try hour,
 Constance rush fearless through the dreadful field,
 with breast-plate firm invulnerable steel,
 he heed not the storm which round he press,
 to any peril he disdain to yield,
 endue with prudence as with hardiness,
 and ever skill to bring due succour in distress. 

lo! swift return on his master steed,
 in his right hand he hold the lion chain,
 the mighty beast his gentleness can lead,
 though little use to bear the curb or rein,
 and amid those grove accustom to remain,
 yet now prepare, with sweet submissive grace,
 he ready stand the knight to bear again,
 while tremble Psyche on the steed they place,
 which swift as lightning fly far from the dreadful chase. 

rough be the rude wild way, and many a thorn
 tear her loose garment in their rapid flight,
 over many a league the pant fair be bear,
 till now, emerge from the shade of night,
 the grey-eyed morn steal forth her pallid light. 
then first she pause, unable to proceed,
 exhaust with fatigue, and pain, and fright. 
 "turn, Psyche," cry the youth, "relax thy speed,
 and see thyself at length from thy pursuer free." 

amid the thick forest be a lonely dell,
 where foot of man be seldom know to tread,
 the slope hill all round in graceful swell
 the little green with wood environ;
 hither the dove their passive course have lead:
 here the thin smoke blue rise amid the tree,
 where broad and brown the deep umbrage spread,
 speak the abode of safe retire ease,
 and Psyche glad there her dove descend see. 

in lowly cottage, wall with mossy sod,
 close by a little spring perpetual rill,
 a hermit dwell, who many a year have tread
 with sacred solitude that pine-clad hill,
 and love with holy image to fill
 his soul enrapt; yet courteous then beseech
 a while seclude here to rest; and still
 replete with kind and hospitable thought,
 to a sequester bower the weary Psyche bring. 

skill in the virtue of each heal flower,
 and the wild fruit restore juice to blend,
 he spread the frugal fare of wholesome power,
 and heedful his care their want attend;
 a docile ear to his advice they lend,
 and sage instruction from his precept take,
 which much their future journey may befriend;
 wisdom with soothe eloquence he speak,
 please to resolve their doubt, and all their care partake. 

in those sweet placid scene awhile they rest,
 till Psyche find her faint strength revive;
 and here her dove, as in a quiet nest,
 delight seem to sportive joy alive;
 and hence they sure confidence derive. 
he plume his wing, and through his swell throat
 (no more a ruffle, fearful fugitive)
 in gentle murmur pour his dulcet note,
 while Psyche listen sit in some still vale remote. 

oh! have you never know the silent charm
 that undisturbed retirement yield the soul,
 where no intruder may your peace alarm,
 and tenderness have weep without control,
 while melt fondness over the bosom steal? 
do fancy never, in some lonely grove,
 abridge the hour which must in absence roll? 
those pensive pleasure do you never prove,
 oh, you have never love! you know not what be love! 

they do not love who can to these prefer
 the tumult of the gay, or folly roar;
 the muse they know not; nor delight in she
 who can the trouble soul to rest restore,
 calm contemplation: yes, i must deplore
 their joyless state, even more than his who mourn
 his love for ever lose; delight no more
 unto his widow heart indeed return,
 yet, while he weep, his soul their cold indifference spurn. 

but if soft hope illumine fancy dream,
 assure he of love and constancy,
 how exquisite do then the moment seem,
 when he may hide himself from every eye,
 and cherish the dear thought in secrecy! 
while sweet remembrance sooth his thrill heart,
 and bring once more past hour of kindness nigh,
 recall the look of love when force to part,
 and turn to drop of joy the tear that sad start. 

forgetful of the danger of her way,
 imagination oft will Psyche bear
 to her long travel' end, and that bless day
 when love unveil shall to her eye appear;
 when she may view his charm exempt from fear,
 taste his pure kiss, feel his balmy sigh,
 rest in the fond embrace of arm so dear,
 gaze with soft rapture on his melt eye,
 and hear his voice divine, the music of the sky! 

their destine course impatient to achieve,
 the knight be urgent onward to proceed:
 cheer with recruit strength they take their leave
 of their kind host, and pay their grateful meed
 of warm thanks sincere; onward they speed
 their sunless journey long through forest green,
 and tangle thicket rank with many a weed;
 and when at close day a hut be see,
 they seek the humble roof, nor scorn its welcome mean. 

it happen once that early rouse from sleep,
 (ere her damp veil the virgin morn have cast
 from her pale face, not yet with blush deep
 lovely suffuse, as when approach fast
 his herald star proclaim her spouse at last)
 Psyche forsake soon her homely bed,
 alone have fearless the low threshold past,
 and, to beguile the hour which linger flee,
 light over the dewy plain walk forth with nimble tread. 

yet though the knight close wrap in slumber lie,
 her step, at distance, still the page pursue,
 fearful that danger may befall her way,
 or lest, entangle in the mazy wood,
 return she shall miss the pathway rude. 
the lark now hail the sun with rapturous song,
 the cheerful earth resound with gratitude,
 over the guy scene, as Psyche trip along,
 she feel her spirit rise, her lighten heart grow strong. 

and hark, soft music steal upon the ear! 
it be woman voice most exquisite sweet! 
behold two female form approach near
 arrest with wonder psyche timid foot;
 on a gay car, by speckle panther fleet
 be draw in gallant state a seem queen,
 and at her foot on low but graceful seat
 a gentle nymph of lovely form be see,
 in robe of fair white, with scarf of pleasant green. 

in strain of most bewitch harmony,
 and still adapt to her sovereign praise,
 she fill the grove with such sweet melody,
 that, quite overcome with rapture and amaze,
 Psyche stand listen to the warble lay;
 yet with a sullen, scarce approve ear
 her mistress sit, but with attentive gaze,
 her eye she fix on a mirror clear
 where still by fancy spell unrivalled charm appear. 

and, as she look with aspect ever new,
 she seem on change and novel grace intent,
 her robe be form of ever vary hue,
 and whimsical place each ornament;
 on her attire, with rich luxuriance spend,
 the treasure of the earth, the sea, the air,
 be vain heap her wish to content;
 yet be her arm and snowy bosom bare,
 and both in paint pride shine exquisite fair. 

her braid tress in profusion dress,
 circle with diadem, and nod plume,
 sport their artful ringlet over her breast,
 and to the breeze give their rich perfume;
 her cheek with tint of borrow rose bloom:
 use to receive from all rich offering,
 she quaff with conscious right the fragrant fume
 which her attendant from a censer fling,
 who graceful feed the flame with incense while she sing. 

soon as her glance fair psyche form have catch,
 her soft attendant smile she address:
 "behold, Lusinga! can thou ever have think
 that these wild wood be so in beauty bless? 
let but that nymph in my attire be dress
 and scarce her loveliness will yield to i! 
at least invite she in our bower to rest,
 before her eye let all my splendour shine,
 perhaps to dwell with we her heart we may incline." 

with soft smile applaud all she hear,
 Lusinga bow leave her golden seat,
 and Psyche, who at first in doubt have fear
 while listen to the lay so silver sweet,
 now passive follow with unconscious foot;
 till Constance, all alarm, impatient fly,
 and soft his whisper of the maid entreat
 to fly the syren song, for well he know
 what lurk danger hence will to his lord ensue. 

 "oh, do not trust her treacherous lip," he cry,
 "she be the subtle slave of vanity,
 her queen, the child of folly, and of pride,
 to lure thou to her power each art will try,
 nor ever will release thou peaceable." 
he speak, but speak in vain, for lo! from far,
 of giant port they fast approach spy
 a knight, high mount on a glitter car,
 from who conspicuous crest flame wide a dazzle star. 

 "Psyche, escape! ambition be at hand!" 
the page exclaim: while swift as thought he fly;
 she will have follow, but with parley bland
 Lusinga soon her terror pacify. 
 "fair nymph, ascend my car," the sovereign cry,
 i will convey thou where thy wish lead,
 haply the safe course i may advise
 how thou thy journey may perform with speed;
 for never in wood to dwell such beauty be decree. " 

so gentle urgent her consent they woo
 with much persuasion of the strange knight,
 that yield Psyche now no more withstand,
 but point out to her observant sight
 the humble cot where she have pass the night,
 she pray her kind conductress there to turn,
 and promise to herself what vast delight
 her wonder knight will feel at her return,
 and with what blush shame the timid page will burn. 

but scarce have she climb the fatal car
 when swift than the wind the panther fly,
 the traverse plain and wood, recede far,
 soon shut from tremble psyche anxious view
 the spot where she have leave her guardian true;
 with desperate effort, all in vain she try
 to escape the ill which how too sure she know
 must from her ill-placed confidence arise:
 betray — ah! self-betrayed, a wretched sacrifice. 

she strive to quit the car with sudden bound,
 ah, vain attempt! she now perceive too late
 a thousand silken trammel, subtle wind
 over her fair form, detain she as she sit:
 lose in despair she yield to her sad fate,
 and silent, hear but with augment fright
 the queen describe her brother splendid state,
 who now outstrip they by his rapid flight,
 and press his foam steed to gain the arduous

high over the spacious plain a mountain rise,
 a stately castle on its summit stand:
 huge craggy cliff behind their strength oppose
 to the rough surge of the dash flood;
 the rocky shore a bold rise wood
 on either side conceal; bright shine the tower
 and seem to smile upon the billow rude. 
in front the eye, with comprehensive power,
 see wide extend plain enrich with splendid bower. 

hither they bear the sad reluctant fair,
 who mount with dizzy eye the awful steep;
 the blaze structure seem high poise in air,
 and its light pillar tremble over the deep:
 as yet the heaven be calm, the tempest sleep,
 she know not half the horror of her fate:
 nor feel the approach ruin whirlwind sweep:
 yet with ill-boding fear she past the gate,
 and turn with sicken dread from scene of gorgeous state. 

in vain the haughty master of the hall
 invite she to partake his regal throne,
 with cold indifference she look on all
 the gild trophy, and the well-wrought stone
 which in triumphal arch proud shine:
 and as she cast around her timid eye,
 back to her knight her tremble heart be fly,
 and many a anxious wish, and many a sigh
 invoke his gallant arm protection to supply. 

sudden the lurid heaven obscure frown,
 and sweep gust the come storm proclaim;
 flattery soft voice the howl tempest drown,
 while the roof catch the greedy lightning flame. 
loud in their fear, the attendant train exclaim
 the light build fabric never can stand the blast,
 and all its insecure foundation blame:
 tumultuous they rush: the chief aghast
 behold his throne overturn, his train disperse fast. 

Psyche dismay, yet thoughtful of escape,
 in anxious silence to the portal press;
 and freedom will have hail in any shape
 though see in death tremendous colour dress:
 but ah! she feel the knight strong grasp arrest
 her tremble step.  "think not," he cry, "to fly
 with yond false crowd who by my favour bless,
 can now desert i when with changeful eye
 inclement fortune frown from yond dark angry sky." 

while yet he speak loud burst the groan hall,
 with frightful peal the thunder dome resound,
 disjointed column in wild ruin fall,
 while the huge arch tremble to the ground. 
yet unappalled amid the crush be find
 the dare chief: his hold he firm maintain
 though hideous devastation roar around;
 plunge headlong down his prey he still sustain,
 who in his powerful grasp in deathlike swoon remain. 

down sink the palace with its mighty lord,
 hurl from the awful steep with vehemence
 even to the flood below, which angry roar
 and gape wide receive the weight immense:
 indignant still, with fearless confidence
 he rise, high mount over the heave wave;
 against their rage one arm be his defence,
 the other still his lovely burden save,
 though strong the billow beat, and fierce the tempest rave. 

the blaze star yet shine upon his brow,
 and flame triumphant over the dash main;
 he ride secure the watery waste, and now
 the shelter shore he may in safety gain;
 the shelter shore he shun with proud disdain,
 and breast the adverse tide. ah, rash resource! 
yond vessel, prince, thou never shall attain! 
for plunge amid the deep, with generous force,
 see where the lion lord pursue thy hardy course! 

Psyche a well know voice to life restore,
 once more her eye unclose view the light,
 but not the water, nor recede shore,
 one only object can arrest her sight,
 high over the flood she see her valiant knight,
 and sudden joy, and hope scarce trust cheer
 even in that awful moment dread affright;
 her feeble cry indeed he can hear,
 but see her outstretch arm, and seem already near. 

in vain the giant knight exert his strength;
 urge by the impetuous youth the lion press,
 and gain fast upon his flight, at length
 prepare his dare progress to arrest,
 and seize with furious jaw his struggle breast;
 gasp he loose his hold — and Psyche lose
 the overwhelm wave with ruin have oppress,
 but Constance, ever near when need most,
 the sink beauty catch and bear she to the coast. 

sting with the shame of the relinquish prey,
 mad with revenge, and hate, and conscious pride,
 the knight, recover from his short dismay,
 dash resistless through the foam tide;
 the billow yield to his arm divide,
 as rush on the youth he seek the shore;
 but now a combat strange on either side
 amid the wave begin; each hope no more
 the engulf deep his foe shall ever to light restore. 

beside the cold inhospitable land
 where sun long absent dawn with lustre pale,
 thus on his bark the bold Biscayen stand,
 and bid his javelin rouse the parent whale:
 fear, pain, and rage at once her breast assail,
 the agitate ocean foam around
 lash by the sound fury of her tail,
 or as she mount the surge with frightful bound,
 wide echo to her cry the bellow shore resound

fierce be the contest, but at length subdue,
 the youth exult see his giant foe. 
with wonder still the enormous limb he view
 which lifeless now the wave support show;
 his starred helm, that now be first lay low,
 he seize as trophy of the wondrous fight,
 and bid the sparkle gem on Constance glow,
 while psyche eye, soft beam with delight,
 through tear of grateful praise applaud she gallant knight. 
