the swallow.

write September, 1748. 

by the same.

ere yellow autumn from our plain retire,
and give to wintery storm the vary year,
the swallow-race, with foresight clear inspire,
to southern clime prepare their course to steer.

on damon roof a grave assembly sit;
his roof, a refuge to the feather kind;
with serious look he mark the nice debate,
and to his Delia thus address his mind.

observe yond twitter flock, my gentle maid,
observe, and read the wondrous way of heaven!
with we through summer genial reign they stay,
and food, and lodging to their want be give.

but now, through sacred prescience, well they know
the near approach of elemental strife;
the blustery tempest, and the chill snow,
with every want, and scourge of tender life!

thus teach, they meditate a speedy slight;
for this, even now they prune their vigorous wing;
for this, consult, advise, prepare, excite,
and prove their strength in many a airy ring.

no sorrow load their breast, or swell their eye,
to quit their friendly haunt, or native home;
nor fear they, launch on the boundless sky,
in search of future settlement, to roam.

they feel a power, a impulse all divine!
that warn they hence; they feel it, and obey;
to this direction all their care resign,
unknown their destine stage, unmarked their way!

well fare your flight! you mild domestic race!
oh! for your wing to travel with the sun!
health brace your nerve, and zephyr aid your pace,
till your long voyage happy be do!

see, Delia, on my roof your guest today;
tomorrow on my roof your guest no more!
ere yet it be night, with haste they wing away,
tomorrow land they on some safe shore.

how just the moral in this scene convey!
and what without a moral will we read?
then mark what Damon tell his gentle maid,
and with his lesson register the deed.

it be thus life cheerful season roll away;
thus threat the winter of inclement age;
our time of action but a summer day;
and earth frail orb the sadly-varied stage!

and do no power its friendly aid dispense,
nor give we tiding of some happy clime?
find we no guide in gracious providence
beyond the stroke of death, the verge of time!

yes, yes, the sacred oracle we hear,
that point the path to realm of endless day:
that bid our heart, nor death, nor anguish fear,
this future transport, that to life the way.

then let we timely for our flight prepare,
and form the soul for her divine abode;
obey the call, and trust the leader care
to bring we safe through virtue path to god.

let no fond love for earth exact a sigh,
no doubt divert our steady step aside;
nor let we long to live, nor dread to die;
heaven be our hope, and providence our guide.

part ii.

write April, 1749. 

at length the winter surly blast be over;
array in smile the lovely spring return:
health to the breeze unbar the scream door,
and every breast with heat celestial burn.

again the daise peep, the violet blow,
again the tenant of the leafy grove
forget the patter hail, the drive snow,
resume the lay to melody and love.

and see, my Delia, see over yonder stream,
where on the sunny bank the lambkin play,
alike attract to the enliven gleam,
the stranger-swallow take their wonted way.

welcome, you gentle tribe, your sport pursue,
welcome again to Delia, and to i:
your peaceful council on my roof renew,
and plan your settlement from danger free.

no tempest on my shed its fury pour,
my frugal hearth no noxious blast supply;
go, wanderer, go, repair your sooty bower,
think, on no hostile roof my chimney rise.

again i will listen to your grave debate,
i will think i hear your various maxim tell,
your number, leader, policy, and state,
your limit settle, and your tribe enrol.

i will think i hear you tell of distant land,
what insect-nation rise from egypt mud,
what paint swarm subsist on lybia sand,
what mild Euphrates yield, and ganges flood.

thrice happy race! who nature call invite
to travel over her realm with active wing,
to taste her choice store, her best delight,
the summer radiance, and the sweet of spring.

while we be doom to bear the restless change
of shift season, vapour dank, or dry,
forbid, like you, to mild clime to range,
when wintery cloud deform the trouble sky.

but know the period to your joy assign!
know ruin hover over this earthly ball;
certain as fate, and sudden as the wind,
its secret adamantine prop shall fall.

yet when your short-lived summer shine no more,
my patient mind, swear foe to vice way,
sustain on light wing than you shall soar
to fair realm beneath a bright ray.

to plain etherial, and elysian bower,
where wintery storm no rude access obtain,
where blast no lightning, and no thunder lower,
but spring, and joy unchanged for ever reign.
