Woodstock.

a elegy.

write in the year mdcclix.

ah i! what be this mortal life? (i cry)
 what change crowd the page of flit time! 
what dire reverse of fate have number try! 
what youth, what beauty, wither in the prime! 

inexorable destiny pursue,
 and level in the chace with rapid wing:
 pity in vain, or mirth, or merit sue,
 equal vain the beggar and the king! 

ah! what be fame, the idol of the great? 
no solid pleasure can she ever bestow;
 if just to worth, that justice come too late:
 prompt be her malice, but her mercy slow! 

thus on the wind isis willowed bank,
 the vary scene of fortune i deplore;
 waste in fruitless sigh the evening dank,
 tear add water to the river store. 

a gloomy mansion open to the view,
 disclose horror heighten by the shade;
 where round the nod wall the mournful yew
 point to the vault where Rosamond be lay:

where with her bird of night, haggard and foul,
 in sullen fellowship together dwell,
 the bat ambiguous, and ill-omened owl,
 scream to nighted swain a dreadful knell! 

intent i gaze, till terror, rule sight,
 rear a pale spectre from the yawn tomb,
 a faint delusion of the murky night,
 beget and breed in fancy fruitful womb! 

semblance of virgin elegance and grace,
 the mimic shape in every part adorn;
 but wan and languid seem the beauteous face,
 which elen envy, and which Henry mourn,

now gentle glide over the hallow ground,
 close by my side the phantom make a stand,
 pierce the night-stilled air. a awful sound! 
and claim attention with uplift hand. 

 "i once be bless with love delude joy,
" i also feel the worst extreme of hate! 
 "and can no length of time (she cry) destroy
" remembrance of my love, and of my fate? 

 "o have oblivion in her peaceful cell,
" shroud from every eye my moulder dust! 
 "that on the chisel stone no verse may tell,
" my crime how great! my punishment how just! 

 "but woodstock bloom bower still remain,
" the scene, to i, of pleasure and of woe;
 "and godstow wall perpetuate the stain
" my name reproach, while my grave they show. 

 "o Woodstock, fate long to be the seat
" of all the charm that wit and beauty boast,
 "the hero guerdon, and his soft retreat,
" yield content, in field and senate lose. 

 "thy glory now be level low in earth;
" no long beauty do thy bower adorn;
 "no more thy wood resound the voice of mirth;
" the laurel from thy victor brow be tear! 

 "but thou who bosom foreign sorrow heave,
" who eye can stream for anguish not thy own;
 "who heart the white-robed fugitive receive,
" when force by awful rigour from her throne;

 "the scourge of vice, the good man destiny,
" the wreck of fortune, and the waste of year;
 "the misery thou mourn thou shall see,
" sad consolation grant to thy tear. " 

now on the summit of a cloud-built height
 methinks i stand: and from a open glade
 with faulter ray gleam forth a magic light,
 and round the plain in lambent circle play. 

sudden the ground with inbred motion shake,
 a solemn murmur rustle through the tree;
 and on the pebble shore the surge brook
 dash angry wave, unconscious of a breeze! 

daedalian mystery! from the part soil,
 a labyrinth rose to sound of melt note;
 a moment labour mock all the toil
 of nation old, and monarch long forget. 

high overarch in summer gay weed,
 meander alley form the wondrous maze,
 and puzzle most when best they seem to lead
 the untaught foot, that in their precinct stray. 

deep in a vale impervious to all tread,
 save by a flower-hid path, a grotto stand! 
and ancient oak their foliage round it spread,
 overshade with their top the neighbour wood

and nature sport, with a lavish hand
 this little spot in gay profusion grace,
 with every wanton variation plan,
 luxuriant fancy yield but to taste. 

here on the brink of a pellucid stream,
 circle in eddy over its moss-grown bed,
 where ever and anon a quiver beam,
 pierce the covert, on the surface play:

a beauty lie, surpass all the train
 of virgin Delia, or idalia queen;
 or what of dryad poet sweet feign,
 on Ida, or thessalian Oeta see. 

and by her side a form imperial lie,
 with rose, and with myrtle garland crown;
 the wither laurel cast in scorn away,
 the pomp of war in lydian measure drown. 

the little love that flutter on the bough,
 in grateful bondage do their limb entwine,
 and strive to join they close than their vow,
 with woodbine sweet, and twist eglantine. 

but weak all bond when those of beauty fail;
 the monarch sate left the flowery bed,
 nor grieve to see the maid his loss bewail,
 nor mingle part tear with those she shed. 

now swift advance to the guilty bower,
 with frantic step the injure queen draw nigh;
 and arm for vengeance seize the fatal hour,
 when all thing sleep but rage and jealousy. 

each eager hand a deadly weapon fill,
 a point dagger, and a poison bowl;
 my ebb blood her mad demeanour chill,
 and anguish unallayed possess my soul. 

ah stop, inhuman! with a faulter tongue
 and inarticulate voice, as in a dream,
 i cry; and strait the rattle thunder ring,
 and livid lightning in the welkin gleam! 

no more the mazy grove, or bower appear,
 but all around a waste and barren plain;
 the scatter tree of leaf and branch bare,
 and blanch by frown wind and beat rain. 

and murder shriek hideous wander there:
 and ruthless envy, and relentless hate,
 with snaky lock, and shrivel bosom bare,
 while lurk felons on their motion wait. 

and soon the landscape shift like a cloud,
 to lessen distance bear the hellish crew;
 now twang in faint sound their yell loud;
 now vanish quite; a mild scene i view. 

of chequer light and shade, a sober dawn,
 faint through a linger vapour do disclose,
 a hamlet seat on a open lawn,
 and from each roof the pillared smoke arise. 

for now with frequent challenge, have the cock
 his rival menac, awake the swain;
 now in the pen impatient bleat the flock,
 and ruddy streak the horizon distain. 

the crouch dog the moon no long bay,
 but stretch supine upon the social hearth
 he lie, rejoice in the crackle blaze,
 while flaunt sunbeam dry the moisten earth. 

while to the strain of rural minstrelsy,
 a band forth issue to a neighbour hill
 welcome the morn with decent jollity,
 and all the air their youthful carol fill. 

with unskilled hand a simple crown they weave
 of vervain, and the never-sading bay;
 and raise a throne within a rude alcove;
 to grace the parent of the british lie:

old Chaucer, who in rough, unequal verse,
 sing quaint allusion and facetious tale;
 and ever as his jest he will rehearse,
 loud peal of laughter echo through the vale:

and eager gape the rustic listen throng,
 and still their joy and laughter they renew;
 and warlike baron, soften by the song,
 from loud alarm to mute attention draw. 

but short-lived pleasure soon to sorrow change;
 for melody a sigh, for mirth a tear;
 and now the swain in solemn order range,
 surround the bard extend on his bier. 

what though succeed poet, as their sire,
 revere his memory, and approve his wit;
 though spenser elegance and dryden fire
 his name to age far remote transmit;

his tuneless number hardly now survive,
 as ruin of a dark and gothic age;
 and all his blithsome tale their praise derive
 from pope immortal song, and prior page! 

again, quick rise through the tuft green,
 turret and lofty battlement ascend;
 tree half obscure column, intervene,
 and real bough with sculpture fruitage blend. 

and arch window shine with torch clear,
 soothe the wanderer. a delusive home! 
and busy croud of minister appear,
 deck with jocund haste a festive room. 

and now of sprightly youth and damsel gay,
 a wanton bevy at the board be set,
 and all intent they seem on amorous play,
 for kindle glance, kindle glance meet. 

their volant finger over the chord lyre,
 with modulate touch the artist ply;
 pursue still to animate desire,
 strain that in thrill undulation die. 

and every cheek with deep suffusion glow,
 denote thought inflame, and trouble breast,
 and passion in seduce sigh avow
 mutual, yet still by decency repress. 

but soon excess to mad riot lead,
 ensue meaning jest, and licence bold;
 till comely order from the banquet flee,
 ashamed the lustful orgy to behold. 

a youth exalt high above the rest,
 in bad preeminence conspicuous shine! 
and blind submission to his lewd behest,
 unrivaled lewdness from they all have win. 

and deep be he skill in wanton lore,
 with fertile thought suggest every art,
 to make impure, fire impure before,
 taint at once the manner and the heart. 

please proportion, youthful beauty aid,
 and bland complacency and win smile,
 and wit diffusive tempt to persuade,
 maintain his power, and hold he in the toil. 

ah! why shall nature in a angel dress,
 to lure with seem worth unwary eye,
 conceal rank thought and gross voluptuousness,
 too apt to poison without virtue guise? 

pride of thy country, Wilmot, and her shame! 
by every grace adorn, and Muse inspire! 
thy early fall how pity! and thy name,
 how much detest, and how much admire! 

yet must unbiased posterity admit,
 for all thou write and acted to atone,
 thy fail be the age, but thy wit,
 thy part and die penitence, thy own. 

but now prevail over the hubbub wild,
 the clang trumpet kindle great acclaim;
 and all around be warlike trophy pile,
 and croud triumphant echo Churchill fame. 

and throng senate in the glorious cause,
 repel oppression, liberty maintain,
 accord with gratulant vote the loud applause;
 the fair prize by british valour gain. 

who erst implore, and soon obtain relief,
 high-fated monarch grateful homage pay,
 and fulgent honour crown the matchless chief,
 and verse harmonious, never to decay:

and humble Gallia kneel with distant awe;
 her general baffle, and her warrior slay;
 no more to dictate but receive the law,
 no long to impose but wear the chain. 

but venom faction spread over the land,
 too soon forget the mighty debt to owe;
 and envy stretch out her lurid hand,
 the victor meed to blast and overthrow. 

and yet unfinished stand the votive dome,
 by all his toil and all his danger buy:
 when just resentment call he far from home,
 revisit the field where late he fight. 

in vain auspicious brunswick happy reign,
 blunt the rancorous point of party strife,
 restore the hero to his friend again;
 too late to cheer the dregs of lengthen life! 

the lofty column and the voice of praise
 in vain proclaim he great, and just, and brave;
 tardy repentance merit ill repay,
 unheard, unheeded, in the silent grave! 

in conquest equal, and alike in fate,
 Rome mount genius, godlike Scipio stand;
 and prop by worth and dignity innate,
 contemn the venal censure of the crowd. 

yet once again the visionary scene,
 ductile, for sorrow social beauty yield;
 a temperate sunshine and a air serene,
 foster the upland down and level field. 

and tepid shower bedew the frolic herd,
 bound in gamesome measure over the lea,
 with daisy crimson-tipped, and green parterred,
 and shadow fragrance drop from every tree. 

the wide expand prospect gentle close,
 on vistoed walk lead to high arcade;
 each wave copse in symmetry dispose,
 point to the terras captain with colonnade. 

and more remote the cloister wing confine,
 in architecture elegant and just,
 a portal front where niche deep inshrine
 the marble statue, and the gild bust. 

unfold wide the hospitable port
 on ready hinge, to the search eye
 reveal unblemished childhood harmless sport,
 and placid parent stand delight by. 

for here unmindful of the call of state,
 the smile of favour, or the voice of power;
 in tranquil pleasure, even and sedate,
 great Churchill heir enjoy the waste hour. 

and beam rapture glisten on his brow,
 and glad dependant share their patron joy,
 no frown their heart-bred transport disallow,
 debase worth in servitude alloy. 

such charm have innocence! such virtue pride! 
from starry height her sacred power descend,
 the garish pomp of grandeur to deride,
 and giddy Fortune rash decree amend. 

a day he flourish in the peaceful soil,
 another see he on the hostile strand,
 guide the thunder of the white-cliffed isle,
 ambition wasteful rapine to withstand. 

to match his great progenitor in war,
 elate with hope his generous bosom burn;
 but inauspicious twinkle every star,
 and heaven avert all his wish spurn. 

too high request in every sphere to shine,
 in peace a pattern, and a chief in blood;
 the god to each a separate path assign,
 but he alone be great who be true good. 
