kymber:

a monody.

by mr. Potter.

yet once more you love poplar, and once more
 my silver yare, your hallow haunt i tread,
 the bough-inwoven bank, the damask mead,
 and seek the sweet shade of the woodbine bower,
 if haply here the british muse abide:
 for not on isis academic side,
 nor where proud thamis roll his royal wave
 through forest brown or sunny meadow fair,
 her rapture-breathing voice enchant the ear:
 nor in those field that honour Camus lave;
 he, reverend sire, the sacred grove beneath
 oft deck with laureate wreath,
 through the still valley wind his pensive way
 without the sweet note of one warble song;
 save ever and anon some plaintive lay
 pour its soft air, the rustic tomb among,
 to the low wind that through his osier breathe,
 and murmur to the rustle reed beneath. 

do she over cambria rugged mountain stray,
 snowdon rude cliff, or huge plinlimmon height? 
or in rough conway foam flood delight,
 that down the steep rock urge their headlong way? 
there chant the rapture bard in solemn strain
 malgo strong lance, cadwallin puissant reign,
 high deed record yet in druid song:
 or swell his woe-wild note, of power to spread
 chill horror round the ruthless tyrant head,
 for urien fate, for bleed modred wrong,
 and smite the harp in dreadful harmony. 
or do she love to lie
 in the mild shade of hulla soft grove,
 and twine the vermeil wreath to grace the youth,
 who rapt breast glow, as over the beach he rove,
 touch with the sacred flame of starbright truth;
 while to her lore his manly measure flow,
 "and wake old Humber from his deep repose." 

yet deign, if not to dwell, thy presence deign
 here, heavenly visitant; and with thou bring
 the lofty note that swell the sound string,
 when stern Tyrtaeus raise the heroic strain;
 to arm the warrior poet smite his lyre,
 and all Laconia catch the martial fire. 
thou too, harmonious maid, the string obey;
 strike they, and bid the inspire number slow,
 bid britain son with sparta spirit glow,
 and rouse old Albion with thy awful lay. 
thy lay shall wellborn Wodehouse deign to hear,
 as now with generous care
 from honour fount the enliven stream he bring
 to visit as they flow, that silver bower,
 where the fair plant of public virtue spring,
 and breathe pure fragrance from each glow flower;
 like heaven own amarant the immortal tree
 shoot, bloom, and bear; the growth of Kimberley. 

have thou no verse then, heavenly virgin say,
 by truth attune on fancy fairy plain;
 no solemn air, no hymn of high vein,
 to hail the bless morn auspicious ray,
 when, these tall tower rejoice to behold,
 forth walk the orient sun, array in gold,
 first on their glitter top to impress his beam;
 thence, glance downwards, sparkle on the tide
 that bend along yond hoar grove moss-grown side,
 and scatter crimson over its azure stream? 
the naiad, haste from their coral cave
 beneath the crystal wave,
 (in pearl braid their amber tress bind)
 thrice wave their hand, and hail the rise tower:
 the wood-nymph too, with flourish chaplet crown,
 forsake their grove, forsake their broider bower;
 and thrice their hand they wave, and thrice they say,
 "raise, you fair structure, raise your towery head!" 

next kymber come, slow wind over the lea,
 his beard and sedge-crowned lock all silvered over
 with reverend eld, as winter breathe frore
 hang on the bare bough of the spangle tree:
 he urn be silver fret round with gold,
 with runic rhime emboss, and figure old,
 the illustrious monument of british fame:
 here stout tenantius draw his righteous sword
 to crush the curse rule of a foreign lord,
 and spread unconquered freedom sacred flame:
 there war-worn kymbeline, by victor power
 forth drive from princely bower,
 to the thick shelter of these shade retire,
 feed high thought and flame of vengeful war,
 (like a chace lion with fell fury fire)
 writhe on the lurk traitor close-couched spear,
 and bid the conscious grove, and bid the plain,
 and kindred stream, his honour name retain. 

high on her warlike car bonduca stand,
 the plume helmet glitter on her brow,
 while loose in stream of gold her tress flow,
 the bow and point javelin grace her hand;
 deliberate courage lighten in her eye,
 and conscious worth, and inborn majesty;
 heroic empress! as thy virtue spread,
 Rome raven eagle cower his quiver wing,
 hope smile, fair liberty her blessing bring,
 and heaven-born glory ray thy sacred head. 
grace with these sculpture scene of ancient fame
 with stately step he come;
 nor want in his way melodious sound
 from pipe or pastoral reed, or dulcet voice
 of nymph or Naïad he enring round,
 or choir bird that in his shade rejoice,
 or gentle warble wind, or water fall
 soft trickle from his urn in murmur musical. 

then on the stately structure towery height
 with conscious pride he fix his rapture eye;
 and as past scene of ancient glory rise
 arrange on fancy field in order bright,
 he pause; then graceful bow his reverend head,
 and thus in lofty strain due homage pay. 
 "you strong-based battlement, you gorgeous wall,
" you princely structure, that with splendour crown,
 "shine over your wide dominion stretch round,
" to you with friendly voice your kymber call,
 "and bid you hail! thereto he add your name
" renowned in ancient same,
 "hail wodehouse-tower! to tell you with what pride,
" what triumph he your glitter state survey,
 "that dignify his lilly-silvered side,
" and wake sweet memory of those glorious day,
 "when full-plumed victory wave her golden wing,
" and deck with trophy proud his honour spring. 

 "yes, kymber! now thou may with joy retrace
" the long succession of thy patriot line;
 "with joy behold the unclouded lustre shine
" which virtue beam around her favour race. 
 "can thou forget the lord of wodehouse-tower,
" who strong build bastion scorn the norman power? 
 "from deva bank (who mystic water glide
" by holy Whitchurch, through those pasture plain
 "long since the warlike Talbot rich domain,
" when from blackmere he bring his lovely bride,
 "the fair l'estrange) thou see the stout knight lead
" to silfield happy mead
 "he saxon train. there beauclerk royal ray
" shine on his battailous bold offspring, try
 "in many a hard and chivalrous assay,
" when neustria field with crimson gore he die,
 "spread vengeful flame revolt Bayeux round,
" and dash the rampired pride of caën to the ground. 

 "oft as britannia royal ensign wave,
" and the stern clarion call in field to fight,
 "the warlike Wodehouse march with prow may,
" and the rough front of deathful danger brave. 
 "let bara tell, and let Bodotria tell,
" fort, lough, and river, mountain, wood, and dell,
 "all that from southern eiden flowery lea
" reach to bleak strathnavern northern strand,
 "be his sword sheathe, when Edward iron hand
 "spread desolation wide from sea to sea? 
" or when the sable warrior lift lance
 "glare in the eye of France,
" be Wodehouse want to the hero fame? 
 "let Crecy tell, and Poictiers purple plain,
" and captive valois' hallow oriflame,
 "he dreadless hardiment let glequin chain
 "record, and brave dandrehen froward fate,
 "and poor castilia tyrant-wielded state. 

 "who have not hear of somme affright flood,
" how mournful his cumber stream he roll
 "over shine hauberk, shield, and helm of gold,
" his crystal current stain with prince blood,
 "when dare delabreth in wanton pride
" the warlike Henry way-worn troop defy? 
 "but all this gallant trim and rich array
" lay soil in dust, when bedford burnisat spear
 "flame in their front, and thunder in their rear,
" and york bright blade hew out his dreadful way. 
 "rouse, royal England, rouse thy matchless might,
" and with a dragon flight
 "sweep over the ensanguine plain of Agincourt:
" and see thy Wodehouse, who strong arm subdue
 "the ruin bulwark of yond age fort,
" he golden chevron charge with drop of blood,
 "rest on the woodman wild that bear his shield,
" and hail thou victor of the well fight field! 

 "can i forget how blythe my eddy roll
" and kiss their crisp bank, when to tewksbury plain
 "my gallant son lead his heroic train,
 "stout earl, and princely duke, and baron bold? 
" yet, ah for pity! these fierce host cease,
 "that maiden blossom wear the badge of peace,
" and will you die she white leaf red in blood? 
 "but if your flame courage prick you forth,
" see where the prowl pilferer of the north
 "with inroad foul over tine forbid flood
" rush from their bleak hill, lure with scent of prey:
 "brook they your firm array? 
" far humble thought on eske embattle bank
 "they learn, as Somerset victorious spear
" with foul disorder break their bleed rank:
 "while vengeful Wodehouse teach their proud heart fear,
 "and bid his thunder tell they, as they flee,
" the brother triumph where the brother bleed. 

 "but not on camp and fight field alone
" my glory rest; when turtle-pennoned peace
 "hush war harsh roar, and bid his fury cease,
" in these love shade her soft lustre shine. 
 "here heaven-rapt piety delight to dwell,
" train in monastic flitcham holy cell;
 "here plant her palm, who hallow branch spread
" over tower Richmond consecrate shrine,
 "and form the only wreath ever teach to twine
" round desolate caernarvon hapless head. 
 "even that strong arm, which stretch from a cloud
" crest the achievement proud
 "impress with agincourt emblazon name,
" among his laurel weave this sacred bough,
 "ennoble valour with devotion flame,
" and teach the warble orison to flow,
 "as amid the taper choir the solemn priest
" chant to the victor saint high heaven eternal rest. 

 "here the firm guardian of the public weal,
" inspire with freedom heaven-descended flame,
 "rise noble faithful to their country fame;
" in frequent senate pour their ardent zeal,
 "dash the base bribe from curse corruption hand,
" and save from sceptre pride the sink land. 
 "or, prompt to answer bleed europe call,
 "to distant realm bear britain high behest,
" bid the sword sleep, give gasp nation rest,
 "and teach the doubtful balance where to fall. 
" but in the soft hour of social joy,
 "when cease the high employ,
" these woodland walk, these tuft dale among
 "the silver-sounding muse build their bower,
" make vocal with the lute attemper song;
 "while bloom courtesy gold-spangled flower,
" cull by the grace, spread its bright glow
 "to deck unswerving honour manly brow. 

 "and you, age-honour oak! who solemn shade
" environ this fair mansion, proud stand
 "the sacred nurseling of Eliza hand,
 "when she with sovereign glory grace your glade,
" and please behold she boleyn kindred line
 "ennoble with your trophy honour shine. 
" spring crestless craven from such root as these? 
 "ask the pale groin, ask tayo tremble tide,
 "ask Cadiz weep over her ruin pride,
" and Austria scourge over all the subject sea. 
 "from this deep root my bloom branch spread,
" and raise their flourish head,
 "cheere with the princely Henry orient ray;
 "till, rise on the morn, importune night
" spread her black veil, and blot his golden day;
 "darkness ensue, dark deed, and impious might;
" while discord, mount on his iron car,
 "cry havoc, and let slip the dog of war. 

 "what then can virtue, 'fall'n on evil day,
" on evil day thus fall, and evil tongue,
 "with danger compass, 'and oppress with wrong,
" save to the wild wood breathe her plaintive lay,
 "and charm the shade, and teach the stream to flow
" with all the melt melody of woe? 
 "but what avail or voice, or tuneful hand,
" when hell breed faction, rear on baleful wing,
 "stain with the blood of noble and of king,
" spread total desolation over the land? 
 "ah kymber! where be then thy princely state? 
" sink in the general fate;
 "thy rich roof sink, over golden pendent spread;
" fastolff white croslet moulder from the wall,
 "and hamo lion drop his gold crown head;
" the sacred chapel sink, the festive hall;
 "even thy tall tower, majestic in decay,
" like thy lose monarch, low in ruin lay. 

 "thus Britain sink, and thus sink Wodehouse tower;
" so sink the sun, as over the turbid sky
 "sudden the storm-engendering cloud arise,
" and vex with uproar wild night fearful hour;
 "that past, his bright beam resalute the day,
" and heighten splendor crown his orient ray:
 "so Britain rise, so rise my princely state. 
" but not the swell column massy proof,
 "the mould pediment, the fret roof,
" not this fair fabric proud elevate,
 "though fix by prowse just palladian hand
" its tower honour stand;
 "not this clear lake, who wave crystal spread
" round yond hoar isle with awful shade embrown:
 "not these pure stream that vein the envermeil mead:
" nor those age-honour oak wide wave round;
 "exterior glory these, of humble fame,
" beam not that splendent ray which dignify my name. 

 "the spark of honour kindle glorious thought,
" the soul by warm benevolence refine,
 "the aethereal glow that melt the empassion mind,
" and virtue work to fair perfection bring,
 "be these my glory. and thou, power benign! 
" who live splendor round the patriot shine,
 "immortal genius of this far-famed land,
" this sceptre isle throne midst the circle sea,
 "seat of the brave, and fortress of the tree,
" oft have thou deign to take thy hallow stand,
 "these shade among; at virtue radiant shrine
" oft catch the flame divine,
 "when dark corruption dim thy sovereign light;
" thence beam thy solemn soul-ennobling ray,
 "to gild these grove with all thy lustre bright,
" where noble thoughtful Mordaunt love to stray,
 "and manly Prowse with every science crown,
" in freedom rustic seat the polish grace throne. 

 "and thou, to who thy kymber tune this strain,
" if strain like this may reach thy nice ear,
 "o deign in my thy country voice to hear,
" which never to a Wodehouse call in vain! 
 "by the proud honour of thy martial crest,
" the trophy tomb where thy fame father rest,
 "by lacy, clervaux' , hunsdon, armine name,
" by manhood, glory, freedom, virtue praise,
 "wake the high thought, the lofty spirit raise,
" and blazon thy hereditary fame. 
 "that fame shall live, while pride unrighteous power,
" the pageant of a hour,
 "fade from the guilty scene, and sink in night:
" that fame shall live, and spread its constant ray,
 "warm like the bless sun with genial light;
" while vice and folly spend their baleful blaze,
 "as meteor, glare over a trouble sky,
" shoot their pernicious fire, amaze, and die. " 

he cease his gratulation: the high strain
 pierce the thick gloom where britain genius lie
 cover with charm cloud from view of day:
 he hear, and burst through the false train,
 in all the majesty of empire rise,
 and issue stern to quell his vaunt foe. 
the naiad see, and swell their surge flood;
 old kymber see, and smile; the burnish glade
 rejoice; the grove wave their exult shade;
 and lofty feorhou bow with all his wood! 
the lordly lion ramp by his side,
 he march in martial pride,
 and pour his flame spirit over the land;
 the kindle hamlet rouse with war alarm,
 snatch the bright falchion from the hireling hand,
 and brave train their free-born youth to arm;
 while liberty her glitter ensign wave,
 and bid each generous son disdain a host of slave. 

then royal on the ocean wave enthrone,
 with all his terror arm, he ride sublime,
 and roll his thunder over each hostile clime:
 seine silken vassal tremble at the sound;
 the cloud-wrap promontory shake, and all
 its rock-based rampire nod to their fall. 
reign ever thus, unconquered Britain, reign;
 while thy free son in firm battalion stand,
 and guard with lion-ramp their native land:
 thus fix thy throne, thus rule the subject main! 
so shall bright victory over thy laureled head
 her eagle-pennon spread;
 while soft-eyed peace, quit at thy command
 her radiant orb in yond empyreal plain,
 wave over the will world her myrtle wand:
 so shall the muse she doric oat disdain,
 and touch with sphere-born rapture hallow fire,
 swell she triumphal note, and sweep the golden lyre. 
