[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night v.  the relapse.

humble inscribe to the right Hon. the earl of Lichfield.

Lorenzo! to recriminate be just. 
fondness for fame be avarice of air. 
i grant the man be vain who write for praise. 
praise no man ever deserve, who seek no more. 

as just thy second charge. i grant the muse
 have often blush at her degenerate son,
 retain by sense to plead her filthy cause
 to raise the low, to magnify the mean,
 and subtilize the gross into refine:
 as if to magic numbers powerful charm
 it be give to make a civet of their song
 obscene, and sweeten ordure to perfume. 
wit, a true pagan, deify the brute,
 and lift our swine-enjoyment from the mire. 

the fact notorious, nor obscure the cause. 
we wear the chain of pleasure and of pride:
 these share the man; and these distract he too;
 draw different way, and clash in their command. 
pride, like a eagle, build among the star;
 but pleasure, lark-like, nest upon the ground. 
joy share by brute-creation pride resent,
 pleasure embrace. man will both enjoy,
 and both at once: a point how hard to gain! 
but what can wit, when sting by strong desire? 

wit dare attempt this arduous enterprise. 
since joy of sense can rise to reason taste,
 in subtle sophistry laborious forge
 wit hammer out a reason new, that stoop
 to sordid scene, and greet they with applause. 
wit call the grace the chaste zone to loose,
 nor less than a plump god to fill the bowl;
 a thousand phantom, and a thousand spell,
 a thousand opiate scatter to delude,
 to fascinate, inebriate, lay asleep,
 and the fool mind delightful confound. 
thus that which shock the judgement, shock no more;
 that which give pride offence, no more offend. 
pleasure and pride, by nature mortal foe,
 at war eternal which in man shall reign,
 by wit address, patch up a fatal peace,
 and hand in hand lead on the rank debauch,
 from rank refine to delicate and gay. 
art, curse art! wipe off they indebt blush
 from nature cheek, and bronze every shame. 
man smile in ruin, glory in his guilt,
 and infamy stand candidate for praise. 

all write by man in favour of the soul
 these sensual ethics far in bulk transcend. 
the flower of eloquence profuse pour
 over spot vice, fill half the letter world. 
can power of genius exorcise their page,
 and consecrate enormity with song? 

but let not these inexpiable strain
 condemn the muse that know her dignity;
 nor mean stop at time, but hold the world —
 as it be, in nature ample field, a point —
 a point in her esteem; from whence to start,
 and run the round of universal space,
 to visit be universal there,
 and being source, that utmost flight of mind! 
yet, spite of this so vast circumference,
 well know, but what be moral, nought be great. 
sing siren only? do not angel sing? 
there be in poesy a decent pride,
 which well become she when she speak to prose,
 her young sister; haply, not more wise. 

think thou, Lorenzo, to find pastime here? 
no guilty passion blow into a flame,
 no foible flatter, dignity disgrace,
 no fairy field of fiction, all on flower,
 no rainbow colour here, or silken tale;
 but solemn counsel, image of awe,
 truth which eternity let fall on man
 with double weight, through these revolve sphere,
 this death-deep silence, and incumbent shade:
 thought such as shall revisit your last hour;
 visit uncalled, and live when life expire;
 and thy dark pencil, midnight, dark still
 in melancholy dip, embrown the whole. 

yet this, even this, my laughter-loving friend! 
Lorenzo, and thy brother of the smile! 
if what import you most can most engage,
 shall steal your ear, and chain you to my song. 
or if you fail i, know, the wise shall taste
 the truth i sing; the truth i sing shall feel;
 and, feeling, give assent; and their assent
 be ample recompense; be more than praise. 
but chief thy, o Lichfield! nor mistake:
 think not unintroduce i force my way;
 narcissa, not unknown, not unallied,
 by virtue or by blood, illustrious youth,
 to thou, from bloom amaranthine bower,
 where all the language harmony, descend
 uncalled, and ask admittance for the muse;
 a muse that will not pain thou with thy praise;
 thy praise she drop, by noble still inspire. 

o thou bless spirit! whether the supreme,
 great antemundane father! in who breast
 embryo-creation, unborn being, dwell,
 and all its various revolution roll
 present, though future, prior to themselves;
 who breath can blow it into nought again;
 or from his throne some delegate power,
 who, studious of our peace, do turn the thought
 from vain and vile to solid and sublime! 
unseen thou lead i to delicious draught
 of inspiration, from a pure stream,
 and full of the god, than that which burst
 from fame Castalia: nor be yet allay
 my sacred thirst; though long my soul have range
 through please path of moral and divine,
 by thou sustain, and light by the star. 

by they best light be the path of thought:
 night be their day, their most illumine hour. 
by day the soul, overbear by life career,
 stun by the din, and giddy with the glare,
 reel far from reason, jostle by the throng. 
by day the soul be passive, all her thought
 impose, precarious, break, ere mature. 
by night, from object free, from passion cool,
 thought uncontrolled and unimpressed, the birth
 of pure election, arbitrary range,
 not to the limit of one world confine,
 but from ethereal travel light on earth,
 as voyager drop anchor, for repose. 

let indian, and the gay, like indian, fond
 of feather foppery, the sun adore:
 darkness have more divinity for i:
 it strike thought inward; it drive back the soul
 to settle on herself, our point supreme! 
there lie our theatre; there sit our judge. 
darkness the curtain drop over life dull scene;
 it be the kind hand of providence stretch out
 betwixt man and vanity; it be reason reign,
 and virtue too; these tutelary shade
 be man asylum from the taint throng. 
night be the good man friend, and guardian too;
 it no less rescue virtue than inspire. 

virtue for ever frail, as fair, below,
 her tender nature suffer in the crowd,
 nor touch on the world without a stain. 
the world be infectious; few bring back at eve,
 immaculate, the manner of the morn. 
something we think, be blot; we resolve,
 be shake; we renounce, return again. 
each salutation may slide-in a sin
 unthought before, or fix a former flaw. 
nor be it strange; light, motion, concourse, noise,
 all scatter we abroad; thought, outward-bound,
 neglectful of our home-affair, fly off
 in fume and dissipation, quit her charge,
 and leave the breast unguarded to the foe. 

present example get within our guard,
 and act with double force, by few repel. 
ambition fire ambition; love of gain
 strike like a pestilence, from breast to breast;
 riot, pride, perfidy, blue vapour breathe;
 and inhumanity be catch from man,
 from smile man! a slight, a single glance,
 and shoot at random, often have bring home
 a sudden fever to the throb heart
 of envy, rancour, or impure desire. 
we see, we hear, with peril; safety dwell
 remote from multitude; the world be a school
 of wrong, and what proficient swarm around! 
we must or imitate or disapprove;
 must list as their accomplice, or foe;
 that stain our innocence, this wound our peace. 
from nature birth, hence, wisdom have be smite
 with sweet recess, and languish for the shade. 

this sacred shade and solitude, — what be it? 
it be the feel presence of the deity. 
few be the fault we flatter when alone. 
vice sink in her allurement, be ungilt,
 and look, like other object, black by night:
 by night a atheist half-believes a god. 

night be fair virtue immemorial friend;
 the conscious moon, through every distant age,
 have hold a lamp to wisdom, and let fall
 on contemplation eye her purge ray. 
the fame athenian, he who woo from heaven
 philosophy the fair, to dwell with man,
 and form their manner, not inflame their pride, —
 while over his head, as fearful to molest
 his labour mind, the star in silence slide,
 and seem all gaze on their future guest,
 see he solicit his ardent suit
 in private audience: all the live-long night,
 rigid in thought, and motionless, he stand;
 nor quit his theme or posture till the sun
 (rude drunkard! rise rosy from the main)
 disturb his noble intellectual beam,
 and give he to the tumult of the world. 
hail, precious moment, steal from the black waste
 of murder time! auspicious midnight, hail! 
the world exclude, every passion hush,
 and open a calm intercourse with heaven,
 here the soul sit in council; ponder past,
 predestine future action; see, not feel,
 tumultuous life, and reason with the storm;
 all her lie answer, and think down her charm. 

what awful joy! what mental liberty! 
i be not pen in darkness: rather say,
 (if not too bold,) in darkness i be embower. 
delightful gloom! the cluster thought around
 spontaneous rise, and blossom in the shade;
 but droop by day, and sicken in the sun. 
thought borrow light elsewhere; from that flast fire,
 fountain of animation, whence descend
 Urania, my celestial guest! who deign
 nightly to visit i, so mean; and now,
 conscious how needful discipline to man,
 from please dalliance with the charm of night,
 my wander thought recall, to what excite
 far other beat of heart, — narcissa tomb! 

or be it feeble nature call i back,
 and break my spirit into grief again? 
be it a Stygian vapour in my blood,
 a cold, slow puddle, creep through my vein? 
or be it thus with all man? — thus with all. 
what be we? how unequal! now we soar,
 and now we sink. to be the same, transcend
 our present prowess. dear pay the soul
 for lodging ill; too dear rent her clay. 
reason, a baffle counsellor, but add
 the blush of weakness to the bane of woe. 
the noble spirit, fight her hard fate
 in this damp, dusky region, charge with storm,
 but feeble flutter, yet untaught to fly;
 or, fly, short her flight, and sure she fall. 
our utmost strength, when down, to rise again;
 and not to yield, though beat, all our praise. 

it be vain to seek in man for more than man. 
though proud in promise, big in previous thought,
 experience damp our triumph. i, who late,
 emerge from the shadow of the grave,
 where grief detain i prisoner, mount high,
 throw wide the gate of everlasting day,
 and call mankind to glory, shake off pain,
 mortality shake off, in ether pure,
 and strike the star; now feel my spirit fail:
 they drop i from the zenith; down i rush,
 like he who fable fledge with waxen wing,
 in sorrow drown — but not in sorrow lose. 
how wretched be the man who never mourn! 
i dive for precious pearl in sorrow stream:
 not so the thoughtless man that only grieve;
 take all the torment, and reject the gain,
 (inestimable gain!) and give heaven leave
 to make he but more wretched, not more wise. 

if wisdom be our lesson, (and what else
 ennoble man? what else have angel learn?) 
grief, more proficient in thy school be make
 than genius, or proud learning, ever can boast. 
voracious learning, often over-fed,
 digest not into sense her motley meal. 
this book-case, with dark booty almost burst,
 this forager on other wisdom, leave
 her native farm, her reason, quite untilled. 
with mix manure she surfeit the rank soil,
 dunge, but not dress, and rich to beggary. 
a pomp untameable of weed prevail. 
her servant wealth encumber wisdom mourn. 

and what say genius?  "let the dull be wise."
genius, too hard for right, can prove it wrong;
 and love to boast where blush man less inspire. 
it plead exemption from the law of sense;
 consider reason as a leveller;
 and scorn to share a blessing with the crowd;
 that wise it can be, think a ample claim
 to glory, and to pleasure give the rest. 
Crassus but sleep, ardelio be undo. 
wisdom less shudder at a fool than wit. 

but wisdom smile when humble mortal weep. 
when sorrow wound the breast, as plough the glebe,
 and heart obdurate feel her soften shower;
 her seed celestial, then, glad wisdom sow;
 her golden harvest triumph in the soil. 
if so, narcissa! welcome my relapse:
 i will raise a tax on my calamity,
 and reap rich compensation from my pain. 
i will range the plenteous intellectual field;
 and gather every thought of sovereign power,
 to chase the moral malady of man;
 thought which may bear transplant to the sky,
 though native of this coarse penurious soil;
 nor whole wither there, where seraph sing,
 refine, exalt, not annul, in heaven:
 reason, the sun that give they birth, the same
 in either clime, though more illustrious there. 
these, choice cull, and elegant range,
 shall form a garland for narcissa tomb;
 and, peradventure, of no fade flower. 

say, on what theme shall puzzle choice descend? 
 "the"importance of contemplate the tomb;
 why man decline it; suicide foul birth;
 the various kind of grief; the fault of age;
 and death dread character, "— invite my song. 

and, first, they importance of our end survey. 
friend counsel quick dismission of our grief. 
mistaken kindness! our heart heal too soon. 
be they more kind than he who strike the blow,
 who bid it do his errand in our heart,
 and banish peace, till noble guest arrive,
 and bring it back a true and endless peace? 
calamity be friend: as glare day
 of these unnumbered lustre rob our sight,
 prosperity put out unnumbered thought
 of import high, and light divine, to man. 

the man how bless, who, sick of gaudy scene,
 (scene apt to thrust between we and ourselves!) 
be lead by choice to take his favourite walk
 beneath death gloomy, silent, cypress shade,
 unpierced by vanity fantastic ray;
 to read his monument, to weigh his dust,
 visit his vault, and dwell among the tomb! 
Lorenzo! read with i narcissa stone;
 (narcissa be thy favourite;) let we read
 her moral stone: few doctor preach so well;
 few orator so tender can touch
 the feeling heart. what pathos in the date! 
apt word can strike; and yet in they we see
 faint image of what we here enjoy. 
what cause have we to build on length of life? 
temptation seize when fear be lay asleep,
 and ill forebode be our strong guard. 

see, from her tomb, as from a humble shrine,
 truth, radiant goddess, sally on my soul,
 and put delusion dusky train to flight;
 dispel the mist our sultry passion raise,
 from object low, terrestrial, and obscene;
 and show the real estimate of thing,
 which no man, unafflict, ever see;
 pull off the veil from virtue rise charm;
 detect temptation in a thousand lie. 
truth bid i look on man as autumn leave,
 and all they bleed for as the summer dust,
 drive by the whirlwind. light by her beam,
 i widen my horizon, gain new power,
 see thing invisible, feel thing remote,
 be present with futurity; think nought
 to man so foreign as the joy possess,
 nought so much his as those beyond the grave. 

no folly keep its colour in her sight;
 pale worldly wisdom lose all her charm;
 in pompous promise from her scheme profound,
 if future fate she plan, it be all in leaf,
 like sibyl, unsubstantial, fleet bliss! 
at the first blast it vanish in air. 
not so celestial. will thou know, Lorenzo,
 how differ worldly wisdom and divine? 
just as the wane and the wax moon. 
more empty worldly wisdom every day,
 and every day more fair her rival shine. 
when late, there be less time to play the fool. 
soon our whole term for wisdom be expire,
 (thou know she call no council in the grave,)
 and "everlasting fool"be write in fire,
 or real wisdom waft we to the sky. 

as worldly scheme resemble sibyl leaf,
 the good man day to sibyl book compare,
 (en ancient story read, thou know the tale,)
 in price still rise, as in number less;
 inestimable quite his final hour. 
for that, who throne can offer, offer throne:
 insolvent world the purchase can pay. 
 "o let i die his death!"all nature cry. 
 "then live his life!"— all nature falter there. 
our great physician daily to consult,
 to commune with the grave, our only cure. 

what grave prescribe the best? a friend; and yet
 from a friend grave how soon we disengage! 
even to the dear, as his marble, cold. 
why be friend ravish from we? it be to bind,
 by soft affection tie, on human heart,
 the thought of death, which reason, too supine,
 or misemploy, so rare fasten there. 
nor reason, nor affection, no, nor both
 combine, can break the witchcraft of the world. 
behold they inexorable hour at hand! 
behold they inexorable hour forget! 
and to forget it the chief aim of life,
 though well to ponder it be life chief end. 

be death, that ever threaten, never remote,
 that all-important, and that only sure,
 (come when he will,) a unexpected guest? 
nay, though invite by the loud call
 of blind imprudence, unexpected still? 
though numerous messenger be send before,
 to warn his great arrival. what the cause,
 the wondrous cause, of this mysterious ill? 
all heaven look down, astonish at the sight. 

be it, that life have sow her joy so thick,
 we can thrust in a single care between? 
be it, that life have such a swarm of care,
 the thought of death can enter for the throng? 
be it, that time steal on with downy foot,
 nor wake indulgence from her golden dream? 
today be so like yesterday, it cheat;
 we take the lie sister for the same. 
life glide away, Lorenzo, like a brook;
 for ever change, unperceived the change. 
in the same brook none ever bathe he twice:
 to the same life none ever twice awake. 
we call the brook the same; the same we think
 our life, though still more rapid in its flow;
 nor mark the much irrevocable lapse,
 and mingle with the sea. or shall we say,
 (retain still the brook to bear we on,)
 that life be like a vessel on the stream? 
in life embark, we smooth down the tide
 of time descend, but not on time intent;
 amuse, unconscious of the glide wave;
 till on a sudden we perceive a shock;
 we start, awake, look out; what see we there? 
our brittle bark be burst on charon shore. 

be this the cause death fly all human thought? 
or be it judgement by the will strike blind,
 (that domineer mistress of the soul,)
 like he so strong, by Delilah the fair? 
or be it fear turn startle reason back,
 from look down a precipice so steep? 
it be dreadful; and the dread be wise place,
 by nature, conscious of the make of man. 
a dreadful friend it be, a terror kind,
 a flame sword to guard the tree of life. 
by that unawed, in life most smile hour,
 the good man will repine; will suffer joy,
 and burn impatient for his promise sky. 
the bad, on each punctilious pique of pride,
 or gloom of humour, will give rage the rein,
 bind over the barrier, rush into the dark,
 and mar the scheme of providence below

what groan be that, Lorenzo? fury! rise;
 and drown, in your less execrable yell,
 britannia shame. there take her gloomy flight,
 on wing impetuous, a black sullen soul,
 blast from hell, with horrid lust of death,
 thy friend, the brave, the gallant Altamont,
 so call, so think: — and then he flee the field. 
less base the fear of death than fear of life. 
o Britain, infamous for suicide! 
a island in thy manner! far disjoin
 from the whole world of rational beside! 
in ambient wave plunge thy pollute head,
 wash the dire stain, nor shock the continent. 

but thou be shock, while i detect the cause
 of self-assault, expose the monster birth,
 and bid abhorrence hiss it round the world. 
blame not thy clime, nor chide the distant sun;
 the sun be innocent, thy clime absolve:
 immoral clime kind nature never make. 
the cause i sing in Eden may prevail,
 and prove it be thy folly, not thy fate. 

the soul of man, (let man in homage bow,
 who name his soul,) a native of the sky,
 highborn and free, her freedom shall maintain,
 unfold, unmortgaged for earth little bribe. 
the illustrious stranger, in this foreign land, —
 like stranger, jealous of her dignity,
 studious of home, and ardent to return, —
 of earth suspicious, earth enchant cup
 with cool reserve light touch, shall indulge
 on immortality her godlike taste;
 there take large draught; make she chief banquet there. 

but some reject this sustenance divine;
 to beggarly vile appetite descend;
 ask alm of earth for guest that come from heaven;
 sink into slave; and sell, for present hire,
 their rich reversion, and (what share its fate)
 their native freedom, to the prince who sway
 this nether world; and, when his payment fail,
 when his foul basket gorge they no more,
 or their pall palate loathe the basket full,
 be instant, with wild demoniac rage,
 for break all the chain of providence,
 and burst their confinement; though fast bar
 by law divine and human; guard strong
 with horror double to defend the pass
 the black nature or dire guilt can raise;
 and moat round with fathomless destruction,
 sure to receive and whelm they in their fall. 

such, briton! be the cause, to you unknown,
 or worse, overlook; overlook by magistrate,
 thus criminal themselves. i grant the deed
 be madness; but the madness of the heart. 
and what be that? our utmost bound of guilt. 
a sensual, unreflecting life be big
 with monstrous birth, and suicide, to crown
 the black infernal brood. the bold to break
 heaven law supreme, and desperate rush
 through sacred nature murder on their own,
 because they never think of death, they die. 
it be equal man duty, glory, gain,
 at once to shun and meditate his end. 
when by the bed of languishment we sit,
 (the seat of wisdom! if our choice, not fate,)
 or over our die friend in anguish hang,
 wipe the cold dew, or stay the sink head,
 number their moment, and in every clock
 start at the voice of a eternity;
 see the dim lamp of life just feeble lift
 a agonize beam, at we to gaze,
 then sink again, and quiver into death,
 that most pathetic herald of our own: —
 how read we such sad scene? as send to man
 in perfect vengeance? no; in pity send,
 to melt he down, like wax, and then impress,
 indelible, death image on his heart;
 bleed for other, tremble for himself. 
we bleed, we tremble; we forget, we smile:
 the mind turn fool before the cheek be dry. 
our quick-returning folly cancel all;
 as the tide rush rase what be write
 in yield sand, and smooth the letter shore. 

Lorenzo! have thou ever weigh a sigh,
 or study the philosophy of tear? 
(a science yet unlecture in our school:)
 have thou descend deep into the breast,
 and see their source? if not, descend with i,
 and trace these briny rivulet to their spring. 

our funeral tear from different cause rise. 
as if from separate cistern in the soul,
 of various kind, they flow. from tender heart,
 by soft contagion call, some burst at once,
 and stream obsequious to the lead eye. 
some ask more time, by curious art distil. 
some heart, in secret hard, unapt to melt,
 strike by the magic of the public eye,
 like moses smite rock, gush out amain. 
some weep to share the fame of the decease,
 so high in merit, and to they so dear. 
they dwell on praise which they think they share;
 and thus, without a blush, commend themselves. 
some mourn in proof that something they can love;
 they weep, not to relieve their grief, but show. 
some weep in perfect justice to the dead,
 as conscious all their love be in arrear. 
some mischievous weep, not unapprised
 tear sometime aid the conquest of a eye. 
with what address the soft ephesian draw
 their sable net-work over entangle heart! 
as see through crystal, how their rose glow,
 while liquid pearl run trickle down their cheek! 
of she not proud egypt wanton queen,
 carouse gem, herself dissolve in love. 
some weep at death, abstract from the dead,
 and celebrate, like Charles, their own decease. 
by kind construction some be deem to weep,
 because a decent veil conceal their joy. 

some weep in earnest, and yet weep in vain;
 as deep in indiscretion as in woe. 
passion, blind passion, impotent pour
 tear that deserve more tear, while reason sleep,
 or gaze, like a idiot, unconcerned,
 nor comprehend the meaning of the storm;
 know not it speak to she, and her alone. 
Irrationals all sorrow be beneath,
 that noble gift, that privilege of man! 
from sorrow pang, the birth of endless joy. 
but these be barren of that birth divine:
 they weep impetuous as the summer storm,
 and full as short! the cruel grief soon tame,
 they make a pastime of the stingless tale;
 far as the deep-resounding knell, they spread
 the dreadful news, and hardly feel it more:
 no grain of wisdom pay they for their woe. 

half round the globe, the tear pump up by death
 be spend in water vanity of life;
 in make folly flourish still more fair. 
when the sick soul, her wonted stay withdraw,
 recline on earth, and sorrow in the dust,
 instead of learning there her true support,
 though there throw down her true support to learn,
 without heaven aid impatient to be bless,
 she crawl to the next shrub or bramble vile,
 though from the stately cedar arm she fall;
 with steal, forswear embrace cling anew,
 the stranger wed, and blossom, as before,
 in all the fruitless foppery of life;
 present her weed, well fancy, at the ball,
 and raffle for the death's-head on the ring. 

so weep Aurelia, till the destine youth
 step in with his receipt for make smile,
 and blanch sable into bridal bloom. 
so weep Lorenzo fair Clarissa fate,
 who give that angel boy on who he dote;
 and die to give he, orphan in his birth! 
not such, narcissa, my distress for thou;
 i will make a altar of thy sacred tomb,
 to sacrifice to wisdom. what waste thou? 
 "young, gay, and fortunate!"each yield a theme:
 i will dwell on each, to shun thought more severe;
 (heaven know i labour with severe still!) 
i will dwell on each, and quite exhaust thy death. 
a soul without reflection, like a pile
 without inhabitant, to ruin run. 

and, first, thy youth: what say it to grey hair? 
narcissa, i be become thy pupil now. —
 early, bright, transient, chaste, as morning dew,
 she sparkle, be exhale, and go to heaven. 
time on this head have snow, yet still it be bear
 aloft, nor think but on another grave. 
cover with shame i speak it, age severe
 old worn-out vice set down for virtue fair;
 with graceless gravity chastise youth,
 that youth chastise surpass in a fault,
 father of all, forgetfulness of death! 
as if, like object press on the sight,
 death have advance too near we to be see;
 or, that life loan time ripen into right,
 and man may plead prescription from the grave;
 deathless, from repetition of reprieve. 
deathless? far from it! such be dead already;
 their heart be bury; and the world their grave. 

tell i, some god! my guardian angel, tell,
 what thus infatuate? what enchantment plant
 the phantom of a age betwixt we and death
 already at the door? he knock; we hear he,
 and yet we will not hear. what mail defend
 our untouched heart? what miracle turn off
 the point thought, which from a thousand quiver
 be daily dart, and be daily shun? 
we stand, as in a battle, throng on throng
 around we fall; wound oft ourselves;
 though bleed with our wound, immortal still! 
we see time be furrow on another brow,
 and death, entrench, prepare his assault:
 how few themselves in that just mirror see! 
or, see, draw their inference as strong! 
there death be certain; doubtful here: he must,
 and soon — we may, within a age — expire. 
though grey our head, our thought and aim be green;
 like damage clock, who hand and bell dissent;
 folly sing six, while nature point at twelve. 

absurd longevity!  "more, more,"it cry:
 more life, more wealth, more trash of every kind. 
and wherefore mad for more, when relish fail? 
object and appetite must club for joy. 
shall folly labour hard to mend the bow,
 (bauble i mean, that strike we from without,)
 while nature be relax every string? 
ask thought for joy; grow rich, and hoard within. 
think you the soul, when this life be rattle cease,
 have nothing of more manly to succeed? 
contract the taste immortal; learn even now
 to relish what alone subsist hereafter. 
divine or none, henceforth, your joy for ever. 
of age the glory be, to wish to die;
 that wish be praise and promise; it applaud
 past life, and promise our future bliss. 
what weakness see not child in their sire? 
grand-climacterical absurdity! 
grey-haired authority to fault of youth,
 how shock! it make folly thrice a fool;
 and our first childhood might our last despise. 
peace and esteem be all that age can hope. 
nothing but wisdom give the first; the last,
 nothing but the repute of be wise. 
folly bar both: our age be quite undo. 

what folly can be rank? like our shadow,
 our wish lengthen as our sun decline. 
no wish shall loiter, then, this side the grave. 
our heart shall leave the world before the knell
 call for our carcass to mend the soil. 
enough to live in tempest, die in port. 
age shall fly concourse, cover in retreat
 defect of judgement, and the will subdue;
 walk thoughtful on the silent, solemn shore
 of that vast ocean it must sail so soon,
 and put good work on board, and wait the wind
 that short blow we into world unknown;
 if unconsidered too, a dreadful scene! 
all shall be prophet to themselves; foresee
 their future fate; their future fate foretaste:
 this art will waste the bitterness of death. 
the thought of death alone the fear destroy. 
a disaffection to that precious thought
 be more than midnight darkness on the soul,
 which sleep beneath it, on a precipice,
 puff off by the first blast, and lose for ever. 

do ask, Lorenzo, why so warm press,
 by repetition hammer on thy ear,
 the thought of death? that thought be the machine,
 the grand machine that heave we from the dust,
 and rear we into man! that thought ply home
 will soon reduce the ghastly precipice
 overhang hell, will soften the descent,
 and gentle slope our passage to the grave. 
how warm to be wish! what heart of flesh
 will trifle with tremendous, dare extreme,
 yawn over the fate of infinite? what hand,
 beyond the black brand of censure bold,
 (to speak a language too well know to thou,)
 will at a moment give its all to chance,
 and stamp the die for a eternity? 

aid i, narcissa! aid i to keep pace
 with destiny; and ere her scissors cut
 my thread of life, to break this tough thread
 of moral death, that tie i to the world. 
sting thou my slumber reason to send forth
 a thought of observation on the foe;
 to sally, and survey the rapid march
 of his ten thousand messenger to man;
 who, jehu-like, behind he turn they all. 
all accident apart, by nature sign,
 my warrant be go out, though dormant yet;
 perhaps behind one moment lurk my fate. 

must i then forward only look for death? 
backward i turn my eye, and find he there. 
man be a self-survivor every year. 
man, like a stream, be in perpetual flow. 
death a destroyer of quotidian prey. 
my youth, my noontide, he; my yesterday;
 the bold invader share the present hour. 
each moment on the former shut the grave. 
while man be grow, life be in decrease,
 and cradle rock we near to the tomb. 
our birth be nothing but our death begin;
 as taper waste that instant they take fire. 

shall we then fear lest that shall come to pass,
 which come to pass each moment of our life? 
if fear we must, let that death turn we pale
 which murder strength and ardour; what remains
 shall rather call on death, than dread his call. 
you partner of my fault and my decline! 
thoughtless of death, but when your neighbour knell
 (rude visitant!) knock hard at your dull sense,
 and with its thunder scarce obtain your ear! 
be death your theme in every place and hour;
 nor long want, you monumental sire,
 a brother-tomb to tell you, you shall die. 
that death you dread, (so great be nature skill!) 
know, you shall court, before you shall enjoy. 

but you be learn; in volume deep you sit,
 in wisdom shallow. pompous ignorance! 
will you be still more learned than the learn? 
learn well to know how much need not be know,
 and what that knowledge which impair your sense. 
our needful knowledge, like our needful food,
 unhedged, lie open in life common field,
 and bid all welcome to the vital feast. 
you scorn what lie before you in the page
 of nature and experience, — moral truth,
 of indispensable, eternal fruit;
 fruit on which mortal, feed, turn to god, —
 and dive in science for distinguish name,
 dishonest fomentation of your pride,
 sink in virtue as you rise in fame. 
your learning, like the lunar beam, afford
 light, but not heat; it leave you undevout,
 freeze at heart, while speculation shine. 
awake, you curious indagators, fond
 of know all, but what avail you know. 
if you will learn death character, attend. 
all cast of conduct, all degree of health,
 all die of fortune, and all date of age,
 together shake in his impartial urn,
 come forth at random; or, if choice be make,
 the choice be quite sarcastic, and insult
 all bold conjecture and fond hope of man. 
what countless multitude not only leave
 but deep disappoint we by their death! 
though great our sorrow, great our surprise. 

like other tyrant, death delight to smite
 what, smite, most proclaim the pride of power
 and arbitrary nod. his joy supreme,
 to bid the wretch survive the fortunate;
 the feeble wrap they athletic in his shroud;
 and weep father build their child tomb:
 i thy, narcissa! — what, though short thy date? 
virtue, not roll sun, the mind mature. 
that life be long which answer life great end. 
the time that bear no fruit deserve no name. 
the man of wisdom be the man of year. 
in hoary youth methuselah may die;
 o how misdate on their flatter tomb! 

narcissa youth have lecture i thus far. 
and can her gaiety give counsel too? 
that, like the jews fame oracle of gem,
 sparkle instruction; such as throw new light,
 and open more the character of death,
 ill know to thou, Lorenzo! this thy vaunt:
 "give death his due, — the wretched and the old;
 even let he sweep his rubbish to the grave:
 let he not violate kind nature law,
 but own man bear to live, as well as die"
 wretched and old thou give he: young and gay
 he take; and plunder be a tyrant joy. 
what if i prove, "the farther from the fear
 be often near to the stroke of fate?"

all more than common, menace a end. 
a blaze betoken brevity of life:
 as if bright ember shall emit a flame,
 glad spirit sparkle from narcissa eye,
 and make youth young, and teach life to live. 
as nature opposite wage endless war,
 for this offence, as treason to the deep
 inviolable stupor of his reign,
 where lust and turbulent ambition sleep,
 death take swift vengeance. as he life detest,
 more life be still more odious; and, reduce
 by conquest, aggrandise more his power. 
but wherefore aggrandise? by heaven decree,
 to plant the soul on her eternal guard,
 in awful expectation of our end. 
thus run death dread commission: "strike, but so
 as most alarm the live by the dead."
hence stratagem delight he, and surprise,
 and cruel sport with man security. 
not simple conquest, triumph be his aim;
 and where least fear, there conquest triumph most. 
this prove my bold assertion not too bold. 

what be his art to lay our fear asleep? 
tiberian art his purpose wrap up
 in deep dissimulation dark night. 
like prince unconfessed in foreign court,
 who travel under cover, death assume
 the name and look of life, and dwell among we;
 he take all shape that serve his black design;
 though master of a wide empire far
 than that over which the roman eagle fly,
 like Nero, he be a fiddler, charioteer;
 or drive his phaeton in female guise;
 quite unsuspected, till, the wheel beneath,
 his disarray oblation he devour. 

he most affect the form least like himself,
 his slender self: hence burly corpulence
 be his familiar wear, and sleek disguise. 
behind the rosy bloom he love to lurk,
 or ambush in a smile; or, wanton, dive
 in dimple deep: love eddy, which drawing
 unwary heart, and sink they in despair. 
such on narcissa couch he loiter long
 unknown, and, when detect, still be see
 to smile: such peace have innocence in death! 
most happy they who least his art deceive! 
one eye on death, and one full fix on heaven,
 become a mortal and immortal man. 
long on his wile a pique and jealous spy,
 i have see, or dream i see, the tyrant dress,
 lay by his horror, and put on his smile. 
say, Muse, for thou remember, call it back;
 and show Lorenzo the surprise scene:
 if it be a dream, his genius can explain. 

it be in a circle of the gay i stand:
 death will have enter; nature push he back;
 support by a doctor of renown,
 his point he gain; then artful dismiss
 the sage, for death design to be conceal. 
he give a old vivacious usurer
 his meager aspect, and his naked bone;
 in gratitude for plump up his prey,
 a pamper spendthrift, who fantastic air,
 well-fashioned figure, and cockade brow,
 he take in change, and underneath the pride
 of costly linen tuck his filthy shroud. 
his crooked bow he straighten to a cane,
 and hide his deadly shaft in myra eye. 

the dreadful masquerader, thus equip,
 out-sally on adventure. ask you where? 
where be he not? for his peculiar haunt
 let this suffice: — sure as night follow day,
 death tread in pleasure footstep round the world,
 when pleasure tread the path which reason shun. 
when against reason riot shut the door,
 and gaiety supply the place of sense,
 then foremost, at the banquet and the ball,
 death lead the dance, or stamp the deadly die:
 nor ever fail the midnight bowl to crown. 
gay carouse to his gay compeer,
 inly he laugh to see they laugh at he,
 as absent far; and when the revel burn,
 when fear be banish, and triumphant thought,
 call for all the joy beneath the moon,
 against he turn the key, and bid he sup
 with their progenitor, — he drop his mask,
 frown out at full; they start, despair, expire. 

scarce with more sudden terror and surprise
 from his black mask of nitre, touch by fire,
 he burst, expand, roar, blaze, and devour. 
and be not this triumphant treachery,
 and more than simple conquest, in the fiend? 

and now, Lorenzo, do thou wrap thy soul
 in soft security, because unknown
 which moment be commission to destroy? 
in death uncertainty thy danger lie. 
be death uncertain? therefore thou be fix,
 fix as a sentinel, all eye, all ear,
 all expectation of the come foe. 
Rouse, stand in arm, nor lean against thy spear,
 lest slumber steal one moment over thy soul,
 and fate surprise thou nod. watch, be strong:
 thus give each day the merit and renown
 of die well, though doom but once to die. 
nor let life period hide (as from most)
 hide, too, from thou the precious use of life. 

early, not sudden, be narcissa fate:
 soon, not surprise, death his visit pay:
 her thought go forth to meet he on his way,
 nor gaiety forget it be to die;
 though fortune, too, (our third and final theme,)
 as a accomplice, play her gaudy plume,
 and every glitter gewgaw, on her sight,
 to dazzle and debauch it from its mark. 
death dreadful advent be the mark of man,
 and every thought that miss it be blind. 
fortune, with youth and gaiety, conspire
 to weave a triple wreath of happiness
 (if happiness on earth) to crown her brow. 
and can death charge through such a shine shield? 

that shine shield invite the tyrant spear,
 as if to damp our elevate aim,
 and strong preach humility to man. 
o how portentous be prosperity! 
how, comet-like, it threaten while it shine! 
few year but yield we proof of death ambition,
 to cull his victim from the fair fold,
 and sheathe his shaft in all the pride of life. 
when flood with abundance, purple over
 with recent honour, bloom with every bliss,
 set up in ostentation, make the gaze,
 the gaudy centre, of the public eye;
 when fortune thus have toss her child in air,
 snatch from the covert of a humble state,
 how often have i see he drop at once,
 our morning envy, and our evening sigh! 
as if her bounty be the signal give,
 the flowery wreath, to mark the sacrifice,
 and call death arrow on the destine prey! 

high fortune seem in cruel league with fate. 
ask you for what? to give his war on man
 the deep dread, and more illustrious spoil;
 thus to keep dare mortal more in awe. 
and burn Lorenzo still for the sublime
 of life? to hang his airy nest on high,
 on the slight timber of the topmost bough,
 rock at each breeze, and menac a fall? 
grant grim death at equal distance there,
 yet peace begin just where ambition end. 
what make man wretched? happiness deny? 
Lorenzo! no: it be happiness disdain. 
she come too mean dress to win our smile,
 and call herself content, a homely name:
 our flame be transport, and content our scorn. 
ambition turn, and shut the door against she,
 and wed a toil, a tempest, in her stead;
 a tempest, to warm transport near of kin. 
unknowing what our mortal state admit
 life modest joy we ruin while we raise,
 and all our ecstasy be wound to peace;
 peace, the full portion of mankind below. 

and since thy peace be dear, ambitious youth! 
of fortune fond, as thoughtless of thy fate! 
as late i draw death picture, to stir up
 thy wholesome fear; now, draw in contrast, see
 gay Fortune, thy vain hope to reprimand. 
see, high in air the sportive goddess hang,
 unlock her casket, spread her glitter ware,
 and call the giddy wind to puff abroad
 her random bounty over the gape throng. 
all rush rapacious, — friend over tread friend,
 son over their father, subject over their king,
 priest over their god, and lover over the fair,
 (still more adore,) — to snatch the golden shower. 

gold glitter most where virtue shine no more,
 as star from absent sun have leave to shine. 
o what a precious pack of votary,
 unkennel from the prison and the stew,
 pour in, all open in their idol praise! 
all, ardent, eye each wafture of her hand,
 and, wide-expanding their voracious jaw
 morsel on morsel swallow down unchew,
 untasted, through mad appetite for more;
 gorge to the throat, yet lean and ravenous still;
 sagacious all to trace the small game,
 and bold to seize the great. if (bless chance!) 
court-zephyr sweet breathe, they launch, they fly
 over just, over sacred, all forbid ground,
 drink with the burn scent of place or power,
 staunch to the foot of lucre, till they die. 

or, if for man you take they, as i mark
 their manner, thou their various fate survey. 
with aim mismeasured and impetuous speed,
 some, dart, strike their ardent wish far off,
 through fury to possess it: some succeed,
 but stumble, and let fall the take prize. 
from some, by sudden blast, it be whirl away,
 and lodge in bosom that never dream of gain. 
to some it stick so close, that, when tear off,
 tear be the man, and mortal be the wound. 
some, over-enamoured of their bag, run mad,
 groan under gold, yet weep for want of bread. 
together some (unhappy rival!) seize,
 and rend abundance into poverty. 
loud croak the raven of the law, and smile:
 smile too the goddess; but smile most at those
 (fust victim of exorbitant desire!) 
who perish at their own request, and, whelm
 beneath her load of lavish grant, expire. 
fortune be famous for her number skin:
 the number small which happiness can bear. 
though various for a while their fate, at last
 one curse involve they all: at death approach,
 all read their riches backward into loss,
 and mourn in just proportion to their store. 

and death approach (if orthodox my song)
 be hasten by the lure of Fortune smile. 
and be thou still a glutton of bright gold? 
and be thou still rapacious of thy ruin? 
death love a shine mark, a signal blow;
 a blow which, while it execute, alarm,
 and startle thousand with a single fall. 
as when some stately growth of oak, or pine,
 which nod aloft, and proud spread her shade,
 the sun defiance and the flock defence,
 by the strong stroke of labour hind subdue,
 loud groan her last, and, rush from her height,
 in cumbrous ruin thunder to the ground;
 the conscious forest tremble at the shock,
 and hill, and stream, and distant dale resound. 

these high-aimed dart of death, and these alone,
 shall i collect, my quiver will be full;
 a quiver which, suspend in mid air,
 or near heaven Archer, in the zodiac, hang,
 (so can it be,) shall draw the public eye,
 the gaze and contemplation of mankind;
 a constellation awful, yet benign,
 to guide the gay through life tempestuous wave;
 nor suffer they to strike the common rock, —
 "from great danger to grow more secure,
 and, wrap in happiness, forget their fate."

Lysander, happy past the common lot,
 be warn of danger, but too gay to fear. 
he woo the fair Aspasia; she be kind:
 in youth, form, fortune, fame, they both be bless:
 all who know envy, yet in envy love:
 can fancy form more finish happiness? 
fix be the nuptial hour. her stately dome
 rise on the sound beach. the glitter spire
 float in the wave, and break against the shore:
 so break those glitter shadow, human joy! 
the faithless morning smile; he take his leave,
 to re-embrace, in ecstasy, at eve. 
the rise storm forbid. the news arrive;
 untold she see it in her servant eye. 
she feel it see; (her heart be apt to feel;)
 and, drown without the furious ocean aid,
 in suffocate sorrow, share his tomb. 
now round the sumptuous bridal monument
 the guilty billow innocent roar;
 and the rough sailor, pass, drop a tear. 
a tear! — can tear suffice? — but not for i. 
how vain our effort! and our art how vain! 
the distant train of thought i take, to shun,
 have throw i on, my fate. — these die together;
 happy in ruin! undivorce by death! 
or never to meet, or never to part, be peace. —
 narcissa! pity bleed at thought of thou;
 yet thou be only near i; not myself. 
survive myself? — that cure all other woe. 
narcissa live; Philander be forget. 
o the soft commerce! o the tender tie,
 close twist with the fibre of the heart! 
which, break, break they, and drain off the soul
 of human joy, and make it pain to live. —
 and be it then to live? when such friend part,
 it be the survivor die. — my heart! no more. 
