the statue: or, the trial of constancy

in a fair island, in the southern main,
 bless with indulgent sky, and kindly rain,
 a princess live, of origin divine,
 of bloom celestial, and imperial line. 

in that sweet season when the mount sun
 prepare, with joy, his radiant course to run,
 lead by the grace, and the dance hour,
 and wake to life the various race of flower;
 the lovely queen forsake her shine court,
 for rural scene, and healthful sylvan sport,

it so befall, that, as in cheerful talk,
 her nymph and she pursue their evening walk,
 on the green margin of the oozy deep,
 they find a graceful youth dissolve in sleep,
 his charm the queen survey with fond delight,
 and hang enamour over the please sight;
 by her command the youth be strait convey,
 and (sleep) soft in her palace lay. 

now ruddy morning purple over the sky,
 and beamy light unsealed the stranger eye,
 who cry aloud, you god unfold this scene! 
where be i? what can all these wonder mean? 

scarce have he speak, when, with officious care,
 attendant nymph a fragrant bath prepare;
 he rise, he bathe, and on his lovely head,
 ambrosial sweet, and precious oil they shed;
 to deck his polish limb, a robe they bring,
 in all the various die of beauty wrought;
 then lead he to the queen, who, on a throne
 of burnish gold, and beamy diamond shine:
 but o what wonder seize her beauteous guest! 
what love, what ecstasy his soul possess! 
entranced he stand, and on his falter tongue,
 imperfect word, and half form accent hang;
 nor less the queen the bloom youth admire,
 nor less delight, and love, her soul inspire. 
o stranger! say the queen, if hither drive,
 by adverse wind, or send a guest from heaven;
 to i the wretched never sue in vain,
 this fruitful isle with joy approve my reign;
 then speak thy wish, and thy want declare,
 and no denial shall attend thy prayer:
 she pause, and blush; the youth his silence break,
 and kneel, thus the charm queen bespeak:

o goddess! for a form so bright as thy,
 speak thou descend of celestial line;
 low at your foot a prostrate king behold,
 who faithless subject sell his life for gold;
 i fly a cruel tyrant lawless hand,
 and storm have drive my vessel on your strand:
 but why do i complain of Fortune frown? 
or what be title! honour! sceptre! crown! 
to this sweet moment? while in fond amaze,
 on such transport excellence i gaze! 
such symmetry of shape! so fair a face! 
such finish elegance! such perfect grace! 
hear then my only wish, and o approve
 the ardent prayer, which supplicate thy love. 
from Neptune, know, o prince, my birth i claim,
 reply the queen, and lucida my name;
 this island, these attendant nymph he give
 the fair-haired daughter of the azure wave:
 but he who fortune gain i for a bride,
 must have his constancy severe try;
 one day each moon be i compel to go
 to my great father watery realm below,
 where coral grove celestial red display,
 and blaze diamond emulate the day;
 in this short absence if your love endure,
 my heart and empire be for ever you;
 and hoary Neptune, to reward your truth,
 shall crown you with immortal bloom and youth;
 but instant death will on your falsehood wait,
 nor can my tenderness prevent your fate:
 twice twenty time in wedlock sacred band,
 my royal father join my plight hand;
 twice twenty noble youth, alas! be dead,
 who in my absence stain the nuptial bed;
 your virtue, prince, may claim a noble throne;
 but i be yield on these term alone. 
delightful term! reply the rapture youth,
 accept my constancy, my endless truth:
 perfidious, faithless man, enrage he cry! 
they merit the fate by which they die:
 accept a heart incapable of change;
 thy beauty shall forbid desire to range. 
no other form shall to my eye seem fair;
 no other voice attract my listen ear;
 no charm but thy, shall ever my soul approve;
 so aid thy votary, potent god of love. 

now loud applause through the palace ring;
 the duteous subject hail their god-like king;
 to feastful mirth they dedicate the day,
 while tuneful voice chant the nuptial lay:
 love-dittied-air, hymn by the vocal choir,
 sweet attemper to the warble wire. 
but when the sun descend seek the main,
 and low-browed night assume her silent reign,
 they to the marriage-bed convey the bride,
 and lay the rapture bridegroom by her side. 
now rise the morn, and with auspicious ray,
 dispel the dewy mist, and give the day;
 when lucida, with anxious care oppress,
 thus wake her sleep lord from downy rest,
 soul of my soul, and monarch of my heart,
 this day, she cry, this fatal day, we part;
 yet, if your love uninjured you retain,
 we soon shall meet in happiness again,
 to part no more, but roll year employ,
 in circle bliss, and never-fading joy:
 alas! my bode soul be lose in woe! 
and from my eye the tear unbidden flow. 

joy of my life, dismiss those needless fear,
 reply the king, and stay those precious tear;
 shall lovely Venus leave her native sky,
 and at my foot, implore fondness, lie,
 even she, the radiant queen of soft desire,
 shall, disappoint, burn with hopeless fire. 

the heart of man, the queen experience know
 perjure, and false, yet wish to find he true:
 she sigh, retire; and, in regal state,
 the king conduct she to the palace gate,
 where sacred neptune crystal chariot stand,
 the wondrous work of his celestial hand;
 six harness swan the bright machine convey,
 swift through the air, or pathless watery way;
 the bird with eagle-speed the air divide,
 and plunge the goddess in the sound tide. 

slow to the court the pensive king return,
 and sigh in secret, and in silence mourn;
 so in the grove sad philomel complain,
 in mournful accent, and melodious strain;
 her plaintive woe fill the resound lawn,
 from starry-vesper, to the rosy dawn. 

the king, to mitigate his tender pain,
 seek the apartment of the virgin train,
 with sportive mirth sad absence to beguile,
 and bid the melancholy moment smile;
 but there desert, lonely room he find;
 and solitary silence reign around:
 he call aloud, when, lo! a hag appear,
 bend beneath deformity and year;
 who say, my liege, explain your sacred will,
 with joy your sovereign purpose i fulfil. 
my will! detest wretch! avoid my sight,
 and hide that hideous shape in endless night. 
what? do thy queen, overrun with rude distrust,
 resolve by force to keep a husband just? 

you wrong, reply the hag, your royal wife,
 who care be love, and love to guard your life;
 the race of mortal be by nature frail,
 and strong temptation with the best prevail. 
be that my care, he say; be thy, to send
 the virgin train, let they my will attend. 

the beldame flee, the cheerful nymph advance,
 and tread to measure air, the mazy dance;
 the rapture prince, with greedy eye survey
 the bloomy maid, and covet still to gaze;
 no more recall the image of his spouse,
 (how false be man!) nor recollect his vow;
 with wild inconstancy for all he burn,
 and every nymph subdue his soul by turn. 
at length a maid superior to the rest,
 array in smile, in virgin beauty dress,
 receive his passion, and return his love,
 and soft woo he to the silent grove. 

enclose in deep shade of fullgrown wood,
 within the grove a spacious grotto stand,
 where forty youth in marble seem to mourn,
 each youth recline on a funeral urn;
 thither the nymph direct the monarch way;
 he tread her footstep, joyful to obey;
 there, fire with passion, clasp she to his breast,
 and thus the transport of his soul express:

delightful beauty! deck with every charm
 high fancy paint, or glow love can form,
 i sigh, i gaze, i tremble, i adore,
 such lovely look never bless my eye before! 
here, under covert of the embower shade,
 for love delight, and tender transport make,
 no busy eye our rapture to detect,
 no envious tongue to censure or direct,
 here yield to love, and tender employ
 the silent season in ecstatic joy. 

with arm enclasp, his treasure to retain,
 he sigh and strive, but strive and sigh in vain;
 she rush indignant from his fond embrace,
 while rage, with blush, paint her virgin face;
 yet still he sue, with suppliant hand and eye;
 while she to magic charm for vengeance fly. 

a limpid fountain murmur through the cave;
 she fill her palm with the translucent wave,
 and, sprinkle, cry, receive, false man, in time,
 the just reward of thy detest crime. 

thy changeful sex in perfidy delight,
 despise perfection, and fair virtue slight;
 false, fickle, base, tyrannic, and unkind,
 who heart nor vow can chain, nor honour bind,
 mad to possess, by passion blind lead,
 and then as mad, to stain the nuptial bed;
 who rove soul no excellence, no age,
 no form, no rank, no beauty, can engage:
 slave to the bad, to the deserve worst,
 sick of your twentieth love, as of your first. 
these statue, which this hallow grot adorn,
 like thou be lover, and like thou forswear;
 who faithless heart no kindness can secure,
 nor for a day preserve their passion pure;
 who neither love, nor beauty, can restrain,
 nor fear of endless infamy and pain. 
now feel the force of heaven avenge hand,
 and here inanimate for ever stand! 

she speak — amaze the listen monarch stand;
 and icy horror freeze his ebb blood! 
thick shade of death upon his eyelid creep,
 and close they fast in everlasting sleep;
 no sense of life, no motion he retain,
 but fix, a dreadful monument remain! 
a statue now! and if revive once more,
 will prove, no doubt, as constant as before. 
