the offer. 

1. 

accept, my god, the praise which i bring,
the humble tribute from a creature due:
permit i of thy power to sing,
that power which do stupendous wonder do,
and who effect we still with awful reverence view:
that mighty power which from thy boundless store,
out of thy self where all thing lay,
this beauteous universe do call,
this great, this glorious, this amaze all!
and fill with matter that vast empty space,
where nothing all alone
have long unrivalled sit on its triumphant throne.
see! now in every place
the restless atom play:
lo! high as heaven they proud soar,
and fill the wide-stretched region there;
in sun they shine above, in gem below,
and roll in solid mass through the yield air:
in earth compact, and diffuse in sea;
in corn they nourish, and in flower they please:
in beast they walk, in bird they fly,
and in gay paint insect crowd the sky:
in fish amid the silver wave they stray,
and every where the law of their first cause obey:
of they, compose with wondrous art,
we be our self a part:
and on we still they nutriment bestow;
to we they kindly come, from we they swift go,
and through our vein in purple torrent flow.
vacuity be no where find,
each place be full: with body we be encompass round:
in sound they be to our ear convey,
in fragrant odour they our smell delight,
and in ten thousand curious form display,
they entertain our sight:
in luscious fruit our taste they court,
and in cool balmy breeze round we sport,
the friendly zephyr fan our vital flame,
and give we breath to praise his holy name,
from who our self, and all these blessing come.

2. 

receive my thanks, it be all that i can pay,
the whole i can for numerous favour give;
their number do increase each day,
i still on unexhausted bounty live:
my life, my health, the calmness of my mind,
all those delight i in my reason find,
those dear delight which be from all the dregs of sense refine,
be donative of love divine,
the benefactor in his gift do shine:
he boundless goodness still it self display,
still warm with kind refulgent ray:
in it the whole creation share;
the whole creation be his care:
all being upon he depend;
to whatsoever he make, still his regard extend:
nothing be so high, nor yet so low,
as to escape his sight,
he do his the want of all his creature know,
and to relieve they be his chief delight,
a pleasure worthy that almighty mind,
who kindness like himself be unconfined.

3. 

ah! thankless mortal, can such wondrous love,
inspire you with a grateful sense?
can such amaze favour move?
must he his blessing unobserved dispense,
have no return, no tribute pay,
no retribution for such bounty make?
o think, and blush at his footstool fall,
there beg his pardon, prostrate lie,
and for forgiveness to his mercy fly:
remember it be to he you owe your all,
he give you power upon himself to call:
shall he from you his aid withdraw,
you quick will have cause to mourn,
and sigh to your dust return:
he be your strength, your life, your light,
he to your jar principle give law,
and the destroyer death do awe:
he angel compass you around,
and keep off ill from the forbid ground:
by his command you be ever in their sight,
and make at once their care, and their delight:
o quick then your gratitude express,
and as become you, your creator bless:
before his throne melodious offering lie,
and in harmonious strain your long neglect homage pay.

4. 

i will strive with you my zeal to show,
with you i will strive to pay
some little part of what i owe:
my self before his throne i will lay,
my self, and all he do on i bestow:
my reason for he i will employ,
and in his favour place my joy:
he favour which to i be more dear
than all the tempt glory here:
my tongue shall still extol his name,
shall still his wondrous work proclaim:
my memory shall his kindness inrol,
and fix they firm in my soul:
from he my thought no more shall stray,
no more my passion i will obey,
no more to the rash dictate of my will give way,
but still to he, and he alone, a glad submission pay.

5. 

to love i will my self resign;
but it shall be to love divine:
that over i ever shall preside,
shall every word, and every action guide:
to it i will my self unite,
in it i will place my sole delight,
and every mean object slight;
till one at last with it i grow,
and tire with tread this dull round below,
to its bless source with eager swiftness go;
to its bless source, where constant joy be find,
and where never end pleasure spread themselves around;
where nothing be want that we can desire,
where we to nothing great can aspire,
and where even think it self can soar to nothing high.
