to Della Crusca. 

i hate the tardy elegiac lay —
 choose i a measure jocund as the day! 
such day as near the ides of June
 meet the lark elaborate tune,
 when his downy fringe breast
 ambitious on a cloud to rest
 he soar aloft; and from his gurgle throat
 dart to the earth the pierce note —
 which soft fall with the dew of morn
 (that bless the scent pink, and snowy thorn)
 expand upon the zephyr wing,
 and wake the burnish finch, and linnet sweet to sing. 

and be thy line irregular and free,
 poetic chain shall fall before such bard as thou. 
scorn the dull law that pinch thou round,
 raise about thy verse a mound,
 over which thy muse, so lofty! dare not bind. 
bid she in verse meander sport;
 her footstep quick, or long, or short,
 just as her various impulse will —
 scorn the frigid square, which her fine fervor chill. 

and in thy verse meander wild,
 thou, who art fancy favourite child,
 may sweet paint the long past hour,
 when, the slave of Cupid power,
 thou can the tear of rapture weep,
 and feed on agony, and banish sleep. 

ha! do thou, favour mortal, taste
 all that adorn our life dull waste? 
have thou know love enchant pain —
 its hope, its woe, and yet complain? 
thy sense, at a voice, be lose,
 thy madden soul in tumult toss? 
ecstatic wish fire thy brain —
 these, have thou know, and yet complain? 
thou then deserve never more to feel; —
 thy nerve be rigid, hence, as steel! 
their fine vibration all destroy,
 thy future day a tasteless void! 
never shall thou know again to sigh,
 or, on a soft idea die;
 never on a recollection gasp,
 thy arm, the air-draw charmer, never grasp. 

vapid content her poppy round thou strew,
 while to the bliss of taste thou bid adieu! 
to vulgar comfort be thou hence confine,
 and the shrink bay be from thy brow untwine. 
thy statue tear from Cupid hallow nitch,
 but in return thou shall be dull, and rich;
 the muse hence disown thy rebel lay —
 but thou, in aldermanic gown, their scorn repay;
 crimson, and fur, the high honour dare,
 and on thy laurel tread — a plump lord mayor! 
