epistle from lord WILLIAM Russel to WILLIAM lord Cavendish.

by GEO. Canning, ESQ.

lose to the world, tomorrow doom to die,
 still for my country weal my heart beat high. 
though rattle chain ring peal of horror round,
 while night black shade augment the savage sound,
 'midst bolt and bar the active soul be free,
 and fly, unfettered, Cavendish, to thou. 

thou dear companion of my better day,
 when hand in hand we tread the path of praise;
 when, league with patriot, we maintain the cause
 of true religion, liberty, and law,
 disdain down the golden stream to glide,
 but brave stem corruption rapid tide;
 think not i come to bid thy tear to flow,
 or melt thy generous soul with tale of woe;
 no: view i firm, unshaken, undismayed,
 as when the welcome mandate i obey —
 heaven! with what pride that moment i recall! 
who will not wish, so honour, thus to fall! 
when England genius, hover over, inspire
 her choose son, with love of freedom fire,
 spite of a abject, servile, pension train,
 Minions of power, and worshipper of gain,
 to save from bigotry its destine prey,
 and shield three nation from tyrannic sway. 

it be then my ca'ndish catch the glorious flame,
 the happy omen of his future fame;
 adorn by nature, perfect by art,
 the clear head, and warm, noble heart,
 his word, deep sink in each captive ear,
 have power to make even liberty more dear. 

while i, unskilled in oratory lore,
 who tongue never speak but when the heart run over,
 in plain blunt phrase my honest thought express
 warm from the heart, and to the heart address. 

justice prevail; yes justice, let i say,
 well poise her scale on that auspicious day. 
the watchful shepherd spy the wolf afar,
 nor trust his flock to try the unequal war;
 what though the savage crouch in humble guise,
 and check the fire that flash from his eye,
 shall once his barbarous fang the fold invade,
 vain be their cry, too late the shepherd aid,
 thirst for blood, he know not how to spare,
 his jaw distend, his fiery eyeball glare,
 while ghastly desolation, stalk round,
 with mangle limb bestrew the purple ground. 

now, memory, fail! nor let my mind revolve,
 how England peer annul the just resolve,
 against her bosom aim a deadly blow,
 and lay at once her great Palladium low! 

degenerate noble! yes, by heaven i swear,
 have bedford self appear delinquent there,
 and join, forgetful of his country claim,
 to thwart the exclusion of apostate JAMES,
 all filial tie have then be leave at large,
 and i myself the first to urge the charge. 

such the fix sentiment that rule my soul,
 time can change, nor tyranny control;
 while free, they hang upon my pensive brow,
 then my chief care, my pride and glory now;
 foiled i submit, nor think the measure hard,
 for conscious virtue be its own reward. 

vain then be force, and vain each subtle art,
 to wring retraction from my torture heart;
 there lie, in mark indelible engrave,
 the mean whereby my country must be save;
 be to thy eye those character unknown? 
to read my inmost heart, consult thy own;
 there will thou find this sacred truth reveal,
 which shall to morrow with my blood be seal,
 seek not infirm expedient to explore,
 but banish JAMES, or England be no more. 

friendship her tender office may spare,
 nor strive to move the unforgive pair,
 hopeless the tyrant mercy-seat to climb —
 zeal for my country freedom be my crime! 
ere that meet pardon, lamb with wolf shall range,
 CHARLES be a saint, and JAMES his nature change. 

press by my friend, and rachel fond desire,
 (who can deny what weep love require!) 
frailty prevail, and for a moment quell
 the indignant pride that in my bosom swell;
 i sue — the weak attempt i blush to own —
 i sue for mercy, prostrate at the throne. 
o! blot the foible out, my noble friend,
 with human firmness human feeling blend! 
when love endearment soft moment seize,
 and love dear pledge hang upon the knee,
 when nature strong tie the soul enthrall,
 (thou can conceive, for thou have feel they all!) 
let he resist their prevalence, who can;
 he must, indeed, be more or less than man. 

yet let i yield my RACHEL honour due,
 the tender wife, the noble heroine too! 
anxious to save her husband honest name,
 dear be his life, but dear still his fame! 
when suppliant prayer no pardon can obtain,
 and, wondrous strange! even bedford gold prove vain,
 the informer part her generous soul abhor,
 though life preserve have be the sure reward;
 let impious Escrick act such treacherous scene,
 and shrink from death by such opprobrious mean. 

o! my love RACHEL! all-accomplished fair! 
source of my joy, and sooth of my care! 
who heavenly virtue, and unfading charm,
 have bless through happy year my peaceful arm! 
part with thou into my cup be throw,
 its harsh dregs else have not force a groan! —
 but all be over — these eye have gaze their last —
 and now the bitterness of death be past. 

Burnet and Tillotson, with pious care,
 my fleet soul for heavenly bliss prepare,
 wide to my view the glorious realm display,
 pregnant with joy, and bright with endless day. 
charm, as of old when israel prophet sing,
 who word distil like manna from his tongue,
 while the great bard sublime truth explore,
 each ravish hearer wonder and adore;
 so rapt, so charm, my soul begin to rise,
 spurn the base earth, and seem to reach the sky. 

but when, descend from the sacred theme,
 of boundless power, and excellence supreme,
 they will for man, and his precarious throne,
 exact obedience, due to heaven alone,
 forbid resistance to his worst command,
 and place God thunderbolt in mortal hand;
 the vision sink to life contract span,
 and rise passion speak i still a man. 

what! shall a tyrant trample on the law,
 and stop the source whence all his power he draw? 
his country right to foreign foe betray,
 lavish her wealth, yet stipulate for pay? 
to shameful falsehood venal slave suborn,
 and dare to laugh the virtuous man to scorn? 
deride religion, justice, honour, fame,
 and hardly know of honesty the name? 
in luxury lap lie screen from care and pain,
 and only toil to forge his subject chain? 
and shall he hope the public voice to drown,
 the voice which give, and can resume his crown! 

when conscience bare her horror, and the dread
 of sudden vengeance, burst over his head,
 wring his black soul; when injure nation groan,
 and cry of million shake his totter throne;
 shall flatter churchman soothe his guilty ear,
 with torture text, to calm his grow fear;
 exalt his power above the aetherial clime,
 and call down heaven to sanctify his crime! 

o! impious doctrine! — servile priest away! 
your prince you poison, and your god betray. 

hapless the monarch! who, in evil hour,
 drink from your cup the draught of lawless power! 
the magic potion boil within his vein,
 and lock each sense in adamantine chain;
 reason revolt, insatiate thirst ensue,
 the wild delirium each fresh draught renew;
 in vain his people urge he to refrain,
 his faithful servant supplicate in vain;
 he quaff at length, impatient of controul,
 the bitter dregs that lurk within the bowl. 

zeal your pretence, but wealth and power your aim,
 you even can make a Solomon of JAMES. 
behold the pedant, throne in awkward state,
 absorb in pride, ridiculous great;
 his courtier seem to tremble at his nod,
 his prelate call his voice the voice of god;
 weakness and vanity with they combine,
 and JAMES believe his majesty divine. 
presumptuous wretch! almighty power to scan,
 while every action prove he less than man. 

by your delusion to the scaffold lead,
 martyr by you, a royal CHARLES have bleed. 
teach then, you sycophant! o! teach his son,
 the gloomy path of tyranny to shun;
 teach he to prize religion sacred claim,
 teach he how virtue lead to honest fame,
 how freedom wreath a monarch brow adorn,
 nor, base fawn, plant his couch with thorn. 
point to his view his people love alone,
 the solid basis of his steadfast throne;
 choose by they their dear right to guard,
 the bad to punish, and the good reward,
 Clement and just let he the sceptre sway,
 and will subject shall with pride obey,
 shall vie to execute his high command,
 his throne their heart, his sword and shield their hand. 

happy the prince! thrice firm fix his crown! 
who build on public good his chaste renown;
 studious to bless, who know no second aim,
 his people interest, and his own the same;
 the ease of million rest upon his care,
 and thus heaven high prerogative he share. 
wide from the throne the bless contagion spread,
 over all the land its gladden influence shed,
 faction discordant sound be hear no more,
 and soul corruption fly the indignant shore. 

his minister with joy their course run,
 and borrow lustre from the royal sun. 

but shall some upstart, train in slavery school,
 learnt in the maxim of despotic rule,
 full fraught with form, and grave pedantic pride,
 (mysterious cloak! the mind defect to hide!) 
sordid in small thing, prodigal in great,
 save for minion, squander for the state —
 shall such a miscreant, bear for England bane,
 obscure the glory of a prosperous reign;
 gain, by the semblance of each praiseful art,
 a pious prince unsuspecting heart;
 envious of worth, and talent not his own,
 chase all experience merit from the throne;
 to guide the helm a motley crew compose,
 servile to he, the king and country foe;
 mean descend each paltry place to fill,
 with tool of power, and plandar to his will;
 brandish high the scorpion scourage over all,
 except such slave as bow the knee to Baal —
 shall albion fate decree the baneful hour —
 short be the date of his detest power! 
soon may his sovereign break his iron rod,
 and hear his people; for their voice be God! 

cease then your wile, you fawn courtier! cease,
 suffer your ruler to repose in peace;
 by reason lead, give proper name to thing,
 god make they man, the people make they king;
 to all their act but legal power belong,
 thus England monarch never can do wrong;
 of right divine let foolish filmer dream,
 the public welfare be the law supreme. 

live there a wretch, who base, degenerate soul
 can crouch beneath a tyrant stern controul? 
cringe to his nod, ignoble kiss the hand
 in gall chain that bind his native land? 
purchase by gold, or awe by slavish sear,
 abandon all his ancestor hold dear? 
tame behold that fruit of glorious toil,
 England great charter make a russian spoil;
 hear, unconcerned, his injure country groan,
 nor stretch a arm to hurl he from the throne? 
let such to freedom forfeit all their claim,
 and charles minious be the slave of JAMES,

but soft awhile — now, Cavendish, attend
 the warm effusion of thy die friend;
 fearless who dare his inmost thought reveal,
 when thus to heaven he make his last appeal. 

all-gracious god! who goodness know no bound! 
who power the ample universe surround! 
in who great balance, infinite just,
 king be but man, and man be only dust;
 at thy tribunal low thy suppliant fall,
 and here condemn, on thou for mercy call! 

thou hear not, lord! a hypocrite complain,
 and sure with thou hypocrisy be vain;
 to thy all-piercing eye the heart lie bare,
 thou know my sin, and, know, still can spare! 
though partial power its minister may awe,
 and murder here by specious form of law;
 the axe, which execute the harsh decree,
 but wound the flesh, to set the spirit free! 
well may the man a tyrant frown despise,
 who, spurn earth, to heaven for refuge fly;
 and on thy mercy, when his foe prevail,
 build his firm trust; that rock can never fail! 

hear then, Jehovah! hear thy servant prayer! 
be England welfare thy peculiar care! 
defend her law, her worship chaste, and pure,
 and guard her right while heaven and earth endure! 
o let not ever fell tyrannic sway
 his blood-stained standard on her shore display! 
nor fiery zeal usurp thy holy name,
 blind with blood, and wrap in roll of flame! 
in vain let slavery shake her threaten chain,
 and persecution wave her torch in vain! 
arise, o lord! and hear thy people call! 
nor for one man let three great kingdom fall! 

o! that my blood may glut the barbarous rage
 of freedom foe, and England ill assuage! —
 grant but that prayer, i ask for no repeal,
 a will victim for my country weal! 
with rapturous joy the crimson stream shall flow,
 and my heart leap to meet the friendly blow! 

but shall the fiend, though drench with human gore,
 dire bigotry, insatiate, thirst for more,
 and, arm from Rome, seek this devote land,
 death in her eye, and bondage in her hand —
 blast her fell purpose! blast she foul desire! 
break short her sword, and quench her horrid fire! 

raise up some champion, zealous to maintain
 the sacred compact, by which monarch reign! 
wise to foresee all danger from afar,
 and brave to meet the thunder of the war! 
let pure religion, not to form confine,
 and love of freedom fill his generous mind! 
warm let his breast with spark celestial glow,
 benign to man, the tyrant deadly foe! 
while sink nation rest upon his arm,
 do thou the great deliverer shield from harm! 
inspire his council! aid his righteous sword! 
till Albion ring with liberty restore! 
thence let her year in bright succession run! 
and freedom reign coaeval with the sun. 

it be do, my ca'ndish, heaven have hear my prayer;
 so speak my heart, for all be rapture there. 

to belgia coast advert thy ravish eye,
 that happy coast, whence all our hope arise! 
behold the prince, perhaps thy future king! 
from who green year mature blessing spring;
 who youthful arm, when all-o'erwhelming power
 ruthless march forth, his country to devour,
 with firm brace nerve repel the brutal force,
 and stop the unwieldy giant in his course. 

great William hail! who sceptre can despise,
 and spurn a crown with unretorted eye! 
o! when will prince learn to copy thou,
 and leave mankind, as heaven ordain they, free! 

haste, mighty chief! our injure right restore! 
quick spread thy sail for albion longing shore! 
haste, mighty chief! ere million groan enslave;
 and add three realm to one already save! 
while freedom live, thy memory shall be dear,
 and reap fresh honour each return year;
 nation preserve shall yield immortal fame,
 and endless age bless thy glorious name! 

then shall my ca'ndish, foremost in the field,
 by justice arm, his sword conspicuous wield;
 while will legion crowd around his car,
 and rush impetuous to the righteous war. 
on that great day be every chance defy,
 and think thy Russell combat by thy side;
 nor, crown with victory, cease thy generous toil,
 till firm peace secure this happy isle. 

never let thy honest, open heart believe
 profession specious, forge but to deceive;
 fear may extort they, when resource fail,
 but o! reject the baseless, flatter tale. 

think not that promise, or oath can bind,
 with solemn tie, a rome-devoted mind;
 which yield to all the holy juggler say,
 and deep imbibe the bloody, damn faith. 
what though the bigot raise to heaven his eye,
 and call the almighty witness from the sky! 
soon as the wish occasion he explore,
 to plant the roman cross on England shore,
 all, all will vanish, while his priest applaud,
 and saint the perjurer for the pious fraud. 

far let he fly these freedom-breathing clime,
 and seek proud Rome, the fosterer of his crime;
 there let he strive to mount the Papal chair,
 and scatter empty thunder in the air,
 grim preside in superstition school,
 and curse those kingdom he can never rule,

here let i pause, and bid the world adieu,
 while heaven bright mansion open to my view! —

yet still one care, one tender care remain;
 my bounteous friend, relieve a father pain! 
watch over my son, inform his waxen youth,
 and mould his mind to virtue and to truth;
 soon let he learn fair liberty to prize,
 and envy he, who for his country die;
 in one short sentence to comprise the whole,
 transfuse to he the virtue of thy soul. 

preserve thy life, my too, too generous friend,
 nor seek with my thy happy fate to blend! 
live for thy country, live to guard her law,
 proceed, and prosper in the glorious cause;
 while i, though vanquish, scorn the field to fly,
 but bold face my foe, and brave die. 

let princely Monmouth courtly wile beware,
 nor trust too far to fond paternal care;
 too oft dark deed deform the midnight cell,
 heaven only know how noble Essex fall! 
Sidney yet live, who comprehensive mind
 range at large through system unconfined;
 wrap in himself, he scorn the tyrant power,
 and hurl defiance even from the tower;
 with tranquil brow await the unjust decree,
 and, arm with virtue, look to follow i. 

ca'ndish, farewell! may fame our name entwine! 
through life i love thou, die i be thy;
 with pious rite let dust to dust be throw,
 and thus inscribe my monumental stone. 

 "here Russel lie, enfranchise by the grave,
" he prize his birthright, nor will live a slave. 
 "few be his word, but honest and sincere,
" dear be his friend, his country still more dear;
 "in parent, child, wife, supreme bless,
" but that one passion swallow all the rest;
 "to guard her freedom be his only pride,
" such be his love, and for that love he die. " 

yet fear not thou, when liberty display
 her glorious flag, to steer his course to praise;
 for know, (whoever thou be that read his fate,
 and think, perhaps, his suffering be too great,)
 bless as he be, at her imperial call,
 wife, child, parent, he resign they all;
 each fond affection then forsake his soul,
 and amor patriae occupy the whole;
 in that great cause he joy to meet his doom,
 bless the keen axe, and triumph over the tomb. 

the hour draw near — but what be hour to i? 
hour, day, and year hence undistinguished flee! 
time, and his glass unheeded pass away,
 absorb, and lose in one vast flood of day! 
on freedom wing my soul be bear on high,
 and soar exult to its native sky! 
