a epistle to a lady.

in vain, dear madam, yes in vain you strive;
 alas! to make your luckless Mira thrive. 
for tycho and copernicus agree,
 no golden planet bend its ray on i. 

it be twenty winter, if it be no more;
 to speak the truth it may be twenty four. 
as many spring their appoint space have run,
 since mira eye first open on the sun. 
it be when the flock on slabby hillock lie,
 and the cold fish rule the watery sky:
 but though these eye the learned page explore,
 and turn the ponderous volume over and over,
 i find no comfort from their system flow,
 but be deject more as more i know. 
hope shine a while, but like a vapour fly,
 (the fate of all the curious and the wise)
 for, ah! cold Saturn triumph on that day,
 and frown Sol deny his golden ray. 

you see i be learned, and i show the more,
 that none may wonder when they find i poor. 
yet Mira dream, as slumber poet may,
 and roll in treasure till the break day:
 while book and picture in bright order rise,
 and paint parlour swim before her eye:
 till the shrill clock impertinent ring,
 and the soft vision move their shine wing:
 then Mira wake, — her picture be no more,
 and through her finger slide the vanish over. 
convince too soon, her eye unwilling fall
 on the blue curtain and the dusty wall:
 she wake, alas! to business and to woe,
 to sweep her kitchen, and to mend her clothes. 

but see pale sickness with her languid eye,
 at who appearance all delusion fly:
 the world recede, its vanity decline,
 clorinda feature seem as faint as i:
 gay robe no more the ache sight admire,
 wit grate the ear, and melt music tire:
 its wonted pleasure with each sense decay,
 book please no more, and painting fade away:
 the slide joy in misty vapour end:
 yet let i still, ah! let i grasp a friend:
 and when each joy, when each love object fly,
 be you the last that leave my close eye. 

but how will this dismantle soul appear,
 when stripe of all it late hold so dear,
 force from its prison of expire clay,
 afraid and shiver at the doubtful way. 

yet do these eye a die parent see,
 loose from all care except a thought for i,
 without a tear resign her shorten breath,
 and dauntless meet the linger stroke of death. 
then at the almighty sentence shall i mourn:
 "of dust thou be, to dust shall thou return."
or shall i wish to stretch the line of fate,
 that the dull year may bear a long date,
 to share the folly of succeed time
 with more vexation and with deep crime:
 ah no — though heaven bring near the final day,
 for such a life i will not, dare not pray;
 but let the tear for future mercy flow,
 and fall resign beneath the mighty blow. 
nor i alone — for through the spacious ball,
 with i will number of all age fall:
 and the same day that Mira yield her breath,
 thousand may enter through the gate of death. 
