elegy iv. to a officer. write at Rome, 1756. 

from latian field, the mansion of renown,
where fix the warrior god his fate seat;
where infant hero learn the martial frown,
and little heart for genuine glory beat;

what for my friend, my soldier, shall i frame?
what noble glow verse that breathe of arm,
to point his radiant path to deathless fame,
by great example, and terrific charm?

Quirinus first, with bold, collect band,
the sinewy son of strength, for empire strive;
beneath his thunder bow the astonish land,
and temple rise to Mars, and to feretrian Jove.

war teach contempt of death, contempt of pain,
and hence the fabii, hence the Decii come:
war urge the slaughter, though she weep the slay,
stern war, the rugged nurse of virtuous Rome.

but not from antique fable will i draw,
to fire thy feeling soul, a dubious aid,
though now, even now, they strike with reverent awe,
by poet or historian sacred make.

nor yet to thou the babble muse shall tell
what mighty king with all their legion wrought,
what city sink, and story nation fall
when Caesar, Titus, or when Trajan fight,

from private worth, and Fortune private way
while over yond hill the exalt trophy show
to what vast height of incorrupted praise
the great, the self-ennobled Marius rise.

from steep arpinum rock-invested shade,
from hardy virtue emulative school
his dare flight the expand genius make,
and by obey noble learn to rule.

abash, confound, stern Iberia groan,
and Afric tremble to her utmost coast;
when the proud land its destine conqueror own
in the new consul, and his veteran host.

yet chief be madman, and ambition weak,
and mean the joy the laureled harvest yield,
if virtue fail. let fame, let envy speak
of capfa wall, and sextia watery field.

but sink for ever, in oblivion cast,
dishonest triumph, and ignoble spoil.
minturnae marsh severe pay at last
the guilty glory gain in civil broil.

nor yet his vain contempt the muse shall praise
for scene of polish life, and letter worth;
the steel-ribed warrior want not envy way
to darken they, or call his merit forth,

witness yond cimbrian trophy! — Marius, there
thy ample pinion find a space to fly;
as the plume eagle soar sail in air,
in upper air, and scorn a middle sky.

thence too thy country claim thou for her own,
and bid the sculptor toil thy act adorn,
to teach in character of live stone
eternal lesson to the youth unborn.

for wise Rome her warlike son reward
with the sweet labour of her artist hand;
he wake her grace, who her empire guard,
and both minervas join in will band.

o why, Britannia, why untrophied pass
the patriot deed thy godlike son display,
why breathe on high no monumental brass,
why swell no arc to grace culloden day?

wait we till faithless France submissive bow
beneath that hero delegate spear,
who lightning smite rebellion haughty brow,
and scatter her vile rout with horror in the rear?

o land of freedom, land of art, assume
that graceful dignity thy merit claim;
exalt thy hero like imperial Rome,
and build their virtue on their love of fame.

so shall the modest worth, which check my friend,
forget its blush when rouse by glory charm;
from breast to breast the generous warmth descend,
and still new trophy rise, at once, to art, and arm.
