a sight of Christ.

angel of light, your god and king surround
 with noble song; in his exalt flesh
 he claim your worship; while his saint on earth
 bless their redeemer-god with humble tongue. 
angel with lofty honour crown his head;
 we bow at his foot, by faith may feel
 this distant influence, and confess his love. 

once i behold his face, when beam divine
 break from his eyelid, and unusual light
 wrap i at once in glory and surprise. 
my joyful heart high leap in my breast
 with transport cry, this be the Christ of god;
 then throw my arm around in sweet embrace,
 and clasp, and bow adore low, till i be lose in he. 

while he appear no other charm can hold
 or draw my soul ashamed of former thing,
 which no remembrance now deserve or name
 though with contempt, best in oblivion hide. 

but the bright shine and presence soon withdraw;
 i seek he who i love, but find he not;
 i feel his absence; and with strong cry
 proclaim, where Jesus be not, all be vain. 
whether i hold he with a full delight,
 or seek he pant with extreme desire,
 it be he alone can please my wonder soul;
 to hold or seek he be my only choice. 
if he refrain on i to cast his eye
 down from his palace, nor my longing soul
 with upward look can spy my dear lord
 through his blue pavement, i will behold he still
 with sweet reflection on the peaceful cross,
 all in his blood and anguish, groan deep,
 gasp and die there. —
 this sight i never can loose, by it i live:
 a quicken vertue from his death inspire
 be life and breath to i; his flesh my food;
 his vital blood i drink, and hence my strength. 

i live, i be strong, and now eternal life
 beat quick within my breast; my vigorous mind
 spurn the dull earth, and on her fiery wing
 reach the mount of purpose divine,
 counsel of peace betwixt the almighty three
 conceive at once, and sign without debate
 in perfect union of the eternal mind. 
with vast amaze i see the unfathomed thought,
 infinite scheme, and infinite design
 of God own heart in which he ever rest. 
eternity lie open to my view;
 here the begin and the end of all
 i can discover; Christ, the end of all,
 and Christ the great begin; he my head,
 my god, my glory, and my all in all. 

o that the day, the joyful day be come
 when the first Adam from his ancient dust
 crown with new honour shall revive, and see
 Jesus his son and lord; while shout saint
 surround their king, and God eternal son
 shine in the midst but with superior beam,
 and like himself; then the mysterious word
 long hide behind the letter shall appear
 all spirit and life, and in the full light
 stand forth to public view, and there disclose
 his father sacred work and wondrous way:
 then wisdom, righteousness and grace divine
 through all the infinite transaction past
 inwrought and shine shall with double blaze
 strike our astonish eye, and ever reign
 admire and glorious in triumphant light. 

death and the tempter, and the man of sin
 now at the bar arraign, in judgement cast,
 shall vex the saint no more, but perfect love
 and loud praise perfect joy create,
 while ever-circling year maintain the blissful state. 
