A Sight of CHRIST.

ANgels of Light, your God and King surround
 With Noble Songs; in his Exalted Flesh
 He claims your Worship; while his Saints on Earth
 Bless their Redeemer-God with humble Tongues. 
Angels with lofty Honours crown his Head;
 We bowing at his Feet, by Faith may feel
 This distant Influence, and confess his Love. 

Once I beheld his Face, when Beams Divine
 Broke from his Eyelids, and unusual Light
 Wrap't me at once in Glory and Surprize. 
My Joyful Heart high leaping in my Breast
 With Transport cry'd, This is the Christ of God;
 Then threw my Arms around in sweet Embrace,
 And clasp'd, and bow'd Adoring low, till I was lost in him. 

While he appears no other Charms can hold
 Or draw my Soul asham'd of former things,
 Which no Remembrance now deserve or Name
 Tho' with Contempt, best in Oblivion hid. 

But the bright Shine and Presence soon withdrew;
 I sought him whom I Love, but found him not;
 I felt his Absence; and with strongest cries
 Proclaim'd, Where Jesus is not, all is vain. 
Whether I hold him with a full Delight,
 Or seek him panting with Extream Desire,
 'Tis He alone can please my Wondring Soul;
 To hold or seek him is my only Choice. 
If he refrain on me to cast his Eye
 Down from his Palace, nor my longing Soul
 With upward Look can spy my Dearest Lord
 Thro' his Blue Pavement, I'll behold him still
 With sweet reflection on the peaceful Cross,
 All in his Blood and Anguish, groaning deep,
 Gasping and dying there. —
 This Sight I ne're can loose, by it I live:
 A Quickning Vertue from his Death inspir'd
 Is Life and Breath to me; His Flesh my Food;
 His Vital Blood I drink, and hence my Strength. 

I Live, I'm Strong, and now Eternal Life
 Beats quick within my Breast; my Vigorous Mind
 Spurns the dull Earth, and on her fiery Wings
 Reaches the Mount of Purposes Divine,
 Counsels of Peace betwixt th' Almighty Three
 Conceiv'd at once, and Sign'd without Debate
 In perfect Union of the Eternal Mind. 
With vast Amaze I see the Unfathom'd Thoughts,
 Infinite Schemes, and Infinite Designs
 Of God's own Heart in which he ever rests. 
Eternity lies open to my View;
 Here the Beginning and the End of all
 I can discover; Christ, the End of all,
 And Christ the great Beginning; He my Head,
 My God, my Glory, and my All in All. 

O that the Day, the joyful Day were come
 When the first Adam from his Ancient Dust
 Crown'd with new Honours shall revive, and see
 Jesus his Son and Lord; while shouting Saints
 Surround their King, and God's Eternal Son
 Shines in the midst but with Superior Beams,
 And like himself; Then the Mysterious Word
 Long hid behind the Letter shall appear
 All Spirit and Life, and in the fullest Light
 Stand forth to publick View, and there disclose
 His Father's Sacred Works and wondrous Ways:
 Then Wisdom, Righteousness and Grace Divine
 Thro' all the Infinite Transactions past
 Inwrought and shining shall with double blaze
 Strike our astonish't Eyes, and ever reign
 Admir'd and Glorious in Triumphant Light. 

Death and the Tempter, and the Man of Sin
 Now at the Bar arraign'd, in Judgment cast,
 Shall vex the Saints no more, but perfect Love
 And loudest Praises perfect Joy create,
 While ever-circling Years maintain the blissful State. 
