write on Leicester abbey.

hail venerable wall! who lonely round,
 still show the stranger what you once have be,
 though now with tuft of flower elder crown,
 and vivid ivy never-fading green. 

thy pristine glory be for ever flee,
 flee the unbounded power that once be thy;
 nor ever more shall rapt devotion tread
 with votive offering round thy hallow shrine. 

but where the cloister train with anthem clear,
 in long procession sweep the vault aisle,
 where pale repentance drop the pious tear,
 and faith midst die agony can smile;

nought now but bleat flock be see to stray,
 or browse ox from the ploughshare lead;
 or the rude peasant who at close of day,
 regardless pass over the silent dead. 

the nightly bat amid the ruin flit,
 the clamorous Daw here build her airy nest;
 while with discordant note the screech owl sit,
 foreboding woe to superstition breast. 

can the reflective mind unmoved remain,
 where every view invite the moral lay;
 and kind warn the arrogant and vain
 their boast honour must alike decay. 

methinks, as over these grass-grown tomb i tread,
 new shadowy form in solemn order rise,
 the warrior here erect his crest head,
 and here the statesman meet my wonder eye. 

for not alone the undistinguished crowd
 of monk in this forsake scene be lay;
 here too the child of ambition bow,
 and death inevitable tribute pay. 

tire with contention and the din of arm,
 here Leicester earl, once turbulent and bold,
 seek in monastic gloom those pure charm
 which camp or palace can never unfold. 

oft on the bank of Soar he pensive tread,
 and sweep the rapid current with his tear,
 while he beseech a long neglect god
 to blot the error of his former year. 

raise by his care the sculpture arch bend,
 the massive column form the lengthen aisle;
 in gothic state the lofty tower ascend,
 and proud crown the consecrate pile. 

though in those rude age bigot zeal
 too oft mislead the visionary mind;
 and round religion throw a gloomy veil,
 condemn joy which providence design;

yet far more happy for the human race,
 those rigid law that deem all pleasure crime,
 than the licentious precept which debase
 the false philosophy of modern time. 

within these hospitable wall conceal,
 unhappy Seagrave shun the barons hate;
 and in some cell obscure his eye he seal,
 who, uncontrolled, have rule the king and state. 

a more illustrious mourner yet behold! 
lo, haughty Wolsey, humble to the dust! 
hear he his fortune sad reverse unfold! 
and rue the hour he place in king his trust. 

how change from he, who, insolent and proud,
 the dazzle pomp of majesty outshine! 
amid who suit attendant noble bow,
 raise by his smile, or by his frown undo. 

from he who foremost in the glitter train,
 at Guisnes and Bruges boundless power display:
 where rival king his favour seek to gain,
 and more than princely honour to he pay,

no more by vain prosperity mislead,
 to bright object here he turn his mind;
 with resignation bow his hoary head,
 and die own his cup of sorrow kind. 

who, then, since such the end of human power,
 will waste in court the vigour of their prime? 
or lose one short, inestimable hour,
 that fill the lessen measure of their time? 

since wealth and grandeur in possession cloy,
 and oft with unsuspected swiftness part,
 with wise aim, o man, thy thought employ,
 to cultivate the mind, to mend the heart. 

with awful wonder mark yond vault sky,
 observe those ponderous planet how they roll:
 the vast expanse of endless space descry,
 and tremble to it be maker lift thy soul:

turn, then, to sublunary scene thy eye,
 behold what trifle mortal toil to gain;
 and ask thy mind if those they great prize,
 can merit aught but pity and disdain. 
