man injustice towards providence.

a thrive merchant, who no loss sustain
 in little time a mighty fortune gain. 
no pyrate seize his still return freight;
 nor founder vessel sink with its own weight
 no ruin enter through disserver plank;
 no wreck at sea, nor in the public bank. 
a loft he sail, above the reach of chance,
 and do in pride, as fast as wealth, advance. 
his wife too, have her town and countryseat,
 and rich in purse, conclude her person great. 
a Dutchess wear not so much gold and lace;
 then it be with she a undisputed case,
 the fine petticoat must take the place. 
her room, anew at every christen dress,
 put down the court, and vex the city-guest. 
grin malotto in true ermine stare;
 the best Japan, and clear china Ware
 be but as common Delft and english laquar there. 
no luxury by either unenjoyed,
 or cost withhold, though awkward employ. 
how come this wealth? a country friend demand,
 who scarce can live on product of his land. 
how be it that, when trade be so bad
 that some be break, and some with fear run mad,
 you can in better state yourself maintain,
 and your effect still unimpaired remain! 
my industry, he cry, be all the cause;
 sometime i interlope, and slight the law:
 i wise measure, than my neighbour, take,
 and better speed, who better bargain make. 
i know, the smyrna-fleet will fall a prey,
 and therefore send no vessel out that way:
 my busy factor prudent i choose,
 and in straight bond their friend and kindred noose:
 at home, i to the public sum advance,
 while, underhand in fee with hostile France,
 i care not for your tourvill, or du-barts,
 no more than for the rock, and shelf in chart:
 my own sufficiency create my gain,
 raise, and secure by this unfailing brain. 
this idle vaunt have scarce past his lip,
 when tiding come, his ill-provided ship
 some through the want of skill, and some of care,
 be lose, or back return without their fare. 
from bad to worse, each day his state decline,
 until leave town, and wife, and debt behind,
 to his acquaintance at the rural seat
 he skulk, and humble sue for a retreat. 
whence come this change, have wisdom leave that head,
 (his friend demand) where such right scheme be breed? 
what frenzy, what delirium mar the Scull,
 which fill the chest, and be it self so full? 
here interrupt, sad he reply,
 in i be no change, but fate must all thing guide;
 to providence i attribute my loss. 

vainglorious man do his thus the praise engross,
 when prosperous day around he spread their beam:
 but, if revolve to opposite extreme,
 still his own sense he fond will prefer,
 and providence, not he, in his affair must err! 
