in memory of the right Hon. Nevil lord Lovelace.

in the calm hour, when pleasure most prevail,
 and smooth prosperity have swell your sail,
 the sportive muse her humble lyre have string,
 to join the triumph with some idle song:
 and shall she now, when nature smile no more,
 when tempest rise, and surge lash the shore,
 sit doubtful, and the serious lie refuse? 
shall Lovelace sigh, nor sympathize the muse? 

in life mix scene, where various part agree
 to form one tedious tragicomedy,
 how few, alas! in either part can shine? 
but both to grace, what force must combine! 
in some low scene be Silia deem a wit? 
with patience 'meek ear attentive sit. 
in mimic state, and proud fantastic power,
 be Fulvia crown the queen of half a hour? 
the queen of half a island if she please;
 the wise have no debate with such as these. 
but when the rise scene with anguish swell,
 it be you the high, hard part to tell,
 and dignify distress by suffering well. 
whether the stoic, or the christian part,
 find in the head, or work at the heart;
 here all the kind affection, touch, comply;
 there rouse again to study apathy. 

come, false philosophy! as proud as vain,
 talk well of virtue, talk it over again;
 deep in the heart true fortitude conceal,
 and need no eloquence to be reveal. 
yet speak! o tell i! whence this clam of mind? 
the will obedient, and the wish resign;
 the steady temper, and the look serene,
 and all a sister woe in silence see? 
that i may learn, when by misfortune press,
 to yeild with meekness, or with strength resist. 

brave youth! with every virtue crown, farewell! 
how true love, young Walpole muse can tell. 
he to the tomb have lead the weep nine,
 and hang the wreath of friendship over the shrine. 
not sweet note, who pope consign to fame,
 "attend the shade of gentle Buckingham." 
here the pale love, and sicken grace mourn,
 and there the sister weep over the urn:
 like some fair pillar nod over it be base,
 the last remain ruin of her race;
 leave but to make their mild virtue know,
 and fill the radiant circle with her own. 

useless the marble, and the mournful crest,
 no tomb so lovely as a sister breast;
 there shall thy memory live, by time improve,
 and she for virtue, once thy own, be love:
 not such as make of king and queen a friend,
 but such as grace thy life, and bless thy end;
 truth unaffected, manner void of art,
 plain sense, and strong benevolence of heart. 

oft as she eye yond bright etherial plain,
 and burn to follow thou, and mix again;
 some tender friendship, some endear tie,
 cling round her heart, and hold she from the sky. 
a little while, and these shall all decay,
 and the free soul emerge to endless day:
 where, have long sustain the faithful part,
 the strong attraction seize all her heart,
 her gentle orb shall round it be centre move,
 rekindled into harmony and love. 
