on a landscape by Rubens.

nay, let we gaze, even till the sense be full,
upon the rich creation, shadow so
that not great nature, in her lofty pomp
of live beauty, ever on the sight
rise more magnificent; nor aught so fair
have fancy, in her wild, bright mood,
image of thing most lovely, when the sound
of this cold cloudy world at distance sink,
and all alone the warm idea live
of what be great, or beautiful, or good,
in nature general plan.
so the vast scope,
o Rubens! of thy mighty mind, and such
the fervour of thy pencil, pour wide
the still illumination, that the mind
pause, absorb, and scarce think what power
of mortal art the sweet enchantment wrought.
she see the painter, with no human touch,
create, embellish, animate at will,
the mimic scene, from nature ampler range
catch as by inspiration; while the cloud,
high wander, and the fair form of thing,
seem at his bid to emerge, and burn
with radiance and with life!
let we, subdue,
now to the magic of the moment lose
the thought of life, and mingle every sense
even in the scene before we!
the fresh morn
of summer shine; the white cloud of the east
be crisp; beneath, the bright blue champaign steam;
the bank, the meadow, and the flower, send up
a incense exhalation, like the meek
and holy praise of he who soul deep joy
the lone wood witness. thou, who heart be sick
of vanity; who, in the throng of man,
do feel no lenient fellowship; who eye
turn, with a languid carelessness, around
upon the toil crowd, still murmur on,
restless; — oh, think, in summer scene like these,
how sweet the sense of quiet gladness be,
that, like the silent breath of morning, steal
from lowly nook, and feel itself expand
amid the work of nature, to the power
that make they: to the awful thought of he
who, when the morning star shout for joy,
bid the great sun from tenfold darkness burst,
the green earth roll in light, and solitude
first hear the voice of man, while hill and wood
stand eminent, in orient hue array,
his dwelling; and all live nature smile,
as in this picture semblance, beam full
before we!
Mark again the various view:
some city far-off spire and dome appear,
break the long horizon, where the morn
sit blue and soft: what glow imagery
be spread beneath! — town, village, light smoke,
and scarce-seen windmill-sail, and devious wood,
chequer 'mid sunshine the grass-level land,
that stretch from the sight.
now near trace
the form of tree distinct — the broad brown oak;
the poplar, that, with silvery trunk, incline,
shade the lonely castle; flake of light
be fling behind the massy group, that, now
enlarge and enlarge still, unfold
their separate beauty. but awhile delay;
pass the foot-bridge, and listen (for we hear,
or think we hear she), listen to the song
of yonder milkmaid, as she brim her pail;
while, in the yellow pasture, pensive near,
the red cow ruminate.

break off, break off, for lo! where, all alarm,
the small bird, from the late resound perch,
fly various, hush their early song; and mark,
beneath the darkness of the bramble-bank
that overhang the half-seen brook, where nod
the flow rush, dew-besprent, with breast
ruddy, and emerald wing, the kingfisher
steal through the drip sedge away. what shape
of terror scare the woodland habitant,
mar the music of the dawn? look round;
see, where he creep, beneath the willowy stump,
cower and low, step silent after step,
the boot fouler: keen his look, and fix
upon the adverse bank, while, with firm hand,
he grasp the deadly tube; his dog, with ear
hang back, and still and steady eye of fire,
point to the prey; the boor, intent, move on
pant, and creep close beneath the leaf,
and fear lest even the rustle reed betray
his footfall; near yet, and yet more near,
he stalk. who now shall save the heedless group,
the speckle partridge, that in the sun,
on yonder hillock green, across the stream,
bask unalarmed beneath the hawthorn bush,
who age bough the crawl blackberry
entwine!
and thus, upon the sweet scene
of human loveliness, and social peace
domestic, when the full fond heart recline
upon its hope, and almost mingle tear
of joy, to think that in this hollow world
such bliss shall be its portion; then (alas,
the bitter change!), then, with his unheard step,
in darkness shroud, yet approach fast,
death, from amid the sunny flower, lift up
his giant dread anatomy, and smite,
smite the fair prospect once, while every bloom
hang shrivel, and a sound of mourning fill
the lone and blast valley: but no sound
be here of sorrow or of death, though she,
the country Kate, with shine morning cheek
(who, in the tumbrel, with her market-gear,
sit seat high), seem to expect the flash
explode, that shall lay the innocent
and feather tenant of the landscape low.
not so the clown, who, heedless whether life
or death betide, across the plashy ford
drive slow; the beast plod on, foot follow foot,
age and grave, with half-erected ear,
as now his whip above their mat mane
hang tremulous, while the dark and shallow stream
flash beneath their fetlock: he, astride
on harness saddle, not a sidelong look
deign at the breathe landscape, or the maid
smile behind; the cold and lifeless calf
her sole companion: and so mate oft
be some sweet maid, who thrill heart be form
for dear fellowship. but lift the eye,
and hail the abode of rural ease. the man
walk forth, from yonder antique hall, that look
the mistress of the scene; its turret gleam
amid the tree, and cheerful smoke be see,
as if no spectre shape (though most retire
the spot) there ever wander, stole in white,
along the midnight chamber; but quaint MAB
her tiny revel lead, till the rare dawn
peep out, and chanticleer his shrill alarm
beneath the window ring, then, with a wink,
the shadowy rout have vanish!
as the morn
jocund ascend, how lovely be the view
to he who own the fair domain! the friend
of his still hour be near, to who he vow
his truth; her eye reflect his bliss; his heart
beat high with joy; his little child play,
please, in his pathway; one the scatter flower
straggle collect, the other spread its arm,
in speechless blandishment, upon the neck
of its caress nurse.
still let we gaze,
and image every form of heartfelt joy
which scene like these bestow, that charm the sight,
yet soothe the spirit. all be quiet here,
yet cheerful as the green sea, when it shine
in some still bay, shine in its loneliness
beneath the breeze, that move, and hardly move,
the placid surface.
on the balustrade
of the old bridge, that over the moat be throw,
the fisher with his angle lean intent,
and turn, from the bright pomp of spread plain,
to watch the nimble fry, that glance oft
beneath the grey arch shoot! oh, happy he
who steal through life, untroubled as unseen!
the distant city, with its crowd spire,
that dim shine upon his view, awake
no thought but that of pleasure more compose,
as the wind whisper he to sound sleep.
he lean upon the faithful arm of she
for who his youthful heart beat, fond beat,
when life be new: time steal away, yet health
and exercise be he; and in these shade,
though sometime he have mourn a proud world wrong,
he feel a independence that all care
breast with a carol of content; he hear
the green leaf of his old paternal tree
make music, soothe as they stir: the elm,
and poplar with its silvery trunk, that shade
the green sward of the bank before his porch,
be to he as companion; — while he turn
with more endearment to the live smile
of those his infant, who, when he be dead,
shall hear the music of the self-same tree
wave, till year roll on, and their grey hair
go to the dust in peace. 
away, sad thought!
lo! where the morning light, through the dark wood,
upon the window-pane be fling like fire,
hail, life and hope; and thou, great work of art,
that 'amid this populous and busy swarm
of man do smile serene, as with the hue
of fair, grand nature; may thou speak
not vain of the endearment and best joy
that nature yield. the manly heart that swell
with honest english feeling, — while the eye,
sadden, but not cast down, behold far off
the darkness of the onward roll storm, —
charm for a moment by this mantling view,
its anxious tumult shall suspend: and such,
the pensive patriot shall exclaim, thy scene,
my own belove country, such the abode
of rural peace! and while the soul have warmth,
and voice have energy, the brave arm strength,
England, thou shall not fall! the day shall come,
yes, and now be, that thou shall lift thyself;
and woe to he who set upon thy shore
his hostile foot! proud victor though he be,
his bloody march shall never soil a flower
that hang its sweet head, in the morning dew,
on thy green village bank! his muster host
shall be roll back in thousand, and the surge
bury they! then, when peace illume once more,
my country, thy green nook and inmost vale,
it will be sweet amid the forest glen
to stray, and think upon the distant storm
that howl, but injure not!
at thought like these,
what heart, what english heart, but shall beat high!
meantime, its keen flash pass, thy eye intent,
Beaumont, shall trace the master-stroke of art,
and view the assemblage of the finish piece,
as with his skill who form it: rude view,
savage, with solitary pine, hang high
amid the break crag (where scowl wait
the fierce banditti), stern salvator's hand
shall apt shade: over poussin cluster dome,
with ampler umbrage, the black wood shall hang,
beneath who wave gloom the sudden flash
of break light upon the brawl stream
be fling below.
aërial Claude shall paint
the grey fane peer over the summer wood,
the azure lake below, or distant sea,
and sail, in the pellucid atmosphere,
soft gleam to the morn. dark on the rock,
where the red lightning burst, shall Wilson stand,
like mighty Shakspeare, who the imp of fire
await. nor oh, sweet Gainsborough! shall thou
the muse forget, who simple landscape smile
attractive, whether we delight to view
the cottage chimney through the high wood peep;
or beggar beauty stretch her little hand,
with look most innocent; or homeward cow
wind through the hollow road at even-tide,
or browse the straggle branch.
scene like these
shall charm all heart, while truth and beauty live,
and nature picture loveliness shall own
each master vary touch; but chief thou,
great Rubens! shall the will sense lead,
enamour of the vary imagery,
that fill the vivid canvas, swell still
on the enrapture eye of taste, and still
new charm unfold; though minute, yet grand,
simple, yet most luxuriant; every light
and every shade, great oppose, and all
subserve to one magical effect
of truth and harmony.
so glow the scene;
and to the pensive thought refine display
the rich rural poem. oh, may view
so picture animate thy classic mind,
Beaumont, to wander 'amid sicilian scene,
and catch the beauty of the pastoral bard,
shadow his wild landscape! ætna fire,
bebrycian rock, Anapus' holy stream,
and wood of ancient Pan; the break crag
and the old fisher here; the purple vine
there bend; and the smile boy set down
to guard, who, innocent and happy, weave,
intent, his rushy basket, to ensnare
the chirp grasshopper, nor see the while
the lean fox meditate her morning meal,
eye his scrip askance; while further on
another tread the purple grape — he sit,
nor aught regard, but the green rush he weave.

o Beaumont! let this pomp of light and shade
wake thou, to paint the wood that the sweet muse
have consecrate: then the summer scene
of Phasidamus, clad in rich light,
shall glow, the glance poplar, and clear fount;
while distant time admire (as now we trace
this summer-mantling view) hoar ætna pine,
the vine-hung grott, and branch plane, that shade
the silver arethusa steal wave.
