line to a teapot.

on thy carve side, where many a vivid dye
 in easy progress lead the wander eye,
 a distant nation manner we behold,
 to the quick fancy whimsical tell. 

the small-eyed beauty with she Mandarin,
 who over the rail of garden arbour lean,
 in listless ease; and rock of arid brown,
 on who sharp crag, in gay profusion blow,
 the ample loose-leaved rose appear to grace
 the skilful culture of the wondrous place;
 the little verdant plate, where with his mate
 the golden pheasant hold his gorgeous state,
 with gay crest pate and twist neck,
 turn janty his glossy wing to peck;
 the smooth-streaked water of a paly grey,
 over which the chequer bridge lend ready way,
 while, by its margin moor, the little boat
 do with its oar and net awning float:
 a scene in short all soft delight to take in,
 a paradise for grave grandee of Pekin. 
with straight small spout, that from thy body fair,
 diverge with a smart vivacious air,
 and round, arch handle with gold tracery bind,
 and dome-shaped lid with bud or button crown,
 thou stand complete, fair subject of my rhyme,
 a goodly vessel of the olden time. 

but far less pleasure yield this fair display
 than that enjoy upon thy natal day,
 when round the potter wheel, their chin raise,
 a urchin group in silent wonder gaze,
 stand and behold, as, touch with magic skill,
 the whirl clay swift fashion to his will, —
 see mazy motion stop, and then the toy
 complete before their eye, and grin for joy;
 clap their naked side with blythe halloo,
 and curtail word of praise, like ting, tongue, too! 
the brown-skinned artist, with his unclothed waist
 and gird loin, who, slow and patient, trace,
 beneath his humble shed, this fair array
 of picture form upon thy surface gay,
 i will not stop in fancy sight to place,
 but speed i on my way with quicken pace. 
pack in a chest with other of thy kind,
 the sport of wave and every shift wind,
 the ocean thou have cross, and thou may claim
 the pass of the line to swell thy fame,
 with as good observation of the thing
 as some of those who in a hammock swing. 

and now thou be see in britain polish land,
 hold up to public view in wave hand
 of boastful auctioneer, while dame of pride
 in morning farthingale, scarce two yard wide,
 with collar lapdog snarl in their arm,
 contend in rival keenness for thy charm. 
and certes well they may, for there they find thou
 with all thy train of vassal cup around thou,
 a prize which thought by day, and dream by night,
 can dwell on for a week with fresh delight. 

our please imagination now portray
 the glory of thy high official day,
 when thou on board of rich japan be set,
 round who support table gay meet
 at close of eve, the young, the learned, the fair,
 and even philosophy and wit be there. 
midst bason, cream-pot, cup and saucer small,
 thou stand the rule chieftain of they all;
 and even the kettle of potosi over,
 who ample cell supply thy liquid store,
 beneath who base the sapphire flame be burn,
 above who lid the wreathy smoke be turn,
 though rich chase and burnish it may be,
 be yet, confess, subordinate to thou. 
but o! when beauty hand thy weight sustain,
 the climax of thy glory be attain! 
back from her elevate elbow fall
 its three-tired ruffle, and display the swell
 and gentle round of her lily arm,
 the eye of wistful sage or beau to charm —
 a sight at other time but dim see
 through veil fold of point or colberteen. 
with please toil, red glow her dimple cheek,
 bright glance her eye beneath her forehead sleek,
 and as she pour the beverage, through the room
 be spread its fleet, delicate perfume. 
then do bright wit and cheerful fancy play
 with all the pass topic of the day. 
so delicate, so vary and so free
 be the heart pastime, then inspire by thou,
 that goblet, bowl or flask can boast no power
 of high excitement, in their reign hour,
 compare to thy; — red wildfire of the fen,
 to summer moonshine of some fairy glen. 

but now the honour of thy course be past,
 for what of earthly happiness may last! 
although in modern drawing-room, a board
 may fragrant tea from menial hand afford,
 which, pour in dull obscurity have be,
 from pot of vulgar ware, in nook unseen,
 and pass in hasty round our eye before,
 thou in thy graceful state be see no more. 
and what the changeful fleet crowd, who sip
 the unhonoured beverage with contemptuous lip,
 enjoy amid the tangle, giddy maze,
 their languid eye — their listless air betray. 
what though at time we see a youthful fair
 by white clothe board her watery drug prepare,
 at further corner of a noisy room,
 where only casual straggler deign to come,
 like tavern busy barmaid; still i say,
 the honour of thy course be pass away. 

again have auctioneer thy value praise,
 again have rival bidder on thou gaze,
 but not the gay, the young, the fair, i trow! 
no; sober connoisseur, with wrinkle brow
 and spectacle on nose, thy part inspect,
 and by grave rule approve thou or reject. 
for all the bliss which china charm afford,
 my lady now have cede to her lord. 
and wise too do she forgo the prize,
 since modern pinmoney will scarce suffice
 for all the trimm, flounce, bead and lace,
 the thousand needful thing that needs must grace
 her daily change attire. — and now on shelf
 of china closet place, a cheerless elf,
 like moody statesman in his rural den,
 from power dismiss — like prosperous citizen,
 from shop or change set free — untoward bliss! 
thou rest in most ignoble uselessness. 
