ode vii. to a friend, on the hazard of fall in love.

no, foolish boy — to virtuous fame
 if now thy early hope be vow,
 if true ambition noble flame
 command thy footstep from the crowd,
 Lean not to love enchant snare;
 his dance, his delight beware,
 nor mingle in the band of young and fair. 

by thought, by danger, and by toil,
 the wreath of just renown be wear;
 nor will ambition awful spoil
 the flowery pomp of ease adorn:
 but love dissolve the nerve of thought;
 by love unmanly fear be teach;
 and love reward with slothful art be buy. 

true, where the muse, where the power
 of soft wisdom, easy wit,
 assist the grace and the hour
 to render beanty praise complete,
 the fair may then perhaps impart
 each fine sense, each win art,
 and more than school adorn the manly heart. 

if then, from love deceit secure,
 such bliss be all thy heart intend,
 go, where the white-winged evening-hour
 on delia vernal walk descend:
 go, while the please, peaceful scene
 become her voice, become her mien. 
sweet as her smile, and as her brow serene. 

attend, while that harmonious tongue
 each bosom, each desire command;
 apollo lute by Hermes string
 and touch by chaste minerva hand. 
attend. i feel a force divine,
 o Delia, win my thought to thy,
 that half thy grace seem already i. 

yet conscious of the dangerous charm,
 soon will i turn my step away;
 nor oft provoke the lovely harm,
 nor once relax my reason sway. 
but thou, my friend — what sudden sigh? 
what mean the blush that come and fly? 
why stop? why silent? why avert thy eye? 

so soon again to meet the fair? 
so pensive all this absent hour?
 — o yet, unlucky youth, beware,
 while yet to think be in thy power
 in vain with friendship flatter name
 thy passion mask its inward shame;
 friendship, the treacherous fuel of thy flame! 

once, i remember, tire of love,
 i spurn his hard, tyrannic chain,
 yet win the haughty fair to prove
 what sober joy in friendship reign. 
no more i sigh, complain, or swear;
 the nymph coy art appear no more. 
but each can laugh at what we feel before. 

well-pleased we pass the cheerful day,
 to unreserved discourse resign,
 and i enchant to survey
 one generous woman real mind:
 but soon i wonder what possess
 each wakeful night my anxious breast;
 no other friendship ever have break my rest! 

fool that i be — and now, even now
 while thus i preach the stoic strain,
 unless i shun dione view,
 a hour unsay it all again. 
o friend! — when love direct her eye
 to pierce where every passion lie,
 where be the firm, the cautious, or the wise? 
