[Psyche] Canto v. 

Canto v. 

delightful vision of my lonely hour! 
charm of my life and solace of my care! 
oh! will the muse but lend proportion power,
 and give i language, equal to declare
 the wonder which she bid my fancy share,
 when rapt in she to other world i fly,
 see angel form unutterable fair,
 and hear the inexpressive harmony
 that seem to float on air, and warble through the sky. 

may i the swift glance scene recall! 
bright as the roseate cloud of summer eve,
 the dream which hold my soul in will thrall,
 and half my visionary day deceive,
 communicable shape may then receive,
 and other heart be ravish with the strain:
 but scarce i seek the airy thread to weave,
 when quick confusion mock the fruitless pain,
 and all the fairy form be vanish from my brain. 

fond dreamer! meditate thy idle song! 
but let thy idle song remain unknown:
 the verse, which cheer thy solitude, prolong;
 what, though it charm no moment but thy own,
 though thy love Psyche smile for thou alone,
 still shall it yield thou pleasure, if not fame,
 and when, escape from tumult, thou have fly
 to thy dear silent hearth enliven flame,
 there shall the tranquil muse her happy votary claim! 

my psyche wander then she love to trace;
 unroll the glow canvas to my sight;
 her chaste calm eye, her soft attractive grace,
 the lightning of her heavenly smile so bright,
 all yield i strange and unconceived delight:
 even now entrance her journey i pursue,
 and gaze enrapture on her matchless knight;
 vision of love, pure, innocent and true! 
oh! may your graceful form for ever bless my view! 

see as they tread the green, soft-levelled plain,
 where never weed, nor noxious plant be find! 
Psyche, enchant, bid her knight explain
 who rule that lovely and well culture ground,
 where fair flower and pure spring abound:
 "oh! object of my anxious care," (he cry,
 as with a half-breathed sigh he gaze around)
 a stranger here, full oft i vain try
 admittance to obtain, and sooth the sovereign pride. 

here Castabella reign, who brow severe
 oft chill my sanguine spirit by its frown;
 yet have i serve she with adore fear,
 though her ungrateful scorn will oft disown
 the faithful homage by her servant show;
 i she have banish from her fair domain,
 for crime my loyal heart have never know;
 while thus exclude vain i complain,
 and feel another guilt my injure honour stain. 

with false assumption of my arm and name,
 knight of the bleed heart miscall too long,
 a vile impostor have disgrace my fame,
 and much usurp by violence and wrong,
 which to the virgin queen by right belong;
 on i her irritate vengeance fall,
 on i, repulse by force of arm so strong
 that, never suffer to approach her wall,
 unheard, indignant truth in vain for justice call. 

 "yet she alone our progress can assist,
 and thou, oh Psyche! must her favour gain;
 nor from thy soft entreaty ever desist
 till thou free entrance for thy knight obtain;
 here let his faithful service remain
 fix on thy grateful heart! nor thou consent,
 nor let their force thy gentleness constrain
 to leave he, thus disgrace, yet innocent,
 thy undeserved neglect forsake to lament." 

while yet he speak, before her ravish eye
 the brilliant tower of Castabella shine:
 the sun that view they from unclouded sky
 shed not through heaven a radiance more divine;
 the adamantine wall with strength combine
 inimitable lustre ever clear;
 celestial temple! it be not lip like my
 thy glory can reveal to mortal ear,
 or paint the unsullied beam which blaze for ever here. 

approach now the well defend gate,
 which place at distance guard the sacred fane,
 their lowly suit a stern repulse await;
 the timid voice of Psyche plead in vain,
 nor entrance there together can they gain:
 while yet they stay, unwilling to retreat,
 the dove, swift-sailing through, the ethereal plain,
 have reach already castabella seat,
 and in her spotless breast have find a welcome sweet. 

caress oft her well remember guest,
 Serener smile illume her soften brow;
 the heaven-sent messenger her soul confess,
 and mild listen to his murmur low,
 which seem in plead eloquence to flow;
 his snowy pinion then he wide display,
 and gentle lure she from her throne to go
 even to the gate, where Psyche blush stay
 beside her awe-struck knight half doubt afraid. 

that form majestic may the brave awe:
 yet Psyche gaze with love unmixed with fear,
 and feel those charm her soul attract draw
 as to maternal tenderness most dear;
 congenial soul! they at one glance appear
 link to each other by a mutual tie:
 her courteous voice invite she to draw near. 
and lo! obedient to their sovereign eye,
 to psyche will step the barrier open fly. 

but to the lion, and his gallant lord
 sudden the affright guard the portal close. 
Psyche look back, and mindful of her word,
 mindful of he who save she from her foe,
 guide of her course and sooth of her woe,
 the tear that start to her downcast eye,
 the deepen blush which eloquent rise,
 silent assistant of the plead sigh,
 to speed the unuttered suit their power persuasive try. 

and now the knight, encourage to approach,
 assert his injure fame, and justice claim,
 confute each charge, repel each foul reproach,
 and each accuse falsehood bold shame,
 while conscious innocence his tongue inflame:
 a firm attachment to her reign he vow,
 the base impostor guilty madness blame,
 and, while the impute crime his spirit rouse,
 no intercourse with he his noble soul allow. 

mean time his faithful page have not be mute,
 and he have find a ready warm ally;
 for (while his master urge the eager suit)
 as through the goodly train he cast his eye,
 he chance exult amid the group to spy
 a joyous youth, his fond cherish friend;
 HYMEN, the festive, love-attending boy,
 delight his assistance hastes to lend,
 laugh unbar the gate, and bid the parley end. 

around their queen the timid virgin crowd,
 who half consent receive the knight,
 and check her sportive boy, who welcome loud
 speak his gay triumph and his proud delight:
 yet graceful smile her happy guest invite
 to share the feast with sacred honour bless;
 the palace open to their dazzle sight;
 still as they gaze, the adore eye confess
 that wonder awe which fill each consecrate breast. 

all be divine, yet still the fair queen
 like Dian amid her circle nymph appear,
 or as Minerva on Parnassus see,
 when condescend with smile she cheer
 the silent muse who her presence fear:
 a starry crown its heavenly radiance throw
 over her pale cheek; for there the rose revere
 the pure lily of her saint-like hue,
 yet oft the mantling blush its transient visit know. 

the hand of fate, which weave of spotless white
 her wondrous robe, bid it unchangeable
 preserve unsullied its first lustre bright,
 nor ever may be renew that sacred spell
 if once destroy; wherefore to guard it well
 two handmaid she entrust with special care,
 prudence and purity, who both excel,
 the first in matron dignity of air,
 the last in bloom youth unalterable fair. 

favourite of heaven! she at her birth receive
 with it the brilliant zone that bind her waist,
 which, be the earth of sun and star bereave,
 by its own light beneficent cast
 can cheer the innocent, and guide the chaste:
 nor armour ever have the virgin bear,
 though oft in warlike scene her youth she pass,
 for while her breast this dazzle cestus wear,
 the foe who dare to gaze behold the light no more. 

but when her placid hour in peace be spend,
 conceal she bid its latent terror lie,
 sheathe in a silken scarf, with kind intent
 weave by the gentle hand of modesty;
 and see, the blush maid with down-cast eye
 behind her mistress hide her charm retire! 
while, foremost of the group, of stature high,
 firm courage lift her brow by truth inspire,
 who hold a crystal lamp in flame celestial fire. 

see, fresh as Hebe bloom temperance stand,
 present the nectared fruit, and crown the bowl! 
while bright-eyed honour lead the choral band,
 who song divine can animate the soul,
 lead will captive to their high control:
 they sing the triumph of their spotless queen,
 and proud bid immortal fame enrol
 upon her fair page such as have be
 the champion of her cause, the favourite of her reign. 

from Pallas first begin the lofty song,
 and Cynthia, bright goddess of the sky;
 to she the virgin deity belong,
 and each behold she with a sister eye;
 the mystic honour next of fauna rise;
 her solemn rite which pure hand require;
 and Vesta, who her virgin teach to prize,
 and guard the sacred symbol of the fire
 which earth can never revive if suffer to expire. 

emblem divine of female purity! 
who trust betray to like sad fate shall doom;
 pursue by scorn, consign to infamy,
 the hapless victim perish in their bloom
 amid the dark horror of a live tomb;
 effulgent queen! thou will the pure defend
 from the dark night of this opprobrious gloom;
 nor even with life thy favour smile shall end,
 they bid illustrious fame beyond the grave extend. 

first of the noble youth who virtue shine
 conspicuous chief in castabella train,
 they sing the firm unmoved Bellerophon;
 and Peleus fly the magnesian plain,
 pursue by all a wanton fierce disdain. 
you too, Hippolytus, their song employ! 
belove by Phædra, but belove in vain;
 with the chaste honour of the hebrew boy,
 which time shall never obscure, nor idle scorn destroy. 

nor be unsung who on hymettus brow
 the bright Aurora woo with amorous care;
 he, mindful of his sacred nuptial vow,
 refuse the goddess though celestial fair,
 breathe pure perfume and ambrosial air:
 of wanton Circe baffle art they tell,
 and he, too wise her treacherous cup to share,
 who scorn the enchantress, and her mystic spell,
 and all the syrens art can glorious repel. 

the long try virtue of his faithful spouse
 now sweet animate the tuneful string,
 unsullied guardian of her virgin vow! 
who twice ten year have weep her wander king. 
acastus mourning daughter next they sing;
 the chaste embrace which clasp her husband shade:
 and thou, Dictynna! who, with dare spring,
 call from the cretan rock on dian aid:
 and still the goddess love her favourite luckless maid. 

please to assume herself a name so dear
 she bid her altar to Dictynna rise,
 thus call, she ever turn, with will ear,
 to aid each nymph who for her succour cry. 
see how the tremble Arethusa fly
 through pathless wood, over rock and open plain;
 in vain to escape the ravisher she try,
 fast on her rapid flight Alpheus gain,
 and scarce her faint strength the unequal course sustain. 

and now more near his dread step she hear,
 his lengthen shadow fly before her foot,
 now over her neck his pant breath appear
 to part her lock, which, in disorder sweet,
 ambitious seem to fan the fervid heat
 that flush her glow cheek and charm:
 hear how her gasp sigh for aid entreat! 
 "Dictynna! pity see my just alarm,
 and snatch thy faint maid from those pollute arm." 

the goddess hear, and in a favour cloud
 conceal her suppliant from alpheus sight;
 in vain he look around, and call aloud,
 and wonder seek the trace of her flight:
 envelope, still she view he with affright,
 a icy coldness creep over all her frame,
 and soon, dissolve in a current bright,
 the silver stream retain her honour name,
 and still unmingled flow, and guard its, virgin fame. 

it be thus castalia sacred fountain spring,
 once a fair nymph by bright Apollo love:
 to Daphne too his amorous strain he sing,
 but sing in vain: her heart remain unmoved,
 no vain delight her modest virtue prove
 to be the theme of all his wanton lay:
 to shun the god the silvan scene she rove;
 nor prize the flattery of his tuneful praise,
 nor one relent smile his splendid gift can raise. 

yet be his lip with eloquence endue,
 and melt passion warble over his lyre,
 and have she yield listen as he woo,
 the virgin sure have catch the kindle fire,
 and fall a victim to impure desire;
 for safety cautious flight alone remain,
 while tear of tremble innocence require
 her parent aid: and lo! that aid obtain,
 how sudden her charm immortal laurel gain! 

dear to the muse still her honour live:
 and they too glory in their virgin name;
 to pure delight their tranquil hour they give,
 and fear to mingle with a gross flame
 the chaster fire which heaven have bid they claim:
 they smile when Pan, on ladon bank deceive,
 the fair syringa clasp, who, snatch from shame,
 already have her tuneful form receive,
 and to the breathe wind in airy music grieve. 

still in that tuneful form to Dian dear
 she bid it injure innocence befriend;
 command her train the sentence to revere,
 and in her grove the vocal reed suspend
 which virtue may from calumny defend;
 self-breathed, when virgin purity appear,
 what note melodious they spontaneous send! 
while the rash guilty nymph with horror hear
 deep groan declare her shame to awe-struck wonder ear. 

the spotless virgin shall unhurt approach
 the stream rude ordeal, and the sacred fire. 
see the pure maid, indignant of reproach,
 the dreadful test of innocence require
 amid the holy priest and virgin choir! 
see she leap fearless on the blaze shrine! 
the lambent flame, bright-circling, all aspire
 innoxious wreathe around her form to twine,
 and crown with lustrous beam the virgin brow divine. 

nor be the dare clusia then unsung,
 who plunge illustrious from the lofty tower;
 the favour wind around the virgin cling,
 and bear her harmless from the tyrant power:
 nor those, who Vesta in the try hour
 protect from slander, and restore to fame;
 nor clelia, shield from the arrowy shower;
 nor thou! who pure hand the sibyl claim,
 and bid the modest fane revere sulpicia name. 

over her soft cheek how arch the dimple play,
 while please the goddess hear sinope wile! 
how oft she mock the changeful lord of day,
 and many a silvan god who seek her smile:
 but chief when Jove she innocence beguile;
 "grant i a boon," the blush maid reply,
 urge by his suit: hope over his amorous toil
 exult dawn: — "thy oath be past," she cry;
 "unalterable pure thy spotless virgin die!" 

Rome shall for age boast lucretia name! 
and while its temple moulder into dust
 still triumph in Virginia rescue fame,
 and scipio victory over baffle lust: —
 even now the strain prophetical just,
 in unborn servant bid their queen rejoice,
 and in her british beauty firm trust;
 thrice happy fair! who still adore her voice,
 the blush virgin law, the modest matron choice! 

Psyche with ravish ear the strain attend,
 enrapture hang upon the heaven-strung lyre;
 her kindle soul from sensual earth ascend;
 to joy divine her pure thought aspire;
 she long to join the white robe spotless choir,
 and there for ever dwell a hallow guest:
 even love himself not long can inspire
 the wish of the soft enthusiast breast,
 who, fill with sacred zeal, will there for ever rest;

despise every mean low pursuit,
 and quite forgetful of her amorous care,
 all heedless of her knight, who sad and mute
 with wonder hear the strange ungrateful fair,
 a prostrate suppliant, pour the fervent prayer
 to be receive in, castabella train,
 and that in tranquil bliss seclude there,
 her happy votary still she may remain,
 free from each worldly care, and each pollute stain. 

with gracious smile the queen her favourite hear,
 and fond raise, and clasp she to her breast;
 a beam of triumph in her eye appear,
 while ardent Psyche offer her request,
 which to the indignant knight her pride confess:
 "farewell, mistaken Psyche!" he exclaim,
 rise at length with grief and shame oppress,
 since thy false heart a spouse divine disclaim,
 i leave thou to the pomp which here thy pride enflame. " 

 "yet stay, impetuous youth," the queen reply,
 abash, irresolute as Psyche stand,
 "my favourite happiness too dear i prize,
 far other service my soul demand
 than those which here in these sequester land
 her zeal will pay: no, let she bear my fame
 even to the bower where love himself command:
 there shall my votary reign secure from blame,
 and teach his myrtle grove to echo to my name. 

my lovely servant still defend from harm,
 and stem with her yond strong oppose tide:
 haste, bear she safe to her lover arm! 
be it thy care with steady course to guide
 the light-winged bark i will myself provide. 
depart in peace! thou choose of my heart! 
leave not thy faithful knight protect side. 
dear to i both, oh may no treacherous art
 your kindred soul divide, your fair alliance part! 

here rest tonight! tomorrow shall prepare
 the vessel which your destine course shall speed. 
lo! i consign my Psyche to thy care,
 oh gallant youth! for so have fate decree,
 and love himself shall pay the generous meed. " 
she say, and join their unreluctant hand. 
the grateful knight, from fear and sorrow free,
 receive with hope revive the dear command,
 and psyche modest eye no other law demand. 

now peace with downy step and silent hand
 prepare for each the couch of soft repose:
 fair attendant! she with whisper bland
 bid the obedient eye in slumber close;
 she too the first at early morning go
 with lightfoot cheerfulness the guest to greet,
 who soothe by quiet dream refresh arise,
 ready the labour of the day to meet;
 but first due homage pay at castabella foot. 

bright be the prospect which before they shine;
 gay dance the sunbeam over the tremble wave:
 who that the faithless ocean have not know,
 which now the strand in placid whisper lave,
 can ever believe the rage with which it rave
 when angry Boreas bid the storm arise,
 and call his wild wind from their wintery cave? 
now soft Favonius breathe his gentle sigh,
 auspicious omen wait, serene smile the sky. 

the eager mariner now seize the oar,
 the streamer flutter in the favour gale. 
nor unattended do they leave the shore:
 HYMEN, who smile shall over mischance prevail,
 sit at the helm, or spread the swell sail:
 swift through the part wave the vessel fly,
 and now at distance scarce can Psyche hail
 the shore, so fast recede from her eye,
 or bless the snowy cliff which over, the coast arise. 

please with her voyage and the novel scene,
 hope vivid ray her cheerful heart expand:
 delight now she eye the blue serene,
 the purple hill, and distant rise land,
 or, when the sky the silver queen command,
 in please silence listen to the oar
 dash by the frequent stroke of equal hand;
 or ask her knight if yet the promise shore
 may bless she long eye when morn shall light restore? 

the impatient question oft repeat thus
 he smile hear, and still with many a tale,
 or song of heavenly lore unknown to we
 beguile the live-long night, or flag sail
 when the fresh breeze begin their bark to fail. 
strong run the tide against the vessel course,
 and much they need the kind propitious gale
 steady to bear against its rapid force,
 and aid the labour oar, their tedious last resource. 

but lo! the blacken surface of the deep
 with sullen murmur now begin to swell,
 on ruffle wing the scream sea fowl sweep
 the unlovely surge, and piteous seem to tell
 how from the low-hung cloud with fury fall
 the demon of the tempest threaten rage;
 there, brood future terror, yet they dwell,
 till with collect force dread war they wage,
 and in convulsive gust the adverse wind engage. 

the tremble Psyche, supplicate heaven,
 lift to the storm her fate-deploring eye,
 see over her head the livid lightning drive:
 then, turn in horror from the blaze sky,
 cling to her knight in speechless agony:
 he all his force exert the bark to steer,
 and bid the mariner each effort try
 to escape the rocky coast which threaten near,
 for HYMEN teach the youth that dangerous shore to fear. 

who have not listen to his tuneful lay,
 that sing so well the hateful cave of spleen? 
those land, submit to her gloomy sway,
 now open to their view a dreary scene,
 as the sad subject of the sullen queen
 hang over the cliff, and blacken all the strand;
 and where the entrance of the cave be see
 a peevish, fretful, melancholy band,
 her ever wrangle slave, in jar concert stand. 

Driven by the hurricane they touch the shore,
 the frown guard prepare to seize their prey,
 the knight (attentive to the helm no more)
 resume his arm, and bid his shield display
 its brilliant, orb: "Psyche, let no dismay
" possess thy gentle breast, "he cheerly cry,
 behind thy knight in fearless safety stay,
 smile at the dart which over thou vain fly,
 secure from each attack their powerless rage despise. 

soon shall the fury of the wind be past,
 Serener sky shall brighten to our view,
 let we not yield to the imperious blast
 which now forbid our vessel to pursue
 its purpose course; soon shall the heaven renew
 their calm clear smile; and soon our coward foe,
 despair thus our courage to subdue,
 shall cease their idle-weapon to oppose,
 and unmolested peace restore our lose repose. " 

still as he speak, wherever he turn his shield
 the dart drop quiver from each slacken bow,
 unnerved each arm, no force remain to wield
 the weighty falchion, or the javelin throw;
 each voice half choke expire in murmur low,
 a dizzy mist obscure their wonder sight,
 their eye no more their wonted fury know,
 with stupid awe they gaze upon the knight,
 or, as his voice they hear, tremble disperse in flight. 

yet rage the storm with unabated power;
 a little creek the labour vessel gain;
 there they resolve to endure the bluster hour,
 the dash billow, and the beat rain. 
soon as the bark the shelter bay attain,
 and in the shallows moor secure ride,
 attentive still to soften all her pain,
 the watchful knight for psyche ease provide;
 some fisher hut perchance the shelve harbour hide. 

deep in the sterile bank a grotto stand,
 who wind cave repel the inclement air,
 wear in the hollow rock by many a flood
 and sound surge that dash its white foam there,
 the refuge now of a defenceless fair,
 who issue thence, with courteous kind intent
 approach the knight, and kind bid he share
 whatever good indulgent heaven have lend
 to cheer her hapless year in lonely suffering spend. 

more sweet than health fresh bloom the wan hue seem
 which sit upon her pallid cheek; her eye,
 her placid eye, with dove-like softness beam;
 her head unshielded from the pitiless sky,
 loose to the rude wild blast her tress fly,
 bare be her foot which press the shelly shore
 with firm unshrinking step; while smile
 she eye the dash billow as they roar,
 and brave the boisterous storm so oft endure before. 

long have she there in silent sorrow dwell,
 and many a year resign to grief have know;
 spleen cruel insolence she oft have feel,
 but never will the haughty tyrant own,
 nor heed the dart which, from a distance throw,
 screen by her cavern she can safe shun;
 the thorny brake she tread for food alone,
 drink the cold stream which near the grotto run,
 and bear the winter frost and scorch summer' sun. 

in early youth, exchange mutual vow,
 courage have woo and win his lovely bride;
 toss on those stormy sea, her dare spouse
 from her fond arm the cruel wave divide,
 and dash she faint on that rock rough side. 
still hope she keep, and still her constant heart
 expect to hail with each return tide
 his dear remember bark; hence can no art
 from those unlovely scene induce she to depart. 

when the vex sea their stormy mountain roll,
 she love the shipwreck mariner to cheer;
 the tremble wretch escape from spleen control,
 deep in her silent cell conceal his fear,
 and pant find repose and refuge here;
 benevolent skill each wound to heal,
 to she the sufferer fly, with will ear
 she woo they all their anguish to reveal,
 and while she speak, they half forget the woe they feel. 

now to her cave have patience gentle bring
 Psyche, yet shudder at the fearful blast,
 large she heap with hospitable thought
 the blaze pile, and spread the pure repast;
 over her chill form her own soft mantle cast,
 and soothe her weary spirit to repose,
 till all the fury of the storm be past,
 till swift recede cloud the heaven disclose,
 and over subside wave pacific sunshine glow. 
