[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book ii.

the time-piece.

oh for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
 some boundless continguity of shade,
 where rumour of oppression and deceit,
 of unsuccessful or successful war
 may never reach i more. my ear be pain,
 my soul be sick with every day report
 of wrong and outrage with which earth be fill. 
there be no flesh in man obdurate heart,
 it do not feel for man. the natural bond
 of brotherhood be sever as the flax
 that fall asunder at the touch of fire. 
he find his fellow guilty of a skin
 not colour like his own, and have power
 the enforce the wrong, for such a worthy cause
 doom and devote he as his lawful prey. 
land intersect by a narrow frith
 abhor each other. mountain interpose,
 make enemy of nation who have else
 like kindred drop be mingle into one. 
thus man devote his brother, and destroy;
 and worse than all, and most to be deplore
 as human nature broad, foul blot,
 chain he, and task he, and exact his sweat
 with stripe, that mercy with a bleed heart
 weep when she see inflict on a beast. 
then what be man? and what man see this,
 and have human feeling, do not blush
 and hang his head, to think himself a man? 
i will not have a slave to till my ground,
 to carry i, to fan i while i sleep,
 and tremble when i wake, for all the wealth
 that sinew buy and sell have ever earn. 
no: dear as freedom be, and in my heart
 just estimation prize above all price,
 i have much rather be myself the slave
 and wear the bond, than fasten they on he. 
we have no slave at home. — then why abroad? 
and they themselves once serried over the wave
 that part we, be emancipate and loose. 
slave can breathe in England; if their lung
 receive our air, that moment they be free,
 they touch our country and their shackle fall. 
that be noble, and bespeak a nation proud
 and jealous of the blessing. spread it then,
 and let it circulate through every vein
 of all your empire. that where britain power
 be feel, mankind may feel her mercy too. 

sure there be need of social intercourse,
 benevolence and peace and mutual aid
 between the nation, in a world that seem
 to toll the death-bell of its own decease,
 and by the voice of all its element
 to preach the general doom. when be the wind
 let slip with such a warrant to destroy,
 when do the wave so haughty overleap
 their ancient barrier, deluge the dry? 
fire from beneath, and meteor from above
 portentous, unexampled, unexplained,
 have kindle beacon in the sky, and the old
 and crazy earth have have her shake fit
 more frequent, and forgo her usual rest. 
be it a time to wrangle, when the prop
 and pillar of our planet seem to fail,
 and nature with a dim and sickly eye
 to wait the close of all? but grant her end
 more distant, and that prophecy demand
 a long respite, unaccomplished yet;
 still they be frown signal, and bespeak
 displeasure in his breast who smite the earth
 or heal it, make it languish or rejoice. 
and it be but seemly, that where all deserve
 and stand expose by common peccancy
 to what not few have feel, there shall be peace,
 and brother in calamity shall love. 

alas for Sicily! rude fragment now
 lie scatter where the shapely column stand. 
her palace be dust. in all her street
 the voice of sing and the sprightly chord
 be silent. revelry and dance and show
 suffer a syncope and solemn pause,
 while god perform upon the tremble stage
 of his own work, his dreadful part alone. 
how do the earth receive he? — with what sign
 of gratulation and delight, her king? 
pour she not all her choice fruit abroad,
 her sweet flower, her aromatic gum,
 disclose paradise wherever he tread? 
she quake at his approach. her hollow womb
 conceive thunder, through a thousand deep
 and fiery cavern roar beneath his foot. 
the hill move light and the mountain smoke,
 for he have touch they. from the extreme point
 of elevation down into the abyss,
 his wrath be busy and his frown be feel. 
the rock fall headlong and the valley rise,
 the river die into offensive pool,
 and charge with putrid verdure, breathe a gross
 and mortal nuisance into all the air. 
what solid be, by transformation strange
 grow fluid, and the fix and root earth
 torment into billow heave and swell,
 or with vortiginous and hideous whirl
 suck down its prey insatiable. immense
 the tumult and the overthrow, the pang
 and agony of human and of brute
 multitude, fugitive on every side,
 and fugitive in vain. the sylvan scene
 migrate uplift, and with all its soil
 alight in far distant field, find out
 a new possessor, and survive the change. 
ocean have catch the frenzy, and upwrought
 to a enormous and overbear height,
 not by a mighty wind, but by that voice
 which wind and wave obey, invade the shore
 resistless. never such a sudden flood,
 upridge so high, and send on such a charge,
 possess a inland scene. where now the throng
 that press the beach and hasty to depart
 look to the sea for safety? they be go,
 go with the refluent wave into the deep,
 a prince with half his people. ancient tower,
 and roof embattle high, the gloomy scene
 where beauty oft and letter worth consume
 life in the unproductive shade of death,
 fall prone; the pale inhabitant come forth,
 and happy in their unforeseen release
 from all the rigour of restraint, enjoy
 the terror of the day that set they free. 
who then that have thou, will not hold thou fast
 freedom! who they that lose thou, so regret,
 that even a judgement make way for thou,
 seem in their eye, a mercy, for thy sake. 

such evil sin have wrought; and such a flame
 kindle in heaven, that it burn down to earth,
 and in the furious inquest that it make
 on God behalf, lay waste his fair work. 
the very element, though each be mean
 the minister of man, to serve his want,
 conspire against he. with his breath, he draw
 a plague into his blood. and can use
 life necessary mean, but he must die. 
storm rise to overwhelm he: or if stormy wind
 rise not, the water of the deep shall rise,
 and need none assistance of the storm,
 shall roll themselves ashore, and reach he there. 
the earth shall shake he out of all his hold,
 or make his house his grave. nor so content,
 shall counterfeit the motion of the flood,
 and drown he in her dry and dusty gulf. 
what then — be they the wicked above all,
 and we the righteous, who fast-anchored isle
 move not, while they be rock like a light skiff,
 the sport of every wave? no: none be clear,
 and none than we more guilty. but where all
 stand chargeable with guilt, and to the shaft
 of wrath obnoxious, god may choose his mark. 
may punish, if he please, the less, to warn
 the more malignant. if he spare not they,
 tremble and be amaze at thy escape
 far guilty England, lest he spare not thou. 

happy the man who see a god employ
 in all the good and ill that chequer life! 
resolve all event with their effect
 and manifold result, into the will
 and arbitration wise of the supreme. 
do not his eye rule all thing, and intend
 the least of our concern (since from the least
 the great oft originate) can chance
 find place in his dominion, or dispose
 one lawless particle to thwart his plan,
 then god may be surprise, and unforeseen
 contingence may alarm he, and disturb
 the smooth and equal course of his affair. 
this truth, philosophy, though eagle-eyed
 in nature tendency, oft overlook,
 and have find his instrument, forget
 or disregard, or more presumptuous still
 deny the power that wield it. god proclaim
 his hot displeasure against foolish man
 that live a atheist life. involve the heaven
 in tempest, quit his grasp upon the wind
 and give they all their fury. bid a plague
 kindle a fiery boil upon the skin,
 and putrify the breath of bloom health. 
he call for famine, and the meager fiend
 blow mildew from between his shrivel lip,
 and taint the golden ear. he spring his mine,
 and desolate a nation at a blast. 
forth step the spruce philosopher, and tell
 of homogeneal and discordant spring
 and principle; of cause how they work
 by necessary law their sure effect,
 of action and re-action. he have find
 the source of the disease that nature feel,
 and bid the world take heart and banish fear. 
thou fool! will thy discovery of the cause
 suspend the effect or heal it? have not god
 still wrought by mean since first he make the world,
 and do he not of old employ his mean
 to drown it? what be his creation less
 than a capacious reservoir of mean
 form for his use, and ready at his will? 
go, dress thy eye with eye-salve, ask of he,
 or ask of whomsoever he have teach,
 and learn, though late, the genuine cause of all. 

England, with all thy fault, i love thou still
 my country! and while yet a nook be leave
 where english mind and manner may be find,
 shall be constrain to love thou. though thy clime
 be fickle, and thy year, most part, deform
 with drip rain, or wither by a frost,
 i will not yet exchange thy sullen sky
 and field without a flower, for warm France
 with all her vine; nor for ausonias grove
 of golden fruitage and her myrtle bower. 
to shake thy senate, and from height sublime
 of patriot eloquence to flash down fire
 upon thy foe, be never mean my task;
 but i can feel thy fortune, and partake
 thy joy and sorrow with as true a heart
 as any thunderer there. and i can feel
 thy folly too, and with a just disdain
 frown at effeminate, who very look
 reflect dishonour on the land i love. 
how, in the name of soldiership and sense,
 shall England prosper, when such thing, as smooth
 and tender as a girl, all essence over
 with odour, and as profligate as sweet,
 who sell their laurel for a myrtle wreath,
 and love when they shall fight; when such as these
 presume to lay their hand upon the ark
 of her magnificent and awful cause? 
time be when it be praise and boast enough
 in every clime, and travel where we may,
 that we be bear her child. praise enough
 to fill the ambition of a private man,
 that chatham language be his mother tongue,
 and wolf great name compatriot with his own. 
farewell those honour, and farewell with they
 the hope of such hereafter. they have fall
 each in his field of glory: one in arm,
 and one in council. Wolfe upon the lap
 of smile victory that moment win,
 and Chatham, heart-sick of his country shame. 
they make we many soldier. Chatham still
 consult England happiness at home,
 secure it by a unforgive frown
 if any wrong she. wolf, wherever he fight,
 put so much of his heart into his act,
 that his example have a magnet force,
 and all be swift to follow who all love. 
those sun be set. oh rise some other such! 
or all that we have leave, be empty talk
 of old achievement, and despair of new. 

now hoist the sail, and let the streamer float
 upon the wanton breeze. strew the deck
 with lavender, and sprinkle liquid sweet,
 that no rude savour maritime invade
 the nose of nice nobility. breathe soft
 you clarionet, and soft still the flute,
 that wind and water lull by magic sound
 may bear we smooth to the Gallic shore. 
true, we have lose a empire — let it pass. 
true, we may thank the perfidy of France
 that pick the jewel out of England crown,
 with all the cunning of a envious shrew. 
and let that pass — it be but a trick of state. 
a brave man know no malice, but at once
 forget in peace, the injury of war,
 and give his dire foe a friend embrace. 
and shame as we have be, to the very beard
 brave and defy, and in our own sea prove
 too weak for those decisive blow, that once
 insure we mastery there, we yet retain
 some small preeminence, we just boast
 at least superior jockeyship, and claim
 the honour of the turf as all our own. 
go then, well worthy of the praise you seek,
 and show the shame you may conceal at home,
 in foreign eye! — by groom, and win the plate,
 where once your noble father win a crown! —
 it be generous to communicate your skill
 to those that need it. folly be soon learn. 
and under such preceptor, who can fail. 

there be a pleasure in poetic pain
 which only poet know. the shift and turn,
 the expedient and invention multiform
 to which the mind resort, in chace of term
 though apt, yet coy, and difficult to win —
 the arrest the fleet image that fill
 the mirror of the mind, and hold they fast,
 and force they sit, until he have pencil off
 a faithful likeness of the form he view;
 then to dispofe his copy with such art
 that each may find its most propitious light,
 and shine by situation, hardly less,
 than by the labour and the skill it cost,
 be occupation of the poet mind
 so please, and that steal away the thought
 with such address, from theme of sad import,
 that lose in his own muse, happy man! 
he feel the anxiety of life, deny
 their wonted entertainment, all retire. 
such joy have he that sing. but ah! not such,
 or seldom such, the hearer of his song. 
fastidious, or else listless, or perhaps
 aware of nothing arduous in a task
 they never undertake, they little note
 his danger or escape, and haply find
 there least amusement where he find the most. 
but be amusement all? studious of song,
 and yet ambitious not to sing in vain,
 i will not trifle mere, though the world
 be loud in their praise who do no more. 
yet what can satire, whether grave or gay? 
it may correct a foible, may chastise
 the freak of fashion, regulate the dress,
 retrench a sword-blade, or displace a patch;
 but where be its sublime trophy find? 
what vice have it subdue? who heart reclaim
 by rigour, or who laugh into reform? 
alas! leviathan be not so tame. 
laugh at, he laugh again; and strike hard,
 turn to the stroke his adamantine scale,
 that fear no discipline of human hand. 

the pulpit therefore (and i name it, fill
 with solemn awe, that bid i well beware
 with what intent i touch that holy thing)
 the pulpit (when the satirist have at last,
 strut and vapour in a empty school,
 spend all his force and make no proselyte)
 i say the pulpit (in the sober use
 of its legitimate peculiar power)
 must stand acknowledge, while the world shall stand,
 the most important and effectual guard,
 support and ornament of virtue cause. 
there stand the messenger of truth. there stand
 the legate of the sky. his theme divine,
 his office sacred, his credential clear. 
by he, the violate law speak out
 its thunder, and by he, in strain as sweet
 as angel use, the gospel whisper peace. 
he stablish the strong, restore the weak,
 reclaim the wanderer, bind the break heart,
 and arm himself in panoply complete
 of heavenly temper, furnish with arm
 bright as his own, and train by every rule
 of holy discipline, to glorious war,
 the sacramental host of God elect. 
be all such teacher? will to heaven all be! 
but hark — the doctor voice — fast wedge between
 two empiric he stand, and with swell cheek
 inspire the news, his trumpet. keen far
 than all invective be his bold harangue,
 while through that public organ of report
 he hail the clergy; and defy shame,
 announce to the world his own and they. 
he teach those to read, who school dismiss,
 and college untaught; sell accent, tone,
 and emphasis in score, and give to prayer
 the adagio and andante it demand. 
he grind divinity of other day
 down into modern use; transform old print
 to zig-zag manuscript, and cheat the eye
 of gallery critic by a thousand art. —
 be there who purchase of the doctor ware! 
oh name it not in Gath! — it can be,
 that grave and learned clerk shall need such aid. 
he doubtless be in sport, and do but droll,
 assume thus a rank unknown before,
 grand caterer and dry-nurse of the church. 

i venerate the man, who heart be warm,
 who hand be pure, who doctrine and who life
 coincident, exhibit lucid proof
 that he be honest in the sacred cause. 
to such i render more than mere respect,
 who action say that they respect themselves. 
but loose in moral, and in manner vain,
 in conversation frivolous, in dress
 extreme, at once rapacious and profuse,
 frequent in park, with lady at his side,
 amble and prattle scandal as he go,
 but rare at home, and never at his book
 or with his pen, save when he scrawl a card;
 constant at rout, familiar with a round
 of ladyship, a stranger to the poor;
 ambitious of preferment for its gold,
 and well prepare by ignorance and sloth,
 by infidelity and love of the world
 to make God work a sinecure; a slave
 to his own pleasure and his patron pride. —
 from such apostle, oh you mitred head
 preserve the church! and lay not careless hand
 on scull that can teach, and will not learn. 

will i describe a preacher, such as Paul
 be he on earth, will hear, approve, and own,
 Paul shall himself direct i. i will trace
 his master-stroke, and draw from his design. 
i will express he simple, grave, sincere;
 in doctrine uncorrupt; in language plain;
 and plain in manner. decent, solemn, chaste,
 and natural in gesture. much impress
 himself, as conscious of his awful charge,
 and anxious main that the flock he feed
 may feel it too. affectionate in look,
 and tender in address, as well become
 a messenger of grace to guilty man. 
behold the picture! — be it like? — like who? 
the thing that mount the rostrum with a skip
 and then skip down again. pronounce a text,
 cry, hem; and read what they never write
 just fifteen minute, huddle up their work,
 and with a well breed whisper close the scene. 

in man or woman, but far most in man,
 and most of all in man that minister
 and serve the altar, in my soul i loath
 all affectation. it be my perfect scorn;
 object of my implacable disgust. 
what! — will a man play trick; will he indulge
 a silly fond conceit of his fair form
 and just proportion, fashionable mien
 and pretty face in presence of his god? 
or will he seek to dazzle i with trope,
 as with the diamond on his lily hand,
 and play his brilliant part before my eye
 when i be hungry for the bread of life? 
he mock his maker, prostitute and shame
 his noble office, and instead of truth
 display his own beauty, starve his flock. 
therefore avaunt! all attitude and stare
 and start theatric, practise at the glass. 
i seek divine simplicity in he
 who handle thing divine; and all beside,
 though learn with labour, and though much admire
 by curious eye and judgment ill-informed,
 to i be odious as the nasal twang
 at conventicle hear, where worthy man
 mislead by custom, strain celestial theme
 through the press nostril, spectacle-bestrid. 
some, decent in demeanour while they preach,
 that task perform, relapse into themselves,
 and have speak wise, at the close
 grow wanton, and give proof to every eye —
 whoever be edify, themselves be not. 
forth come the pocket mirror. first we stroke
 a eye-brow; next, compose a straggle lock;
 then with a air, most graceful perform,
 fall back into our seat; extend a arm
 and lay it at its ease with gentle care,
 with handkerchief in hand, depend low. 
the better hand more busy, give the nose
 its bergamot, or aid the indebt eye
 with opera glass to watch the move scene,
 and recognize the slow-retiring fair. 
now this be fulsome; and offend i more
 than in a churchman slovenly neglect
 and rustic coarseness will. a heavenly mind
 may be indifferent to her house of clay,
 and slight the hovel as beneath her care;
 but how a body so fantastic, trim,
 and quaint in its deportment and attire,
 can lodge a heavenly mind — demand a doubt. 

he that negotiate between god and man,
 as God ambassador, the grand concern
 of judgement and of mercy, shall beware
 of lightness in his speech. it be pitiful
 to court a grin, when you shall woo a soul;
 to break a jest, when pity will inspire
 pathetic exhortation; and to address
 the skittish fancy with facetious tale,
 when send with God commission to the heart. 
so do not Paul. direct i to a quip
 or merry turn in all he ever write,
 and i consent you take it for your text,
 your only one, till side and bench fail. 
no: he be serious in a serious cause,
 and understand too well the weighty term
 that he have take in charge. he will not stoop
 to conquer those by jocular exploit,
 who truth and soberness assail in vain. 

oh, popular applause! what heart of man
 be proof against thy sweet seduce charm? 
the wise and the best feel urgent need
 of all their caution in thy gentle gale;
 but swell into a gust — who then, alas! 
with all his canvas set, and inexpert
 and therefore heedless, can withstand thy power? 
praise from the rivele lip of toothless, bald
 decrepitude; and in the look of lean
 and crave poverty; and in the bow
 respectful of the smutched artificer
 be oft too welcome, and may much disturb
 the bias of the purpose. how much more
 pour forth by beauty splendid and polite,
 in language soft as adoration breathe? 
ah spare your idol! think he human still. 
charm he may have, but he have frailty too,
 dote not too much, nor spoil what you admire. 

all truth be from the sempiternal source
 of light divine. but Egypt, Greece, and Rome
 draw from the stream below. more favour we
 drink, when we choose it, at the fountain head. 
to they it flow much mingle and defile
 with hurtful error, prejudice, and dream
 illusive of philosophy, so call,
 but false. sage after sage strive
 in vain, to filter off a crystal draught
 pure from the lees, which often more enhance
 the thirst than slake it, and not seldom breed
 intoxication and delirium wild. 
in vain they push enquiry to the birth
 and springtime of the world, ask, whence be man? 
why form at all? and wherefore as he be? 
where must he find his maker? with what rite
 adore he? will he hear, accept, and bless? 
or do he sit regardless of his work? 
have man within he a immortal seed? 
or do the tomb take all? if he survive
 his ash, where? and in what weal or woe? 
knot worthy of solution, which alone
 a deity can solve. their answer vague
 and all at random, fabulous and dark,
 leave they as dark themselves. their rule of life
 defective and unsanctioned, prove too weak
 to bind the rove appetite, and lead
 blind nature to a god not yet reveal. 
it be revelation satisfy all doubt,
 explain all mystery, except her own,
 and so illuminate the path of life,
 that fool discover it, and stray no more. 
now tell i, dignify and sapient sir,
 my man of moral, nurture in the shade
 of Academus, be this false or true? 
be Christ the able teacher, or the school? 
if Christ, then why resort at every turn
 to Athens or to Rome, for wisdom short
 of man occasion, when in he reside
 grace, knowledge, comfort, a unfathomed store? 
how oft when Paul have serve we with a text,
 have Epictetus, Plato, Tully preach! 
man that if now alive, will sit content
 and humble learner of a saviour worth,
 preach it who might. such be their love of truth,
 their thirst of knowledge, and their candour too. 

and thus it be. the pastor, either vain
 by nature, or by flattery make so, teach
 to gaze at his own splendour, and to exalt
 absurd, not his office, but himself;
 or unenlightened, and too proud to learn,
 or vicious, and not therefore apt to teach,
 pervert often by the stress of lewd
 and loose example, who he shall instruct,
 expose and hold up to broad disgrace
 the noble function, and discredit much
 the bright truth that man have ever see. 
for ghostly counsel, if it either fall
 below the exigence, or be not back
 with show of love, at least with hopeful proof
 of some sincerity on the giver part;
 or be dishonour in the exterior form
 and mode of its conveyance, by such trick
 as move derision, or by foppish air
 and histrionic mummery, that let down
 the pulpit to the level of the stage,
 drop from the lip a disregard thing. 
the weak perhaps be move, but be not teach;
 while prejudice in man of strong mind
 take deep root, confirm by what they see. 
a relaxation of religion hold
 upon the rove and untutored heart
 soon follow, and the curb of conscience snap,
 the laity run wild. — but do they now? 
note their extravagance, and be convince. 

as nation ignorant of god, contrive
 a wooden one, so we, no long teach
 by monitor that mother church supply,
 now make our own. posterity will ask
 (if ever posterity see verse of i)
 some fifty or a hundred lustrum hence,
 what be a monitor in George day? 
my very gentle reader, yet unborn,
 of who i needs must augur better thing,
 since heaven will sure grow weary of a world
 productive only of a race like we,
 a monitor be wood. plank shave thin. 
we wear it at our back. there close brace
 and neat fit, it compress hard
 the prominent and most unsightly bone,
 and bind the shoulder flat. we prove its use
 sovereign and most effectual to secure
 a form not now gymnastic as of yore,
 from rickets and distortion, else, our lot. 
but thus admonish we can walk erect,
 one proof at least of manhood; while the friend
 stick close, a Mentor worthy of his charge. 
our habit costly than Lucullus wear,
 and by caprice as multiply as he,
 just please we while the fashion be at full,
 but change with every moon. the sycophant
 that wait to dress we, arbitrate their date,
 survey his fair reversion with keen eye;
 find one ill make, another obsolete,
 this fit not nice, that be ill conceive,
 and make prize of all that he condemn,
 with our expenditure defray his own. 
variety the very spice of life
 that give it all its flavor. we have run
 through every change that fancy at the loom
 exhaust, have have genius to supply,
 and studious of mutation still, discard
 a real elegance a little use
 for monstrous novelty and strange disguise. 
we sacrifice to dress, till household joy
 and comfort cease. dress drain our cellar dry,
 and keep our larder lean. put out our fire,
 and introduce hunger, frost, and woe,
 where peace and hospitality may reign. 
what man that live and that know how to live,
 will fail to exhibit at the public show
 a form as splendid as the proud there,
 though appetite raise outcry at the cost? 
a man of the town dine late, but soon enough
 with reasonable forecast and dispatch,
 the insure a side-box station at half price. 
you think perhaps, so delicate his dress,
 his daily fare as delicate. alas! 
he pick clean tooth, and busy as he seem
 with a old tavern quill, be hungry yet. 
the rout be folly circle which she draw
 with magic wand. so potent be the spell,
 that none decoy into that fatal ring,
 unless by heaven peculiar grace, escape. 
there we grow early grey, but never wise. 
there form connexion, and acquire no friend. 
solicit pleasure hopeless of success;
 waste youth in occupation only fit
 for second childhood, and devote old age
 to sport which only childhood can excuse. 
there they be happy who dissemble best
 their weariness; and they the most polite
 who squander time and treasure with a smile
 though at their own destruction. she that ask
 her dear five hundred friend, contemn they all,
 and hate their come. they, what can they less? 
make just reprisal, and with cringe and shrug
 and bow obsequious, hide their hate of she. 
all catch the frenzy, downward from her grace
 who flambeaux flash against the morning sky,
 and gild our chamber ceiling as they pass,
 to she who frugal only that her thrift. 
may feed excess she can ill afford,
 be hackneyed home unlacquey. who in haste
 alight, turn the key in her own door,
 and at the watchman lantern borrow light,
 find a cold bed her only comfort leave. 
wife beggar husband, husband starve their wife,
 on fortune velvet altar offer up
 their last poor pittance. fortune most severe
 of goddess yet know, and costly far
 than all that hold their rout in heathen heaven —
 so fare we in this prisonhouse the world. 
and it be a fearful spectacle to see
 so many maniac dance in their chain. 
they gaze upon the link that hold they fast
 with eye of anguish, execrate their lot,
 then shake they in despair, and dance again. 

now basket up the family of plague
 that waste our vital. peculation, sale
 of honour, perjury, corruption, fraud
 by forgery, by subterfuge of law,
 by trick and lie as numerous and as keen
 as the necessity their author feel;
 then cast they close bundle, every brat
 at the right door. profusion be its sire. 
profusion unrestrained, with all that be base
 in character, have litter all the land,
 and breed within the memory of no few
 a priesthood such as baal be of old,
 a people such as never be until now. 
it be a hungry vice: — it eat up all
 that give society its beauty, strength,
 convenience, and security, and use. 
make man mere vermin, worthy to be trap
 and gibbete as fast as catchpole claw
 can seize the slippery prey. untie the knot
 of union, and convert the sacred band
 that hold mankind together, to a scourge. 
profusion deluge a state with lust
 of gross nature and of worst effect,
 prepare it for its ruin. harden, blind,
 and warp the conscience of public man
 till they can laugh at virtue; mock the fool
 that trust they; and in the end, disclose a face
 that will have shock credulity herself
 unmask, vouchsafe this their sole excuse,
 since all alike be selfish — why not they? 
this do profusion, and the accurse cause
 of such deep mischief, have itself a cause. 

in college and hall, in ancient day,
 when learning, virtue, piety and truth
 be precious, and inculcate with care,
 there dwell a sage call discipline. his head
 not yet by time complete silvered over,
 bespeak he past the bound of freakish youth,
 but strong for service still, and unimpaired. 
his eye be meek and gentle, and a smile
 play on his lip, and in his speech be hear
 paternal sweetness, dignity, and love. 
the occupation dear to his heart
 be to encourage goodness. he will stroke
 the head of modest and ingenuous worth
 that blush at its own praise, and press the youth
 close to his side that please he. learning grow
 beneath his care, a thrive vigorous plant;
 the mind be well inform, the passion hold
 subordinate, and diligence be choice. 
if ever it chance, as sometime chance it must,
 that one among so many overleap
 the limit of controul, his gentle eye
 grow stern, and dart a severe rebuke;
 his frown be full of terror, and his voice
 shake the delinquent with such fit of awe
 as leave he not, till penitence have win
 lose favour back again, and close the breach. 
but discipline, a faithful servant long,
 decline at length into the vale of year;
 a palsy strike his arm, his sparkle eye
 be quench in rheum of age, his voice unstring
 grow tremulous, and move derision more
 than reverence, in perverse rebellious youth. 
so college and hall neglect much
 their good old friend, and discipline at length
 overlook and unemployed, fall sick and die. 
then study languish, emulation sleep,
 and virtue flee. the school become a scene
 of solemn farce, where ignorance in stilt,
 his cap well line with logic not his own,
 with parrot tongue perform the scholar part,
 proceed soon a graduate dunce. 
then compromise have place, and scrutiny
 become stone-blind, precedence go in truck,
 and he be competent who purse be so. 
a dissolution of all bond ensue,
 the curb invent for the muleish mouth
 of headstrong youth be break; bar and bolt
 grow rusty by disuse, and massy gate
 forget their office, open with a touch;
 until gown at length be find mere masquerade;
 the tasselled cap and the spruce band a jest,
 a mockery of the world. what need of these
 for gamester, jockey, brotheller impure,
 spendthrift and boot sportsman, often see
 with belt waist and pointer at their heel,
 than in the bound of duty? what be learn,
 if aught be learn in childhood, be forget,
 and such expense as pinch parent blue,
 and mortify the liberal hand of love,
 be squander in pursuit of idle sport
 and vicious pleasure. buy the boy a name,
 that sit a stigma on his father house,
 and cleave through life inseparable close
 to he that wear it. what can atter-game
 of riper joy, and commerce with the world,
 the lewd vain world that must receive he soon,
 add to such erudition thus acquire
 where science and where virtue be profess? 
they may confirm his habit, rivet fast
 his folly, but to spoil he be a task
 that bid defiance to the unite power
 of fashion, dissipation, tavern, stew. 
now, blame we most the nurseling or the nurse? 
the child crooked and twist and deform
 through want of care, or she who wink eye
 and slumber oscitancy mar the brood? 
the nurse no doubt. regardless of her charge
 she need herself correction. need to learn
 that it be dangerous sport with the world,
 with thing so sacred as a nation trust,
 the nurture of her youth, her dear pledge. 

all be not such. i have a brother once. —
 peace to the memory of a man of worth;
 a man of letter, and of manner too. 
of manner sweet as virtue always wear,
 when gay good-nature dress she in smile. 
he grace a college in which order yet
 be sacred, and be honour, love and weep
 by more than one, themselves conspicuous there. 
some mind be tempere happy, and mix
 with such ingredient of good sense and taste
 of what be excellent in man, they thirst
 with such a zeal to be what they approve,
 that no restraint can circumscribe they more,
 than they themselves by choice, for wisdom sake. 
nor can example hurt they. what they see
 of vice in other but enhance more
 the charm of virtue in their just esteem. 
if such escape contagion, and emerge
 pure, from so foul a pool, to shine abroad,
 and give the world their talent and themselves,
 small thanks to those who negligence or sloth
 expose their inexperience to the snare,
 and leave they to a undirected choice. 

see then! the quiver break and decay
 in which be keep our arrow. rust there
 in wild disorder and unfit for use,
 what wonder if discharge into the world
 they shame their shooter with a random flight,
 their point obtuse, and feather drink with wine. 
well may the church wage unsuccessful war
 with such artillery arm. vice parry wide
 the undreaded volley with a sword of straw,
 and stand a impudent and fearless mark. 

have we not track the felon home, and find
 his birth-place and his dam? the country mourn,
 mourn, because every plague that can infest
 society, and that saps and worm the base
 of the edifice that policy have raise,
 swarm in all quarter; meet the eye, the ear,
 and suffocate the breath at every turn. 
profusion breed they. and the cause itself
 of that calamitous mischief have be find. 
find too where most offensive, in the skirt
 of the robe pedagogue. else, let the arraign
 stand up unconscious and refute the charge. 
so when the Jewish leader stretch his arm
 and wave his rod divine, a race obscene
 spawn in the muddy bed of Nile, come forth
 pollute aegypt. garden, field, and plain
 be cover with the pest. the street be fill;
 the croak nuisance lurk in every nook,
 nor palace nor even chamber escape,
 and the land stink, so numerous be the fry. 
