to the learnt and ingenious dr. Musgrave of Exeter.

1. 

those who like i their gratitude will show,
be grieve to think they still must owe:
be still oblige, and never know the way
the small part of the vast sum to pay:
a sum beyond the arithmetic of thought,
and which do daily high rise:
to be your debtor be no more my fault,
the whole that i can give, will not suffice:
i be too poor return to make,
unless you will thanks as a requital take:
thanks be the whole that i can bring:
my muse shall of your wondrous bounty sing;
your generous temper to the world make know,
that generous temper you have so often show,
and which i still must with the high praise own.

2. 

but what, alas, be it i say!
can i with thanks for a love daughter pay?
can her dear life that be owe to your care,
any proportion to such trifle bear?
with weep eye i see her faint lie,
gasp for breath,
but see no safety nigh.
as some poor wretch who from the distant shore,
and with insult wave quite cover over,
with piteous cry do for assistance pray,
and strive to escape the liquid death;
thus almost lose your helpless patient lay,
to the devour water leave a prey,
till she be rescue by your hand:
by such amaze skill, and depth of thought,
once more into the number of the live bring:
where she the trophy of your art do his stand,
that powerful art, which hitherto do save
a life, which long since seem determine to the grave.

3. 

under your care while she remain,
each day she strength and spirit gain:
her health such quick advance make,
that all with wonder do its progress view,
and when they look on she, applaud you:
but since she from your care be snatch away
like plant which want revive ray,
she withereth in the shade,
and hourly do decay:
have heaven design her length of day,
she never have be from you remove,
but fate to she have inauspicious prove:
weak as she be, she still do thanks repay,
do still your former favour own,
those kindness you have in her sickness show;
and in the fit word that she can frame,
she strive to pay her homage to your fame,
and add a worthless mite to the glory of your name.

4. 

but by a child, and one so young,
there can be no become praise sing:
i will undertake the task, and try
if i can her defect supply:
my muse shall strive to make your virtue know;
those virtue which you modest conceal,
she shall to the applaud world reveal:
your prudence, truth, and justice shall rehearse,
though each alone
will prove a copious subject for her verse:
and you to all mankind shall recommend,
for the sincere, most oblige friend,
for one in who they may confide, on who they may depend:
for one who be bless with all they can desire,
with whatsoever can esteem engage;
with all those quality in one combine,
which single they admire,
and can but seldom find:
who to the coolness of deliberate age,
have add all that sprightly youthful fire,
which do the noble thought inspire:
to solid judgement, elevate sense,
and all the knowledge learning can dispense,
have join the charm of powerful eloquence.

5. 

you like a second Æsculapius rise,
before you fame, that noisy goddess, fly,
and musgrave name be echo through the sky:
the obsequious mountain answer to the sound,
and friendly wind disperse the glorious accent round.
disease yield; they to your art submit,
and health do on your step attend;
when you appear, death must her conquest quit;
she dare not touch what you defend:
murmur she fly, grieve at her loss of power;
and find she must not now with so much ease devour,
long may you live the bless of this isle,
from every pain, and every ill secure;
on you may fortune ever smile,
and still your happiness ensure.
o may we long your conversation have,
and with the sweet of friendship bless,
for numerous year defeat the grave,
and keep you back from everlasting rest;
till tire with length of day, and crown with fame,
you the great privilege of die claim,
please to live only here in a immortal name.
