[the botanic garden. part i  the economy of vegetation.]

[CANTO I.] 

argument of the first Canto.

the economy of vegetation.

Canto i 

 "stay your rude step! who throb breast enfold
 the legion-fiend of glory, or of gold! 
stay! who false lip seductive simper part,
 while cunning nestle in the harlot-heart! —
 for you no dryad dress the roseate bower,
 for you no nymph their sparkle vase pour;
 unmarked by you, light grace swim the green,
 and hover cupid aim their shaft, unseen. 

 "but thou! who mind the well-attempered ray
 of taste and virtue light with pure day;
 who fine sense each soft vibration own
 with sweet responsive sympathy of tone;
 so the fair flower expand it be lucid form
 to meet the sun, and shut it to the storm; —
 for thou my border nurse the fragrant wreath,
 my fountain murmur, and my zephyr breathe;
 slow slide the paint snail, the gild fly
 smooth his fine down, to charm thy curious eye;
 on twinkle fin my pearly nation play,
 or win with sinuous train their trackless way;
 my plumy pair in gay embroidery dress
 form with ingenious bill the pensile nest,
 to love sweet note attune the listen dell,
 and echo sound her soft symphonious shell

 "and, if with thou some hapless maid shall stray,
 disastrous love companion of her way,
 oh, lead her timid step to yonder glade,
 who arch cliff depend alder shade;
 there, as meek evening wake her temperate breeze,
 and moonbeam glimmer through the tremble tree,
 the rill, that gurgle round, shall soothe her ear,
 the weep rock shall number tear for tear;
 there as sad philomel, alike forlorn,
 sing to the night from her accustom thorn;
 while at sweet interval each fall note
 sigh in the gale, and whisper round the grot;
 the sister-woe shall calm her ache breast,
 and soft slumber steal her care to rest. —

 "wind of the north! restrain your icy gale,
 nor chill the bosom of these happy vale! 
hence in dark heap, you gather cloud, revolve! 
disperse, you lightning! and, you mist, dissolve!
 — hither, emerge from you orient sky,
 botanic goddess! bend thy radiant eye;
 over these soft scene assume thy gentle reign,
 Pomona, Ceres, Flora in thy train;
 over the still dawn thy placid smile effuse,
 and with thy silver sandal print the dew;
 in noon bright blaze thy vermil vest unfold. 
and wave thy emerald banner stare with gold." 

thus speak the genius, as he step along,
 and bid these lawn to peace and truth belong;
 down the steep slope he lead with modest skill
 the will pathway, and the truant rill,
 stretch over the marshy vale yond willowy mound,
 where shine the lake amid the tuft ground,
 raise the young woodland, smooth the wavy green,
 and give to beauty all the quiet scene. —

she come! — the goddess! — through the whisper air,
 bright as the morn, descend her blush car;
 each circle wheel a wreath of flower intwine,
 and gem with flower the silken harness shine;
 the golden bit with flowery stud be deck,
 and knot of flower the crimson reins connect. —
 and now on earth the silver axle ring,
 and the shell sink upon its slender spring;
 light from her airy seat the goddess bound,
 and step celestial press the pansy ground. 

fair spring advance call her feather choir,
 and tune to soft note her laugh lyre;
 bid her gay hour on purple pinion move,
 and arm her zephyr with the shaft of love,
 please gnome, ascend from their earthy bed,
 play round her graceful footstep, as she tread;
 gay sylph attendant beat the fragrant air
 on winnow wing, and waft her golden hair;
 blue nymph emerge leave their sparkle stream,
 and fiery form alight from orient beam;
 musked in the rose lap fresh dew they shed,
 or breathe celestial lustre round her head. 

first the fine form her dulcet voice require,
 which bathe or bask in elemental fire;
 from each bright gem of day refulgent car,
 from the pale sphere of every twinkle star,
 from each nice poor of ocean, earth, and air,
 with eye of flame the sparkle host repair,
 mix their gay hue, in changeful circle play,
 like mote, that tenant the meridian ray. —
 so the clear lens collect with magic power
 the countless glory of the midnight hour;
 star after star with quiver lustre fall,
 and twinkle glide along the whiten wall. —
 please, as they pass, she count the glitter band,
 and still their murmur with her wave hand;
 each listen tribe with fond expectance burn,
 and now to these, and now to those, she turn. 

i "nymph of primeval fire! your vestal train
 hang with gold-tress over the vast inane,
 pierce with your silver shaft the throne of night,
 and charm young nature open eye with light;
 when love divine, with brood wing unfurled,
 call from the rude abyss the live world. 
 "— let there be light!" proclaim the almighty lord,
 astonish chaos hear the potent word; —
 through all his realm the kindle ether run,
 and the mass start into a million sun;
 earth round each sun with quick explosion burst,
 and second planet issue from the first;
 bend, as they journey with projectile force,
 in bright ellipsis their reluctant course;
 orb wheel in orb, round centre centre roll,
 and form, self-balanced, one revolve whole. 
— onward they move amid their bright abode,
 space without bound, the bosom of their god! 

ii. ethereal power! you chase the shoot star,
 or yoke the volley lighten to your car,
 cling round the aërial bow with prism bright,
 and please untwist the sevenfold thread of light;
 eve silken couch with gorgeous tint adorn,
 and fire the arrowy throne of rise morn. 
— or, plume with flame, in gay battalion spring
 to bright region bear on broad wing;
 where light gas, circumfuse on high,
 form the vast concave of exterior sky;
 with airy lens the scatter ray assault,
 and bend the twilight round the dusky vault;
 ride, with broad eye and scintillate hair,
 the rapid fireball through the midnight air;
 dart from the north on pale electric stream,
 fringe night sable robe with transient beam. 
— or rein the planet in their swift career,
 gild with borrow light their twinkle sphere;
 alarm with comet-blaze the sapphire plain,
 the wan star glimmer through its silver train;
 gem the bright zodiac, stud the glow pole,
 or give the sun phlogistic orb to roll. 

iii. nymph! your fine form with step impassive mock
 earth vault roof of adamantine rock;
 round her still centre tread the burn soil,
 and watch the billowy lavas, as they boil;
 where, in basaltic cave imprison deep,
 reluctant fire in dread suspension sleep;
 or sphere on sphere in widen wave expand,
 and glad with genial warmth the incumbent land. 
so when the mother-bird select their food
 with curious bill, and feed her callow brood;
 warmth from her tender heart eternal spring,
 and please she clasp they with extend wing. 

 "you from deep cauldron and unmeasured cave
 blow flame air, or pour vitrescent wave;
 over shine ocean ray volcanic light,
 or hurl innocuous ember to the night. —
 while with loud shout to Etna Heccla call,
 and Andes answer from his beaconed wall;
 sea-wildered crew the mountain-star admire,
 and beauty beam amid tremendous fire. 

 "thus when of old, as mystic bard presume,
 huge Cyclops dwell in etna rocky womb,
 on thunder anvil ring their loud alarm,
 and league with VUCLAN forge immortal arm;
 descend Venus seek the dark abode,
 and soothe the labour of the grisly god. —
 while frown love the threaten falchion wield,
 and titter grace peep behind the shield,
 with joint mail their fairy limb overwhelm,
 or nod with pause step the plume helm;
 with radiant eye she view the boil over,
 hear undismayed the breathe bellows roar,
 admire their sinewy arm, and shoulder bare,
 and ponderous hammer lift high in air,
 with smile celestial bless their dazzle sight,
 and beauty blaze amid infernal night. 

iv. " effulgent maid! you round deciduous day,
 tress with soft beam, your glitter band array;
 on earth cold bosom, as the sun retire,
 confine with fold of air the linger fire;
 over eve pale form diffuse phosphoric light,
 and deck with lambent flame the shrine of night. 
so, warm and kindle by meridian sky,
 and view in darkness with dilate eye,
 bologna chalk with saint ignition blaze,
 beccari shell emit prismatic ray. 
so to the sacred sun in Memnon fane,
 spontaneous concord quire the matin strain;
 — touch by his orient beam, responsive ring
 the live lyre, and vibrate all it be string;
 accordant ail the tender tone prolong,
 and holy echo swell the adore song. 

 "you with light gas the lamp nocturnal feed,
 which dance and glimmer over the marshy mead;
 shine round calendula at twilight hour,
 and tip with silver all her saffron flower;
 warm on her mossy couch the radiant worm,
 guard from cold dew her love-illumined form,
 from leaf to leaf conduct the virgin light,
 star of the earth, and diamond of the night. 
you bid in air the tropic beetle burn,
 and fill with golden flame his wing urn;
 or gild the surge with infect-spark, that swarm
 round the bright oar, the kindle prow alarm;
 or arm in wave, electric in his ire,
 the dread gymnotus with ethereal fire, —
 onward his course with wave tail he helm,
 and mimic lighten scare the watery realm,
 so, when with bristle plume the bird of Jove
 vindictive leaf the argent field above,
 bear on broad wing the guilty world he awe,
 and grasp the lightning in his shine claw. 

v. 1.   "nymph! your soft smile uncultured man subdue,
 and charm the savage from his native wood;
 you, while amaze his hurry horde retire
 from the fell havoc of devour fire,
 teach, the first art! with piny rod to raise
 by quick attrition the domestic blaze,
 fan with soft breath, with kindle leaf provide,
 and list the dread destroyer on his side. 
so, with bright wreath of serpent-tress crown,
 severe in beauty, young Medusa frown;
 erewhile subdue, round wisdom aegis roll
 hiss the dread snake, and flame in burnish gold;
 flash on her brandish arm the immortal shield,
 and terror lighten over the dazzle field. 

2.  nymph! you disjoin, unite, condense, expand,
 and give new wonder to the chemist hand;
 on tepid cloud of rise steam aspire,
 or fix in sulphur all it be solid fire;
 with boundless spring elastic air unfold,
 or fill the fine vacuity of gold;
 with sudden flash vitrescent spark reveal,
 by fierce collision from the flint and steel;
 or mark with shine letter kunkel name
 in the pale phosphor self-consuming flame. 
so the chaste heart of some enchant maid
 shine with insidious light, by love betray;
 round her pale bosom play the young desire,
 and slow she waste by self-consuming fire. 

3.   "you teach mysterious Bacon to explore
 metallic vein, and part the dross from over;
 with sylvan coal in whirl mill combine
 the crystale nitre, and the sulphurous minè;
 through wiry net the black diffusion strain,
 and close a airy ocean in a grain. —
 pen in dark chamber of cylindric brass,
 slumber in grim repose the sooty mass;
 lit by the brilliant spark, from grain to grain
 run the quick fire along the kindle train;
 on the pain ear-drum burst the sudden crash,
 start the red flame, and death pursue the flash. —
 fear feeble hand direct the fiery dart,
 and strength and courage yield to chemic art;
 guilt with pale brow the mimic thunder own,
 and tyrant tremble on their blood-stained throne. 

vi. nymph! you erewhile on simmer cauldron play,
 and call delight Savery to your aid;
 bid round the youth explosive steam aspire
 in gather cloud, and winge the wave with fire;
 bid with cold stream the quick expansion stop,
 and sink the immense of vapour to a drop. —
 press by the ponderous air the Piston fall
 resistless, slide through it be iron wall;
 quick move the balance beam, of giant-birth,
 wield his large limb, and nod shake the earth. 

 "the giant-power from earth remote cave
 lift with strong arm her dark reluctant wave;
 each cavern rock, and hide den explore,
 drag her dark coal, and dig her shine oar. —
 next, in close cell of rib oak confine,
 gale after gale, he crowd the struggle wind;
 the imprison storm through brazen nostril roar,
 fan the white flame, and fuse the sparkle over. 
here high in air the rise stream he pour
 to clay-built cistern, or to lead-lined tower;
 fresh through a thousand pipe the wave distil,
 and thirsty city drink the exuberant rill. —
 there the vast mill-stone with inebriate whirl
 on tremble floor his forceful finger twirl. 
who flinty tooth the golden harvest grind,
 feast without blood! and nourish humankind. 

 "now his hard hand on mona rift crest,
 bosomed in rock, her azure oar arrest;
 with iron lip his rapid roller seize
 the lengthen bar, in thin expansion squeeze;
 descend screw with ponderous fly-wheel wound
 the tawny plate, the new medallion round;
 hard dye of steel the cupreous circle cramp,
 and with quick fall his massy hammer stamp. 
the harp, the lily and the lion join,
 and GEORGE and Britain guard the sterling coin. 

 "soon shall thy arm, unconquered steam! afar
 drag the slow barge, or drive the rapid car;
 or on wide-waving wing expand bear
 the flying-chariot through the field of air. 
— fair crew triumphant, lean from above,
 shall wave their flutter kerchief as they move;
 or warrior-band alarm the gape crowd,
 and army shrink beneath the shadowy cloud. 

 "so mighty Hercules over many a clime
 wave his vast mace in virtue cause sublime,
 unmeasured strength with early art combine,
 awe, serve, protect, and amaze mankind. —
 first two dread snake at juno vengeful nod
 climb round the cradle of the sleep god;
 wake by the shrill hiss, and rustle sound,
 and shriek of fair attendant tremble round,
 their gasp throat with clench hand he hold;
 and death untwist their convolute fold. 
next in red torrent from her sevenfold head
 fall hydra blood on lerna lake he shed;
 grasp Achelous with resistless force,
 and drag the roar river to his course;
 bind with loud bellow and with hideous yell
 the monster Bull, and threefold dog of hell. 

 "then, where nemea howl forest wave,
 he drive the lion to his dusky cave;
 seize by the throat the growl fiend disarm,
 and tear his gape jaw with sinewy arm;
 lift proud anteus from his mother-plain,
 and with strong grasp the struggle giant strain;
 back fall his faint head, and clammy hair,
 writhe his weak limb, and flit his life in air; —
 by step revert over the blood-dropped fen
 he track huge Cacus to his murderous den;
 where breathe flame through brazen lip he flee,
 and shake the rock-roofed cavern over his head. 

 "last with wide arm the solid earth he tear,
 pile rock on rock, on mountain mountain rear;
 heave up huge Abyla on afric sand,
 crown with high Calpe europe saliant strand,
 crest with oppose tower the splendid scene,
 and pour from urn immense the sea between. —
 — loud over her whirl flood Charybdis roar,
 affright Scylla bellows round his shore,
 vesuvio groan through all his echo cave,
 and Etna thunder over the insurgent wave. 

vii. 1.  nymph! your fine hand ethereal flood amass
 from the warm cushion, and the whirl glass;
 beard the bright cylind with golden wire,
 and circumfuse the gravitate fire. 
cold from each point cerulean lustre gleam,
 or shoot in air the scintillate stream. 
so, bear on brazen talon, watch of old
 the sleepless dragon over his fruit of gold;
 bright beam his scale, his eye-ball blaze with ire,
 and his wide nostril breathe enchant fire. 
you bid gold-leave, in crystal lanthern hold,
 approach attract, and recede repel;
 while paper-nymph instinct with motion rise,
 and dance faun the admire sage surprise. 
or, if on wax some fearless beauty stand,
 and touch the sparkle rod with graceful hand;
 through her fine limb the mimic lightning dart,
 and flame innocuous eddy round her heart;
 over her fair brow the kindle lustre glare,
 blue ray diverge from her bristle hair;
 while some fond youth the kiss ethereal sip. 
and soft fire issue from their meeting lip. 
so round the virgin saint in silver stream
 the holy halo shoot it be arrowy beam. 

 "you crowd in coat jar the denser fire,
 pierce the thin glass, and fuse the blaze wire;
 or dart the red flash through the circle band
 of youth and timorous damsel, hand in hand. 
— start the quick ether through the fibre-train
 of dance artery, and of tingle vein,
 goad each fine nerve, with new sensation thril,
 bend the reluctant limb with power unwilled;
 palsy cold hand the fierce concussion own,
 and life cling tremble on her totter throne. —
 so from dark cloud the playful lightning spring,
 Rives the firm oak, or print the fairy-ring. 

2.  nymph! on that day you shed from lucid eye. 
celestial tear, and breathe ethereal sigh! 
when Richman rear, by fearless haste betray,
 the wiry rod in nieva fatal shade; —
 cloud over the sage, with fringe skirt succeed,
 flash follow flash, the warn cork recede;
 near and more near he eye with fond amaze
 the silver stream, and watch the saphire blaze;
 then burst the steel, the dart electric speed,
 and the bold sage lay number with the dead! —
 nymph! on that day you shed from lucid eye
 celestial tear, and breathe ethereal sigh! 

3.   "you lead your franklin to your glaze retreat,
 your air-built castle, and your silken seat;
 bid his bold arm invade the lower sky,
 and seize the tiptoe lightning, ere they fly;
 over the young sage your mystic mantle spread,
 and wreathe the crown electric round his head. —
 thus when on wanton wing intrepid love
 snatch the raise lightning from the arm of Jove;
 quick over his knee the triple bolt he bend,
 the cluster dart and forky arrow rend,
 snap with illumine hand each flame shaft,
 his tingle finger shake, and stamp, and laugh;
 bright over the floor the scatter fragment blaze,
 and god retreat tremble as they gaze;
 the immortal sire, indulgent to his child,
 bow his ambrosial lock, and heaven relent smile. 

viii.  "when air pure essence join the vital flood,
 and with phosphoric Acid dye the blood,
 your virgin train the transient heat dispart,
 and lead the soft combustion round the heart;
 life holy lamp with fire successive feed,
 from the crown forehead to the prostrate weed,
 from earth proud realm to all that swim or sweep
 the yield ether or tumultuous deep. 
you swell the bulb beneath the heave lawn,
 brood the live seed, unfold the burst spawn;
 nurse with soft lap, and warm with fragrant breath
 the embryon pant in the arm of death;
 youth vivid eye with live light adorn,
 and fire the rise blush of beauty golden morn. 

 "thus when the egg of night, on chaos hurl,
 burst, and disclose the cradle of the world;
 first from the gape shell refulgent spring
 immortal love, his bow celestial string; —
 over the wide waste his gaudy wing unfold,
 beam his soft smile, and wave his curl of gold; —
 with silver dart he pierce the kindle frame,
 and lit with torch divine the everliving flame. " 

ix. the goddess pause, admire with conscious pride
 the effulgent legion marshale by her side,
 form sphere in fire with tremble light array,
 ens without weight, and substance without shade;
 and, while tumultuous joy her bosom warm,
 wave her white hand, and call her host to arm,

 "unite, illustrious nymph! your radiant power,
 call from their long repose the vernal hour. 
wake with soft touch, with rosy hand unbind
 the struggle pinion of the western wind;
 chase his wan cheek, his ruffle plume repair,
 and wring the rain-drop from his tangle hair. 
blaze round each frost rill, or stagnant wave,
 and charm the naiad from her silent cave;
 where, shrine in ice, like Niobe she mourn,
 and clasp with hoary arm her empty urn. 
call your bright myriad, troop from afar,
 with beamy helm, and glitter shaft of war;
 in phalanx firm the fiend of frost assail,
 break his white tower, and pierce his crystal mail;
 to zembla moon-bright coast the tyrant bear,
 and chain he howl to the northern bear. 

 "so when enormous grampus, issue forth
 from the pale region of the icy north;
 wave his broad tail, and open his rib mouth,
 and seek on winnow fin the breezy south;
 from town desert rush the breathless host,
 swarm round the hill, and darken all the coast;
 boat follow boat along the shout tide,
 and spear and javelin pierce his blubbery side;
 now the bold sailor, raise on point toe,
 whirl the winge harpoon on the slimy foe;
 quick sink the monster in his oozy bed,
 the blood-stained surge circle over his head,
 steer to the freeze pole his wonted track,
 and bear the iron tempest on his back. 

x. "on wing of flame, ethereal virgin! sweep
 over earth fair bosom, and complacent deep;
 where dwell my vegetative realm benumb,
 in bud imprison, or in bulb entomb,
 pervade, pellucid form! their cold retreat,
 ray from bright urn your viewless flood of heat;
 from earth deep waste electric torrent pour,
 or shed from heaven the scintillate shower;
 pierce the dull root, relax its fibre-train,
 thaw the thick blood, which linger in its vein;
 melt with warm breath the fragrant gum, that bind
 the expand foliage in its scaly rind;
 and as in air the laugh leaflet play,
 and turn their shine bosom to the ray,
 nymph! with sweet smile each open flower invite,
 and on its damask eyelid pour the light. 

 "so shall my pine, canadian wild that shade,
 where no bold step have pierce the tangle glade,
 high-towering palm, that part the southern flood
 with shadowy isle and continent of wood,
 oak, who broad antler crest britannia plain,
 or bear her thunder over the conquer main,
 shout, as you pass, inhale the genial sky,
 and bask and brighten in your beamy eye;
 bow their white head, admire the change clime,
 shake from their candy trunk the tinkle rhyme;
 with burst bud their wrinkle bark adorn,
 and wed the timorous floret to her thorn;
 deep strike their root, their lengthen top revive,
 and all my world of foliage wave, alive. 

 "thus with hermetic art the adept combine
 the royal acid with cobaltic mine;
 mark with quick pen, in line unseen portray,
 the blush mead, green dell, and dusky glade;
 shade with pellucid cloud the tintless field,
 and all the future group exist conceal;
 till wake by fire the dawn tablet glow,
 green spring the herb, the purple floret blow,
 hill vale and wood in bright succession rise,
 and all the live landscape charm his eye. 

ix.  "with crest of gold shall sultry Sirius glare,
 and with his kindle tress scorch the air;
 with point of flame the shaft of summer arm,
 and burn the beauty he design to warm; —
 — so erst when Jove his oath extort mourn,
 and clad in glory to the fair return;
 while love at forky bolt their torch light,
 and rest lightning gild the car of night;
 his blaze form the dazzle maid admire,
 meet with fond lip, and in his arm expire; —
 nymph! on light pinion lead your banner host
 high over the cliff of orkney gulphy coast;
 leave on your left the red volcanic light,
 which HECCLA lift amid the dusky night;
 mark on the right the dofrine snow-captain brow,
 where whirl MAELSTROME roar and foam below;
 watch with unmoving eye, where Cepheus bend
 his triple crown, his sceptre hand extend;
 where stud Cassiope with star unknown
 her golden chair, and gem her sapphire zone;
 where with vast convolution Draco hold
 the ecliptic axis in his scaly fold,
 over half the sky his neck enormous rear,
 and with immense meander part the bear;
 onward, the kindred bear with footstep rude
 dance round the pole, pursue and pursue. 

 "there in her azure coif and starry stole,
 grey twilight sit, and rule the slumber pole;
 bend the pale moonbeam round the sparkle coast,
 and strew with livid hand eternal frost. 
there, nymph! alight, array your dazzle power,
 with sudden march alarm the torpid hour;
 on ice-built isle expand a thousand sail,
 hinge the strong helm, and catch the freeze gale;
 the wing rock to feverish climates guide,
 where faint zephyr pant upon the tide;
 pass, where to ceuta calpe thunder roar,
 and answer echo shake the kindred shore;
 pass, where with palmy plume canary smile,
 and in her silver girdle bind her isle;
 onward, where niger dusky naiad lave
 a thousand kingdom with prolific wave,
 or lead over golden sand she threefold train
 in steamy channel to the fervid main,
 while swarthy nation crowd the sultry coast,
 drink the fresh breeze, and hail the float frost,
 nymph! veil in mist, the melt treasure steer,
 and cool with arctic snow the tropic year. 
so from the burn line by monsoon drive
 cloud sail in squadron over the darken heaven;
 wide waste of sand the gelid gale pervade,
 and ocean cool beneath the move shade. 

xii. shall solstice, stalk through the sicken bower,
 suck the warm dew-drop, lap the fall shower;
 kneel with parch lip, and bend from it be brink
 from drip palm the scanty river drink;
 nymph! over the soil ten thousand point erect,
 and high in air the electric flame collect. 
soon shall dark mist with self-attraction shroud
 the blaze day, and sail in wild of cloud;
 each silvery flower the stream aerial quaff,
 bow her sweet head, and infant harvest laugh. 

 "thus when Elija mark from carmel brow
 in bright expanse the briny flood below;
 roll his red eye amid the scorch air,
 smite his firm breast, and breathe his ardent prayer;
 high in the midst a massy altar stand,
 and slaughter offering press the pile of wood;
 while israel chief the sacred hill surround,
 and famish army crowd the dusty ground;
 while proud idolatry be league with dearth,
 and wither famine sweep the desert earth. —
"oh, mighty lord! thy woe-worn servant hear,
 "who call thy name in agony of prayer;
"thy fane dishonour, and thy prophet slay,
 "lo! i alone survive of all thy train! —
"oh send from heaven thy sacred fire, — and pour
 "over the parch land the salutary shower, —
"so shall thy priest thy err flock recall, —
 "and speak in thunder," thou art lord of all. — "
he cry, and kneel on the mountain-sand,
 stretch high in air his supplicate hand. 
— descend flame the dusky shrine illume;
 fire the wet wood, the sacred bull consume;
 winge from the sea the gather mist arise,
 and float water darken all the sky;
 the king with shift reins his chariot bend,
 and wide over earth the airy flood descend;
 with mingle cry disperse host applaud,
 and shout nation own the live god." 
the goddess cease, — the exult tribe obey,
 start from the soil, and win their airy way;
 the vault sky with stream of transient ray
 shine, as they pass, and earth and ocean blaze. 
so from fierce war when lawless monarch cease,
 or liberty return with laureled peace;
 bright fly the spark, the colour lustre burn,
 flash follow flash, and flame-winged circle turn;
 blue serpent sweep along the dusky air,
 imp by long train of scintillate hair;
 red rocket rise, loud crack be hear on high,
 and shower of star rush headlong from the sky,
 burst, as in silver line they hiss along,
 and the quick flash unfold the gaze throng. 

[CANTO II.] 

argument of the second Canto.

the economy of vegetation.

Canto ii.

and now the goddess with attention sweet
 turn to the gnome, that circle round her foot;
 orb within orb approach the marshale train,
 and pigmy legion darken all the plain;
 thrice shout with silver tone the applaud band,
 bow, ere she speak, and clap their fairy hand. 
so the tall grass, when noontide zephyr blow,
 bend it be green blade in undulate row;
 wide over the field the billowy tumult spread,
 and rustle harvest bow their golden head. 

i "gnome! your bright form, preside at her birth,
 cling in fond squadron round the new-born earth;
 when high in ether, with explosion dire,
 from the deep crater of his realm of fire,
 the whirl sun this ponderous planet hurl,
 and give the astonish void another world. 
when from it be vaporous air, condense by cold,
 descend torrent into ocean roll;
 and fierce attraction with relentless force
 bend the reluctant wanderer to it be course. 

 "where yet the bull with diamond-eye adorn
 the spring fair forehead, and with golden horn;
 where yet the lion climb the ethereal plain,
 and shake the summer from his radiant mane;
 where Libra lift her airy arm, and weigh,
 poise in her silver balance, night and day;
 with pale lustre where Aquarius burn,
 and shower the still snow from his hoary urn;
 your ardent troop pursue the fly sphere,
 circle the starry girdle of the year;
 while sweet vicissitude of day and clime
 mark the new annal of enascent time. 

ii.  "you tread with printless step earth tender globe,
 while ocean wrap it in his azure robe;
 beneath his wave her harden strata spread,
 raise her primeval island from his bed,
 stretch her wide lawn, and sink her wind dell,
 and deck her shore with coral, pearl, and shell. 

 "over those bless isle no ice-crowned mountain tower,
 no lightning dart, and no tempest lower;
 soft fall the vesper-drop, condense below,
 or bend in air the rain-refracted bow;
 sweet breathe the zephyr, just perceive and lose;
 and brineless billow only kiss the coast;
 round the bright zodiac dance the vernal hour,
 and peace, the cherub, dwell in mortal bower! 
so young Dione, nurse beneath the wave,
 and rock by nereid in their coral cave,
 charm the blue sisterhood with playful wile,
 lisp her sweet tone, and try her tender smile. 
then, on her beryl throne by triton bear,
 bright rose the goddess like the star of morn;
 when with soft fire the milky dawn he lead,
 and wake to life and love the laugh mead; —
 with rosy finger, as uncurled they hang
 round her fair brow, her golden lock she wring;
 over the smooth surge on silver sandal stand,
 and look enchantment on the dazzle flood. —
 the bright drop, roll from she lift arm,
 in slow meander wander over her charm,
 seek round her snowy neck their lucid track,
 pearl her white shoulder, gem her ivory back,
 round her fine waist and swell bosom swim,
 and star with glitter brine each crystal limb. —
 — the immortal form enamour nature hail,
 and beauty blaze to heaven and earth, unvail. 

iii.  "you! who then, kindle after many a age,
 see with new fire the first volcano rage,
 over smoulder heap of livid sulphur swell
 at earth firm centre, and distend her shell,
 see at each open cleave the furnace glow,
 and sea rush headlong on the gulf below. —
 gnome! how you shriek! when through the trouble air
 roar the fierce din of elemental war;
 when rise the continent, and sink the main,
 and earth huge sphere explode burst in twain. —
 gnome! how you gaze! when from her wound side
 where now the South-Sea heave its waste of tide,
 rise on swift wheel the moon refulgent car,
 circle the solar orb, a sister-star,
 dimple with vale, with shine hill emboss,
 and roll round earth her airless realm of frost. 

 "gnome! how you tremble! with the dreadful force
 when earth recoil stagger from her course;
 when, as her line in slow circle spin,
 and her shock axis nod from the sun,
 with dreadful march the accumulate main
 sweep her vast wreck of mountain, vale, and plain;
 and, while new tide their shout flood unite,
 and hail their queen, fair regent of the night;
 chain to one centre whirl the kindred sphere,
 and mark with lunar cycle solar year. 

iv.  "gnome! you then bid dissolve shell distil
 from the loose summit of each shatter hill,
 to each fine poor and dark interstice flow,
 and fill with liquid chalk the mass below. 
whence sparry form in dusky cavern gleam
 with borrow light, and twice refract the beam;
 while in white bed congeal rock beneath
 court the nice chisel, and desire to breathe. —

 "hence weary Hercules in marble rear
 his languid limb, and rest a thousand year;
 still, as he lean, shall young Antinous please
 with careless grace, and unaffected ease;
 onward with lofty step Apollo spring,
 and launch the unerring arrow from the string;
 in beauty bashful form, the veil unfurled,
 ideal Venus win the gaze world. 
hence on roubiliac tomb shall fame sublime
 wave her triumphant wing, and conquer time;
 long with soft touch shall damer chisel charm,
 with grace delight we, and with beauty warm;

foster' fine form shall heart unborn engage,
 and melbourn smile enchant another age. 

v.  gnome! you then teach transude dew to pass
 through time-fallen wood, and root-inwove morass
 age after age; and with filtration fine
 dispart, from earth and sulphur, the saline. 

1.   "hence with diffusive salt old ocean steep
 his emerald shallows, and his sapphire deep. 
oft in wide lake, around their warm brim
 in hollow pyramid the crystal swim;
 or, fuse by earth-born fire, in cubic block
 shoot their white form, and harden into rock. 

 "thus, cavern round in cracow mighty mine,
 with crystal wall a gorgeous city shine;
 scoop in the briny rock long street extend
 their hoary course, and glitter dome ascend;
 down the bright steep, emerge into day,
 impetuous fountain burst their headlong way,
 over milkwhite vale in ivory channel spread,
 and wonder seek their subterraneous bed. 
form in pellucid salt with chisel nice,
 the pale lamp glimmer through the sculpture ice,
 with wild revert eye fair Lotta stand,
 and spread to heaven, in vain, her glassy hand;
 cold dew condense upon she pear breast,
 and the big tear roll lucid down her vest. 
far gleam over the town transparent fane
 rear their white tower, and wave their golden vane;
 long line of lustre pour their tremble ray,
 and the bright vault return the mingle blaze. 

2.   "hence orient nitre owe it be sparkle birth,
 and with prismatic crystal gem the earth,
 over totter dome in filmy foliage crawl,
 or frost with branch plume the moulder wall. 
as woof azotic gas the virgin air,
 and veil in crimson cloud the yield fair,
 indignant fire the treacherous courtship fly,
 wave his light wing, and mingle with the sky. 

 "so beauty goddess, warm with new desire,
 leave, on her silver wheel, the god of fire;
 her faithless charm to fierce Mars resign,
 meet with fond lip, with wanton arm entwine. 
— indignant Vulcan eye the part fair,
 and watch with jealous step the guilty pair;
 over his broad neck a wiry net he fling,
 quick as he stride, the tinkle mesh ring;
 fine as the spider flimsy thread he weave
 the immortal toil to lime illicit love;
 steel be the knot, and steel the twist thong,
 ring link in ring, indissoluble strong;
 on viewless hook along the fret roof
 he hang, unseen, the inextricable woof. —
 — quick start the spring, the web pellucid spread,
 and lock the embrace lover on their bed;
 fierce with loud taunt vindictive Vulcan spring,
 try all the bolt, and tighten all the string,
 shake with incessant shout the bright abode,
 clap his rude hand, and call the festive god. —
 — with spread palm the alarm goddess try
 to veil her beauty from celestial eye,
 writhe her fair limb, the slender ringlet strain,
 and bid her love untie the obdurate chain;
 soft swell her pant bosom, as she turn,
 and her flush cheek with bright blush burn. 
majestic grief the queen of heaven avow,
 and chaste Minerva hide her helm brow;
 attendant nymph with bashful eye askance
 steal of entangle Mars a transient glance;
 surround god the circle nectar quaff,
 gaze on the fair, and envy as they laugh. 

3.   "hence dusky iron sleep in dark abode,
 and ferny foliage nestle in the nodes;
 till with wide lung the pant bellows blow,
 and wake by fire the glitter torrent flow;
 — quick whirl the wheel, the ponderous hammer fall,
 loud anvil ring amid the tremble wall,
 stroke follow stroke, the sparkle ingot shine,
 flow the red flag, the lengthen bar refine;
 cold wave, immerse, the glow mass congeal,
 and turn to adamant the hiss steel. 

 "last michell have hand with touch of potent charm
 the polish rod with power magnetic arm;
 with point direct to the polar star
 in one long line extend the tempere bar;
 then thrice and thrice with steady eye he guide,
 and over the adhesive train the magnet slide;
 the obedient steel with live instinct move,
 and veer for ever to the pole it love. 

 "hail, adamantine steel! magnetic lord! 
king of the prow, the ploughshare, and the sword! 
true to the pole, by thou the pilot guide
 his steady helm amid the struggle tide,
 brave with broad sail the immeasurable sea,
 cleave the dark air, and ask no star but thou. —
 by thou the ploughshare rend the mat plain,
 inhume in level row the live grain;
 intrusive forest quit the culture ground,
 and Ceres laugh with golden fillet crown. —
 over restless realm when scowl discord fling
 her snake, and loud the din of battle ring;
 expire strength, and vanquish courage feel
 thy arm resistless, adamantine steel! 

4.   "hence in fine stream diffusive acid flow,
 or winge with fire over earth fair bosom blow;
 transmute to glitter flint her chalky land,
 or sink on ocean bed in countless sand. 
hence silvery selenite her crystal mould,
 and soft asbestus smooth his silky fold;
 his cubic form phosphoric fluor print,
 or ray in sphere his amethystine tint. 
soft cobweb cloud transparent onyx spread,
 and playful agate weave their colour thread;

gay picture mochoe glow with landscape-dy,
 and changeful opal roll their lucid eye;
 blue lambent light around the sapphire play,
 bright ruby blush, and live diamond blaze. 

 "thus, for attractive earth, inconstant Jove
 mask in new shape forsake his realm above. —
 first her sweet eye his eagle-form beguile,
 and Hebe feed he with ambrosial smile;
 next the change god a cygnet down assume,
 and playful Leda smooth his glossy plume;
 then glide a silver serpent, treacherous guest! 
and fair Olympia fold he in her breast;
 now swallow a milkwhite bull on afric strand,
 and crop with dance head the daisy land. —
 with rosy wreathe europa hand adorn
 his fringe forehead, and his pearly horn;
 light on his back the sportive damsel bound,
 and please he move along the flowery ground;
 bear with slow step his beauteous prize aloof,
 dip in the lucid flood his ivory hoof;
 then wet his velvet knee, and wade lave
 his silky side amid the dimple wave. 
while her fond train with beckon hand deplore,
 strain their blue eye, and shriek along the shore;
 beneath her robe she draw her snowy foot,
 and, half-reclining on her ermine seat,
 round his raise neck her radiant arm she throw,
 and rest her fair cheek on his curl brow;
 her yellow tress wave on wanton gale,
 and high in air her azure mantle sail. 
— onward he move, applaud cupid guide,
 and skim on shoot wing the shine tide;
 emerge triton leave their coral cave,
 sound their loud conch, and smooth the circle wave,
 surround the timorous beauty, as she swim,
 and gaze enamour on her silver limb. 
— now europe shadowy shore with loud acclaim
 hail the fair fugitive, and shout her name;
 soft echo warble, whisper forest nod,
 and conscious nature own the present god. 
— change from the bull, the rapturous god assume
 immortal youth, with glow celestial bloom,
 with lenient word her virgin fear disarm,
 and clasp the yield beauty in his arm;
 whence king and hero own illustrious birth,
 guard of mankind, and demigod on earth. 

vi.  "gnome! as you pass beneath the labour soil,
 the guard and guide of nature chemic toil,
 you see, deep-sepulchred in dusky realm,
 which earth rock-ribbed ponderous vault overwhelm,
 with self-born fire the mass ferment glow,
 and flame-winged sulphur quit the earth below. 

i "hence ductile clay in wide expansion spread,
 soft as the cygnet down, their snow-white bed;
 with yield flake successive form reveal,
 and change obedient to the whirl wheel. 
— first china son, with early art elate,
 form the gay tea-pot, and the picture plate;
 see with illumine brow and dazzle eye
 in the red stove vitrescent colour rise;
 specked her tall beaker with enamel star,
 her monster-josses, and gigantic jar;
 smear her huge dragon with metallic hue,
 with golden purple, and cobaltic blue;
 bid on wide hill her porcelain castle glare,
 and glaze pagoda tremble in the air. 

 "Etruria! next beneath thy magic hand
 glide the quick wheel, the plaistic clay expand,
 nerve with fine touch, thy finger (as it turn)
 mark the nice bound of vase, ewer, and urn;
 round each fair form in line immortal trace
 uncopy beauty, and ideal grace. 

 "gnome! as you now dissect with hammer fine
 the granite-rock, the noduled flint calcine;
 grind with strong arm, the circle chertz betwixt,
 your pure ka-o-lins and petuntses mix;
 over each red saggar burn cave preside,
 the keen-eyed fire-nymph blaze by your side;
 and please on wedgwood ray your partial smile,
 a new Etruria deck britannia isle. —
 charm by your touch, the flint liquescent pour
 through fine sieve, and fall in white shower;
 charm by your touch, the knead clay refine,
 the biscuit harden, the enamel shine;
 each nice mould a soft feature drink,
 the bold cameo speak, the soft intaglio think. 

 "to call the pearly drop from pity eye,
 or stay despair disanimate sigh,
 whether, o friend of art! the gem you mould
 rich with new taste, with ancient virtue bold;
 form the poor fetter slave on bend knee
 from britain son implore to be free;
 or with fair hope the brighten scene improve,
 and cheer the dreary waste at sydney-cove;
 or bid mortality rejoice and mourn
 over the fine form on portland mystic urn. —

 "here by fall column and disjoin arcade,
 on moulder stone, beneath deciduous shade,
 sit humankind in hieroglyphic state,
 serious, and ponder on their changeful state;
 while with invert torch, and swim eye,
 sink the fair shade of mortal life, and die. 
there the pale ghost through death wide portal bend
 his timid foot, the dusky steep descend;
 with smile assuasive love divine invite,
 guide on broad wing, with torch uplift light;
 immortal life, her hand extend, court
 the linger form, his totter step support;
 lead on to Pluto realm the dreary way,
 and give he tremble to elysian day. 
beneath, in sacred robe the priestess dress,
 the coif close-hooded, and the flutter vest,
 with point finger guide the initiate youth,
 unweave the many-coloured veil of truth,
 drive the profane from mystery bolt door,
 and silence guard the Eleusinian lore. —

 "whether, o friend of art! your gem derive
 fine form from Greece, and fable god revive;
 or bid from modern life the portrait breathe,
 and bind round honour brow the laurel wreath;
 buoyant shall sail, with fame historic page,
 each fair medallion over the wreck of age;
 nor time shall mar; nor steel, nor fire, nor fire, nor rust
 touch the hard polish of the immortal bust. 

2.   "hence sable coal his massy couch extend,
 and star of gold the sparkle pyrite blend;
 hence dull-eyed naphtha pour his pitchy stream,
 and jet uncoloured drink the solar beam,
 bright amber shine on his electric throne,
 and add ethereal lustre to his own. 
— lead by the phosphor-light, with dare tread
 immortal franklin seek the fiery bed;
 where, nurse in night, incumbent tempest shroud
 the seed of thunder in circumfluent cloud,
 besiege with iron point his airy cell,
 and pierce the monster slumber in the shell. 

 "so, bear on sound pinion to the west,
 when tyrant-power have build his eagle nest;
 while from his eyry shriek the famish brood,
 clench their sharp claw, and champ their beak for blood,
 immortal franklin watch the callow crew,
 and stab the struggle vampire, ere they fly. 
— the patriot-flame with quick contagion run,
 hill light hill, and man electrise man;
 her hero slay awhile Columbia mourn,
 and crown with laurel liberty return. 

 "the warrior, liberty, with bend sail
 helmed his bold course to fair hibernia vale; —
 firm as he step, along the shout land,
 lo! truth and virtue range their radiant band;
 sad superstition wail her empire tear,
 art ply his oar, and commerce pour her horn. 

 "long have the giant-form on gallia's plain
 inglorious sleep, unconscious of his chain;
 round his large limb be wind a thousand string
 by the weak hand of confessor and king;
 over his close eye a triple veil be bind,
 and steely rivet lock he to the ground;
 while stern bastile with iron cage inthrall
 his fold limb, and hem in marble wall. 
— touch by the patriot-flame, he rend amaze
 the flimsy bond, and round and round he gaze;
 start up from earth, above the admire throng
 lift his colossal form, and tower along;
 high over his foe his hundred arm he rear,
 ploughshare his sword, and prune hook his spear;
 call to the good and brave with voice, that roll
 like heaven own thunder round the echo pole;
 give to the wind his banner broad unfurled,
 and gather in its shade the live world! 

vii.  "gnome! you then teach volcanic air to force
 through bubble lavas their resistless course,
 over the broad wall of rift granite climb,
 and pierce the rent roof of incumbent lime,
 round sparry cave metallic lustre fling,
 and bear phlogiston on their tepid wing. 

 "hence glow, refulgent tin! thy crystal grain,
 and tawny copper shoot her azure vein;
 zinc line his fret vault with sable over,
 and dull Galena tessellate the floor;
 on vermil bed in idria mighty cave
 the live silver roll its ponderous wave;
 with gay refraction bright platina shine,
 and stud with squander star his dusky mine;
 long thread of net gold, and silvery dart,
 inlay the lazuli, and pierce the quartz; —
 — whence roof with silver beam Peru, of old,
 and hapless Mexico be pave with gold. 

 "heaven! on my sight what sanguine colour blaze! 
Spain deathless shame! the crime of modern day! 
when avarice, shroud in religion robe,
 sail to the west, and slaughter half the globe;
 while superstition, stalk by his side,
 mock the loud groan, and lap the bloody tide;
 for sacred truth announce her frenzy dream,
 and turn to night the sun meridian beam. —
 hear, oh, Britannia! potent queen of isle,
 on who fair art, and meek religion smile,
 now afric coast thy crafty son invade
 with murder, rapine, theft, — and call it trade!
 — the slave, in chain, on supplicate knee,
 spread his wide arm, and lift his eye to thou;
 with hunger pale, with wound and toil oppress,
"be we not brother? "sorrow choke the rest; —
 — air! bear to heaven upon thy azure flood
 their innocent cry! — earth! cover not their blood! 

viii.  "when heaven dread justice smite in crime overgrow
 the blood-nursed tyrant on his purple throne,
 gnome! your bold form unnumbered arm outstretch,
 and urge the vengeance over the guilty wretch. —
 thus when Cambyses lead his barbarous host
 from persia rock to egypt tremble coast,
 defile each hallow fane, and sacred wood,
 and, drink with fury, swell the Nile with blood;
 wave his proud banner over the theban state,
 and pour destruction through her hundred gate;
 in dread division march the marshale band,
 and swarm army blacken all the land,
 by Memphis these to ethiop sultry plain,
 and those to hammon sand-incircled fane. —
 slow as they pass, the indignant temple frown,
 low curse mutter from the vault ground;
 long ail of cypress wave their deepen gloom,
 and quiver spectre grin amid the tomb;
 prophetic whisper breathe from sphinx tongue,
 and memnon lyre with hollow murmur ring;
 burst from each pyramid expire groan,
 and dark shadow stretch their lengthen cone. —
 day after day their deathful rout they steer,
 lust in the van, and rapine in the rear. 

 "gnome! as they march, you hide the gather fruit,
 the bladed grass, sweet grain, and mealy root;
 scare the tire quail, that journey over their head,
 retain the locust in their earthy bed;
 bid on your sand no night-born dew distil,
 stay with vindictive hand the scanty rill. —
 loud over the camp the fiend of famine shriek,
 call all her brood, and champ she hundred beak;
 over ten square league her pennon broad expand,
 and twilight swim upon the shudder sand;
 perch on her crest the griffin discord cling,
 and giant murder ride between her wing;
 blood from each clot hair, and horny quill,
 and shower of tear in blend stream distil;
 high-poised in air her spiry neck she bend,
 roll her keen eye, her dragon-claw extend,
 dart from above, and tear at each fell swoop
 with iron fang the decimate troop. 

 "now over their head the whizz whirlwind breathe,
 and the live desert pant, and heave beneath;
 tinge by the crimson sun, vast column rise
 of eddy sand, and war amid the sky,
 in red arcade the billowy plain surround,
 and stalk turret dance upon the ground. 
— long rank in vain their shine blade extend,
 to demon-god their knee unhallowed bend,
 wheel in wide circle, form in hollow square,
 and now they front, and now they fly the war,
 pierce the deaf tempest with lament cry,
 press their parch lip, and close their blood-shot eye. 
— gnome! over the waste you lead your myriad power,
 climb on the whirl, and aim the flinty shower! —
 onward resistless roll the infuriate surge,
 cloud follow cloud, and mountain mountain urge;
 wave over wave the drive desert swim,
 burst over their head, inhume their struggle limb;
 man mount on man, on camel camel rush,
 host march over host, and nation nation crush, —
 wheel in air the wing island fall,
 and one great earthy ocean cover all! —
 then cease the storm, — night bow his Ethiop brow
 to earth, and listen to the groan below, —
 grim horror shake, — awhile the live hill
 heave with convulsive throe, — and all be still! 

ix.  "gnome! who fine form, impassive as the air,
 shrink with soft sympathy for human care;
 who glide unseen, on printless slipper bear,
 beneath the wave grass, and nod corn;
 or lay your tiny limb, when noontide warm,
 where shadowy cowslip stretch their golden arm, —
 so mark on orrery in lucid sign,
 stare with bright point the mimic zodiac shine;
 bear on fine wire amid the picture sky
 with ivory orb the planet set and rise;
 round the dwarf earth the pearly moon be roll,
 and the sun twinkle whirl his ray of gold. —
 call your bright myriad, march your mail host,
 with spear and helmet glitter round the coast;
 thick as the hair, which rear the lion mane,
 or fringe the boar, that bay the hunter-train;
 watch, where proud surge break their treacherous mound,
 and sweep resistless over the culture ground;
 such as erewhile, impel over belgia plain,
 roll her rich ruin to the insatiate main;
 with pile and pier the ruffian wave engage,
 and bid indignant ocean stay his rage. 

 "where, gird with cloud, the rift mountain yawn,
 and chill with length of shade the gelid lawn,
 climb the rude steep, the granite-cliff surround,
 pierce with steel point, with wooden wedge wind;
 break into clay the soft volcanic slagg,
 or melt with acid air the marble crag;
 crown the green summit with adventurous flock,
 and charm with novel flower the wonder rock. 
— so when proud Rome the Afric warrior brave,
 and high on Alps his crimson banner wave;
 while rock on rock their beetling brow oppose
 with piny forest, and unfathomed snow;
 onward he march, to latium velvet ground
 with fire and acid burst the obdurate bind,
 wide over her weep vale destruction hurl,
 and shake the rise empire of the world. 

x. "go, gentle gnome! resume your vernal toil,
 seek my chill tribe, which sleep beneath the soil;
 on grey-moss bank, green mead, or furrow land
 spread the dark mould, white lime, and crumble sand;
 each burst bud with healthy juice feed,
 emerge scion, or awaken seed. 
so, in descend stream, the silver chyle
 streak with white cloud the golden flood of bile;
 through each nice valve the mingle current glide,
 join their fine rill, and swell the sanguine tide;
 each countless cell, and viewless fibre seek,
 nerve the strong arm, and tinge the blush cheek. 

 "oh, watch, where bosom in the teem earth,
 green swell the germ, impatient for its birth;
 guard from rapacious worm its tender shoot,
 and drive the mine beetle from its root;
 with ceaseless effort rend the obdurate clay,
 and give my vegetable babe to day!
 — thus when a angel-form, in light array,
 like Howard pierce the prison noisome shade;
 where chain to earth, with eye to heaven upturned,
 the kneel saint in holy anguish mourn; —
 ray from his lucid vest, and haloed brow
 over the dark roof celestial lustre glow,
"Peter, arise! "with cheer voice he call,
 and sound seraphic echo round the wall;
 lock, bolt, and chain his potent touch obey,
 and please he lead the dazzle sage to day. 

xi.  "you! who fine finger fill the organic cell,
 with virgin earth, of wood and bone and shell;
 mould with retractile glue their spongy bed,
 and stretch and strengthen all their fibre-thread. —
 late when the mass obey its changeful doom,
 and sink to earth, its cradle and its tomb,
 gnome! with nice eye the slow solution watch,
 with foster hand the part atom catch,
 join in new form, combine with life and sense,
 and guide and guard the transmigrate ens. 

 "so when on lebanon sequester hight
 the fair Adonis leave the realm of light,
 bow his bright lock, and, fate from his birth
 to change eternal, mingle with the earth; —
 with dark horror shake the conscious wood,
 groan the sad gale, and river blush with blood;
 on cypress-bough the love their quiver hang,
 their arrow scatter, and their bow unstring;
 and beauty goddess, bend over his bier,
 breathe the soft sigh, and pour the tender tear. —
 admire Proserpine through dusky glade
 lead the fair phantom to elysian shade,
 clad with new form, with fine sense combine,
 and lit with pure flame the ethereal mind. 
— erewhile, emerge from infernal night,
 the bright assurgent rise into light,
 leave the drear chamber of the insatiate tomb,
 and shine and charm with renovate bloom. —
 while wonder love the burst grave surround,
 and edge with meet wing the yawn ground,
 stretch their fair neck, and lean over the brink
 view the pale region of the dead, and shrink;
 long with broad eye ecstatic beauty stand,
 heave her white bosom, spread her waxen hand;
 then with loud shriek the pant youth alarm,
 "my life! my love! and spring into his arm." 

the goddess cease, — the delegate throng
 over the wide plain delight rush along;
 in dusky squadron, and in shine group,
 host follow host, and troop succeed to troop;
 scarce bear the bend grass the move freight,
 and nod floret bow beneath their weight. 
so when light cloud on airy pinion sail,
 flit the soft shadow over the wave vale;
 shade follow shade, as laugh zephyr drive,
 and all the chequer landscape seem alive. 

[CANTO III.] 

argument of the third Canto.

the economy of vegetation.

Canto iii.

again the goddess speak! — glad echo swell
 the tuneful tone along her shadowy dell,
 her wrinkle fount with soft vibration shake,
 curl her deep well, and rimple all her lake,
 thrill each wide stream, britannia isle that lave,
 her headlong cataract, and circumfluent wave. 
— thick as the dew, which deck the morning flower,
 or rain-drop twinkle in the sun-bright shower,
 fair nymph, emerge in pellucid band,
 rise, as she turn, and whiten all the land. 

i "your buoyant troop on dimple ocean tread,
 waft the moist air from his oozy bed,
 aquatic nymph! — you lead with viewless march
 the wing vapour up the aerial arch,
 on each broad cloud a thousand sail expand,
 and steer the shadowy treasure over the land,
 through vernal sky the gather drop diffuse,
 plunge in soft rain, or sink in silver dew. —
 your lucid band condense with finger chill
 the blue mist hover round the gelid hill;
 in clay-formed bed the trickle stream collect,
 strain through white sand, through pebbly vein direct;
 or point in rift rock their dubious way,
 and in each bubble fountain rise to day. 

 "nymph! you then guide, attendant from their source,
 the associate rill along their sinuous course;
 float in bright squadron by the willowy brink,
 or circle slow in limpid eddy sink;
 call from her crystal cave the naiad-nymph,
 who hide her fine form in the pass lymph,
 and, as below she braid her hyaline hair,
 eye her soft smile reflect in the air;
 or sport in group with river-boy, that lave
 their silken limb amid the dash wave;
 pluck the pale primrose bend from its edge,
 or titter dance amid the whisper sedge. —

 "onward you pass, the pine-captain hill divide,
 or feed the golden harvest on their side;
 the wide-ribbed arch with hurry torrent fill,
 shove the slow barge, or whirl the foam mill. 
or lead with beckon hand the sparkle train
 of refluent water to its parent main,
 and please revisit in their sea-moss vale
 blue nereid-form array in shine scale,
 shape, who broad oar the torpid wave impel,
 and Triton bellow through their twist shell. 

 "so from the heart the sanguine stream distil,
 over beauty radiant shrine in vermil rill,
 feed each fine nerve, each slender hair pervade,
 the skin bright snow with live purple shade,
 each dimple cheek with warm blush dye,
 laugh on the lip, and lighten in the eye. 
— erewhile absorb, the vagrant globule swim
 from each fair feature, and proportion limb,
 join in one trunk with deep tint return
 to the warm concave of the vital urn. 

ii. i "aquatic maid! you sway the mighty realm
 of scale and shell, which ocean overwhelm;
 as night pale queen her rise orb reveal,
 and climb the zenith with refulgent wheel,
 care on the foam your glimmer legion ride,
 your little trident heave the dash tide,
 urge on the sound shore their crystal course,
 restrain their fury, or direct their force. 

2.   "nymph! you adorn, in glossy volume roll,
 the gaudy conch with azure, green, and gold. 
you round Echinus ray his arrowy mail,
 give the keel nautilus his oar and sail;
 firm to his rock with silver cord suspend
 the anchor Pinna, and his cancer-friend;
 with worm-like beard his toothless lip array,
 and teach the unwieldy sturgeon to betray. —
 ambush in weed, or sepulchr in sand,
 in dread repose he wait the scaly band,
 wave in red spire the live lure, and draw
 the unwary plunderer to his circle jaw,
 eye with grim joy the twinkle shoal beset,
 and clasp the quick inextricable net. 
you chase the warrior shark, and cumbrous whale,
 and guard the mermaid in her briny vale;
 feed the live petal of her insect-flower,
 her shell-wrack garden, and her sea-fan bower;
 with oar and gem adorn her coral cell,
 and drop a pearl in every gape shell. 

3.   "your myriad train over stagnant ocean tow,
 harness with gossamer, the loiter prow;
 or with fine film, suspend over the deep,
 of oil effusive lull the wave to sleep. 
you stay the fly bark, conceal beneath,
 where live rock of worm-built coral breathe;
 meet fell TEREDO, as he mine the keel
 with beak head, and break his lip of steel;
 turn the broad helm, the flutter canvas urge
 from maelstrome fierce innavigable surge. 
— 'amid the lorn isle of norway stormy main,
 as sweep over many a league his eddy train,
 vast watery wall in rapid circle spin,
 and deep-engulfed the demon dwell within;
 spring over the fear-froze crew with harpy-claw,
 down his deep den the whirl vessel draw;
 churn with his bloody mouth the dread repast,
 the boom water murmur over the mast. 

iii.  "where with chill frown enormous Alps alarm
 a thousand realm, horizon in his arm;
 while cloudless sun meridian glory shed
 from sky of silver round his hoary head,
 tall rock of ice refract the colour ray,
 and frost sit throne amid the lambent blaze;
 nymph! your thin form pervade his glitter pile,
 his roof of crystal, and his glassy ail;
 where in cold cave imprison naiad sleep,
 or chain on mossy couch wake and weep;
 where round dark crag indignant water bend
 through rift ice, in ivory vein descend,
 seek through unfathomed snow their devious track,
 heave the vast spar, the rib granite crack,
 rush into day, in foamy torrent shine,
 and swell the imperial Danube or the Rhine. —
 — or feed the murmur Tiber, as he lave
 his realm inglorious with diminish wave,
 hear his lorn Forum sound with eunuch-strain,
 see dance slave insult his martial plain;
 part with chill stream the dim religious bower,
 time-mouldered bastion, and dismantle tower;
 by alter fane and nameless villa glide,
 and classic dome, that tremble on his side;
 sigh over each break urn, and yawn tomb,
 and mourn the fall of liberty and Rome. 

iv.  "sail in air, when dark monsoon inshroud
 his tropic mountain in a night of cloud;
 or draw by whirlwind from the line return,
 and shower over Afric all his thousand urn;
 high over his head the beam of Sirius glow,
 and, dog of Nile, Anubis bark below. 
nymph! you from cliff to cliff attendant guide
 in headlong cataract the impetuous tide;
 or lead over waste of abyssinian sand
 the bright expanse to egypt shower-less land. 
— her long canal the sacred water fill,
 and edge with silver every people hill;
 gigantic Sphinx in circle wave admire,
 and Memnon bend over his break lyre;
 over furrow glebe and green savanna sweep,
 and town and temple laugh amid the deep. 

v.  i "high in the freeze north where HECCLA glow,
 and melt in torrent his coeval snow;
 over isle and ocean shed a sanguine light,
 or shoot red star amid the ebon night;
 when, at his base entomb, with bellow sound
 fall GIESAR roar, and struggle shake the ground;
 pour from red nostril, with her scald breath,
 a boil deluge over the blast heath;
 and, wide in air, in misty volume hurl
 contagious atom over the alarm world;
 nymph! your bold myriad break the infernal spell,
 and crush the sorceress in her flinty cell. 

2.   "where with soft fire in unextinguished urn,
 cauldron in rock, innocuous lava burn;
 on the bright lake your gelid hand distil
 in pearly shower the parsimonious rill;
 and, as aloft the curl vapour rise
 through the cleave roof, ambitious for the sky,
 in vault hill condense the tepid steam,
 and pour to health the medicate stream. 
— so in green vale amid her mountain bleak
 BUXTONIA smile, the goddess-nymyh of peak;
 deep in warm wave, and pebbly bath she dwell,
 and call hygeia to her saint well. 

 "hither in sportive band bright Devon lead
 grace and love from chatsworth flowery mead. —
 charm round the nymph, they climb the rift rock;
 and steep in mountain-mist their golden lock;
 on venturous step she sparry cave explore,
 and light with radiant eye her realm of over;
 — oft by her bubble fount, and shadowy dome,
 in gay undress the fairy legion roam,
 their drip palm in playful malice fill,
 or taste with ruby lip the sparkle rill;
 croud round her bath, and, bend over the side,
 unclasp their sandal, and their zone untie,
 dip with gay fear the shudder foot undress,
 and quick retract it to the fringe vest;
 or cleave with brandish arm the lucid stream,
 and sob, their blue eye twinkle in the steam. 
— high over the chequer vault with transient glow
 bright lustre dart, as dash the wave below;
 and echo sweet responsive voice prolong
 the dulcet tumult of their silver tongue. —
 over their flush cheek uncurling tress flow,
 and dew-drop glitter on their neck of snow;
 round each fair nymph her drop mantle cling,
 and love emerge shake their showery wing. 
here oft her lord survey the rude domain,
 fair art of Greece triumphant in his train;
 lo! as he step, the columned pile ascend,
 the blue roof close, or the crescent bend;
 new wood aspire clothe their hill with green,
 smooth slope the lawn, the grey rock peep between;
 relent nature give her hand to taste,
 and health and beauty crown the laugh waste. 

vi.  "nymph! your bright squadron watch with chemic eye
 the cold-elastic vapour, as they rise;
 with playful force arrest they as they pass,
 and to pure air betrothe the flame gas. 
round their translucent form at once they fling
 their rapturous arm, with silver bosom cling;
 in fleecy cloud their flutter wing extend,
 or from the sky in lucid shower descend;
 whence rill and river owe their secret birth,
 and ocean hundred arm enfold the earth. 

 "so, robe by beauty queen, with soft charm
 Saturnia woo the thunderer to her arm;
 over her fair limb a veil of light she spread,
 and bind a starry diadem on her head;
 long braid of pearl her golden tress grace,
 and the charm cestus sparkle round her waist. 
— raise over the woof, by beauty hand inwrought,
 breathe the soft sigh, and glow the enamour thought;
 vow on light wing succeed, and quiver wile,
 assuasive accent, and seductive smile. 
— slow roll the cyprian car in purple pride,
 and, steer by love, ascend admire Ide;
 climb the green slope, the nod wood pervade,
 burns round the rock, or gleam amid the shade. —
 glad zephyr lead the train, and wave above
 the barb dart, and blaze torch of love;
 revert his smile face, and pause fling
 soft shower of rose from aurelian wing. 
delight fawn, in wreathe of flower array,
 with tiptoe wood-boy beat the chequer glade;
 alarm naiad, rise into air,
 lift over their silver urn their leafy hair;
 each to her oak the bashful dryad shrink,
 and azure eye be see through every chink. 
— love cull a flame shaft of broad wing,
 and rest the fork upon the quiver string;
 point his arch eye aloft, with finger strong
 draw to his curl ear the silken thong;
 loud twang the steel, the golden arrow fly,
 trail a long line of lustre through the sky;
 "it be do!" he shout, "the mighty monarch feel!" 
and with loud laughter shake the silver wheel;
 bend over the car, and whirl, as it move,
 his loosen bowstring, drive the rise dove. 
— pierce on his throne the start thunderer turn,
 melt with soft sigh, with kindle rapture burn;
 clasp her fair hand, and eye in fond amaze
 the bright intruder with enamour gaze. 
 "and leave my goddess, like a bloom bride,
"the fane of Argos for the rock of Ide? 
 "her gorgeous palace, and amaranth bower,
"for cliff-toped mountain, and aerial tower? 
he say; and, lead from her ivory seat
 the blush beauty to his lone retreat,
 curtain with night the couch imperial shroud,
 and rest the crimson cushion upon cloud. —
 earth feel the grateful influence from above,
 sigh the soft air, and ocean murmur love;
 etherial warmth expand his brood wing,
 and in still shower descend the genial spring. 

vii.  "nymph of aquatic taste! who placid smile
 breathe sweet enchantment over britannia isle;
 who sportive touch in shower resplendent fling
 her lucid cataract, and her bubble spring;
 through people vale the liquid silver guide,
 and swell in bright expanse her freight tide. 
you with nice ear, in tiptoe train, pervade
 dim walk of morn or evening silent shade;
 join the lone nightingale, her wood among,
 and roll your rill symphonious to her song;
 through fount-full dell, and wave-worn valley move,
 and tune their echo waterfall to love;
 or catch, attentive to the distant roar,
 the pause murmur of the dash shore;
 or, as aloud she pour her liquid strain,
 pursue the nereid on the twilight main. 
— her playful sea-horse woo her soft command,
 turn his quick ear, his webbed claw expand,
 his watery way with wave volute win,
 or listen librate on unmoving fin. 
the nymph emerge mount her scaly seat,
 hang over his glossy side her silver foot,
 with snow-white hand her arch veil detain,
 give to his slimy lip the slacken reins,
 lift to the star of eve her eye serene,
 and chant the birth of beauty radiant queen. —
 over her fair brow she pear comb unfurl
 her beryl lock, and part the wave curl,
 each tangle braid with glisten tooth unbind
 and with the float treasure musk the wind. —
 thril by the dulcet accent, as she sing,
 the ripple wave in widen circle ring;
 night shadowy form along the margin gleam
 with point ear, or dance upon the stream;
 the moon transport stay her bright career,
 and madden star shoot headlong from the sphere. 

viii.  "nymph! who fair eye with vivid lustre glow
 for human weal, and melt at human woe;
 late as you float on your silver shell,
 sorrow and slow by derwent willowy dell;
 where by tall grove his foamy flood he steer
 through ponderous arch over impetuous wear,
 by derby shadowy tower reflective sweep,
 and gothic grandeur chill his dusky deep;
 you pearled with pity drop his velvet side,
 sigh in his gale, and murmur in his tide,
 wave over his fringe brink a deep gloom,
 and bow his alder over milcena tomb. 

 "oft with sweet voice she lead her infant-train,
 print with graceful step his spangle plain,
 explore his twinkle swarm, that swim or fly,
 and mark his floret with botanic eye. —

 "sweet bud of spring! how frail thy transient bloom,
"fine film, she cry, "of nature fair loom! 
soon beauty fade upon its damask throne!" —
 — unconscious of the worm, that mine she own! —
 — pale be those lip, where soft caress hang,
 win the warm cheek, and mute the tender tongue,
 cold rest that feeling heart on derwent shore,
 and those love-lighted eye-ball roll no more! 

ix.  "your virgin train on brindley cradle smile,
 and nurse with fairy-love the unlettered child,
 spread round his pillow all your secret spell,
 pierce all your spring, and open all your well. —
 as now on grass, with glossy fold reveal,
 glide the bright serpent, now in flower conceal;
 far shine the scale, that gild his sinuous back,
 and lucid undulation mark his track;
 so with strong arm immortal Brindley lead
 his long canal, and part the velvet mead;
 wind in lucid line, the watery mass
 mine the firm rock, or load the deep morass,
 with rise lock a thousand hill alarm,
 fling over a thousand stream its silver arm,
 feed the long vale, the nod woodland lave,
 and plenty, art, and commerce freight the wave. 
— nymph! who erewhile round brindley early bier
 on snow-white bosom shower the incessant tear,
 adorn his tomb! — oh, raise the marble bust,
 proclaim his honour, and protect his dust! 
with urn invert, round the sacred shrine
 their ozier wreath let weep naiad twine;
 while on the top mechanic genius stand,
 count the fleet wave, and balancés the land. 

x. "nymph! you first teach to pierce the secret cave
 of humid earth, and lift her ponderous wave;
 bid with quick stroke the slide piston bear
 the viewless column of incumbent air; —
 press by the incumbent air the flood below,
 through open valve in foam torrent flow,
 foot after foot with lessen impulse move,
 and rise seek the vacancy above. —
 so when the mother, bend over his charm,
 clasp her fair nursel in delight arm;
 throw the thin kerchief from her neck of snow,
 and half unveil the pearly orb below;
 with sparkle eye the blameless plunderer own
 her soft embrace, and endear tone,
 seek the salubrious fount with open lip,
 spread his inquire hand, and smile, and sip. 

 "connubial fair! who not fond transport warm
 to lull your infant in maternal arm;
 who, bless in vain with tumid bosom, hear
 his tender wail with unfeeling ear;
 the soothe kiss and milky rill deny
 to the sweet pout lip, and glisten eye! —
 ah! what avail the cradle damask roof,
 the eider bolster, and embroider woof! —
 oft hear the gild couch unpitied plain,
 and many a tear the tasselled cushion stain! 
no voice so sweet attune his care to rest,
 so soft no pillow, as his mother breast! —
 — thus charm to sweet repose, when twilight hour
 shed their soft influence on celestial bower,
 the cherub, innocence, with smile divine
 shut his white wing, and sleep on beauty shrine. 

xi.  "from dome to dome when flame infuriate climb,
 sweep the long street, invest the tower sublime;
 gild the tall vane amid the astonish night,
 and redden heaven return the sanguine light;
 while with vast stride and bristle hair aloof
 pale danger glide along the fall roof;
 and giant terror howl in amaze
 move his dark limb across the lurid blaze. 
nymph! you first teach the gelid wave to rise,
 hurl in resplendent arch to the sky;
 in iron cell condense the airy spring,
 and imp the torrent with unfailing wing;
 — on the fierce flame the shower impetuous fall,
 and sudden darkness shroud the shatter wall;
 steam, smoke, and dust in blend volume roll,
 and night and silence repossess the pole. —

 "where be you, nymph! in those disastrous hour,
 which wrap in flame augusta's sink tower? 
why do you linger in your well and grove,
 when sad WOODMASON mourn her infant love? 
when thy fair daughter with unheeded scream,
 ill-fated Molesworth! call the loiter stream? —
 the tremble nymph on bloodless finger hang
 eye from the totter wall the distant throng,
 with ceaseless shriek her sleep friend alarm,
 drop with singe hair into her lover arm. —
 the illumine mother seek with footstep fleet,
 where hang the safe balcony over the street,
 wrap in her sheet her young hope suspend,
 and pant lower it to her tiptoe friend;
 again she hurry on affection wing,
 and now a third, and now a four, she bring;
 safe all her babe, she smooth her horrent brow,
 and burst through bicker flame, unscorch, below. 
so, by her son arraign, with foot unshod
 over burn bar indignant Emma tread. 

 "even on the day when youth with beauty wed,
 the flame surprise they in their nuptial bed; —
 see at the open sash with bosom bare,
 with wring hand, and dark dishevel hair,
 the blush beauty with disorder charm
 round her fond lover wind her ivory arm;
 beat, as they clasp, their throb heart with fear,
 and many a kiss be mix with many a tear; —
 ah i! in vain the labour engine pour
 round their pale limb the ineffectual shower! —
 — then crash the floor, while shrink croud retire,
 and love and virtue sink amid the fire! —
 with pierce scream afflict stranger mourn,
 and their white ash mingle in their urn. 

xii.  "pellucid form! who crystal bosom show
 the shine of welfare, or the shade of woe;
 who with soft lip salute return spring,
 and hail the zephyr quiver on his wing;
 or watch, untired, the wintery cloud, and share
 with stream eye my vegetable care;
 go, shove the dim mist from the mountain brow,
 chase the white fog, which flood the vale below;
 melt the thick snow, that linger on the land,
 and catch the hailstone in your little hand;
 guard the coy blossom from the pelt shower,
 and dash the rimy spangle from the bower;
 from each chill leaf the silvery drop repel,
 and close the timorous floret golden bell. 

 "so shall young sympathy, in female form,
 climb the tall rock, spectatress of the storm;
 life sink wreck with secret sigh deplore,
 and bleed for other woe, herself on shore;
 to friendless virtue, gasp on the strand,
 bear her warm heart, her virgin arm expand,
 charm with kind look, with tender accent cheer,
 and pour the sweet consolatory tear;
 grief cureless wound with lenient balm assuage,
 or prop with firm staff the step of age;
 the lift arm of mute despair arrest,
 and snatch the dagger point to his breast;
 or lull to slumber envy haggard mien,
 and rob her quiver shaft with hand unseen. 
— sound, nymph of Helicon! the trump of fame,
 and teach hibernian echo Jones name;
 bind round her polish brow the civic bay,
 and drag the fair philanthropist to day. —
 so from seclude spring, and secret cave,
 her liffy pour his bright meander wave,
 cool the parch vale, the sultry mead divide,
 and town and temple star his shadowy side. 

xiii.  "call your light legion, tread the swampy heath,
 pierce with sharp spade the tremulous peat beneath;
 with colter bright the rushy sward bisect,
 and in new vein the gush rill direct; —
 so flower shall rise in purple light array,
 and blossom orchard stretch their silver shade;
 admire glebe their amber ear unfold,
 and labour sleep amid the wave gold. 

 "thus when young Hercules with firm disdain
 brave the soft smile of pleasure harlot train;
 to valiant toil his forceful limb assign,
 and give to virtue all his mighty mind,
 fierce Achelous rush from mountain-cave,
 over sad Etolia pour his wasteful wave,
 over low vale and bleat pasture roll,
 sweep her red vineyard, and her glebe of gold,
 mine all her town, uptore her root wood,
 and famine dance upon the shine flood. 
the youthful hero seize his curl crest,
 and dash with lift club the watery pest;
 with wave arm the billowy tumult quell,
 and to his course the bellow fiend repel. 

 "then to a snake the finny demon turn
 his lengthen form, with scale of silver burn;
 lash with resistless sweep his dragon-train,
 and shoot meander over the affright plain. 
the hero-god, with giant finger clasp
 firm round his neck, the hiss monster grasp;
 with start eye, wide throat, and gape tooth,
 curl his redundant fold, and writhe in death. 

 "and now a bull, amid the fly throng
 the grisly demon foam, and roar along;
 with silver hoof the flowery meadow spurn,
 roll his red eye, his threaten antler turn. 
drag down to earth, the warrior victor-hand
 press his deep dewlap on the imprint sand;
 then with quick bind his bend knee he fix
 high on his neck, the branch horn betwixt,
 strain his strong arm, his sinewy shoulder bend,
 and from his curl brow the twist terror rent. 
— please fawn and nymph with dance step applaud,
 and hang their chaplet round the rest god;
 link their soft hand, and rear with pause toil
 the golden trophy on the furrow soil;
 fill with ripe fruit, with wreathe flower adorn,
 and give to plenty her prolific horn. 

xiv.  "on spring fair lap, cerulean sister! pour
 from airy urn the sun-illumined shower,
 feed with the dulcet drop my tender brood,
 mellifluous flower, and aromatic bud;
 hang from each bend grass and horrent thorn
 the tremulous pearl, that glitter to the morn;
 or where cold dew their secret channel lave,
 and earth dark chamber hide the stagnant wave,
 o, pierce, you nymph! her marble vein, and lead
 her gush fountain to the thirsty mead;
 wide over the shine vale, and trickle hill
 spread the bright treasure in a thousand rill. 
so shall my people realm of leaf and flower
 exult, inebriate with the genial shower;
 dip their long tress from the mossy brink,
 with tuft root the glassy current drink;
 shade your cool mansion from meridian beam,
 and view their wave honour in your stream. 

 "thus where the vein their confluent branch bend,
 and milky eddy with the purple blend;
 the chyle white trunk, diverge from its source,
 seek through the vital mass its shine course;
 over each red cell, and tissue membrane spread
 in live net-work all its branch thread;
 maze within maze its tortuous path pursue,
 wind into gland, inextricable clue;
 steal through the stomach velvet side, and sip
 the silver surge with a thousand lip;
 fill each fine poor, pervade each slender hair,
 and drink salubrious dew-drop from the air. 

 "thus when to kneel in mecca awful gloom,
 or press with pious kiss medina tomb,
 league after league, through many a linger day,
 steer the swart caravan their sultry way;
 over sandy waste on gasp camel toil,
 or print with pilgrim-step the burn soil;
 if from lone rock a sparkle rill descend,
 over the green brink the kneel nation bend,
 bathe the parch lip, and cool the feverish tongue,
 and the clear lake reflect the mingle throng." 

the goddess pause, — the listen band awhile
 still seem to hear, and dwell upon her smile;
 then with soft murmur sweep in lucid train
 down the green slope, and over the pebbly plain,
 to each bright stream on silver sandal glide,
 reflective fountain, and tumultuous tide. 

so shoot the spider-brood at breezy dawn
 their glitter net-work over the autumnal lawn;
 from blade to blade connect with cordage fine
 the unbending grass, and live along the line;
 or bathe unwet their oily form, and dwell
 with foot repulsive on the dimple well. 

so when the north congeal his watery mass,
 pile high his snow, and floor his sea with glass;
 while many a month, unknown to warm ray,
 mark its slow chronicle by lunar day;
 stout youth and ruddy damsel, sportive train,
 leave the white soil, and rush upon the main;
 from isle to isle the moon-bright squadron stray,
 and win in easy curve their graceful way;
 on step alternate bear, with balance nice
 hang over the glide steel, and hiss along the ice. 

[CANTO IV.] 

argument of the four Canto.

the economy of vegetation.

Canto iv.

as when at noon in hybla fragrant bower
 cacalia open all her honeyed flower;
 contend swarm on bend branch cling,
 and nation hover on aurelian wing;
 so round the goddess, ere she speak, on high
 impatient sylph in gawdy circlet fly;
 quiver in air their paint plume expand,
 and colour shadow dance upon the land. 

i "sylph! your light troop the tropic wind confine,
 and guide their stream arrow to the line;
 while in warm flood ecliptic breeze rise,
 and sink with wing benumb in cold sky. 
you bid monsoon on indian sea reside,
 and veer, as move the sun, their airy tide;
 while southern gale over western ocean roll,
 and eurus steal his ice-wind from the pole. 
your playful train, on sultry island bear,
 turn on fantastic toe at eve and morn;
 with soft susurrant voice alternate sweep
 earth green pavilion and encircle deep. 
or in itinerant cohort, bear sublime
 on tide of ether, float from clime to clime;
 over wave autumn bend your airy ring,
 or waft the fragrant bosom of the spring. 

ii.  "when morn, escort by the dance hour,
 over the bright plain her dewy lustre shower;
 till from her sable chariot eve serene
 drop the dark curtain over the brilliant scene;
 you form with chemic hand the airy surge,
 mix with broad van, with shadowy trident urge. 
sylph! from each sun-bright leaf, that twinkle shake
 over earth green lap, or shoot amid her lake,
 your playful band with simper lip invite,
 and wed the enamour oxygene to light. —
 round their white neck with finger interwove,
 cling the fond pair with unabate love;
 hand link in hand on buoyant step they rise,
 and soar and glisten in unclouded sky. 
whence in bright flood the vital air expand,
 and with concentric sphere involve the land;
 pervade the swarm sea, and heave earth,
 where teem nature brood her myriad birth;
 fill the fine lung of all that breathe or bud,
 warm the new heart, and dye the gush blood;
 with life first spark inspire the organic frame,
 and, as it waste, renew the subtle flame. 

 "so pure, so soft, with sweet attraction shine
 fair Psyche, kneel at the ethereal throne;
 win with coy smile the admire court of Jove,
 and warm the bosom of unconquered love. —
 beneath a move shade of fruit and flower
 onward they march to hymen sacred bower;
 with lift torch he light the festive train,
 sublime, and lead they in his golden chain;
 join the fond pair, indulgent to their vow,
 and hide with mystic veil their blush brow. 
round their fair form their mingle arm they fling,
 meet with warm lip, and clasp with rustle wing. —
 — hence plastic nature, as oblivion whelm
 her fade form, repeople all her realm;
 soft joy disport on purple plume unfurled,
 and love and beauty rule the will world. 

iii. 1.   "sylph! your bold myriad on the witheringheath
 stay the fell syroc suffocative breath;
 arrest simoom in his realm of sand,
 the poison javelin balance in his hand; —
 fierce on blue stream he ride the taint air,
 point his keen eye, and wave his whistle hair;
 while, as he turn, the undulate soil
 roll in red wave, and billowy desert boil. 
you seize tornado by his lock of mist,
 burst his dense cloud, his wheel spire untwist;
 wide over the west when bear on headlong gale,
 dark as meridian night, the monster sail,
 howl high in air, and shake his curl brow,
 lash with serpent-train the wave below,
 whirl his black arm, the fork lightning fling,
 and shower a deluge from his demon-wing. 

2.   "sylph! with light shaft you pierce the drowsy fog,
 that linger slumber on the sedge-wove bog,
 with webbed foot over midnight meadow creep,
 or fling his hairy limb on stagnant deep. 
you meet contagion issue from afar,
 and dash the baleful conqueror from his car;
 when, guest of death! from charnel vault he steal,
 and bath in human gore his arm wheel. 

 "thus when the plague, upborne on belgian air,
 look through the mist and shake his clot hair,
 over shrink nation steer malignant cloud,
 and rain destruction on the gasp croud. 
the beauteous Aegle feel the venom dart,
 slow roll her eye, and feeble throb her heart;
 each fervid sigh seem short than the last,
 and start friendship shun she, as she pass. 
— with weak unsteady step the faint maid
 seek the cold garden solitary shade,
 sink on the pillowy moss her droop head,
 and print with lifeless limb her leafy bed. 
— on wing of love her plight Swain pursue,
 shade she from wind, and shelter she from dew,
 extend on taper pole the canvas roof,
 spread over the straw-wove matt the flaxen woof,
 sweet bud and blossom on her bolster strow,
 and bind his kerchief round her ache brow;
 sooth with soft kiss, with tender accent charm,
 and clasp the bright infection in his arm. —
 with pale and languid smile the grateful fair
 applaud his virtue, and reward his care;
 mourn with wet cheek her fair companion flee
 on timorous step, or number with the dead;
 call to its bosom all its scatter ray,
 and pour on thyrsis the collect blaze;
 brave the chill night, caress and caress,
 and fold her hero-lover to her breast. —
 less bold, Leander at the dusky hour
 eye, as he swim, the far love-lighted tower;
 breasted with struggle arm the toss wave,
 and sink benight in the watery grave. 
less bold, Tobias claim the nuptial bed,
 where seven fond lover by a fiend have bleed;
 and drive, instruct by his angel-guide,
 the enamour demon from the fatal bride. —
 — sylph! while your winnow pinion fan the air,
 and shed gay vision over the sleep pair;
 love round their couch effuse his rosy breath,
 and with his keen arrow conquer death. 

iv. 1.   "you charm, indulgent sylph! their learnedtoil,
 and crown with fame your torricell, and Boyle;
 teach with sweet smile, responsive to their prayer,
 the spring and pressure of the viewless air. 
— how up exhaust tube bright current flow
 of liquid silver from the lake below,
 weigh the long column of the incumbent sky,
 and with the changeful moment fall and rise. 
— how, as in brazen pump the piston move,
 the membrane-valve sustain the weight above;
 stroke follow stroke, the gelid vapour fall,
 and misty dew-drop dim the crystal wall;
 rare and more rare expand the fluid thin,
 and silence dwell with vacancy within. —
 so in the mighty void with grim delight
 primeval silence reign with ancient night. 

2.   "sylph! your soft voice, whisper from the sky,
 bid from low earth the bold MONGULFIER rise;
 outstretch his buoyant ball with airy spring,
 and bear the sage on levity of wing; —
 where be you, sylph! when on the ethereal main
 young ROSIERE launch, and call your aid in vain? 
fair mount the light balloon, by zephyr drive,
 part the thin cloud, and sail along the heaven;
 high and yet high the expand bubble fly,
 light with quick flash, and burst amid the sky. —
 headlong he rush through the affright air
 with limb distort, and dishevel hair,
 whirl round and round, the fly crowd alarm,
 and death receive he in his sable arm! —
 so erst with melt wax and loosen string
 sink hapless Icarus on unfaithful wing;
 his scatter plumage dance upon the wave,
 and sorrow mermaid deck his watery grave;
 over his pale corpse their pearly sea-flower shed,
 and strew with crimson moss his marble bed;
 strike in their coral tower the pause bell,
 and wide in ocean toll his echo knell. 

v. "sylph! you, retire to sequester bower,
 where oft your Priestley woo your airy power,
 on noiseless step or quiver pinion glide,
 as sit the sage with science by his side;
 to his charm eye in gay undress appear,
 or pour your secret on his rapture ear. 
how nitrous gas from iron ingot drive
 drink with red lip the pure breath of heaven;
 how, while conferva from its tender hair
 give in bright bubble empyrean air;
 the crystal flood phlogistic oar calcine,
 and the pure ether marry with the mine. 

 "so in sicilia ever-blooming shade
 when playful Proserpine from Ceres stray,
 lead with unwary step her virgin train
 over etna steep, and enna golden plain;
 pluck with fair hand the silver-blossomed bower,
 and purple mead, — herself a fair flower;
 sudden, unseen amid the twilight glade,
 rush gloomy this, and seize the tremble maid. —
 her start damsel spring from mossy feat,
 drop from their gauzy lap the gather sweet,
 cling round the struggle nymph, with pierce cry,
 pursue the chariot, and invoke the sky; —
 please as he grasp she in his iron arm,
 fright with soft sigh, with tender word alarm,
 the wheel descend roll in smoky ring,
 infernal cupid flap their demon wing;
 earth with deep yawn receive the fair, amaze,
 and far in night celestial beauty blaze. 

vi.  "lead by the sage, lo! britain son shall guide
 huge sea-balloon beneath the toss tide;
 the dive castle, roof with spheric glass,
 rib with strong oak, and bar with bolt of brass,
 buoy with pure air shall endless track pursue,
 and priestley hand the vital flood renew. —
 then shall Britannia rule the wealthy realm,
 which ocean wide insatiate wave overwhelm;
 confine in net bower his scaly flock,
 part his blue plain, and people all his rock. 
deep, in warm wave beneath the line that roll,
 beneath the shadowy ice-isle of the pole,
 onward, through bright meander vale, afar,
 obedient shark shall trail her sceptre car,
 with harness neck the pearly flood disturb,
 stretch the silk rein, and champ the silver curb;
 please round her triumph wonder Triton play,
 and seamaid hail she on the watery way. 
— oft shall she weep beneath the crystal wave
 over shipwreck lover welter in their grave;
 mingle in death the brave and good behold
 with slave to glory, and with slave to gold;
 shrined in the deep shall day and Spalding mourn,
 each in his treacherous bell, sepulchral urn! —
 oft over thy lovely daughter, hapless pierce! 
her sigh shall breathe, her sorrow dew their hearse. —
 with brow upturned to heaven, "we will not part!" 
he cry, and clasp they to his ache heart. —
 — dash in dread conflict on the rocky ground,
 crash the shock mast, the stagger wreck rebound;
 through gape seam the rush deluge swim,
 chill their pale bosom, bath their shudder limb,
 climb their white shoulder, buoy their stream hair,
 and the last sea-shriek bellows in the air. —
 each with loud sob her tender sire caress,
 and gasp strain he close to her breast! —
 — stretch on one bier they sleep beneath the brine,
 and their white bone with ivory arm intwine! 

vii.  "sylph of nice ear! with beat wing you guide
 the fine vibration of the aerial tide;
 join in sweet cadence the measure word,
 or stretch and modulate the tremble cord. 
you string to melody the grecian lyre,
 breathe the rapt song, and fan the thought of fire,
 or bring in combination, deep and clear,
 immortal harmony to handel ear. —
 you with soft breath attune the vernal gale,
 when breezy evening brood the listen vale;
 or wake the loud tumultuous sound, that dwell
 in echo many-toned diurnal shell. 
you melt in dulcet chord, when zephyr ring
 the Eolian harp, and mingle all its string;
 or trill in air the soft symphonious chime,
 when rapt CECILIA lift her eye sublime,
 swell, as she breathe, her bosom rise snow,
 over her white tooth in tuneful accent flow,
 through her fair lip on whisper pinion move,
 and form the tender sigh, that kindle love! 

 "so playful love on ida flowery side
 with ribbon-rein the indignant lion guide;
 please on his brind back the lyre he ring,
 and shake delirious rapture from the string;
 slow as the pause monarch stalk along,
 sheath his retractile claw, and drink the song;
 soft nymph on timid step the triumph view,
 and listen fawn with beat hoof pursue;
 with point ear the alarm forest start,
 and love and music soften savage heart. 

viii.  "sylph! your bold host, when heaven with justice dread
 call the red tempest round the guilty head,
 fierce at his nod assume vindictive form,
 and launch from airy car the volley storm. —
 from ashur vale when proud senacherib tread,
 pour his swell heart, defy the live god,
 urge with incessant shout his glitter power;
 and Judah shake through all her massy tower;
 round her sad altar press the prostrate crowd,
 host beat their breast, and suppliant chieftain bow;
 loud shriek of matron thril the trouble air,
 and tremble virgin rend their scatter hair;
 high in the midst the kneel king adore,
 spread the blaspheme scroll before the lord,
 raise his pale hand, and breathe his pause sigh,
 and fix on heaven his dim implore eye, —
"oh! mighty god! amid thy seraph-throng
 "who sit sublime, the judge of right and wrong;
"thy the wide earth, bright sun, and starry zone,
 "that twinkle journey round thy golden throne;
"thy be the crystal source of life and light,
 "and thy the realm of death eternal night. 
"oh, bend thy ear, thy gracious eye incline,
 "lo! ashur king blaspheme thy holy shrine,
"insult our offering, and deride our vow, —
 "oh! strike the diadem from his impious brow,
"tear from his murderous hand the bloody rod,
 "and teach the tremble nation," thou art god! — "
— sylph! in what dread array with pennon broad
 onward you float over the ethereal road,
 call each dank steam the reek marsh exhale,
 contagious vapour, and volcanic gale,
 give the soft south with poisonous breath to blow,
 and roll the dreadful whirlwind on the foe! —
 hark! over the camp the venom tempest sing,
 man fall on man, on buckler buckler ring;
 groan answer groan, to anguish anguish yield,
 and death loud accent shake the tent field!
 — high rear the fiend his grin jaw, and wide
 span the pale nation with colossal stride,
 wave his broad falchion with uplift hand,
 and his vast shadow darken all the land. 

ix. 1.   "ethereal cohort! essence of air! 
make the green child of the spring your care! 
oh, sylph! disclose in this inquire age
 one golden secret to some favour sage;
 grant the charm talisman, the chain, that bind,
 or guide the changeful pinion of the wind!
 — no more shall hoary Boreas, issue forth
 with eurus, lead the tempest of the north;
 rhyme the pale dawn, or veil in flaky shower
 chill the sweet bosom of the smile hour. 
by whisper Auster wake shall zephyr rise,
 meet with soft kiss, and mingle in the sky,
 fan the gay floret, bend the yellow ear,
 and rock the uncurtained cradle of the year;
 autumn and spring in lively union blend,
 and from the sky the golden age descend. 

2.   "castle on ice, beneath the circle bear,
 a vast camelion spit and swallow air;
 over twelve degree his rib gigantic bend,
 and many a league his leathern jaw extend;
 half-fish, beneath, his scaly volute spread,
 and vegetable plumage crest his head;
 huge field of air his wrinkle skin receive,
 from pant gills, wide lung, and wave leaf;
 then with dread throe subside his bloat form,
 his shriek the thunder, and his sigh the storm. 
oft high in heaven the hiss demon win
 his tower course, upborne on winnow fin;
 steer with expand eye and gape mouth,
 his mass enormous to the affright south;
 spread over the shudder line his shadowy limb,
 and frost and famine follow as he swim. —
 sylph! round his cloud-built couch your band array,
 and mould the monster to your gentle sway;
 charm with soft tone, with tender touch check,
 bend to your golden yoke his will neck,
 with silver curb his yield tooth restrain,
 and give to kirwan's hand the silken rein. 
— please shall the sage, the dragon-wing between,
 bend over discordant clime his eye serene,
 with Lapland breeze cool arabian vale,
 and call to Hindostan antarctic gale,
 adorn with wreathe ear kampschatca brow,
 and scatter rose on zealandic snow,
 earth wonder zone the genial season share,
 and nation hail he "monarch of the air." 

x. 1.   "sylph! as you hover on ethereal wing,
 brood the green child of parturient spring! —
 where in their burst cell my embryon rest,
 i charge you guard the vegetable nest;
 count with nice eye the myriad seed, that swell
 each vault womb of husk, or pod, or shell;
 feed with sweet juice, clothe with downy hair,
 or hang, enshrine, their little orb in air. 

 "so, late descry by herschel pierce sight,
 hang the bright squadron of the twinkle night;
 ten thousand marshale star, a silver zone,
 effuse their blend lustre round her throne;
 sun call to sun, in lucid cloud conspire,
 and light exterior sky with golden fire;
 resistless roll the illimitable sphere,
 and one great circle form the unmeasured year. 
— roll on, you star! exult in youthful prime,
 mark with bright curve the printless step of time;
 near and more near your beamy car approach,
 and lessen orb on lessen orb encroach; —
 flower of the sky! you too to age must yield,
 frail as your silken sister of the field! 
star after star from heaven high arch shall rush,
 sun sink on sun, and system system crush,
 headlong, extinct, to one dark centre fall,
 and death and night and chaos mingle all!
 — till over the wreck, emerge from the storm,
 immortal nature lift her changeful form,
 mount from her funeral pyre on wing of flame,
 and soar and shine, another and the same. 

2.   "lo! on each seed within its slender rind
 life golden thread in endless circle wind;
 maze within maze the lucid web be roll
 and, as they burst, the live flame unfold. 
the pulpy acorn, ere it swell, contain
 the oak vast branch in its milky vein;
 each ravel bud, fine film, and fibre-line
 trace with nice pencil on the small design. 
the young Narcissus, in it be bulb compress,
 cradle a second nestle on its breast;
 in who fine arm a young embryon lie,
 fold its thin leaf, and shut its floret-eye;
 grain within grain successive harvest dwell,
 and boundless forest slumber in a shell. 
— so yond grey precipice, and ivy tower,
 long wind mead, and intermingle bower,
 green file of poplar, over the lake that bow,
 and glimmer wheel, which roll and foam below,
 in one bright point with nice distinction lie
 plane on the move tablet of the eye. 
— so, fold on fold, earth wavy plain extend,
 and, sphere in sphere, its hide strata bend; —
 incumbent spring her beamy plume expand
 over restless ocean, and impatient land,
 with genial lustre warm the mighty ball,
 and the great seed evolve, disclose all;
 life bud or breathe from Indus to the pole,
 and the vast surface kindle, as it roll! 

3.   "come, you soft sylph! who sport on latian land,
 come, sweet-liped zephyr, and Favonius bland! 
teach the fine seed, instinct with life, to shoot
 on earth cold bosom its descend root;
 with pith elastic stretch its rise stem,
 part the twin lobe, expand the throb gem;
 clasp in your airy arm the aspire plume,
 fan with your balmy breath its kindle bloom,
 each widen scale and burst film unfold,
 swell the green cup, and tint the flower with gold;
 while in bright vein the silvery sap ascend,
 and refluent blood in milky eddy bend;
 while, spread in air, the leaf respire play,
 or drink the golden quintessence of day. 
— so from his shell on delta shower-less isle
 burst into life the monster of the Nile;
 first in translucent lymph with cobweb-thread
 the brain fine float tissue swell, and spread;
 nerve after nerve the glisten spine descend,
 the red heart dance, the aorta bend;
 through each new gland the purple current glide,
 new vein meander drink the refluent tide;
 edge over edge expand the harden scale,
 and sheath his slimy skin in silver mail. 
— erewhile, emerge from the brood sand,
 with tyger-paw he print the brineless strand,
 high on the flood with speckle bosom swim,
 helmed with broad tail, and oar with giant limb;
 roll his fierce eye-ball, clasp his iron claw,
 and champ with gnash tooth his massy jaw;
 old Nilus sigh along his cane-crowned shore,
 and swarthy Memphis tremble and adore. 

xi.  "come, you soft sylph! who fan the paphian grove,
 and bear on sportive wing the callow love;
 call with sweet whisper, in each gale that blow,
 the slumber snowdrop from her long repose;
 charm the pale primrose from her clay-cold bed,
 unveil the bashful Violet tremulous head;
 while from her bud the playful tulip break,
 and young carnation peep with blush cheek;
 bid the close petal from nocturnal cold
 the virgin style in silken curtain fold,
 shake into viewless air the morning dew,
 and wave in light their iridescent hue;
 while from on high the burst anther trust
 to the mild breeze their prolific dust;
 or bend in rapture over the central fair,
 love out their hour, and leave their life in air. 
so in his silken sepulchre the worm,
 warm with new life, unfold his larva-form;
 erewhile aloft in wanton circle move,
 and woo on hymen-wing his velvet love. 

xii. 1.   "if proud branch with exuberance rude
 point their green gem, their barren shoot protrude;
 wound they, you sylph! with little knife, or bind
 a wiry ringlet round the swell rind;
 bisect with chisel fine the root below,
 or bend to earth the inhospitable bough. 
so shall each germ with new prolific power
 delay the leaf-bud, and expand the flower;
 close in the style the tender pith shall end,
 the lengthen wood in circle stamens bend;
 the smooth rind its soft embroidery spread
 in vault petal over their fertile bed;
 while the rough bark, in circle maze roll,
 form the green cup with many a wrinkle fold;
 and each small bud-scale spread its foliage hard,
 firm round the callow germ, a floral guard. 

2.   "where crude juice swell the leafy vein,
 stint the young germ, the tender blossom stain;
 on each lope shoot a foster scion bind,
 pith press to pith, and rind apply to rind,
 so shall the trunk with lofty crest ascend,
 and wide in air its happy arm extend;
 nurse the new bud, admire the leaf unknown,
 and blush bend with fruitage not its own. 

 "thus when in holy triumph Aaron tread,
 and offer on the shrine his mystic rod;
 first a new bark its silken tissue weave,
 new bud emerge widen into leaf;
 fair fruit protrude, enascent flower expand,
 and blush and tremble round the live wand. 

xiii. 1.   "sylph! on each oak-bud wind the wormy gall,
 with pigmy spear, or crush the venom ball;
 fright the green locust from his foamy bed,
 unweave the caterpillar gluey thread;
 chase the fierce earwig, scare the bloat toad,
 arrest the snail upon his slimy road;
 arm with sharp thorn the sweet-brier's tender wood,
 and dash the cynip from her damask bud;
 steep in ambrosial dew the woodbine bell,
 and drive the night-moth from her honeyed cell. 
so where the humming-bird in chili bower
 on murmur pinion rob this pendent flower;
 seek, where fine pore their dulcet balm distil,
 and suck the treasure with proboscis-bill;
 fair cyprepedia with succesfful guile
 knit her smooth brow, extinguish her smile;
 a spider bloat paunch and joint arm
 hide her fine form, and mask her blush charm;
 in ambush sly the mimic warrior lie,
 and on quick wing the pant plunderer fly. 

2 "shield the young harvest from devour blight,
 the smut dark poison, and the mildew white;
 deep-rooted mould, and ergot horn uncouth,
 and break the canker desolate tooth. 
first in one point the fester wound confine
 mine unperceived beneath the shrivel rined;
 then climb the branch with increase strength,
 spread as they spread, and lengthen with their length;
 — thus the slight wound engrave on glass unneal
 run in white line along the lucid field;
 crack follow crack, to law elastic just,
 and the frail fabric shiver into dust. 

xiv. 1.   "sylph! if with morn destructive eurus spring,
 o, clasp the harebel with your velvet wing;
 screen with thick leaf the jasmine as it blow,
 and shake the white rhyme from the shudder rose;
 while Amaryllis turn with graceful ease
 her blush beauty, and elude the breeze. —
 sylph! if at noon the fritillary droop,
 with drop nectareous hang she nod cup;
 thin cloud of gossamer in air display,
 and hide the vale chaste lily from the ray;
 while erythrina over her tender flower
 bend all her leaf, and brave the sultry hour; —
 shield, when cold Hesper shed his dewy light,
 mimosa soft sensation from the night;
 fold she thin foilage, close her timid flower,
 and with ambrosial slumber guard her bower;
 over each warm wall while Cerea fling her arm,
 and waste on night dull eye a blaze of charm. 

2.  round her tall elm with dewy finger twine
 the gad tendril of the adventurous vine;
 from arm to arm in gay festoon suspend
 her fragrant flower, her graceful foliage bend;
 swell with sweet juice her vermil orb, and feed
 shrine in transparent pulp she pear seed;
 hang round the orange all her silver bell,
 and guard her fragrance with hesperian spell;
 but after but her polish leaf unfold,
 and load her branch with successive gold. 
so the learn alchemist exult see
 rise in his bright mattress diana tree;
 drop after drop, with just delay he pour
 the red-fumed acid on potosi oar;
 with sudden flash the fierce bullition rise,
 and wide in air the gas phlogistic fly;
 slow shoot, at length, in many a brilliant mass
 metallic root across the net glass;
 branch after branch extend their silver stem,
 but into gold, and blossom into gem. 

so sit enthrone in vegetable pride
 imperial Kew by thames glitter side;
 obedient sail from realm unfurrowed bring
 for she the unnamed progeny of spring;
 attendant nymph her dulcet mandate hear,
 and nurse in foster arm the tender year,
 plant the young bulb, inhume the live seed,
 prop the weak stem, the err tendril lead;
 or fan in glass-built fane the strange flower
 with mild gale, and steep with warm shower. 
delight Thames through tropic umbrage glide,
 and flower antarctic, bend over his tide;
 drink the new tint, the sweet unknown inhale,
 and call the son of science to his vale. 
in one bright point admire nature eye
 the fruit and foliage of discordant sky,
 twine the gay floret with the fragrant bough,
 and bend the wreath round George royal brow. 
— sometime retire, from the public weal
 one tranquil hour the royal partner steal;
 through glade exotic pass with step sublime,
 or mark the growth of britain happy clime;
 with beauty blossom, and with virtue blaze,
 mark the fair scion, that themselves have raise;
 sweet bloom the rose, the tower oak expand,
 the grace and guard of britain golden land. 

XV. sylph! who, round earth on purple pinion bear,
 attend the radiant chariot of the morn;
 lead the gay hour along the ethereal hight,
 and on each dun meridian shower the light;
 sylph! who from realm of equatorial day
 to clime, that shudder in the polar ray,
 from zone to zone pursue on shift wing,
 the bright perennial journey of the spring;
 bring my rich balm from mecca hallow glade,
 sweet flower, that glitter in arabia shade;
 fruit, who fair form in bright succession glow
 gild the bank of Arno, or of po;
 each leaf, who fragrant steam with ruby lip
 gay china nymph from picture vase sip;
 each spicy rind, which sultry India boast,
 scent the night-air round her breezy coast;
 root who bold stem in bleak Siberia blow,
 and gem with many a tint the eternal snow;
 bark, who broad umbrage high in ether wave
 over ande steep, and hide his golden cave;
 — and, where yond oak extend his dusky shoot
 wide over the rill, that bubble from his root;
 beneath who arm, protect from the storm
 a turf-built altar rear it be rustic form;
 sylph! with religious hand fresh garland twine,
 and deck with lavish pomp hygeia shrine. 

 "call with loud voice the sisterhood, that dwell
 on floating-cloud, wide wave, or bubble well;
 stamp with charm foot, convoke the alarm gnome
 from golden bed, and adamantine dome;
 each from her sphere with beckon arm invite,
 curl with red flame, the vestal form of light. 
close all your spot wing, in lucid rank
 press with your bend knee the crowd bank,
 cross your meek arm, incline your wreathe brow,
 and win the goddess with unwearied vow. 

 "oh, wave, hygeia! over britannia throne
 thy serpent-wand, and mark it for thy own;
 lead round her breezy coast thy guardian train,
 her nod forest, and her wave plain;
 shed over her people realm thy beamy smile,
 and with thy airy temple crown her isle!" 

the goddess cease, — and call from afar
 the wander zephyr, join they to her car;
 mount with light bind, and graceful, as she bend,
 whirl the long lash, the flexile rein extend;
 on whisper wheel the silver axle slide,
 climb into air, and cleave the crystal tide;
 burst from its pearly chain, her amber hair
 stream over her ivory shoulder, buoy in air;
 swell her white veil, with ruby clasp confine
 round her fair brow, and undulate behind;
 the lessen courser rise in spiral ring,
 pierce the slow-sailing cloud, and stretch their shadowy wing. 

verse omit by mistake, to be insert after line 320.  Canto iii. page 140. 

— here her sad consort, steal through the gloom
 of murmur cloister, gaze on her tomb;
 hang in mute anguish over the scutcheoned hearse,
 or grave with tremble style the votive verse. 

 "sexton! oh, lay beneath this sacred shrine,
 when time be cold hand shall close my ache eye,
 oh, gentle lie this weary earth of i,
 where wrap in night my love MILCENA lie. 

 "so shall with pure joy my spirit move,
 when the last trumpet thrill the cave of death,
 catch the first whisper of my wake love,
 and drink with holy kiss her kindle breath. 

 "the spotless fair, with blush ethereal warm,
 shall hail with sweet smile return day,
 rise from her marble bed a bright form,
 and win on buoyant step her airy way. 

 "shall bend approve, where beckon host invite,
 on cloud of silver her adore knee,
 approach with Seraphim the throne of light,
 — and beauty plead with angel-tongue for i!" 
