epistle in the manner of Ovid.

Monimia to Philocles.

by the same.

since language never can describe my pain,
how can i hope to move when i complain?
but such be woman frenzy in distress,
we love to plead, though hopeless of redress.

perhaps, affect ignorance, 'thou'lt say,
from whence these line? who message to convey?
mock not my grief with that feign cold demand,
too well you know the hapless writer hand:
but if you force i to avow my shame,
behold it prefaced with monimia name.

lose to the world, abandon and forlorn,
expose to infamy, reproach, and scorn,
to mirth and comfort lose, and all for you,
yet lose, perhaps, to your remembrance too,
how hard my lot! what refuge can i try,
weary of life, and yet afraid to die!
of hope, the wretch last resort, bereave,
by friend, by kindred, by my lover, leave.
oh! frail dependence of confide fool!
on lover oath, or friendship sacred rule,
how weak in modern heat, too late i find,
monimia fall, and Philocles unkind!
to these reflection, each slow wear day,
and each revolve night a constant prey,
think what i suffer, nor ungentle hear
what madness dictate in my fond despair;
grudge not this short relief, (too fast it fly)
nor chide that weakness i myself despise.
one moment sure may be at least her due,
who sacrifice she all of life for you.
without a frown this farewell then receive,
for, it be the last my hapless love shall give;
nor this i will, if reason can command,
but what restriction reins a lover hand?
nor prudence, shame, nor pride, nor interest sway,
the hand implicit the heart obey:
too well this maxim have my conduct show,
too well that conduct to the world be know.

oft have i write, and often to the flame
condemn this after-witness of my shame;
oft in my cool recollect thought,
thy beauty, and my fondness half forget,
(how short those interval for reason aid!)
thus to myself in anguish have i say.

thy vain remonstrance, foolish maid, give over,
who act the wrong, can never that wrong deplore.
then sanguine hope again delusive reign,
i form thou melt, as i tell my pain.
if not of rock thy flinty heart be make,
nor tiger nurse thou in the desert shade,
let i at least thy cold compassion prove,
that slender sustenance of greedy love:
though no return my warm wish find,
be to the wretch, though not the mistress, kind;
nor while i court my melancholy state,
forget it be love, and thou, that wrought my fate.
without restraint habituate to range,
the path of pleasure; can i bear this change?
doom from the world unwilling to retire,
in bloom of life, and warm with young desire,
in lieu of roof with regal splendour gay,
condemn in distant wild to drag the day;
where beast of prey maintain their savage court,
or human brute (the worst of brute) resort.
yes, yes, the change i can unsighing see,
for none i mourn, but what i find in thou,
there centre all my woe, thy heart estrange,
i weep my lover, not my fortune, change;
bless with thy presence, i can all forget,
nor gild palace in hut regret,
but exile thence, superfluous be the rest,
each place the same, my hell be in my breast;
to pleasure dead, and live but to pain,
my only sense to suffer, and complain.

as all my wrong distressful i repeat,
say, can thy pulse with equal cadence beat?
can thou know peace? be conscience mute within?
that upright delegate for secret sin;
be nature so extinguish in thy heart,
that not one spark remain to take my part?
not one repentant throb, one grateful sigh?
thy breast unruffled, and unwet thy eye?
thou cool betrayer, temperate in ill!
thou nor remorse, nor think humane can feel:
nature have form thou of the rough kind,
and education more debase thy mind,
bear in a age when guilt and fraud prevail,
when justice sleep, and interest hold the scale;
thy loose companion a licentious crew,
most to each other, all to we untrue,
who chance, or habit mix, but rare choice,
nor league in friendship, but in social vice,
who indigent of honour, or of shame,
glory in crime which other blush to name;
by right or wrong disdain to be move,
unprincipled, unloving, and unloved.
the fair who trust their prostitute vow,
if not their falsehood, still their boast expose;
nor know the wise to elude the harm,
even she who prudence shun the tinsel charm
they know to slander, though they fail to warm:
they make she languish in fictitious flame,
affix some specious slander on her name,
and baffle by her virtue, triumph over her fame.

these be the leader of thy blind youth,
these vile seducer laugh thou out of truth;
who scurril jest all solemn tie profane,
or friendship band, or Hymen sacred chain;
morality as weakness they upbraid,
nor even revere religion hallow head;
alike they spurn divine and human law,
and treat the honest like the christian cause.
curse on that tongue who vile pernicious art
delight the ear but to corrupt the heart,
that take advantage of the cheerful hour,
when weaken virtue bend to nature power,
and will the goodness of the soul efface,
to substitute dishonour in her place.

with such you lose the day in false delight,
in lewd debauch you revel out the night,
(o fatal commerce to monimia peace!)
their argument convince because they please;
while sophistry for reason they admit,
and wander dazzle by the glare of wit,
wit that on ill a specious lustre throw,
and in false colour every object show,
that gild the wrong, depreciate the right,
and hurt the judgement, while it feast the sight;
so in the prism to the delude eye
each picture trifle take a rainbow dye,
with borrow charm the shine prospect glow,
and truth reverse the faithless mirror show,
invert scene in bright confusion lie,
the lawn impend over the nether sky;
no just, no real image we meet,
but all the gaudy vision be deceit.

oft i revolve in this distract mind
each word, each look, that speak my charmer kind;
but oh! how dear their memory i pay!
what pleasure past can present care allay?
of all i love for ever dispossess:
ah! what avail to think i once be bless?
hard disposition of unequal fate!
mix be our joy, and transient be their date;
nor can reflection bring they back again,
yet bring a after-sting to every pain.

thy fatal letter, oh immoral youth,
those perjure pledge of fictitious truth,
dear as they be not second joy afford,
my credulous heart once leap at every word,
my glow bosom throb with thick-heaved sigh,
and flood of rapture gush into my eye:
when now repeat (for thy theft be vain,
each treasure syllable my thought retain)
far other passion rule, and different care,
my joy and grief, my transport and despair.

why do thou mock the tie of constant love?
but half its joy the faithless ever prove,
they only taste the pleasure they receive,
when sure the noble be in those we give.
acceptance be the heaven which mortal know,
but it be the bliss of angel to bestow.
oh! emulate, my love, that task divine,
be thou that angel, and that heaven be i.
yes, yet relent, yet intercept my fate:
alas! i rave, and sue for new deceit.
as soon the dead shall from the grave return,
as love extinguish with new ardor burn.
oh! that i dare to act a roman part,
and stab thy image in this faithful heart,
where rivet for life secure you reign,
a cruel inmate, author of my pain:
but coward-like irresolute i wait
time be tardy aid, nor dare to rush on fate;
perhaps may linger on life late stage,
survey thy cruelty, and fall by age:
no — grief shall swell my sail, and speed i over
(despair my pilot) to that quiet shore
where i can trust, and thou betray no more.
may i but once again behold thy charm,
may i but breathe my last in those dear arm,
on that love face but fix my close eye,
permit where i may not live to die,
my soften fate i will accuse no more;
but fate have not such happiness in store.
it be past, it be do — what gleam of hope behind,
when i can never be false, nor thou be kind?
why then this care? — it be weak — it be vain — farewell —
at that last word what agony i feel!
i faint — i die — remember i be true —
it be all i ask — eternal — adieu! —
