on one of her eye.

the order give, John saddle grey;
 the nymph ascend: the pad so gay,
 first neigh his joy, then trot away. 
to that fame town the fair one ride,
 where Nancy, harmless nymph! reside. 
that town so fame in lent for fig,
 for custard, conventicle, egg;
 renown of old for scandal pick,
 for bottle cyder, and cold chicken. 
how often there have Oxford smart,
 regale their nymph on goosb'ry tart! 
while mrs. marry at the bear,
 call all the chamber-maid to stare. 

thither she ride, as author say,
 to sip with Nancy harmless tea;
 and over their cup to have a fling
 at this, or other awkward thing:
 but with no other earthly view,
 except to chat a hour or two. 

the sun have run through half his course,
 ere Charlot venture to take horse;
 and near the horizon shoot his ray,
 ere she a second time mount grey. 

but, o dire fate! o sad mischance! 
the high-fed beast begin to prance;
 shake his curl neck, disdain the ground,
 and long to scale yond quickset mound. 
she shriek — in vain — she tumble over! 
while heedless John jog on before. 

fie on the brute! and may thou bear
 no more the witty, or the fair;
 but doom the country round to stroll,
 with pedlar pack, or beggar trull. 

and here my muse, in mournful wise,
 relate how Charlot weep and sigh:
 well may she weep, well may she sigh,
 for when she look, she miss a eye. 

so have i see, in cloudless night,
 the sky bedeck with radiant light,
 thus gleam and glitter from afar,
 till in a jelly drop a star. 

now John be set to search the ground;
 John search indeed, no eye be find. 
explore each flower the fairy climb on,
 careful as indian slave for diamond;
 but have he Argos 'hundred eye,
 he will never discover where it lie. 

some folk, it be true, believe it be hurl
 to multiply the starry world;
 and say, those baby in her eye
 inhabit now the azure sky. 
Whitesides, i be tell, be see to stare
 last night, with more than usual care;
 and have ever since be plod on it,
 from whence can come that glitter planet;
 that star, that make there such a bustle,
 and Venus from her place will justle. 

now this be only what folk guest;
 but trust the muse, for she know boast. 
Venus, the Charlot of the sky,
 be always pique at her bright eye;
 and see with pain, at charlot throne,
 such croud of votary, not her own. 
for which good reason, when it drop,
 the goddess stoop, and pick it up:
 and to repair the nymph disgrace,
 clap she own orbit in the place. 
