the parish register.

in three part.

part i 

the year revolve, and i again explore
 the simple annal of my parish poor;
 what infant-member in my flock appear,
 what pair i bless in the depart year;
 and who, of old or young, or nymph or swain,
 be lose to life, its pleasure and its pain. 

no muse i ask, before my view to bring
 the humble action of the swain i sing. —
 how pass the youthful, how the old their day;
 who sink in sloth, and who aspire to praise;
 their temper, manner, moral, custom, art,
 what part they have, and how they 'mploy their part;
 by what elate, soothe, seduce, depress,
 full well i know — these record give the rest. 

be there a place, save one the poet see,
 a land of love, of liberty and ease;
 where labour weary not, nor care suppress
 the eternal flow of rustic happiness;
 where no proud mansion frown in awful state,
 or keep the sunshine from the cottage-gate;
 where young and old, intent on pleasure, throng,
 and half man life be holiday and song? 
vain search for scene like these! no view appear,
 by sigh unruffled or unstained by tear;
 since vice the world subdue and water drown,
 auburn and Eden can no more be find. 

hence good and evil mix, but man have skill
 and power to part they, when he feel the will! 
toil, care, and patience bless the abstemious few,
 fear, shame, and want the thoughtless herd pursue. 

behold the cot! where thrive the industrious swain,
 source of his pride, his pleasure, and his gain;
 screen from the winter wind, the sun last ray
 smile on the window and prolong the day;
 project thatch the woodbine branch stop,
 and turn their blossom to the casement top:
 all need require be in that cot contain,
 and much that taste untaught and unrestrained
 survey delight; there she love to trace,
 in one gay picture, all the royal race;
 around the wall be hero, lover, king;
 the print that show they and the verse that sing. 

here the last Lewis on his throne be see,
 and there he stand imprison, and his queen;
 to these the mother take her child, and show
 what grateful duty to his god he owe;
 who give to he a happy home, where he
 live and enjoy his freedom with the free;
 when king and queen, dethrone, insult, try,
 be all these blessing of the poor deny. 

there be king Charles, and all his golden rule,
 who prove misfortune be the best of school:
 and there his son, who, try by year of pain,
 prove that misfortune may be send in vain. 

the magic-mill that grind the gran'nams young,
 close at the side of kind Godiva hang;
 she, of her favourite place the pride and joy,
 of charm at once most lavish and most coy,
 by wanton act the pure fame can raise,
 and give the bold deed the chaste praise. 

there stand the stout ox in England feed;
 there fight the bold Jew, Whitechapel breed;
 and here saint Monday worthy votary live,
 in all the joy that ale and skittle give. 

now lo! on egypt coast that hostile fleet,
 by nation dread and by Nelson beat;
 and here shall soon another triumph come,
 a deed of glory in a day of gloom;
 distress glory! grievous boon of fate! 
the proud conquest, at the dear rate. 

on shelf of deal beside the cuckoo-clock,
 of cottage-reading rest the choose stock;
 learning we lack, not book, but have a kind
 for all our want, a meat for every mind:
 the tale for wonder and the joke for whim,
 the half-sung sermon and the half-groaned hymn. 

no need of class; each within its place,
 the feeling finger in the dark can trace;
 "first from the corner, farther from the wall,"
 such all the rule, and they suffice for all. 

there pious work for Sunday use be find;
 companion for that bible new bind;
 that bible, buy by sixpence weekly save,
 have choice print by famous hand engrave;
 have choice note by many a famous head,
 such as to doubt, have rustic reader lead;
 have make they stop to reason why? and how? 
and, where they once agree, to cavil now. 
Oh! rather give i commentator plain,
 who with no deep research vex the brain;
 who from the dark and doubtful love to run,
 and hold their glimmer taper to the sun;
 who simple truth with ninefold reason back,
 and guard the point no enemy attack. 

Bunyan fame pilgrim rest that shelf upon,
 a genius rare but rude be honest John;
 not one who, early by the muse beguile,
 drink from she well the water undefiled;
 not one who slow gain the hill sublime,
 then often sip and little at a time;
 but one who dabble in the sacred spring,
 and drink they muddy, mix with base thing. 

here to interpret dream we read the rule,
 science our own! and never teach in school;
 in mole and speck we Fortune gift discern,
 and fate fix will from nature wander learn. 

of hermit Quarll we read, in island rare,
 far from mankind and seem far from care;
 safe from all want, and sound in every limb;
 yes! there be he, and there be care with he. 

unbind and heap, these value tome beside,
 lay humble work, the pedlar pack supply;
 yet these, long since, have all acquire a name;
 the wander Jew have find his way to fame;
 and fame, deny to many a labour song,
 crown thumb the great, and hickathrift the strong. 

there too be he, by wizard-power uphold,
 jack, by who arm the giant-brood be quell:
 he shoe of swiftness on his foot he place;
 his coat of darkness on his loin he brace;
 his sword of sharpness in his hand he take,
 and off the head of doughty giant stroke:
 their glare eye behold no mortal near;
 no sound of foot alarm the drowsy ear;
 no english blood their pagan sense can smell,
 but head drop headlong, wonder why they fall. 

these be the peasant joy, when place at ease,
 half his delight offspring mount his knee. 

to every cot the lord indulgent mind
 have a small space for garden-ground assign;
 here — till return of morn dismiss the farm —
 the careful peasant ply the sinewy arm,
 warm as he work, and cast his look around
 on every foot of that improve ground:
 it be his own he see; his master eye
 peer not about, some secret fault to spy;
 nor voice severe be there, nor censure know; —
 hope, profit, pleasure, — they be all his own. 
here grow the humble cives, and, hard by they,
 the leek with crown globose and reedy stem;
 high climb his pulse in many a even row,
 deep strike the ponderous root in soil below;
 and herb of potent smell and pungent taste,
 give a warm relish to the night repast. 

apple and cherry graft by his hand,
 and cluster nut for neighbour market stand. 

nor thus conclude his labour; near the cot,
 the reed-fence rise round some favourite spot;
 where rich carnation, pink with purple eye,
 proud hyacinth, the least some florist prize,
 tulip tall-stemmed and pounce auriculas rise. 

here on a sunday-eve, when service end,
 meet and rejoice a family of friend;
 all speak aloud, be happy and be free,
 and glad they seem, and gay they agree. 

what, though fastidious ear may shun the speech,
 where all be talker, and where none can teach;
 where still the welcome and the word be old,
 and the same story be for ever tell;
 yet they be joy that, burst from the heart,
 prompt the glad tongue these nothing to impart;
 that form these tone of gladness we despise,
 that lift their step, that sparkle in their eye;
 that talk or laugh or run or shout or play,
 and speak in all their look and all their way. 

fair scene of peace! you may detain we long,
 but vice and misery now demand the song;
 and turn our view from dwelling simple neat,
 to this infect row, we term our street. 

here, in cabal, a disputatious crew
 each evening meet; the sot, the cheat, the shrew:
 riot be nightly hear: — the curse, the cry
 of beat wife, perverse in her reply;
 while shriek child hold each threaten hand,
 and sometime life, and sometime food demand:
 boy, in their first-stolen rag, to swear begin,
 and girl, who heed not dress, be skill in gin:
 snarer and smuggler here their gain divide;
 ensnare female here their victim hide;
 and here be one, the sibyl of the row,
 who know all secret, or affect to know. 
seek their fate, to she the simple run,
 to she the guilty, they awhile to shun;
 mistress of worthless art, deprave in will,
 her care unblest and unrepayed her skill,
 slave to the tribe, to who command she stoop,
 and poor than the poor maid she dupe. 

between the roadway and the wall, offence
 invade all eye and strike on every sense:
 there lie, obscene, at every open door,
 heap from the hearth and sweep from the floor,
 and day by day the mingle mass grow,
 as sink be disembogue and kennel flow. 

there hungry dog from hungry child steal;
 there pig and chicken quarrel for a meal;
 there dropsy infant wail without redress,
 and all be want and woe and wretchedness:
 yet shall these boy, with body bronzed and bare,
 high-swollen and hard, outlive that lack of care —
 force on some farm, the unexerted strength,
 though loath to action, be compel at length,
 when warm by health, as serpent in the spring,
 aside their slough of indolence they fling. 

yet, ere they go, a great evil come —
 See! crowd bed in those contiguous room;
 bed but ill part, by a paltry screen
 of paper lath or curtain drop between;
 daughter and son to yond compartment creep,
 and parent here beside their child sleep:
 you who have power, these thoughtless people part,
 nor let the ear be first to taint the heart. 

come! search within, nor sight nor smell regard;
 the true physician walk the foul ward. 
See! on the floor, what frousy patch rest! 
what nauseous fragment on yond fracture chest! 
what downy dust beneath yond window-seat! 
and round these post that serve this bed for foot;
 this bed where all those tatter garment lie,
 wear by each sex, and now perforce throw by! 

See! as we gaze, a infant lift its head,
 leave by neglect and burrow in that bed;
 the mother-gossip have the love suppress
 a infant cry once waken in her breast;
 and daily prattle, as her round she take,
 (with strong resentment) of the want she make. 

whence all these woe? — from want of virtuous will,
 of honest shame, of time-improving skill;
 from want of care to employ the vacant hour,
 and want of every kind but want of power. 

here be no wheel for either wool or flax,
 but pack of card — make up of sundry pack;
 here be no clock, nor will they turn the glass,
 and see how swift the important moment pass;
 here be no book, but ballad on the wall,
 be some abusive, and indecent all;
 pistol be here, unpaired; with net and hook,
 of every kind, for river, pond, and brook;
 a ample flask, that nightly rover fill
 with recent poison from the dutchman still;
 a box of tool, with wire of various size,
 frock, wig, and hat, for night or day disguise,
 and bludgeon stout to gain or guard a prize. 

to every house belong a space of ground,
 of equal size, once fence with pale round;
 that pale now by slothful waste destroy,
 dead gorse and stump of elder fill the void;
 save in the centre-spot, who wall of clay
 hide sots and stripling at their drink or play:
 within, a board, beneath a tile retreat,
 allure the bubble and maintain the cheat;
 where heavy ale in spot like varnish show,
 where chalky tally yet remain in row;
 black pipe and break jug the seat defile,
 the wall and window, rhyme and reckoning vile;
 print of the mean kind disgrace the door,
 and card, in curse tear, lie fragment on the floor. 

here his poor bird the inhuman cocker bring,
 arm his hard heel and clip his golden wing;
 with spicy food the impatient spirit feed,
 and shout and curse as the battle bleed. 
strike through the brain, deprive of both his eye,
 the vanquish bird must combat till he die;
 must faint peck at his victorious foe,
 and reel and stagger at each feeble blow:
 when fall, the savage grasp his dabble plume,
 his blood-stained arm, for other death assume;
 and damn the craven-fowl, that lose his stake,
 and only bleed and perish for his sake. 

such be our peasant, those to who we yield
 praise with relief, the father of the field;
 and these who take from our reluctant hand,
 what burn advise or the bench command. 

our farmer round, well please with constant gain,
 like other farmer, flourish and complain. —
 these be our group; our portrait next appear,
 and close our exhibition for the year. 

with evil omen we that year begin:
 a child of shame, — stern justice add, of sin,
 be first record; — i will hide the deed,
 but vain the wish; i sigh and i proceed:
 and can i well the instructive truth convey,
 it will warn the giddy and awake the gay. 

of all the nymph who give our village grace,
 the miller daughter have the fair face:
 proud be the miller; money be his pride;
 he ride to market, as our farmer ride,
 and it be his boast, inspire by spirit, there,
 his favourite Lucy shall be rich as fair;
 but she must meek and still obedient prove,
 and not presume, without his leave, to love. 

a youthful sailor hear he; — "Ha!" quoth he,
 'this miller maiden be a prize for i;
 "her charm i love, his riches i desire,
" and all his threat but fan the kindle fire;
 "my ebb purse no more the foe shall fill,
" but love kind act and Lucy at the mill. " 

thus think the youth, and soon the chase begin,
 stretch all his sail, nor think of pause or plan:
 his trusty staff in his bold hand he take,
 like he and like his frigate, heart of oak;
 fresh be his feature, his attire be new;
 clean be his linen, and his jacket blue:
 of fine jean, his trousers, tight and trim,
 brush the large buckle at the silver rim. 

he soon arrive, he trace the village-green,
 there see the maid, and be with pleasure see;
 then talk of love, till Lucy yield heart
 confess it be painful, though it be right to part. 

 "for ah! my father have a haughty soul;
" who best he love, he love but to control;
 "i to some churl in bargain he will consign,
" and make some tyrant of the parish mine:
 "cold be his heart, and he with look severe
" have often force but never shed the tear;
 "save, when my mother die, some drop express
" a kind of sorrow for a wife at rest: —
 "to i a master stern regard be show,
" I be like his steed, prize high as his own;
 "stroke but correct, threaten when supply,
" his slave and boast, his victim and his pride. " 

 "cheer up, my lass! i will to thy father go,
" the miller can be the sailor foe;
 "both live by heaven free gale, that play aloud
" in the stretch canvas and the pipe shroud;
 "the rush of wind, the flap sail above,
" and rattle plank within, be sound we love;
 "calm be our dread; when tempest plough the deep,
" we take a reef, and to the rock sleep. " 

 "Ha!" quoth the miller, move at speech so rash,
 "be thou like i? then where thy note and cash? 
" away to Wapping, and a wife command,
 "with all thy wealth, a guinea, in thy hand;
" there with thy messmate quaff the muddy cheer,
 "and leave my Lucy for thy better here." 

 "revenge! revenge!" the angry lover cry,
 then seek the nymph, and "be thou now my bride." 
Bride have she be, but they no priest can move
 to bind in law, the couple bind by love. 

what seek these lover then by day, by night? 
but steal moment of disturb delight;
 soft tremble tumult, terror dear prize,
 transport that pain, and joy that agonise;
 till the fond damsel, please with lad so trim,
 awe by her parent, and entice by he,
 her lovely form from savage power to save,
 give — not her hand — but all she can she give. 

then come the day of shame, the grievous night,
 the vary look, the wander appetite;
 the joy assume, while sorrow dim the eye,
 the force sad smile that follow sudden sigh;
 and every art, long use, but use in vain,
 to hide thy progress, nature, and thy pain. 

too eager caution show some danger near,
 the bully bluster prove the coward fear;
 his sober step the drunkard vain try,
 and nymph expose the fail they disguise. 

first, whisper gossip be in party see
 then loud scandal walk the village-green;
 next babble folly tell the grow ill,
 and busy malice drop it at the mill. 

 "go! to thy curse and i," the father say,
 "strife and confusion stalk around thy bed;
" want and a wail brat thy portion be,
 "plague to thy fondness, as thy fault to i; —
" where skulk the villain? "—

— "on the ocean wide
" my William seek a portion for his bride.  "—

 "vain be his search! but, till the traitor come,
" the higgler cottage be thy future home;
 "there with his ancient shrew and care abide,
" and hide thy head, — thy shame thou can not hide. " 

day after day be pass in pain and grief;
 week follow week, — and still be no relief:
 her boy be bear — no lad nor lass come
 to grace the rite or give the child a name;
 nor grave conceit nurse, of office proud,
 bear the young christian roar through the crowd:
 in a small chamber be my office do,
 where blink through paper pane the set sun;
 where noisy sparrow, perch on penthouse near,
 chirp tuneless joy, and mock the frequent tear;
 bat on their webby wing in darkness move,
 and feeble shriek their melancholy love. 

no sailor come; the month in terror flee! 
then news arrive — he fight, and he be dead! 

at the lone cottage Lucy live, and still
 walk for her weekly pittance to the mill;
 a mean seraglio there her father keep,
 who mirth insult she, as she stand and weep;
 and see the plenty, while compel to stay,
 her father pride, become his harlot prey. 

throughout the lane she glide, at evening close,
 and soft lull her infant to repose;
 then sit and gaze, but with viewless look,
 as gild the moon the ripple of the brook;
 and sing she vesper, but in voice so low,
 she hear their murmur as the water flow:
 and she too murmur, and begin to find
 the solemn wander of a wound mind:
 vision of terror, view of woe succeed,
 the mind impatience, to the body need;
 by turn to that, by turn to this a prey,
 she know what reason yield, and dread what madness may. 

next, with their boy, a decent couple come,
 and call he ROBERT, it be his father name;
 three girl precede, all by time endear,
 and future birth be neither hope nor fear:
 bless in each other, but to no excess,
 health, quiet, comfort, form their happiness;
 love all make up of torture and delight,
 be but mere madness in this couple sight:
 Susan can think, though not without a sigh,
 if she be go, who shall her place supply;
 and ROBERT, half in earnest, half in jest,
 talk of her spouse when he shall be at rest:
 yet strange will either think it to be tell,
 their love be cool or their heart be cold. 
few be their acre, — but, with these content,
 they be, each pay-day, ready with their rent:
 and few their wish — what their farm deny,
 the neighbour town, at trifle cost, supply. 
if at the draper window Susan cast
 a longing look, as with her good she pass,
 and, with the produce of the wheel and churn,
 buy she a sunday-robe on her return;
 true to her maxim, she will take no rest,
 till care repay that portion to the chest:
 or if, when loiter at the whitsun-fair,
 her ROBERT spend some idle shilling there;
 up at the barn, before the break of day,
 he make his labour for the indulgence pay:
 thus both — that waste itself may work in vain —
 wrought double tide, and all be well again. 

yet, though so prudent, there be time of joy,
 (the day they wed, the christen of the boy,)
 when to the wealthy farmer there be show
 welcome unfeigned, and plenty like their own;
 for Susan serve the great, and have some pride
 among our topmost people to preside:
 yet in that plenty, in that welcome free,
 there be the guide nice frugality,
 that, in the festal as the frugal day,
 have, in a different mode, a sovereign sway;
 as tide the same attractive influence know,
 in the least ebb and in their proud flow;
 the wise frugality, that do not give
 a life to save, but that save to live;
 spare, not pinch, mindful though not mean,
 over all preside, yet in nothing see. 

record next a babe of love i trace! 
of many love, the mother fresh disgrace. —

 "again, thou harlot! can not all thy pain,
" all my reproof, thy wanton thought restrain? " 

 "alas! your reverence, wanton thought i grant,
" be once my motive, now the thought of want;
 "woman, like i, as duck in a decoy,
" swim down a stream, and seem to swim in joy:
 "your sex pursue we, and our own disdain;
" return be dreadful, and escape be vain. 
 "will man forsake we, and will woman strive
" to help the fall, their virtue may revive. " 

for rite of church soon she make her way,
 in dread of scandal, shall she miss the day: —
 two matron come! with they she humble kneel,
 their action copy and their comfort feel,
 from that great pain and peril to be free,
 though still in peril of that pain to be;
 alas! what number, like this amorous dame,
 be quick to censure, but be dead to shame! 

twin-infant then appear; a girl, a boy,
 the overflow cup of Gerard ablett joy:
 one have i name in every year that pass
 since Gerard wed! and twin behold at last! 
well please, the bridegroom smile to hear — "a vine
" fruitful and spread round the wall be thy,
 "and branch-like be thy offspring!" — Gerard then
 look joyful love, and soft say, "amen." 
now of that vine he will have no more increase,
 those playful branch now disturb his peace:
 they he behold around his table spread,
 but find, the more the branch, the less the bread;
 and while they run his humble wall about,
 they keep the sunshine of good humour out. 

cease, man, to grieve! thy master lot survey,
 who wife and child, thou and thy obey;
 a farmer proud, beyond a farmer pride,
 of all around the envy or the guide;
 who trot to market on a steed so fine,
 that when i meet he, i be ashamed of i;
 who board be high up-heaped with generous fare,
 which five stout son and three tall daughter share. 
cease, man, to grieve, and listen to his care. 

a few year flee, and all thy boy shall be
 lord of a cot, and labourer like thou:
 thy girl unportioned neighbour youth shall lead
 bride from my church, and thenceforth thou be free:
 but then thy master shall of care complain,
 care after care, a long connect train;
 his son for farm shall ask a large supply,
 for farmer 'son each gentle miss shall sigh;
 thy mistress, reason well of life decay,
 shall ask a chaise, and hardly brook delay;
 the smart young cornet who, with so much grace,
 ride in the rank and bet at the race,
 while the vex parent rail at deed so rash,
 shall d — n his luck, and stretch his hand for cash. 
sad trouble, Gerard! now pertain to thou,
 when thy rich master seem from trouble free;
 but it be one fate at different time assign,
 and thou shall lose the care that he must find. 

 "Ah!" quoth our village grocer, rich and old,
 "will i may one such cause for care behold!" 
to who his friend, "i great bliss will be,
" will heaven take those my spouse assign to i. " 

age be both, that Dawkins, Ditchem this,
 who much of marriage think, and much amiss;
 both will delay, the one, till — riches gain,
 the son he wish may be to honour train;
 his friend — lest fierce intrude heir shall come,
 to waste his hoard and vex his quiet home. 

Dawkins, a dealer once, on burden back
 bear his whole substance in a pedlar pack;
 to dame discreet, the duty yet unpaid,
 his store of lace and hyson he convey:
 when thus enrich, he choose at home to stop
 and fleece his neighbour in a new-built shop;
 then woo a spinster blithe, and hope, when wed,
 for love fair favour and a fruitful bed. 

not so his friend; — on widow fair and stay
 he fix his eye, but he be much afraid;
 yet woo; while she his hair of silver hue
 demure notice, and her eye withdraw:
 doubtful he pause — "Ah! be i sure," he cry,
 "no crave child will my gain divide;
" fair as she be, i will my widow take,
 "and live more large for my partner sake." 

with such their view some thoughtful year the pass,
 and hope, dread, they be bind at last. 
and what their fate? observe they as they go,
 compare fear with fear and woe with woe. 
 "Humphrey!" say Dawkins, "envy in my breast
" sicken to see thou in thy child bless;
 "they be thy joy, while i go grieve home
" to a sad spouse, and our eternal gloom:
 "we look despondency; no infant near,
" to bless the eye or win the parent ear;
 "our sudden heat and quarrel to allay,
" and soothe the petty suffering of the day:
 "alike our want, yet both the want reprove;
" where be, i cry, these pledge of our love? 
 "when she, like Jacob wife, make fierce reply,
" yet fond — Oh! give i child, or i die:
 "and i return — still childless doom to live,
" like the vex patriarch — be they mine to give? 
 "Ah! much i envy thou thy boy, who ride
" on poplar branch, and canter at thy side;
 "and girl, who cheek thy chin fierce fondness know,
" and with fresh beauty at the contact glow. " 

 "Oh! simple friend," say Ditchem, "will thou gain
" a father pleasure by a husband pain? 
 "alas! what pleasure — when some vigorous boy
" shall swell thy pride, some rosy girl thy joy;
 "be it to doubt who graft this sweet flower,
" or whence arise that spirit and that power? 

 "four year i have wed; not one have pass in vain;
" behold the five! behold a babe again! 
 "my wife gay friend the unwelcome imp admire,
" and fill the room with gratulation dire:
 "while i in silence sit, revolve all
" that influence ancient man, or that befall;
 "a gay pert guest — heaven know his business — come;
" a glorious boy, he cry, and what the name? 
 "angry i growl, — my spirit cease to tease,
" name it yourself, — Cain, Judas, if you please;
 "he father give he, — shall you that explore,
" the devil or you: — i say, and seek the door
 "my tender partner not a word or sigh
" give to my wrath, nor to my speech reply;
 "but take her comfort, triumph in my pain,
" and look undaunted for a birth again. " 

heir thus deny afflict the pine heart,
 and thus afford, jealous pang impart;
 let, therefore, none avoid, and none demand
 these arrow number for the giant hand. 

then with their infant three, the parent come,
 and each assign — it be all they have — a name;
 name of no mark or price; of they not one
 shall court our view on the sepulchral stone,
 or stop the clerk, the engrave scroll to spell,
 or keep the sexton from the sermon bell. 

a orphan-girl succeed: ere she be bear
 her father die, her mother on that morn:
 the pious mistress of the school sustain
 her parent 'part, nor their affection feign,
 but pity feel: with due respect and joy,
 i trace the matron at she love employ;
 what time the stripling, weary even with play,
 part at the close of the summer day,
 and each by different path return the wellknown way —
 then i behold she at her cottage-door,
 frugal of light; — her bible lay before,
 when on her double duty she proceed,
 of time as frugal — knit as she read:
 her idle neighbour, who approach to tell
 some trifle tale, her serious look compel
 to hear reluctant, — while the lad who pass,
 in pure respect, walk silent on the grass:
 then sink the day, but not to rest she go,
 till solemn prayer the daily duty close. 

but i digress, and lo! a infant train
 appear, and call i to my task again. 

 "why lonicera will thou name thy child?" 
i ask the gardener wife, in accent mild:
 "we have a right," reply the sturdy dame; —
 and lonicera be the infant name. 
if next a son shall yield our gardener joy,
 then Hyacinthus shall be that fair boy;
 and if a girl, they will at length agree,
 that Belladonna that fair maid shall be. 

high-sounding word our worthy gardener get,
 and at his club to wonder swain repeat;
 he then of Rhus and rhododendron speak,
 and allium call his onion and his leek;
 nor weed be now, for whence arise the weed,
 scarce plant, fair herb, and curious flower proceed;
 where cuckoo-pint and dandelion spring,
 (gross name have they our plain sire among,)
 there arum, there leontodon we view,
 and Artemisia grow, where wormwood grow. 

but though no weed exist his garden round,
 from rumex strong our gardener free his ground,
 take soft Senecio from the yield land,
 and grasp the arm urtica in his hand. 

not Darwin self have more delight to sing
 of floral courtship, in the awaken spring,
 than Peter Pratt, who simper love to tell
 how rise the stamens, as the pistil swell;
 how bend and curl the moist-top to the spouse,
 and give and take the vegetable vow;
 how those esteem of old but tip and chive,
 be tender husband and obedient wife;
 who live and love within the sacred bower, —
 that bridal bed, the vulgar term a flower. 

hear Peter proud, to some humble friend,
 a wondrous secret, in his science, lend: —
 "will you advance the nuptial hour, and bring
" the fruit of autumn with the flower of spring;
 "view that light frame where cucumis lie spread,
" and trace the husband in their golden bed,
 "three powder anther; — then no more delay
" but to the stigma's tip their dust convey;
 "then by thyself, from pry glance secure,
" twirl the full tip and make your purpose sure;
 "a long-abiding race the deed shall pay,
" nor one unblest abortion pine away. " 

the admire their friend discourse our swain agree,
 and call it science and philosophy. 

it be good, it be pleasant, through the advance year,
 to see unnumbered grow form appear;
 what leafy-life from earth broad bosom rise! 
what insect-myriads seek the summer sky! 
what scaly tribe in every streamlet move;
 what plumy people sing in every grove! 
all with the year awake to life, delight, and love. 
then name be good; for how, without their aid,
 be knowledge, gain by man, to man convey? 
but from that source shall all our pleasure flow? 
shall all our knowledge be those name to know? 
then he, with memory bless, shall bear away
 the palm from Grew, and Middleton, and ray:
 No! let we rather seek, in grove and field,
 what food for wonder, what for use they yield;
 some just remark from nature people bring,
 and some new source of homage for her king. 

pride live with all; strange name our rustic give
 to helpless infant, that their own may live;
 please to be know, they will some attention claim,
 and find some by-way to the house of fame. 

the straight furrow lift the ploughman art,
 the hat he gain have warmth for head and heart;
 the bowl that beat the great number down
 of totter ninepin, give to fame the clown
 or, foil in these, he open his ample jaw,
 and let a frog leap down, to gain applause;
 or grin for hour, or tipple for a week,
 or challenge a well-pinched pig to squeak:
 some idle deed, some child preposterous name,
 shall make he know, and give his folly fame. 

to name a infant meet our village fire,
 assemble all as such event require;
 frequent and full, the rural sage sit,
 and speaker many urge the long debate, —
 some harden knave, who rove the country round,
 have leave a babe within the parish-bound. —
 first, of the fact they question — "be it true?" 
the child be bring — "what then remain to do?" 
 "wase dead or live?" this be fair prove, —
 it be pinch, it roar, and every doubt remove. 
then by what name the unwelcome guest to call
 be long a question, and it pose they all;
 for he who lend it to a babe unknown,
 censorious man may take it for his own:
 they look about, they grave speak to all,
 and not one Richard answer to the call. 
next they inquire the day, when, pass by,
 the unlucky peasant hear the stranger cry:
 this know, — how food and raiment they may give,
 be next debate — for the rogue will live;
 at last, with all their word and work content,
 back to their home there prudent vestry go,
 and Richard Monday to the workhouse send. 

there be he pinch and pity, thump and feed,
 and due take his beat and his bread;
 patient in all control, in all abuse,
 he find contempt and kick have their use:
 sad, silent, supple; bend to the blow,
 a slave of slave, the low of the low;
 his pliant soul give way to all thing base,
 he know no shame, he dread no disgrace. 
it seem, so well his passion he suppress,
 no feeling stir his ever-torpid breast;
 he might the mean pauper bruise and cheat,
 he be a footstool for the beggar foot;
 his be the leg that run at all command;
 they use on all occasion Richard hand:
 his very soul be not his own; he steal
 as other order, and without a dole;
 in all dispute, on either part he lie,
 and free pledge his oath on either side;
 in all rebellion Richard join the rest,
 in all detection Richard first confess:
 yet, though disgrace, he watch his time so well,
 he rise in favour, when in fame he fall;
 base be his usage, vile his whole employ,
 and all despise and feed the pliant boy. 
at length, "it be time he shall abroad be send, '
be whisper near he, — and abroad he go;
 one morn they call he, Richard answer not;
 they deem he hang, and in time forget, —
 yet miss he long, as each, throughout the clan,
 find he" have better spare a better man. " 

now Richard talent for the world be fit,
 he will not small cunning, and have some small wit;
 have that calm look which seem to all assent,
 and that complacent speech which nothing mean:
 he will but one care, and that he strive to hide,
 how best for Richard Monday to provide. 
steel, through oppose plate, the magnet draw,
 and steely atom cull from dust and straw;
 and thus our hero, to his interest true,
 gold through all bar and from each trifle draw;
 but still more sure round the world to go,
 this fortune child have neither friend nor foe. 

long lose to we, at last our man we trace, —
 "sir Richard Monday die at monday-place:"
 he lady worth, his daughter we peruse,
 and find his grandson all as rich as Jew:
 he give reform charity a sum,
 and buy the blessing of the blind and dumb;
 bequeathe to mission money from the stock,
 and bible issue from his private box;
 but to his native place severe just,
 he leave a pittance bind in rigid trust; —
 two paltry pound, on every quarter's-day,
 (at church produce) for forty loaf shall pay;
 a stint gift, that to the parish show
 he keep in mind their bounty and their blow! 

to farmer three, the year have give a son,
 Finch on the moor, and french, and Middleton. 
twice in this year a female Giles i see,
 a Spalding once, and once a Barnaby: —
 a humble man be he, and, when they meet,
 our farmer find he on a distant seat;
 there for their wit he serve a constant theme, —
 "they praise his dairy, they extol his team,
" they ask the price of each unrivaled steed,
 "and whence his sheep, that admirable breed? 
" his thrive art they beg he will explain,
 "and where he put the money he must gain. 
" they have their daughter, but they fear their friend
 "will think his son too much will condescend; —
" they have their son who will their fortune try,
 "but fear his daughter will their suit deny." 
so run the joke, while James, with sigh profound,
 and face of care, look moveless on the ground;
 his care, his sigh, provoke the insult more,
 and point the jest — for Barnaby be poor. 

last in my list, five untaught lad appear;
 their father dead, compassion send they here, —
 for still that rustic infidel deny
 to have their name with solemn rite apply:
 his, a lone house, by deadman dyke-way stand;
 and he, a nightly haunt, in lonely-wood:
 each village inn have hear the ruffian boast,
 that he believe "in neither god nor ghost;
" that, when the sod upon the sinner press,
 "he, like the saint, have everlasting rest;
" that never priest believe his doctrine true,
 "but will, for profit, own himself a Jew,
" or worship wood and stone, as honest heathen do;
 "that fool alone on future world rely,
" and all who die for faith, deserve to die. " 

these maxim, — part the attorney clerk profess,
 his own transcendent genius find the rest. 
our pious matron hear, and, much amaze,
 gaze on the man, and tremble as they gaze;
 and now his face explore, and now his foot,
 man dread foe, in this bad man, to meet:
 but he our drunkard as their champion raise,
 their bishop call, and as their hero praise;
 though most, when sober, and the rest, when sick,
 have little question whence his bishopric

but he, triumphant spirit! all thing dare,
 he poach the wood, and on the warren snare;
 it be he, at card, each novice to trepan,
 and call the want of rogue "the right of man;"
 wild as the wind, he let his offspring rove,
 and deem the marriage-bond the bane of love. 

what age and sickness, for a man so bold,
 have do, we know not; — none behold he old:
 by night, as business urge, he seek the wood, —
 the ditch be deep, — the rain have cause a flood, —
 the foot-bridge fail, — he plunge beneath the deep,
 and sleep, if truth be he, the eternal sleep. 

these have we name; on life rough sea they sail,
 with many a prosperous, many a adverse gale! 
where passion soon, like powerful wind, will rage,
 and prudence, weary, with their strength engage:
 then each, in aid, shall some companion ask,
 for help or comfort in the tedious task;
 and what that help — what joy from union flow,
 what good or ill, we next prepare to show;
 and row, meantime, our weary bark ashore,
 as Spenser his — but not with spenser oar. 

part ii.

dispose to wed, even while you hasten, stay;
 there be great advantage in a small delay: —
 thus Ovid sing, and much the wise approve
 this prudent maxim of the priest of love;
 if poor, delay for future want prepare,
 and ease humble life of half its care;
 if rich, delay shall brace the thoughtful mind,
 the endure the ill that even the happy find:
 delay shall knowledge yield on either part,
 and show the value of the vanquish heart;
 the humour, passion, merit, fail prove,
 and gentle raise the veil that be wear by love;
 love, that impatient guide! — too proud to think
 of vulgar want, of clothe, meat and drink,
 urge our amorous swain their joy to seize,
 and then, at rag and hunger frighten, flee: —
 yet not too long in cold debate remain;
 till age refrain not — but if old, refrain. 

by no such rule will Gaffer Kirk be try;
 first in the year he lead a bloom bride,
 and stand a wither elder at her side. 
Oh! Nathan! Nathan! at thy year trepan,
 to take a wanton harlot by the hand! 
thou, who be use so tart to express
 thy sense of matrimonial happiness,
 till every youth, who ban at church be read,
 strive not to meet, or meeting, hang his head;
 and every lass forbear at thou to look,
 a sly old fish, too cunning for the hook:
 and now at sixty, that pert dame to see,
 of all thy savings mistress, and of thou;
 now will the lad, remem'br insult past,
 cry, "what, the wise one in the trap at last!" 

fie! Nathan! fie! to let a artful jade
 the close recess of thy heart invade;
 what grievous pang! what suffering she will impart! 
and fill with anguish that rebellious heart;
 for thou will strive incessant in vain,
 by threaten speech thy freedom to regain:
 but she for conquest marry, nor will prove
 a dupe to thou, thy anger or thy love;
 clamorous her tongue will be: — of either sex,
 she will gather friend around thou and perplex
 thy doubtful soul; — thy money she will waste,
 in the vain ramble of a vulgar taste;
 and will be happy to exert her power,
 in every eye, in thy, at every hour. 

then will thou bluster — "No! i will not rest,
" and see consume each shilling of my chest: "
thou will be valiant, —" when thy cousin call,
 "i will abuse and shut my door on all:"
 thou will be cruel! — "what the law allow,
 'that be thy portion, my ungrateful spouse! 
' nor other shilling shall thou then receive,
 'and when i die — What! may i this believe? 
" be these true tender tear? and do my Kitty grieve? 
 "Ah! crafty vixen, thy old man have fear;
" but weep no more! i be melt by thy tear;
 "spare but my money; thou shall rule i still,
" and see thy cousin — there! i burn the will. " 

thus, with example sad, our year begin,
 a wanton vixen and a weary man;
 "but have this tale in other guise be tell,"
 young let the lover be, the lady old,
 and that disparity of year shall prove
 no bane of peace, although some bar to love:
 it be not the worst, our nuptial tie among,
 that join the ancient bride and bridegroom young; —
 young wife, like change wind, their power display
 by shift point and vary day by day;
 now zephyr mild, now whirlwind in their force,
 they sometime speed, but often thwart our course
 and much experience shall that pilot be,
 who sail with they on life tempestuous sea. 
but like a trade-wind be the ancient dame,
 mild to your wish and every day the same;
 steady as time, no sudden squall you fear,
 but set full sail and with assurance steer;
 till every danger in your way be past,
 and then she gentle, mild breathe her last;
 rich you arrive, in port awhile remain,
 and for a second venture sail again. 

for this, blithe Donald southward make his way
 and leave the lass on the bank of Tay;
 he to a neighbour garden fortune send,
 who we behold, aspire content:
 patient and mild he seek the dame to please,
 who rule the kitchen and who bear the key. 
fair Lucy first, the laundry grace and pride,
 with smile and gracious look, her fortune try;
 but all in vain she praise his "pawky eye,"
 where never fondness be for Lucy see:
 he the mild Susan, boast of dairy, love,
 and find he civil, cautious and unmoved:
 from many a fragrant simple, Catherine skill
 draw oil and essence from the boil still;
 but not her warmth, nor all her win way
 from his cool phlegm can Donald spirit raise:
 of beauty heedless, with the merry mute,
 to mistress Dobson he prefer his suit;
 there prove his service, there address his vow,
 and see her mistress, — friend, — protectress, — spouse;
 a butler now, he thank his powerful bride,
 and, like her key, keep constant at her side. 

next at our altar stand a luckless pair,
 bring by strong passion and a warrant there;
 by long rent cloak, hang loose, strive the bride,
 from every eye, what all perceive, to hide. 
while the boy-bridegroom, shuffle in his pace,
 now hide awhile and then expose his face;
 as shame alternate with anger strive,
 the brain confuse with muddy ale to move
 in haste and stammer he perform his part,
 and look the rage that rankle in his heart;
 (so will each lover inly curse his fate,
 too soon make happy and make wise too late:)
 i see his feature take a savage gloom,
 and deep threaten for the day to come. 
low speak the lass, and lisp and mince the while,
 look on the lad, and faint try to smile;
 with soften speech and humble tone she strive
 to stir the ember of depart love:
 while he, a tyrant, frown walk before,
 feel the poor purse, and seek the public door,
 she sad follow in submission go,
 and see the final shilling foul spend;
 then to her father hut the pair withdraw,
 and bid to love and comfort long adieu! 
Ah! fly temptation, youth, refrain! refrain! 
i preach for ever; but i preach in vain! 

two summer since i see at Lammas fair,
 the sweet flower that ever blossom there,
 when Phoebe Dawson gay cross the green,
 in haste to see and happy to be see:
 her air, her manner, all who see admire;
 courteous though coy, and gentle though retire;
 the joy of youth and health her eye display,
 and ease of heart her every look convey;
 a native skill her simple robe express,
 as with untutored elegance she dress;
 the lad around admire so fair a sight,
 and Phoebe feel, and feel she give, delight. 
admirer soon of every age she gain,
 her beauty win they and she worth retain;
 envy itself can not contempt display,
 they wish she well, who yet they wish away. 
correct in thought, she judge a servant place
 preserve a rustic beauty from disgrace;
 but yet on sunday-eve, in freedom hour,
 with secret joy she feel that beauty power,
 when some proud bliss upon the heart will steal,
 that, poor or rich, a beauty still must feel. —

at length the youth ordain to move her breast,
 before the swain with bold spirit press;
 with look less timid make his passion know,
 and please by manner most unlike she own;
 loud though in love, and confident though young;
 fierce in his air, and voluble of tongue;
 by trade a tailor, though, in scorn of trade,
 he serve the 'squire, and brush the coat he make. 
yet now, will Phoebe her consent afford,
 her slave alone, again he will mount the board;
 with she shall year of grow love be spend,
 and grow wealth: — she sigh and look consent. 

now, through the lane, up hill, and across the green,
 (see by but few, and blush to be see —
 deject, thoughtful, anxious, and afraid,)
 lead by the lover, walk the silent maid,
 slow through the meadow rove they, many a mile,
 toy by each bank, and trifle at each stile;
 where, as he paint every blissful view,
 and high colour what he strong draw,
 the pensive damsel, prone to tender fear,
 dim the false prospect with prophetic tear. —
 thus pass the allot hour, till linger late,
 the lover loiter at the master gate;
 there he pronounce adieu! and yet will stay,
 till chide — soothe — entreat — force away;
 he will of coldness, though indulge, complain,
 and oft retire, and oft return again;
 when, if his tease vex her gentle mind,
 the grief assume, compel she to be kind! 
for he will proof of plight kindness crave,
 that she resent first and then forgive,
 and to his grief and penance yield more
 than his presumption have require before. —
 Ah! fly temptation, youth; refrain! refrain! 
each yield maid and each presume swain! 

lo! now with red rent cloak and bonnet black,
 and tear green gown loose hang at her back,
 one who a infant in her arm sustain,
 and seem in patience strive with her pain;
 pinch be her look, as one who pine for bread,
 who care be grow and who hope be flee;
 pale her parch lip, her heavy eye sink low,
 and tear unnoticed from their channel flow;
 serene her manner, till some sudden pain
 fret the meek soul, and then she be calm again; —
 her break pitcher to the pool she take,
 and every step with cautious terror make;
 for not alone that infant in her arm,
 but near cause, her anxious soul alarm. 
with water burden, then she pick her way,
 slow and cautious, in the cling clay;
 till, in mid-green, she trust a place unsound,
 and deep plunge in the adhesive ground;
 thence, but with pain, her slender foot she take,
 while hope the mind as strength the frame forsake:
 for when so full the cup of sorrow grow,
 add but a drop, it instant overflow. 
and now her path but not her peace she gain,
 safe from her task, but shiver with her pain;
 her home she reach, open leaf the door,
 and place first her infant on the floor,
 she bare her bosom to the wind, and sit,
 and sob struggle with the rise fit:
 in vain, they come, she feel the inflate grief,
 that shut the swell bosom from relief;
 that speak in feeble cry a soul distress,
 or the sad laugh that can be repress. 
the neighbour-matron leave her wheel and fly
 with all the aid her poverty supply;
 unfee'd, the call of nature she obey,
 not lead by profit, not allure by praise;
 and wait long, till these contention cease,
 she speak of comfort, and depart in peace. 

friend of distress! the mourner feel thy aid,
 she can pay thou, but thou will be pay. 

but who this child of weakness, want, and care? 
it be Phoebe Dawson, pride of Lammas fair:
 who take her lover for his sparkle eye,
 expression warm, and love-inspiring lie:
 compassion first assail her gentle heart,
 for all his suffering, all his bosom smart:
 "and then his prayer! they will a savage move,
" and win the cold of the sex to love: "—
 but ah! too soon his look success declare,
 too late her loss the marriage-rite repair;
 the faithless flatterer then his vow forget,
 a captious tyrant or a noisy sot:
 if present, rail, till he see she pain;
 if absent, spend what their labour gain;
 till that fair form in want and sickness pine,
 and hope and comfort flee that gentle mind. 
then fly temptation, youth; resist, refrain! 
nor let i preach for ever and in vain! 

next come a well-dressed pair, who leave their coach,
 and make, in long procession, slow approach:
 for this gay bride have many a female-friend,
 and youth be there, this favour youth to attend:
 silent, nor want due respect, the crowd
 stand humble round, and gratulation bow;
 but not that silent crowd, in wonder fix,
 not numerous friend, who praise and envy mix,
 nor nymph attend near to swell the pride
 of one more fair, the ever-smiling bride;
 nor that gay bride, adorn with every grace,
 nor love nor joy triumphant in her face,
 can, from the youth, sad sign of sorrow chase:
 why do thou grieve? wealth, pleasure, freedom thy;
 vex it thy soul, that freedom to resign? 
Spake scandal truth?  "thou do not then intend
" so soon to bring thy woo to a end? " 
or, be it, as our prate rustic say,
 to end as soon, but in a different way? 
it be tell thy Phillis be a skilful dame,
 who play uninjured with the dangerous flame:
 that, while, like Lovelace, thou thy coat display,
 and hide the snare for her affection lay,
 thou, with her net, she find the mean to catch,
 and at the amorous see-saw, win the match:
 yet other tell, the captain fix thy doubt,
 he will call thou brother, or he will call thou out: —
 but rest the motive — all retreat too late,
 joy like thy bride shall on thy brow have sit;
 the deed have then appear thy own intent,
 a glorious day, by gracious fortune send,
 in each revolve year to be in triumph spend. 
then in few week that cloudy brow have be
 without a wonder or a whisper see;
 and none have be so weak as to inquire,
" why poutest my lady? "or" why frown the squire? " 

how fair these name, how much unlike they look
 to all the blur subscription in my book:
 the bridegroom letter stand in row above. 
taper yet stout, like pine-tree in his grove;
 while free and fine the bride appear below,
 as light and slender as her jasmine grow. 
Mark now in what confusion, stoop or stand,
 the crooked scrawl of many a clownish hand;
 now out, now in, they droop, they fall, they rise,
 like raw recruit draw forth for exercise;
 ere yet reform and model by the drill,
 the free-born leg stand stride as they will. 

much have i try to guide the fist along,
 but still the blunderer place their blotting wrong:
 behold these mark uncouth! how strange that man,
 who guide the plough, shall fail to guide the pen:
 for half a mile, the furrow even lie;
 for half a inch the letter stand awry; —
 our peasant, strong and sturdy in the field,
 can these arm of idle student wield:
 like they, in feudal day, their valiant lord
 resign the pen and grasp their conquer sword;
 they to robe clerk and poor dependent man
 leave the light duty of the peaceful pen;
 nor to their lady write, but seek to prove,
 by deed of death, their heart be fill with love. 

but yet, small art have charm for female eye;
 our rustic nymph the beau and scholar prize;
 unlettered swain and ploughman coarse they slight,
 for those who dress, and amorous scroll indite. 

for Lucy Collins happy day have be,
 have footman Daniel scorn his native green
 or when he come a idle coxcomb down,
 have he he love reserve for lass in town;
 to Stephen hill she then have pledge her truth, —
 a sturdy, sober, kind, unpolished youth;
 but from the day, that fatal day she spy
 the pride of Daniel, Daniel be her pride. 
in all concern be Stephen just and true;
 but coarse his doublet be and patch in view,
 and feel his stocking be, and black than his shoe;
 while daniel linen all be fine and fair, —
 his master wear it, and he deign to wear:
 (to wear his livery, some respect may prove;
 to wear his linen, must be sign of love:)
 blue be his coat, unsoiled by spot or stain;
 his hose be silk, his shoe of spanish grain;
 a silver knot his breadth of shoulder bear;
 a diamond buckle blaze his breast before —
 diamond he swear it be! and show it as he swear:
 ring on his finger shine; his milkwhite hand
 can picktooth case and box for snuff command:
 and thus, with cloud cane, a fop complete,
 he stalk, the jest and glory of the street. 
join with these power, he can so sweet sing,
 talk with such toss, and saunter with such swing;
 laugh with such glee, and trifle with such art,
 that Lucy promise fail to shield her heart. 

Stephen, meantime, to ease his amorous care,
 fix his full mind upon his farm affair;
 two pig, a cow, and wether half a score,
 increase his stock, and still he look for more. 
he, for his acre few, so due pay,
 that yet more acre to his lot be lay;
 till our chaste nymph no long feel disdain,
 and prudent matron praise the frugal swain;
 who thrive well, through many a fruitful year,
 now clothe himself anew, and act overseer. 

just then poor Lucy, from her friend in town,
 flee in pure fear and come a beggar down;
 tremble, at Stephen door she knock for bread, —
 be chide first, next pity, and then feed;
 then sit at Stephen board, then share in Stephen bed:
 all hope of marriage lose in her disgrace,
 he mourn a flame revive, and she a love of lace. 

now to be wed a well-matched couple come;
 twice have old lodge be tie, and twice the dame;
 totter they come and toy, (odious scene!) 
and fond and simple, as they will always be. 
child from wedlock we by law restrain;
 why not prevent they, when they be such again? 
why not forbid the dote soul to prove
 the indecent fondle of preposterous love? 
in spite of prudence, uncontrolled by shame,
 the amorous senior woo the toothless dame,
 relate idle, at the close eve,
 the youthful folly he disdain to leave;
 till youthful folly wake a transient fire,
 when arm in arm they totter and retire. 

so a fond pair of solemn bird, all day,
 blink in their seat and doze the hour away;
 then by the moon awaken, forth they move,
 and fright the songster with their cheerless love

so two sear tree, dry, stunt, and unsound,
 each other catch, when drop to the ground;
 entwine their wither arm against wind and weather,
 and shake their leafless head and drop together. 

so two cold limb, touch by galvani wire,
 move with new life, and feel awaken fire;
 quiver awhile, their flaccid form remain,
 then turn to cold torpidity again. 

 "but ever frown your HYMEN? man and maid,
" be all repent, suffer or betray? " 
forbid it, love! we have our couple here
 who hail the day in each revolve year:
 these be with we, as in the world around;
 they be not frequent, but they may be find. 

our farmer too, what though they fail to prove,
 in Hymen bond, the tender slave of love,
 (nor, like those pair who sentiment unite,
 feel they the fervour of the mind delight;)
 yet coarse kind and comfortable gay,
 they heap the board and hail the happy day:
 and though the bride, now free from school, admit,
 of pride implant there, some transient fit;
 yet soon she cast her girlish flight aside,
 and in substantial blessing rest her pride. 
no more she move in measure step; no more
 run, with bewilder ear, her music over;
 no more recite her french the hind among,
 but chide her maiden in her mother-tongue;
 her tambour-frame she leave and diet spare,
 plain work and plenty with her house to share;
 till, all her varnish lose in few short year. 
in all her worth the farmer wife appear. 

yet not the ancient kind; nor she who give
 her soul to gain — a mistress and a slave:
 who not to sleep allow the needful time;
 to who repose be loss, and sport a crime;
 who, in her mean room (and all be mean),
 a noisy drudge, from morn till night be see; —
 but she, the daughter, boast a decent room,
 adorn with carpet, form in wilton loom;
 fair print along the paper wall be spread;
 there, Werter see the sportive child feed,
 and Charlotte, here, bewail her lover dead. 

it be here, assemble, while in space apart
 their husband, drink, warm the open heart,
 our neighbour dame, on festal day, unite,
 with tongue more fluent and with heart as light;
 they be that art, which english wife alone
 profess — a boast and privilege their own;
 a be it be where each at once attend
 to all, and claim attention from her friend,
 when they engage the tongue, the eye, the ear,
 reply when listen, and when speak here:
 the ready converse know no dull delay,
 "but double be the pain, and double be the praise." 

yet not to those alone who bear command
 heaven give a heart to hail the marriage band;
 among their servant, we the pair can show,
 who much to love, and more to prudence owe:
 Reuben and Rachel, though as fond as dove,
 be yet discreet and cautious in their love;
 nor will attend to Cupid wild command,
 till cool reflection bid they join their hand:
 when both be poor, they think it argue ill
 of hasty love to make they poor still;
 year after year, with savings long lay by,
 they buy the future dwelling full supply;
 her frugal fancy cull the small ware,
 the weighty purchase ask she reuben care;
 together then their last year gain they throw,
 and lo! a auction bed, with curtain neat and new. 

thus both, as prudence counsel, wise stay,
 and cheerful then the call of love obey:
 what if, when Rachel give her hand, it be one. 
embrown by winter ice and summer sun? 
what if, in reuben hair the female eye
 usurp grey among the black can spy? 
what if, in both, life be bloomy flush be lose,
 and their full autumn feel the mellow frost? 
yet time, who blow the rose of youth away,
 have leave the vigorous stem without decay;
 like those tall elm, in farmer frankford ground,
 they will grow no more, — but all their growth be sound;
 by time confirm and root in the land,
 the storm they have stand, still promise they shall stand. 

these be the happy pair, their life have rest,
 their hope be strong, their humble portion bless
 while those more rash to hasty marriage lead,
 lament the impatience which now stint their bread:
 when such their union, year their care increase,
 their love grow cold, and their pleasure cease;
 in health just feed, in sickness just relieve;
 by hardship harass and by child grieve;
 in petty quarrel and in peevish strife,
 the once fond couple waste the spring of life:
 but when to age mature those child grow,
 find hope and home and hardship of their own,
 the harass couple feel their linger woe
 recede slow, till they find repose. 
complaint and murmur then be lay aside,
 (by reason these subdue, and those by pride;)
 and, teach by care, the patient man and wife
 agree to share the bittersweet of life;
 (life that have sorrow much and sorrow cure,
 where they who most enjoy shall much endure:)
 their rest, their labour, duty, suffering, prayer,
 compose the soul, and fit it for its care;
 their grave before they and their grief behind,
 have each a medicine for the rustic mind;
 nor have he care to who his wealth shall go,
 or who shall labour with his spade and hoe;
 but as he lend the strength that yet remain,
 and some dead neighbour on his bier sustain,
 (one with who oft he whirl the bound flail,
 toss the broad coit, or take the inspire ale,)
 "for i," (he meditate,) "shall soon be do
 'this friendly duty, when my race be run;
" it be first in trouble as in error past,
 "dark cloud and stormy care whole year overcast,
" but calm my set day, and sunshine smile at last:
 "my vice punish and my folly spend,
" not loath to die, but yet to live content,
 "i rest:" — then cast on the grave his eye,
 his friend compel a tear, and his own grief a sigh. 

last on my list appear a match of love,
 and one of virtue; — happy may it prove! —
 sir Edward Archer be a amorous knight,
 and maiden chaste and lovely shun his sight;
 his bailiff daughter suit much his taste,
 for Fanny price be lovely and be chaste;
 to she the knight with gentle look draw near,
 and timid voice assume, to banish fear: —

 "hope of my life, dear sovereign of my breast,
" which, since i know thou, know not joy nor rest;
 "know, thou be all that my delight eye,
" my fond thought, my proud wish prize;
 "and be that bosom — (what on earth so fair!)
" to cradle some coarse peasant sprawl heir,
 "to be that pillow which some surly swain
" may treat with scorn and agonise with pain? 
 "art thou, sweet maid, a ploughman want to share,
" to dread his insult, to support his care;
 "to hear his folly, his contempt to prove,
" and (oh! the torment!) to endure his love;
 "till want and deep regret those charm destroy,
" that time will spare, if time be pass in joy? 
 "with he, in vary pain, from morn till night,
" your hour shall pass; yourself a ruffian right;
 "your soft bed shall be the knot wool;
" your pure drink the water of the pool;
 "your sweet food will but your life sustain,
" and your best pleasure be a rest from pain;
 "while, through each year, as health and strength abate,
" you will weep your woe and wonder at your fate;
 "and cry, 'behold,' as life last care come on,
"'my burden grow when my strength be go.' 

 "now turn with i, and all the young desire,
" that taste can form, that fancy can require;
 "all that excite enjoyment, or procure
" wealth, health, respect, delight, and love, be you:
 "sparkle, in cup of gold, your wine shall flow,
" grace that fair hand, in that dear bosom glow;
 "fruit of each clime, and flower, through all the year,
" shall on your wall and in your walk appear:
 "where all behold, shall your praise repeat,
" no fruit so tempt and no flower so sweet:
 "the soft carpet in your room shall lie,
" picture of happy love shall meet your eye,
 "and tall mirror, reach to the floor,
" shall show you all the object i adore;
 "who, by the hand of wealth and fashion dress,
" by slave attend and by friend caress,
 "shall move, a wonder, through the public way,
" and hear the whisper of adore praise. 
 "your female friend, though gay of the gay,
" shall see you happy, and shall, sigh, say,
 "while smother envy rise in the breast, —
"'Oh! that we live so beauteous and so bless!' 

 "come, then, my mistress, and my wife; for she
" who trust my honour be the wife for i;
 "your slave, your husband, and your friend employ,
" in search of pleasure we may both enjoy. " 

to this the damsel, meek firm, reply:
 "my mother love, be marry, toil, and die;
" with joy, she will grief, have trouble in her course,
 "but not one grief be point by remorse;
" my mind be fix, to heaven i resign,
 "and by her love, her life, her comfort i." 

tyrant have weep; and those with heart of steel,
 unused the anguish of the heart to heal,
 have yet the transient power of virtue know,
 and feel the impart joy promote their own. 

our knight relent, now befriend a youth,
 who to the yield maid have vow his truth;
 and find in that fair deed a sacred joy,
 that will not perish, and that can cloy; —
 a live joy, that shall its spirit keep,
 when every beauty fade, and all the passion sleep. 

part iii.

there be, it be say, and i believe, a time,
 when humble christian die with view sublime;
 when all be ready for their faith to bleed,
 but few to write or wrangle for their creed;
 when lively faith uphold the sink heart,
 and friend, assure to meet, prepare to part;
 when love feel hope, when sorrow grow serene,
 and all be comfort in the death-bed scene. 

alas! when now the gloomy king they wait,
 it be weakness yield to resistless fate;
 like wretched man upon the ocean cast,
 they labour hard and struggle to the last;
 "hope against hope," and wild gaze around,
 in search of help that never shall be find:
 nor, till the last strong billow stop the breath,
 will they believe they in the jaw of death! 

when these my record i reflect read,
 and find what ill these numerous birth succeed;
 what powerful grief these nuptial tie attend,
 with what regret these painful journey end;
 when from the cradle to the grave i look,
 i i conceive a melancholy book. 

where now be perfect resignation see? 
alas! it be not on the village-green: —
 I have seldom know, though i have often read
 of happy peasant on their dying-bed;
 who look proclaim that sunshine of the breast,
 that more than hope, that heaven itself express. 

what i behold be feverish fit of strife,
 betwixt fear of die and desire of life:
 those earthly hope, that to the last endure;
 those fear, that hope superior fail to cure;
 at best a sad submission to the doom,
 which, turn from the danger, let it come. 

sick lie the man, bewilder, lose, afraid,
 his spirit vanquish and his strength decay;
 no hope the friend, the nurse, the doctor lend —
 "call then a priest, and fit he for his end." 
a priest be call; it be now, alas! too late,
 death enter with he at the cottage-gate;
 or time allow — he go, assure to find
 the self-commending, all-confiding mind;
 and sigh to hear, what we may just call
 death commonplace, the train of thought in all. 

 "true, i be a sinner," feeble he begin,
 "but trust in mercy to forgive my sin:"
 (such cool confession no past crime excite! 
such claim on mercy seem the sinner right!)
 "i know, mankind be frail, that god be just,
" and pardon those who in his mercy trust;
 "we be sore tempt in a world like this,
" all man have do, and i like all, amiss;
 "but now, if spare, it be my full intent
" on all the past to ponder and repent:
 "wrong against i i pardon great and small,
" and if i die, i die in peace with all. " 

his merit thus and not his sin confess,
 he speak his hope, and leave to heaven the rest. 
alas! be these the prospect, dull and cold,
 that die christian to their priest unfold? 
or mend the prospect when the enthusiast cry,
 "i die assure!" and in a rapture die? 

ah, where that humble, self-abasing mind,
 with that confide spirit, shall we find;
 the mind that, feel what repentance bring,
 dejection terror and contrition sting,
 feel then the hope, that mount all care above,
 and the pure joy that flow from pardon love? 

such have i see in death, and much deplore,
 so many die — that i see no more:
 lo! now my record, where i grieve to trace,
 how death have triumph in so short a space;
 who be the dead, how die they, i relate,
 and snatch some portion of their act from fate. 

with Andrew Collett we the year begin,
 the blind, fat landlord of the old crown inn, —
 big as his butt, and, for the self-same use,
 to take in store of strong ferment juice. 
on his huge chair beside the fire he sit,
 in revel chief, and umpire in debate;
 each night his string of vulgar tale he tell;
 when ale be cheap and bachelor be bold:
 he hero all be famous in their day,
 cheat be his boast and drunkard have his praise;
 "one, in three draught, three mug of ale take down,
" as mug be then — the champion of the crown;
 "for thrice three day another live on ale,
" and know no change but that of mild and stale;
 "two thirsty soaker watch a vessel side,
" when he the tap, with dexterous hand, apply;
 "nor from their seat depart, till they find
" that butt be out and hear the mournful sound. " 

he praise a poacher, precious child of fun! 
who shoot the keeper with his own spring-gun;
 nor less the smuggler who the exciseman tie,
 and leave he hang at the birchwood side,
 there to expire; — but one who see he hang
 cut the good cord — a traitor of the gang. 

his own exploit with boastful glee he tell,
 what pond he empty and what pike he sell;
 and how, when bless with sight alert and gay,
 the night amusement keep he through the day. 

he sing the praise of those time, when all
 "for card and dice, as for their drink, may call;
" when justice wink on every jovial crew,
 "and ten-pin tumble in the parson view." 

he tell, when angry wife, provoke to rail,
 or drive a third-day drunkard from his ale,
 what be his triumph, and how great the skill
 that win the vex virago to his will;
 who rave come; — then talk in mild strain, —
 then weep, then drink, and pledge her spouse again. 

such be his theme: how knave over law prevail,
 or, when make captive, how they fly from jail;
 the young how brave, how subtle be the old:
 and oath attest all that folly tell. 

on death like his what name shall we bestow,
 so very sudden! yet so very slow? 
it be slow: — disease, augment year by year,
 show the grim king by gradual step bring near:
 it be not less sudden; in the night he die,
 he drink, he swear, he jest, and he lie;
 thus aid folly with depart breath: —
 "beware, Lorenzo, the slow-sudden death." 

next die the widow go, a active dame,
 fame ten mile round, and worthy all her fame;
 she lose her husband when their love be young,
 but keep her farm, her credit, and her tongue:
 full thirty year she rule, with matchless skill,
 with guide judgement and resistless will;
 advice she scorn, rebellion she suppress,
 and son and servant bow at her behest. 
like that great man, who to his saviour come,
 be the strong word of this command dame; —
 "come," if she say, they come; if "go," be go;
 and if "do this," — that instant it be do:
 her maiden tell she be all eye and ear,
 in darkness see and can at distance hear; —
 no parish-business in the place can stir,
 without direction or assent from she;
 in turn she take each office as it fall,
 know all their duty and discharge they well;
 the lazy vagrant in her presence shake,
 and pregnant damsel fear her stern rebuke;
 she look on want with judgement clear and cool,
 and feel with reason and bestow by rule;
 she match both son and daughter to her mind,
 and lend they eye, for love, she hear, be blind;
 yet ceaseless still she thrive, alert, alive,
 the work bee, in full or empty hive;
 busy and careful, like that work bee,
 no time for love nor tender care have she;
 but when our farmer make their amorous vow,
 she talk of market-steed and patent-plough. 
not unemployed her evening pass away,
 amusement close, as business wake the day;
 when to her toilet brief concern she run,
 and conversation with her friend begin,
 who all be welcome, what they see, to share;
 and joyous neighbour praise her christmas fare,
 that none around might, in their scorn, complain
 of gossip go as greedy in her gain. 

thus long she reign, admire, if not approve;
 praise, if not honour; fear, if not belove; —
 when, as the busy day of spring draw near,
 that call for all the forecast of the year;
 when lively hope the rise crop survey,
 and April promise what September pay;
 when stray her lamb where gorse and greenweed grow;
 when rise her grass in rich vale below;
 when please she look on all the smile land,
 and view the hind, who wrought at her command;
 (poultry in group still follow where she go;)
 then dread overcome she, — that her day be spend. 

 "bless i! i die, and not a warn give, —
" with much to do on earth, and all for heaven! —
 "no reparation for my soul affair,
" no leave petition for the barn repair;
 "account perplex, my interest yet unpaid,
" my mind unsettled, and my will unmake; —
 "a lawyer haste, and in your way, a priest;
" and let i die in one good work at least. " 
she speak, and, tremble, drop upon her knee,
 heaven in her eye and in her hand her key;
 and still the more she find her life decay,
 with great force she grasp those sign of sway:
 then fall and die! — in haste her son draw near,
 and drop, in haste, the tributary tear,
 then from the adhere clasp the key unbind,
 and consolation for their sorrow find. 

death have his infant-train; his bony arm
 strike from the baby-cheek the rosy charm;
 the bright eye his glaze film make dim,
 and his cold touch set fast the lith limb:
 he seize the sicken boy to Gerard lend,
 when three day 'life, in feeble cry, be spend;
 in pain bring forth, those painful hour to stay,
 to breathe in pain and sigh its soul away! 

 "but why thus lend, if thus recall again,
" to cause and feel, to live and die in, pain? " 
or rather say, why grievous these appear,
 if all it pay for heaven eternal year;
 if these sad sob and piteous sigh secure
 delight that live, when world no more endure? 

the sister-spirit long may lodge below,
 and pain from nature, pain from reason, know;
 through all the common ill of life may run,
 by hope pervert and by love undo;
 a wife distress, a mother pang, may dread,
 and widow-tear, in bitter anguish, shed;
 may at old age arrive through numerous harm,
 with child child in those feeble arm:
 nor till by year of want and grief oppress
 shall the sad spirit flee and be at rest! 

yet happy therefore shall we deem the boy,
 secure from anxious care and dangerous joy? 

not so! for then will love divine in vain
 send all the burden weary man sustain;
 all that now curb the passion when they rage,
 the check of youth and the regret of age;
 all that now bid we hope, believe, endure,
 our sorrow comfort and our vice cure;
 all that for heaven high joy the spirit train,
 and charity, the crown of all, be vain. 

say, will you call the breathless infant bless,
 because no care the silent grave molest? 
so will you deem the nursling from the wing
 untimely thrust and never train to sing;
 but far more bless the bird who grateful voice
 sing its own joy and make the wood rejoice,
 though, while untaught, ere yet he charm the ear,
 hard be his trial and his pain severe! 

next die the lady who yond hall possess;
 and here they bring her noble bone to rest. 
in town she dwell; — forsake stand the hall:
 worm eat the floor, the tapestry flee the wall:
 no fire the kitchen cheerless grate display;
 no cheerful light the long-closed sash convey;
 the crawl worm, that turn a summer-fly,
 here spin his shroud and lay he up to die
 the winter-death: — upon the bed of state,
 the bat shrill shriek woo his flicker mate;
 to empty room the curious come no more,
 from empty cellar turn the angry poor,
 and surly beggar curse the ever-bolted door. 
to one small room the steward find his way,
 where tenant follow to complain and pay;
 yet no complaint before the lady come,
 the feeling servant spare the feeble dame;
 who see her farm with his observe eye,
 and answer all request with his reply: —
 she come not down, her fall grove to view;
 why shall she know, what one so faithful know? 
why come, from many clamorous tongue to hear,
 what one so just may whisper in her ear? 
her oak or acre, why with care explore;
 why learn the want, the suffering of the poor;
 when one so know all their worth can trace,
 and one so piteous govern in her place? 

lo! now, what dismal son of darkness come,
 to bear this daughter of indulgence home;
 tragedian all, and well-arranged in black! 
who nature, feeling, force, expression lack;
 who cause no tear, but gloomy pass by,
 and shake their sable in the weary eye,
 that turn disgust from the pompous scene,
 proud without grandeur, with profusion, mean! 
the tear for kindness past affection owe;
 for worth decease the sigh from reason flow;
 even well-feigned passion for our sorrow call,
 and real tear for mimic misery fall:
 but this poor farce have neither truth nor art,
 to please the fancy or to touch the heart;
 unlike the darkness of the sky, that pour
 on the dry ground its fertilise shower;
 unlike to that which strike the soul with dread,
 when thunder roar and forky fire be shed;
 dark but not awful, dismal but yet mean,
 with anxious bustle move the cumbrous scene;
 present no object tender or profound,
 but spread its cold unmeaning gloom around. 

when woe be feign, how ill such form appear
 and oh! how needless, when the wo sincere. 

slow to the vault they come, with heavy tread,
 bend beneath the lady and her lead;
 a case of elm surround that ponderous chest,
 close on that case the crimson velvet's press;
 ungenerous this, that to the worm deny,
 with niggard-caution, his appoint prize;
 for now, ere yet he work his tedious way,
 through cloth and wood and metal to his prey,
 that prey dissolve shall a mass remain,
 that fancy loathe and worm themselves disdain. 

but see! the master-mourner make his way,
 to end his office for the coffined clay;
 please that our rustic man and maid behold
 his plate like silver, and his stud like gold,
 as they approach to spell the age, the name,
 and all the title of the illustrious dame. —
 this as (my duty do) some scholar read,
 a village-father look disdain and say:
 "away, my friend! why take such pain to know
" what some brave marble soon in church shall show? 
 "where not alone her gracious name shall stand,
" but how she live — the blessing of the land;
 "how much we all deplore the noble dead,
" what groan we utter and what tear we shed;
 "tear, true as those, which in the sleepy eye
" of weep cherub on the stone shall rise;
 "tear, true as those which, ere she find her grave,
" the noble lady to our sorrow give. " 

down by the churchway walk, and where the brook
 wind round the chancel like a shepherd crook;
 in that small house, with those green pale before,
 where jasmine trail on either side the door;
 where those dark shrub, that now grow wild at will,
 be clip in form and tantalise with skill;
 where cockle blanch and pebble neat spread,
 form shine border for the larkspur 'bed; —
 there live a lady, wise, austere, and nice,
 who show her virtue by her scorn of vice;
 in the dear fashion of her youth she dress,
 a pea-green Joseph be her favourite vest;
 erect she stand, she walk with stately mien,
 tight be her length of stay, and she be tall and lean. 

there long she live in maiden-state immure,
 from look of love and treacherous man secure;
 though evil fame — (but that be long before)
 have blow her dubious blast at Catherine door. 
a captain thither, rich from India come,
 and though a cousin call, it touch her fame:
 her annual stipend rise from his behest,
 and all the long-prized treasure she possess: —
 if aught like joy awhile appear to stay
 in that stern face, and chase those frown away;
 it be when her treasure she dispose for view
 and hear the praise to their splendour due;
 silk beyond price, so rich, they will stand alone,
 and diamond blaze on the buckle zone;
 row of rare pearl by curious workman set,
 and bracelet fair in box of glossy jet;
 bright polish amber precious from its size,
 or form the fair fancy can devise:
 her drawer of cedar, shut with secret spring,
 conceal the watch of gold and rubied ring;
 letter, long proof of love, and verse fine
 round the pink rim of crisp valentine. 
her china-closet, cause of daily care,
 for woman wonder hold her pencil ware;
 that picture wealth of china and Japan,
 like its cold mistress, shun the eye of man. 

her neat small room, adorn with maiden-taste,
 a clip french puppy, first of favourite, grace:
 a parrot next, but dead and stuff with art;
 (for poll, when live, lose the lady heart,
 and then his life; for he be hear to speak
 such frightful word as tinge his lady cheek:)
 unhappy bird! who have no power to prove,
 save by such speech, his gratitude and love. 
a grey old cat his whisker lick beside;
 a type of sadness in the house of pride. 
the polish surface of a India chest,
 a glassy globe, in frame of ivory, press;
 where swim two finny creature; one of gold,
 of silver one; both beauteous to behold: —
 all these be form the guide taste to suit;
 the beast well-mannered and the fish mute. 
a widow aunt be there, compel by need
 the nymph to flatter and her tribe to feed;
 who, veil well her scorn, endure the clog,
 mute as the fish and fawn as the dog. 

as year increase, these treasure, her delight,
 arise in value in their owner sight:
 a miser know that, view it as he will,
 a guinea keep be but a guinea still:
 and so he put it to its proper use,
 that something more this guinea may produce;
 but silk and ring, in the possessor eye,
 the often see, the more in value rise,
 and thus be wise hoard to bestow
 the kind of pleasure that with year will grow. 

but what avail their worth — if worth have they —
 in the sad summer of her slow decay? 

then we behold she turn a anxious look
 from trunk and chest, and fix it on her book, —
 a rich-bound book of prayer the captain give,
 (some princess have it, or be say to have;)
 and then once more, on all her store, look round,
 and draw a sigh so piteous and profound,
 that tell, "alas! how hard from these to part,
" and for new hope and habit form the heart! 
 "what shall i do (she cry), my peace of mind
" to gain in die, and to die resign? " 

 "hear," we return; — "these bauble cast aside,
" nor give thy god a rival in thy pride;
 "thy closet shut, and open thy kitchen door;
" there own thy fail, here invite the poor;
 "a friend of Mammon let thy bounty make;
" for widow prayer, thy vanity forsake;
 "and let the hungry, of thy pride partake
" then shall thy inward eye with joy survey
 "the angel mercy temper death delay!" 

alas! it be hard; the treasure still have charm,
 hope still its flattery, sickness its alarm;
 still be the same unsettled, cloud view,
 and the same plaintive cry, "what shall i do?" 

nor change appear; for when her race be run,
 doubtful we all exclaim, "what have be do?" 
apart she live, and still she lie alone,
 yond earthy heap await the flatter stone,
 on which invention shall be long employ,
 to show the various worth of Catherine Lloyd. 

next to these lady, but in nought ally,
 a noble peasant, Isaac Ashford, die. 
noble he be, contemn all thing mean,
 his truth unquestioned and his soul serene:
 of no man presence Isaac feel afraid;
 at no man question Isaac look dismay:
 shame know he not, he dread no disgrace;
 truth, simple truth, be write in his face;
 yet while the serious thought his soul approve,
 cheerful he seem, and gentleness he love,
 to bliss domestic he his heart resign,
 and with the firm have the fond mind:
 be other joyful, he look smile on,
 and give allowance where he need none;
 good he refuse with future ill to buy,
 nor know a joy that cause reflection sigh;
 a friend to virtue, his unclouded breast
 no envy sting, no jealousy distress;
 (bane of the poor! it wound their weak mind,
 to miss one favour, which their neighbour find:)
 yet far be he from stoic pride remove;
 he feel humane, and he warm love:
 i mark his action, when his infant die,
 and his old neighbour for offence be try;
 the still tear, steal down that furrow cheek,
 speak pity, plain than the tongue can speak. 
if pride be he, it be not their vulgar pride
 who, in their base contempt, the great deride;
 nor pride in learning, — though my clerk agree,
 if fate shall call he, Ashford may succeed;
 nor pride in rustic skill, although we know,
 none his superior, and his equal few: —
 but if that spirit in his soul have place,
 it be the jealous pride that shun disgrace;
 a pride in honest fame, by virtue gain,
 in sturdy boy to virtuous labour train;
 pride in the power that guard his country coast,
 and all that englishman enjoy and boast;
 pride, in a life that slander tongue defy, —
 in fact a noble passion, misname pride. 

he have not party rage, no sect'ry whim:
 christian and countryman be all with he:
 true to his church he come; no sunday-shower
 keep he at home in that important hour;
 nor his firm foot can one persuade sect,
 by the strong glare of their new light direct; —
 "on hope, in my own sober light, i gaze,
" but shall be blind, and lose it, in your blaze. " 

in time severe, when many a sturdy swain
 feel it his pride, his comfort, to complain;
 Isaac their want will soothe, his own will hide,
 and feel in that his comfort and his pride. 

at length he find, when seventy year be run,
 his strength depart, and his labour do;
 when he, save honest fame, retain no more,
 but lose his wife, and see his child poor:
 it be then, a spark of — say not discontent —
 strike on his mind, and thus he give it vent: —

 "kind be your law, (it be not to be deny,)
" that in yond house, for ruin age, provide,
 "and they be just; — when young, we give you all,
" and for assistance in our weakness call. —
 "why then this proud reluctance to be feed,
" to join your poor, and eat the parish-bread? 
 "but yet i linger, loath with he to feed,
" who gain his plenty by the son of need
 "he who, by contract, all your pauper take,
" and gauge stomach with a anxious look:
 "on some old master i can well depend;
" see he with joy and thank he as a friend;
 "but ill on he, who dole the day supply,
" and count our chance who at night may die:
 "yet help i, heaven! and let i not complain
" of what i suffer, but my fate sustain. " 

such be his thought, and so resign he grow;
 daily he place the Workhouse in his view! 
but come not there, for sudden be his fate,
 he drop, expire, at his cottage-gate. 

i feel his absence in the hour of prayer,
 and view his seat and sigh for Isaac there:
 i see no more those white lock thin spread
 round the bald polish of that honour head;
 no more that awful glance on playful wight,
 compel to kneel and tremble at the sight,
 to fold his finger, all in dread the while,
 till mister Ashford soften to a smile;
 no more that meek and suppliant look in prayer,
 nor the pure faith (to give it force), be there: —
 but he be bless, and i lament no more
 a wise good man content to be poor. 

then die a Rambler; not the one who sail
 and truck, for female favour, bead and nail;
 not one, who post from place to place — of man
 and manner treat with a fly pen;
 not he, who climb, for prospect, snowdon height,
 and chide the cloud that intercept the sight;
 no curious shell, rare plant, or brilliant spar,
 entice our traveller from his home so far;
 but all the reason, by himself assign
 for so much ramble, be, a restless mind;
 as on, from place to place, without intent,
 without reflection, robin Dingley go. 

not thus by nature: — never man be find
 less prone to wander from his parish bind:
 claudian old man, to who all scene be new,
 save those where he and where his apple grow,
 resemble robin, who around will look,
 and his horizon for the earth mistake. 

to this poor swain a keen attorney come; —
 "i give thou joy, good fellow! on thy name;
" the rich old dingley dead; — no child have he,
 "nor wife, nor will; his all be leave for thou:
" to be his fortune heir thy claim be good;
 "thou have the name, and we will prove the blood." 

the claim be make; it be try, — it will not stand;
 they prove the blood, but be refuse the land

assure of wealth, this man of simple heart,
 to every friend have predispose a part:
 he wife have hope indulge of various kind;
 the three miss Dingleys have their school assign,
 master be seek for what they each require,
 and book be buy and harpsichord be hire;
 so high be hope: — the failure touch his brain,
 and robin never be himself again;
 yet he no wrath, no angry wish express,
 but try, in vain, to labour or to rest;
 then cast his bundle on his back and go
 he know not whither, nor for what intent. 

year flee; — of robin all remembrance past,
 when home he wander in his rag at last:
 a sailor jacket on his limb be throw,
 a sailor story he have make his own;
 have suffer battle, prison, tempest, storm,
 encounter death in all his ugly form:
 his cheek be haggard, hollow be his eye
 where madness lurk, conceal in misery;
 want, and the ungentle world, have teach a part,
 and prompt cunning to that simple heart:
 "he now bethink he, he will roam no more,
 but live at home and labour as before." 

here clothe and feed, no soon he begin
 to round and redden, than away he run;
 his wife be dead, their child past his aid. 
so, unmolested, from his home he stray:
 six year elapse, when, wear with want and pain,
 come robin, wrap in all his rag, again: —
 we chide, we pity; — place among our poor,
 he feed again, and be a man once more. 

as when a gaunt and hungry fox be find,
 entrap alive in some rich hunter ground:
 feed for the field, although each day be a feast,
 Fatten you may, but never tame the beast;
 a house protect he, savoury viand sustain;
 but loose his neck and off he go again:
 so steal our vagrant from his warm retreat,
 to rove a prowler and be deem a cheat. 

hard be his fare; for he at length we see,
 in cart convey and lay supine on straw. 
his feeble voice now speak a sink heart;
 his groan now tell the motion of the cart;
 and when it stop, he try in vain to stand;
 close be his eye, and clench his clammy hand;
 life ebb apace, and our best aid no more
 can his weak sense or die heart restore:
 but now he fall, a victim to the snare,
 that vile attorney for the weak prepare; —
 they who, when profit or resentment call,
 heed not the groan victim they enthrall. 

then die lament, in the strength of life,
 a value mother and a faithful wife;
 call not away, when time have loose each hold
 on the fond heart, and each desire grow cold;
 but when, to all that knit we to our kind,
 she feel fast-bound, as charity can bind; —
 not when the ill of age, its pain, its care,
 the droop spirit for its fate prepare;
 and, each affection fail, leave the heart
 loose from life charm, and will to the part;
 but all her tie the strong invader break,
 in all their strength, by one tremendous stroke! 
sudden and swift the eager pest come on,
 and terror grow, till every hope be go;
 still those around appear for hope to seek! 
but view the sick and be afraid to speak. —

slow they bear, with solemn step, the dead;
 when grief grow loud and bitter tear be shed
 my part begin; a crowd draw near the place,
 awe in each eye, alarm in every face:
 so swift the ill, and of so fierce a kind,
 that fear with pity mingle in each mind;
 friend with the husband come their grief to blend;
 for goodman Frankford be to all a friend. 
the last-born boy they hold above the bier,
 he know not grief, but cry express his fear;
 each different age and sex reveal its pain,
 in now a loud, now a low strain;
 while the meek father, listen to their tone,
 swell the full cadence of the grief by groan. 

the elder sister strive her pang to hide,
 and soothe word to young mind apply:
 "be still, be patient;" oft she strive to stay;
 but fail as oft, and weep turn away. 

curious and sad, upon the fresh-dug hill,
 the village lad stand melancholy still;
 and idle child, wander to and fro,
 as nature guide, take the tone of woe. 

arrive at home, how then they gaze around,
 in every place, — where she — no more, be find; —
 the seat at table she be wont to fill;
 the fireside chair, still set, but vacant still;
 the garden-walk, a labour all her own;
 the latticed bower, with trail shrub overgrow;
 the sunday-pew she fill with all her race, —
 each place of she, be now a sacred place,
 that, while it call up sorrow in the eye,
 pierce the full heart and force they still to rise. 

oh sacred sorrow! by who soul be try,
 send not to punish mortal, but to guide;
 if thou be i, (and who shall proud dare
 to tell his maker, he have have his share?) 
still let i feel for what thy pang be send,
 and be my guide and not my punishment! 

of Leah cousin next the name appear,
 with honour crown and bless with length of year,
 save that she live to feel, in life decay,
 the pleasure die, the honour drop away;
 a matron she, who every village-wife
 view as the help and guardian of her life;
 father and son, indebt to her aid,
 respect to she and her profession pay;
 who in the house of plenty large feed,
 yet take her station at the pauper bed;
 nor from that duty can be bribe again,
 while fear or danger urge she to remain:
 in her experience all her friend rely,
 heaven be her help and nature be her guide. 

thus Leah live; long trust, much caress,
 till a town-dame a youthful farmer bless;
 a gay vain bride, who will example give
 to that poor village where she deign to live;
 some few month past, she send, in hour of need,
 for doctor glib, who come with wondrous speed:
 two day he wait, all his art apply,
 to save the mother when her infant die: —
 "it be well i come," at last he deign to say;
 "it be wondrous well;" — and proud ride away. 

the news run round; — "how vast the doctor power!" 
 "he save the lady in the try hour;
" save she from death, when she be dead to hope,
 "and her fond husband have resign she up:
" so all, like she, may evil fate defy,
 "if doctor glib, with save hand, be nigh." 

fame (now his friend), fear, novelty, and whim,
 and fashion, send the vary sex to he:
 from this, contention in the village rise;
 and these the dame espouse; the doctor those:
 the wealthy part, to he and science go;
 with luck and she the poor remain content. 

the matron sigh; for she be vex at heart,
 with so much profit, so much fame, to part:
 "so long successful in my art," she cry,
 "and this proud man, so young and so untried!" 

 "nay," say the doctor, "dare you trust your wife
" the joy, the pride, the solace of your life,
 "to one who act and know no reason why,
" but trust, poor hag! to luck for a ally? —
 "who, on experience, can her claim advance,
" and own the power of accident and chance? 
 "a whine dame, who pray in danger view,
" (a proof she know not what beside to do;)
 "what be her experience? in the time that be go,
" blunder she wrought and still she blunder on: —
 "and what be nature? one who act in aid
" of gossip half asleep, and half afraid:
 "with such ally i scorn my fame to blend,
" skill be my luck and courage be my friend:
 "no slave to nature, it be my chief delight
" to win my way and act in her despite: —
 "trust then my art, that, in itself complete,
" need no assistance and fear no defeat. " 

warm by her well-spiced ale and aid pipe,
 the angry matron grow for contest ripe. 

 "can you," she say, "ungrateful and unjust,
" before experience, ostentation trust! 
 "what be your hazard, foolish daughter, tell? 
" if safe, you be certain; if secure, you be well:
 "that i have luck must friend and foe confess,
" and what be good judgement but a lucky guess? 
 "he boast, but what he can do: — will you run
" from i, your friend! who, all he boast, have do? 
 "by proud and learned word his power be know;
" by healthy boy and handsome girl my own:
 "wife! father! child! by my help you live;
" have this pale doctor more than life to give? 
 "no stunt cripple hop the village round;
" your hand be active and your head be sound:
 "my lad be all your field and flock require;
" my lass all those sturdy lad admire. 
 "can this proud leech, with all his boast skill,
" amend the soul or body, wit or will? 
 "do he for court the son of farmer frame,
" or make the daughter differ from the dame? 
 "or, who he bring into this world of woe,
" prepare he they their part to undergo? 
 "if not, this stranger from your door repel,
" and be content to be and to be well. " 

she speak; but, ah! with word too strong and plain;
 her warmth offend, and her truth be vain:
 the many leave she, and the friendly few,
 if never cold, yet they old grow;
 till, unemployed, she feel her spirit droop,
 and take, insidious aid! the inspire cup;
 grow poor and peevish as her power decay,
 and prop the totter frame with strong aid, —
 then die! i see our careful swain convey,
 from this our changeful world, the matron clay,
 who to this world, at least, with equal care,
 bring they its change, good and ill to share. 

now to his grave be Roger Cuff convey,
 and strong resentment linger spirit lay. 
shipwreck in youth, he home return, and find
 his brother three — and thrice they wish he drown. 
 "be this a landsman love? be certain then,
" we part for ever! "— and they cry," Amen! " 

his word be truth be: — some forty summer flee,
 his brother die; his kin suppose he dead:
 three nephew these, one sprightly niece, and one,
 less near in blood — they call he surly John;
 he work in wood apart from all his kind,
 fierce be his look and moody be his mind. 

for home the sailor now begin to sigh: —
 "the dog be dead, and i will return and die;
" when all i have, my gain, in year of care,
 "the young cuff with kind soul shall share —
" yet hold! i be rich; — with one consent they will say,
 "'you be welcome, uncle, as the flower in may.' 
" no; i will disguise i, be in tatter dress,
 "and best befriend the lad who treat i best." 

now all his kindred, — neither rich nor poor, —
 keep the wolf want some distance from the door. 

in piteous plight he knock at George gate,
 and beg for aid, as he describe his state: —
 but stern be George; — "let they who have thou strong,
" help thou to drag thy weaken frame along;
 "to we a stranger, while your limb will move,
" from we depart, and try a stranger love: —
 "Ha! do thou murmur?" — for, in roger throat,
 be "rascal!" rise with disdainful note. 

to pious James he then his prayer address; —
 "good-lack," quoth James, "thy sorrow pierce my breast;
" and, have i wealth, as have my brother twain,
 "one board shall feed we and one roof contain:
" but plead i will thy cause and i will pray:
 "and so farewell! heaven help thou on thy way!" 

 "scoundrel!" say Roger (but apart); — and tell
 his case to Peter; — Peter too be cold; —
 "the rate be high; we have many poor;
" but i will think, "— he say, and shut the door. 

then the gay niece the seem pauper press; —
 "turn, Nancy, turn, and view this form distress:
" Akin to thy be this decline frame,
 "and this poor beggar claim a uncle name." 

 "avaunt! begone!" the courteous maiden say,
 "thou vile impostor! uncle roger dead:
" i hate thou, beast; thy look my spirit shock;
 "Oh! that i see thou starve in the stock!" 

 "my gentle niece!" he say — and seek the wood. —
 "i hunger, fellow; prithee, give i food!" 

 "give! be i rich? this hatchet take, and try
" thy proper strength, nor give those limb the lie;
 "work, feed thyself, to thy own power appeal,
" nor whine out woe, thy own right-hand can heal;
 "and while that hand be thy and thy a leg,
" scorn of the proud or of the base to beg. " 

 "come, surly John, thy wealthy kinsman view,"
 old Roger say; — "thy word be brave and true;
" come, live with i: we will vex those scoundrel-boy,
 "and that prim shrew shall, envy, hear our joy. —
" tobacco glorious fume all day we will share,
 "with beef and brandy kill all kind of care;
" we will beer and biscuit on our table heap,
 "and rail at rascal, till we fall asleep." 

such be their life; but when the woodman die,
 his grieve kin for roger smile apply —
 in vain; he shut, with stern rebuke, the door,
 and die, build a refuge for the poor,
 with this restriction, that no cuff shall share
 one meal, or shelter for one moment there. 

my record end: — but hark! even now i hear
 the bell of death, and know not who to fear:
 our farmer all, and all our hind be well;
 in no man cottage danger seem to dwell: —
 yet death of man proclaim these heavy chime,
 for thrice they sound, with pause space, three time. 

 "go; of my sexton seek, who day be speed? —
" What! he, himself! — and be old Dibble dead? " 
his eightieth year he reach, still undecayed,
 and rector five to one close vault convey: —
 but he be go; his care and skill i lose,
 and gain a mournful subject for my muse:
 he master lose, he will oft in turn deplore,
 and kind add, —" heaven grant, i lose no more! " 
yet, while he speak, a sly and pleasant glance
 appear at variance with his complaisance:
 for, as he tell their fate and vary worth,
 he arch look, —" i yet may bear thou forth. " 
" when first "— (he so begin) —" my trade i ply,
 "good master addle be the parish-guide;
" his clerk and sexton, i behold with fear,
 "his stride majestic, and his frown severe;
" a noble pillar of the church he stand,
 "adorn with college-gown and parish hood:
" then as he pace the hallow aisle about,
 "he fill the seven-fold surplice fair out! 
" but in his pulpit weary down with prayer,
 "he sit and seem as in his study chair;
" for while the anthem swell, and when it cease,
 "the expect people view their slumber priest:
" who, doze, die. — our parson Peele be next;
 "'i will not spare you,' be his favourite text;
" nor do he spare, but raise they many a pound;
 "even i he mulct for my poor rood of ground;
" yet care he nought, but with a gibe speech,
 "'what shall i do,' quoth he, 'but what i preach?' 
" his pierce joke (and he will a plenteous store)
 "be daily offer both to rich and poor;
" his scorn, his love, in playful word he speak;
 "his pity, praise, and promise, be a joke:
" but though so young and bless with spirit high,
 "he die as grave as any judge can die:
" the strong attack subdue his lively power, —
 "he be the grave, and doctor Grandspear we. 

 "then be there golden time the village round;
" in his abundance all appear to abound;
 "liberal and rich, a plenteous board he spread,
" even cool dissenter at his table feed;
 "who wish and hope, — and think a man so kind
" a way to heaven, though not their own, may find;
 "to they, to all, he be polite and free,
" kind to the poor, and, ah! most kind to i! 
 "'Ralph,' will he say, 'Ralph Dibble, thou be old;
"'that doublet fit, it will keep thou from the cold:
 "' how do my sexton? — What! the time be hard;
 "'drive that stout pig, and pen he in thy yard.' 
" but most, his reverence love a mirthful jest: —
 "'thy coat be thin; why, man, thou be bare dress;
"'it be wear to the thread: but i have nappy beer;
 "' clap that within, and see how they will wear! ' 

 "gay day be these; but they be quick pass:
" when first he come, we find he can last:
 "a whoreson cough (and at the fall of leaf)
" upset he quite; — but what be the gain of grief? 

 "then come the author-rector: his delight
" be all in book; to read they or to write:
 "woman and man he strive alike to shun,
" and hurry homeward when his task be do:
 "courteous enough, but careless what he say,
" for point of learning he reserve his head;
 "and when address either poor or rich,
" he know no better than his cassock which:
 "he, like a osier, be of pliant kind,
" erect by nature, but to bend incline;
 "not like a creeper fall to the ground,
" or mean catch on the neighbour round: —
 "careless be he of surplice, hood, and band, —
" and kind take they as they come to hand
 "nor, like the doctor, wear a world of hat,
" as if he seek for dignity in that:
 "he talk, he give, but not with cautious rule:
" nor turn from gipsy, vagabond, or fool;
 "it be his nature, but they think it whim,
" and so our beaux and beauty turn from he:
 "of question, much he write, profound and dark, —
" how speak the serpent, and where stop the ark;
 "from what far land the queen of Sheba come;
" who salem priest, and what his father name;
 "he make the song of song its mystery yield,
" and revelation, to the world, reveal. 
 "he sleep in the aisle, — but not a stone record
" his name or fame, his action or his word:
 "and truth, your reverence, when i look around,
" and mark the tomb in our sepulchral ground
 "(though dare i not of one man hope to doubt),
" i will join the party who repose without. 

 "next come a youth from Cambridge, and, in truth,
" he be a sober and a comely youth;
 "he blush in meekness as a modest man,
" and gain attention ere his task begin;
 "when preach, seldom venture on reproof,
" but touch his neighbour tender enough. 
 "he, in his youth, a clamorous sect assail,
" advise and censure, flatter, — and prevail. —
 "then do he much his sober hearer vex,
" confound the simple, and the sad perplex;
 "to a new style his reverence rash take;
" loud grow his voice, to threaten swell his look;
 "above, below, on either side, he gaze,
" amaze all, and most himself amaze:
 "no more he read his preachment pure and plain,
" but launch outright, and rise and sink again:
 "at time he smile in scorn, at time he weep,
" and such sad coil with word of vengeance keep,
 "that our best sleeper start as they sleep. 

 "'conviction come like lightning,' he will cry;
"'in vain you seek it, and in vain you fly;
 "' it be like the rush of the mighty wind,
 "'unseen its progress, but its power you find;
"'it strike the child ere yet its reason wake;
 "' he reason flee, the ancient sire it shake;
 "'the proud, learn man, and he who love to know
"'how and from whence these gust of grace will blow,
 "' it shun, — but sinner in their way impede,
 "'and sots and harlot visit in their deed:
"'of faith and penance it supply the place;
 "' assure the vile that they live by grace,
 "'and, without run, make they win the race.' 

 "such be the doctrine our young prophet teach;
" and here conviction, there confusion wrought;
 "when his thin cheek assume a deadly hue,
" and all the rose to one small spot withdraw:
 "they call it hectic; it be a fiery flush,
" more fix and deep than the maiden blush;
 "he pale lip the pearly tooth disclose,
" and labour lung the lengthen speech oppose. 
 "no more his span-girth shank and quiver thigh
" uphold a body of the small size;
 "but down he sink upon his die bed,
 'and gloomy crotchet fill his wander head. —

 "'spite of my faith, all-saving faith,' he cry,
"'i fear of worldly work the wicked pride;
 "' poor as i be, degrade, abject, blind,
 "'the good i have wrought still rankle in my mind;
"'my almsdeed all, and every deed i have do,
 "' my moral-rag defile i every one;
 "'it shall not be: — what say thou? tell i, Ralph.' 
" quoth i, 'your reverence, i believe, you be safe;
 "' your faith your prop, nor have you pass such time
 "'in life good-work as swell they to a crime. 
"'if i of pardon for my sin be sure,
 "' about my goodness i will rest secure. ' 

 "such be his end; and my approach fast;
" I have see my best of preacher, — and my last.  "—

he bow, and arch smile at what he say,
 civil but sly: — "and be old Dibble dead?" 

yes! he be go: and we be go all;
 like flower we wither, and like leave we fall; —
 here, with a infant, joyful sponsor come,
 then bear the new-made christian to its home;
 a few short year and we behold he stand,
 to ask a blessing, with his bride in hand:
 a few, still seem short, and we hear
 his widow weep at her husband bier: —
 thus, as the month succeed, shall infant take
 their name; thus parent shall the child forsake;
 thus bride again and bridegroom blithe shall kneel,
 by love or law compel their vow to seal,
 ere i again, or one like i, explore
 these simple annal of the village poor. 
