mercury and Cupid.

in sullen humour one day Jove
 send Hermes down to ida grove,
 command Cupid to deliver
 his store of dart, his total quiver;
 that Hermes shall the weapon break,
 or throw they into lethe lake. 

Hermes, you know, must do his errand:
 he find his man, produce his warrant:
 Cupid, your dart — this very hour —
 there be no contend against power. 

how sullen Jupiter, just now
 i think i say: and you will allow,
 that Cupid be as bad as he:
 hear but the youngster repartee. 

come kinsman (say the little god)
 put off your wing; lay by your rod;
 retire with i to yonder bower;
 and rest your self for half a hour:
 it be far indeed from hence to heaven:
 and you fly fast: and it be but seven. 
we will take one cool cup of nectar;
 and drink to this celestial Hector —

he break my dart, or hurt my power! 
he, leda swan, and danae shower! 
go, bid he his wife tongue restrain;
 and mind his thunder, and his rain. —
 my dart? o certain i will give they:
 from cloe eye he shall receive they. 
there be one, the best in all my quiver,
 twang! through his very heart and liver. 
he then shall pine, and sigh, and rave:
 good lord! what bustle shall we have! 
Neptune must straight be send to sea;
 and Flora summon twice a-day:
 one must find shell, and other flower,
 for cool Grotts, and fragrant bower,
 that cloe may be serve in state:
 the hour must at her toilet wait:
 while all the reason fool below,
 wonder their watch go too slow. 
lybs must fly south, and eurus east,
 for jewel for her hair and breast:
 no matter though their cruel haste
 sink city, and lie forest waste. 
no matter though this fleet be lose;
 or that lie wind-bound on the coast. 
what whis'pr in my mother ear! 
what care, that Juno shall not hear! 
what work among you scholar god! 
Phoebus must write he amorous ode:
 and thou, poor cousin, must compose
 his letter in submissive prose:
 while haughty cloe, to sustain
 the honour of my mystic reign,
 shall all his gift and vow disdain;
 and laugh at your old bully pain. 

dear couz, say Hermes in a fright,
 for heaven sake keep your dart: good night. 
