the rival swain. 

while over the plain stern winter bear the sway,
 and Sol from Capricorn diffuse his ray,
 nigh Bolton gate, beneath a hawthorn shade,
 two rural swain sad lamentation make:
 each for a absent damsel seem to mourn,
 while throb breast do sigh for sigh return. 

young d—y's note and t–be fond praise prove,
 that d—h t—r be the maid belove. 
say d – k, "o have i these sweet hour again,
 i have spend with she; but ah! i wish in vain. 
the nymph be flee; to Manchester she be go,
 nor heed my sigh, nor yet regard my moan:
 her cruel aunt do contribute their aid,
 to banish from my sight the lovely maid. 
o little Cupid, choose two fatal dart,
 and with a vengeance, send they to their heart;
 may they endure the agonize pain
 of love, yet ever unbeloved remain;
 and, when far hence, by death they be doom to go,
 then let their task be lead apes below. 

young d—h be the fair on the plain,
 admire and love by every wonder swain. 
her charm exterior might a hero bind;
 but ah! the beauty that adorn her mind,
 to paint do far exceed my muse skill. 
to you, dear t – i will now resign the quill. " 
say t –," on her the grace seem to wait;
 her form, how fair! enchant be her gait. 
her youthful charm, no tongue can ever express;
 nor do her absence render they the less. 
the soft impression with i still remain;
 i be captive, yet i glory in my chain. 
with fond delight i retrospect the day,
 when we to i—n take our way,
 with heart elate, to view the scottish fair,
 love d—h sweeten all the pleasure there. 
bless with her company upon the road,
 how charm seem each rugged path we tread? 
nor can the scottish fair such charm display;
 my darling reign the empress of the day. 

but ah! reflection animate my pain,
 such happy day i will never behold again. 
alas! i languish now in deep despair;
 o that i can forget my absent fair! " 

while these two youth rehearse their plaintive tale,
 a third come stalk over a distant dale:
 r—n his name, who anxious look do show,
 his beat bosom much oppress with woe. 
of J—y' charm, he in soft concert sing;
 J—y the gay, the beauteous, and the young;
 she who of late, with parson F—r stay,
 in the low station of a dairy-maid. 
yet there it be she gain young r—n heart,
 and in her absence nought can ease his smart. 

o hapless lad! can nought allay your pain,
 till these two charm maid return again? 
be there none else can ease your torture mind? 
none else so fair, so virtuous and so kind? 
so may you think, and thus in sigh lament,
 till Hymen fetter make you all repent. 
better bewail a absent love for life,
 than be torment by a fractious wife. 
