a summer evening meditation.

it be past! the sultry tyrant of the south
 have spend his short-lived rage; more grateful hour
 move silent on; the sky no more repel
 the dazzle sight, but with mild maiden beam
 of tempere light, invite the cherish eye
 to wander over their sphere; where hang aloft
 DIAN's bright crescent, like a silver bow
 new string in heaven, lift high its beamy horn
 impatient for the night, and seem to push
 her brother down the sky. fair Venus shine
 even in the eye of day; with sweet beam
 propitious shine, and shake a tremble flood
 of soften radiance from her dewy lock. 
the shadow spread apace; while meeken eve
 her cheek yet warm with blush, slow retire
 through the hesperian garden of the west,
 and shut the gate of day. it be now the hour
 when contemplation, from her sunless haunt,
 the cool damp grotto, or the lonely depth
 of unpierced wood, where wrap in solid shade
 she muse away the gaudy hour of noon,
 and feed on thought unripened by the sun,
 move forward; and with radiant finger point
 to yond blue concave swell by breath divine,
 where, one by one, the live eye of heaven
 awake, quick kindle over the face of ether
 one boundless blaze; ten thousand tremble fire,
 and dance lustre, where the unsteady eye
 restless, and dazzle wander unconfined
 over all this field of glory: spacious field! 
and worthy of the master: he, who hand
 with hieroglyphic old than the Nile,
 inscribe the mystic tablet; hang on high
 to public gaze, and say, adore, o man! 
the finger of thy god. from what pure well
 of milky light, what soft overflow urn,
 be all these lamp so fill? these friendly lamp,
 for ever stream over the azure deep
 to point our path, and light we to our home. 
how soft they slide along their lucid sphere! 
and silent as the foot of time, fulfil
 their destine course: nature self be hush,
 and, but a scatter leaf, which rustle through
 the thick-wove foliage, not a sound be hear
 to break the midnight air; though the raise ear,
 intense listen, drink in every breath. 
how deep the silence, yet how loud the praise! 
but be they silent all? or be there not
 a tongue in every star that talk with man,
 and woo he to be wise; nor woo in vain:
 this dead of midnight be the noon of thought,
 and wisdom mount her zenith with the star. 
at this still hour the self-collected soul
 turn inward, and behold a stranger there
 of high descent, and more than mortal rank;
 a embryo god; a spark of fire divine,
 which must burn on for age, when the sun,
 (fair transitory creature of a day!) 
have close his golden eye, and wrap in shade
 forget his wonted journey through the east. 

you citadel of light, and seat of god! 
perhaps my future home, from whence the soul
 revolve period past, may oft look back
 with recollect tenderness, on all
 the various busy scene she leave below,
 its deep lay project and its strange event,
 as on some fond and dote tale that soothe
 her infant hour; o be it lawful now
 to tread the hallow circle of your court,
 and with mute wonder and delight awe
 approach your burn confine. seize in thought
 on fancy wild and rove wing i sail,
 from the green border of the people earth,
 and the pale moon, her duteous fair attendant;
 from solitary Mars; from the vast orb
 of Jupiter, who huge gigantic bulk
 dance in ether like the light leaf;
 to the dim verge, the suburb of the system,
 where cheerless Saturn amid her watery moon
 gird with a lucid zone, majestic sit
 in gloomy grandeur; like a exile queen
 among her weep handmaid: fearless thence
 i launch into the trackless deep of space,
 where, burn round, ten thousand sun appear,
 of elder beam; which ask no leave to shine
 of our terrestrial star, nor borrow light
 from the proud regent of our scanty day;
 son of the morning, first bear of creation,
 and only less than he who mark their track,
 and guide their fiery wheel. here must i stop,
 or be there aught beyond? what hand unseen
 impel i onward through the glow orb
 of habitable nature; far remote,
 to the dread confine of eternal night,
 to solitude of vast unpeopled space,
 the desert of creation, wide and wild;
 where embryo system and unkindled sun
 sleep in the womb of chaos; fancy droop,
 and think astonish stop her bold career. 
but oh thou mighty mind! who powerful word
 say, thus let all thing be, and thus they be,
 where shall i seek thy presence? how unblamed
 invoke thy dread perfection? 
have the broad eye-lid of the morn behold thou? 
or do the beamy shoulder of Orion
 support thy throne? o look with pity down
 on err guilty man; not in thy name
 of terror clad; not with those thunder arm
 that conscious Sinai feel, when fear appal
 the scatter tribe; thou have a gentle voice,
 that whisper comfort to the swell heart,
 abash, yet long to behold her maker. 

but now my soul unused to stretch her power
 in flight so dare, drop her weary wing,
 and seek again the know accustom spot,
 dress up with sun, and shade, and lawn, and stream,
 a mansion fair and spacious for its guest,
 and full replete with wonder. let i here
 content and grateful, wait the appoint time
 and ripen for the sky: the hour will come
 when all these splendour burst on my sight
 shall stand unveiled, and to my ravish sense
 unlock the glory of the world unknown. 
