monody, write at Matlock.

Matlock! amid thy hoary-hanging view,
thy glen that smile sequester, and thy nook
which yond forsake crag all dark overlook;
once more i court the long neglect muse,
as erst when by the mossy brink and fall
of solitary Wainsbeck, or the side
of clysdale cliff, where first her voice she try,
i stray a pensive boy. since then, the thrall
that wait life upland road have chill her breast,
and much, as much they may, her wing depress.
wan indolence, resign, her deaden hand
lay on her heart, and fancy she cold wand
drop at the frown of fortune; yet once more
i call she, and once more her converse sweet,
'amid the still limit of this wild retreat,
i woo; — if yet delightful as of yore
my heart she may revisit, nor deny
the soothe aid of some sweet melody!

i hail the rugged scene that burst around;
i mark the wreathe root, the sapling grey,
that bend over the dark derwent wander way;
i mark its stream with peace-persuading sound,
that steal beneath the fade foliage pale,
or, at the foot of frown crag uprear,
complain like one forsake and unheard.
to i, it seem to tell the pensive tale
of springtime, and the summer day all fly;
and while sad autumn voice even now i hear
along the umbrage of the high-wood moan,
at interval, who shiver leaf fall seré;
while over the group of pendant grove i view
the slowly-spreading tint of pine hue,
i think of poor humanity brief day,
how fast its blossom fade, its summer speed away!

when first young hope, a golden-tressed boy,
most musical his early madrigal
sing to the whisper water as they fall,
breathe fresh air of fragrance and of joy,
the wild wood gentle wave, the morning shed
her rise radiance on the mountain head,
strew with green isle appear old ocean reign,
and see at distance ray of rest light
silver the farther promontory height:
then hush be the long murmur of the main,
while silent over the slowly-crisping tide,
bind to some beam spot, the bark of pleasure glide.
alas! the scene that smile in light array
but catch the sense, and then in darkness fade.

we, poor adventurer, of peace bereave,
look back on the green hill that late we leave,
or turn, with beat breast and anxious eye,
to some faint hope that glimmer meet our sight
(like the lone watch-tower in the storm of night),
then on the dismal waste be drive despair by!

meantime, amid the landscape cold and mute,
hope, sweet enchanter, sigh drop his lute:
so sad decay and mortal change succeed,
and over the silent scene time, like a giant, speed!

yet the bleak cliff that lift their head so high
(around who beetling crag, with ceaseless coil,
and still-returning flight, the raven toil)
heed not the changeful season as they fly,
nor spring, nor autumn: they their hoary brow
uprear, and age past, as in this now,
the same deep trench unsubdued have wear,
the same majestic frown, and look of lofty scorn.

so fortitude, a mail warrior old,
appear; he lift his scar-intrenched crest;
the tempest gather round his dauntless breast;
he hear far off the storm of havoc roll;
the feeble fall around: their sound be past;
their sun be set, their place no more be know;
like the wan leaf before the winter blast
they perish: — he, unshaken and alone
remains, his brow a stern shade assume,
by age ennoble, while the hurricane,
that rave resistless over the ravage plain,
but shake unfelt his helmet quiver plume.

and so yond sovereign of the scene i mark
above the wood rear his majestic head,
that soon all shatter at his foot shall shed
their short-lived beauty: he the winter dark
regardless, and the wasteful time that fly,
rejoice in his lonely might, defy.

thou, wander in the deep and craggy dell,
sequester stream, with other thought i view:
thou do in solitude thy course pursue,
as thou have bid life busy scene farewell,
yet make still such music as may cheer
the weary passenger that journey near.

such be the song of peace in virtue shade;
unheard of folly, or the vacant train
that pipe and dance upon the noontide plain,
till in the dust together they be lay!
but not unheard of he, who sit sublime
above the cloud of this tempestuous clime,
its stir and strife; to who more grateful rise
the humble incense, and the still small voice
of those that on their pensive way rejoice,
than shout of thousand echo to the sky;
than song of conquest peal round the car
of hard ambition, or the fiend of war,
sate with slaughter. nor may i, sweet stream,
from thy wild bank and still retreat depart,
where now i meditate my casual theme,
without some mild improvement on my heart
pour sad, yet please! so may i forget
the cross and the care that sometime fret
life smoothe channel, and each wish prevent
that mar the silent current of content!

in such a spot, amid these rugged view,
the pensive poet in his droop age
may wish to place his reed-roofed hermitage;
where much on life vain shadow he may muse.
if fortune smile not on his early way,
if he be doom to mourn a faithless friend,
here he may rest, and when his hair be grey,
behold in peace the part day descend.
if a hard world his error scan severe,
when late the earth receive his moulder clay,
perhaps some love companion, wander near,
pluck the grey moss from the stone, may say:
he i remember, in our careless day,
vacant and glad, till many a loss severe
first hang his placid eyelid with a tear;
yet on such vision ardent will he gaze,
as the muse love, that oft will smile and die,
like the faint bow that leave the weep sky;
his heart unguarded, yet it proud beat
against hard wrong, or coward cold deceit; —
nor pass he ever without a sigh the cell
where wretchedness and her pale child dwell.
he never wish to win the world cold ear,
nor, prize by those he love, its blame can fear;
its praise he leave to those who, at their will,
the ingenious strain of torture art can trill!
content, as random fancy may inspire,
if his weak reed, at time, or plaintive lyre,
he touch with desultory hand, and draw
some soften tone, to nature not untrue.

the leaf, o Derwent! on thy bosom still
oft with the gust now fall — the season pale
have smite with hand unseen the silent vale,
and slow steal the verdure from the hill;
so the fair scene depart, yet wear a while
the linger trace of its beauteous smile:
but we who by thy margin stray, or climb
the cliff aërial height, or join the song
of hope and gladness amid yonder throng,
lose the brief and fleet hour of time,
reck not how age, even thus, with icy hand,
hang over we; — how, as with a wizard wand,
youth bloom like the spring, and roseate mirth,
to slow and seré consumption he shall change,
and with invisible mutation strange,
wither and waste send they to the earth;
while hush, and by the mace of ruin rent,
sink the forsake hall of merriment!

bright burst the sun upon the shaggy scene!
the age rock their glitter summit grey
hang beautiful amid the beam of day;
and all the wood, with slowly-fading green,
yet smile wave: — severe thought, away!
the night be distant, and the lovely day
look on we yet; — the sound of mirthful cheer
from yonder dome come pleasant to my ear.
from rock to rock reverberate swell,
hark, — the glad music of the village bell!
on the crag naked point the heifer swallow,
and wide below the brighten landscape glow!

though brief the time and short our course to run,
Derwent! amid the scene that deck thy side,
ere yet the part path of life divide,
let we rejoice, seek what may be win
from the laborious day, or fortune frown:
here may we, ere the sun of life go down,
a while regardless of the morrow, dwell;
then to our destine road, and speed we well!
