on RICHMOND park, and royal garden.

of blissful groves i sing, and flowery plain:
 you sylvan nymph, assist my rural strain. 
shall Windsor forest gain a deathless fame,
 and grow immortal, as the poet name;
 while not a bard, of all the tuneful throng,
 with these delightful field adorn his song? 
thy garden, Richmond, boast a equal theme,
 and only ask a equal muse flame. 
what, though no virgin nymph, of cynthia train,
 with belt and quiver grace the verdant plain? 
what, though no fable consecrate flood
 flow over thy field, or murmur through thy wood? 
my song thy real beauty shall pursue,
 and paint the lovely scene, and paint they true;
 a please task! nor slight shall be the praise,
 if royal Caroline accept the lay. 

delight, often through the mazy groves,
 the muse, in pensive contemplation, rove;
 or climb the slow ascend hill, who brow
 hang over the silver stream, which roll below;
 where all around i shine prospect rise,
 and various scene invite my gaze eye;
 and, while i view one object with delight,
 new please wonder charm the feast sight:
 now this allure, now that attract it most;
 and the first beauty in the second lose. 

thus, in a grateful concert, may we hear
 the sound at once surprise, and charm our ear;
 the tremble note, in hasty fugue, arise;
 and this advance, ere the former fly;
 all seem to be confuse, yet all agree,
 to perfect the melodious harmony. 

beneath the mount, with what majestic pride
 the sire of river roll his silver tide! 
let poet sing of hermus golden shore,
 his amber foam, and sand of shine over:
 nor Tagus envy we, nor fruitful Nile,
 who fatten flood enrich the thirsty soil:
 happy Britannia boast as fair a stream,
 as great in bounty, and as great in fame;
 since denham deathless muse have sing his tide,
 and india riches over his surface glide. 

obsequious river, when my eye survey
 thy wave, or east, or west, pursue their way;
 now swift roll, to meet the briny main,
 at state period, now return again;
 how vain the scheme of infidel appear! 
how weak their reason, and the god how clear! 
say, atheist, since you own, by nature law,
 there be no effect produce without a cause;
 why shall the restless stream run to and fro,
 and, with alternate motion, ebb and flow;
 do not some be, of superior force,
 rule the wild wave, and regulate their course? 

hence lofty Windsor to the sight appear;
 and, high in air, her pompous turret rear:
 wide, round her dome, the spacious forest shine. 
though bright much in pope harmonious line:
 o! will his tuneful muse my breast inspire,
 with equal warmth, with her sublime fire;
 then Richmond hill renowned in verse shall grow,
 and Thames reecho to the song below;
 a second Eden in my page shall shine,
 and milton paradise submit to i. 

oft, lose in thought, forgetful of my way,
 i, over the park, through wild of beauty, stray;
 where sportive nature wanton at her will,
 and lavish her bloom, unchecked by skill. 
old venerable tree, majestic, rise,
 sublime in air, and brave the vault sky;
 which, free from cruel steel, or labourer hand,
 in peaceful age, and hoary honour, stand. 
here, when Aurora first begin to dawn,
 the wakeful lark spring mount from the lawn;
 poise by their plume, in lofty flight they play;
 with joyful warble hail the approach day:
 but, when the sun display a purple scene,
 and drink the pearly dew, that deck the green;
 a thousand tuneful bird in concert meet,
 a thousand tuneful note the groves repeat;
 and, when their music cease with the day,
 sweet Philomela chant her pensive lay. 

but, hark! i hear a loud music sound;
 from wood and vale the various note rebound:
 it be albion king pursue the royal chace;
 the nimble stag skim over unbending grass:
 the way which fear direct, he tremble try;
 nor know, where fear direct, or where he fly:
 a hundred different sound assail his ear;
 a death, in every different sound, he fear:
 and now he faint move a slow pace,
 and close now the hound pursue the chace;
 till, in despair, back on his foe he turn;
 make feeble effort with his branchy horn;
 short be the combat, soon he yield his breath,
 and gasp fall, and tremble pant in death. 

now to a soft theme descend my muse;
 through artful walk her please path pursue;
 where lofty elm, and conic lindens rise,
 or where the extensive terras charm her eye;
 where elegance and noble grandeur meet,
 as the idea of its mistress, great,
 magnificent fair, majestical sweet. 
see, on its margin, field of wave corn;
 these beard crop, and floweret this, adorn;
 Ceres and Flora love embrace,
 and gay variety the landscape grace. 

hence lead i, muse, through yond arch grove,
 adorn with sand below, and leave above;
 or let i over the spacious oval trace,
 where verdant carpet spread the lovely place;
 where tree in regular confusion stand,
 and sylvan beauty rise on every hand:
 or bear i, nymph, to the sequester cell,
 where Boyle and Newton, mighty sage! dwell;
 who fame shall live, although the grot decay,
 long as those sacred truth their work display. 

how sweet please be this cool retreat,
 when Phoebus blaze with meridian heat! 
in vain the fervid beam around it play;
 the rocky roof repel the scorch ray;
 secure guard with a sylvan scene,
 in nature livery dress, for ever green. 

to visit this, the curious stranger rove,
 with grateful travel, through a wild of groves;
 and, though direct, oft mistake his way,
 unknow where the wind maze stray;
 yet still his foot the magic path pursue,
 charm, though bewilder, with the please view. 

not so attractive late shine the plain,
 a gloomy waste, not worth the muse strain;
 where thorny brake the traveller repel,
 and weed and thistle overspread the field;
 till royal GEORGE, and heavenly Caroline,
 bid nature in harmonious lustre shine;
 the sacred fiat through the chaos ring,
 and symmetry from wild disorder spring. 

so, once, confuse, the barbarous nation stand;
 unpolished be their mind, their manner rude;
 till Rome her conquer eagle wide display,
 and bid the world reform — the world obey. 

how bless the man in these delightful field! 
new pleasure each indulgent moment yield. 
let gay mind in town pursue their joy,
 exchange quietness for crowd and noise;
 consume the night at masquerade or play;
 or waste, in busy idleness, the day:
 i envy not augusta pompous pile,
 since rural solitude more please smile. 
o solitude! the sage chief delight! 
what number can thy lovely charm recite! 
hail, peaceful nymph! thou old thing on earth! 
nay, like eternity, thou have no birth:
 the heaven alone can thy commencement tell,
 ere MICHAEL fight, or peccant angel fell;
 before the sky with radiant light be clad,
 in awful gloom, and venerable shade,
 the father thou he sole companion make. 
when to creation first his thought incline,
 and future world be rise in his mind;
 he sit with thou, and plan the mighty scheme;
 with thou adjust the stupendous frame;
 contrive how globe, self-balanced in the air,
 with restless round shall rule the circle year;
 how orb over orb in mystic dance shall roll,
 what law support, and regulate the whole:
 nor art thou yet impair, celestial dame;
 thy charm be still attractive, still the same;
 with thou the mind, abstract from the crew,
 may study nature, and her end pursue;
 with thou i hear the feather warbler sing;
 with thou survey the beauty of the spring,
 when blossom, leaf, and fruit the branch yield,
 and eden glory crown the happy field. 

here first the muse (auspicious be the place!) 
rejoice to see her royal guardian face:
 how mild, yet how majestic, be her look! 
how sweet condescend all she speak! 
on every please accent wisdom hang,
 and truth and virtue dwell upon her tongue. 
o! be i equal to the glorious theme,
 then shall my lay immortalize her fame;
 or paint great GEORGE in peaceful laurel dress,
 with albion safety labour in his breast;
 who (while contend nation round he jar,
 and subject wealth support their monarch war)
 guard happy Britain, with his float tower,
 from purple slaughter, and invade power;
 no plunder army rob our fruitful plain;
 but, bless with peace and plenty, smile the Swain. 

not so he smile upon the foreign shore;
 but starve walk through nature lavish store;
 poor peasant with their rigid burden groan,
 and till the glebe for harvest not their own. 
what, though their more propitious Phoebus shine
 with warm ray, and cheer the curl vine? 
what, though rich olive grace the fertile soil,
 and the hot climate teem with fatten oil? 
the hungry farmer view his crop in vain,
 in vain the vineyard tempt the thirsty Swain;
 while their stern tyrant arbitrary power
 rifle the plain, and ravage their store:
 thy son, Britannia, from such evil free,
 enjoy the sweet of peace and liberty;
 a gracious sovereign smile upon the throne,
 and heaven confirm the happy realm his own. 
