heaven.

a vision.

by mr. SCOTT.

full many a tedious hour, with care oppress,
 stretch on my weary bed, i wakeful lay,
 sad troublous thought, like hornet, sting my breast,
 and brush the dew of balmy sleep away. 
ah! what avail, i cry, with painful toil,
 by virtue steadfast star the bark to guide,
 far from acrasia wily-wandering isle,
 where ease and pleasure the frail heart divide;
 if life short voyage undistinguished tend
 to darkness, and the land where all forget end? 

shall worth lie hide in sorrow baleful shade? 
and no reward shall suffer goodness find,
 while vice triumphant lift her pamper head,
 nor hear the step of vengeance close behind? —
 then take i, power of beauty, to thy arm,
 and lull, ah lull to peace my trouble soul! 
disclose, o god of wine, thy purple charm,
 i will drown reflection in the mantling bowl! 
against wind, and tide, let stoic dullness sail,
 be mine the calm sea, and pleasure brisk gale. 

pensive i muse, until rise the blush morn,
 and spread her saffron mantle over the sky;
 when pity Morpheus shake his opiate horn,
 and slumberous humour drown my weary eye:
 yet fancy still awake, to sooth my pain,
 sweet scene of joy in lively hue portray;
 she call forth all her bright ideal train,
 and please truth in mystic dream convey:
 oh fail i not, thou fair enchant power,
 at sorrow grim approach, and care distressful hour! 

bear through the yield air, methinks i fly
 to some more blissful clime, sequester far
 from this frail world, that just appear to view,
 like the faint glimmer of a distant star. 
deep in the sea encircle wave it be place,
 as gem in silver; hoary ocean smile,
 cheere with the please sight; and from his breast
 send his sweet child, breeze fresh and mild:
 no cloud nor darkness veil the cheerful scene,
 nor wintery blast deform the ground eternal green. 

lo to the west a large and spacious plain,
 where meet in concert, wood, and hill, and dale;
 bright than all that muse-led poet feign
 of ida grove, and tempe hallow vale:
 though peneus there revolve his amber stream,
 and suppliant Daphne spread her branch arm;
 still tremble lest the sun prolific beam,
 too fierce wanton, blast her virgin charm:
 will thou escape? go, coy relentless maid,
 go choose some worse retreat, some less luxurious shade! 

there bloom grove, gay smile with delight,
 from her fair womb spontaneous nature bring;
 where perch on every bough, all rich dight
 with paint plume, some harmless siren sing:
 please with the wild note zephyr flit unseen,
 and on his musky wing the sound convey;
 while trickle soft, each vary pause between,
 the murmur rivulet roll their silver base;
 wind, water, bird in seemly sort agree,
 and amorous echo blend the liquid melody. 

nor there alone be charm one scanty sense:
 the load tree ambrosial fruitage bear;
 the weep shrub their spicy gum dispense,
 who fragrance fresh imbalm the buxom air;
 thousand of flower their silken web unfold,
 amaranth, immortal amaranth arise,
 these beam bright with vegetable gold,
 and these with azure, these with Tyrian die;
 there laugh sweet red the rose glow,
 while from their breathe soul celestial odour flow. 

but hark, a voice soft-warbling strike my ear! 
 "behold, o man, fair virtue ample meed;
" behold these radiant plain, this star-girt sphere,
 "by righteous Jove her portion be decree! 
" mould not, ah mould not then in idle cell,
 "but strive these rapturous mansion to attain;
" here all the wise, the brave, the virtuous dwell,
 "eternal age free from care and pain;
 "here in elysian seat, their calm abode,
" live in communion bless, with hero and with god! 

eastward to this methinks a different scene
 of equal beauty charm my rapture sight:
 wide spacious lawn with swell hill between,
 and grove of bliss, and garden of delight. 
there lotes and palm their copious branch twine,
 and overarch form delicious bower;
 there gush nectareous rill of dulcet wine,
 and honeyed stream revolve their milky store;
 fresh bleed myrrh and cassia shed perfume,
 ananas swell with sweet, and wild pomegranate bloom,

fast by a fount, who spicy water glide
 in amorous maze, on the velvet ground,
 with blush flower all goodly beautify,
 a smile troop of virgin dance around;
 fair than delia silver-buskined train,
 when erst, ladona, by thy lillied bank,
 or cool eurota laurel-fringed plain,
 to breathe lute they trip in seemly rank;
 and fair, Cypris, than thy wanton choir,
 that melt the soul to love, and kindle fierce desire. 

their eye, like pearl within their shell conceal,
 beauteous and black; their lip with ruby vie;
 on their fair cheek, with white and red anneal,
 what thousand dimple smile in ambush lie! 
see, see they point to you embower shade,
 where cool gale fan their odoriferous wing,
 and Flora fresh, soft couch be spread;
 the while some one this lovely ditty sing! 
through all my vein what thrill transport fly
 to hear the nectar word, drop like honeyed dew! 

 "haste, gentle youth, for lo, the way be plain! 
" haste, gentle youth, and hear the prophet call! 
 "these be the joy that true believer gain,
" immortal joy that never know to pall. 
 "come then, ah come thy weary limb recline
" on silken bed of rose sweet strow,
 "where to thy touch compliant bow the vine,
" all faint, and labour with the luscious load;
 "where nymph of paradise their charm reveal,
" and with their amorous spoil thy greedy eye regale! " 

she cease — and melt with excess of joy,
 voluptuous hope be busy in my breast:
 when lo! swift-darting from the extreme sky,
 with seraph-plume, a angel stand confess! 
a pure immortal crown adorn her head,
 of gold inwove with jewel; in her hand,
 the book of life, and mercy be display,
 with ruddy drop of die martyr stain;
 her eagle-eye be quick, and pass bright,
 yet beam serene, and mild, with heaven celestial light. 

 "and o fond foolish man," she cry, "forbear
" idle to glote on form so light, and vain! 
 "what be these jocund scene, but empty air,
" the fleet coinage of a frenzied brain? —
 "yet even in these, as dark through a glass,
 "some faint, some glimmer view the eye may gain
" of those unmingled joy, that far surpass
 "whatever of bliss the wit of man can feign;
" those pure delight, that flow in stream divine,
 "where thy imperial tower, o heavenly Salem, shine! 

 "for know, my son, that they who worth be try,
" as gold by fire, by great and virtuous deed,
 "soon as the carnal fetter be untie,
" that chain the soul, and strip these mortal weed;
 "haply shall soar, in robe of glory clad,
" to heavenly mansion, bright abode, prepare
 " ere the foundation of the deep be lay,
 "or the firm pillar of the earth be rear;
" ere god his golden compass employ,
 "and mark this beauteous world on chaos dark, and void. 

 "there shall they live, o happy, happy spirit! 
" there shall they live remove from all the care,
 "and thousand ill, that feeble flesh inherit:
" no greedy want, nor wayard lust, that tear
 "with viperous rage the breast from whence it spring,
" their deep-embosomed peace shall ever torment;
 "but hymn sweet, the angel troop among,
" their undisturbed lay of pure content,
 "the smile hour immortal shall employ
" in trance of holy ease, or ecstasy of joy. 

 "then shall their eye, from cloudy film secure,
" with lightning-glance unmeasured space behold;
 "and all the thousand star, that pave the floor
" of heaven, with orient pearl, or live gold;
 "then float through the boundless deep of air,
" a azure sea, like gem of rich hue,
 "myriad of world thick-scattered shall appear,
" with all their bright inhabitant to view:
 "their active mind shall traverse, quick as thought,
" creation ample field, the range betwixt god and nought. 

 "and oh what stream of music sweet, and clear,
" shall drown in deep delight their rapture soul! 
 "ay i, in vain to man unpurged ear
" their heavenly note each tuneful planet roll! 
 "ay i, in vain with softly-thrilling voice,
" through every land they hymn their maker praise,
 "while choirs of young-eyed cherubim rejoice,
" and to their golden harp mellifluous lay
 "attune, holy, holy, holy, sing,
" o lord, almighty god, the saints eternal king! 

 "but not in vain the tuneful planet raise
" to pure ethereal soul their voice divine;
 "nor yet in vain their great creator praise
" do gladsome choirs of young-eyed cherub join:
 "no bless spirit but hear the sacred song,
" and wake his lyre melodious part to bear
 "in the sweet symphony; while all the throng
" of angel, and archangel, nay, the ear
 "of god delight listen to the strain. —
" in heaven, and heaven-born mind such rapturous concord reign! 

 "but where, ah where can glow tint be find
" to paint the charm of sion sacred place,
 " where Christ the lamb in radiance sit enthrone,
 "the lively image of his father grace? 
 "o flower of love! o glorious morning star! 
 "o sun of righteousness, who heal wing
 "bring life, and peace, and mercy from afar! 
" from thou the light, thou beam fountain, spring,
 "that guide poor mortal in their weary way,
" through black affliction night, to pleasure endless day! 

 "Jesus! — and do thou leave thy bower of joy? 
" and do thou leave thy father dear embrace,
 "content with agonize pang to die
" for man forlorn, rebellious, sinful race? 
 "what bliss to hear the high mysterious story;
" by all the prophet, all the apostle sing,
 "and noble army of martyr, crown with glory;
" where bless, the six-winged seraphim among,
 "they drink immortal, from thy rapturous sight,
" conceiveless draught of love ineffable delight! 

 "hail saint of light! who once the patient train
" of silent sorrow, through the thorny road
 "of misery toil, and unappalled by pain,
" with pilgrim-feet the long, long journey tread! 
 "o teach by they, thou man of earth, sustain
" with firm unwearied arm the dangerous fight! 
 "the prize of thy high-calling dare to gain,
 " victorious palm, and robe of spotless white;
 "so in the book of life thy name shall shine,
 "and heaven eternal joy and transport all be thy." 

scarce have she speak, when that cherubic car,
 instinct with soul, and those self-moving wheel,
 that whirl the holy sage from chebar far,
 appear: — my breast the rush impulse feel! 
i see, i see thy glitter turret rise,
 celestial Salem, all of lucid gold,
 inlay with gem of thousand, thousand dye! 
and lo, the everlasting gate unfold
 their door of pearl, and over my ache sight
 full tide of glory flow, and stream of live light! 

of light surpass far thy glimmer ray,
 (more bright, more clear, more glorious, more divine)
 though dress by thou, o golden eye of day,
 in gaudy robe the sparkle diamond shine;
 though yond fair moon to thou her lustre owe,
 gild with borrow light the mountain brow;
 and Iris steal from thou each tint that glow
 in the gay forehead of the showery bow:
 faint be thy feeble blaze, o beauteous sun! 
such peerless beam appear from truth be eternal throne. 

see through the street, like liquid jasper clear,
 the fount of life in mazy error flow! 
through the bright crystal sand of gold appear,
 and heap of pearly grain; while bloom grow,
 on either bank of dainty flower profuse,
 the tree of life superior over the rest,
 who teem branch nectar fruit produce:
 twelve various fruit of sweetly-varied taste,
 from every leaf salubrious dew exhale,
 and pure elixir breathe in every balmy gale. 

lo there, diffuse along the sacred brink,
 angelic choirs replete with love and joy,
 conceive their god, and from his presence drink
 beatitude past utterance! — there they lie
 on flower bed of balsam, cassia, nard,
 and myrrh, a wilderness of rich perfume;
 embalm they lie, like that arabian bird,
 'midst odorous shrub, and incense-breathing gum,
 who life spring recent from the sun-born fire,
 while cloud of spicy smoke in bluish wreath aspire. 

but spare, o spare i, heaven! — my faint soul
 sicken with bliss too great for mortal sense! 
come, over my limb thy quicken water roll,
 life-giving stream, and all thy balm dispense! 
and thou, fair tree, the source of all our woe,
 (that bloom so fatal erst in eden glade,
 transplant since to heaven) thy friendly bough
 extend, and wrap i in the brown shade! 
o veil i from the Lamb too glorious sight,
 from majesty full blaze, insufferable bright! 

tremble i wake with sweet excess of joy,
 and on the wing of sleep, more swift than wind,
 away the fickle, fond delusion fly;
 yet leave their fairy-step the trace behind:
 hear then, you faint myriad, from your sphere,
 and gentle beam your kindly influence down;
 lift, lift my thought above life grovel care,
 to joy sublime, and virtue glorious crown! 
o guide my virgin-soul the high abode,
 to reach, the heaven of heaven, where reign the eternal god!  
