to her majesty.

queen of the northern world, who gentle sway
 invite our love, and bind our heart to obey:
 forgive the nation groan when William die;
 lo, at thy foot in all the loyal pride
 of rise joy three happy realm appear,
 and William urn almost without a tear
 stand; nor complain: while from thy gracious tongue
 peace flow in silver stream amid the throng. 
amaze balm, that on those lip be find
 to heal the twinge of that mortal wound,
 the danger, and the scar! far-distant land
 who live lay trust in nassovian hand
 transfer their soul, and live; secure they play
 in thy mild ray, and feel a grow day. 

thy beamy wing at once defend and warm
 faint devotion; while in various form
 fair piety shine through the british isle:
 here at thy side, and in thy kind smile
 blaze in ornamental gold she stand,
 to bless thy council, and assist thy hand,
 and crowd wait round she to receive command. 
there at a humble distance from the throne
 beauteous she lie; her lustre all her own,
 ungarnished; yet not blush, nor afraid,
 nor know suspicion, nor affect the shade. 
in word of solemn form, or with a free cry
 warm as our zeal for thou, we both address the sky,
 vow for thy safety both, and live beneath thy eye. 

princess, the world already own thy name;
 go, mount the chariot of immortal fame,
 nor die to be renown: fame loud breath
 too dear be purchase by a angel death. 
the thunder of thy hand with general joy
 shall crush rebellion and the rival boy:
 thy sound arm his gallic patron hear,
 and speed his flight; nor overtake his fear
 till hard despair wring from the tyrant soul
 the iron tear out. let thy frown control
 our angry jar at home, till wrath submit
 her bloody banner to thy awful foot.
 mad zeal and frenzy with their murderous train
 flee these bless realm in thy auspicious reign,
 envy expire in rage, and treason bite the chain. 

let no black scene affright the british stage,
 thy thread of life prolong our golden age,
 long bless the earth: then rise and shine on high
 the fair glory of the western sky;
 there check the ray of each malignant star,
 heal the dire pestilence, forbid the war,
 warm the chill north, sooth the two rugged bear,
 and stretch thy peaceful influence to the southern sphere. 
