origin of flattery. 

when Jove, in anger to the son of earth,
 bid artful Vulcan give Pandora birth,
 and send the fatal gift, which spread below
 over all the wretched race, contagious woe,
 unhappy man, by vice and folly tost,
 find in the storm of life his quiet lose,
 while envy, avarice and ambition, hurl
 discord and death around the war world;
 then the bless peasant leave his field and fold,
 and barter love and peace for power and gold;
 leave his calm cottage and his native plain,
 in search of wealth to tempt the faithless main;
 or, brave danger, in the battle stand,
 and bathe his savage hand in human blood:
 no long then, his woodland walk among,
 the shepherd lad his genuine passion sing,
 or seek at early morn his soul delight,
 or grave her name upon the bark at night;
 to deck her flow hair no more he weave
 the simple wreath, or with ambitious love
 bind his own brow with myrtle or with bay,
 but break his pipe, and throw his crook away. 
the nymph forsake, other pleasure seek;
 then first for gold their venal heart be buy,
 and nature blush to sickly art give place,
 and affectation seize the seat of grace:
 no more simplicity, by sense refine,
 or generous sentiment, possess the mind;
 no more they feel each other joy and woe,
 and Cupid flee, and hide his useless bow. 
but with deep grief propitious Venus pine,
 to see the ill which threaten womankind;
 ill, that she know her empire will disarm,
 and rob her subject of their sweet charm;
 good humour potent influence destroy,
 and change for lower frown, the smile of joy. 
then deep sigh at the mournful view,
 she try at length what heavenly art can do
 to bring back pleasure to her pensive train,
 and vindicate the glory of her reign. 
a thousand little love attend the task,
 and bear from mars head his radiant casque,
 the fair enchantress on its silver bind,
 wreathe with soft spell her magic cestus round. 
then shake from her hair ambrosial dew,
 infuse fair hope, and expectation new,
 and stifle wish, and persuasive sigh,
 and fond belief, and 'eloquence of eye,'
 and falter accent, which explain so well
 what study speech vain try to tell,
 and more pathetic silence, which impart
 infectious tenderness to feel heart,
 soft tone of pity; fascinate smile;
 and maia son assist she with wile,
 and bring gay dream, fantastic vision bring,
 and wave his wand over the seduce draught. 
then zephyr come: to he the goddess cry,
 'go fetch from Flora all her flowery pride
 'to fill my charm, each scent bud that blow,
' and bind my myrtle with her thornless rose;
 'then speed thy flight to gallia smile plain,
' where roll the Loire, the Garonne and the Seine;
 'dip in their water thy celestial wing,
' and the soft dew to fill my chalice bring;
 'but chief tell thy Flora, that to i
' she send a bouquet of her fleurs de ly;
 'that poignant spirit will complete my spell.'
 — it be do! the lovely sorceress say it be well. 
and now Apollo lend a ray of fire,
 the caldron bubble, and the flame aspire;
 the watchful grace round the circle dance,
 with arm entwine, to mark the work advance;
 and with full quiver sportive Cupid come,
 temper his favourite arrow in the flame. 
then Venus speak, the waver flame retire,
 and zephyr breath extinguish the fire. 
at length the goddess in the helmet round
 a sweet and subtle spirit due find,
 more soft than oil, than ether more refine,
 of power to cure the woe of womankind,
 and call it flattery: — balm of female life,
 it charm alike the widow, maid and wife;
 clear the sad brow of virgin in despair,
 and smooth the cruel trace leave by care;
 bid palsy age with youthful spirit glow,
 and hang May garland on December snow. 
delicious essence! howsoever apply,
 by what rude nature be thy charm deny? 
some form seduce still thy whisper wear,
 stern wisdom turn to thou her will ear,
 and prudery listen, and forget her fear. 
the rustic nymph, who rigid aunt restrain,
 condemn to dress, and practise air in vain,
 at thy first summons find her bosom swell,
 and bid her crabbed governante farewell;
 while, fire by thou with spirit not her own,
 she grow a toast, and rise into tun. 
the fade beauty who with secret pain,
 see young charm usurp her envy reign,
 by thou assist, can with smile behold
 the record where her conquest be enrol;
 and dwell yet on scene by memory nurse,
 when George the second reign, or George the first;
 she see the shade of ancient beaux arise,
 who swear her eye exceed modern eye,
 when poet sing for she and lover bleed,
 and giddy fashion follow as she lead. 
depart mode appear in long array,
 the flower and flounce of her happy day;
 again her lock the decent fillet bind,
 the wave lappet flutter in the wind,
 and then compare with a proud disdain
 the more fantastic taste that now obtain,
 she deem ungraceful, trifle and absurd,
 the gay world that move round George the third. 
nor thy soft influence will the train refuse,
 who court in distant shade the modest muse,
 though in a form more pure and more refine,
 thy soothe spirit meet the letter mind;
 not death itself thy empire can destroy;
 towards thou, even then, we turn the languid eye;
 still trust in thou to bid our memory bloom,
 and scatter rose round the silent tomb. 
