the fortunate complaint.

as Strephon in a wither cypress shade,
 for anxious thought, and sigh lover make
 revolve lay upon his wretched state,
 and the hard usage of too partial fate;
 thus the sad youth complain, once happy Swain
 now the most abject shepherd of the plain:
 where be that harmonious consort of delight,
 those peaceful day, and pleasurable night;
 that generous mirth, and noble jollity,
 which gay make the dance minute flee? 
disperse, and banish from my trouble breast? 
nor leave i one short interval of rest. 

why do i prosecute a hopeless flame,
 and play in torment, such a lose game;
 all thing conspire to make my ruin sure;
 when wound be mortal they admit no cure. 
but heaven sometime do a miraculous thing,
 when our last hope be just upon the wing;
 and in a moment drive those cloud away,
 who sullen darkness hide a glorious day. 

why be i bear, or why do i survive,
 to be make wretched only, keep alive? 
fate be too cruel in the harsh decree,
 that i must live, yet live in misery. 
be all its please happy moment go,
 must Strephon be unfortunate alone? 
on other swain it lavish bestow;
 on they each nymph neglect favour throw. 
they meet compliance still in every face,
 and lodge their passion in a kind embrace:
 obtain from the soft incurious maid
 true love for counterfeit, and gold for lead. 
success on Mævius always do attend;
 inconstant fortune, be his constant friend:
 he level blind, yet the mark do hit,
 and owe the victory to chance, not wit. 
but let he conquer ever one blow be strike;
 i will not be Mævius to have maevius luck. 
proud of my fate, i will not change my chain
 for all the trophy purr Maevius gain,
 but rather still live delia slave, than be
 like Maevius silly, and like Maevius free. 
but he be happy; love the common road,
 and, packhorse like, jog on beneath his load:
 if Phyllis peevish, or unkind do prove,
 it never disturb his grave mechanic love. 
a little joy his languid flame content,
 and make he easy under all event. 
but when a passion noble and sublime,
 and high still will every moment climb;
 if it be accept with a just return,
 the sire immortal, will for ever burn;
 and with such rapture fill the lover breast,
 that saint in paradise be scarce more bless. 

but i lament my misery in vain,
 for Delia hear i pitiless, complain. 
suppose she pity, and believe i true;
 what satisfaction can from thence accrue,
 unless her pity, make she love i too? 
perhaps she love, (it be but perhaps, i fear,
 for that be a bless can be buy too dear,)
 if she have scruple that oppose her will,
 i must alas, be miserable still. 
though if she love, those scruple soon will fly
 before the reason of the deity. 
for where love enter, he will rule alone,
 and suffer no copartner in his throne:
 and those false argument, that will repel
 his high injunction, teach we to rebel. 

what method can poor Strephon then propound,
 to cure the bleed of his fatal wound:
 if she, who guide the vexatious dart
 resolve to cherish and increase the smart? 
go youth, from these unhappy plain remove,
 leave the pursuit of unsuccessful love;
 go, and to foreign swain thy grief relate;
 tell they the cruelty of frown fate:
 tell they the noble charm of delia mind,
 tell they how fair, but tell they how unkind. 
and when few year thou have in sorrow spend,
 (for sure they can be of large extent,)
 in prayer for she thou love, resign thy breath,
 and bless the minute give thou ease, and death. 

here pause the Swain — when Delia drive by
 her bleat flock to some fresh pasture nigh,
 by love direct, do her step convey
 where Strephon, wrap in silent sorrow, lay. 
as soon as he perceive the beauteous maid,
 he rise to meet she, and thus, tremble, say. 

when humble suppliant will the god appease,
 and in severe affliction beg for ease;
 with constant importunity they sue,
 and their petition every day renew;
 grow still more earnest as they be deny,
 nor one well-weighed expedient leave untried,
 till heaven, those blessing, they enjoy before,
 not only do return; but give they more. 

o, do not blame i, Delia! if i press
 so much, and with impatience, for redress. 
my ponderous grief no ease my soul allow,
 for they be next intolerable now;
 how shall i then support they, when they grow
 to a excess, to a distract woe? 
since you be endow with a celestial mind,
 relieve like heaven, and like the god be kind. 
do you perceive the torment, i endure,
 which you first cause, and you alone can cure:
 they will your virgin soul to pity move;
 and pity may at last be change to love. 
some swain, i own, impose upon the fair,
 and lead the incautious maid into a snare. 
but let they suffer for their perjury,
 and do not punish other crime in i,
 if there be so many of our sex untrue;
 you shall more kind use the faithful few
 though innocence too oft incur the fate
 of guilt, and clear it self sometime too late. 

your nature be to tenderness incline;
 and why to i, to i alone unkind? 
a common love, by other person show,
 meet with a full return, but mine have none:
 nay scarce believe: though from deceit as free,
 as angel flame, can for archangel be. 
a passion feign at no repulse be grieve;
 and value little if it be receive;
 but love sincere, resent the small scorn,
 and the unkindness do in secret mourn. 

sometime i please my self, and think you be
 too good, to make i wretched by despair. 
that tenderness, which in your soul be place,
 will move you to compassion sure at last. 
but when i come to take a serious view
 of my own merit, i despond of you,
 for what can Delia, beauteous Delia see,
 to raise in she the least esteem of i? 
I have nought that can encourage my address,
 my Fortune little; and my worth be less. 
but if a love of the sublime kind
 can make impression on a generous mind:
 if all have real value, that be divine,
 there can be a noble flame than i. 

perhaps you pity i: i know you must,
 and my affection can no more distrust:
 but what, alas! will helpless pity do? 
you pity, but you may despise i too. 
still i be wretched, if no more you give,
 the starve orphan can on pity live,
 he must receive the food for which he cry,
 or he consume; and though much pity, die. 

my torment still do with my passion grow,
 the more i love, the more i undergo. 
but suffer i no long to remain
 beneath the pressure of so vast a pain. 
my wound require some speedy remedy:
 delay be fatal, when despair so nigh. 
much I have endure, much more than i can tell;
 too much, indeed, for one that love so well. 
when will the end of all my sorrow be? 
can you not love, i be sure, you pity i? 
but if i must new misery sustain,
 and be condemn to more, and strong pain;
 i will not accuse you, since my fate be such,
 i please too little, and i love too much,

Strephon no more, the blush Delia say,
 excuse the conduct of a timorous maid:
 now i be convince your love sublime and true,
 such as i always wish to find in you. 
each kind expression, every tender thought
 a mighty transport in my bosom wrought:
 and though in secret i your flame approve,
 i sigh and grieve, but dare not own i love;
 though now — o Strephon: be so kind to guess,
 what shame will not allow i to confess. 

the youth encompass with a joy so bright,
 have hardly strength to bear the vast delight;
 by too sublime a ecstasy possess,
 he tremble, gaze, and clasp she to his breast:
 adore the nymph that do his pain remove,
 vow endless truth, and everlasting love. 
