to mr. ROBERT Atwood. 

the kingdom of the wise Man.  

part i 

the rise year behold the imperious Gaul
 stretch his dominion, while a hundred town
 crouch to the victor: but a steady soul
 stand firm on its own base, and reign as wide,
 as absolute; and sway ten thousand slave,
 lust and wild fancy with a sovereign hand. 

we be a little kingdom: but the man
 that chain his rebel will to reason throne
 form it a large one, Atwood, while his mind
 make heaven its council, from the roll above
 draw his own statute, and with joy obey. 

it be not a troop of well-appointed guard
 create a monarch, not a purple robe
 die in the Peoples blood, not all the crown
 or dazzle tiar that bend about the head,
 though gild with sunbeam and beset with star. 
a monarch he that conquer all his fear
 and tread upon they; when he stand alone,
 make his own camp; four guardian virtue wait
 his nightly slumber and secure his dream. 
now dawn the light; he range all his thought
 in square battalion, bold to meet the attack
 of time and chance, himself a numerous host,
 all eye, all ear, all wakeful as the day,
 firm as a rock, and moveless as the centre. 

in vain the harlot pleasure spread her charm
 to lull his thought in luxury fair lap
 to sensual ease, (the bane of little king,
 monarch who waxen image of soul
 be mould into softness) still his mind
 wear its own shape, nor can the heavenly form
 stoop to be model by the wild decree
 of the mad vulgar, that unthinking herd. 

he live above the crowd, nor hear the noise
 of war and triumph, nor regard the shout
 of popular applause, that empty sound,
 nor feel the fly arrow of reproach,
 or spite, or envy. in himself secure,
 wisdom his tower, and conscience be his shield,
 his peace all inward, and his joy his own. 

now my ambition swell, my wish soar,
 this be my kingdom; sit above the globe
 my 'rise soul, and dress thy self around
 and shine in virtue armour; climb the height
 of wisdom lofty castle, there reside
 safe from the smile and the frown world. 

yet once a day drop down a gentle look
 on the great molehill, and with pity eye
 survey the Busie emmet round the heap
 crowd and bustle in a thousand form
 of strife and toil, to purchase wealth and fame,
 a bubble or a dust: then call thy thought
 up to thy self to feed on joy unknown,
 rich without gold, and great without renown. 

part ii. or the bold stoic.

honour demand my song. forget the ground
 my generous muse, and sit among the star;
 there sing the soul, that conscious of her birth
 live like a native of the vital world
 among these die clod, and bear her state
 just to her self: how noble she maintain
 her character, superior to the flesh,
 she wield her passion like her limb, and know
 the brutal power be only bear obey. 

this be the man who storm can never make
 mean complain, nor can a flatter gale
 make he talk proud: he have no desire
 to read his secret fate; yet unconcerned
 and calm can meet his unborn destiny
 in all its charm or its frightful shape. 

he that unshrinking and without a groan
 bear the first wound may finish all the war
 with mere courageous silence, and come off
 conqueror: for the man that well conceal
 the heavy stroke of fate he bear they well. 

he, though the atlantic and the midland sea
 with adverse surge meet, and rise on high
 suspend betwixt the wind, then rush amain
 mingle with flame upon his single head
 and cloud and star and thunder, he will stand,
 and from the lofty castle of his mind
 sublime look down and joyful survey
 the ruin of creation; he alone
 heir of the die world: a pierce glance
 shoot upward from between his close lid
 to reach his birth-place, then without a sigh
 he bid his batter flesh lie gentle down
 among its native rubbish; while his soul
 breathe and fly upward, a undoubted guest
 of the third heaven, the unruinable sky. 

thither when fate have bring our will soul,
 no matter whether it be a sharp disease,
 or a sharp sword that help the traveller on,
 and push we to our home. bear up my friend,
 my Atwood, and break through the surge brine
 with steady prow; know, we shall once arrive
 at the fair haven of eternal bliss
 to which we ever steer; whether as king
 of wide command we have spread the spacious sea
 with a broad paint fleet, or row along
 in a thin cockboat with a little oar. 

there let my narrow plank shift i to land
 and i will be happy, thus i will leap ashore
 joyful and fearless on the immortal coast,
 since all i leave be mortal, and it must be lose. 
