TO Mr. Robert Atwood. 

THE Kingdom of the Wise Man. 

PART I.

THE rising Year beheld th' Imperious Gaul
 Stretch his Dominion, while a hundred Towns
 Crouch'd to the Victor: But a steady Soul
 Stands firm on its own Base, and reigns as wide,
 As Absolute; and sways ten thousand Slaves,
 Lusts and wild Fancies with a Soveraign Hand. 

We are a little Kingdom: But the Man
 That chains his Rebel Will to Reasons Throne
 Forms it a large one, ATWOOD, whilst his Mind
 Makes Heaven its Council, from the Rolls above
 Draws his own Statutes, and with Joy obeys. 

'Tis not a Troop of Well-appointed Guards
 Create a Monarch, not a Purple Robe
 Dy'd in the Peoples Blood, not all the Crowns
 Or dazling Tiars that bend about the Head,
 Tho' Gilt with Sun-Beams and beset with Stars. 
A Monarch He that Conquers all his Fears
 And treads upon them; when he stands alone,
 Makes his own Camp; four Guardian Virtues wait
 His Nightly Slumbers and secure his Dreams. 
Now dawns the Light; He ranges all his Thoughts
 In square Battalions, bold to meet th' Attacks
 Of Time and Chance, himself a numerous Host,
 All Eye, all Ear, all wakeful as the Day,
 Firm as a Rock, and moveless as the Centre. 

In vain the Harlot Pleasure spreads her Charms
 To lull his Thoughts in Luxuries fair Lap
 To sensual Ease, (the Bane of little Kings,
 Monarchs whose waxen Images of Souls
 Are moulded into Softness) still his Mind
 Wears its own Shape, nor can the Heavenly Form
 Stoop to be model'd by the wild Decrees
 Of the mad Vulgar, that unthinking Herd. 

He lives above the Crowd, nor hears the Noise
 Of Wars and Triumphs, nor regards the Shouts
 Of Popular Applause, that empty Sound,
 Nor feels the flying Arrow of Reproach,
 Or Spite, or Envy. In himself secure,
 Wisdom his Tower, and Conscience is his Shield,
 His Peace all Inward, and his Joys his Own. 

Now my Ambition swells, my Wishes soar,
 This be my Kingdom; sit above the Globe
 My 'Rising Soul, and dress thy self around
 And shine in Virtues Armour; Climb the height
 Of Wisdoms lofty Castle, there reside
 Safe from the Smiling and the Frowning World. 

Yet once a Day drop down a gentle Look
 On the great Molehill, and with pitying Eye
 Survey the Busie Emmets round the Heap
 Crowding and Bustling in a Thousand Forms
 Of Strife and Toil, to purchase Wealth and Fame,
 A Bubble or a Dust: Then call thy Thoughts
 Up to thy self to feed on Joys unknown,
 Rich without Gold, and Great without Renown. 

PART II. OR The Bold Stoick.

HOnour demands my Song. Forget the Ground
 My Generous Muse, and sit amongst the Stars;
 There sing the Soul, that Conscious of her Birth
 Lives like a Native of the Vital World
 Amongst these dying Clods, and bears her State
 Just to her self: How nobly she maintains
 Her Character, Superiour to the Flesh,
 She weilds her Passions like her Limbs, and knows
 The Brutal Powers were only born't obey. 

This is the Man whom Storms could never make
 Meanly complain, nor can a flatt'ring Gale
 Make him talk proudly: He hath no Desire
 To read his Secret Fate; yet unconcern'd
 And calm could meet his unborn Destiny
 In all its Charming or its Frightful Shapes. 

He that unshrinking and without a Groan
 Bears the first Wound may finish all the War
 With meer Couragious Silence, and come off
 Conqueror: For the Man that well conceals
 The heavy Strokes of Fate he bears 'em well. 

He, tho' th' Atlantick and the Midland Seas
 With adverse Surges meet, and rise on high
 Suspended 'twixt the Winds, then rush amain
 Mingled with Flames upon his Single Head
 And Clouds and Stars and Thunder, he would stand,
 And from the lofty Castle of his Mind
 Sublime look down and Joyfully Survey
 The Ruins of Creation; he alone
 Heir of the Dying World: A piercing Glance
 Shoots upwards from between his closing Lids
 To reach his Birth-place, then without a Sigh
 He bids his batter'd Flesh lie gently down
 Amongst its Native Rubbish; while his Soul
 Breaths and flies upward, an undoubted Guest
 Of the third Heaven, th' unruinable Sky. 

Thither when Fate has brought Our willing Souls,
 No matter whether 'twas a Sharp Disease,
 Or a sharp Sword that help'd the Travellers on,
 And push'd us to our Home. Bear up my Friend,
 My ATWOOD, and break thro' the Surging Brine
 With steddy Prow; Know, we shall once arrive
 At the fair Haven of Eternal Bliss
 To which we ever steer; whether as Kings
 Of wide Command we've spread the Spacious Sea
 With a broad Painted Fleet, or Row'd along
 In a thin Cockboat with a little Oar. 

There let my narrow Plank shift me to Land
 And I'll be happy, thus I'll leap Ashore
 Joyful and fearless on the Immortal Coast,
 Since all I leave is Mortal, and it must be lost. 
