the education of Achilles.

by mr. Bedingfield.

i 

ah i! be all our pleasure mix with woe!
be there on earth no happiness sincere?
must even this bitter stream of sorrow flow
from joy domestic spring, our child dear?
how oft do Thetis drop the silver tear,
when with fond eye she view her darling boy!
how oft her breast heave with presage fear,
lest vice secret canker shall annoy
fair virtue open bud, and all her hope destroy!

ii.

at length, so Nereus have her right teach,
that doubtful care may eat her heart no more,
her imp in prattle infancy she bring
to the fame centaur, on mount pelion hoar,
hight chiron, who to Saturn phyl'ra bear;
chiron, who wisdom flourish above his peer,
in every goodly thew, and virtuous lore,
to principle his yet untainted year;
the seed that be early sow, the fair harvest bear.

iii.

far in the covert of a bushy wood,
where age tree their star-proof branch spread,
a grott, with grey moss ever drop stand;
ne costly gem the sparkle roof display,
ne crystal square the pavement rich inlay,
but over the pebble, clear with glassy shine,
a limpid stream in soothe murmur stray,
and all around the flower eglantine
its balmy tendril spread in many a wanton twine.

iv.

a lowly habitation, well i ween,
yet sacred make by man of much fame,
who there in precept wise have lesson be;
chaste Peleus, consort of the sea-born dame,
sage aesculape, who can the vital flame
(bless leach!) relumine by his heal skill;
and Jason, who, his father crown to claim,
descend dreadful from the craggy hill,
and with his portence stern do false usurper thrill.

v. 

fast by the cave a damsel be pight,
afraid from earth her blush look to rear,
lest aught indecent shall offend her sight,
lest aught indecent shall offend her ear;
yet will she sometime deign at sober cheer
soft to smile, but ever hold it shame
the mirth of foulmouthed ribaldry to bear,
a cautious nymph, and modesty her name.
ah! who but churlish carl will hurt so pure a dame?

vi.

with she sit temperance, companion meet,
pluck from tree-en bough her simple food,
and point to a urn beside her foot,
fill with the crystal of the wholesome flood:
with she be see, of grave and awful mood,
hoary fidelity, a matron stay;
and sweet benevolence, who smile stand,
while at her breast two fondle infant play,
and turtle, bill soft, cooe through the echo glade.

vii.

on other side, of bold and open air,
be a fair personage hight exercise;
recline he seem upon his rough boar-spear,
as late surcease from hardy enterprise;
(for sloth inglorious do he aye despise)
fresh glow his cheek with health vermilion dye,
on his sleek brow the swell sweat-drop rise,
and oft around he dart his glow eye
to view his well-breathed hound, full jolly company.

viii.

not far away be sage experience place,
with care-knit brow, fix look, and sober plight,
who weigh well the present with the past,
of every accident can read aright.
with he be reverend contemplation pight,
bow-bent with eld, his beard of snowy hue,
yet age hand mote not empare the sight,
still with sharp ken the eagle he will pursue,
as through the buxom air to heaven bright bower she fly.

ix.

here the fond parent leave her darling care,
yet soft breathe a sigh as she withdraw;
here the young hero, even from tender year,
eftsoon imbibe instruction honey dew,
(for well to file his tongue, sage chiron know)
and learn to discipline his life aright;
to pay to power supreme a reverence due,
chief to saturnian Jove, who dread might
wing through dispart cloud the bicker lightning flight.

x. 

aye be the stripling wont, ere morning fair
have rear over eastern wave her rosy tede,
to grasp with tender hand the point spear,
and beat the thicket where the boar fell breed
enshroud lay, or lion tawny seed.
oft will great Dian, with her woody train,
stop in mid chace to wonder at his speed,
while up the hill rough side she see he strain,
or sweep with wing foot along the level plain.

xi.

and when dun shade have blend the day bright eye,
upon his shoulder, with slow stagger pace,
he bring the prey his hand have do to die,
while blood with dust besprent do foul disgrace
the goodly feature of his glow face.
when as the sage behold on grassy soil
each pant corpse, while life do well apace,
the panther of his spot pride he will spoil,
to deck his foster son: fit need of dare toil.

xii.

and ever and anon the godlike sire,
to temper stern behest with pleasance gay,
will touch (for well he can) the silver lyre;
so sweet ravish each enchant lay,
that Pan, in scornful wise, will fling away
his rustic pipe, and even the sacred train
will leave their love parnass in trim array,
and think their own Apollo once again
charm his attentive flock, a simple shepherd swain.

xiii.

and ever and anon of worthy eld,
who praise fame trump through earth wide hound have spread,
to fire his mind to brave exploit, he tell;
Pirithous, know for prow hardy-head;
Theseus, who wrath the dire Procrustes flee;
and Hercules, who tremble Lerna fear,
when Hydra fall, in loathsome marsh breed,
in vain against the son of Jove uprear
head sprout under head, by thrillant falchion shear.

xiv.

the stern-browed boy in mute attention stand,
to hear the sage relate each great emprise;
then stride along the cave in haughty mood,
while vary passion in his bosom rise,
and lightning-beam flash from his glow eye.
even now he scorn the prey the defart yield,
even now (as hope the future scene supply)
he shake the terror of his heaven-formed shield,
and brave the indignant flood, and thunder over the field.
