elegy.

write in the harvest.

by the same.

farewel the pleasant violet-scanted shade;
 the primros'd-hill, and daisy-mantled mead;
 the furrow land, with spring corn array;
 the sunny wall, with bloomy branch spread:

farewell the bower with blush rose gay;
 farewell the fragrant trefoil-purpled field;
 farewell the walk through row of new-mown hay,
 when evening breeze mingle odour yield! 

farewell to these — now round the lonely farm,
 where jocund plenty deign to fix her seat;
 the autumnal landscape open all its charm,
 declare kind nature annual work complete. 

in different part what different view delight,
 where on neat ridge wave the golden grain;
 or where the beard barley dazzle white,
 spread over the steepy slope or wide champain. 

the smile of morning gleam along the hill;
 and wakeful labour call her son abroad;
 they leave with cheerful look their lowly vill,
 and bid the field resign their ripen load. 

to various task address the rustic band,
 and here the scythe, and there the sickle wield;
 or rear the new-bound sheaf along the land;
 or range in heap the produce of the field. 

some build the shock, some load the spacious wain,
 some lead to shelter barn the fragrant corn. 
some form tall rick that tower over the plain,
 for many a mile the rural yard adorn. —

the enclosure gate throw open all around,
 the stubble people by the glean throng,
 the rattle car with verdant branch crown,
 and joyful swain that raise the clamorous song,

soon mark glad harvest over — you rural lord,
 who wild domain over albion isle extend;
 think who kind hand your annual wealth afford,
 and bid to heaven your grateful praise ascend. 

for though no gift spontaneous of the ground
 rise these fair crop that make your valley smile,
 though the blithe youth of every hamlet round
 pursue for these through many a day their toil. 

yet what avail your labour or your care? 
can all your labour, all your care supply
 bright sun, or soften shower, or tepid air,
 or one indulgent influence of the sky? 

for providence decree that we obtain
 with toil each blessing destine to our use;
 but mean to teach we that our toil be vain,
 if he the bounty of his hand refuse. 

yet Albion, blame not what thy crime demand,
 while this sad truth the blush muse betray,
 more frequent echo over thy harvest land
 the voice of riot than the voice of praise. 

prolific though thy field and mild thy clime,
 know realm once fame for field and clime as fair,
 have fall the prey of famine, war, and time,
 and now no semblance of their glory bear. 

ask Palestine, proud asia early boast,
 where now the grove that pour her wine and oil,
 where the fair town that crown her wealthy coast,
 where the glad swain that till her fertile soil? 

ask, and behold, and mourn her hapless fall! 
where rise fair town, where wave the golden grain,
 throne on the naked rock and moulder wall,
 pale want and ruin hold their dreary reign. 

where Jordan valley smile in live green,
 where sharon flower disclose their vary hue;
 the wander pilgrim view the alter scene,
 and drop the tear of pity as he view. 

ask grecia, mourn over her ruin tower;
 where now the prospect charm her bard of old,
 her corn-clad mountain and elysian bower,
 and silver stream through fragrant meadow roll? 

where freedom praise along the vale be hear,
 and town to town return the favourite sound;
 where patriot war her awful standard rear,
 and brave the million Persia pour around? 

there freedom praise no more the valley cheer,
 there patriot war no more her banner wave;
 nor bard, nor sage, nor martial chief appear,
 but stern barbarian rule a land of slave. 

of mighty realm be such the poor remains? 
of mighty realm that fall when mad with power,
 they lure each vice to revel on their plain;
 each monster doom their offspring to devour! 

o Albion! will thou shun their mournful fate,
 to shun their folly and their crime be thy;
 and woo to linger in thy fair retreat,
 the radiant virtue, progeny divine! 

bright truth, the noble of the sacred band,
 sweet peace who brow no ruffle frown deform,
 fair charity with ever open hand,
 and courage smile amid a thousand storm. 

o haste to grace our isle, you lovely train! 
so may the power who hand all blessing yield,
 give her fame glory ever to remain,
 and crown with annual wealth her laugh field. 
