to mr. S. tucker.

by mr. Mendes.

the son of man, by various passion lead,
 the path of business or of pleasure tread;
 the florist view his dear carnation rise,
 and wonder who can dote on flavia eye;
 the lover see, unmoved, each gaudy streak,
 and know no bloom but that on daphne cheek:
 while some grow pale over Newton, Locke, or Boyle,
 miss read romance, and my lady Hoyle;
 thus inclination bind her fetter strong,
 and, just as judgement mark, we be right or wrong. 

fair be those hill where sacred laurel grow,
 rule by the power who draw the golden bow;
 but see how few attain the dangerous road,
 how few be bear to feel the inspire god! 
yet all, to reach the arduous summit try,
 from soar pope to reptile Ogleby. 
among the rest, your friend attempt to climb,
 but ah, how different poesy and rhyme! 

the midnight bard, recite to his bell,
 who break our rest, and toll the muse knell,
 be just a poet matchless and divine,
 as he a Raphael, who, on ale-house sign,
 seat his bold George in attitude so quaint,
 that none can tell the dragon from a saint. 

reckon each sand in wide New-market plain,
 mount yond blue vault, and count the starry train;
 but number never can comprehend the throng
 of retail dealer in the art of song. 
like summer fly they blot the solar ray,
 and, like their brother insect, live a day. 
be i not blast by some friendless star,
 to know my want, yet wage unequal war? 
i own i be; and dabble thus in rhyme,
 it be folly bell that ring the please chime;
 bit by the bard tarantula i swell,
 write off the rage fit, and all be well. 

and yet, perhaps, to lose my time this way
 be better far than some misspend the day. 
the fatal dice-box never fill my hand,
 by i no orphan weep his ravish land;
 what ward can tax i with a deed unjust? 
what friend upbraid i with a break trust? 
(some few except, who pride and folly blind,
 i find they chaff, and give they to the wind)
 like a poor bird, and one of mean wing,
 around my cage i flutter, hop, and sing. 
unlike in this my brother of the bay,
 i sue for pardon, and they hope for praise;
 and when for verse i find my genius warm,
 like infant send to school, i keep from harm. 
what time the dogstar with unbating flame
 cleave the parch earth, and sink the silver Thames;
 while the shrill tenant of the sun-burnt blade,
 (a poet he, and sing all his trade)
 tear his small throat, i brave the sultry ray,
 and deep-embowered, escape the rage of day. 
thrice bless the man, who, shield from the beam,
 sing lay melodious to the sacred stream;
 thrice bless the stream, who view his bank of flower,
 crown with the muse or imperial tower,
 who limpid water as they onward glide,
 see humble ozier nod, or threaten squadron ride. 

health to my friend, and to his partner, peace,
 a good long life, and moderate increase;
 may Dulwich garden double treasure share,
 and be both Flora and pomona care. 
you Walton naiad, guard the favourite child,
 drive off each marsh-born fog; you zephyr mild,
 fan the dear innocent; you fairy, keep
 your wonted distance, nor disturb his sleep;
 nor in the cradle, while your trick you play,
 the changeling drop, and bear our boy away. 
however chance may chalk his future fate,
 or doom his manhood to be rich or great,
 be not our care; oh, let the guide power
 decide that point, who rule the natal hour;
 nor shall we seek, for knowledge to enrich,
 the Delphic tripod, or your Norwood witch. 

but tucker doubt, and "if not rich,"he cry,
 "how can the boy reward the good and wife? 
give he but gold, and merit never shall freeze,
 but rise from want to affluence and ease:
 the Guido touch shall warm his throb heart,
 the patriot bust shall speak the sculptor art;
 but if from danae precious shower debar,
 the muse he may admire, but never reward."

all this i grant; but do it follow then,
 that part have draw regard from wealthy man? 
do gay receive the tribute of the great? 
no, let his tomb be witness of his fate:
 for Milton day be too long past to strike;
 the rich of all time ever be alike. 

see he, who line "in a fine frenzy roll,"
 he come to tear, to harrow up the soul;
 bear i, you power, from his bewitch sprite,
 my eye-ball darken at excess of light;
 how my heart dance to his magic strain,
 beat my quick pulse, and throb each burst vein. 
from avon bank with every garland crown,
 it be his to rouse, to calm, to cure, to wound;
 to mould the yield bosom to his will,
 and Shakespear be inimitable still:
 oppress by fortune, all her ill he bear,
 hear this you muse, and be vain no more. 

nor shall my Spenser want his share of praise,
 the heaven-sprung sister weave the laureate bay;
 yet what avail his sweet descriptive power,
 the fairy warrior, or enchant bower? 
though matchless Sidney dote on the strain,
 love by the learned shepherd of the main,
 observe what meed his late labour crown,
 belphaebe smile not, and stern Burleigh frown. 
if still you doubt, consult some well know friend,
 let Ellis speak, to he you oft attend,
 who truth approve, who candor call her own,
 know by the god, by all the muse know. 
where tower his hill, where stretch his length of vale,
 say, where his heifer load the smoky pail? 
oh may this grateful verse my debt repay,
 if aught i know, he show the arduous way;
 within my bosom fan the rise flame,
 plume my young wing, and bid i try for fame. 
since then i scribble, and must scribble still,
 his word be once a sanction to my will;
 and i will persist until he resume the pen,
 then shrink content, and never rhyme again. 

yet, ere i take my leave, i have to say,
 that while in sleep my sense waste lay,
 the wake soul, which sport in fancy beam,
 work on my drowsy lid, and form a dream;
 then to my line a due attention keep,
 for oft when poet dream, their reader sleep. 

on a wide champion, where the surge beat
 the extend beach, then sullen retreat,
 a dismal cottage rear its turfy head,
 over which a yew her baleful branch spread;
 the owl profane his dreadful dirge sing,
 the pass bell the foul night-raven ring;
 no village cur here bay the cloudless moon,
 no golden sunshine cheere the hazy noon,
 but ghost of man by love of gold betray,
 in silence glide through the dreary shade. 
there sit pale grief in melancholy state,
 and brood care be trust with the gate,
 within, extend on the cheerless ground,
 a old man lie in golden fillet bind;
 rough be his beard, and mat be his hair,
 his eye be fiery red, his shoulder bare;
 down furrow cheek hot tear have wear their way,
 and his broad scalp be thin strew with grey;
 a weighty ingot in his hand he press,
 nor seem to feel the viper at his breast. 

around the caitiff, glorious to behold,
 lay mint coinage, and historic gold;
 high sculpture urn in bright confusion stand,
 and stream of silver form a precious flood. 

on nail, suspend row of pearl be see,
 not such the pendant of the egyptian queen,
 who (joy luxurious swell all her soul)
 quaff the vast price of empire in her bowl. 

as sea voracious swallow up the land,
 as rage flame eternal food demand,
 so this vile wretch, unblessed with all his store,
 repine in plenty, and grow sick for more;
 nor shall we wonder when his name i tell,
 it be avarice, the old bear of hell. 

but, hark! what noise break in upon my tale,
 be hush each sound, and whisper every gale;
 you croak rook your noisy flight suspend,
 guess i not right how all my toil will end? 
my heavy rhyme have jade tucker quite;
 he yawn — he nod — he snore. good night, good night. 
