slavery.

a poem.

by Maria falconar.

hail, soft philanthropy, to thou i sing
 bless source, whence all our social pleasure spring;
 when every muse bend prostrate at thy shrine,
 and tune her lyre to harmony divine;
 shall i attempt to join the favour throng,
 and pay the tribute of a artless song? 
bright as the beam of glory round you shine,
 glance not contempt, you minion of the nine;
 bold as i soar, yet never think i come,
 a rival Muse, to grasp the wreath of fame;
 though oft a wanderer through the lone retreat
 of your Parnassus, store with balmy sweet;
 where flower and blossom, of the lovely hue,
 in lively bloom and vary fragrance grow;
 their win beauty give but short delight,
 bear by superior genius from my sight;
 yet may my humble blossom find a place
 amid the wreath each bard have twine to grace
 the brow of sympathy, for, oft there grow,
 on the same spot, the daisy and the rose. 
nor may the rose disdain the modest flower
 that give her beauty more distinguish power. 
what though no hand, in honour of my lay,
 shall bind my temple with parnassian bay;
 or fancy raise no bright poetic dream;
 yet soft humanity inspire my theme. 
all bounteous heaven, that bless my native isle
 with gentle liberty enchant smile,
 give i a heart, too oft indeed to blame,
 yet fraught with feeling none shall blush to name. 
long in that heart may mild compassion reign,
 compassion, form to weep for other pain;
 the throb of anguish ever swell my breast,
 when misery sink, by tyranny oppress. 
may one dire fiend far from my wish stray,
 no baneful avarice ever my action sway;
 that vile assassin, stain with numerous crime,
 who bear the shaft of death to distant clime;
 who flinty breast, unknown to social love,
 no tear, no prayer, no suffering, ever can move. 
when he appear, behold affection bleed! 
joy fly the scene and last pang succeed. 
and shall Britannia, who maternal arm
 clasp every virtue, dress in heavenly charm;
 shall she, when rival realm revere her name,
 she, pride of nation and the boast of fame,
 welcome a guest so vile, and seek to gain
 new treasure from the guiltless sufferer pain? 
when justice, fire by distant scene explore,
 high over the foe of Asia wave her sword? 
to wound africa unhappy shore,
 no power the violate right restore? 
sad on her plain the plunder wretch bend,
 to weep a child, a parent, or a friend;
 for, all that briton feel, their soul inspire,
 the same affection and the same desire;
 the mournful dame, with equal frenzy, wild,
 lament the hapless fortune of her child,
 tear from her arm, snatch from his native soil,
 to sad captivity and painful toil! 
in vain she weep, in vain she swell to rage,
 the wretch still suffer what her fear presage. 
these scene of woe, you son of avarice, view,
 these sorrow fill the cup of mirth for you;
 ah! think, for you, what blessing nature pour,
 fame court your grasp, and fortune swell your store;
 while art and luxury their charm employ
 to dress your hour in fascinate joy;
 while round your step seduce siren sing,
 ah! think, whence do these fatal pleasure spring! 
survey the wretch who toil create your joy,
 no cheerful hope his gloomy mind employ;
 if he reflect what hour in sadness fly,
 the next as sad open to his view;
 each sun, that rise, rise but to shed
 fresh stream of sorrow on his hapless head;
 in vain over he revolve season roll,
 they bring no peace to his afflict soul! 
say, do the gallant soldier waste his breath
 amid the horror of triumphant death? 
deep pierce with wound, do he the martial band
 inspire with ardour for their native land? 
fearless of peril, that around he wait,
 he brave the danger of impend fate;
 yet honour to reward his toil appear,
 and loud applause salute his rapture ear;
 million to he their grateful thanks avow,
 and conquest twine her laurel round his brow. 
not thus the slave; alas! no honour bloom
 to soothe the constant rigour of his doom;
 ambition unrestrained that noble flame
 that guide the hero to the height of fame,
 the sole inspirer and the glorious spring
 of all that record boast, or poet sing;
 ambition, ever anxious to aspire,
 burns in his breast a fierce, but hopeless, fire;
 with faint heart he see the morning smile,
 and go, reluctant, to his wonted toil;
 his weaken spirit still invite repose,
 and gloomy apathy his mind overflow. 
you foe of heaven, and britain dire disgrace,
 unjust oppressor of a injure race,
 tell we, who form the slave you thus deride,
 the sport of insult, indolence, and pride? 
with misery shall he sink so mean down,
 adore your smile, and tremble when you frown;
 at your command with servile swiftness fly,
 and mark with dread the language of your eye? 
tell, why such baleful tyranny shall reign,
 caprice empow'r to distribute pain? 
yet, you will say, surround foe combine
 to catch advantage that we decline;
 but, sure, that impious land must deep bleed,
 and dark dishonour all its fame succeed;
 then let they hence the guilty commerce bear,
 and what heaven sanction be britannia care. 

once superstition, in a fatal hour,
 over Europe raise the sceptre of her power;
 she reign triumphant minister of death,
 and peace and pleasure fade in her breath;
 deep in monastic solitude entomb,
 the bud of beauty wither ere it bloom;
 the brilliant eye, where love have fight to dwell,
 shed all its lustre over the cloister cell;
 the smile lip, of bright vermillion dye,
 grow pale, and quiver with the pass sigh;
 the music float from each tuneful tongue,
 with midnight hymn the gothic arch ring. 
here, through reflection eye, the pensive mind
 seek with regret for object far behind;
 and fond remembrance, as she heave a sigh,
 draw back the soul just soar to the sky;
 save where misguided zeal in peace withdraw,
 from each bright pleasure, each enchant view. 
the still retreat pale melancholy seek,
 and find each object suit to she think;
 soft sensibility may here deplore,
 and feel the shaft of falsehood wind no more;
 the sport of fortune, long to comfort lose,
 with hope far banish, expectation cross;
 explore these scene to weep for anguish past,
 where the swell throb heart have burst at last. 
the eternal from the throne of grace survey,
 with eye averse, the sacrifice they make;
 no force devotion find acceptance there,
 no grateful incense issue from her prayer. 
thus superstition can not fix she sway
 in heaven, but look on earth to seize her prey;
 and yet, unsated with domestic pain,
 seek to extend the terror of her reign. 
she see, as on the fatal height she stand,
 her impious altar drench in guiltless blood;
 where fortitude with candid virtue join,
 and seek by sacred truth to save mankind;
 there she bestow her persecution dire,
 and close pursue with unrelenting ire;
 nor cease to scourge they with her vengeful rod,
 till each, a martyr saint, embrace his god. 
but when, to grace the world, religion shine,
 in Britain first she deign to fix her throne;
 freedom and charity, at her command,
 chase superstition from the droop land;
 despair, as public discourd cease to sting,
 beat the retire gloom with raven wing;
 in vain enthusiasm disdain to fly,
 and roll the livid lightning of her eye;
 in vain with frenzy wild her fetter break,
 and threaten horrid vengeance as she speak;
 religion bind she with her magic chain,
 and fix a period to the monster reign;
 yet, last of all, withdraw a black foe
 than ever issue from the realm below;
 fraudful hypocrisy, in who be see
 a aspect ever gentle and serene;
 her tongue be fraught with many a artful lie,
 dissemble sanctity illume her eye;
 she wear the spotless robe of heavenly truth,
 to cheat credulity and artless youth;
 soft on her smile lip dire falsehood hang,
 and music grace the poison of her tongue. 
but soon the fell contention rage no more,
 and liberty the victor garland wear:
 yet, as the conquer goddess soar to life,
 she mourn the ravage of internal strife. 
so when some furious tempest rack the night,
 to break her solemn gloom with horrid light,
 morn smile to show the blast plant and flower,
 or tear tree mingle with the shatter tower. 
thus, from the wreck of civil broil, arise
 the dread and envy of insult foe;
 thus rise the honour of britannia name;
 her naval splendour and her martial fame. 
there hoary time on rapid wing may view
 immortal glory ripen as he fly;
 the gem of genius there adorn the mind,
 by science polish, and by taste refine;
 there in the beam of liberty alone,
 appear the soften splendour of a throne. 
nor can my muse, do she to rapture spring,
 the bright succession of those glory sing. 
in other land if public virtue glow,
 from Britain first the great example flow;
 there spring the plant, there bloom, through endless time,
 the weak exotic of another clime;
 the britons generous valour never fight
 to gain a conquest with oppression fraught;
 they own the spirit to be try brave,
 the power to conquer and the will to save;
 they boast the sympathy to soften woe,
 to form the faithful friend and generous foe. 
view from that happy shore a nymph arise,
 bright as the blush of autumnal sky;
 she come, angelic freedom, with her train,
 to tear from afric son the gall chain;
 see at her foot each generous briton kneel,
 each view your injury and your anguish feel;
 neglect long show, your suffering seek to blame,
 and, seek, blush for his country fame. 
amid the glory of a age refine,
 the feeling heart, the sympathise mind,
 with fond attention over your sorrow pause,
 and join with ardour in the glorious cause. 
friend of philanthropy, to you be give
 the great bounty of indulgent heaven;
 peace over your slumber ever stretch her wing,
 and beneath your foot eternal blessing spring;
 for, angel teach celestial joy to flow
 on heart where sympathy delight to glow;
 that peace divine, that can the soul sustain,
 when keen affliction aim the shaft of pain,
 that power from life dark danger form to save,
 and lift the eye of hope beyond the grave. 
goddess of freedom, hear thy suppliant prayer,
 and haste to snatch the captive from despair;
 before his lighten step thy pleasure strew,
 and place thy train of virtue in his view;
 bid his unfettered inclination stray,
 where bloom industry extend her sway;
 where indolence herself be oft beguile,
 by promise gain, to tread the rugged wild;
 rouse every passion, wake each fond desire,
 and teach his wish great to aspire;
 instruct he, goddess, on his native plain,
 to sing the glory of a George reign;
 tell he, at his command you seek their shore,
 their wrong to pity, and their right restore;
 through the blue concave thy white flag unfurled,
 and arm thy band to prop a sink world. 
