[fragment] vii.

why open thou afresh the spring of my grief, o son of Alpin, inquire how oscur fell? my eye be blind with tear; but memory beam on my heart. how can i relate the mournful death of the head of the people! prince of the warrior, oscur my son, shall i see thou no more!

he fall as the moon in a storm; as the sun from the midst of his course, when cloud rise from the waste of the wave, when the blackness of the storm inwrap the rock of ardannider. i, like a ancient oak on Morven, i moulder alone in my place. the blast have lop my branch away; and i tremble at the wing of the north. prince of the warrior, oscur my son! shall i see thou no more!

Dermid and oscur be one: they reap the battle together. their friendship be strong as their steel; and death walk between they to the field. they come on the foe like two rock fall from the brow of ardven. their sword be stain with the blood of the valiant: warrior faint at their name. who be a match for oscur, but Dermid? and who for Dermid, but oscur?

they kill, mighty dargo in the field; dargo before invincible. his daughter be fair as the morn; mild as the beam of night. her eye, like two star in a shower: her breath, the gale of spring: her breast, as the new-fallen snow float on the move heath. the warrior see she, and love; their soul be fix on the maid. each love she, as his fame; each must possess she or die. but her soul be fix on oscur; my son be the youth of her love. she forget the blood of her father; and love the hand that slay he.

son of oscian, say Dermid, i love; o oscur, i love this maid. but her soul cleave unto thou; and nothing can heal Dermid. here, pierce this bosom, oscur; relieve i, my friend, with thy sword.

my sword, son of morny, shall never be stain with the blood of Dermid.

who then be worthy to slay i, o oscur son of oscian? let not my life pass away unknown. let none but oscur slay i. send i with honour to the grave, and let my death be renown.

Dermid, make use of thy sword; son of morny, wield thy steel. will that i fall with thou! that my death come from the hand of Dermid!

they seek by the brook of the mountain; by the stream of branno. blood tinge the silvery stream, and curdle round the mossy stone. Dermid the graceful fall; fall, and smile in death.

and fall thou, son of morny; fall thou by oscur hand! Dermid invincible in war, thus do i see thou fall! — he go, and return to the maid who he love; return, but she perceive his grief.

why that gloom, son of oscian? what shade thy mighty soul?

though once renown for the bow, o maid, i have lose my same. fix on a tree by the brook of the hill, be the shield of gormur the brave, who in battle i slay. i have waste the day in vain, nor can my arrow pierce it.

let i try, son of oscian, the skill of Dargo's daughter. my hand be teach the bow: my father delight in my skill.

she go. he stand behind the shield. her arrow fly and pierce his breast.

bless be that hand of snow; and bless thy bow of yew! i fall resolve on death: and who but the daughter of dargo be worthy to slay i? lay i in the earth, my fairone; lay i by the side of Dermid.

oscur! i have the blood, the soul of the mighty dargo. well please i can meet death. my sorrow i can end thus. — she pierce her white bosom with steel. she fall; she tremble; and die.

by the brook of the hill their grave be lay; a birch unequal shade cover their tomb. often on their green earthen tomb the branchy son of the mountain feed, when midday be all in flame, and silence be over all the hill.

