celadon to Mira.

to thou, o Mira, i these line commend,
 these from thy gentle and immortal friend,
 though not to thou my airy form appear,
 yet i have be oft a witness to thy tear,
 (at night when, lonely by the taper flame,
 in a still whisper thou have breathe my name)
 and in thy eye behold the rise woe;
 (ah simple sorrow when for i they flow!) 

think not, o Mira, not in i to find
 a friend like vido, or like Rosalind,
 or like courtine to cheat thy dazzl'a eye,
 and sooth thy weakness with a wellbred lye:
 these be (as thou will by the sequel find)
 below a spirit of the blissful kind:
 and be thy form, as wanton Helen gay,
 or do thy eye outshine the lamp of day,
 these please not i — bright eye in vain may roll,
 i read no charm but in the pure soul. 

by thy change feature i too often find
 the wild idea of thy restless mind;
 all serious now abstract from the crew,
 no prudent stoic more serene than you,
 till in your brain some gaudy picture spring,
 all gay and careless, then you laugh and sing:
 these vanish like a paint cloud — and now
 pale discontent overshade thy mournful brow:
 you form dark vision and at phantom start,
 these woe proceed from a ill-governed heart,
 from a too thoughtless or too rove mind;
 for these be stranger to a soul resign. 

can thou presume thy little bark may steer
 from grief black eddy and the gulf of fear? 
or can thou hope to scape the gloomy land,
 where disappointment crowd the rocky strand? 
not so — nor let thy vanity pretend
 to hope for more than ever bless thy friend;
 in life i shine conspicuous over the rest,
 while the pure beam malignant eye oppress;
 sound judgement, learning, wisdom, too be i,
 and pierce wit superior far to thy;
 yet gape rage stand ready to devour,
 and dullness rain on i a leaden shower:
 now sting with scoff, and now with flattery tire,
 defamed, applaud, envy, and admire:
 this fate be i — to hope can thou presume
 a mild passage and more easy doom? 
delude girl! let not a thought so vain
 elate thy spirit, nor ascend thy brain. 

but hear, o Mira, nor too late be wise,
 from paint trifle turn thy long eye;
 ask not for what will make thy prayer offend,
 but ask content, a parent and a friend;
 ask bread and peace, it be all that nature crave,
 this king acknowledge, when they find their grave. 

say, why thy feature lose their healthful dye,
 and the tear tremble in the languid eye? 
the mighty conflict i with pity see,
 when thy rude passion struggle to be free,
 and rack thy breast — the incoherent stage,
 where grave and comic jar like youth and age;
 now death appear all horrible and grim:
 but the next moment none so fair as he,
 and now you sigh — ah, let i calm die:
 then shrink, tremble from the grave you fly,
 such jar tumult in your bosom roll;
 (ah, what so various as a woman soul!) 
but thou, beware, and if thy fate have join
 a sickly body to a rove mind;
 be calm nor mourn at the supreme decree,
 nor think the mandate shall be change for thou,
 but meet with patience what thou can not flee. 

will thou repine to see thy form decay,
 when spio eye-lid be forbid the day! 
may thou with we unbodied spirit fly,
 from sphere to sphere and trace the boundless sky? 
then will the live of little mortal show,
 like empty bubble raise of morning dew:
 all seem as trifle, whether we behold
 a monarch banish, or a sparrow sell;
 a thoughtless insect trample in the mire,
 or a proud beauty in her bloom expire. 
more noble scene enrapture spirit view,
 but the grand prospect be too large for you:
 a close bind best suit thy narrow mind,
 a few example of thy fade kind. 

have thou forget the soft iphenia name,
 who smile face not spleen itself can blame;
 scarce nineteen year she dawn beauty know,
 ever the young rose bid her cheek adieu;
 yet bless with all, can please a woman pride:
 in this gay bloom the bright iphenia die;
 her sire lift to heaven his mournful eye,
 and her sad brother fill the air with cry:
 her brother Clodius, who to grief resign
 to fruitless passion all his manly mind. 
what simple sorrow to the dead you pay,
 who soon must follow the same dusky way. 
for ever the transport of his grief be over,
 fate give the sign and Clodius be no more. 
still Pero live a yet survive son,
 a little space and pero's race be do:
 death icy hand his youthful limb invade,
 and bid he mingle with his kindred shade. 

so quick Pero and narcissa fall,
 scarce look round they ever they bid farewell:
 yet dangerous it be to wander here too long;
 these go more willing as they fall more young;
 but laura name demand thy flow tear,
 who doubt increase with her lengthen year,
 serve not to clear but cloud the dusky way,
 and give new terror to her final day:
 the dreadful moment will have pass as well,
 at sixteen year have weep Laura fall. 

let this, o Mira, cheer thy droop mind,
 to bear the sentence past on all mankind:
 i bear the same, who life be more desire,
 more love, more know, and just more admire:
 yet this grand fear be weave with nature law;
 be sometime right, and sometime have no cause:
 repent and mend — these vapour then will fly,
 and the cloud brighten to a pure sky;
 still look to heaven and its law attend,
 and next the line of thy aerial friend. 
