a tale.

to chlorinda.

by the same.

dame Venus, a daughter of Jove,
and among all his daughter most fair,
lose, it seem, the other day the two dove,
that waft her car through the air.

the dame make a heavy sad rout,
run about heaven and earth to condole they;
and seek high and low to find out,
where the biddye be stray, or who steal they.

to the god, who the straggler shall meet,
she promise most tempt fine pay,
six kiss than honey more sweet,
and a seven far sweet than they.

the proposal no soon be make,
but it put all the god in a flame;
for who will not give all he have
to be kiss by so dainty a dame?

to Cyprus, to paphos they run,
where the goddess oft use to retire;
some ride round the world with the sun,
and search every country and shire.

but with all their hard run and ride,
not a god of they claim the reward;
for no one can tell tale or tide,
if the dove be alive or be starve.

at last the sly shooter of man
young Cupid, (i beg the God pardon)
mamma, your blue bird i have see
in a certain terrestrial garden.

where, where, my dear child, quick show,
quoth the dame, almost out of her wit:
do but go to chlorinda, say cu,
and you will find they in shape of pewit.

be it she that have do i this wrong?
full well i know she, and her art;
she have follow the thieve trade long,
but i think she deal only in heart.

i shall soon make she know, so i shall —
and with that to Jove palace she run,
and begin like a bedlam to bawl,
i be cheat, i be rob, i be undo.

chlorinda, who none can approach
without lose his heart or his sense,
have steal the two dove from my coach,
and now flaunt it at venus expense.

she have change the poor thing to pewit,
and keep they like ordinary fowl:
so when she rob man of their wit,
she turn they to ass or owl.

i can tell you of many a hundred
of figure, high station, and mean,
who she without mercy have plunder,
ever since she come into she teen.

but her theft upon earth i will have bear,
or have let they all pass for mere fable;
but nothing will now serve she turn,
but the dove out of venus stable.

be it fit, let your mighty ship say,
that i, like some pitiful flirt,
shall tarry within door all day,
or else trudge it afoot in the dirt?

be it fit that a mortal shall trample
on i, who be style queen of beauty?
o make she, great Jove, a example,
and teach nimble-finger she duty.

sir Jove when he hear she thus rage,
for all his great gravity, smile;
and then, like a judge wise and sage,
he begin in term sober and mild.

learn, daughter, to bridle your tongue,
forbear to traduce with your prattle
the fair, who have do you no wrong,
and scorn to purloin goods and chattel.

she need neither gewgaw nor trinket,
to carry the world all before she;
her desert, i will have you to think it,
be enough to make all man adore she.

your dove be elope, i confess,
and choose with chlorinda to dwell;
but blame not the lady for this;
for sure it be no crime to excel.

as for they, i applaud their high aim;
have serve from the time of their birth
the fair of heavenly dame,
they will now serve the fair on earth.
