essay on happiness.

nothing, dear madam, nothing be more true,
 than a short maxim much approve by you;
 the line be these: "we by experience know
"within ourselves exist our bliss or woe. "
though round our head the good of fortune roll,
 dazzle they may, but can cheer the soul. 
content, the fountain of eternal joy,
 can riches purchase, or can want destroy? 
no. bear of heaven, its birth it will maintain,
 no slave to power nor the prize of gain:
 say, who can buy what never yet be sell? 
no wealth can bribe she, nor no bond can hold:
 sometime she deign to shine in lofty hall,
 but find more frequent in a cottage wall;
 her flight from thence too often be decree,
 then poverty be double curse indeed. 

content and bliss, which differ but in name,
 alike their nature and their end the same,
 fast bind together in eternal chain. 
this as the end — the other, as the mean,
 will never divide. but who enjoy the one,
 must find the other ere the set sun. 

then where? ah where do these fair sister fly? 
beneath the northern or the southern sky. 
court do they love? the senate or the town,
 or the still village and the healthful down. 
say, do they like humilo's humble vest,
 or the gay diamond on Belinda breast. 
to none of these, alas, be they confine,
 but the still bosom and the virtuous mind. 

see glaro seat on his gild car,
 who stubborn passion wage continual war. 
who can call that ravage heart his own,
 where vice and virtue struggle for the throne. 
see rage appear in that hostile frown:
 now fear distract he and now pleasure drown,
 now turn to heaven with repentant tear:
 but the next hour at his chaplain sneer:
 this day a beast, the next a reason man:
 behold he right, then envy, if you can,
 pale Livia too — who pant beneath the weight
 of irksome jewel and afflict state;
 who glass and pillow do her time divide,
 at once oppress with sickness and with pride. 
the shapely stay her ache rib confine,
 and in her ear the sparkle pendent shine. 
yet not a joy the torture wretch can feel,
 beyond Ixion on his roll wheel. 

see restless cloe, fond to be admire,
 of joy impatient and as quick tire,
 when first her eye-lid open on the day,
 with eager haste she gobble down her tea,
 and to the park command her roll wheel,
 yet sigh and wish for the rural field:
 then back to card and company she fly,
 then for the charm of melt music die. 
at eve the play, assembly, or the ball:
 she hate they single, yet will grasp they all:
 with languid spirit and appal desire,
 she to her closet and her book retire. 
but solitude offend the sprightly fair;
 read she loathe, and think she can bear. 
then to her chamber and her couch she fly,
 where gild chariot swim before her eye. 
in vain for sleep she fold her weary arm,
 who will be cloe to enjoy her charm? 

in yonder path sir thrifty we behold,
 with beaver droop and with garment old;
 who dirty linen show no mark of pride,
 nor sparkle lace deck his slender side;
 who heavy soul a saucy wit will swear,
 be make exact to his easy chair. 
who tasteless sense ask for nothing new,
 who meal be temperate and who pleasure few:
 "be this man bless? — he may be so. — but when? 
"why, when his thousand rise to number ten,
 "from ten to twenty, and from twenty — hold,
"to one round million of bright sterling gold; "
not there we stop, for avarice will crave
 till it shall meet with its grand cure, the grave. 

lavinia bless with all that man desire,
 with eye that charm and reason that inspire;
 youth, wealth, and friend, to gild her shine day,
 the poor man bless and the rich man praise. 
with judgement sound and touch by no extreme,
 speech gentle flow and a soul serene,
 for ever please and for ever true,
 by all admire, envy by a few:
 then she be happy, though beneath the sky,
 hold, not so hasty: — let her husband die. 

then who be happy, it will be hard to say,
 since undisturbed it seldom last a day:
 for who in smile behold the morning sun,
 may weed before his short-lived journey do. 
all pleasure satiate and all object cloy;
 we crave, we grasp, but loath the taste joy:
 nor wealth nor beauty, friend nor Fortune smile,
 can bless our moment, though they may beguile:
 nor wit with happiness can often grow,
 a helpless friend, if not a arrant foe. 

where then? o where shall happiness be find? 
say, shall we search the roll world around,
 on borrow pinion travel through the sky,
 or to the centre drive our pierce eye? 
cease, busy fool: be happiness thy care? 
pierce thy own breast, and thou will find it there:
 drive thence the passion, and the guilt expel,
 and call fair virtue to the polish cell. 
call soft content with all her smile train;
 peace for thy health, and patience for thy pain:
 then not till then, o man, thy heart shall know
 bliss so adore, but seldom find below. 
