the alliance of education and government. a fragment 

essay i 

as sickly plant betray a niggard earth,
who barren bosom starve her generous birth,
nor genial warmth nor genial juice retain
their root to feed and fill their verdant vein;
and as in clime, where winter hold his reign,
the soil, though fertile, will not teem in vain,
forbid her gem to swell, her shade to rise,
nor trust her blossom to the churlish sky:
so draw mankind in vain the vital air,
unformed, unfriended, by those kindly care
that health and vigour to the soul impart,
spread the young thought and warm the open heart.
so fond instruction on the grow power
of nature idle lavish her store,
if equal justice with unclouded face
smile not indulgent on the rise race,
and scatter with a free though frugal hand
light golden shower of plenty over the land:
but tyranny have fix her empire there,
to check their tender hope with chill fear,
and blast the bloom promise of the year.

this spacious animate scene survey
from where the roll orb, that give the day,
his sable son with near course surround,
to either pole and life remote bound.
how rude so ever the exterior form we find,
however opinion tinge the vary mind,
alike to all the kind impartial heaven
the spark of truth and happiness have give:
with sense to feel, with memory to retain,
they follow pleasure and they fly from pain;
their judgement mend the plan their fancy draw,
the event presage and explore the cause.
the soft return of gratitude they know,
by fraud elude, by force repel the foe;
while mutual wish, mutual woe, endear
the social smile and sympathetic tear.

say then, through age by what fate confine
to different clime seem different soul assign?
here measure law and philosophic ease
fix and improve the polish art of peace.
there industry and gain their vigil keep,
command the wind and tame the unwilling deep.
here force and hardy deed of blood prevail;
there languid pleasure sigh in every gale.
oft over the tremble nation from afar
have Scythia breathe the live cloud of war;
and, where the deluge burst, with sweepy sway
their arm, their king, their god be roll away.
as oft have issue, host impel host,
the blue-eyed myriad from the Baltic coast.
the prostrate south to the destroyer yield
her boast title and her golden field:
with grim delight the brood of winter view
a bright day and heaven of azure hue,
scent the new fragrance of the breathe rose,
and quaff the pendent vintage, as it grow.
proud of the yoke and pliant to the rod,
why yet do Asia dread a monarch nod,
while european freedom still withstand
the encroach tide, that drown her lessen land,
and see far off with a indignant groan
her native plain and empire once her own?
can opener sky and sun of fierce flame
overpower the fire that animate our frame,
as lamp, that shed at even a cheerful ray,
fade and expire beneath the eye of day?
need we the influence of the northern star
to string our nerve and steel our heart to war?
and, where the face of nature laugh around,
must sicken virtue fly the taint ground?
unmanly thought! what season can control,
what fancy zone can circumscribe the soul,
who, conscious of the source from whence she spring,
by reason light on resolution wing,
spite of her frail companion, dauntless go
over libya desert and through zembla snow?
she bid each slumber energy awake,
another touch, another temper take,
suspend the inferior law that rule our clay:
the stubborn element confess she sway;
their little want, their low desire, refine,
and raise the mortal to a height divine.

not but the human fabric from the birth
imbibe a flavour of its parent earth:
as various tract enforce a various toil,
the manner speak the idiom of their soil.
a iron-race the mountain-cliff maintain,
foe to the gentle genius of the plain:
for where unwearied sinew must be find
with sidelong plough to quell the flinty ground,
to turn the torrent swift-descending flood,
to brave the savage rush from the wood,
what wonder if, to patient valour train,
they guard with spirit what by strength they gain;
and while their rocky rampart round they see,
the rough abode of want and liberty,
(as lawless force from confidence will grow)
insult the plenty of the vale below?
what wonder in the sultry clime, that spread
where Nile redundant over his summer-bed
from his broad bosom life and verdure fling,
and brood over Egypt with his watery wing,
if with adventurous oar and ready sail,
the dusky people drive before the gale,
or on frail float to distant city ride,
that rise and glitter over the ambient tide.
