avaro and amanda.

a poem, in four canto, take from the spectator, vol. i no. xi.

Canto i 

what ill from want of education flow,
 from avarice what cruel scene of woe;
 i mean to sing, except the tuneful maid
 neglect my number, and refuse her aid. 
say, goddess, first, what make the youth explore
 a foreign clime, and quit his native shore? 
say too, how on the barbarous isle he come;
 what move the kindness of the negro dame? 
what can provoke a faithless youth to sell
 a friend, who only crime be love well? 

now have avaro twenty winter pass,
 his bloom feature every beauty grace;
 in silver ring, his loose flow hair
 hang over his shoulder, with a comely air;
 robust his limb, and dare be his soul,
 and vigour crown the well-proportioned whole:
 his graceful charm the lady oft survey,
 and oft their eye a amorous signal make;
 but never can the tender passion move,
 the stubborn youth be still averse to love;
 yet, though his breast be proof to cupid dart,
 a more ignoble god enslave his heart. 

no mystery of faith disturb his head;
 for mystery of faith he seldom read;
 that moral law, which nature have impress,
 he blot from the volume of his breast;
 yet in his mind his father precept bear,
 who often ring this lesson in his ear:
 "will you, my son, to happiness aspire,
" know, gold alone can happiness acquire;
 "he that have gold, be powerful as a king,
" have valour, virtue, wisdom, every thing! 
 "this to obtain, your utmost skill bestow;
" and if you gain it, be not careful how:
 "if in the court, or camp, you take delight,
" then dare to flatter there, or here to fight:
 "or, shall the merchant life your fancy please,
" be bold, and brave venture on the sea;
 "many by merchandise have gain renown,
" and make the Indies wealth become their own. " 
the youth imbibe the precept of his tongue,
 neglect every law of right and wrong;
 teach by his sire to court destructive gain,
 he burn to try his fortune on the main. 

while other youth, by wit or pleasure sway,
 frequent the play, the ball, or masquerade;
 avaro studious in his chamber stay,
 careless of ball, of masquerade, and play;
 there add, subtract, and, with unwearied pain,
 learn all the rule of interest, loss and gain. 

next, from a old astronomer, he try
 to learn the planet journey through the sky;
 with he, at night, when heaven serene appear,
 he point the quadrant at the shine sphere;
 the Hyades, and freeze pole survey,
 which guide the sailor over the distant sea;
 then map and model of our globe prepare,
 and careful inspect both hemisphere;
 from east to west he view the spacious round,
 please with the modern world Columbus find:
 in hope elate, the youth impatient stand,
 and seem to grasp both Indies in his hand. 
this see the sire, and hasty provide
 a vessel, proof against the wind and tide. 
the youth embark, the soft propitious gale
 arise, and soon expand the swell sail;
 the ship glide swift over the liquid plain,
 and Neptune smile, and court he on the main. 

but see, how mortal be the sport of fate! 
how oft unhappy, strive to be great! 
ere Cynthia twice her monthly race have run,
 a omen of the fatal storm begin:
 the murmur wind arise by degree,
 and rock the ship, and sweep the curl sea;
 now loud, with impetuous force, it roar,
 and shove the swell surge to the shore;
 till rapid rain, and flake of bicker flame,
 with dreadful thunder, vex the ethereal frame. 
strike with surprise, the timorous merchant stand,
 nor know what he forbid, or what command:
 nor safe back, nor can he forward go;
 but tremble wait, and fear the fatal blow. 

long time the sailor work against the wind,
 with fruitless toil, to gain the port assign;
 till courage, hope, and all provision fail,
 and fear, despair, and want their soul assail. 
force by the storm into a wind bay,
 their joyful eye a indian isle survey;
 when straight they quit their ship, and gain the shore,
 and for recruit the savage land explore. 

adjoin to the dreary beach, there stand
 wild shrub and tree, that form a gloomy wood;
 where, close obscure, the crafty native lay,
 and watch the wander crew, remote from sea:
 then forth they rush, and strait their bow prepare;
 too late the sailor see the approach war:
 in vain the brave engage, or timorous fly;
 the timorous, and the brave, promiscuous die;
 the barbarous field be stain with purple gore. 
and dreadful groan echo to the shore. 
our youthful merchant escape, and fly alone;
 his fear impel, and safety prompt he on;
 through dusky wood he take his tremble flight,
 the dusky wood conceal he from their sight;
 till in the devious wild, remote from foe,
 then, on the ground, he weep vent his woe,
 oft curse his hapless fate, and often think
 on what the hoary star-monger have teach;
 how, at our birth, as different planet rule,
 they form a wit, or constitute a fool;
 how, in the maze of life, we act as they
 attract, retard, or force we in the way. 
and, as he these uncertain censure make,
 against the star he thus exclaim say:

the planet sure some noxious power display,
 and rule my life with arbitrary sway;
 else have i never forsake my native home,
 nor in this baleful desert meet my doom —
 and yet, when i reflect, i can see,
 how globe insensible shall influence i! 
i choose my action; when the choice be make. 
i nor invoke, nor yet consult their aid. 
when mortal act accord to their will,
 can heaven be call the author of their ill? 
too late i find, the star be not in fault;
 but it be that golden wish my sire have teach:
 entice gold, that damn deceive guide,
 induce i first to stem the foam tide;
 fallacious charm, that lead i from repose,
 now leave i in a labyrinth of woe. 

so, when compact vapour, in the night,
 skim over the field, with a delusive light,
 the injudicious traveller survey
 the allure scene, and court the glister blaze;
 till, tempt over a rock impend brow,
 he fall to some tremendous gulph below. 

thus the unhappy youth lament his fate,
 conscious of all the ill, that round he wait;
 till set Phoebus leave the blush sky,
 and glimmer star a feeble light supply:
 the shade of night increase his anxious care,
 and add a great horror to despair. 

Canto ii.

all night in tear the pensive merchant lie,
 and often wish, and fear the come day;
 till, on the hill, the rise sun display
 his golden beam, and chase away the shade:
 harmonious bird salute his cheerful ray,
 and hail the rosy morn with joyful lay;
 while, stretch upon the ground, avaro moan,
 answer their tuneful song with pierce groan. 

not distant far from where the youth be lay,
 a purling stream, in please murmur, play;
 and, by the margin of the crystal flood,
 two row of tree in beauteous order stand;
 who branch form a pendent arch above,
 diffuse gloomy verdure over the grove. 
a indian princess hither daily come,
 please with the grateful shade, and cool stream:
 she now be walk to her love retreat,
 and hear the mourn youth lament his fate:
 fix in amaze, awhile she listen stand;
 then swift approach he, rush through the wood. 
the affright merchant rise with gaze eye,
 and timorous look, that testify surprise:
 backward he start; the dame, with equal fear,
 recede as fast, and wonder what appear:
 yet, bold grow, she soon advance again,
 smite with the beauty of the godlike man:
 he dress, and fair complexion, charm her sight;
 each glow feature give her new delight;
 while love and pity both arise within,
 and kindle in her soul a flame unseen. 
with equal joy avaro now survey
 the native grace of the negro maid:
 he view her arm, with various ribbon bind;
 her downy head, with paint feather crown;
 with bredes, and lucid shell, in circle string,
 which shine refulgent, as they round she hang. 

as when, in splendid robe, a courtly maid
 begin the dance at ball or masquerade;
 the pearl and diamond shine with mingle light,
 and glitter pendant blaze against the sight. 

so shine the beauteous shell around her waist,
 and sparkle gem, that deck her jetty breast;
 all which avaro's gaze eye pursue,
 charm with her lovely shape, disclose to view:
 each limb appear in just proportion make,
 with elegance through every part display:
 and now his care dissolve, new passion move;
 and nature intimate, the change be love. 

not far remote, a cool grot be make,
 in which the virgin often seek a shade:
 thick shrub, and fruitful vine, around it grow;
 and none, except herself, the mansion know. 
to this obscure recess the royal dame,
 rejoice, with her lovely captive come:
 then, from the branch, with officious haste,
 she pluck the fruit, which yield a sweet repast:
 that do, she, with her bow, explore the wood;
 pierce with her shaft, the fowl resign his blood. 
then back she hasten to her cool retreat,
 and for avaro dress the grateful meat:
 to slake his thirst, she next direct his way,
 where crystal stream in wild meanders stray:
 nor let he there, expose to foe, remain;
 but to the cave conduct he safe again. 

so dote Amanda on the merchant, while
 she scorn the lover of her native isle:
 for all the hero of her country strive,
 with emulation, to attract her love;
 and, when they can the paint fowl ensnare,
 or pierce the savage beast in sylvan war,
 the skin and feather, trophy of their fame,
 they give for present to the royal dame;
 all which she to she love avaro bring,
 and with they gay deck his shine grot:
 the spot panther here she hang; and there,
 with paw extend, frown the shaggy bear;
 here gaudy plume appear, in lustre bright;
 there shell and pearl diffuse a sparkle light. 

as when, to grace some royal prince hall,
 the skilful painter animate the wall;
 here warlike hero frown in martial arm,
 there a soft nymph display her blush charm
 a please landscape next invite our eye,
 and the room glow with sweet variety. 

yet, still to give her lover more delight,
 (lest what he daily see, shall pall the sight)
 when Sol with purple clothe the western sky,
 and shade extend show the evening nigh,
 she to some verdant grove the youth convey,
 where nightingale harmonious music make:
 soft floweret be their couch; and, all around,
 diffusive sweet perfume the fragrant ground. 
there oft she will his snowy bosom bare,
 oft round her finger wind his silver hair;
 charm with the contrast, which their colour make,
 more please than the tulip light and shade. 
nor be the youth insensible; but soon
 repay her love, by show of his own:
 oft will his bosom heave with speak sigh;
 oft will he gaze, and languish with his eye:
 now on her pant breast his head repose,
 to meet his head her pant breast arise;
 while in her soul ecstatic rapture glow,
 and her fond arm believe they clasp a god. 

so live the happy pair, observe by none,
 till both have learn a language of their own;
 in which the youth, one evening, in the shade,
 beguile the harmless unsuspicious maid;
 lean on her breast, and, with a kiss, betray;
 then vent his specious fraud in word like these;

witness, you god, and all you bless above,
 (for you can witness best, how well i love)
 if ever, among our bloom nymph, i know
 such pleasure, as my soul receive from you! 
o dear Amanda! can i but, with thou,
 once more my happy native country see,
 you shall not there in lonely cave retreat,
 nor trace the burn sand with naked foot;
 your limb, which now the sun and wind invade,
 shall neat be in soft silk array;
 in gild house gay shall you ride,
 by horse draw, which prance side by side,
 neigh, foam, and champ the bit with graceful pride;
 our time, in pomp and peace, shall slide away,
 and bloom pleasure crown the smile day;
 and, when the set sun forsake the sky,
 approach night shall but increase our joy:
 we will not on the chill ground embrace,
 nor foe, as now, shall interrupt our peace;
 but both repose on some easy bed,
 soft, as the fleecy down, that deck thy head,
 the sportive god of love shall round we play,
 while we, in rapture, pass the night away:
 then let we careful, my dear, explore
 the haven, where i first approach the shore. 
perhaps we shall some float ship survey,
 safe to conduct we over the watery way:
 nor let the foam wave your step retard;
 i will guard you over, and be a faithful guard. 

how oft, alas! be innocence betray,
 when love invite, and flatterer persuade? 
how can the dame, a stranger to deceit,
 imagine such a heavenly form a cheat? 
she pause, she sigh; then, with a pensive look,
 half loath, and half consent, thus she speak:

once have avaro scape the rage main:
 why will you tempt the fickle sea again? 
to seek new danger, when in safety here,
 will but provoke the deity you fear —
 sometime, i own, we have be surprise by foe,
 who nightly walk have wake you from repose:
 yet still i guard your sacred life secure,
 and always will — what can Amanda more? 

thus say, she clasp he in her love arm,
 embrace his neck, and dote on his charm:
 and now both show their passion in their look,
 and now connubial HYMEN both invoke;
 in sportive joy they close the genial day,
 while Philomela sing the nuptial lay;
 till soon the youth recline upon her breast,
 and golden slumber seal their eye to rest. 

Canto iii.

soon as the sun begin to gild the day,
 and on the hill emit a tremble ray;
 Amanda, from her flowery bed, awake;
 sad be her heart, and discompose she look;
 the briny torrent flow down her cheek,
 while thus she to her dear avaro speak:

o thou, on who my life and love depend,
 if ever Amanda claim the name of friend;
 if ever i give thy trouble mind repose,
 or hide thou, when pursue with furious foe;
 explain this dream, that terrify my breast;
 the strange, fear, or fancy, ever impress! 

methinks a god descend from the sky;
 celestial beauty sparkle in his eye;
 like ray of Phoebus shine his radiant hair,
 his shape like thy, like thy his graceful air;
 a robe be neat gird about his waist,
 fine as my love avaro's silken vest;
 his shine lip upon my breast he lay,
 and soft press my hand, and smile say:

 "arise, my dear, my love Amanda, rise;
" a easy lodging wait thou in the sky:
 "i be descend from the bless abode,
" to bear thou hence to heaven among the god:
 "no enemy shall there disturb thy rest;
" there, with thy lover, live for ever bless. " 

thus say, he raise i from the dewy plain,
 and bear, or seem to bear i, over the main:
 but soon he lead i to a distant isle,
 where horror reign, and comfort never smile:
 thick brake and bramble choke the dreary coast,
 the only product, which the land can boast;
 till a deject, servile race arise,
 with gloomy sadness brood on their brow:
 this crowd, promiscuous, with incessant toil,
 or root up the wood, or plough the soil:
 how each perform his task, a tyrant view;
 and stern shake his whip, and menace, as he stand. 
sometime, to shun the direful lash, they flee;
 the insult lord pursue with great speed:
 sure not so fearful fly the tremble bear,
 to shun our hunter dart, and missive spear;
 sure not so swift our hunter ever pursue
 the tremble bear, when fly through the wood;
 as from the tyrant wrath they swift run,
 or, as the tyrant, swift, urge they on. 
each to his wonted task he drive again,
 and make i mix among the servile train;
 doom with the rest to groan beneath the yoke,
 alike i feel the dire correct stroke. 
but, o! what add most to my despair,
 my godlike guide be false, and leave i there —

as thus she speak, confuse she look appear;
 for still her soul the dreadful vision fear:
 decide reason from her seat withdraw,
 and fancy paint all the scene anew. 
the youth to cheer the droop dame essay,
 when straight a boar come rush through the shade;
 the crash wood proclaim his rapid force,
 while two fleet youth pursue the sylvan course:
 the lover start from their flowery seat,
 surprise, and each a different way retreat. 

as when some musquet thunder have expel
 two love turtle from the verdant field;
 both, diverse, through the wide ethereal plain
 fly swift; and fly, fear their mate be slay. 

so part, devious flee the affright pair;
 such be avaro's, such amanda's fear. 
the foam boar between they swift past,
 the nimble courser urge the chace as fast;
 till soon they pierce he with a mortal wound;
 he fall, and purple gore distain the ground:
 then, from the savage war, they take their way;
 and to their cave, triumphant, bear the prey. 

soon as the sportive hunter leave the wood,
 the love pair conceal no long stand;
 but tremble both forsake the dusky shade,
 both tremble meet upon the open glade:
 mute with surprise awhile they stand; the man
 break silence first, and thus his tale begin:

o dear Amanda! soon we have survey
 this mystic vision of the night display:
 these be the frown tyrant in thy dream,
 that chase the slave, and we their fly game. 

some part, say she, resemble this, i own;
 and some remain a riddle yet unknown:
 what mean that god, which still, methinks, i view? 
that radiant deity! so much like you! 
and what the field above, which he propose? 
say, if the mystery can be disclose. 

to who the youth: our active fancy seem
 for ever rove, rove most in dream:
 for then the soul, disburden of her load,
 soar high, and grow prophetic, like a god;
 mind thing when past, as present to our view;
 and, by allusion, know the future too. 
thus, when to sleep your muse head recline,
 she keep our evening converse in her mind;
 reflect on the joy my country yield,
 joy, sweet as those in yonder azure field;
 till, soar high, strive to discern
 her hide fate, and future fortune learn,
 heaven show she something like this morning chace,
 by tremble slave, who flee their tyrant face;
 perhaps, to warn we timely from our bed;
 for, o my dear Amanda! have we stay,
 i have not live to tell this mystic tale,
 nor you, to hear the secret i reveal —
 but let we to my happy country steer,
 nor long wait impend ruin here. 

so speak the youth; and, with a gracious look,
 he seem to sanctify the word he speak. 

go, she reply; go where you be incline;
 your faithful lover will not stay behind. 
if over the sea you shall attempt your way,
 the sea shall not compel i here to stay;
 nor will i fear the surge of the deep;
 (for surge oft, you say, assail the ship)
 calm and compose, intrepid, will i stand,
 till you conduct i to your native land. 
or, if you will some other clime pursue,
 then shall some other climate please i too. 
and when the happy destine land we meet,
 where providence shall fix our wander foot;
 with joyful servitude, i will still attend
 on you, my nuptial lord, and dear friend. 
soon as Aurora spread her purple ray,
 when you awake, to chase the nimble prey,
 i will also rise; and, with a equal art,
 display the net, or speed the point dart;
 or search the plain, and tasteful herb provide;
 or strip the vine, and press their juicy pride:
 each evening will i fond deck your bed
 with sweet floweret, gather from the Mead
 and when, dissolve in downy sleep, you lie,
 i will wake, and watch if foe approach too nigh:
 to guard your life, all hazard will i run;
 and, for your safety, sacrifice my own. 

to who the youth: no hazard shall you run;
 nor, for my safety, sacrifice your own;
 nor yet at evening fond deck my bed
 with sweet floweret, gather from the Mead;
 nor shall Amanda tasteful herb explore;
 nor shall avaro chase the savage boar:
 a soft bed, than flower, shall give you rest;
 a choice meat, than fruit, indulge your taste. 
ten thousand thing my grateful soul shall find,
 to charm your fancy, and delight your mind;
 i will vary love a hundred different way,
 and institute new art to make it please:
 so shall our future race of child see
 a constant proverb make of you and i:
 when british youth shall court the doubt dame,
 and want expression equal to their flame;
 then, strong to attest it, shall be say,
 "true, as avaro to the indian maid." 

to who Amanda, (pause at the name)
 what mean avaro by the doubt dame? 
have any of your british damsel make
 a doubt of what such godlike being say? 
or be it customary to your clime? 
have ever youth commit such a crime,
 as base ingratitude? have any there
 delude first, and then forsake, the fair? 
i can think, your love will ever decline,
 nor can my radiant angel question i. 
by yond bright beam, which paint the rise day;
 by thy bright charm, as beautiful as they;
 by all our please hour of love, i vow
 to share your fate through every scene of woe;
 content, with you, to yield my vital breath;
 for life, without you, will but lengthen death. 

with such sweet talk their moment they beguile;
 both seem impatient for the destine isle:
 he daily vow, and daily be believe;
 she daily hear, and daily be deceive. 

Canto iv.

farewel, bright goddess of the idalian grove! 
farewell, you sportive deity of love! 
no long i your please joy rehearse;
 a rough theme demand my pensive verse;
 a scene of woe remain to be display,
 indulgent love with slavery repay:
 ingratitude, and break vow, and lie,
 the mighty ill, that spring from avarice,
 provoke my lay: your aid, you muse, bring;
 assist my tragic number, while i sing. 
say, what ensue, when, on the briny deep,
 the watchful dame behold a float ship? 
she call, and beckon to it from the shore;
 then to the youth the grateful tiding bear;
 and say, i something see, like wing tree,
 (strange to behold!) fly swift over the sea;
 their bulky root upon the billow float:
 say, be not this the ship, you long have seek? 
or i mistake, or, by the god command,
 this come to bear we to your native land:
 then hasten, see the partner of your heart,
 with you, her guide, be ready to depart;
 my father, mother, friend, i bid adieu,
 friend, father, mother, not so dear as you. 

to who the youth, with smile brow, reply:
 o thou true pattern of a faithful bride! 
who dare thy father, mother, friend resign;
 and risque thy own dear life, to rescue i! —
 if i forget the debt i owe to thou,
 may all the god forget their care of i! 
in more wild desert let i rove again;
 nor find a friend, like thou, to ease my pain! 
there let the praetor, wolf, and tiger tear
 this body, thou have kind nourish here! 

so say, to the beach he straight descend;
 and, by the flag, discern the crew his friend:
 and now his heart exult within his breast;
 his love mate a equal joy confess;
 she, with he, glad venture on the main,
 unthinking of her future toil and pain. 

so, to the plough, the heifer, yet unbroken,
 walk cheerful on, nor dread the impend yoke;
 till, in the field, urge with the pierce goad,
 she groan, and writhe, reluctant with her load. 

the british bark be to Barbados bind:
 the expect shore the sailor quick find;
 where, safe from danger, now the perjure youth,
 false to his former vow of sacred truth,
 reflect, count the interest he have lose,
 while fate detain he on the indian coast:
 the frugal thought suppress his amorous flame,
 and prompt he to betray the faithful dame. 
yet scarce he can the curse fact pursue;
 but hesitate at what he fain will do:
 for, though his avarice move he to the ill,
 his gratitude within he struggle still;
 and, betwixt two passion, neither guide his will. 

as when two scale, which equal load suspend,
 sway to and fro; alternate both descend,
 till undeclining each aloft abide,
 nor this, nor that, the doubtful weight decide. 

so stand the doubtful youth awhile; nor will
 forsake the evil, nor pursue the good;
 till, as the sailor in the haven stay,
 to purchase slave, the Planters crowd the key:
 one ask, for what the negro may be sell;
 then bid a price, and show the tempt gold:
 which when avaro view with greedy eye,
 he soon resolve to gain the allure prize;
 nor oath, nor gratitude, can long bind;
 her fate he thus determine in his mind:

 "suppose i shall conduct this indian over;
" and thus, instead of gold, import a moor —
 "will not my sire, with stern contract brow,
" condemn my choice, and curse my nuptial vow? 
 "be it for this i learn the merchant art? 
" only to gain a dote negro heart! 
 "be it for this the rage sea i cross? 
" no; gold induce i to the indian coast;
 "and gold be offer for this simple dame;
" shall i refuse it, or renounce my flame? —
 "let amorous fool their tiresome joy renew,
" and dote on love, while interest i pursue. " 
he add not; for now, intent on gold,
 and dead to all remorse, the dame he sell. 

Amanda stand confound with surprise,
 and silent reproach he with her eye:
 she often try to speak; but when she try,
 her heart swell full, her voice its aid deny;
 and, when she make her falter tongue obey,
 these word, commix with sigh, find out their way. 

 "who can the mystic way of fate explain? 
" be i awake, or do i dream again? 
 "be this the sad reward of all my care? 
" be it for this i cheere thou in despair? 
 "the god above (if any god there be)
" witness what i have do to succour thou! 
 "yet, if my kindness can thy pity move,
" pity the fruit of our unhappy love:
 "o let the infant, in my pregnant womb,
" excite thou to revoke my threaten doom;
 "think how the future slave, in clime remote,
" shall curse the treacherous sire, that he beget. " 

so speak the mourn dame, but speak in vain;
 the obdurate youth insult she with disdain;
 not all her kindness can his pity move,
 nor yet the fruit of their unhappy love. 
but, as the flame, which soften wax, display
 the same warm force to harden sordid clay;
 that motive, which will melt another heart,
 more harden his, and make he act a double villain part. 
he, for the child, demand a large sum;
 and sell it, while a embryo in the womb. 

and now he stern take she by the hand,
 then drag she on, reluctant, to the land;
 while, as she walk, her dismal fate she moan,
 the rock around her echo to her groan:
 "o base, ungrateful youth!" she loud cry;
 "o base, ungrateful youth!" the shore reply:
 "and can thou, cruel, perjure villain! leave
" thy tender infant too, a abject slave,
 "to toil, and groan, and bleed beneath the rod? 
" fool that i be, to think thou be a god!
 "sure from some savage tiger be thou spring —
" no: tiger feed, and fawn upon their young:
 "but thou despise all paternal care,
" the fate of infant, and their mother prayer. " 

in vain she do her wretched state deplore;
 please with the gold, he glad quit the shore;
 the ruffle wind dilate the sail, the ship
 divide the wave, and skim along the deep. 
three day the belly canvas gentle swell,
 clear shine the sun, and friendly blow the gale;
 then frown cloud invest the vault sky,
 and hollow wind proclaim a tempest nigh:
 fierce Boreas loud over the ocean roar,
 smoke the white wave, and sound the adverse shore;
 while, to increase the horror of the main,
 descend a deluge of impetuous rain. 
the giddy ship on circle eddy ride,
 toss, and retossed, the sport of wind and tide. 
redouble peal of roar thunder roll,
 and flame, conflict, flash from pole to pole,
 while guilty thought distract avaro's soul. 
of life despair, though afraid to die,
 one fatal effort yet he mean to try:
 while all the busy crew, with pant breath,
 be labour to repel the liquid death;
 avaro from the stern the boat divide,
 and yield up to the fury of the tide:
 toss on the boisterous wave, the vessel fly,
 now sink low, now mount to the sky;
 till soon the storm decrease, and, by degree,
 hush be the wind, and calm the ruffle sea;
 the sailor safe steer their course again,
 and leave avaro float on the main;
 who land quick on a lonely isle,
 where human foot never print the baleful soil;
 a dreary wilderness be all appear,
 and howl wolf the only sound he hear;
 a thousand death he view before his eye,
 a thousand guilt-created fiend arise;
 a conscious hell within his bosom burn,
 and rack his torture soul, while thus he mourn:

 "curse be the precept of my selfish sire,
" who bad i after fatal gold aspire! 
 "curse be myself, and double curse, who sell
" a faithful friend, to gain that fatal gold! —
 "o! can these gloomy wood my sin conceal,
" or in my bosom quench this firy hell;
 "here will i pine my wretched life away,
" or to the hungry savage fall a prey —
 "but can the gloomy wood conceal my sin,
" or cool shadow quench the hell within? 
 "no; like some spirit banish heaven, i find
" terror in every place, to rack my mind;
 "torment conscious plague increase my care,
" and guilty thought indulge my just despair —
 "o! where shall i that pierce eye evade,
" that scan the depth of hell tremendous shade? " 

so say, straight he give a hideous glare,
 with roll eye, that witness strong despair:
 then draw his point weapon from the sheath,
 confuse wild, and all his thought on death;
 to pierce his tremble heart he thrice essay,
 and thrice his coward arm deny its aid:
 meanwhile a howl wolf, with hunger press,
 leap on the wretch, and seize he by the breast;
 tear out his heart, and lick the purple flood;
 for earth refuse to drink the villain blood. 
