a father advice to his son.

by JOHN Gilbert cooper, ESQ.

deep in a grove by cypress shade,
 where mid day sun have seldom shine,
 or noise the solemn scene invade,
 save some afflict muse moan;

a Swain towards full age manhood wend,
 sit sorrow at the close of day,
 at who fond side a boy attend,
 lisp half his father care away. 

the father eye no object wrest,
 but on the smile prattler hang,
 till, what his throb heart suggest,
 these accent tremble from his tongue. 

 "my youth first hope, my manhood treasure,
" my prattle innocent, attend,
 "nor fear rebuke, or sour displeasure,
" a father lovely name be friend. 

 "some truth, from long experience flow,
" worth more than royal grant receive,
 "for truth be wealth of heaven bestow,
" which king have seldom power to give. 

 "since from a ancient race descend
" you boast a unattainted blood,
 "by you be their fair fame attend,
" and claim by birthright to be good. 

 "in love for every fellow-creature,
" superior rise above the crowd;
 "what most ennoble human nature
" be never the portion of the crowd. 

 "be thy the generous heart that borrow
" from other joy a friendly glow,
 "and for each hapless neighbour sorrow,
" throb with a sympathetic woe. 

 "this be the temper most endear;
" though wide proud pomp her banner spread,
 "an heavenly power good-nature bear,
" each heart in will thraldom lead. 

 "taste not from fame uncertain fountain,
" the peace-destroying stream that flow;
 "nor from ambition dangerous mountain,
" look down upon the world below. 

 "the princely pine on hill exalt,
" who lofty branch cleave the sky,
 "by wind long brave, at last assault,
" be headlong whirl in dust to lie;

 "while the mild rose more safe grow
" low in its unaspiring vale,
 "amid retirement shelter blow,
" exchange sweet with every gale. 

 "wish not for beauty darling feature,
" mould by nature fondle power;
 "for fair form among human creature,
" shine but the pageant of a hour. 

 "i see, the pride of all the meadow,
" at noon, a gay Narcissus blow
 "upon a river bank, who shadow
" bloom in the silver wave below. 

 "by noontide's heat its youth be waste,
" the water as they pass, complain;
 "at eve its glory all be blast,
" and not one former tint remain. 

 "nor let vain wit deceitful glory
" lead you from wisdom path astray:
 "what genius live renowned in story,
" to happiness who find the way? 

 "in yonder mead behold that vapor,
" who vivid beam illusive play,
 "far off it seem a friendly taper,
" to guide the traveller on his way;

 "but shall some hapless wretch pursue,
" tread where the treacherous meteor glow,
 "he will find, too late his rashness rue,
" that fatal quicksand lurk below. 

 "in life such bubble nought admire,
" gild with false light, and fill with air,
 "do you, from pageant crowd retire,
" to peace in virtue cot repair. 

 "there seek the never-wasted treasure,
" which mutual love and friendship give,
 "domestic comfort, spotless pleasure,
" and bless and blessing you will live. 

 "if heaven with child crown your dwelling,
" as mine its bounty do with you,
 "in fondness fatherly excel
" the example you have feel pursue. " 

he pause — for tender caress
 the darling of his wound heart,
 look have mean only of express
 thought language never can impart. 

now night her mournful mantle spread,
 have rob with black the horizon round,
 and dank dew from her tress shed,
 with genial moisture bathe the ground:

when back to city folly fly,
 'midst custom slave he live resign,
 his face array in smile, deny
 the true complexion of his mind;

for serious around survey
 each character in youth and age,
 of fool betray and knave betray,
 that play upon this human stage,

(peaceful himself and undesigning)
 he loathe the scene of guile and strife,
 and feel each secret wish incline
 to leave this fretful farce of life. 

yet to whatever above be fate,
 obedient he bow his soul;
 for, what all-bounteous heaven create,
 he think heaven only shall control. 
