the progress of dullness.

[part iii.] the progress of coquetry.

"come hither, Harriet, pretty miss,
come hither; give your aunt a kiss.
what, blush? fie, hold up your head.
full six year old, and yet afraid!
with such a form, a air, a grace,
you be not ashamed to show your face!
look like a lady — bold — my child —
why, madam, your Harriet will be spoil.
what pity it be, a girl so sprightly
shall hang her head so unpolite?
and sure there be nothing worth arush in
that odd, unnatural trick of blush;
it mark one ungenteel breed,
and show she be mischief in her head.
i have hear Dick hairbrain prove from Paul,
eve never blush before the fall.
it be say indeed, in late day,
it gain our grandmother some praise;
perhaps it suit well enough
with hoop and fardingale and ruff;
but this politer generation
hold ruff and blush out of fashion.
and what can mean that gown so odd?
you ought to dress she in the mode,
to teach she how to make a figure;
or she will be awkward when she be big,
and look as queer as Joan of Nokes,
and never rig like other folk;
her clothes will trail, all fashion lose,
as if she hang they on a post,
and sit as awkward as eve
first peagreen petticoat of leaf.
and what can mean your simple whim here
to keep her pore on her primmer?
it be quite enough for girl to know,
if she can read a billet-doux,
or write a line you will understand
without a alphabet o'th hand.
why needs she learn to write, or spell?
a pothook-scrawl be just as well;
it rank she with the better sort,
for it be the reign mode at court.
and why shall girl be learn or wise?
book only serve to spoil their eye.
the studious eye but faint twinkle,
and read pave the way to wrinkle.
in vain may learning fill the head full:
it be beauty that be the one thing needful;
beauty, our sex sole pretence,
the best receipt for female sense,
the charm, that turn all word to witty,
and make the silly speech pretty.
even folly borrow kill grace
from ruby lip and roseate face.
give air and beauty to your daughter,
and sense and wit will follow after. "
thus round the infant miss in state
the council of the lady meet,
and gay in modern style and fashion
prescribe their rule of education.
the mother, once herself a toast,
pray for her child the self-same post;
the father hate the toil and pother,
and leave his daughter to their mother;
a proper hand their youth to guide,
and over their study to preside;
from who her fault, that never vary,
may come by right hereditary,
folly be multiply with quickness,
and whim keep up the family likeness.
you parent, shall those form so fair,
the grace may be proud to wear,
the charm those speak eye display,
where passion sit in every ray,
the expressive glance, the air refine,
that sweet vivacity of mind,
be doom for life to folly sway,
by trifle lure, to fop a prey,
blank all the power that nature give,
to dress and tinsel-show the slave!
say, can you think that charm so bright,
be give alone to please the sight,
or like the moon, that form so fine
be make for nothing but to shine?
with lip of rose and cheek of cherry,
out go the work of statuary?
and gain the prize of show, as victor
over bust and effigy and picture?
can female sense no trophy raise?
be dress and beauty all their praise?
and do no lover hope to find
a angel in his charmer mind?
first from the dust our sex begin.
but woman be refine from man;
receive again, with soft air,
the great creator form care.
and shall it not attention claim
their beauteous infant soul to frame.
shall half your precept tend the while
fair nature lovely work to spoil,
the native innocence deface,
the glow blush, the modest grace,
on folly fix their young desire,
to trifle bid their soul aspire,
fill their gay head with whim of fashion,
and slight all other cultivation,
let every useless barren weed
of foolish fancy run to seed,
and make their mind the receptacle
of every thing that be false and fickle,
where gay caprice with wanton air,
and vanity keep constant fair,
where ribbon, lace, patch, puff,
cap, jewel, ruffle, tippet, muff,
with gaudy whim of vain parade,
croud each apartment of the head,
where stand display with costly pain
the toy-shop of coquettish brain,
and high-crowned cap hang out the sign,
and beau, as customer throng in;
whence sense be banish in disgrace,
where wisdom dare not show her face,
where calm reflection can live,
nor think sublime a hour survive;
where the light head and vacant brain
spoil all idea they contain,
as the airpump kill in half a minute
each live thing you put within it.
it must be so; by ancient rule
the fair be nurse in folly school,
and all their education do
be none at all, or worse than none;
whence still proceed in maid or wife,
the folly and the ill of life.
learning be call our mental diet,
that serve the hungry mind to quiet,
that give the genius fresh supply,
till soul grow up to common size:
but here, despise sense refine,
gay trifle feed the youthful mind.
chamaeleon thus, who colour airy
as often as coquette can vary,
despise all dish rich and rare,
and diet whole on the air;
think fog bless eat, nothing fine,
and can on whirlwind make a dinner.
and throng all to feast together,
fare dainty in bluster weather.
here to the fair alone remain
long year of action spend in vain;
in number little skill it show
to cast the sum of all she know.
perhaps she learn (what can she less?)
the art of dance and of dress.
but dress and dance be to woman,
their education mint and cummin;
these light grace shall be teach,
and weighty matter not forget.
for there, where only these be show,
the soul will fix on these alone.
then most the finery of dress
her thought, her wish and time possess;
she value only to be gay,
and work to rig herself for play;
weave score of cap with different spire,
and all variety of wire;
gay ruffle vary just as flow
the tide and ebb of the mode;
bright flower, and topknot wave high,
that float, like streamer in the sky;
work catgut handkerchief, who flaw
display the neck, as well as gauze;
or network apron somewhat thinnish,
that cost but six week time to finish,
and yet so neat, as you must own
you can not buy for half a crown —
perhaps in youth (for country-fashion
prescribe that mode of education)
she waste long month in still more tawdry,
and useless labour of embroidery;
with toil weave up for chair together,
six bottom quite as good as leather;
a set of curtain tapestry work,
the figure frown like the Turk;
a tentstitch picture, work of folly,
with portrait wrought of Dick and Polly;
a coat of arm, that mark her house,
three owl rampant, the crest a goose:
or show in wax-work goodman Adam,
and serpent gay, gallant madam,
a woeful mimicry of Eden,
with fruit, that need not be forbid:
all useless work, that fill for beauty
of time and sense their vast vacuity;
of sense, which read may bestow,
and time, who worth they never know.
now to some populous city send,
she come back proud than she go;
few month in vain parade she spare,
nor learn, but apes, politer air;
so formal act, with such a set air,
that country-manner far be better.
this spring from want of just discern,
as pedantry from want of learning;
and prove this maxim true to sight,
the half-genteel be least polite.
yet still that active spark, the mind
employment constant will find,
and when on trifle most it be bend,
be always find most diligent;
for, weighty work man show mostsloth in,
but labour hard at do nothing,
a trade, that need no deep concern,
or long apprenticeship to learn,
to which mankind at first apply
as natural as to cry,
till at the last their late groan
proclaim their idleness be do.
good sense, like fruit, be raise by toil;
but folly sprout in every soil,
and where no tillage find a place,
they grow, like tares, the more apace,
nor culture, pain, nor plant need,
as moss and mushroom have no seed.
thus Harriet, rise on the stage,
learn all the art, that please the age,
and study well, as fit her station,
the trade and politics of fashion:
a judge of mode, in silk and satten,
from tassel down to clog and patten;
a genius, that can calculate
when mode of dress be out of date,
cast the nativity with ease
of gown, and sack and negligee,
and tell, exact to half a minute,
what be out of fashion and what bein it;
and scan all with curious eye
minute fault in dress spy;
(so in nice point of sight, a flea
see atom better far than we,)
a patriot too, she great labour,
to spread her art among her neighbour,
hold correspondency to learn
what fact the female world concern,
to gain authentic state-report
of vary mode in distant court,
the present state and swift decay
of tucker, handkerchief and stay,
the colour silk that beauty wrap,
and all the rise and fall of cap.
then shine, a pattern to the fair,
of mein, address and modish air,
of every new, affect grace,
that play the eye, or deck the face,
the artful smile, that beauty warm,
and all the hypocrisy of charm.
on sunday see the haughty maid
in all the glare of dress array,
deck in her most fantastic gown,
because a stranger come to town.
heedless at church she spend the day
for homely folk may serve to pray,
and for devotion those may go,
who can have nothing else to do.
beauty at church must spend theircare in
far other work, than pious hear;
they have beau to conquer, bell to rival;
to make they serious be uncivil.
for, like the preacher, they each sunday
must do their whole week work inone day.
as though they mean to take by blow
the oppose gallery of beau,
to church the female squadron move,
all arm with weapon use in love.
like colour ensign gay and fair,
high cap rise float in the air;
bright silk its vary radiance-flings,
and streamer wave in kissing-string;
their dart and arrow be not see,
but lover tell we what they mean;
each bear the artillery of her charm,
like train band at view arm.
so once, in fear of indian beat,
our grandsire bear their gun to meeting,
each man equip on sunday morn,
with psalm-book, shoot and powder-horn;
and look in form, as all must grant,
like the ancient, true church militant;
or fierce, like modern deep divine,
who fight with quill, like porcupine.
or let we turn the style and see
our bell assemble over their tea;
where folly sweetens every theme,
and scandal serve for sugar cream.
"and do you hear the news? (they cry)
the court wear cap full three foot high,
build gay with wire, and at the end on it,
red tassel stream like a pendant:
well sure, it must be vast pretty;
it be all the fashion in the city.
and be you at the ball last night?
well Chloe look like any fright;
her day be over for a toast;
she will now do best to act a ghost.
you see our Fanny; envy must own
she figure, since she come from BOSTON,
good company improve one air —
i think the troop be station there.
poor Caelia venture to the place;
the small-pox quite have spoil her face.
a sad affair, we all confess:
but providence know what be best.
poor dolly too, that write the letter
of love to Dick; but Dick know better;
a secret that; you will notdisclose it:
there be not a person liveknow it.
Sylvia shine out, no peacock fine;
i wonder what the fop seein she.
perhaps it be true, what harry maintain,
she mend on intimate acquaintance."
hail british land! to who belong
untroubled privilege of tongue,
bless gift of freedom, prize as rare
by all, but dear to the fair;
from grandmother of loud renown,
through long succession hand down,
thence with affection kind and hearty,
bequeath unlessen to poster'ty!
and all you power of slander, hail,
who teach to censure and to rail!
by you, kind aid to pry eye,
minute fault the fair one spy,
and expect in rival toast can mind,
which no one else can ever find;
by shrewd hint and doubtful guess,
tear reputation all in piece;
point out what smile to sin advance,
find assignation in a glance;
and show how rival toast (you will think)
break all commandment with a wink.
so priest drive poet to the lurch
by fulmination of the church,
mark in our titlepage our crime.
find heresy in double rhyme,
charge trope with damnable opinion,
and prove a metaphor Arminian,
peep for our doctrine, as at window,
and pick out creed of innuendo.
and now the conversation sport
from scandal turn to try fortune.
their future luck the fair foresee
in dream, in card, but most in tea.
each find of love some future trophy
in settling leave of tea, or coffee.
there fate display its book, she believe,
and lover swim in form of tea-leave;
where oblong stalk she take for beau,
and square of leaf for billet-doux,
gay ball in parboil fragment rise,
and expect for kiss greet her eye.
so roman augur wont to pry
in victim heart for prophecy,
seek from the future world advice,
by light and lung of sacrifice,
and read with eye more sharp than wizard,
the book of fate in pigeon gizzard;
can tell what chief will be survivor,
from aspect of a ox liver,
and cast what luck will fall in fight,
by trine and quartile of its light.
yet that we fair may proceed,
we own that lady sometime read,
and grieve that read be confine
to book that poison all the mind;
the bluster of romance, that fill
the head brimful of purling rill,
inspire with dream the witless maiden
on flowery vale, and field arcadian,
and swell the mind with haughty fancy,
and amorous folly of romance,
with whim that in no place exist,
but author head and woman breast.
for while she read romance, the fair one
fail not to think herself the heroine;
for every glance, or smile, or grace,
she find resemblance in her face,
think while the fancy beauty strike,
two pea be never more alike,
expect the world to fallbefore she,
and every fop she meetadore she.
thus Harriet read, and read real
believe herself a young Pamela,
the high-wrought whim, the tender strain
elate her mind and turn her brain:
before her glass, with smile grace,
she view the wonder of her face;
there stand in admiration moveless,
and hope a Grandison, or Lovelace. 
then shine she forth, and round she hover
the powder swarm of bow lover;
by flame of love attract thither,
fop, scholar, dunce, cit, together.
no lamp expose in nightly sky
ever gather such a swarm of fly;
or flame in tube electric draw
such throng multitude of straw.
(for i shall still take simile
from fire electric when i please.)
with vast confusion swell the sound,
when all the coxcomb flutter round.
what undulation wide of bow!
what gentle oath and amorous vow!
what doubl 'entendres all so smart!
what sigh hot-piping from the heart!
what jealous leer! what angry brawl
to gain the lady hand at ball!
what billet-doux, brimful of flame!
acrostic line with Harriet name!
what compliment overstrain with tell
sad lie of Venus and of Hellen! 
what wit half-cracked with common place
on angel, goddess and grace!
on fire of love what witty pun!
what simile of star and sun!
what cringe, dance, ogle, sigh,
what languish for love, and die!
for lover of all thing that breathe
be most expose to sudden death,
and many a swain much fame in rhyme
have die some hundred thousand time:
yet though love oft their breath may stifle,
it be sing it hurt they but a trifle.
the swain revive by equal wonder,
as snake will join when cut asunder,
and often murder still survive;
no cat have half so many life.
while round the fair, the coxcomb throng
with oath, card, billet-doux, and song,
she spread her charm and wish to gain
the heart of every simple swain;
to all with gay, allure air,
she hide in smile the fatal snare,
for sure that snare must fatal prove,
where falsehood wear the form of love;
full oft with please transport hang
on accent of each flatter tongue,
and find a pleasure most sincere
from each erect, attentive ear;
for pride be she, that oft with ease,
despise the man, she wish to please.
she love the chace, but scorn the prey,
and fish for heart to throw away;
joy at the tale of pierce dart,
and torture flame and pine heart,
and please peruse the billet-doux,
that say, "i die for love of you;"
find conquest in each gallant sigh,
and bless the murder of her eye.
so doctor live but by the dead,
and pray for plague, as daily bread;
thank providence for cold and fever,
and hold consumption special favour;
and think disease kind make,
as bless material of their trade.
it will weary all the power of verse
their amorous speech to rehearse,
their compliment, who vain parade
turn Venus to a kitchen-maid;
with high pretence of love and honour,
they vent their folly all upon she,
(even as the scripture-precept say,
more shall be give to he that have;)
tell she how wondrous fair they deem she,
how handsome all the world esteem she;
and while they flatter and adore,
she contradict to call for more.
"and do they say i be so handsome?
my look — i be sure not one can fancy they.
it be true we be all as we be frame,
and none have right to be ashamed;
but as for beauty — all can tell
i never fancy i look well;
i be a fright, have i a grain less.
you be only joke, mr. brainless."
yet beauty still maintain she sway;
and bid the proud heart obey;
even sense her glance can beguile,
and vanquish wisdom with a smile:
while merit bow and find no arm,
the oppose the conquest of her charm,
catch all those bashful fear, that place
the mask of folly on the face,
that awe, that rob our air of ease,
and blunder, when it hope to please;
for man of sense will always prove
the most forlorn of fool in love.
the fair esteem, admire, it be true,
and praise — it be all coquette can do.
and when deserve lover come
believe her smile and own their flame,
her bosom thril, with joy affect
the increase the list, she have reject;
while please to see her art prevail,
to each she tell the self-same tale.
she wish in truth they never have see she,
and feign what grief it oft have give she,
and sad, of tender-hearted make,
grieve they be ruin for her sake.
it be true, she own on recollection,
she will give they proof of kind affection:
but they mistake her whole intent,
for friendship be the thing she mean.
she wonder how their heart canmove they
so strange as to think she willlove they;
she think her purity above
the low and sensual flame of love;
and yet they make such sad ado,
she wish she can have love they too.
she pity they and as a friend
she prize they more than all mankind;
and beg they not their heart to vex,
or hang themselves, or break their neck;
tell they it will make her life uneasy,
if they shall run forlorn, or crazy:
object of love she can notdeem they;
but do most marv'lousesteem they.
for it be esteem, coquette dispense
tower learning, genius, worth and sense,
sincere affection, truth refine,
and all the merit of the mind.
but love the passion they experience
for gold, and dress, and gay appearance.
for ah! what magic charm and grace
be find in golden suit of lace!
what go forth of heart and soul
tower glare of gild button-hole!
what lady heart can stand its ground
against hat with glitter edge bound?
while vest and shoe and hose conspire,
and glove and ruffle fan the fire;
and broadcloth, cut by tailor art,
spread fatal net for female heart.
and oh, what charm more potent shine,
draw from the dark Peruvian mine!
what spell and talisman of Venus
be find in dollar, crown and guinea!
in purse of gold, a single stiver
beat all the dart in Cupid quiver.
what heart so constant, but must veer,
when draw by thousand pound a year!
how many fair one every day
to house fine have fall a prey,
be force on store of good to fix,
or carry off in coach and fix!
for Caelia merit find no dart;
five thousand sterling break her heart.
so witch, hunter sayconfound they,
for silver bullet onlywind they.
Cupid of old, as poet say,
but barter heart in simple way;
our modern Cupid wise find,
and go to work on sure ground,
like lawyer join the monied faction,
think gold the sure cause of action,
but where of money not acopper be,
reject all suit in forma pauperis;
admit the rich to bliss and glory,
and send the poor to purgatory.
and now the time be come, our fair
shall all the plague of passion share,
and after every heart she will win,
by sad disaster lose her own.
so true the ancient proverb say,
"edge tool be dangerous thing to play with;"
the fisher, every gudgeon hook,
may chance himself to catch a duck;
the child that play with fire, in pain
will burn its finger now and then;
and from the Dutchess to the laundress,
coquette be seldom salamander.
for lo! Dick hairbrain heave in sight,
from foreign clime return bright,
a coxcomb, past all mortal match,
well worth a lady pain in catch;
he dance, he sing to admiration;
he swear to general acceptation;
in air and dress so great his merit,
he shine — no lady eye canbear it.
poor Harriet see; her heart be stout;
she gather all her smileabout she;
hope by her eye to gain the laurel,
and charm he down, as snake do squirrel;
so prize his love and wish towin it,
that all her hope be centrein it;
and take such pain his heart to move,
herself fall desperate in love;
nor have the art to keep it private,
Dick soon find what she mean todrive at.
though great her skill in amorous trick,
she can not hope to equal Dick:
her fate she venture on his trial,
and lose her birthright of denial.
and here her bright hope miscarry;
for Dick be too gallant to marry:
he own she will charm for those whoneed they.
but he, be sure, be all for freedom;
so, leave in hopeless flame to burn,
gay Dick esteem she in turn.
in love, a lady once give over
be never fate to recover,
doom to indulge her trouble fancy
and feed her passion by romance;
and always amorous, always change,
from coxcomb still to coxcomb range,
find in her heart a void, which still
succeed beau can never fill:
as shadow vary over a glass,
each hold in turn the vacant place;
she dote upon her early pain,
and follow thousand love in vain.
poor Harriet now have have her day;
no more the beau confess she sway;
new beauty push she from the stage;
she tremble at the approach of age,
and start to view the alter face,
that wrinkle at she in her glass:
so Satan, in the monk tradition,
fear, when he meet his apparition.
at length her name each coxcomb cancel
from stand list of toast and angel;
and slight where she shine before,
a grace and goddess now no more,
deprive of long-accustomed pleasure
in daily falsehood tell topraise she;
despise by all, and doom to meet
her lover at her rival foot,
she fly assembly, shun the ball,
and cry out, vanity, on all;
affect to scorn the tinsel-shows
of glitter bell and gaudy beau;
nor long hope to hide by dress
the track of age upon her face.
now careless grow of air polite,
her noonday nightcap meet the sight;
her hair uncombed collect together,
with ornament of many a feather;
her stay for easiness throw by,
her rumple handkerchief awry,
a careless figure half undress,
(the reader wit may guess the rest)
all point of dress and neatness carry,
as though she will be a twelvemonth marry;
she spend her breath, as year prevail,
at this sad, wicked world to rail,
to slander all her sex impromptu,
and wonder what the time willcome to.
Tom brainless at the close of last year
have be six year a reverend pastor,
and now resolve to smooth his life,
to seek the blessing of a wife.
his brother see his amorous temper,
and recommend fair miss simper,
who fond, they hear, of sacred truth,
have leave her levity of youth,
grow fit forth ministerial union,
and grave, as christian wife in Bunyan. 
on this he rig he in his best,
and get his old grey wig new-dr,
fix on his suit of sable stuff,
and brush the powder from the cuff,
with black silk stocking, yet in being,
the same he take his firstdegree in;
procure a horse of breed from Europe,
and learn to mount he by the stirrup,
and set forth fierce to court the maid;
his white haired deacon go for aid;
and on the right in solemn mode,
the reverend mr. brainless ride.
thus grave, the courtly pair advance,
like knight and squire in fame romance;
the priest then bow in sober gesture,
and all in scripture termaddress she;
he will find for reason ample know,
it be not good to be alone,
and think his duty lead to try
the great command of multiply;
so with submission, by her leave,
he will come to look he out a eve,
and hope, in pilgrimage of life,
to find a helpmeet in a wife,
a wife discreet and fair withal,
to make amends for Adam fall.
in short, the bargain finish soon,
a reverend doctor make they one.
and now the joyful peoplerouse all
to celebrate their priest espousal;
and first, by kind agreement set,
in case their priest a wife can get,
the parish vote he five pound clear,
the increase his salary every year.
then swift the tagrag gentry come
to welcome madam brainless home;
wish their good parson joy; vhth pride
in order round salute the bride;
at home, at visit and at meeting,
to madam all allow precedence:
greet she at church with reverence due,
and next the pulpit fix her pew. —
