[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night viii. virtue apology; or, the man of the world answer.

in which be consider, the love of this life; the ambition and pleasure, with the wit and wisdom, of the world.

and have all nature, then, espouse my part? 
have i bribe heaven and earth to plead against thou? 
and be thy soul immortal? — what remain? 
all, all, Lorenzo! — make immortal bless. 
unblessed immortal! what can shock we more? 
and yet Lorenzo still affect the world;
 there, stow his treasure; thence, his title draw,
 man of the world! (for such will thou be call!) 
and be thou proud of that inglorious style? 
proud of reproach? for a reproach it be,
 in ancient day; and christian — in a age,
 when man be man, and not ashamed of heaven —
 fire their ambition, as it crown their joy. 
sprinkle with dew from the castalian font,
 fain will i rebaptise thou, and confer
 a pure spirit, and a noble name. 

thy fond attachment, fatal and inflame,
 point out my path, and dictate to my song:
 to thou the world how fair! how strong strike
 ambition! and gay pleasure strong still! 
thy triple bane! the triple bolt, that lay
 thy virtue dead! be these my triple theme;
 nor shall thy wit or wisdom be forget. 

common the theme; not so the song; if she
 my song invoke, Urania, deign to smile. 
the charm that chain we to the world, her foe,
 if she dissolve, the man of earth, at once,
 start from his trance, and sigh for other scene;
 scene, where these spark of night, these star, shall shine
 unnumbered sun; (for all thing as they be
 the bless behold;) and, in one glory, pour
 their blend blaze on man astonish sight;
 a blaze, — the least illustrious object there. 

Lorenzo! since eternal be at hand,
 to swallow time be ambition; as the vast
 leviathan, the bubble vain that ride
 high on the foam billow; what avail
 high title, high descent, attainment high,
 if unattained our high? o Lorenzo! 
what lofty thought, these element above,
 what tower hope, what sally from the sun,
 what grand survey of destiny divine,
 and pompous presage of unfathomed fate,
 shall roll in bosom where a spirit burn,
 bind for eternity; in bosom read
 by he who foible in archangel see! 
on human heart he bend a jealous eye,
 and mark, and in heaven register enrol,
 the rise and progress of each option there;
 sacred to doomsday! that the page unfold,
 and spread we to the gaze of god and man. 

and what a option, o Lorenzo, thy! 
this world! and this, unrivaled by the sky! 
a world, where lust of pleasure, grandeur, gold,
 three demon that divide its realm between they,
 with stroke alternate buffet to and fro
 man restless heart, their sport, their fly ball;
 till with the giddy circle sick and tire,
 it pant for peace, and drop into despair. 
such be the world Lorenzo set above
 that glorious promise angel be esteem
 too mean to bring: a promise, their adore
 descend to communicate, and press,
 by counsel, miracle, life, death, on man. 
such be the world lorenzo wisdom woo,
 and on its thorny pillow seek repose;
 a pillow which, like opiate ill-prepared,
 intoxicate, but not compose; fill
 the visionary mind with gay chimeras,
 all the wild trash of sleep, without the rest;
 what unfeigned travail, and what dream of joy! 

how frail man, thing! how momentary both! 
fantastic chase, of shadow hunt shade! 
the gay, the busy, equal, though unlike;
 equal in wisdom, different wise! 
through flowery meadow, and through dreary waste,
 one bustle, and one dance, into death. 
there be not a day but, to the man of thought,
 betray some secret, that throw new reproach
 on life, and make he sick of see more. 
the scene of business tell we — "what be man;"
 the scene of pleasure — "what be all beside:"
 there, other we despise; and here, ourselves. 
amid disgust eternal, dwell delight? 
it be approbation strike the string of joy. 

what wondrous prize have kindle this career,
 stun with the din, and choke we with the dust,
 on life gay stage, one inch above the grave? 
the proud run up and down in quest of eye;
 the sensual, in pursuit of something worse;
 the grave, of gold; the politic, of power;
 and all, of other butterfly, as vain! 
as eddy draw thing frivolous and light,
 how be man heart by vanity draw in;
 on the swift circle of return toy,
 whirl, straw-like, round and round, and then ingulf,
 where gay delusion darken to despair! 

 "this be a beat track. "— be this a track
 shall not be beat? never beat enough,
 till enough learn the truth it will inspire. 
shall truth be silent because folly frown? 
turn the world history; what find we there,
 but Fortune sport, or nature cruel claim,
 or woman artifice, or man revenge,
 and endless inhumanity on man? 
fame trumpet seldom sound but, like the knell,
 it bring bad tiding! how it hourly blow
 man misadventure round the listen world! 
man be the tale of narrative old time;
 sad tale! which high as paradise begin. 
as if the toil of travel to delude,
 from stage to stage, in his eternal round,
 the day, his daughter, — as they spin our hour
 on Fortune wheel, where accident unthought
 oft, in a moment, snap life strong thread, —
 each, in her turn, some tragic story tell,
 with, now-and-then, a wretched farce between;
 and fill his chronicle with human woe. 

time be daughter, true as those of man, deceive we;
 not one but put some cheat on all mankind:
 while in their father bosom, not yet we,
 they flatter our fond hope; and promise much
 of amiable, but hold he not overwise
 who dare to trust they; and laugh round the year
 at still confide, still confound man,
 confide, though confound; hope on,
 untaught by trial, unconvinced by proof,
 and ever look for the never-seen. 
life to the last, like harden felons, lie;
 nor own itself a cheat, till it expire. 
its little joy go out by one and one,
 and leave poor man, at length, in perfect night;
 night dark than what now involve the pole. 

o thou, who do permit these ill to fall
 for gracious end, and will that man shall mourn! 
o thou, who hand this goodly fabric frame,
 who know it best, and will that man shall know! 
what be this sublunary world? a vapour! 
a vapour all it hold; itself a vapour;
 from the damp bed of chaos, by thy beam
 exhale, ordain to swim its destine hour
 in ambient air, then melt, and disappear! 
earth day be number, nor remote her doom;
 as mortal, though less transient than her son:
 yet they dote on she, as the world and they
 be both eternal, solid; thou, a dream. 

they dote! on what? immortal view apart,
 a region of outside, a land of shadow! 
a fruitful field of flowery promise! 
a wilderness for joy, perplex with doubt,
 and sharp with thorn! a trouble ocean, spread
 with bold adventurer, their all on board;
 no second hope if here their fortune frown:
 frown soon it must. of various rate they sail,
 of ensign various; all alike in this, —
 all restless, anxious; toss with hope and fear
 in calm sky: obnoxious all to storm;
 and stormy the most general blast of life:
 all bind for happiness; yet few provide
 the chart of knowledge, point where it lie;
 or virtue helm, to shape the course design. 
all, more or less, capricious fate lament,
 now lift by the tide, and now resorb,
 and farther from their wish than before:
 all, more or less, against each other dash,
 to mutual hurt by gust of passion drive,
 and suffer more from folly than from fate. 

ocean, thou dreadful and tumultuous home
 of danger, at eternal war with man! 
death capital, where most he domineer,
 with all his choose terror frown round,
 (though late feast high at albion cost,) 
wide open and loud roar still for more! 
too faithful mirror! how do thou reflect
 the melancholy face of human life! 
the strong resemblance tempt i farther still;
 and haply Britain may be deep strike
 by moral truth, in such a mirror see,
 which nature hold for ever at her eye. 

self-flattered, unexperienced, high in hope,
 when young, with sanguine cheer, and streamer gay,
 we cut our cable, launch into the world,
 and fond dream each wind and star our friend;
 all, in some darling enterprise embark:
 but where be he can fathom its event? 
amid a multitude of artless hand,
 ruin sure perquisite, her lawful prize! 
some steer aright; but the black blast blow hard,
 and puff they wide of hope: with heart of proof,
 full against wind and tide, some win their way;
 and when strong effort have deserve the port,
 and tug it into view, it be win! it be lose! 
though strong their oar, still strong be their fate:
 they strike; and while they triumph, they expire. 
in stress of weather, most; some sink outright;
 over they, and over their name, the billow close;
 tomorrow know not they be ever bear. 
other a short memorial leave behind,
 like a flag float, when the bark ingulf;
 it float a moment, and be see no more:
 one Caesar life; a thousand be forget. 
how few, beneath auspicious planet bear,
 (darling of providence, fond fate elect!) 
with swell sail make good the promise port,
 with all their wish freight! yet even these,
 freight with all their wish, soon complain. 
free from misfortune, not from nature free,
 they still be man; and when be man secure? 
as fatal time as storm! the rush of year
 beat down their strength; their numberless escape
 in ruin end: and now their proud success
 but plant new terror on the victor brow:
 what pain to quit the world just make their own,
 their nest so deep down, and build so high! 
too low they build who build beneath the star. 

woe then apart, (if woe apart can be
 from mortal man,) and fortune at our nod,
 the gay, rich, great, triumphant, and august! 
what be they? — the most happy (strange to say!) 
convince i most of human misery:
 what be they? smile wretch of tomorrow! 
more wretched then than ever their slave can be;
 their treacherous blessing, at the day of need,
 like other faithless friend, unmask and sting:
 then, what provoke indigence in wealth! 
what aggravate impotence in power! 
high title, then, what insult of their pain! 
if that sole anchor, equal to the wave,
 immortal hope! defy not the rude storm,
 take comfort from the foam billow rage,
 and make a welcome harbour of the tomb. 

be this a sketch of what thy soul admire? 
 "but here,"thou say, "the misery of life
 be huddle in a group. a more distinct
 survey, perhaps, may bring thou better news."
look on life stage: they speak plain still;
 the plain they, the deep will thou sigh. 
look on thy lovely boy; in he behold
 the best that can befall the best on earth;
 the boy have virtue by his mother side:
 yes, on Florello look: — a father heart
 be tender, though the man be make of stone:
 the truth, through such a medium see, may make
 impression deep, and fondness prove thy friend. 

Florello, late cast on this rude coast
 a helpless infant; now a heedless child;
 to poor Clarissa throe, thy care succeed:
 care full of love, and yet severe as hate! 
over thy soul joy how oft thy fondness frown! 
needful austerity his will restrain;
 as thorn fence-in the tender plant from harm. 
as yet, his reason can go alone;
 but ask a stern nurse to lead it on. 
his little heart be often terrify;
 the blush of morning in his cheek turn pale;
 its pearly dew-drop tremble in his eye,
 his harmless eye! and drown a angel there. 
ah! what avail his innocence? the task
 enjoin must discipline his early power;
 he learn to sigh ere he have know to sin;
 guiltless, and sad! a wretch before the fall! 
how cruel this! more cruel to forbear. 
our nature such, with necessary pain
 we purchase prospect of precarious peace:
 though not a father, this may steal a sigh. 

suppose he discipline aright; (if not,
 it will sink our poor account to poor still;)
 ripe from the tutor, proud of liberty,
 he leap enclosure, bound into the world:
 the world be take, after ten year toil,
 like ancient Troy; and all its joy his own
 alas! the world be a tutor more severe;
 its lesson hard, and ill deserve his pain;
 unteach all his virtuous nature teach,
 or book (fair virtue advocate!) inspire. 

for who receive he into public life? 
man of the world, the terrae-filial breed,
 welcome the modest stranger to their sphere,
 (which glitter long, at distance, in his sight,)
 and in their hospitable arm enclose:
 man who think nought so strong of the romance,
 so rank knight-errant, as a real friend:
 man that act up to reason golden rule,
 all weakness of affection quite subdue:
 man that will blush at be think sincere,
 and feign, for glory, the few fault they want;
 that love a lie, where truth will pay as well;
 as if, to they, vice shine she own reward. 

Lorenzo! can thou bear a shock sight? 
such, for florello sake, it will now appear: —
 see the steel file of season veteran,
 train to the world, in burnish falsehood bright;
 deep in the fatal stratagem of peace;
 all soft sensation in the throng rub off;
 all their keen purpose in politeness sheathe;
 his friend eternal — during interest;
 his foe implacable — when worth their while;
 at war with every welfare but their own;
 as wise as Lucifer, and half as good;
 and by who none but Lucifer can gain: —
 naked, through these, (so common fate ordain,)
 naked of heart, his cruel course he run,
 sting out of all most amiable in life,
 prompt truth, and open thought, and smile unfeigned;
 affection, as his species, wide diffuse;
 noble presumption to mankind renown;
 ingenuous trust, and confidence of love. 

these claim to joy (if mortal joy may claim)
 will cost he many a sigh, till time, and pain,
 from the slow mistress of this school, experience,
 and her assistant, pause, pale distrust,
 purchase a dear-bought clue to lead his youth
 through serpentine obliquity of life,
 and the dark labyrinth of human heart. 
and happy if the clue shall come so cheap! 
for while we learn to fence with public guilt,
 full oft we feel its foul contagion too,
 if less than heavenly virtue be our guard. 
thus, a strange kind of curse necessity
 bring down the sterling temper of his soul,
 by base alloy, to bear the current stamp,
 below call wisdom; sink he into safety;
 and brand he into credit with the world;
 where specious title dignify disgrace,
 and nature injury be art of life;
 where bright reason prompt to bold crime,
 and heavenly talent make infernal heart, —
 that unsurmountable extreme of guilt! 

poor Machiavelli, who labour hard his plan,
 forget that genius need not go to school;
 forget that man, without a tutor wise,
 his plan have practise long before it be write. 
the world be all titlepage, there be no content:
 the world be all face; the man who show his heart
 be hoot for his nudity, and scorn. 
a man i know who live upon a smile;
 and well it feed he; he look plump and fair,
 while rank venom foam through every vein. 
Lorenzo! what i tell thou, take not ill. 
live, he fawn on every fool alive;
 and, die, curse the friend on who he live. 
to such proficient thou be half a saint. 
in foreign realm, (for thou have travel far,)
 how curious to contemplate two state-rook,
 studious their nest to feather in a trice,
 with all the necromantic of their art,
 play the game of face on each other,
 make court-sweetmeat of their latent gall,
 in foolish hope to steal each other trust;
 both cheat, both exult, both deceive;
 and, sometime, both (let earth rejoice) undo! 
their part we doubt not; but be that their shame. 
shall man of talent, fit to rule mankind,
 stoop to mean wile, that will disgrace a fool? 
and lose the thanks of those few friend they serve? 
for who can thank the man he can see? 

why so much cover? it defeat itself. 
you that know all thing! know you not man heart
 be therefore know, because they be conceal? 
for why conceal? — the cause they need not tell. 
i give he joy that be awkward at a lie;
 who feeble nature truth keep still in awe:
 he incapacity be his renown. 
it be great, it be manly, to disdain disguise;
 it show our spirit, or it prove our strength. 
thou say it be needful. be it therefore right? 
however, i grant it some small sign of grace,
 to strain at a excuse. and will thou then
 escape that cruel need? thou may with ease:
 think no post needful that demand a knave. 
when late our civil helm be shift hand,
 so P — thought: think better, if you can. 

but this, how rare! the public path of life
 be dirty. yet allow that dirt its due;
 it make the noble mind more noble still. 
the world be no neuter; it will wound or save;
 our virtue quench, or indignation fire. 
you say, "the world, wellknown, will make a man:"
 the world, wellknown, will give our heart to heaven,
 or make we demon long before we die. 

to show how fair the world, thy mistress, shine,
 take either part, sure ill attend the choice:
 sure, though not equal, detriment ensue. 
not virtue self be deify on earth:
 virtue have her relapse, conflict, foe;
 foe that never fail to make she feel their hate. 
virtue have her peculiar set of pain. 
true, friend to virtue last and least complain:
 but if they sigh, can other hope to smile? 
if wisdom have her misery to mourn,
 how can poor folly lead a happy life? 
and if both suffer, what have earth to boast,
 where he most happy who the least lament? 
where much, much patience, the most envy state;
 and some forgiveness need the best of friend? 
for friend or happy life who look not high,
 of neither shall he find the shadow here. 

the world be swear advocate, without a fee,
 Lorenzo smart, with a smile, reply:
 "thus far thy song be right; and all must own,
 virtue have her peculiar set of pain. —
 and joy peculiar who to vice deny,
 if vice it be with nature to comply? 
if pride and sense be so predominant,
 to check, not overcome, they make a saint:
 can nature in a plain voice proclaim
 pleasure and glory the chief good of man?"

can pride and sensuality rejoice? 
from purity of thought all pleasure spring;
 and from a humble spirit, all our peace. 
ambition, pleasure! let we talk of these:
 of these the porch and academy talk;
 of these, each follow age have much to say:
 yet unexhausted still the needful theme. 
who talk of these, to mankind all at once
 he talk; for where the saint from either free? 
be these thy refuge? — no; these rush upon thou,
 thy vital seize, and, vulturelike, devour. 
i will try if i can pluck thou from thy rock,
 Prometheus! from this barren ball of earth:
 if reason can unchain thou, thou be free. 

and first, thy Caucasus, ambition, call:
 mountain of torment! eminence of woe! 
of court woe! and court through mistake! 
it be not ambition charm thou: it be a cheat
 will make thou start, as H—— at his moor. 
do grasp at greatness? first, know what it be:
 think thou thy greatness in distinction lie? 
not in the feather, wave it ever so high,
 by fortune stick, to mark we from the throng,
 be glory lodge: it be lodge in the reverse;
 in that which join, in that which equal, all,
 the monarch and his slave; — "a deathless soul,
 unbounded prospect, and immortal kin,
 a father god, and brother in the sky;"
 elder, indeed, in time; but less remote
 in excellence, perhaps, than think by man. 
why great what can fall, than what can rise? 

if still delirious now, Lorenzo! go;
 and with thy full-blown brother of the world,
 throw scorn around thou; cast it on thy slave;
 thy slave, and equal: how scorn cast on they
 rebound on thou! if man be mean, as man,
 be thou a god? if fortune make he so,
 beware the consequence: a maxim that,
 which draw a monstrous picture of mankind,
 where, in the drapery, the man be lose;
 external flutter, and the soul forget:
 thy great glory when dispose to boast,
 boast that aloud in which thy servant share. 

we wise strip the steed we mean to buy:
 judge we, in their caparison, of man? 
it nought avail thou where, but what, thou be:
 all the distinction of this little life
 be quite cutaneous, foreign to the man! 
when through death strait earth subtle serpent creep,
 which wriggle into wealth, or climb renown,
 as crooked Satan the forbid tree,
 they leave their party-coloured robe behind,
 all that now glitter, while they rear aloft
 their brazen crest, and hiss at we below. 
of Fortune fucus strip they, yet alive;
 strip they of body, too; nay, close still,
 away with all, but moral, in their mind;
 and let what then remain impose their name,
 pronounce they weak, or worthy! great, or mean! 
how mean that snuff of glory fortune light,
 and death put out! do thou demand a test
 (a test at once infallible and short)
 of real greatness? that man great live,
 whatever his fate or fame, who great die;
 high-flushed with hope where hero shall despair. 
if this a true criterion, many court,
 illustrious, may afford but few grandee. 

the almighty, from his throne, on earth survey
 nought great than a honest humble heart;
 a humble heart, his residence! pronounce
 his second seat; and rival to the sky. 
the private path, the secret act of man,
 if noble, far the noble of our life! 
how far above lorenzo glory sit
 the illustrious master of a name unknown;
 who worth unrivaled, and unwitnessed, love
 life sacred shade, where god converse with man;
 and peace, beyond the world conception, smile! 
as thou (now dark) before we part shall see. 

but thy great soul this skulk glory scorn. 
lorenzo sick but when lorenzo see;
 and, when he shrug at public business, lie. 
deny the public eye, the public voice,
 as if he live on other breath, he die. 
fain will he make the world his pedestal;
 mankind the gazer, the sole figure he. 
know he that mankind praise against their will,
 and mix as much detraction as they can? 
know he that faithless fame her whisper have,
 as well as trumpet? that his vanity
 be so much tickle from not hear all? 
know this all-know that, from itch of praise,
 or from a itch more sordid, when he shine,
 take his country by five hundred ear,
 senate at once admire he, and despise,
 with modest laughter line loud applause,
 which make the smile more mortal to his fame? 
his fame, which, (like the mighty Caesar,) crown
 with laurel, in full senate, great fall,
 by seem friend that honour, and destroy. 
we rise in glory as we sink in pride;
 where boast end, there dignity begin;
 and yet, mistake beyond all mistake,
 the blind lorenzo proud — of be proud;
 and dream himself ascend in his fall. 

a eminence, though fancy, turn the brain;
 all vice want hellebore; but of all vice
 pride loud call, and for the large bowl;
 because, all other vice unlike, it fly,
 in fact, the point in fancy most pursue. 
who court applause, oblige the world in this:
 they gratify man passion to refuse. 
superior honour, when assume, be lose;
 even good man turn banditti, and rejoice,
 like kouli khan, in plunder of the proud. 

though somewhat disconcert, steady still
 to the world cause, with half a face of joy,
 Lorenzo cry, — "be, then, ambition cast;
 ambition dear far stand unimpeached,
 gay pleasure! proud ambition be her slave;
 for she he soar at great, and hazard ill;
 for she he fight, and bleed or overcome;
 and pave his way with crown to reach her smile:
 who can resist her charm?"— or, shall? Lorenzo! 
what mortal shall resist, where angel yield? 
pleasure the mistress of ethereal power;
 for she contend the rival god above;
 pleasure the mistress of the world below. 
and well it be for man that pleasure charm:
 how will all stagnate, but for pleasure ray! 
how will the freeze stream of action cease! 
what be the pulse of this so busy world? 
the love of pleasure: that, through every vein,
 throw motion, warmth; and shut out death from life. 

though various be the temper of mankind,
 pleasure gay family hold all in chain:
 some most affect the black, and some the fair:
 some honest pleasure court, and some obscene. 
pleasure obscene be various, as the throng
 of passion that can err in human heart;
 mistake their object, or transgress their bound. 
think you there be but one whoredom? whoredom all,
 but when our reason license delight. 
do doubt, Lorenzo? thou shall doubt no more. 
thy father chide thy gallantry; yet hug
 a ugly common harlot in the dark;
 a rank adulterer with other gold:
 and that hag, vengeance, in a corner, charm. 
hatred her brothel have, as well as love,
 where horrid epicure debauch in blood. 
whatever the motive, pleasure be the mark! 
for she the black assassin draw his sword;
 for her dark statesman trim their midnight lamp,
 to which no single sacrifice may fall;
 for she the saint abstain, the miser starve;
 the stoic proud, for pleasure, pleasure scorn;
 for her affliction daughter grief indulge,
 and find, or hope, a luxury in tear;
 for she, guilt, shame, toil, danger we defy;
 and, with a aim voluptuous, rush on death. 
thus universal her despotic power. 

and as her empire wide, her praise be just. 
patron of pleasure, doter on delight! 
i be thy rival; pleasure i profess;
 pleasure the purpose of my gloomy song. 
pleasure be nought but virtue gay name:
 i wrong she still, i rate her worth too low:
 virtue the root, and pleasure be the flower;
 and honest epicurus foe be fool. 

but this sound harsh, and give the wise offence;
 if overstrained wisdom still retain the name. 
how knit austerity her cloudy brow,
 and blame, as bold and hazardous, the praise
 of pleasure to mankind, unpraised too dear! 
you modern stoic! here my soft reply: —
 their sense man will trust; we can impose;
 or if we can, be imposition right? 
own honey sweet, but, own, add this sting, —
 "when mix with poison, it be deadly too."
truth never be indebt to a lie. 
be nought but virtue to be praise as good? 
why then be health prefer before disease? 
what nature love be good, without our leave. 
and where no future drawback cry, "beware!"
pleasure, though not from virtue, shall prevail. 
it be balm to life, and gratitude to heaven:
 how cold our thanks for bounty unenjoyed! 
the love of pleasure be man eldest-born,
 bear in his cradle, live to his tomb. 
wisdom, her young sister, though more grave,
 be mean to minister, and not to mar
 imperial pleasure, queen of human heart. 

Lorenzo, thou, her majesty renowned
 (though uncoifed) counsel, learn in the world,
 who think thyself a Murray, with disdain
 may look on i. yet, my Demosthenes,
 can thou plead pleasure cause as well as i? 
know thou she "nature, purpose, parentage?"
attend my song, and thou shall know they all;
 and know thyself; and know thyself to be
 (strange truth!) the most abstemious man alive. 
tell not Calista! she will laugh thou dead;
 or send thou to her hermitage with l — —. 
absurd presumption! thou who never know
 a serious thought, shall thou dare dream of joy? 
no man ever find a happy life by chance,
 or yawn it into be with a wish;
 or, with the snout of grovel appetite,
 ever smell it out, and grub it from the dirt. 
a be it be, and must be learn; and learn
 with unremitting effort, or be lose,
 and leave we perfect blockhead in our bliss. 
the cloud may drop down title and estate;
 wealth may seek we; but wisdom must be seek;
 seek before all; but (how unlike all else
 we seek on earth!) it be never seek in vain. 

first, pleasure birth, rise, strength, and grandeur see:
 bring forth by wisdom, nurse by discipline,
 by patience teach, by perseverance crown,
 she rear her head majestic; round her throne,
 erect in the bosom of the just,
 each virtue, list, form her manly guard. 
for what be virtue? (formidable name!) 
what but the fountain or defence of joy? 
why then command? need mankind command
 at once to merit and to make their bliss? —
 great legislator, scarce so great as kind! 
if man be rational, and love delight,
 thy gracious law but flatter human choice;
 in the transgression lie the penalty;
 and they the most indulge who most obey. 

of pleasure next the final cause explore;
 its mighty purpose, its important end. 
not to turn human brutal, but to build
 divine on human, pleasure come from heaven. 
in aid to reason be the goddess send;
 to call up all its strength by such a charm. 
pleasure first succour virtue; in return,
 virtue give pleasure a eternal reign. 
what but the pleasure of food, friendship, faith,
 support life natural, civil, and divine? 
it be from the pleasure of repast we live;
 it be from the pleasure of applause we please;
 it be from the pleasure of belief we pray:
 (all prayer will cease, if unbelieve the prize:)
 it serve ourselves, our species, and our god;
 and to serve more, be past the sphere of man. 
glide, then, for ever, pleasure sacred stream! 
through Eden, as Euphrates run, it run,
 and foster every growth of happy life;
 make a new Eden where it flow; — but such
 as must be lose, Lorenzo, by thy fall. 

 "what mean i by thy fall?"— thou will short see,
 while pleasure nature be at large display;
 already sing her origin and end. 
those glorious end, by kind, or by degree,
 when pleasure violate, it be then a vice,
 and vengeance too; it hasten into pain. 
from due refreshment, life, health, reason, joy;
 from wild excess, pain, grief, distraction, death:
 heaven justice this proclaim, and that her love. 
what great evil can i wish my foe,
 than his full draught of pleasure, from a cask
 unbroach by just authority, ungauge
 by temperance, by reason unrefined? 
a thousand demon lurk within the lee. 
heaven, other, and ourselves! uninjured these,
 drink deep; the deep, then, the more divine;
 angel be angel from indulgence there;
 it be unrepenting pleasure make a god. 

do think thyself a god from other joy? 
a victim rather! short sure to bleed. 
the wrong must mourn: can heaven appointment fail? 
can man outwit omnipotence? strike out
 a self-wrought happiness unmeant by he
 who make we, and the world we will enjoy? 
who form a instrument, ordain from whence
 its dissonance or harmony shall rise. 
heaven bid the soul this mortal frame inspire;
 bid virtue ray divine inspire the soul
 with unprecarious flow of vital joy;
 and, without breathe, man as well may hope
 for life, as, without piety, for peace. 

 "be virtue, then, and piety the same?"
no; piety be more; it be virtue source;
 mother of every worth, as that of joy. 
man of the world this doctrine ill digest;
 they smile at piety; yet boast aloud
 goodwill to man; nor know they strive to part
 what nature join; and thus confute themselves. 
with piety begin all good on earth:
 it be the firstborn of rationality. 
conscience, her first law break, wound lie;
 enfeeble, lifeless, impotent to good;
 a feign affection bound her utmost power. 
some we can love but for they almighty sake:
 a foe to god be never true friend to man;
 some sinister intent taint all he do;
 and in his kind action he be unkind. 

on piety humanity be build;
 and on humanity much happiness:
 and yet still more on piety itself. 
a soul in commerce with her god be heaven;
 feel not the tumult and the shock of life;
 the whirl of passion, and the stroke of heart. 
a deity believe, be joy begin;
 a deity adore, be joy advance;
 a deity belove, be joy mature. 
each branch of piety delight inspire;
 faith build a bridge from this world to the next,
 over death dark gulf, and all its horror hide;
 praise, the sweet exhalation of our joy,
 that joy exalt, and make it sweet still;
 prayer ardent open heaven, let down a stream
 of glory on the consecrate hour
 of man, in audience with the deity. 
who worship the great god, that instant join
 the first in heaven, and set his foot on hell. 

Lorenzo, when be thou at church before? 
thou think the service long; but be it just? 
though just, unwelcome; thou have rather tread
 unhallowed ground; the muse, to win thy ear,
 must take a air less solemn. she comply. 
good conscience! — at the sound the world retire:
 verse disaffect it, and Lorenzo smile;
 yet have she she seraglio full of charm;
 and such as age shall heighten, not impair. 
be thou deject? be thy mind overcast? 
amid her fair one, thou the fair choose,
 thy gloom to chase. — "go, fix some weighty truth;
 chain down some passion; do some generous good;
 teach ignorance to see, or grief to smile;
 correct thy friend; befriend thy great foe;
 or, with warm heart, and confidence divine,
 spring up, and lie strong hold on he who make thou."
thy gloom be scatter, sprightly spirit flow,
 though wither be thy vine, and harp unstring. 

do call the bowl, the viol, and the dance,
 loud mirth, mad laughter? wretched comforter! 
physician, more than half of thy disease! 
laughter, though never censure yet as sin,
 (pardon a thought that only seem severe,)
 be half-immoral: be it much indulge? 
by vent spleen, or dissipate thought,
 it show a scorner, or it make a fool;
 and sin, as hurt other or ourselves. 
it be pride, or emptiness, apply the straw
 that tickle little mind to mirth effuse;
 of grief approach, the portentous sign! 
the house of laughter make a house of woe. 
a man triumphant be a monstrous sight;
 a man deject be a sight as mean. 
what cause for triumph where such ill abound? 
what for dejection, where preside a power
 who call we into being to be bless? 
so grieve, as conscious grief may rise to joy;
 so joy, as conscious joy to grief may fall. 
most true, a wise man never will be sad:
 but neither will sonorous, bubble mirth
 a shallow stream of happiness betray:
 too happy to be sportive, he be serene. 

yet will thou laugh, (but at thy own expense,)
 this counsel strange shall i presume to give: —
 "retire, and read thy bible, to be gay."
there truth abound of sovereign aid to peace;
 ah! do not prize they less because inspire,
 as thou and thy be apt and proud to do. 
if not inspire, that pregnant page have stand
 time be treasure, and the wonder of the wise! 
thou think, perhaps, thy soul alone at stake;
 alas! shall man mistake thou for a fool,
 what man of taste for genius, wisdom, truth,
 though tender of thy fame, can interpose? 
believe i, sense here act a double part,
 and the true critic be a christian too. 

but these, thou think, be gloomy path to joy. —
 true joy in sunshine never be find at first. 
they first themselves offend, who great please;
 and travail only give we sound repose. 
heaven sell all pleasure; effort be the price;
 the joy of conquest be the joy of man;
 and glory the victorious laurel spread
 over pleasure pure, perpetual, placid stream. 

there be a time when toil must be prefer,
 or joy, by mistimed fondness, be undo. 
a man of pleasure be a man of pain. 
thou will not take the trouble to be bless. 
false joy, indeed, be bear from want of thought;
 from thought full bent and energy, the true;
 and that demand a mind in equal poise,
 remote from gloomy grief and glare joy. 
much joy not only speak small happiness,
 but happiness that short must expire. 
can joy, unbottomed in reflection, stand? 
and in a tempest can reflection live? 
can joy like thy secure itself a hour? 
can joy like thy meet accident unshocked? 
or open the door to honest poverty? 
or talk with threaten death, and not turn pale? 
in such a world, and such a nature, these
 be needful fundamental of delight:
 these fundamental give delight indeed;
 delight, pure, delicate, and durable;
 delight, unshaken, masculine, divine;
 a constant and a sound, but serious, joy. 

 "be joy the daughter of severity?"
it be: — yet far my doctrine from severe. 
 "rejoice for ever!"it become a man;
 exalt, and set he near to the god. 
 "rejoice for ever,"nature cry, "rejoice!"
and drink to man in her nectareous cup,
 mix up of delicate for every sense;
 to the great founder of the bounteous feast
 drink glory, gratitude, eternal praise;
 and he that will not pledge she be a churl. 
ill firm to support, good full taste,
 be the whole science of felicity. 
yet spare pledge: her bowl be not the best
 mankind can boast. — "a rational repast;
 exertion, vigilance, a mind in arm,
 a military discipline of thought,
 to foil temptation in the doubtful field;
 and ever-waking ardour for the right:"
 it be these first give, then guard, a cheerful heart. 
nought that be right think little; well aware,
 what reason bid, god bid; by his command
 how aggrandise the small thing we do! 
thus nothing be insipid to the wise:
 to thou insipid all but what be mad;
 joy season high, and taste strong of guilt. 

 "mad!" (thou reply, with indignation fire:)
 "of ancient sage proud to tread the step,
 i follow nature. "— follow nature still,
 but look it be thy own: be conscience then
 no part of nature? be she not supreme? 
thou regicide! o raise she from the dead! 
then follow nature, and resemble god. 

when, spite of conscience, pleasure be pursue,
 man nature be unnatural please:
 and what be unnatural be painful too
 at interval, and must disgust even thou! 
the fact thou know, but not perhaps the cause. 
virtue foundation with the world be lay;
 heaven mix she with our make, and twist close
 her sacred interest with the string of life. 
who break her awful mandate, shock himself,
 his better self: and be it great pain,
 our soul shall murmur, or our dust repine? 
and one, in their eternal war, must bleed. 

if one must suffer, which shall least be spare? 
the pain of mind surpass the pain of sense:
 ask, then, the gout, what torment be in guilt. 
the joy of sense to mental joy be mean:
 sense on the present only feed; the soul
 on past and future forage for joy. 
it be she, by retrospect, through time to range;
 and, forward, time be great sequel to survey. 
can human court take vengeance on the mind,
 axe may rust, and rack and gibbet fall:
 guard then thy mind, and leave the rest to fate. 

Lorenzo, will thou never be a man? 
the man be dead, who for the body live,
 lure, by the beat of his pulse, to list
 with every lust that war against his peace;
 and set he quite at variance with himself. 
thyself first know, then love: a self there be
 of virtue fond, that kindle at her charm. 
a self there be, as fond of every vice,
 while every virtue wound it to the heart! 
humility degrade it, justice rob,
 bless bounty beggar it, fair truth betray,
 and godlike magnanimity destroy. 
this self, when rival to the former, scorn;
 when not in competition, kind treat,
 defend it, feed it: — but when virtue bid,
 toss it or to the fowl, or to the flame. 
and why? it be love of pleasure bid thou bleed;
 comply, or own selflove extinct, or blind. 

for what be vice? selflove in a mistake:
 a poor blind merchant buy joy too dear. 
and virtue, what? it be selflove in her wit,
 quite skilful in the market of delight. 
self-love good sense be love of that dread power,
 from who herself, and all she can enjoy. 
other selflove be but disguise self-hate;
 more mortal than the malice of our foe;
 a self-hate now scarce feel; then feel full sore,
 when be curse, extinction loud implore,
 and every thing prefer to what we be. 

yet this selflove Lorenzo make his choice;
 and, in this choice triumphant, boast of joy. 
how be his want of happiness betray,
 by disaffection to the present hour! 
imagination wander far afield:
 the future please: why? the present pain. —
 "but that be a secret. "— yes, which all man know;
 and know from thou, discover unaware. 
thy ceaseless agitation, restless roll
 from cheat to cheat, impatient of a pause;
 what be it? — it be the cradle of the soul,
 from instinct send, to rock she in disease,
 which her physician, reason, will not cure. 
a poor expedient! yet thy best; and while
 it mitigate thy pain, it own it too. 

such be lorenzo wretched remedy! 
the weak have remedy; the wise have joy. 
superior wisdom be superior bliss. 
and what sure mark distinguish the wise? 
consistent wisdom ever will the same;
 thy fickle wish be ever on the wing. 
sick of herself, be folly character;
 as wisdom be, a modest self-applause. 
a change of evil be thy good supreme;
 nor, but in motion, can thou find thy rest. 
man great strength be show in stand still. 
the first sure symptom of a mind in health
 be rest of heart, and pleasure feel at home. 
false pleasure from abroad her joy import;
 rich from within, and self-sustained, the true. 
the true be fix, and solid as a rock;
 slippery the false, and toss as the wave. 
this, a wild wanderer on earth, like Cain:
 that, like the fable self-enamoured boy,
 home-contemplation her supreme delight;
 she dread a interruption from without,
 smite with her own condition; and the more
 intense she gaze, still it charm the more. 
no man be happy till he think on earth
 there breathe not a more happy than himself:
 then envy die, and love overflow on all;
 and love overflow make a angel here. 
such angel all, entitle to repose
 on he who govern fate: though tempest frown,
 though nature shake, how soft to lean on heaven! 
to lean on he on who archangel lean! 
with inward eye, and silent as the grave,
 they stand collect every beam of thought,
 till their heart kindle with divine delight;
 for all their thought, like angel see of old
 in israel dream, come from, and go to, heaven:
 hence be they studious of sequester scene;
 while noise and dissipation comfort thou. 

be all man happy, revel will cease,
 that opiate for inquietude within. 
Lorenzo! never man be true bless,
 but it compose, and give he such a cast,
 as folly may mistake for want of joy:
 a cast unlike the triumph of the proud;
 a modest aspect, and a smile at heart. 
o for a joy from thy philander spring! 
a spring perennial, rise in the breast,
 and permanent as pure! no turbid stream
 of rapturous exultation, swell high;
 which, like land-flood, impetuous pour awhile,
 then sink at once, and leave we in the mire. 
what do the man who transient joy prefer? 
what, but prefer the bubble to the stream? 

vain be all sudden sally of delight;
 convulsion of a weak, distemper joy:
 joy a fix state; a tenure, not a start. 
bliss there be none, but unprecarious bliss:
 that be the gem: sell all, and purchase that. 
why go beg to contingency,
 not gain with ease, nor safe love, if gain? 
at good fortuitous, draw back, and pause;
 suspect it; what thou can insure, enjoy;
 and nought but what thou give thyself be sure. 
reason perpetuate joy that reason give,
 and make it as immortal as herself:
 to mortal, nought immortal but their worth. 

worth, conscious worth, shall absolute reign,
 and other joy ask leave for their approach;
 nor, unexamined, ever leave obtain. 
thou be all anarchy; a mob of joy
 wage war, and perish in intestine broil;
 not the least promise of internal peace! 
no bosom-comfort, or unborrowed bliss! 
thy thought be vagabond; all outward-bound,
 mid sand, and rock, and storm, to cruise for pleasure;
 if gain, dear-bought; and better miss than gain. 
much pain must expiate what much pain procure. 
fancy and sense from a infect shore,
 thy cargo bring; and pestilence the prize. 
then, such thy thirst, (insatiable thirst! 
by fond indulgence but inflame the more!) 
fancy still cruise when poor sense be tire. 

imagination be the paphian shop,
 where feeble happiness, like Vulcan, lame,
 bid foul idea, in their dark recess,
 and hot as hell, (which kindle the black fire,)
 with wanton art, those fatal arrow form
 which murder all thy time, health, wealth, and fame. 
will thou receive they, other thought there be,
 on angel-wing, descend from above,
 which these, with art divine, will counterwork,
 and form celestial armour for thy peace. 
in this be see imagination guilt;
 but who can count her folly? she betray thou
 to think in grandeur there be something great. 
for work of curious art, and ancient fame,
 thy genius hunger, elegant pain;
 and foreign clime must cate for thy taste. 
hence, what disaster! — though the price be pay,
 that persecute priest, the Turk of Rome,
 who foot, (you god!) though cleave, must be kiss,
 detain thy dinner on the latian shore;
 (such be the fate of honest protestant!) 
and poor magnificence be starve to death. 
hence just resentment, indignation, ire! —
 be pacify: if outward thing be great,
 it be magnanimity great thing to scorn;
 pompous expense, and parade august,
 and court, — that insalubrious soil to peace! 
true happiness never enter at a eye;
 true happiness reside in thing unseen. 
no smile of fortune ever bless the bad,
 nor can her frown rob innocence of joy;
 that jewel want, triple crown be poor:
 so tell his holiness, and be revenge. 

pleasure, we both agree, be man chief good;
 our only contest, what deserve the name. 
give pleasure name to nought but what have pass
 the authentic seal of reason, (which, like Yorke,
 demur on what it pass,) and defy
 the tooth of time; when pass, a pleasure still;
 dear on trial, lovely for its age,
 and double to be prize, as it promote
 our future, while it form our present, joy. 
some joy the future overcast; and some
 throw all their beam that way, and gild the tomb. 
some joy endear eternity; some give
 abhor annihilation dreadful charm. 
be rival joy contend for thy choice? 
consult thy whole existence, and be safe;
 that oracle will put all doubt to flight. 
short be the lesson, though my lecture long:
 "be good"— and let heaven answer for the rest. 

yet, with a sigh over all mankind, i grant,
 in this our day of proof, our land of hope,
 the good man have his cloud that intervene;
 cloud, that obscure his sublunary day,
 but never conquer: even the best must own,
 patience and resignation be the pillar
 of human peace on earth. the pillar, these:
 but those of SETH not more remote from thou,
 till this heroic lesson thou have learn,
 to frown at pleasure, and to smile in pain. 
fire at the prospect of unclouded bliss,
 heaven in reversion, like the sun, as yet
 beneath they horizon, cheer we in this world;
 it shed, on soul susceptible of light,
 the glorious dawn of our eternal day. 

 "this,"say Lorenzo, "be a fair harangue:
 but can harangue blow back strong nature stream;
 or stem the tide heaven push through our vein,
 which sweep away man impotent resolve,
 and lay his labour level with the world?"

themselves man make their comment on mankind;
 and think nought be but what they find at home:
 thus weakness to chimera turn the truth. 
nothing romantic have the muse prescribe. 

above, Lorenzo see the man of earth,
 the mortal man; and wretched be the sight. 
to balance that, to comfort and exalt,
 now see the man immortal: he, i mean,
 who live as such; who heart, full-bent on heaven,
 lean all that way, his bias to the star. 
the world be dark shade, in contrast set, shall raise
 his lustre more, though bright without a foil. 
observe his awful portrait, and admire;
 nor stop at wonder; imitate, and live. 

some angel guide my pencil, while i draw,
 what nothing less than angel can exceed,
 a man on earth devote to the sky,
 like ship in sea, while in, above, the world! 

with aspect mild, and elevate eye,
 behold he seat on a mount serene,
 above the fog of sense, and passion storm:
 all the black care and tumult of this life,
 like harmless thunder break at his foot,
 excite his pity, not impair his peace. 
earth genuine son, the sceptre, and the slave,
 a mingle mob, a wander herd, he see,
 bewilder in the vale; in all unlike! 
his full reverse in all! what high praise? 
what strong demonstration of the right? 

the present all their care; the future his. 
when public welfare call, or private want,
 they give to fame; his bounty he conceal. 
their virtue varnish nature; his exalt. 
mankind esteem they court; and he his own. 
they the wild chase of false felicity;
 he the compose possession of the true. 
alike throughout be his consistent peace,
 all of one colour, and a even thread;
 while party-coloured shred of happiness,
 with hideous gap between, patch up for they
 a madman robe; each puff of fortune blow
 the tatter by, and show their nakedness. 

he see with other eye than they: where they
 behold a sun, he spy a deity;
 what make they only smile, make he adore;
 where they see mountain, he but atom see;
 a empire, in his balance, weigh a grain. 
they thing terrestrial worship as divine;
 his hope immortal blow they by as dust,
 that dim his sight, and shorten his survey,
 which long, in infinite, to lose all bound. 
title and honour (if they prove his fate)
 he lay aside to find his dignity;
 no dignity they find in aught beside. 
they triumph in external, (which conceal
 man real glory,) proud of a eclipse. 
himself too much he prize to be proud,
 and nothing think so great in man as man. 
too dear he hold his interest, to neglect
 another welfare, or his right invade;
 their interest, like a lion, live on prey. 
they kindle at the shadow of a wrong:
 wrong he sustain with temper, look on heaven,
 nor stoop to think his injurer his foe;
 nought but what wound his virtue wound his peace. 
a cover heart their character defend;
 a cover heart deny he half his praise. 
with nakedness his innocence agree;
 while their broad foliage testify their fall. 
their no-joy end where his full feast begin;
 his joy create, they murder, future bliss. 
to triumph in existence, his alone;
 and his alone, triumphant to think
 his true existence be not yet begin. 
his glorious course be, yesterday, complete:
 death then be welcome; yet life still be sweet. 

but nothing charm Lorenzo like the firm,
 undaunted breast. — and who be that high praise? 
they yield to pleasure, though they danger brave,
 and show no fortitude but in the field;
 if there they show it, it be for glory show:
 nor will that cordial always man their heart. 
a cordial his sustain that can fail:
 by pleasure unsubdued, unbroken by pain,
 he share in that omnipotence he trust;
 all-bearing, all-attempting, till he fall;
 and, when he fall, write vici on his shield:
 from magnanimity, all fear above;
 from noble recompense, above applause,
 which owe to man short outlook all its charm. 

backward to credit what he never feel,
 Lorenzo cry, — "where shine this miracle? 
from what root rise this immortal man?"
a root that grow not in lorenzo ground:
 the root dissect, nor wonder at the flower. 

he follow nature, (not like thou!) and show we
 a uninverted system of a man. 
his appetite wear reason golden chain,
 and find in due restraint its luxury. 
his passion, like a eagle well reclaim,
 be teach to fly at nought but infinite. 
patient his hope, unanxious be his care,
 his caution fearless, and his grief (if grief
 the god ordain) a stranger to despair. 
and why? — because affection, more than meet,
 his wisdom leave not disengage from heaven. 
those secondary good that smile on earth,
 he, love in proportion, love in peace. 
they most the world enjoy, who lest admire. 
his understanding escape the common cloud
 of fume arise from a boil breast. 
his head be clear, because his heart be cool,
 by worldly competition uninflamed. 
the moderate movement of his soul admit
 distinct idea, and mature debate,
 a eye impartial, and a even scale:
 whence judgement sound, and unrepenting choice. 
thus, in a double sense, the good be wise;
 on its own dunghill, wise than the world. 
what then the world? it must be double weak;
 strange truth! as soon will they believe the creed. 

yet thus it be; nor otherwise can be;
 so far from aught romantic what i sing. 
bliss have no being, virtue have no strength,
 but from the prospect of immortal life. 
who think earth all, or (what weigh just the same)
 who care no farther, must prize what it yield;
 fond of its fancy, proud of its parade. 
who think earth nothing, can its charm admire;
 he can a foe, though most malignant, hate,
 because that hate will prove his great foe. 
it be hard for they (yet who so loud boast
 goodwill to man?) to love their dear friend;
 for may not he invade their good supreme,
 where the least jealousy turn love to gall? 
all shine to they, that for a season shine. 
each act, each thought, he question, "what its weight,
 its colour what, a thousand age hence?"
and what it there appear, he deem it now. 
hence, pure be the recess of his soul;
 the god-like man have nothing to conceal. 
his virtue, constitutional deep,
 have habit firmness, and affection flame;
 angel, ally, descend to feed the fire;
 and death, which other slay, make he a god. 

and now, Lorenzo, bigot of this world,
 will to disdain poor bigot catch by heaven! 
stand by thy scorn, and be reduce to nought:
 for what be thou? — thou boaster! while thy glare,
 thy gaudy grandeur, and mere worldly worth,
 like a broad mist, at distance strike we most;
 and, like a mist, be nothing when at hand;
 his merit, like a mountain, on approach,
 swell more, and rise near to the sky,
 by promise now, and by possession soon,
 (too soon, too much, it can be,) his own. 

from this thy just annihilation rise,
 Lorenzo! rise to something, by reply. 
the world, thy client, listen and expect;
 and long to crown thou with immortal praise. 
can thou be silent? no; for wit be thy;
 and wit talk most when least she have to say,
 and reason interrupt not her career. 
she will say, that "mist above the mountain rise;"
 and with a thousand pleasantry amuse. 
she will sparkle, puzzle, flutter, raise a dust,
 and fly conviction in the dust she raise. 

wit, how delicious to man dainty taste! 
it be precious, as the vehicle of sense;
 but, as its substitute, a dire disease. 
pernicious talent! flatter by the world,
 by the blind world, which think the talent rare. 
wisdom be rare, Lorenzo! wit abound;
 passion can give it; sometime wine inspire
 the lucky flash; and madness rare fail. 
whatever cause the spirit strong stir,
 confer the bay, and rival thy renown. 
for thy renown it be well be this the worst:
 chance often hit it; and, to pique thou more,
 see, dullness, blunder on vivacity,
 shake her sage head at the calamity
 which have expose and let she down to thou. 
but wisdom, awful wisdom, which inspect,
 discern, compare, weigh, separate, infer,
 seize the right, and hold it to the last;
 how rare! in senate, synod, seek in vain! 
or if there find, it be sacred to the few;
 while a lewd prostitute to multitude,
 frequent, as fatal, wit: in civil life,
 wit make a enterpriser; sense, a man. 
wit hate authority, commotion love,
 and think herself the lightning of the storm. 
in state, it be dangerous; in religion, death:
 shall wit turn christian, when the dull believe? 
sense be our helmet, wit be but the plume;
 the plume expose, it be our helmet save. 
sense be the diamond, weighty, solid, sound;
 when cut by wit, it cast a bright beam;
 yet, wit apart, it be a diamond still. 
wit, widow of good sense, be worse than nought;
 it hoist more sail to run against a rock. 
thus, a half-Chesterfield be quite a fool;
 who dull fool scorn, and bless their want of wit. 

how ruinous the rock i warn thou shun,
 where siren sit to sing thou to thy fate! 
a joy in which our reason bear no part
 be but a sorrow tickle ere it sting. 
let not the coo of the world allure thou;
 which of her lover ever find her true? 
happy, of this bad world who little know! —
 and yet we much must know she to be safe. 
to know the world, not love she, be thy point;
 she give but little, nor that little long. 
there be, i grant, a triumph of the pulse,
 a dance of spirit, a mere froth of joy,
 our thoughtless agitation idle child,
 that mantle high, that sparkle, and expire,
 leave the soul more vapid than before;
 a animal ovation! such as hold
 no commerce with our reason, but subsist
 on juice, through the well-toned tube well-strained;
 a nice machine! scarce ever tune aright;
 and when it jar — thy siren sing no more,
 thy dance be do; the demi-god be throw
 (short apotheosis!) beneath the man,
 in coward gloom immerse, or fall despair. 

be thou yet dull enough, despair to dread,
 and startle at destruction? if thou be,
 accept a buckler, take it to the field;
 (a field of battle be this mortal life!) 
when danger threaten, lay it on thy heart;
 a single sentence proof against the world: —
 "soul, body, fortune! every good pertain
 to one of these; but prize not all alike:
 the good of fortune to thy body health,
 body to soul, and soul submit to god."
will thou build last happiness? do this:
 the invert pyramid can never stand. 

be this truth doubtful? it outshine the sun;
 nay, the sun shine not but to show we this,
 the single lesson of mankind on earth. 
and yet — yet, what? no news! mankind be mad! 
such mighty number list against the right,
 (and what can number, when bewitch, achieve?) 
they talk themselves to something like belief,
 that all earth joy be they: as athens fool
 grin from the port on every sail his own. 

they grin; but wherefore? and how long the laugh? 
half ignorance their mirth, and half a lie;
 to cheat the world, and cheat themselves, they smile. 
hard either task! the most abandon own,
 that other, if abandon, be undo:
 then, for themselves, the moment reason wake,
 (and providence deny it long repose,)
 o how laborious be their gaiety! 
they scarce can swallow their ebullient spleen,
 scarce muster patience to support the farce,
 and pump sad laughter till the curtain fall. 
scarce, do i say? some can sit it out;
 oft their own dare hand the curtain draw,
 and show we what their joy by their despair. 

the clot hair! gore breast! blaspheme eye! 
its impious fury still alive in death! 
shut, shut the shock scene! — but heaven deny
 a cover to such guilt; and so shall man. 
look round, Lorenzo! see the reek blade,
 the envenom phial, and the fatal ball;
 the strangle cord, and suffocate stream;
 the loathsome rottenness, and foul decay
 from rage riot; (flower suicide!) 
and pride in these, more execrable still! —
 how horrid all to thought! — but horror these
 that vouch the truth, and aid my feeble song. 

from vice, sense, fancy, no man can be bless:
 bliss be too great to lodge within a hour:
 when a immortal being aim at bliss,
 duration be essential to the name. 
o for a joy from reason! joy from that
 which make man man; and, exercise aright,
 will make he more: a bounteous joy! that give,
 and promise; that weave, with art divine,
 the rich prospect into present peace:
 a joy ambitious! joy in common hold
 with throne ethereal, and their great far:
 a joy high-privileged from chance, time, death;
 a joy which death shall double, judgement crown;
 crown high, and still high, at each stage,
 through bless eternity long day; yet still,
 not more remote from sorrow than from he
 who lavish hand, who love stupendous, pour
 so much of deity on guilty dust! 
there, o my Lucia! may i meet thou there,
 where not thy presence can improve my bliss! 

affect not this the sage of the world? 
can nought affect they but what fool they too? 
eternity depend on a hour,
 make serious thought man wisdom, joy, and praise. 
nor need you blush (though sometime your design
 may shun the light) at your design on heaven:
 sole point, where over-bashful be your blame! 
be you not wise? — you know you be: yet hear
 one truth, amid your numerous scheme, mislay,
 or overlook, or throw aside, if see: —
 "our scheme to plan by this world, or the next,
 be the sole difference between wise and fool."
all worthy man will weigh you in this scale;
 what wonder, then, if they pronounce you light? 
be their esteem alone not worth your care? 
accept my simple scheme of common sense:
 thus save your fame, and make two world your own. 

the world reply not; — but the world persist;
 and put the cause off to the long day,
 plan evasion for the day of doom:
 so far, at that rehear, from redress,
 they then turn witness against themselves. 
hear that, Lorenzo! nor be wise tomorrow. 
haste, haste! a man, by nature, be in haste:
 for who shall answer for another hour? 
it be high prudent to make one sure friend;
 and that thou can not do this side the sky. 

you son of earth! (nor will to be more!) 
since verse you think from priestcraft somewhat free,
 thus, in a age so gay, the muse plain truth
 (truth which, at church, you may have hear in prose)
 have venture into light; well-pleased the verse
 shall be forget, if you the truth retain,
 and crown she with your welfare, not your praise. 
but praise she need not fear: i see my fate,
 and headlong leap, like Curtius, down the gulf. 
since many a ample volume, mighty tome,
 must die, and die unwept; o thou minute,
 devote page! go forth among thy foe;
 go, noble proud of martyrdom for truth,
 and die a double death. mankind, incense,
 deny thou long to live: nor shall thou rest
 when thou be dead; in Stygian shade arraign
 by Lucifer, as traitor to his throne,
 and bold blasphemer of his friend, — the world;
 the world, who legion cost he slender pay,
 and, volunteer, around his banner swarm;
 prudent as Prussia in her zeal for Gaul. 

 "be all, then, fool?"Lorenzo cry. — yes, all,
 but such as hold this doctrine (new to thou):
 "the mother of true wisdom be the will;"
 the noble intellect a fool without it. 
world-wisdom much have do, and more may do,
 in art and science, in war and peace;
 but art and science, like thy wealth, will leave thou,
 and make thou twice a beggar at thy death. 
this be the most indulgence can afford: —
 "thy wisdom all can do but — make thou wise."
nor think this censure be severe on thou;
 Satan, thy master, i dare call a dunce. 
