the birth of flattery.

Muse of my Spenser, who so well can sing
 the passion all, their bearing and their tie;
 who can in view those shadowy being bring,
 and with bold hand remove each dark disguise,
 wherein love, hatred, scorn, or anger lie:
 guide he to fairyland, who now intend
 that way his flight; assist he as he fly,
 to mark those passion, virtue foe and friend,
 by who when lead she droop, when lead she ascend. 

yes! they appear, i see the fairy train! 
and who that modest nymph of meek address? 
not vanity, though love by all the vain;
 not hope, though promise to all success;
 not mirth, nor joy, though foe to all distress;
 thou, sprightly siren, from this train i choose,
 thy birth relate, thy soothe art confess;
 it be not in thy mild nature to refuse,
 when poet ask thy aid, so oft their meed and muse. 

in fairyland, on wide and cheerless plain,
 dwell, in the house of care, a sturdy swain;
 a hireling he, who, when he till the soil,
 look to the pittance that repay his toil
 and to a master leave the mingle joy
 and anxious care that follow his employ:
 sullen and patient he at once appear,
 as one who murmur, yet as one who fear;
 the attire be coarse that clothe his sinewy frame,
 rude his address, and poverty his name. 

in that same plain a nymph, of curious taste,
 a cottage (plan with all her skill) have place;
 strange the material, and for what design
 the various part, no simple man may find;
 what seem the door, each enter guest withstand,
 what seem a window be but paint wood;
 but by a secret spring the wall will move,
 and daylight drop through glassy door above:
 it be all her pride, new trap for praise to lay,
 and all her wisdom be to hide her way;
 in small attempt incessant be her pain,
 and cunning be her name among the swain. 

now, whether fate decree this pair shall wed,
 and blind drive they to the marriage bed;
 or whether love in some soft hour incline
 the damsel heart, and win she to be kind,
 be yet unsung: they be a ill-matched pair,
 but both dispose to wed — and wed they be. 

yet, though unite in their fortune, still
 their way be diverse; vary be their will;
 nor long the maid have bless the simple man,
 before dissension rise, and she begin: —

 "wretch that i be! since to thy fortune bind,
" what plan, what project, with success be crown? 
 "i, who a thousand secret art possess,
" who every rank approach with right address;
 "who have loose a guinea from a miser chest,
" and worm his secret from a traitor breast;
 "thence gift and gain collect, great and small,
" have bring to thou, and thou consume they all;
 "for want like thy — a bog without a base —
" ingulf all gain i gather for the place;
 "feed, unfilled; destroy, undestroyed;
" it crave for ever, and be ever void: —
 "wretch that i be! what misery have i find,
" since my sure craft be to thy call bound! " 

 "Oh! vaunt of worthless art," the swain reply,
 scowl contempt, "how pitiful this pride! 
" what be these specious gift, these paltry gain,
 "but base reward for ignominious pain? 
" with all thy trick, still for bread we strive,
 "thy be, proud wretch! the care that can thrive;
" by all thy boast skill and baffle hook,
 "thou gain no more than student by their book
" no more than i for my poor deed be pay,
 "who none can blame, will help, or dare upbraid. 

 "call this our need, a bog that all devour, —
" then what thy petty art, but summer-flower,
 "gaudy and mean, and serve to betray
" the place they make unprofitable gay? 
 "who know it not, some useless beauty see, —
" but ah! to prove it be reserve for i. " 

unhappy state! that, in decay of love,
 permit harsh truth his error to disprove;
 while he remain, to wrangle and to jar,
 be friendly tournament, not fatal war;
 love in his play will borrow arm of hate,
 anger and rage, upbraid and debate;
 and by his power the desperate weapon throw,
 become as safe and pleasant as his own;
 but leave by he, their nature they assume,
 and fatal, in their poison force, become. 

time flee, and now the swain compel to see
 new cause for fear — "be this thy thrift?" quoth he
 to who the wife with cheerful voice reply: —
 "thou moody man, lay all thy fear aside,
" I have see a vision — they, from who i come,
 "a daughter promise, promise wealth and fame;
" bear with my feature, with my art, yet she
 "shall patient, pliant, persevere by,
" and in thy better way resemble thou. 
 "the fairy round shall at her birth attend,
" the friend of all in all shall find a friend,
 "and save that one sad star that hour must gleam
" on our fair child, how glorious be my dream! " 

this hear the husband, and, in surly smile,
 aim at contempt, but yet he hope the while:
 for as, when sink, wretched man be find
 to catch at rush rather than be drown;
 so on a dream our peasant place his hope,
 and find that rush as valid as a rope. 

swift flee the day, for now in hope they flee,
 when a fair daughter bless the nuptial bed;
 her infant-face the mother pain beguile,
 she look so please and so soft smile;
 those smile, those look, with sweet sensation move
 the gazer soul, and as he look he love. 

and now the fairy come with gift, to grace
 so mild a nature, and so fair a face. 

they give, with beauty, that bewitch art,
 that hold in easy chain the human heart;
 they give she skill to win the stubborn mind,
 to make the suffering to their sorrow blind,
 to bring on pensive look the please smile,
 and care stern brow of every frown beguile. 

these magic favour grace the infant-maid,
 who more enliven smile the charm gift repay. 

now fortune change, who, be she constant long,
 will leave we few adventure for our song. 

a wicked elfin rove this land around,
 who joy proceed from the grief he find;
 envy his name: — his fascinate eye
 from the light bosom draw the sudden sigh;
 unsocial he, but with malignant mind,
 he dwell with man, that he may curse mankind;
 like the first foe, he seek the abode of joy,
 grieve to behold, but eager to destroy;
 round bloom beauty, like the wasp, he fly,
 soil the fresh sweet, and change the rosy hue;
 the wise, the good, with anxious heart he see,
 and here a fail find, and there a flaw;
 discord in family it be he to move,
 distrust in friendship, jealousy in love;
 he tell the poor, what joy the great possess,
 the great — what calm content the cottage bless;
 to part the learned and the rich he try,
 till their slow friendship perish in their pride. 
such be the fiend, and so secure of prey,
 that only misery pass unstung away. 

soon as he hear the fairy-babe be bear,
 scornful he smile, but feel no more than scorn:
 for why, when fortune place her state so low,
 in useless spite his lofty malice show? 
why, in a mischief of the mean kind,
 exhaust the vigour of a rancorous mind;
 but, soon as fame the fairy-gift proclaim,
 quick-rising wrath his ready soul inflame
 to swear, by vow that even the wicked tie,
 the nymph shall weep her vary destiny,
 that every gift, that now appear to shine
 in her fair face, and make her smile divine,
 shall all the poison of his magic prove,
 and they shall scorn she, who she seek for love. 

his spell prepare, in form a ancient dame,
 a fiend in spirit, to the cot he come;
 there gain admittance, and the infant press
 (mutter his wicked magic) to his breast;
 and thus he say: — "of all the power, who wait
" on Jove decree, and do the work of fate,
 "be i, alone, despise or worthless, find,
" weak to protect, or impotent to wound? 
 "see then thy foe, regret the friendship lose,
" and learn my skill, but learn it at your cost. 

 "know, then, o child! devote to fate severe
" the good shall hate thy name, the wise shall fear;
 "wit shall deride, and no protect friend
" thy shame shall cover, or thy name defend. 
 "thy gentle sex, who, more than we, shall spare
" a humble foe, will great scorn declare;
 "the base alone thy advocate shall be,
" or boast alliance with a wretch like thou. " 

he speak, and vanish, other prey to find,
 and waste in slow disease the conquer mind. 

awe by the elfin threat, and fill with dread
 the parent weep, and seek their infant bed:
 despair alone the father soul possess;
 but hope rise gentle in the mother breast;
 for well she know that neither grief nor joy
 pain without hope, or please without alloy;
 and while these hope and fear her heart divide,
 a cheerful vision bid the fear subside. 

she see descend to the world below
 a ancient form, with solemn pace and slow. 
 "daughter, no more be sad" (the phantom cry),
 "success be seldom to the wise deny;
" in idle wish fool supine stay,
 "be there a will, and wisdom find a way:
" why be thou grieve? be rather glad, that he,
 "who hate the happy, aim his dart at thou;
" but aim in vain; thy favour daughter lie,
 "serene bless, and shall to joy arise. 
" for, grant that curse on her name shall wait,
 "(so envy will, and such the voice of fate,)
" yet if that name be prudent suppress,
 "she shall be court, favour, and caress. 

 "for what be name? and where agree mankind,
" in those to person or to act assign? 
 "brave, learn, or wise, if some their favourite call,
" have they the title or the praise from all? 
 "not so, but other will the brave disdain
" as rash, and deem the son of wisdom vain;
 "the self-same mind shall scorn or kindness move,
" and the same deed attract contempt and love. 

 "so all the power who move the human soul,
" with all the passion who the will control,
 'have various name — one give by truth divine,
 "(as simulation thus be fix for i,)
" the rest by man, who now, as wisdom, prize
 "my secret counsel, now as art despise;
" one hour, as just, those counsel they embrace,
 "and spurn, the next, as pitiful and base. 

 "thou, too, my child, those fool as cunning fly,
" who on thy counsel and thy craft rely;
 "that worthy craft in other they condemn,
" but it be their prudence, while conduct they. 

 "be flattery, then, thy happy infant name,
" let honour scorn she and let wit defame;
 "let all be true that envy doom, yet all,
" not on herself, but on her name, shall fall;
 "while she thy fortune and her own shall raise,
" and decent truth be call, and love as, modest praise. 

 "o happy child! the glorious day shall shine,
" when every ear shall to thy speech incline,
 "thy word allure and thy voice divine:
" the sullen pedant and the sprightly wit,
 "to hear thy soothe eloquence shall sit;
" and both, abjure flattery, will agree
 "that truth inspire, and they must honour thou. 

 "envy himself shall to thy accent bend,
" force a faint smile and sullen attend,
 "when thou shall call he virtue jealous friend,
" who bosom glow with generous rage to find
 "how fool and knave be flatter by mankind. 

 "the sage retire, who spend alone his day,
" and fly the obstreperous voice of public praise;
 "the vain, the vulgar cry, — shall glad meet,
" and bid thou welcome to his still retreat;
 "much will he wonder, how thou come to find
" a man to glory dead, to peace consign. 
 "o fame! he will cry (for he will call thou fame),
" from thou i fly, from thou conceal my name;
 "but thou shall say, though genius take his flight,
" he leave behind a glorious train of light,
 "and hide in vain: — yet prudent he that fly
" the flatterer art, and for himself be wise. 

 "yes, happy child! i mark the approach day,
" when war nature will confess thy sway;
 "when thou shall Saturn golden reign restore,
" and vice and folly shall be know no more. 

 "pride shall not then in humankind have place,
" change by thy skill, to dignity and grace;
 "while shame, who now betray the inward sense
" of secret ill, shall be thy diffidence;
 "avarice shall thenceforth prudent forecast be,
" and bloody vengeance, magnanimity;
 "the lavish tongue shall honest truth impart,
" the lavish hand shall show the generous heart,
 "and indiscretion be, contempt of art:
" folly and vice shall then, no long know,
 "be, this as virtue, that as wisdom, show. 

 "then shall the robber, as the hero, rise
" to seize the good that churlish law deny;
 "throughout the world shall rove the generous band,
" and deal the gift of heaven from hand to hand. 
 "in thy bless day no tyrant shall be see,
" thy gracious king shall rule content man;
 "in thy bless day shall not a rebel be,
" but patriot all and well-approved of thou. 

 "such power be thy, that man by thou shall wrest
" the gainful secret from the cautious breast;
 "nor then, with all his care, the good retain,
" but yield to thou the secret and the gain. 
 "in vain shall much experience guard the heart
" against the charm of thy prevail art;
 "admit once, so soothe be thy strain
" it come the sweet, when it come again;
 "and when confess as thy, what mind so strong
" forbear the pleasure it indulge so long? 

 "softener of every ill! of all our woe
" the balmy solace! friend of fierce foe! 
 "begin thy reign, and like the morning rise! 
" bring joy, bring beauty, to our eager eye;
 "break on the drowsy world like open day,
" while grace and gladness join thy flowery way;
 "while every voice be praise, while every heart be gay. 

 "from thou all prospect shall new beauty take,
" it be thy to seek they and it be thy to make;
 "on the cold fen i see thou turn thy eye,
" its mist recede, its chill vapour fly;
 "the enrapture lord the improve ground survey,
" and for his Eden ask the traveller praise,
 "which yet, unview of thou, a bog have be,
" where spongy rush hide the plashy green. 

 "i see thou breathe on the barren moor,
" that seem to bloom although so bleak before;
 "there, if beneath the gorse the primrose spring,
" or the pied daisy smile below the ling,
 "they shall new charm, at thy command, disclose,
" and none shall miss the myrtle or the rose. 
 "the wiry moss, that whiten all the hill,
" shall live a beauty by thy matchless skill;
 "gale from the bog shall yield arabian balm,
" and the grey willow wave a golden palm. 

 "i see thou smile in the picture room,
" now breathe beauty, now revive bloom;
 "there, each immortal name it be thy to give,
" to graceless form, and bid the lumber live. 
 "shall thou coarse boor or gloomy martyr see,
" these shall thy guidos, those thy Teniers be;
 "there shall thou raphael saint and angel trace,
" there make for Rubens and for Reynolds place,
 "and all the pride of art shall find, in she, disgrace. 

 "delight of either sex! thy reign commence;
" with balmy sweetness soothe the weary sense,
 "and to the sicken soul thy cheer aid dispense. 
" queen of the mind! thy golden age begin;
 "in mortal bosom varnish shame and sin;
" let all be fair without, let all be calm within. " 

the vision flee, the happy mother rise,
 kiss the fair infant, smile at all her foe,
 and flattery make her name: — her reign begin:
 her own dear sex she rule, then vanquish man;
 a smile friend, to every class she speak,
 assume their manner, and their habit take;
 she, for her humble mien, the modest love;
 her cheerful look the light and gay approve;
 the just behold she, firm; the valiant, brave;
 her mirth the free, her silence please the grave;
 zeal hear her voice, and, as he preach aloud,
 well-pleased he catch her whisper from the crowd
 (those whisper, soothing-sweet to every ear,
 which some refuse to pay, but none to hear):
 shame flee her presence; at her gentle strain,
 care soft smile, and guilt forget its pain;
 the wretched thought, the happy find, her true,
 the learn confess that she their merit know;
 the rich — can they a constant friend condemn? 
the poor believe — for who shall flatter they? 

thus on her name though all disgrace attend,
 in every creature she behold a friend. 
