the thirteenth book of Virgil.

write by maphoeus vegius.

translate into english verse, by Moses Mendes, esq. 

the thirteenth book of Virgil.

deform in dust now Turnus press the ground,
 the soul indignant rush from the wound,
 while eminent amid the gaze band,
 like Mars himself, the trojan victor stand;
 groan thick in consort from the latians rise,
 and every heart in every bosom die. 

as the tall wood bewail in hollow sound,
 by storm impel, her honour on the ground:
 now, fix in earth their spear, the humble foe
 rest on their sword, and target from they throw;
 condemn the thirst of battle, and abhor
 the dread fury of destructive war;
 submit to all the conqueror shall impose,
 and pardon crave and end of all their woe. 

as when two bull, inflame with martial rage,
 impetuous in the bloody fight engage,
 to each his herd incline, who anxious wait
 the dubious conflict, and their champion fate;
 but, one victorious, other dame in awe
 from their foil chief their former faith withdraw:
 they grieve indeed, but join with one accord
 to share the fortune of a happy lord. 

so the rutulians, strike with mighty dread,
 though deep their sorrow for their leader dead,
 yet now the phrygian glorious arm will join,
 conduct by a leader so divine;
 and a firm league of last peace implore,
 that cruel war may vex their life no more. 
then stride over the foe, the ghastly dead,
 the trojan chief expostulate say:

 "what madness seize thou, daunian, in the thought,
 that we by heaven appointment hither bring,
 here plant by the thunderer decree,
 can from our mansion be expel by thou? 
oh rash, the will celestial to oppose,
 to anger Jove, and make the god thy foe. 
at length the utmost of thy rage be do
 against teucer race with breach of league begin:
 lo, future time from this instructive day
 almighty Jove shall fear to disobey;
 and learn from dread example, to abhor
 the crime of kindle, without cause, a war. 
now boast thy arm: a noble corpse thou be lay;
 since such a price thou for Lavinia pay:
 nor yet shall fame to thy dishonour tell,
 that thou defeat by eneas fall. 
but, oh rutulians, bear away your chief,
 funereal rite perform, indulge your grief;
 with all his arm your hero i restore,
 except the belt which erst young Pallas wear;
 that, to his hoary sire i mean to send,
 perhaps some comfort may the gift attend:
 the sullen joy that slake revenge bestow,
 may sooth his soul, and mollify his woe. 
and you, ausonians, under better star
 shall lead your legion to successful war,
 if justice wield the sword. i never seek
 to harm your friend, but self-defending fight,
 to save my own the hostile steel i draw,
 fate crown my honest aim, and frown on you."

eneas say, and seek with inward joy
 the wall that hold the poor remains of Troy;
 mean while his troop their well-loved chief attend,
 and with reproach the conquer host offend:
 their shout triumphant echo to the sky,
 the mettleed courser neigh, and seem to fly. 

the pious trojan ere he light the fire
 due to his friend upon the sacred pyre,
 by other flame begin his just return,
 and to the god each holy altar burn;
 observant ever of his country rite,
 the mitred priest devote heifer smite. 
the clamorous swine increase the heap of slay,
 and milkwhite lambkin plead for life in vain. 
forth from each victim be the entrails tear,
 and piecemeal cut, in sacred charger bear. 
they strip the fleecy mother of her pride,
 and roast fire the attendant throng provide:
 from deepmouthed urn they pour upon the shrine
 their due libation to the god of wine. 
with grateful incense they the power invoke,
 and from each altar curl the fragrant smoke. 
the choral band the hymn appoint sing
 to thou, o Venus, and to heaven great king;
 saturnian Juno hear her praise with joy,
 her rage abate tower the son of Troy. 
Mars too be sing, and then the numerous host
 of minor god, who seat aetherial boast. 
eneas with his hand to heaven address,
 and fold young Iülus to his breast,
 bespeak the boy; "at length, my only son,
 our toil be over, the task of war be do,
 at length approach the long wished-for hour
 to clasp soft quiet, now within our power. 
soon as the morn shall open the gate of day
 to yond proud wall, o wing thy speedy way:"
 next to his friend he turn he graceful round,
 "you son of Ilion, ever-faithful find,
 too long, alas, we have stranger be to ease,
 the brunt of battle, and the rage of sea
 have be our lot, a scene of endless pain
 involve we all, but better day remain;
 our pang be past, our suffering all be over,
 peace, dove-eyed peace, salute we on this shore;
 for know, Lavinia shall be firm i,
 and trojan shall with latian blood combine;
 from who great mixture shall a nation spring,
 to give the world one universal king,
 who wide domain shall stretch from pole to pole,
 where earth be see, or mighty ocean roll. 
then, dear companion, with th'ausonian band
 in peace and concord share this happy land;
 the good Latinus as your king obey,
 for who more just, more fit for regal sway. 
this have i fix; by i be teach to dare
 the rough approach of invasive war,
 by i instruct, suffer as you ought,
 nor on the god cast one unhallowed thought;
 by heaven i swear, my friend so often try,
 now wanton fortune combat on my side,
 the toil you have suffer, and the danger past,
 shall meet with ample usury at last."

so speak the chief, revolve in his mind
 the various fortune that attend mankind,
 rejoice to see the object of his care
 safe, through his mean, from tempest, rage, and war. 
as when a kite in many a whirl ring
 intent on blood, come stoop on the wing,
 the anxious hen, for her young brood in dread,
 the fell destroyer hover over their head,
 whet her sharp bill, the invader to engage,
 and urge by fondness conquer lawless rage;
 the tyrant fly, nor yet her fear suppress,
 she call each feather wanderer to her breast,
 there shield they close, and count they over and over,
 and danger overpass regard no more:
 Anchises son thus to his band of Troy
 by former woe enhance present joy,
 the peril past of battle, land and sea,
 be sweet remembrance to a heart at ease,
 for which the hero grateful homage pay
 to every god, and hymn the thunderer praise. 

the sad rutulians their dead leader bear,
 and the last office for the chief prepare,
 the clamorous sorrow catch all around,
 Latinus hear the melancholy sound;
 presage fear his anxious breast divide:
 but when he see the wound in Turnus side,
 he quick catch the epidemic woe,
 his bosom heave, his eye in torrent flow,
 in graceful guise he wave his sceptre hand,
 and order silence to the intrude band,
 who come in cluster throng to the plain,
 to view the feature of the mighty slay. 

as when the foam boar, who dog surround,
 rip up their generous chief with mortal wound,
 the howl pack about the hunter throng,
 and seem to call he to avenge the wrong;
 the well know signal of his hand and voice
 reduce their tumult, and compose the noise:
 Latinus silence thus the clamorous train,
 and a dumb sorrow dwell on all the plain;
 the solemn pause the good old monarch break,
 and the big drop fall from he as he speak. 

 "what scene of various ill, of care, and strife,
 await poor mortal on this sea of life;
 pride find in crown her pleasure all complete,
 delude wretch to call a poison sweet;
 ambition hasten to the dusty field,
 can death, can danger soft contentment yield? 
the example now be recent to your eye,
 young Turnus fate shall teach you to be wise. 
beneath the glitter throne that bear a king
 be poniard hide, and aspy dart their sting:
 few, few alas, a monarch care behold,
 he sigh in purple, and repine in gold,
 control to act against his own intent,
 and when he sigh for peace, to be consent. 

 "ah, what avail, mistake Turnus say,
 to urge my people to the lawless fray,
 to break that knot which sacred faith have tie,
 and war against those with who the immortal side? 
it be with regret the sword of rage i draw,
 for ah too well the consequence i know. 
oft have i see thou on thy bound steed,
 in burnish arm the will nation lead,
 as oft my prayer have soothe thou from the plain;
 but sober prudence counsel rage in vain. 

 "my city thin, be nod to their fall,
 each useless fortress weep her ruin wall,
 a sanguine dye, once happy river yield,
 and latian courser whiten every field:
 ah i, what scene attend latinus age,
 grief, devastation, war, despair, and rage! 

 "farewell, once more. ah, Turnus, where be now
 that warmth for glory, and that awful brow? 
that please face, by youth more please dress,
 now shock the sight that once charm every breast. 
ah i! what horror shall on Daunus wait,
 when he shall hear his turnus rigid fate! 
what sting of sorrow shall his bosom tear,
 and ardea son their monarch grief shall share! 
yet soil with dust, and grim with clot blood,
 cleanse the pale corpse in yonder silver flood,
 perhaps some ease his father heart may feel,
 to know he sink beneath a hero steel."

he speak and weep, and turn to the train,
 they raise the body off the dusty plain,
 place on a bier, to ardea wall they tend,
 a horrid present to a sire to send. 

shield, horse, sword, the prize of the war,
 be bear aloft, next move the rattle car,
 still wet with phrygian blood. metiscus now
 move slow on, and sorrow cloud his brow;
 metiscus, bear to tame the generous steed,
 do in procession turnus courser lead. 
the noble beast, who never before know fear,
 now shake, and drop the sympathize tear. 
full oft have he he dare master lead,
 where the war thunder, and the nation bleed,
 to death, to danger, never know to yield,
 the pride, the fear, the glory of the field. 

invert arm the follow legion bear,
 and stuiek of sorrow pierce the yield air. 
through night dull shade they march, while latium king
 deep in his palace feel keen sorrow sting,
 foresee strange horror: widow, maid, and wife,
 young man and old, all anxious for their life,
 join in one shrill complaint: thus surge roar,
 when press by wind, they break upon the shore. 

nor yet have Daunus hear, his son no more
 shall cheer his age, or what his army bear
 in sullen pomp approach ardea wall,
 another grief the pensive monarch call:
 for while the latin have engage in fight,
 and war-like Turnus glory in his might,
 involve flame have seize his native land,
 and ardea town be level to the sand. 
beyond the star ascend sparkle fly,
 and gleamy horror blaze through the sky. 
so will the god; perhaps the crumb'le wall
 in omen dread predict Turnus fall;
 the affright citizen in dread array,
 through flame and death pursue their dubious way;
 the shriek of matron witness their despair,
 and cloud of smoke involve the darken air. 

as careful ant for future want provide,
 where a old oak present she rive side,
 but if the ax the shelter timber wound,
 or bring its leafy honour to the ground,
 among the crowd what care tumultuous rise,
 this way and that the sable cohort fly;
 or as the tortoise broil on the fire,
 when on her back, unable to retire,
 with head, with foot, with tail declare her pain,
 and try all strength and stratagem in vain:
 thus ardea son, beset with peril round,
 and wild confusion, no deliverance find;
 when from amid the flame be see to rise
 with clap wing, a fowl that cut the sky:
 it be Ardea, but transform, and she ever while
 with turret crown, and many a stately pile,
 now, give the city name and mark to bear,
 on ample pinion flit around in air. 
fix with dismay the astonish vulgar gaze,
 nor further fly to shun the dreadful blaze;
 but who a monarch sorrow can relate,
 a monarch tremble for his country fate,
 doom tale of fresh affliction soon to know,
 doom to a sad variety of woe. 

the solemn train approach now too near,
 and Turnus corpse behold upon the bier;
 black torch, so their country rite demand,
 each sad attendant carry in his hand;
 a general sorrow seize all the crowd,
 the timorous matron, in affliction loud,
 pierce heaven blue arch, their flow garment tear,
 beat their soft breast, and rend their flow hair. 
but when the father hear his Turnus slay,
 he seem a statue fix upon the plain:
 but soon his sorrow find a different way,
 he fly like lightning where the body lie,
 the breathless corpse he hold in grapple fast,
 and, tongue-tied long by grief, find word at last. 

 "my son, my son! my age last relief,
 thy sire late glory, now his cause of grief;
 prop of my age, and guardian of my throne,
 which totter to its fall now thou be go:
 comfort no more her heal balm will shed,
 my Turnus fall, and Daunus peace be flee. 
be these the trophy of thy vast renown? 
be these the glory of a add crown? 
be these the honour of extend power,
 o fortune, giddy as the whirl hour? 
man build up scheme for she to overturn,
 we grasp at sceptre, and possess a urn:
 and thou, who, late a whole nation joy,
 do drive thy thunder on the son of Troy,
 now lie a empty form of lifeless clay,
 our hope no long, nor the foe dismay. 
no more that tongue shall listen croud persuade,
 no more that face shall charm each gaze maid,
 no more that form shall catch the admire view,
 those eye no more their lustre shall renew;
 thy port majestic no one now shall prize,
 in art of peace, ah, Turnus. vain wise;
 Mars crop thy honour in their vernal bloom,
 and every virtue withereth on thy tomb. 
urge on to war, too eager in thy hate,
 thou rush to sight, and half-way meet thy fate. 
o death, relentless, thy unerring blow
 strike down the great, and lay the haughty low;
 king, prince, people, his dread rigor fear,
 and shrink to dust when he approach near. 
insatiate power, among the old and young,
 each day over who thy sable stole be fling,
 can not thy hand arrest-one single dart,
 that through a son have rive a parent heart? 
Amata happy! now at endless rest,
 thy slaughter son move not thy quiet breast. 
say, say, you power! have i yet more to dread? 
what drive you next on this devote head? 
you crop my blossom in his early spring,
 and blaze Ardea flutter on the wing. 
yet what be Ardea? for my child i moan. 
the loss of he be every loss in one;
 some woe superior be for i decree,
 i have it now, and be a wretch indeed. 
when once the fate have mark their destine prey,
 each various ill pursue he on his way;
 this way and that the faint wretch be hurl,
 the sport of heaven, and pity of the world."

no more he say, but down his reverend cheek,
 in scald stream, the briny torrent break;
 thick groan distend his breast, his eye-ball stare,
 and all his look be horror and despair. 

so when a fawn be from th'embow'ring grove,
 truss by the bird of thunder-bearing Jove,
 the hapless mother shake with deadly fear,
 and give what aid she can, a fruitless tear. 

now from the portal of the rosy sky
 the morn arise, earth bear vapour fly;
 when good Latinus, find that it be vain
 to try the fortune of the warlike plain,
 (for his pale legion shudder at the word,
 and almost wish to call eneas, lord,)
 he much revolve of former breach of vow,
 the truce infringe, and long-disputed spouse. 
at length a solemn embassy be send,
 a thousand man select for that intent;
 commission these the virtuous chief implore,
 to waste Laurentum with his arm no more;
 to quiet hostile rage among the band,
 and visit friendly old latinus land. 

with these want sage verse in wisdom lore,
 well skill to plead, and prince stand before:
 instruct to declare their king desire,
 to accomplish what the awful god require;
 and as they will, that Troy and latium blood
 shall flow commingled in one common flood,
 he yield glad to their wise decree,
 and wish the dardan and their chief to see. 

mean while Latinus cheer the anxious crew,
 relate his measure, and his pious view;
 hope swell their bosom, and expel their fear,
 the news in transport all Ausonia hear. 

now the glad city ring with peal of joy,
 and all prepare to meet the son of Troy,
 not in the plain in warfare to contend,
 but as to meet a brother or a friend. 
the royal court be deck with double care,
 worthy the chief who shall be short there. 

the appoint envoy reach the camp design,
 their reverend head fair olive-branch bind,
 of peace the token, and their tongue no less
 of friendly talk the full intent profess. 
within his palace, venus god-like son
 with kind demeanour welcome every one;
 to who thus drance, drance, first in age,
 and who against Turnus nourish endless rage:

 "o trojan chief! thy phrygia chief boast,
 in virtue first, and mighty of the host,
 our royal master swear by all the power,
 (hear i, immortal, in your heavenly bower)
 that against his will the treaty swear, he break,
 or do to fight your valiant band provoke;
 but inly wish to gratify the choice
 the god have make, by his assent voice;
 to give his daughter to thy long arm,
 Lavinia, fame for virtue, as for charm. 
but if stern rage have turn his view aside,
 if sea of blood have flow on either side;
 if mad fury, reason over come,
 o powerful chief, let Turnus bear the blame;
 his busy mind disdain all peace and rest,
 and flood of gall overflow his rancorous breast. 
long our Latinus steadfast deny
 to lend his troop, and against his will comply:
 even then our army wish the frantic boy
 will yield obedience to the chief of Troy. 
our monarch too request nation join;
 but say, can reason bend the stubborn mind? 
can human reason hope for weight or force,
 when not the god can turn his impious course? 
in dire portent they speak their will in vain,
 his rage renew, he hurry to the plain,
 where his reward the dare caitiff find;
 overbear by thou, he bite the bloody ground. 
ah, wicked youth! in tartarus black shade
 contract new nuptial with some Stygian maid;
 if rage and fury still be thy delight,
 in Acheron display thy skill in fight. 
but thou, the happy heir of latium throne,
 who all our people their protector own;
 who ample praise be with rapture sing,
 who glorious deed untie the infant tongue;
 our youth, our sage, and each sober dame,
 with one accord all celebrate thy name:
 that Turnus fall by thou we all rejoice,
 believe not i, but hear a nation voice;
 on thou, the latians turn a eye of joy,
 Latinus wait thou. o thou son of Troy,
 forbear a while to seek the shade of night,
 in full expectance of the nuptial rite;
 so shall the italian and the phrygian race
 join in one stock, which time shall never efface. 
then haste, great chief! thy conduct be our care,
 to gain those honour thou be bear to wear."

he say; the shout band his sense approve,
 and former hate give way to new-born love:
 to which the pious hero smile kind,
 thus speak the gentle dictate of his mind:

 "the rage of combat, and past scene of woe,
 you and your king be guiltless of i know:
 Turnus alone provoke the martial strife,
 lavish of blood, and prodigal of life;
 a rage passion for delusive fame
 too oft we find the youthful breast inflame;
 then tell your king his will shall be obey,
 with rapture i embrace the latian maid,
 and peace eternal swear. nor till the power
 have stop the course of good latinus hour,
 shall his imperial sceptre grace these hand;
 but, bear a king, he still shall rule these land. 
another city shall my Trojans find,
 where add household god shall bless the ground;
 lavinia name shall grace the rise town,
 and equal law unite band shall own:
 may love and friendship spread through all the host,
 and Troy and Latium in one name be lose. 
what now remain but with a pious care
 to burn those corpse that insect the air,
 sad victim of the war, who ravenous hand
 smite mighty hero, and destroy a land? 
that business do, tomorrow sun shall guide
 the happy lover to his bloom bride."

he say; the attentive people round he gaze,
 his virtue charm they, and they shout his praise. 
now see the busy legion all around,
 tree crack'le fall, and axe loud resound;
 with holy zeal they shape the different pyre,
 and high to heaven ascend the curl fire;
 thick cloud of smoke mount slow to the sky,
 a thousand sheep, appoint victim, die;
 the blood of swine impurple all the plain,
 and in the flame they cast the heifer slay:
 no more the field be load with the dead,
 and noisy shout around the plain be spread;
 at length the sun diffuse his golden ray,
 and all prepare to hasten on their way. 
eneas first his fiery steed bestride,
 and at his side the reverend drance ride,
 who much bespeak the chief; the next to sight
 Ascanius come, in youthful honour bright:
 the good Aletes, deep wear with age,
 Ilioneus, and Mnestheus, worthy sage;
 serestus and sergestus pass along,
 and valiant Gyas, and cloanthus strong. 
in band commix, the follow troop succeed,
 for so the friendly leader have decree. 

now on laurentum wall, a gape train
 view the procession move over the plain;
 each citizen exult with inward joy,
 to think the sword no long shall destroy. 

Latinus from the town, a certain way
 with choose friend, to meet the trojan, lie:
 nor can the crowd the god-like chief conceal,
 the mighty prince his action all reveal;
 high over the rest in graceful pomp he tread,
 each action speak the offspring of a god. 

thus meet, the leader of the latian band
 address the chief, and press his friendly hand:

 "at length, thou glory of the trojan race,
 my hope be complete, for i behold thy face. 
to i at length the happy hour be give,
 to clasp the choice favourite of heaven;
 with joy to yield to the divine decree,
 that here have fix a rest place for thou. 
long toss through peril, here thy rigour cease,
 these land, these happy land, enjoy in peace. 
though furious rage that know not ever to yield,
 though Jove shall frown, have drench with blood the field,
 though lawless licence arm her harpy claw,
 and wild boast violate law;
 yet i, alas, unwilling comply,
 with tear, not blood, latinus steel be die:
 deceive my legion fight, and he who most,
 in Jove despite, attack thy pious host,
 now lie a carcass on the barren sand,
 victim of heaven, and of thy mighty hand. 
no more the trumpet shall awake to arm
 thy martial soul, that bend to Hymen charm. 
some realm i have, and town my own i call,
 fit for defence, and girdle with a wall:
 yet of all object that my soul engage,
 lavinia chief, the comfort of my age;
 she and her charm, o mighty son, be thy,
 in this embrace i the sweet maid resign. 
dear to my soul, thy virtue i adore,
 spring from my loin, i can not love thou more."

to who eneas, "when that reverend head
 meet my glad sight, by hoary time overspread,
 i soon conclude that battle stubborn rage
 be never the option of thy prudent age;
 if thou have fear, oh, give they to the wind,
 in thou, oh monarch, i a father find;
 believe thy son, when'er that form i view,
 the thought of good Anchises rise anew;
 again his figure in full sight appear,
 and filial duty melt i into tear."

now to the palace hastes the royal pair,
 the latian crowd confess the stranger fair;
 maid, woman, boy, and hoary sire combine
 to praise the beauty of their guest divine. 
but chief eneas strike their wondrous eye:
 his fair demeanour, and superior size,
 catch every gazer, and sincere their praise
 attend the chief who bless with peace their day. 

as when long rain have drench the genial plain,
 in gloomy sadness sit each pensive swain;
 with arm enfold, and deject brow,
 the farmer weep his unavailing blow:
 but clad in splendour shall the sun arise,
 and pour his golden glory through the sky,
 they haste exult to their honest care,
 and wind earth bosom with the crooked share:
 so the ausonians lull their mind to ease,
 and shout and revel at the approach of peace. 

Latinus now have reach the palace gate,
 eneas join, Iülus swell the state;
 Trojans, italian, march in pomp along,
 and the court brighten with a noble throng:
 by matron circle, and by virgin lead
 appear the partner of eneas bed;
 her eye like star diffuse a lustre round,
 her modest eye she rivet to the ground. 
soon as the trojan see the beauteous maid,
 he gaze, he love, and thus in secret say:
 "i blame not, Turnus, thy ambitious rage,
 for such a prize who will not in war engage? 
to taste such beauty, such transcendent charm,
 king rouse the nation, and the world be in arm."

the sacred priest fast by the altar stand,
 and join in marriage-bond their plight hand:
 with peal of joy the vault roof resound,
 and hymeneal song be waft all around. 
and now Achates, by his prince fore-taught,
 from out the camp the various present bring. 
vest work with gold which hector consort give,
 ere yet the greek have cross the briny wave;
 a collar too, who gem emit flame,
 and once the honour of the princely dame:
 nor be forget a bowl insculpture high,
 pond'ious to bear, and beauteous to the eye,
 which on anchises board do whilom blaze,
 the gift of Priam in his happy day. 
this for Latinus good Achates bring,
 such royal present king may send to king:
 but the gay robe, and collar radiant pride,
 be just destine for the bloom bride. 

now converse sweet, and joy without allay,
 deceive the wing hour, and close day;
 the genial feast be serve in sumptuous state,
 for luxury, at time, become the great. 
on purple couch all the noble lie,
 the teach attendant wait attentive by;
 from crystal urn be live water pour,
 and every dainty load the regal board. 
bright Ceres here provide her gift divine,
 and the red god bestow his choice wine. 
with eye attentive every waiter stand,
 and fly to execute each guest command. 
this serve the charger, that the mantling bowl,
 and crowd in billow seem to wave, and roll. 
Latinus near Iülus at the board,
 hear he with transport, and devour each word;
 for in the godlike youth at once combine,
 the grace of feature with the worth of mind;
 his manly talk, his observation sage,
 bespeak a judgement riper than his age. 
nor can the king withhold his honest praise,
 "take this embrace, thou wonder of thy day:
 thrice bless eneas, sure the god conspire
 to make each son add lustre to the sire."

the banquet end, some their talk employ
 on grecian battle, and the fall of Troy:
 now of laurentum broil, what shrink band
 flee from the foe, or dare opposer hand;
 who first break through the rank with furious force,
 and through the slaughter urge his foam horse. 
but much eneas and Latinus tell
 of latium ancient deed, and hero old;
 how Saturn fly from his offspring rage,
 in fair Hesperia hide his hoary age,
 hence Latium call: he teach to raise the vine,
 and the force earth her bounty to resign;
 a wander race, and mountain-bred he tame,
 by art improve they, and with law reclaim. 
again Jove seek his father realm, to taste
 electra beauty, and the dame embrace,
 whence Dardanus be bear: his brother slay
 by his own hand, he flee across the main. 
from Corythus he flee, with numerous band,
 and safe settle on the phrygian land. 
proud of his birth, he in his banner bear
 the bird of Jove, which after, Hector wear. 
much fame he win, which time shall never destroy,
 the immortal founder of imperial Troy. 
to choral air the high-roofed palace ring,
 the torch blaze, the minstrel sweep the string;
 trojan and latians to the sound advance,
 and mingle friendly in the mazy dance. 
for thrice three day in revelry and joy
 they drown their care: at length the chief of Troy
 to other task direct his curious eye,
 mark out by plough shall destine city rise;
 here form they trench, there dig ditch wide,
 when, strange to say, the phrygian leader spy
 a blaze glory round lavinia head,
 which to the sky its flamy honour spread. 
he stand aghast, nor know what mean the sign;
 but thus his prayer address: "o king divine,
 of man and god! if ever my trojan band
 have unrepining follow thy command,
 still through all peril or by land or sea
 to thou have pray, have sacrifice to thou;
 if i have lead they to these pious deed,
 explain this omen that belief exceed. 
ah may no dire portent our peace oppose,
 be end here, o Jove! our various woe."
while thus he pray, his mother lie conceal
 behind a cloud; but, soon to sight reveal,
 thus sooth her son: "thy doubt and care give over,
 interpret right the happiness in store
 the god predict. peace spread her olive wand,
 and buxom plenty crown the laugh land. 
the lambient glory round Lavinia see,
 portend the god-like issue of the queen;
 from she a mighty race of chief shall rise,
 who fame immortal shall ascend the sky;
 the vanquish world with pride shall wear their chain,
 realm far divide by the sea in vain. 
this flame, great Jove from high Olympus send;
 fame yet reserve be mark by this portent;
 her share of honour let Lavinia claim,
 call thy new city by her happy name. 
thy household god, escape from burn Troy,
 shall in these wall a double peace enjoy;
 with pious awe their kindly love revere,
 for know they ever shall inhabit here. 
with such affection for these realm they burn,
 that force from hence again they shall return;
 no other clime their godhead deign to bless,
 then, my best son, thy happiness confess. 
over trojan band thy legal sway maintain,
 until good Latinus seek the elysian plain;
 then double sceptre shall my offspring grace,
 ruler of Troy, and latium hardy race:
 one common law shall bind they all in one,
 no fell division, and distinction none. 
yet mark, o mark, what still remain for thou,
 the god consent fix the kind decree,
 thy day spin out, thou shall not mix with earth,
 more honour claim thy virtue and thy birth;
 it be thy to enter in the bless abode,
 vanquish proud fate, and mingle with the god."
she speak, and quick dart from the sight,
 streak the thin ether with a trail of light. 

the hero stand revolve in his mind
 the various bounty which the power design;
 peace crown his day, Latinus yield to fate,
 the pious trojan rule the happy state,
 full wide extend his undisputed sway,
 and all alike one common king obey;
 their rite, their custom, and their will the same,
 as citizen they share one general name. 

and now the mother of each smile love,
 prostrate, and tremble at the throne of Jove,
 bespeak the god: "almighty sire of heaven! 
to who the rule of the world be give,
 who read mankind, and see the heart intent,
 ere yet the lip have give the secret vent,
 thy sacred promise let a goddess claim,
 a goddess plead for the trojan name:
 do thou not vow in pity of their woe,
 to ease their suffering by a bless repose? 
nor can i tax thy promise make in vain,
 three year have peace behold this happy plain;
 yet think, o Jove, to sooth a mother care,
 there yet remain a seat in heaven to spare
 for great eneas, who transcend all praise:
 speak thy decree, thy humble suppliant raise. 
past mortal strength his grow virtue rise,
 too great for earth, he ripen for the sky."
to who the mighty power with look serene. 
but first he raise, and kiss the cyprian queen:

 "thy mighty son and all his powerful band
 that much i love, bear witness sea and land,
 my arm have snatch they from each peril near,
 and at their suffering Jove have shed a tear
 for thy fair sake. my Juno now relent,
 and to my grant, overcome, at length consent. 
then it be decree, his virtue shall prevail,
 purge off each part that make the mortal frail,
 then add he to the star; shall other rise
 of equal merit, they shall share the sky."
the god assent, and Juno vex no more,
 request the boon she often cross before. 

quick from the starry pole fair Venus glide,
 and where numicus roll through reed his tide,
 she dip her son, and wash well away
 each gross particle of mortal clay;
 the part divine to heaven the goddess bear,
 and the just prince aetherial honour share. 
he as their god the Julian race invoke,
 for he do temple rise, and sacred altar smoke. 
