a epistle to lady Bowyer.

how much of paper spoil what flood of ink! 
and yet how few, how very few can think! 
the knack of write be a easy trade;
 but to think well require — at least a head. 
once in a age, one genius may arise,
 with wit well-cultured, and with learning wise. 
like some tall oak, behold his branch shoot!
 no tender scion spring at the root. 
while lofty pope erect his laureled head,
 no lay, like i, can live beneath his shade. 
nothing but weed, and moss, and shrub be find. 
cut, cut they down, why cumber they the ground? 

and yet you will have i write! — for what? for who? 
to curl a favourite in a dressing-room? 
to mend a candle when the snuff too short? 
or save rappee for chamber-maid at court? 
glorious ambition! noble thirst of same! —
 no, but you will have i write — to get a name. 
alas! i will live unknown, unenvied too;
 it be more than pope, with all his wit can do. 
it be more than you, with wit and beauty join,
 a please from, and a discern mind. 
the world and i be no such cordial friend;
 i have my purpose, they their various end. 
i say my prayer, and lead a sober life,
 nor laugh at Cornus, or at Cornus 'wife. 
what be fame to i, who pray, and pay my rent? 
i my friend know i honest, i be content. 

well, but the joy to see my work in print! 
my self too picture in a mezzo-tint! 
the preface do, the dedication frame,
 with lie enough to make a lord ashamed! 
thus i step forth; a authoress in some sort. 
my patron name?  "o choose some lord at court. 
" one that have money which he do not use,
 one you may flatter much, that be, abuse. 
for if you be nice, and can change your note,
 regardless of the trim, or untrimmed coat;
 believe i, friend, you will never beworth a groat. " 
well then, to cut this mighty matter short,
 i have neither friend, nor interest at court. 
quite from saint James to thy stair, Whitehall,
 i hardly know a creature, great or small,
 except one maid of honour, worth they all. 
i have no business there. let those attend
 the courtly levee, or the courtly friend,
 who more than fate allow they, dare to spend. 
or those who avarice, with much, crave more,
 the pension beggar, or the title poor. 
these be the thrive breed, the tiny great! 
slave! wretched slave! the journeyman of state! 
philosopher! who calm bear disgrace,
 patriot! who sell their country for a place. 

shall i for these disturb my brain with rhyme? 
for these, like Bavius creep, or glencus climb? 
shall i go late to rest, and early rise,
 to be the very creature i despise? 
with face unmoved, my poem in my hand,
 cringe to the porter, with the footman stand? 
perhaps my lady maid, if not too proud,
 will stoop, you will say, to wink i from the crowd. 
will entertain i, till his lordship dress,
 with what my lady eat, and how she rest:
 how much she give for such a birthday gown,
 and how she trampt to every shop in town. 

sick at the news, impatient for my lord,
 i be force to hear, nay smile at every word. 
Tom rap at last, — "his lordship beg to know
 your name? your business?" — sir, i be not a foe. 
i come to charm his lordship listen ear
 with verse, soft as music of the sphere. 
 "verse! — alas! his lordship seldom read:
 pedant indeed with learning stuff their head;
 but my good lord, as all the world can tell,
 read not even tradesman bill, and scorn to spell. 
but trust your lay with i. some thing i'veread,
 be bear a poet, though no poet breed:
 and if i find they will bear my nice view,
 i will recommend your poetry — and you." 

shock at his civil impudence, i start,
 pocket my poem, and in haste depart;
 resolve no more to offer up my wit,
 where footman in the seat of critic sit. 

be there a lord who great unspotted soul,
 not place, pension, ribbon can control;
 unlace, unpowdered, almost unobserved,
 eat not on silver, while his train be starve;
 who though to noble, or to king ally,
 dare walk on foot, while slave in coach ride;
 with merit humble, and with greatness free,
 have bow to Freeman, and have dine with i;
 who breed in foreign court, and early know,
 have yet to learn the cunning of his own;
 to title bear, yet heir to no estate,
 and, hard still, to honest to be great;
 if such a one there be, wellbred, polite? 
to he i will dedicate, for he i will write. 

peace to the rest. i can be no man slave;
 i ask for nothing, though i nothing have. 
by fortune humble, yet not sink so low
 to shame a friend, or fear to meet a foe. 
meanness, in ribbon or in rag, i hate;
 and have not learn to flatter, even the great. 
few friend i ask, and those who love i well;
 what more remain, these artless line shall tell. 

of honest parent, not of great, i come;
 not know to fortune, quite unknown to fame. 
frugal and plain, at no man cost they eat,
 nor know a baker, or a butcher debt. 
o be their precept ever in my eye! 
for one have learn to live, and one to die. 
long may her widow age by heaven be lend
 among my blessing! and I be well content. 
i ask no more, but in some calm retreat,
 to sleep in quiet, and in quiet eat. 
no noisy slave attend round my room;
 my viand wholesome, and my waiter dumb. 
no orphan cheat, and no widow curse,
 no household lord, for better or for worse. 
no monstrous sum to tempt my soul to sin,
 but just enough to keep i plain, and clean. 
and if sometime, to smooth the rugged way,
 Charlot shall smile, or you approve my lay,
 enough for i. i can put my trust
 in lord; smile lie, eat toad, or lick the dust. 
fortune her favour much too dear may hold:
 a honest heart be worth its weight in gold. 
