the mimic.

by the reverend mr. PITT.

the mimic have ductile feature claim my lay,
change to a thousand shape, a thousand way:
who with variety of art put on
all other person, and throw off his own;
who look well discipline his will obey,
bloom at command, or at command decay:
nor blush, my muse, those change to impart,
which ask a ovid or apollo art.

but who, Apollo, all the art can trace,
all the deceit of that delusive face?
for lo! in sight the various artist come;
lo! how in beauty and in health he bloom:
its smoothe charm triumphant youth supply,
laugh in his check, and sparkle in his eye.
but sudden see, the scene be snatch away,
see each invert feature in decay;
his muscle all relax, his face overgrow,
rough and emboss with wrinkle not his own.

he trail his dangle leg: the wonder train
laugh at the solemn conduct of his cane;
rapt through the scene of life, he drop his prime;
a cripple sixty year before his time;
run in a moment all his stage over,
and step from four-and-twenty to fourscore.

now he a venerable judge appear,
and the long garb of lazy purple wear;
like drowsy p** look his age frame,
his mien, his habit, and address the same:
when to the sneer crowd he lisp a joke,
pun from the law, or quibble out of coke;
with settle air, and most judicious face,
nod over the cushion, counsel, and the case;
slumber, and hear by start the noisy train;
catch a period, and drop down again.
and now his hearer in their turn to lull,
himself stand up most venerable dull;
talk of old time; commend their loyal zeal,
their wholesome statute, discipline, and ale;
on different theme bestow one common praise,
the Thames, the street, the king, and king highway.

you see he quit the bench, and strait appear
a huge old gouty counsel at the bar;
bawl for his client, wrest the torture law
from their true sense, and mould they to the cause;
in solemn form harangue the listen crowd,
and hem and cough emphatical loud;
bless art indeed! and glorious eloquence,
where empty noise supply the want of sense.
for meaning, sign, and motion he afford,
and interjection for the want of word.
what shape to you, o s**, be unknown!
what face, but you adopt into your own!
at the least hint, fictitious crowd you raise,
and multiply yourself ten thousand way:
this moment, to indulge the mirthful vein,
a fool or doctor person you sustain;
the next resume yourself and sense again.

be i deceive? or by some sudden slight,
a starch tub-preacher now he strike the sight,
(quick the transition, and unseen the art!)
pale and entire change in every part,
his shorten visage, and fantastic dress,
the mad fantastic to the life express;
that small silk cap; those puritanic hair,
crop to the quick, and circle round his ear;
that round face the mimic here proclaim,
how very different, yet how still the same!
now he, by just degree, his-silence break;
his frantic silence mutter ere he speak:
protract hum the solemn farce begin,
and groan and pause interrupt the scene;
as each in just succession come and go,
work to its pitch, the spirit strong grow,
and squeeze out his eye, and twang his vocal nose.
now quick and rapid, and in rage more loud,
a storm of nonsense burst upon the crowd:
he hand and voice proclaim the general doom,
while this the hourglass shake, and that the room.
on nature ruin all his doctrine dwell,
and throw wide open every gate of hell.

a thousand other shape he wear with grace;
a thousand more variety of face:
but who, in every shape, can count he over,
who multiply his person every hour?
what muse his fly feature can pursue,
or keep his wander countenance in view?
have i a thousand mouth, a thousand tongue,
a throat of brass, and adamantine lung,
i can not celebrate this proteus skill,
who shift his person and his face at will;
this Proteus, who outnumber host alone;
a crowd himself; a multitude in one.
