at see archbishop williams monument in Carnarvonshire.

in that remote and solitary place,
which the sea wash, and circle hill embrace,
where those lone wall amid the grove arise,
all that remain of thou, fame Williams, lie.
thither, sequester shade, creation nook,
the wander muse her pensive journey take,
curious to trace the statesman to his home,
and moralise at leisure over his tomb:
she come not, with the pilgrim, tear to shed,
mutter a vow, or trifle with a bead,
but such a sadness do her thought employ,
as life within the neighbourhood of joy.
reflect much upon the mighty shade,
his glory, and his misery, she say:

"how poor the lot of the once-honoured dead!
perhaps the dust be Williams, that we tread.
the learn, ambitious, politic, and great,
statesman, and prelate, this alas! thy fate.
can not thy Lincoln yield her pastor room,
can not thy York supply thou with a tomb?
be it for this thy lofty genius soar,
caress by monarch and by crowd adore?
for this, thy hand over rival can prevail,
grasp by turn the crosier and the seal?
who dare on laud meredian power to frown,
and on aspire Buckingham look down.
this thy gay morn, — but ere the day decline
cloud gather, and adversity be thy.
doom to behold thy country fierce alarm,
what have thy tremble age to do with arm?
thy land dragoon, thy palace in dust,
why be thy life protract to be curse?
thy king in chain, — thyself by lawless might
strip of all power, and exile from thy right.

awhile the venerable hero stand,
and stem with quiver limb the boisterous flood;
at length, overmatch by injury and time,
steal from the world and seek his native clime.
cambria for he with moan her region fill:
she weep his downfal from a thousand hill:
tender embrace her prelate though undo,
stretch out her mother-rock to hide her son:
search, while alive, each vale for his repast,
and, when he die, receive he in her breast.
envy ambition! what be all thy scheme,
but wake misery, or please dream,
slide and totter on the height of state!
the subject of this verse declare thy fate.
great as he be, you see how small the gain,
a burial so obscure, a muse so mean.
