[the farmer boy; a rural poem.]

spring.

spring.

i 

o come, bless spirit! whatsoever thou be,
 thou rush warmth that hover round my heart,
 sweet inmate, hail! thou source of sterling joy,
 that poverty itself can destroy,
 be thou my muse; and faithful still to i,
 retrace the path of wild obscurity. 
no deed of arm my humble line rehearse,
 no alpine wonder thunder through my verse,
 the roar cataract, the snow-top hill,
 inspire awe, till breath itself stand still:
 nature sublime scene never charm my eye,
 nor science lead i through the boundless sky;
 from mean object far my rapture flow:
 o point these rapture! bid my bosom glow! 
and lead my soul to ecstacy of praise
 for all the blessing of my infant day! 
bear i through region where gay fancy dwell;
 but mould to truth be fair form what memory tell. 

live, trifle incident, and grace my song,
 that to the humble menial belong;
 to he who drudgery unheeded go,
 his joy unreckoned as his care or woe:
 though joy and care in every path be sow,
 and youthful mind have feeling of their own;
 quick spring sorrow, transient as the dew;
 delight from trifle, trifle ever new. 
it be thus with Giles: meek, fatherless, and poor;
 labour his portion, but he feel no more;
 no stripe, no tyranny his step pursue;
 his life be constant, cheerful, servitude;
 strange to the world, he wear a bashful look,
 the field his study, nature be his book;
 and, as revolve season change the scene
 from heat to cold, tempestuous to serene,
 though every change still vary his employ,
 yet each new duty bring its share of joy. 

where noble Grafton spread his rich domain,
 round euston water vale, and slope plain,
 where wood and grove in solemn grandeur rise,
 where the kite brood, unmolested fly;
 the woodcock and the paint pheasent race,
 and skulk fox, destine for the chace;
 there Giles, untaught and unrepining, stray
 through every copse, and grove, and wind glade;
 there his first thought to nature charm incline,
 that stamp devotion on the inquire mind. 
a little farm his generous master till,
 who with peculiar grace his station fill;
 by deed of hospitality endear,
 serve from affection, for his worth revere:
 a happy offspring bless his plenteous board,
 his field be fruitful, and his barn well store,
 and fourscore ewe he feed, a sturdy team,
 and low cow that graze beside the stream:
 unceasing industry he keep in view;
 and never lack a job for Giles to do. 

flee now the sullen murmur of the north,
 the splendied raiment of the spring peep forth;
 her universal green, and the clear sky,
 delight still more and more the gaze eye. 
wide over the field, in rise moisture strong,
 shoot up the simple flower, or creep along
 the mellow soil; imbibe as it go
 fresh sweet from frequent shower and evening dew;
 that summon from its shed the slumber plough,
 while health impregnate every breeze that blow. 
no wheel support the dive point share;
 no groan ox be doom to labour there;
 no helpmate teach the docile steed his road;
 (alike unknown the plow-boy and the goad;)
 but, unassisted through each toilsome day,
 with smile brow the ploughman cleave his way,
 draw his fresh parallel, and widen still,
 tread slow the heavy dale, or climb the hill:
 strong on the wing his busy follower play,
 where writhe earthworm meet the unwelcome day;
 till all be change, and hill and level down
 assume a livery of sober brown:
 again disturb, when Giles with weary stride
 from ridge to ridge the ponderous harrow guide;
 his heel deep sink every step he go,
 till dirt usurp the empire of his shoe. 
welcome green headland! firm beneath his foot;
 welcome the friendly bank refresh seat! 
there, warm with toil, his pant horse browse. 
their shelter canopy of pendent bough,
 till rest, delicious, chase each transient pain,
 and new-born vigour swell in every vein. 
hour after hour, and day to day succeed,
 till every clod and deep-drawn furrow spread
 to crumble mould; a level surface clear,
 and strew with corn to crown the rise year;
 and over the whole Giles once transverse again,
 in earth moist bosom bury up the grain. 
the work be do; no more to man be give;
 the grateful farmer trust the rest to heaven. 
yet oft with anxious heart he look around,
 and mark the first green blade that break the ground:
 in fancy see his tremble oat uprun,
 his tuft barley yellow with the sun;
 see cloud propitious shed their timely store,
 and all his harvest gather round his door. 
but still unsafe the big sowln grain below,
 a favourite morsel with the rook and crow;
 from field to field the flock increase go;
 to level crop most formidable foe:
 their danger well the wary plunderer know,
 and place a watch on some conspicuous bough;
 yet oft the skulk gunner by surprise
 will scatter death among they as they rise. 
these, hang in triumph round the spacious field,
 at best will but a short-lived terror yield:
 nor guard of property; (not penal law,
 but harmless rifleman of rag and straw);
 familiarise to these, they bold rove,
 nor heed such centinel that never move. 
let then your bird lie prostrate on the earth,
 in die posture, and with wing stretch forth;
 shift they at eve or morn from place to place,
 and death shall terrify the pilfer race;
 in the mid air, while circle round and round,
 they will call their lifeless comrade from the ground;
 with quicken wing, and note of loud alarm,
 warn the whole flock to shun the impend harm. 

this task have Giles, in field remote from home:
 oft have he wish the rosy morn to come. 
yet never fame be he nor foremost find
 to break the seal of sleep; his sleep be sound:
 but when at day-break summon from his bed,
 light as the lark that carol over his head,
 his sandy way deep-worn by hasty shower,
 overarch with oak that form fantastic bower,
 wave aloft their tower branch proud,
 in borrow tinge from the eastern cloud,
 (whence inspiration, pure as ever flow,
 and genuine transport in his bosom glow)
 his own shrill matin join the various note
 of nature music, from a thousand throat:
 the blackbird strive with emulation sweet,
 and echo answer from her close retreat;
 the sport white-throat on some twig end bear,
 pour hymn to freedom and the rise morn;
 stop in her song perchance the start thrush
 shake a white shower from the black-thorn bush,
 where dew-drop thick as early blossom hang,
 and tremble as the minstrel sweet sing. 
across his path, in either grove to hide,
 the timid rabbit scout by his side;
 or bold cock-pheasant stalk along the road,
 who gold and purple tint alternate glow. 
but grove no further fence the devious way;
 a wide-extended heath before he lie,
 where on the grass the stagnant shower have run,
 and shine a mirror to the rise sun,
 (thus double see) light a distant wood,
 give new life to each expand bud;
 efface quick the dewy foot-mark find,
 where prowl Reynard tread his nightly round;
 to shun who theft it be Giles evening care,
 his feather victim to suspend in air,
 high on the bough that nod over his head,
 and thus each morn to strew the field with dead. 

his simple errand do, he homeward hie;
 another instant its place supply. 
the clatter dairy-maid immerse in steam,
 sing and scrub midst her milk and cream,
 bawl out, "go fetch the cow: ..." he hear no more;
 for pig, and duck, and turkey, throng the door,
 and sit hen, for constant war prepare;
 a concert strange to that which late he hear. 
straight to the meadow then he whistle go:
 with wellknown halloo call his lazy cow:
 down the rich pasture heedless they graze,
 or hear the summon with a idle gaze;
 for well they know the cow-yard yield no more
 its tempt fragrance, nor its wintery store. 
reluctance mark their step, sedate and slow;
 the right of conquest all the law they know:
 subordinate they one by one succeed;
 and one among they always take the lead,
 be ever foremost, wheresoever they stray;
 allow precedence, undisputed sway;
 with jealous pride her station be maintain,
 for many a broil that post of honour gain. 
at home, the yard afford a grateful scene,
 for spring make even a miry cow-yard clean. 
thence from its chalky bed behold convey
 the rich manure that drench winter make,
 which pile near home, grow green with many a weed,
 a promise nutriment for autumn seed. 
forth come the maid, and like the morning smile;
 the mistress too, and follow close by Giles. 
a friendly tripod form their humble seat,
 with pail bright scour, and delicate sweet. 
where shadow elm obstruct the morning ray,
 begin their work, begin the simple lay;
 the full-charged udder yield its will stream,
 while mary sing some lover amorous dream;
 and crouch Giles beneath a neighbour tree
 tugs over his pail, and chant with equal glee:
 who hat with tatter brim, of knap so bare,
 from the cow side purloin a coat of hair,
 a mottle ensign of his harmless trade,
 a unambitious, peaceable cockade. 
as unambitious too that cheerful aid
 the mistress yield beside her rosy maid;
 with joy she view her plenteous reek store,
 and bear a brimmer to the dairy door;
 her cow dismiss, the luscious mead to roam,
 till eve again recall they load home. 
and now the dairy claim her choice care,
 and half her household find employment there:
 slow roll the churn, its load of clog cream
 at once forego its quality and name;
 from knotty particle first float wide
 congeal butter be dash from side to side;
 stream of new milk through flow cooler stray,
 and snow-white curd abound, and wholesome whey. 
due north the unglazed window, cold and clear,
 for warn sunbeam be unwelcome here. 
brisk go the work beneath each busy hand,
 and Giles must trudge, whoever give command;
 a Gibeonite, that serve they all by turn:
 he drain the pump, from he the faggot burn;
 from he the noisy hog demand their food;
 while at his heel run many a chirp brood,
 or down his path in expectation stand,
 with equal claim upon his strew hand. 
thus waste the morn, till each still pleasure see
 the bustle over, and press the new-made cheese. 

unrivaled stand thy country cheese, o Giles! 
who very name alone engender smile;
 who fame abroad by every tongue be speak,
 the wellknown butt of many a flinty joke,
 that pass like current coin the nation through;
 and, ah! experience prove the satire true. 
provision grave, thou ever crave mart,
 dependant, huge metropolis! where art
 her pore thousand stow in breathless room,
 midst poisonous smoke and steam, and rattle loom;
 where grandeur revel in unbounded store;
 restraint, as slight stranger at their door! 
thou, like a whirlpool, drain the country round,
 till London market, London price, resound
 through every town, round every pass load,
 and dairy produce throng the eastern road:
 delicous veal, and butter, every hour,
 from Essex lowland, and the bank of stour;
 and further far, where numerous herd repose,
 from orwell brink, from weveny, or ouse. 
hence Suffolk dairy-wife run mad for cream,
 and leave their milk with nothing but its name;
 its name derision and reproach pursue,
 and stranger tell of "three time skim sky-blue." 
to cheese convert, what can be its boast? 
what, but the common virtue of a post! 
if drought overtake if fast than the knife,
 most fair it bid for stubborn length of life,
 and, like the oaken shelf whereon it be lay,
 mock the weak effort of the bend blade;
 or in the hog-trough rest in perfect spite,
 too big to swallow, and too hard to bite. 
inglorious victory! you Cheshire mead,
 or severn flowery dale, where plenty tread,
 be your rich milk to suffer wrong like these,
 farewell your pride! farewell renown cheese! 
the skimmer dread, who ravage alone
 thus turn the mead sweet nectar into stone. 

neglect now the early daisy lie;
 nor thou, pale primrose, bloom the only prize:
 advance spring profuse spread abroad
 flower of all hue, with sweet fragrance store;
 wherever she tread, love gladden every plain,
 delight on tiptoe bear she lucid train;
 sweet hope with conscious brow before her fly,
 anticipate wealth from summer sky;
 all nature feel her renovate sway;
 the sheep-fed pasture, and the meadow gay;
 and tree, and shrub, no long bud see,
 display the new-grown branch of light green;
 on airy down the shepherd idle lie,
 and see tomorrow in the marble sky. 
here then, my soul, thy darling theme pursue,
 for every day be Giles a shepherd too. 

small be his charge; no wild have tay to roam,
 but bright enclosure circle round their home. 
nor yellow-blossomed furze, nor stubborn thorn,
 the heath rough produce, have their fleece tear;
 yet ever rove, ever seek thou,
 enchant spirit, dear variety! 
o happy tenant, prisoner of a day! 
release to ease, to pleasure, and to play;
 indulge through every field by turn to range,
 and taste they all in one continual change. 
for through luxuriant their grassy food,
 sheep long confine but loathe the present good;
 instinctive they haunt the homeward gate,
 and starve, and pine, with plenty at their foot. 
loose from the wind lane, a joyful throng,
 see, over yond pasture how they pour along! 
Giles round their boundary take his usual stroll:
 see every pass secure, and fence whole;
 high fence, pround to charm the gaze eye,
 where many a nestle first assay to fly;
 where blow the woodbine, faint streak with red,
 and rest on every bough its tender head;
 round the young ash its twine branch meet,
 or crown the hawthorn with its odour sweet. 
say, you that know, you who have feel and see
 spring morning smile, and soul-enlivening green,
 say, do you give the thrill transport way? 
do your eye brighten, when young lamb at play
 leap over your path with animate pride,
 or gaze in merry cluster by your side? 
you who can smile, to wisdom no disgrace,
 at the arch meaning of a kitten face;
 if spotless innocence, and infant mirth,
 excite to praise, or give reflection birth;
 in shade like these pursue your favourite joy,
 midst nature revel, sport that never cloy. 
a few begin a short but vigorous race,
 and indolence abash soon fly the place;
 thus challenge forth, see thither one by one,
 from every side assemble playmate run;
 a thousand wily anty mark their stay,
 a start crowd, impatient of delay. 
like the fond dove from fearful prison free,
 each seem to say, "come, let we try our speed;"
 away they scour, impetuous, ardent, strong,
 the green turf tremble as they bind along;
 down the slope, then up the hillock climb,
 where every molehill be a bed of thyme;
 there pant stop; yet scarce can refrain;
 a bird, a leaf, will set they off again:
 or, if a gale with strength unusual blow. 
scatter the wild-brier rose into snow,
 their little limb increase effort try,
 like the tear flower the fair assemblage fly. 
ah, fall rose! sad emblem of their doom;
 frail as thyself, they perish while they bloom! 
though unoffending innocence may plead,
 though frantic ewe may mourn the savage deed,
 their shepherd come, a messenger of blood,
 and drive they bleat from their sport and food. 
care load his brow, and pity wring his heart,
 for lo, the murder butcher with his cart
 demand the firstling of his flock to die,
 and make a sport of life and liberty! 
his gay companion Giles behold no more;
 close be their eye, their fleece drench in gore;
 nor can compassion, with her soft note,
 withhold the knife that plunge through their throat. 
down, indignation! hence, idea foul! 
away the shock image from my soul! 
let kind visitant attend my way,
 beneath approach summer fervid ray;
 nor thankless gloom obtrude, nor care annoy,
 while the sweet theme be universal joy. 

summer.

summer.

ii.

the farmer life display in every part
 a moral lesson to the sensual heart. 
though in the lap of plenty, thoughtful still,
 he look beyond the present good or ill;
 nor estimate alone one blessing worth,
 from changeful season, or capricious earth;
 but view the future with the present hour,
 and look for failure as he look for show'er;
 for casual as for certain want prepare,
 and round his yard the reek haystack rear;
 or clover, blossom lovely to the sight,
 his team rich store through many a wintery night. 
what though abundance round his dwelling spread,
 though ever moist his self-improving mead
 supply his dairy with a copious flood,
 and seem to promise unexhausted food,
 that promise fail, when bury deep in snow,
 and vegetative juice cease to flow. 
for this, his plough turn up the destine land,
 whence stormy winter draw its full demand;
 for this, the seed minute small he sow,
 whence, sound and sweet, the hardy turnip grow. 
but how unlike to april close day! 
high climb the sun, and dart his powerful ray;
 whiten the fresh-drawn mould, and pierce through
 the cumbrous clod that tumble round the plough. 
over heaven bright azure hence with joyful eye
 the farmer see dark cloud assemble rise;
 bear over his field a heavy torrent fall,
 and strike the earth in hasty drive squall. 
 "right welcome down, you precious drop," he cry;
 but soon, too soon, the partial blessing fly. 
 "boy, bring thy harrow, try how deep the rain
 have foree its way." he come, but come in vain;
 dry dust beneath the bubble surface lurk,
 and mock his pain the more, the more he work:
 still midst huge clod he plunge on forlorn,
 that laugh his harrow and the shower to scorn. 
even thus the live clod, the stubborn fool,
 resist the stormy lecture of the school,
 till try with gentle mean, the dunce to please,
 his head imbibe right reason by degree;
 as when from eve till morning wakeful hour,
 light, constant rain, evince secret power,
 and ere the day resume its wout smile,
 present a cheerful easy task for Giles. 
down with a touch the mellow soil be lay,
 and you tall crop next claim his timely aid;
 thither well please he hie, assure to find
 wild trackless haunt, and object to his mind. 

shot up from broad rank blade that droop below,
 the nod wheat-ear form a graceful bow,
 with milky kernel start full, weigh down,
 ere yet the sun have tinge its head with brown;
 while thousand in a flock, for every gay,
 loud chirp sparrow welcome on the day,
 and from the maze of the leafy thorn
 drop one by one upon the bend corn;
 Giles with a pole assail their close retreat,
 and round the grass-grown dewy border beat,
 on either side complete overspread,
 here branch bend, there corn overtop his head. 
green covert, hail! for through the vary year
 no hour so sweet, no scene to he so dear. 
here wisdom placid eye delight see
 his frequent interval of lonely case,
 and with one ray his infant soul inspire,
 just kindle there her never-dying fire,
 whence solitude derive peculiar charm,
 and heaven-directed thought his bosom warm. 
just where the part bough light shadow play,
 scarce in the shade, nor in the scorch day,
 stretch on the turf he lie, a people bed,
 where swarm insect creep around his head. 
the small dust-coloured beetle climb with pain
 over the smooth plantain-leaf, a spacious plain! 
thence high still, by countless step convey,
 he gain the summit of a shiver blade,
 and flirt his filmy wing, and look around,
 exult in his distance from the ground. 
the tender speckle moth here dance see,
 the vault grasshopper of glossy green,
 and all prolific summer sport train,
 their little life by various power sustain. 
but what can unassisted vision do? 
what, but recoil where most it will pursue;
 his patient gaze but finish with a sigh,
 when music wake speak the skylark nigh. 
just start from the corn she cheerly sing,
 and trust with conscious pride her downy wing;
 still loud breathe, and in the face of day
 mount up, and call on Giles to mark her way. 
close to his eye his hat he instant bend,
 and form a friendly telescope, that lend
 just aid enough to dull the glare light,
 and place the wand' bird before his sight;
 yet oft beneath a cloud she sweep along,
 lose for awhile, yet pour her vary song:
 he view the spot, and as the cloud move by,
 again she stretch up the clear blue sky;
 her form, her motion, undistinguished quite,
 save when she wheel direct from shade to light:
 the flutter songstress a mere speck become,
 like fancy float bubble in a dream;
 he see she yet, but yield to repose,
 unwitting his jade eyelid close. 
delicious sleep! from sleep who can forbear,
 with no more guilt than Giles, and no more care? 
peace over his slumber wave her guardian wing,
 nor conscience once disturb he with a sting;
 he wake refresh from every trivial pain,
 and take his pole and brush round again. 

its dark-green hue, its sickly tint all fail,
 and rip'en harvest rustle in the gale. 
a glorious sight, if glory dwell below,
 where heaven munificence make all the show,
 over every field and golden prospect find,
 that glad the ploughman Sunday morning round,
 when on some eminence he take his stand,
 to judge the smile produce of the land. 
here vanity slink back, her head to hide:
 what be there here to flatter human pride? 
the tower fabric, or the dome loud roar,
 and steadfast column, may astonish more,
 where the charm gazer long delight stay,
 yet trace but to the architect the praise;
 while here, the very clown that tread the sod,
 without one scruple, give the praise to god;
 and twofold joy possess his rapture mind,
 from gratitude and admiration join. 

here, midst the bold triumph of her worth,
 nature herself invite the reaper forth;
 dare the keen sickle from its twelvemonth rest,
 and give that ardour which in every breast
 from infancy to age alike appear,
 when the first sheaf its plumy top uprear. 
no rake take here what heaven to all bestow:
 child of want, for you the bounty flow! 
and every cottage from the plenteous store
 receive a burden nightly at its door. 

hark! where the sweep scythe now rip along:
 each sturdy mower emulous and strong;
 who writhe form meridian heat defy,
 bend over his work, and every sinew try;
 prostrate the wave treasure at his foot,
 but spare the rise clover, short and sweet. 
come, health! come, jollity! light-footed, come;
 here hold your revel, and make this your home. 
each heart await and hail you as its own;
 each moisten brow, that scorn to wear a frown:
 the unpeopled dwelling mourn its tenant stray;
 even the domestic laugh dairy-maid
 hie to the field, the general toil to share. 
meanwhile the farmer quit his elbow-chair,
 his cool brick-floor, his pitcher, and his ease,
 and brave the sultry beam, and glad see
 his gate throw open, and his team abroad,
 the ready group attendant on his word,
 to turn the swarth, the quiver load to rear,
 or ply the busy rake, the land to clear. 
summer light garb itself now cumbrous grow,
 each his thin doublet in the shade throw down;
 where oft the mastiff skulk with half-shut eye,
 and rouse at the stranger pass by;
 while unrestrained the social converse flow,
 and every breast love powerful impulse know,
 and rival wit with more than rustic grace
 confess the presence of a pretty face;
 for, lo! encircle there, the lovely maid,
 in youth own bloom and native smile array;
 her hat awry, divest of her gown,
 her creak stay of leather, stout and brown; ... 
invidious barier! why be thou so high,
 when the slight cover of her neck slip by,
 there half reveal to the eager sight
 her full, ripe bosom, exquisite white? 
in many a local tale of harmless mirth,
 and many a jest of momentary birth,
 she bear a part, and as she stop to speak,
 stroke back the ringlet from her glow cheek. 

now noon go by, and four decline hour,
 the weary limb relax their boast power;
 thirst rage strong, the faint spirit fail,
 and ask the sovereign cordial, home-brewed ale:
 beneath some shelter heap of yellow corn
 rest the hoop keg, and friendly cool horn,
 that mock alike the goblet brittle frame,
 its costly potion, and its noble name. 
to mary first the brim draught be give,
 by toil make welcome as the dew of heaven,
 and never lip that press its homely edge
 have kind blessing or a hearty pledge. 
of wholesome viand here a banquet smile,
 a common cheer for all; ... even humble Giles,
 who joy his trivial service to yield
 amid the fragrance of the open field;
 oft doom in suffocate heat to bear
 the cobwebbed barn impure and dusty air;
 to ride in murky state the pant steed,
 destine aloft the unload grain to tread,
 where, in his path as heap on heap be throw,
 he rear, and plunge the loose mountain down:
 laborious task! with what delight when do
 both horse and rider greet the unclouded sun! 
yet by the unclouded sun be hourly breed
 the bold assailant that surround thy head,
 poor patient ball! and with insult wing
 roar in thy ear, and dart the pierce sting:
 in thy behalf the crest-waved bough avail
 more than thy short-clipped remnant of a tail,
 a move mockery, a useless name,
 a live proof of cruelty shame. 
shame to the man, whatever fame he bear,
 who take from thou what man can never restore,
 thy weapon of defence, thy chief good,
 when swarm fly contend suck thy blood. 
nor thy alone the suffering, thy the care,
 the fretful ewe bemoan a equal share;
 torment into sore, her head she hide,
 or angry brush from her new-shorn side. 
pen in the yard, even now at close day
 unruly cow with mark impatience stay,
 and vain strive to escape their foe,
 the pail kick down; a piteous current flow. 

be it not enough that plague like these molest? 
must still another foe annoy their rest? 
he come, the pest and terror of the yard,
 his full-fledged progeny imperious guard;
 the gander; ... spiteful, insolent, and bold,
 at the colt footlock take his dare hold;
 there, serpentlike, escape a dreadful blow;
 and straight attack a poor defenceless cow:
 each booby goose the unworthy strife enjoy,
 and hail his prowess with redouble noise. 
then back he stalk, of self-importance full,
 seize the shaggy foretop of the bull,
 till whirl aloft he fall; a timely check,
 enough to dislocate his worthless neck:
 for lo! of old, he boast a honour wound;
 behold that break wing that trail the ground! 
thus fool and bravo kindred prank pursue;
 as savage quite, and oft as fatal too. 
happy the man that foil a envious elf,
 use the dart of spleen to serve himself. 
as when by turn the stroll swine engage
 the utmost effort of the bully rage,
 who nibble warfare on the grunter side
 be welcome pleasure to his bristly hide;
 gentle he stoop, or lay himself along,
 endure the insult of the gabble throng,
 that march exult round his fall head,
 as human victor trample on their dead. 

still twilight, welcome! rest, how sweet be thou! 
now eve overhang the western cloud thick brow;
 the far-stretched curtain of retire light,
 with fiery treasure fraught, that on the sight
 flash from its bulge side, where darkness lour,
 in fancy eye, a chain of moulder tower;
 or craggy coast just rise into view,
 mid javelin dire, and dart of stream blue. 
anon tire labourer bless their shelter home,
 when midnight, and the frightful tempest come. 
the farmer wake, and see with silent dread
 the angry shaft of heaven gleam round his bed;
 the burst cloud reiterate roar,
 shake his straw roof, and jar his bolt door:
 the slow-winged storm along the trouble sky
 spread its dark course; the wind begin to rise;
 and full-leaved elm, his dwelling shade by day,
 with mimic thunder give its fury way:
 sound in his chimney top a doleful peal,
 midst pour rain, or gust of rattle hail;
 with tenfold danger low the tempest bend,
 and quick and strong the sulph'urous flame descend:
 the frighten mastiff from his kennel fly,
 and cringe at the door with piteous cry .... 

where now be the trifler? where the child of pride? 
these be the moment when the heart be try! 
nor live the man with conscience ever so clear,
 but feel a solemn, reverential fear;
 feel too a joy relieve his ache breast,
 when the spend storm have howl itself to rest. 
still, welcome beat the long continue shower,
 and sleep protract, come with double power;
 calm dream of bliss bring on the morning sun,
 for every barn be fill, and harvest do! 

now, ere sweet summer bid its long adieu,
 and wind blow keen where late the blossom grow,
 the bustle day and jovial night must come,
 the long accustom feast of harvest-home. 
no blood-stained victory, in story bright,
 can give the philosophic mind delight;
 no triumph please while rage and death destroy:
 reflection sicken at the monstrous joy. 
and where the joy, if right understand,
 like cheerful praise for universal good? 
the soul nor cheek nor dubtful anguish know,
 but free and pure the grateful current flow. 

behold the sound oak table massy frame
 bestride the kitchen floor! the careful dame
 and generous host invite their friend around,
 while all that clear the crop, or till the ground,
 be guest by right of custom: ... old and young;
 and many a neighbour yeoman join the throng,
 with artisan that lend their dexterous aid,
 when over each field the flame sunbeam play. —

yet plenty reign, and from her boundless hoard,
 though not one jelly tremble on the board,
 supply the feast with all that sense can crave;
 with all that make our great forefather brave,
 ere the cloy palate countless flavour try,
 and cook have nature judgement set aside. 
with thanks to heaven, and tale of rustic lore,
 the mansion echo when the banquet's over;
 a wide circle spread, and smile abound,
 as quick the froth horn perform its round;
 care mortal foe; that sprightly joy impart
 to cheer the frame and elevate their heart. 
here, fresh and brown, the hazel produce lie
 in tempt heap, and peal of laughter rise,
 and crackle music, with the frequent song,
 unheeded bear the midnight hour along. 
here once a year distinction lower its crest,
 the master, servant, and the merry guest,
 be equal all; and round the happy ring
 the reaper eye exult glance fling,
 and, warm with gratitude, he quit his place,
 with sun-burnt hand and ale-enlivened face,
 refills the jug his honour host to tend,
 to serve at once the master and the friend;
 proud thus to meet his smile, to share his tale,
 his nut, his conversation, and his ale. 

such be the day, ... of day long past i sing, ... 
when pride give place to mirth without a sting;
 ere tyrant custom strength sufficient bear
 to violate the feeling of the poor;
 to leave they distance in the madden race,
 wherever refinement show its hate face:
 nor causeless hate; it be the peasant curse,
 that hourly make his wretched station worse;
 destroy life intercourse; the social plan
 that rank to rank cement, as man to man:
 wealth flow around he, fashion lordly reign;
 yet poverty be he, and mental pain. 
methinks i hear the mourner thus impart
 the stifle murmur of his wound heart:
 'whence come this change, ungracious, irksome, cold? 
' whence the new grandeur that my eye behold? 
 'the widen distance which i daily see,
' have wealth do this? ... the wealth a foe to i;
 'foe to our right; that leave a powerful few
' the path of emulation to pursue: ... 
 'for emulation stoop to we no more:
' the hope of humble industry be over;
 'the blameless hope, the cheer sweet presage
' of future comfort for decline age. 
 'can my son share from this paternal hand
' the profit with the labour of the land? 
 'no; though indulgent heaven its blessing deign,
' where be the small farm to suit my scanty mean? 
 'content, the poet sing, with we reside,
' in lonely cot like i the damsel hide;
 'and will he then in rapture vision tell
' that sweet content with want can ever dwell? 
'a barley loaf, it be true, my table crown,
 'that fast diminish in lusty round,
' stop nature crave; yet her sigh will flow
 'from know this, ... that once it be not so. 
our annual fist, when earth her plenty yield,
' when crown with bough the last load quit the field,
 'the aspect still of ancient joy put on;
' the aspect only, with the substance go:
 'the self-same horn be still at our command,
' but serve none now but the plebeian hand:
 'for home-brewed ale, neglect and debase,
' be quite discard from the realm of taste. 
 'where unaffected freedom charm the soul,
' the separate table and the costly bowl,
 'cool as the blast that check the bud spring,
' a mockery of gladness round they fling. 
' for oft the farmer, ere his heart approve,
 'yield up the custom which he dear love:
' refinement force on he like a tide;
 'bold innovation down its current ride,
' that bear no peace beneath their showy dress,
 'nor add one tittle to his happiness. 
' he guest sclect; rank punctilio know;
 'what trouble wait upon a casual frown! 
' restraint' foul manacle his pleasure maim;
 'select guest select phrase claim:
' nor reign that joy when hand in hand they join
 'that good old master feel in shake i. 
' heaven bless his memory! bless his honour name! 
 '(the poor will speak his last worthy fame:)
' to soul fair-purposed strength and guidance give;
' in pity to we still let goodness live:
 'let labour have its due! my cot shall be
' from chill want and guilty murmur free:
 'let labour have its due; ... then peace be i,
' and never, never shall my heart repine. ' 

autumn.

autumn.

iii.

again, the year decline, midst storm and flood,
 the thunder chase, the yellow fade wood,
 invite my song; that fain will bold tell
 of upland covert, and the echo dell,
 by turn resound loud, at eve and morn
 the swineherd halloo, or the huntsman horn. 

no more the field with scatter grain supply
 the restless wander tenant of the sty;
 from oak to oak they run with eager haste,
 and wrangle share the first delicious taste
 of fall acorn; yet but thin find
 till the strong gale have shake they to the ground. 
it come; and roar wood obedient wave:
 their home well please the joint adventure leave:
 the trudge sow lead forth her numerous young,
 playful, and white, and clean, the brier among,
 till brier and thorn increase, fence they round,
 where last year moulder leaf bestrew the ground,
 and over their head, loud lash by furious squall,
 bright from their cup the rattle treasure fall;
 hot thirsty food; whence double sweet and cool
 the welcome margin of some rush-grown pool,
 the wild duck lonely haunt, who jealous eye
 guard every point; who sit prepare to fly,
 on the calm bosom of her little lake,
 too close screen for russian wind to shake;
 and as the bold intruder press around,
 at once she start, and rise with a bound:
 with bristle raise the sudden noise they hear,
 and ludicrous wild, and winge with fear,
 the herd decamp with more than swinish speed,
 and snort dash through sedge, and rush, and reed:
 through tangle thicket headlong on they go,
 then stop, and listen for their fancy foe;
 the hindmost still the grow panic spread,
 repeat fright the first alarm succeed,
 till folly wage, wound and thorn, they reap:
 yet glory in their fortunate escape,
 their groundless terror by degree soon cease,
 and night dark reign restore their wonted peace. 
for now the gale subside, and from each bough
 the roost pheasant short but frequent crow
 invite to rest; and huddle side by side,
 the herd in closet ambush seek to hide;
 seek some warm slope with shagged moss overspread,
 dry leaf their copious cover and their bed. 
in vain may Giles, through gather gloom that fall,
 and solemn silence, urge his pierce call:
 whole day and night they tarry midst their store,
 nor quit the wood till oak can yield no more. 

beyond bleak winter rage, beyond the spring
 that roll earth unvary course will bring,
 who till the ground look on with mental eye,
 and see next summer sheaf and cloudless sky;
 and even now, while nature beauty die,
 deposit seed, and bid new harvest rise;
 seed well prepare and warm with glow lime,
 against earthbred grub, and cold, and lapse of time:
 for search frost and various ill invade,
 while wintery month depress the spring blade. 
the plough move heavy, and strong the soil,
 and clog harrow with augment toil
 dive deep: and cling, mix with the mould
 a fatten treasure from the nightly fold,
 and all the cow-yard high value store,
 that late bestrew the blacken surface over. 
no idle hour be here, when fancy trim
 her dance taper over outstretch limb,
 and in her thousand thousand colour dress,
 play round the grassy couch of noontide rest:
 here Giles for hour of indolence atone
 with strong exertion, and with weary bone,
 and know no leisure; till the distant chime
 of sabbath bell he hear at sermon time,
 that down the brook sound seet in the gale,
 or strike the rise hill, or skim the dale. 

nor his alone the sweet of ease to taste:
 kind rest extend to all; ... save one poor beast,
 that true to time and pace, be doom to plod,
 to bring the pastor to the house of god:
 mean structure; where no bone of hero lie! 
the rude inelegance of poverty
 reign here alone: else why that roof of straw? 
those narrow window with the frequent flaw? 
over who low cell the dock and mallow spread,
 and rampant nettle lift their spiry head,
 while from the hollow of the tower on high
 the grey-caped daw in saucy legion fly. 
round these lone wall assemble neighbour meet,
 and tread depart friend beneath their foot;
 and new-briered grave, that prompt the secret sigh,
 show each the spot where he himself must lie. 
midst timely greeting village news go round,
 of crop late shear, or crop that deck the ground;
 experience ploughman in the circle join;
 while sturdy boy, in feat of strength to shine,
 with pride elate their young associate brave
 to jump from hollow-sounding grave to grave;
 then close consult, each his talent lend
 to plan fresh sport when tedious service end. 
hither at time, with cheerfulness of soul,
 sweet village maid from neighbour hamlet stroll,
 that like the light-heeled do over lawn that rove,
 look shy curious; ripen into love;
 for love their errand: hence the tint that glow
 on either cheek, a heighten lustre know:
 when, conscious of their charm, even age look sly,
 and rapture beam from youth observant eye. 

the pride of such a party, nature pride,
 be lovely poll; who innocent try
 with hat of airy shape and ribbon gay,
 love to inspire, and stand in Hymen way:
 but, ere her twentieth summer can expand,
 or youth be render happy with her hand,
 her mind serenity be lose and go,
 her eye grow languid, and she weep alone;
 yet causeless seem her grief; for quick restrain,
 mirth follow loud, or indignation reign:
 whim wild and simple lead she from she home,
 the heath, the common, or the field to roam:
 terror and joy alternate rule her hour;
 now blithe she sing, and gather useless flower;
 now pluck a tender twig from every bough,
 to whip the hover demon from her brow. 
ill-fated maid! thy guide spark be flee,
 and last wretchedness wait round thy bed ... 
thy bed of straw! for mark, where even now
 over their lose child afflict parent bow;
 their woe she know not, but preverse coy,
 invert custom yield her sullen joy;
 her midnight meal in secrecy she take,
 low mutter to the moon, that rise break
 through night dark gloom: ... oh how much more forlorn
 her night, that know of no return dawn! ... 
slow from the threshold, once her infant seat,
 over the cold earth she crawl to her retreat;
 quit the cot warm wall in filth to lie,
 where the swine grunt yield up half his sty;
 the damp night air her shiver limb assail;
 in dream she moan, and fancy wrong bewail. 
when morning wake, none early rouse than she,
 when pendent drop fall glitter from the tree;
 but nought her rayless melancholy cheer,
 or sooth her breast, or stop she stream tear. 
her mat lock unornamented flow;
 clasp her knee, and wave to and fro; ... 
her head bow down, her fade cheek to hide; ... 
a piteous mourner by the pathway side. 
some tuft molehill through the livelong day
 she call her throne; there weep her life away:
 and oft the gay pass stranger stay
 his well-timed step, and take a silent gaze,
 till sympathetic drop unbidden start,
 and pang quick spring muster round his heart;
 and soft he tread with other gazer round
 and fain will catch her sorrow plaintive sound:
 one word alone be all that strike the car,
 one short, pathetic, simple word, ... " oh dear!" 
a thousand time repeat to the wind,
 that waft the sigh, but leave the pang behind! 
for ever of the proffer parley shy,
 she hear the unwelcome foot advance nigh;
 nor quite unconscious of her wretched plight,
 give one sad look, and hurry out of sight .... 

fair promise sunbeam of terrestrial bliss,
 health gallant hope, ... and be you sink to this? 
for in life road though thorn abundant grow,
 there still be joy poor poll can never know;
 joy which the gay companion of her prime
 sip, as they drift along the stream of time;
 at eve to hear beside their tranquil home
 the lift latch, that speak the lover come:
 that love mature, next playful on the knee
 to press the velvet lip of infancy;
 to stay the totter step, the feature trace; ... 
inestimable sweet of social peace! 

o thou, who bid the vernal juice rise! 
thou, on who blast autumnal foliage fly! 
let peace never leave i, nor my heart grow cold,
 while life and sanity be i to hold. 

shear of their flower that shed the untreasure seed,
 the wither pasture, and the fade mead,
 less tempt groan, diminish more and more,
 the dairy pride; sweet summer flow store. 
new care succeed, and gentle duty press,
 where the fireside, a school of tenderness,
 revive the languid chirp, and warm the blood
 of cold-nipt weakling of the latter brood,
 that from the shell just burst into day,
 through yard or pond pursue their venturous way. 
far weighty care and wide scene expand;
 what devastation mark the new-sown land! 
 "from hungry woodland foe go, Giles, and guard
 the rise wheat; ensure its great reward:
 a future sustenance, a summer pride,
 demand thy vigilance: then be it try:
 exert thy voice, and wield thy shotless gun:
 go, tarry there from morn till set sun." 

keen blow the blast, or ceaseless rain descend;
 the half-stripped hedge a sorry shelter lend. 
o for a hovel, ever so small or low,
 who roof, repel wind and early snow,
 may bring home comfort fresh before his eye! 
no soon think, than see the structure rise,
 in some sequester nook, embanked around,
 sod for its wall, and straw in burden bind:
 dry fuel hoard be his rich store,
 and circle smoke obscure his little door;
 whence creep forth, to duty call he yield,
 and stroll the Crusoe of the lonely field. 
on white-thorn tower, and the leafless rose,
 a frost-nipped feast in bright vermilion glow:
 where cluster sloe in glossy order rise,
 he crop the load branch; a cumbrous prize;
 and over the flame the sputter fruit he rest,
 place green sod to seat his come guest;
 his guest by promise; playmate young and gay: ... 
but ah! fresh pastime lure their step away! 
he sweep his hearth, and homeward look in vain,
 till feel disappointment cruel pain,
 his fairy revel be exchange for rage,
 his banquet mar, grow dull his hermitage. 
the field become his prison, till on high
 benight bird to shade and covert fly. 
midst air, health, daylight, can he prisoner be? 
if field be prison, where be liberty? 
here still she dwell, and here her votary stroll;
 but disappoint hope untune the soul:
 restraint unfelt while hour of rapture flow,
 when trouble press, to chain and barrier grow. 
look then from trivial up to great woe;
 from the poor bird-boy with his roast sloe,
 to where the dungeoned mourner heave the sigh;
 where not one cheer sun-beam meet his eye. 
though ineffectual pity thy may be,
 no wealth, no power, to set the captive free;
 though only to thy ravish sight be give
 the golden path that Howard tread to heaven;
 thy slight can make the wretched more forlorn,
 and deep drive affliction barb thorn. 
say not, "i will come and cheer thy gloomy cell
 with news of dear friend; how good, how well:
 i will be a joyful herald to thy heart:"
 then fail, and play the worthless trifler part,
 to sip flat pleasure from thy glass brim,
 and waste the precious hour that be due to he. 
in mercy spare the base unmanly blow:
 where can he turn, to who complain of you? 
back to past joy in vain his thought may stray,
 trace and retrace the beat worn-out way,
 the rankle injury will pierce his breast,
 and curse on thou break his midnight rest. 

bereave of song, and ever cheer green,
 the soft endearment of the summer scene,
 new harmony pervade the solemn wood,
 dear to the soul, and healthful to the blood:
 for bold exertion follow on the sound
 of distant sportsman, and the chide hound;
 first hear from kennel burst, mad with joy,
 where smile Euston boast her good Fitzroy,
 lord of pure alm, and gift that wide extend;
 the farmer patron, and the poor man friend:
 who mansion glitter with the eastern ray,
 who elevate temple, point the way,
 over slope and lawn, the park extensive pride,
 to where the victim of the chace reside,
 ingulf in earth, in conscious safety warm,
 till lo! a plot portend their come harm. 

in early hour of dark unhooded morn,
 ere yet one rosy cloud bespeak the dawn,
 while far abroad the fox pursue his prey,
 he be doom to risk the peril of the day,
 from his strong hold block out; perhaps to bleed,
 or owe his life to fortune or to speed. 
for now the pack, impatient rush on,
 range through the dark covert one by one;
 trace every spot; while down each noble glade
 that guide the eye beneath a changeful shade,
 the loiter sportsman feel the instinctive flame,
 and check his steed to mark the spring game. 
midst intersect cut and wind way
 the huntsman cheer his dog, and anxious stray
 where every narrow ride, even shear,
 give back the echo of his mellow horn:
 till fresh and lightsome, every power untried,
 the start fugitive leap by his side,
 his lift finger to his ear he ply,
 and the view halloo bid a chorus rise
 of dog quick-mouthed, and shout that mingle loud,
 as burst thunder roll from cloud to cloud. 
with ear crop short, and chest of vigorous mould,
 over ditch, over fence, unconquerable bold,
 the shine courser lengthen every bind,
 and his strong footlock suck the moisten groud,
 as from the confine of the wood they pour,
 and joyous village partake the roar. 
over heath far stretch, or down, or valley low,
 the stiff-limbed peasant, glory in the show,
 pursue in vain; where youth itself soon tire,
 spite of the transport that the chace inspire;
 for who unmounted long can charm the eye,
 or hear the music of the lead cry? 

poor faithful trouncer! thou can lead no more;
 all thy fatigue and all thy triumph over! 
triumph of worth, who honorary fame
 be still to follow true the hunt game;
 beneath enormous oak, britannia boast,
 in thick impenetrable covert lose,
 when the warm pack in falter silence stand,
 thy be the note that rouse the listen wood,
 rekindle every joy with tenfold force,
 through all the maze of the taint course. 
still foremost thou the dash stream to cross,
 and tempt along the animate horse;
 foremost over fen or level mead to pass,
 and sweep the shower dew-drop from the grass;
 then bright emerge from the mist below
 to climb the woodland hill exult brow. 

pride of thy race! with worth far less than thy,
 full many human leader daily shine! 
less faith, less constaney, less generous zeal! ... 
then no disgrace my humble verse shall feel,
 where not one lie line to rihe bow,
 or poison sentiment from rancour flow;
 nor flower be strew around ambition car: ... 
a honest dog a noble theme by far. 
each sportsman hear the tiding with a sigh,
 when death cold touch have stop his tuneful cry;
 and though high deed, and fair exalt praise,
 in memory live, and flow in rustic lay,
 short be the strain of monumental woe:
 "fox, rejoice! here bury lie your foe. " 

in safety house, throughout night lengthen reign. 
the cock send forth a loud and pierce strain;
 more frequent, as the gloom of midnight flee,
 and hour roll round, that bring he liberty,
 when summer early dawn, mild, clear, and bright,
 chase quick away the transitory night: ... 
hour now in darkness veil; yet loud the scream
 of goose impatient for the playful stream;
 and all the feather tribe imprison raise
 their morning note of inharmonious praise;
 and many a clamorous hen and cockerel gay,
 when daylight slow through the fog break way,
 fly wanton abroad: but ah, how soon
 the shade of twilight follow hazy noon,
 shorten the busy day! ... day that slide by
 amid the unfinished toil of husbandry;
 toil still each morn resume with double care,
 to meet the icy terror of the year;
 to meet the threat Boreas undismayed,
 and winter gather frown and hoary head. 

then welcome, cold; welcome, you snowy night! 
heaven midst your rage shall mingle pure delight,
 and confidence of hope the soul sustain,
 while devastation sweep along the plain:
 nor shall the child of poverty despair,
 but bless the power that rule the change year;
 assure, ... though horror round his cottage reign, ... 
that spring will come, and nature smile again. 

winter.

winter.

iv.

with kindred pleasure move, and care oppress;
 share alike our weariness and rest;
 who live the daily partner of our hour,
 through every change of heat, and frost, and shower;
 partake our cheerful meal, partake first
 in mutual labour and in mutual thirst;
 the kindly intercourse will ever prove
 a bond of amity and social love. 
to more than man this generous warmth extend,
 and oft the team and shiver herd befriend;
 tender solicitude the bosom fill,
 and pity execute what reason will:
 youth learn compassion tale from every tongue,
 and fly to aid the helpless and the young;
 when now, unsparing as the scourge of war,
 blast follow blast, and grove dismantle roar. 
around their home the storm-pinched cattle swallow,
 no nourishment in freeze pasture grow;
 yet freeze pasture every morn resound
 with fair abundance thunder to the ground. 
for though on hoary twig no bud peep out,
 and even the hardy bramble cease to sprout,
 beneath dread winter level sheet of snow
 the sweet nutrition turnip deign to grow. 
till now imperious want and widespread dearth
 bid labour claim her treasure from the earth. 
on Giles, and such as Giles, the labour fall,
 to strew the frequent load where hungner call. 
on drive gale sharp hail indignant fly,
 and sleet, more irksome still, assail his eye;
 snow clog his foot; or if no snow be see,
 the field with all its juicy store to screen,
 deep go the frost, till every root be find
 a roll mass of ice upon the ground. 
no tender ewe can break her nightly fast,
 nor heifer strong begin the cold repast,
 till Giles with ponderous beetle foremost go,
 and scatter splinter fly at every blow;
 when press round he, eager for the prize,
 from their mix breath warm exhalation rise. 

if now in bead row drop deck the spray,
 while Phoebus grant a momentary ray,
 let but a cloud broad shadow intervence,
 and stiffen into gem the drop be see;
 and down the furrow oak broad southern side
 stream of dissolve rhyme no long glide. 

though night approach bid for rest prepare,
 still the flail echo throughout the frosty air,
 nor stop till deep shade of darkness come,
 send at length the weary laborer home. 
from he, with bed and nightly food supply,
 throughout the yard, house round on every side,
 deep-plunging cow their rustle feast enjoy,
 and snatch sweet mouthful from the pass boy,
 who move unseen beneath his trail load,
 fill the tall rack, and leave a scatter road;
 where oft the swine from ambush warm and dry
 bolt out, and scamper headlong to their sty,
 when Giles with wellknown voice, already there,
 deign they a portion of his evening care. 

he, though the cold may pierce, and storm molest,
 succeedign hour shall cheer with warmth and rest:
 gladness to spread, and raise the grateful smile,
 he hurl the faggot burst from the pile,
 and many a log and rift trunk convey,
 to heap the fire, and to extend the blaze
 that quiver strong through every open fly,
 while smoky column unobstructed rise. 
for the rude architect, unknown to fame,
 (nor symmetry nor elegance his aim)
 who spread his floor of solid oak on high,
 on beam rough-hew, from age to age that lie,
 bid his wide fabric unimpaired sustain
 pomona store, and cheese, and golden grain;
 bid from its central base, capacious lay,
 the well-wrought chimney rear its lofty head;
 where since have many a savoury ham be store,
 and tempest howl, and christmas gambol roar. 

flat on the hearth the glow ember lie,
 and flame reflect dance in every eye:
 there the long billet, force at last to bend,
 while frothing sap gush at either end,
 throw round its welcome heat: ... the ploughman smile,
 and oft the joke run hard on sheepish Giles,
 who sit joint tenant of the corner-stool,
 the converse share, though in duty school;
 for now attentive it be his to hear
 interrogation from the master chair. 

 'lift you your bleat charge, when daylight flee,
' near where the hay-stack lift its snowy head? 
 'who fence of bushy furze, so close and warm,
' may stop the slant bullet of the storm. 
 'for, hark! it blow; a dark and dismal night:
' heaven guide the trav'eller fearful step aright! 
 'now from the wood, mistrustful and sharp-eyed,
' the fox in silent darkness seem to glide,
 'steal around we, listen as he go,
' if chance the cock or stammer capon crow,
 'or goose, or nod duck, shall darkling cry,
' as if apprize of lurk danger night:
 'destruction wait they, Giles, if ever you fail
 'to bolt their door against the drive gale. 
' strew you (still mindful of the unsheltered head)
 'burden of straw, the cattle welcome bed? 
' thy heart shall feel, what thou may hourly see,
 'that duty basis be humanity. 
' of pain unsavoury cup though thou may taste,
 '(the wrath of winter from the bleak northeast,)
' thy utmost suffering in the cold day
' a period terminate, and joy repay. 
perhaps even now, while her those joy we boast,
 'full many a bark ride down the neighbour coast,
 where the high northern wave tremendous roar,
' drive down by blast from norway icy shore. 
 'the seaboy there, less fortunate than thou,
' feel all thy pain in all the gust that blow;
 his freeze hand now drench, now dry, by turn;
 'now lose, now see, the distant light that burn,
' on some tall cliff upraise, a flame guide,
 'that throw its friendly radiance over the tide. 
' he labour cease not with decline day,
 'but toil and peril mark his watery way;
' and while in peaceful dream secure we lie,
 'the ruthless whirlwind rage along the sky,
' round his head whistle; ... and shall thou repine,
 'while this protect roof still shelter thy?' 

mild, as the vernal shower, his word prevail,
 and aid the moral precept of his tale:
 his wonder hearer learn, and ever keep
 these first idea of the reatless deep;
 and, as the open mind a circuit try,
 present felicity in value rise. 
increase pleasure every hour they find,
 the warmth more precious, and he shelter kind;
 warmth that long reign bid the eyelid close,
 as through the blood its balmy influence go,
 when the cheere heart forget fatigue and care,
 and drowsiness alone dominion bear. 

sweet then the ploughman slumber, hale and young,
 when the last topic die upon his tongue;
 sweet then the bliss his transient dream inspire,
 till chilblain wake he, or the snap fire:

he start, and ever thoughtful of his team,
 along the glitter snow a feeble gleam
 shoot from his lantern, as he yawn go
 to add fresh comfort to their night repose;
 diffuse fragrance as their food he move,
 and pat the jolly side of those he love. 
thus full replenish, perfect ease possess,
 from might till morn alternate food and rest,
 no rightful cheer withhold, no sleep debar,
 their each day labour bring its sure reward. 
yet when from plough or lumber cart set free,
 they taste awhile the sweet of liberty:
 even sober Dobbin lift his clumsy heel
 and kick, disdainful of the dirty wheel;
 but soon, his frolic end, yield again
 to trudge the road, and wear the clink chain. 

short-sighted DOBBIN! ... thou can only see
 the trivial hardship that encompass thou:
 thy chain be freedom, and thy toil repose,
 can the poor post-horse tell thou all his woe;
 show thou he bleed shoulder, and unfold
 the dreadful anguish he endure for gold:
 hire at each call of business, lust, or rage,
 that prompt the trav'eller on from stage to stage. 
still on his strength depend their boast speed;
 for they his limb grow weak, his bare rib bleed;
 and though he groan quicken at command,
 their extra shilling in the rider hand
 become his bitter scourge: ... it be he must feel
 the double effort of the lash and steel;
 till when, up-hill, the destine inn he gain,
 and tremble under complicate pain,
 prone from his nostril, dart on the ground,
 his breath emit float in cloud around:
 drop chase each other down his chest and side,
 and spatter mud his native colour hide:
 through his swell vein the boil torrent flow,
 and every nerve a separate torture know. 
his harness loose, he welcome eager-eyed
 the pail full draught that quiver by his side;
 and joy to see the wellknown stable door,
 as the starve mariner the friendly shore. 

ah, well for he if here his suffering cease,
 and ample hour of rest his pain appease! 
but rouse again, and stern bid to rise,
 and shake refresh slumber from his eye,
 ere his exhaust spirit can return,
 or through his frame revive ardour burn,
 come forth he must, though limp, maim, and sore;
 he hear the whip; the chaise be at the door: ... 
the collar tighten, and again he feel
 his half-healed wound inflame; again the wheel
 with tiresome sameness in his ear resound,
 over blind dust, or mile of flinty ground. 
thus nightly rob, and injure day by day,
 his piecemeal murderer wear his life away. 

what say thou, Dobbin? what though hound await
 with open jaw the moment of thy fate
 no better fate attend his public race;
 his life be misery, and his end disgrace. 
then free bear thy burden to the mill,
 obey but one short law, ... thy driver will. 
affection, to thy memory ever true,
 shall boast of mighty load that Dobbin draw;
 and back to childhood shall the mind with pride
 recount thy gentleness in many a ride
 to pond, or field, or village fair, when thou
 held high thy braid mane and comely brow;
 and oft the tale shall rise to homely fame
 upon thy generous spirit and thy name. 

though faithful to a proverb, we regard
 the midnight chieftain of the farmer yard,
 beneath who guardianship all heart rejoice,
 wake by the echo of his hollow voice;
 yet as the hound may falter quit the pack,
 snuff the foul scent, and hasten yelp back;
 and even the docile pointer know disgrace,
 thwart the general instinct of his race;
 even so the mastiff, or the mean cur,
 at time will from the path of duty err,
 (a pattern of fidelity by day;
 by night a murderer, lurk for his prey;)
 and round the pasture or the fold will creep,
 and, coward-like, attack the peaceful sheep:
 alone the wanton mischief he pursue,
 alone in reek blood his jaw embrue;
 chase amain his frighten victim round,
 till death in wild confusion strew the ground;
 then weary out, to kennel sneak away,
 and lick his guilty paw till break of day. 

the deed discover, and the news once spread,
 vengeance hang over the unknown culprit head,
 and careful shepherd extra hour bestow
 in patient watch for the common foe;
 a foe most dread now, when rest and peace
 shall wait the season of the flock increase. 

in part these nightly terror to dispel,
 Giles, ere he sleep, his little flock must tell. 
from the fireside with many a shrug he hie,
 glad if the full-orbed moon salute his eye,
 and through the unbroken stillness of the night
 shed on his path her beam of cheer light. 
with saunter step he climb the distant stile,
 while all around he wear a placid smile;
 there view the white-robed cloud in cluster drive,
 and all the glorious pageantry of heaven. 
low, on the utmost boundary of the sight,
 the rise vapour catch the silver light;
 thence fancy measure, as they part fly,
 which first will throw its shadow on they eye,
 pass the source of light; and thence away,
 succeed quick by bright still than they. 
for yet above these waft cloud be see
 (in a remot sky, still more serene,)
 other, detach in range through the air,
 spotless as snow, and countless as they be fair;
 scatter immense wide from east to west,
 the beauteous semblance of a flock at rest. 
these, to the rapture mind, aloud proclaim
 their mighty shepherd everlasting name. 
while thus the loit'rer utmost stretch of soul
 climb the still cloud, or pass those that roll,
 and loose imagination soar go
 high over his home, and all his little woe,

time glide away; neglect duty call:
 at once from plainss of light to earth he fall,
 and down a narrow lane, well know by day,
 with all his speed pursue his sound way,
 in thought still half absorb, and chill with cold;
 when, lo! a object frightful to behold;
 a grisly spectre, clothe in silver-grey,
 around who foot the wave shadow play,
 stand in his path! ... he stop, and not a breath
 heave from his heart, that sink almost to death. 
loud the owl halloo over his head unseen;
 all else be silent, dismal serene:
 some prompt ejaculation, whisper low,
 yet bear he up against the threaten foe;
 and thus poor Giles, though half incline to fly,
 mutter his doubt, and strain his steadfast eye. 
it be not my crime thou come here to reprove;
 'no murder stain my soul, no perjure love:
' if thou be indeed what here thou seem to be,
 'thy dreadful mission can reach to i. 
' by parent teach still to mistrust my eye,
 'still to approach each object of surprise,
' lest fancy formful vision shall deceive
 'in moon-light path, or gloom of fall eve,
' this then be the moment when my heart shall try
 'to scan thy motionless deformity;
 'but oh, the fearful task! yet well i know
' a aged ash, with many a spread bough,
 '(beneath who leaf i have find a summer bower,
' beneath who trunk i have weather many a shower,)
 'stand single down this solitary way,
' but far beyond where now my footstep stay. 
it be true, thus far i have come with heedless haste;
 'no reckon keep, no pass object trace: ... 
' and can i then have reach that very tree? 
 'or be its reverend form assume by thou?' 
the happy thought alleviate his pain:
 he creep another step; then stop again;
 till slow, as his noiseless foot draw near,
 its perfect lineament at once appear;
 its crown of shiver ivy whisper peace,
 and its white bark that front the moon pale face. 
now, while his blood mount upward, now he know
 the solid gain that from conviction flow;
 and strengthen confidence shall hence fulfil
 (with conscious innocence more value still)
 the dreary task that winter night can bring,
 by church-yard dark, or grove, or fairy ring;
 still buoy up the timid mind of youth,
 till loiter reason hoist the scale of truth. 
with these bless guardian Giles his course pursue,
 till number his heavy-sided ewe,
 surround stillness tranquilise his breast,
 and shape the dream that wait his hour of rest. 

as when retreat tempest we behold,
 who skirt at length the azure sky unfold,
 and full of murmur and mingle wrath,
 slow unshroud the smile face of earth,
 bring the bosom joy: so winter fly! ... 
and see the source of life and light uprise! 
a heighten arch over southern hill he bend;
 warm on the cheek the slant beam descend,
 and give the reek mead a bright hue,
 and draw the modest primrose bud to view. 
yet frost succeed, and wind impetuous rush,
 and hailstorm rattle through the bud bush;
 and night-fallen lamb require the shepherd care,
 and teem ewe, that still their burden bear;
 beneath who side tomorrow dawn may see
 the milkwhite stranger bow the tremble knee;
 at who first birth the powerful instinct see
 that fill with champion the daisy green:
 for ewe that stand aloof with fearful eye,
 with stamp foot now man and dog defy,
 and obstinate faithful to their young,
 guard their first step to join the bleat throng. 

but casualty and death from damp and cold
 will still attend the well-conducted fold:
 her tender offspring dead, the dam aloud
 call, and run wild amid the unconscious crowd:
 and orphan suckling raise the piteous cry;
 no wool to warm they, no defender nigh. 
and must her stream milk then flow in vain? 
must unregarded innocence complain? 
no; ... ere this strong solicitude subside,
 maternal fondness may be fresh apply,
 and the adopt stripling still may find
 a parent most assiduous kind. 
for this he be doom awhile disguise to range,
 (for fraud or force must work the wished-for change;)
 for this his predecessor skin he wear,
 till cheat into tenderness and care,
 the unsuspecting dam, content grow,
 cherish and guard the fondle as her own. 

thus all by turn to fair perfection rise;
 thus twin be part to increase their size:
 thus instinct yield as interest point the way,
 till the bright flock, augment every day,
 on sunny hill and vale of spring flower
 with ceaseless clamour greet the vernal hour. 

the humble shepherd here with joy behold
 the approve economy of crowd fold,
 and, in his small contract round of care,
 adjust the practice of each hint he hear:
 for boy with emulation learn to glow,
 and boast their pasture, and their healthful show
 of well-grown lamb, the glory of the spring;
 and field to field in competition bring. 

even Giles, for all his care and watch past,
 and all his contest with the wintery blast,
 claim a full share of that sweet praise bestow
 by gaze neighbour, when along the road,
 or village green, his curly-coated throng
 suspend the chorus of the spinner song;
 when admiration unaffected grace
 lisp from the tongue, and beam in every face:
 delightful moment! ... sunshine, health, and joy,
 play round, and cheer the elevate boy! 
 'another spring!' his heart exult cry;
 'another year! with promise blessing rise! ... 
' eternal power! from who those blessing flow,
 'teach i still more to wonder, more to know:
' seed-time and harvest let i see again;
 'wander the leaf-strewn wood, the freeze plain:
' let the first flower, corn-waving field, plain, tree,
 'here round my home, still lift my soul to thou;
' and let i ever, midst thy bounty, raise
 'a humble note of thankfulness and praise! —
