write at Steephill, in the isle of wight,

august, m dcc XC. 

what joy, escape from the restless throng,
 who in Augusta waste their trifle day,
 to wander, Vecta, thy wild rock among,
 or careless over thy airy summit stray! 

or muse loiter in thy wave grove,
 or mark thy limpid streamlet as they flow;
 or view thy hamlet, where mild patience love
 to shade with olive labour sun-burnt brow! 

where the calm villager content abide,
 bless in the sweet of liberty and peace,
 crop the luxuriant harvest golden pride,
 or spread their net to catch the finny race. 

no wild ambition damp the genuine joy
 which bounteous nature to her son afford;
 no keen remorse their quiet rest annoy,
 or sick disgust attend their frugal board. 

ah! why shall fortune, with deceitful smile,
 lure free-born briton from the rural plain,
 in court deprave for sordid wealth to toil,
 and mean drag a golden idiot chain? 

what number, Vecta, on thy sea-girt shore,
 unpractised in the world pernicious strife,
 rich in simplicity, never seek for more,
 and close where they receive their blameless life! 

yet though thy hill no costly metal yield,
 to draw oppressive avarice from afar,
 even here the rustic in his native field
 have sink beneath the iron hand of war. 

when banish Harold with destructive rage
 against thy isle his vengeful fury turn,
 what crowd, unnoted in the historic page,
 here over their murder friend in anguish mourn! 

the dreadful scene, methinks, even now i see! 
o Harold, be this cruelty abhor! 
spare the low cot of helpless poverty,
 and against the powerful turn thy conquer sword. 

here amid sanguine heap earl Goodwin stand;
 relentless Tosti hear the suppliant cry;
 those cry restrain not the fierce victor hand,
 and the pale islander unpitied die. 

unhappy victim, who with fruitless prayer
 to savage conqueror have sue in vain! 
to avenge your wrong, impend fate prepare
 for your unfeeling foe a equal pain. 

soon civil discord, and fraternal hate,
 shall destine Tosti to a early tomb;
 while mad proud, usurp regal state,
 Harold on hastings plain shall meet his doom. 

where the insignia now of kingly pride,
 the dazzle sceptre and imperial throne? 
for he each vain distinction lay aside! 
 "unhappy Harold! "only mark the stone. 

thus shall the monarch mingle with the slave,
 thus shall the noble and ignoble meet:
 death, all-subduing, open in the grave,
 to wealth and wretchedness a like retreat. 

but turn, my mind, from age long pass over,
 far bright prospect to thy view remain;
 Vecta can dread a hostile force no more,
 while England navy triumph over the main. 

behold the warlike fleet in proud array,
 majestic move over the liquid plain:
 loose to the wind their flag and streamer play,
 and menace ruin to insult Spain. 

thrice happy land, where the direct care
 of a wise statesman in each step we trace;
 who active vigilance prepare for war,
 even when recline in the lap of peace! 

long may he, Albion, near thy throne preside;
 and never inconstant Fortune falsehood prove,
 humble the spanish and the Gallic pride,
 and be reward by his country love! 

here pause, my muse! no more the theme pursue,
 fix on the present thy enrapture eye:
 a bright scene can never attract thy view;
 o, may its cheer lustre never die! 
