on the eternity of the supreme be.

by Christopher smart, m. a. 

hail, wondrous be, who in power supreme
 exist from everlasting, who great name
 deep in the human heart, and every atom
 the air, the earth, or azure main contain
 in undecipher character be write —
 in comprehensible! — o what can word,
 the weak interpreter of mortal thought,
 or what can thought (though wild of wing they rove
 through the vast concave of the aetherial round)
 if to the heaven of heaven they will wing their way
 adventurous, like the bird of night they be lose,
 and deluge in the flood of dazzle day. —

may then the youthful, uninspired bard
 presume to hymn the eternal; may he soar
 where seraph, and where cherubin on high
 resound the unceasing plaudit, and with they
 in the grand chorus mix his feeble voice? 

he may — if thou, who from the witless babe
 ordain honour, glory, strength, and praise,
 uplift the unpinioned muse, and deign to assist,
 great poet of the universe, his song. 

before this earthly planet wind her course
 round light perennial fountain, before light
 herself begin shine, and at the inspire word
 shoot to existence in a blaze of day,
 before "the morning-star together sing,
 and hail thou architect of countless world
 thou be — all-glorious, all-beneficent,
 all wisdom and omnipotence thou be. 

but be the aera of creation fix
 at when these world begin? can ought retard
 goodness, that know no bound, from blessing ever,
 or keep the immense artificer in sloth? 
avaunt the dust-directed crawl thought,
 that puissance immeasurable vast,
 and bounty inconceivable, can rest
 content, exhaust with one week of action —
 no — in the exertion of thy rigteous power,
 ten thousand time more active than the sun,
 thou reign, and with a mighty hand compose
 system innumerable, matchless all,
 all stamp with thy uncounterfeited seal. 

but yet (if still to more stupendous height
 the muse unblamed her ache sense may strain)
 perhaps wrap up in contemplation deep,
 the best of being on the noble theme
 may ruminate at leisure, scope immense
 the eternal power and godhead to explore,
 and with itself the omniscient mind replete. 
this be enough to fill the boundless all,
 this be a sabbath worthy the supreme! 
perhaps enthrone amid a choice few,
 of spirit inferior, he may great plan
 the two prime pillar of the universe,
 creation and redemption — and a while
 pause — with the grand presentiment of glory. 

perhaps — but all be conjecture here below,
 all ignorance, and self-plumed vanity —
 o thou, who way to wonder at his distrust,
 who to describe presumption (all we can —
 and all we may —) be glorify, be praise. 

a day shall come, when all this earth shall perish,
 nor leave behind even chaos; it shall come
 when all the army of the element
 shall war against themselves, and mutual rage,
 to make perdition triumph; it shall come,
 when the capacious atmosphere above
 shall in sulphureous thunder groan, and die,
 and vanish into void; the earth beneath
 shall sever to the centre, and devour
 the enormous blaze of the destructive flame. 
you rock, that mock the rave of the flood. 
and proud frown upon the impatient deep,
 where be your grandeur now? you foam wave,
 that all along the immense atlantic roar,
 in vain you swell; will a few drop suffice
 to quench the inextinguishable fire? 
you mountain, on who cloud-crowned top the cedar
 be lessen into shrub, magnific pile,
 that prop the paint chamber of the heaven,
 and fix the earth continual; Athos, where;
 where, tenerif thy stateliness today? 
what, Aetna, be thy flame to these? — no more
 than the poor glowworm to the golden sun. 

nor shall the verdant valley then remain
 safe in their meek submission; they the debt
 of nature and of justice too must pay. 
yet i must weep for you, you rival fair,
 Arno and Andalusia; but for thou
 more large and with filial tear must weep,
 o Albion, o my country! thou must join,
 in vain dissever from the rest, must join
 the terror of the inevitable ruin. 

nor thou, illustrious monarch of the day;
 nor thou, fair queen of night; nor you, you star,
 though million league and million still remote,
 shall yet survive that day; you must submit,
 sharer, not bright spectator of the scene. 

but though the earth shall to the centre perish,
 nor leave behind even chaos; though the air
 with all the element must pass away,
 vain as a idiot dream; though the huge rock,
 that brandish the tall cedar on their top,
 with humble vale must to perdition yield;
 though the gild sun, and silver-tressed moon
 with all her bright retinue, must be lose;
 yet thou, great father of the world, survive
 eternal, as thou be: yet still survive
 the soul of man immortal, perfect now,
 and candidate for unexpire joy. 

he come! he come! the awful trump i hear;
 the flame sword intolerable blaze
 i see; he come! the archangel from above. 
 "arise, you tenant of the silent grave,
" awake incorruptible and arise:
 "from east to west, from the antarctic pole
" to region hyperborean, all you son,
 "you son of Adam, and you heir of heaven —
" arise, you tenant of the silent grave,
 "awake incorruptible and arise." 

it be then, nor soon, that the restless mind
 shall find itself at home; and like the ark,
 fix on the mountain-top, shall look aloft
 over the vague passage of precarious life;
 and, wind and wave and rock and tempest past,
 enjoy the everlasting calm of heaven:
 it be then, nor soon, that the deathless soul
 shall just know its nature and its rise:
 it be then the human tongue new-tuned shall give
 praise more worthy the eternal ear. 
yet what we can, we ought; — and therefore, thou,
 purge thou my heart, omnipotent and good! 
purge thou my heart with hyssop, lest like Cain
 i offer fruitless sacrifice, and with gift
 offend and not propitiate the adore. 
though gratitude be bless with all the power
 her burst heart can long for, though the swift,
 the fiery-winged imagination soar
 beyond ambition wish — yet all be vain
 to speak he as he be, who be ineffable. 
yet still let reason through the eye of faith
 view he with fearful love; let truth pronounce,
 and adoration on her bend knee
 with heaven-directed hand confess his reign. 
and let the angelic, archangelic band
 with all the host of heaven, cherubic form,
 and form seraphic, with their silver trump
 and golden lyre attend: — "for thou be holy,
" for thou be one, the eternal, who alone
 "exert all goodness, and transcend all praise." 
