[pastoral 01] the first pastoral.

lobbin.

if we, o Dorset, quit the city throng,
 to meditate in shade the rural song,
 by your command; be present: and, o, bring
 the muse along! the muse to you shall sing. 

begin. — a shepherd boy, one evening fair,
 as western wind have cool the sultry air,
 when as his sheep within the fold be pen,
 thus plain he of his dreary discontent;
 so pitiful, that all the starry throng
 attentive seem to hear his mournful song. 

ah, welladay! how long must i endure
 this pine pain? or who shall speed my cure? 
fond love no cure will have; seek no repose;
 delight in grief; nor any measure know. 
and now the moon begin in cloud to rise;
 the twinkle star be light in the sky;
 the wind be hush; the dew distil; and sleep
 with soft embrace have seize my weary sheep. 
i only with the prowl wolf, constrain
 all night to wake. with hunger be he pain,
 and i with love. his hunger he may tame:
 but who in love can stop the growl flame? 

whilom do i, all as this popular fair,
 upraise my heedless head, then void of care,
 among rustic rout the chief for wanton game;
 nor can they merry make until lobbin come. 
who better see than i, in shepherd art,
 to please the lad and win the lass heart? 
how deff to my oaten reed, so sweet,
 will they, upon the green, to shift their foot? 
and, when the dance be do, how will they yearn
 some well devise tale from i to learn? 
for, many song and tale of mirth have i,
 to chase the linger sun down the sky. 
but, ah! since Lucy coy have wrought her spite
 within my heart; unmindful of delight,
 the jolly groom i fly; and, all alone
 to rock and wood pour forth my fruitless moan. 

oh quit thy wonted scorn, relentless fair! 
before, linger long, i perish through despair. 
have Rosalind be mistress of my mind,
 though not so fair, she will have be more kind. 
o think, unwitting maid, while yet be time,
 how fly year impair our youthful prime! 
thy virgin bloom will not for ever stay;
 and flower, though leave ungathered, will decay. 
the flower anew return season bring;
 but beauty fade have not second spring. 

my word be wind! she, deaf to all my cry,
 take pleasure in the mischief of her eye. 
like frisk heifer, loose in flowery mead,
 she gad wherever she rove fancy lead;
 yet still from i. ah i, the tiresome chace! 
while, winge with scorn, she flied my fond embrace. 
she fly indeed: but ever leave behind,
 fly where she will, her likeness in my mind. 
ah turn thou then! unthinking damsel! why,
 thus from the youth, who love thou, shall thou fly? 
no cruel purpose in my speed i bear:
 it be all but love; and love why shall thou fear? 
what idle fear a maiden breast alarm! 
stay, simple girl! a lover can harm. 

two kidlin, sportive as thy self, i rear;
 like tender bud their shoot horn appear. 
a lambkin too, pure white, i breed, as tame,
 as my fond heart can wish my scornful dame. 
a garland, deck with all the pride of may,
 sweet as thy breath, and as thy beauty gay,
 i will weave. but why these unavailing pain? 
the gift alike and giver she disdain. 

oh will my gift but win her wanton heart! 
or can i half the warmth i feel impart! 
how will i wander every day to find
 the ruddy wilding! be but Lucy kind,
 for glossy plumb i will climb the knotty tree,
 and of fresh honey rob the thrifty bee. 
or, if thou deign to live a shepherdess,
 thou lobbin flock, and lobbin, shall possess. 
fair be my flock; nor yet uncomely i,
 if liquid fountain flatter not: and why
 shall liquid fountain flatter we? yet show
 the border flower less beauteous than they grow. 

o! come, my love! nor think the employment mean,
 the dam to milk, and little lambkin wean,
 to drive a-field by morn the fatten ewe,
 before the warm sun drink up the cooly dew. 
how will the Crook beseem thy beauteous hand! 
how will my youngling round thou gaze stand! 
ah witless youngling! gaze not on her eye:
 such heedless glance be the cause i die. 
nor trow i when this bitter blast will end;
 or if kind love will ever i befriend. 
sleep, sleep, my flock: for happy you may take
 your rest, though nightly thus your master wake. 

now, to the wain moon, the nightingale
 in doleful ditty tell her piteous tale. 
the lovesick shepherd listen find relief,
 please with so sweet a partner in his grief:
 until by degree her note and silent night
 to slumber soft his heavy heart invite. 
