a elegy on the late holy father pope innocent the eleventh.

strange power of piety when virtue be
so strong it can disarm our prejudice:
when luther son romes prizeless loss bemoan,
less than a miracle can there be show;
yet see they mourn, and those our doctrine breed,
hate the body, yet adore the head.
this truth, though age pass scarce understand,
we bold may affirm, one pope be good;
not partial, nor to private interest sell,
nay, what be more strange than all, not fond of gold;
but dare against the stream of avarice swim,
saint Peter key be never gild by he,
nor do the church biggot, till his sway
ever, so little for salvation pay.
his mellow wisdom prop romes totter state,
his moderate judgement stem the clergy hate,
will the church variance to atone,
rail not at we, nor lessen not his own.
when heathen do in swarm number list,
and war begin betwixt Mahomet and Christ;
the imprison treasure which he then set free,
show he refine from former papacy.
the gold which to that holy war he throw,
declare he more than pope, a christian too.
when France observe he scourge the infidel,
quite different from his pagan principle;
his mother church the apostate dare condemn,
and slight her power to make his own supreme,
nor long own romes doctrine his soul guide,
when its ambition be unsatisfied;
this faultless prelate, if ever pope be so,
sound his wile, and plot do overthrow,
lent the golden Mattock to this pious work,
and balk both pagan, and the christian Turk,
who sly do like snarl bloodhound lurk,
to snap the prey, and gorge himself alone,
when the rest be tire with fight for the bone.
mourn all you neighbour prince, sigh and mourn,
old Rome will now to her old sin return;
her scarlet robe have for a time be clean,
but with new error, will new spot be see:
now each ambitious cardinal bribe high,
to fill the conclave for the prelacy,
which gain, the enchant purse strait shut as close,
as if the string be never to unloose.
the fish be catch, farewell hypocrisy,
the vizor banish, and the net lay by.
religion late be beyond gold prefer,
but profit now be the only sound be hear.
vile sore over romes corrupt body grow,
her trunk be filthy, now her head lie low:
for when as some rich honest farmer die,
leave behind he land, and legacy,
his brainless off-spring by their vice allure,
destroy the crop, which he with care manure;
his garden be fruitless, and his vineyard bleed,
the one yield no grape, the other only weed:
so Rome, her pious farmer be go,
be leave to her lewd race to be undo.
