saint MICHAEL mount.

inscribe to the right honourable lord Somers.

while summer air scarce breathe along the tide,
oft pause, up the mountain craggy side
we climb, how beautiful, how still, how clear,
the scene that stretch around! the rock that rear
their shape, in rich fantastic colour dress;
the hill-top, where the soft shadow rest;
the long-retiring bay, the level sand,
the fade sea-line, and the further land,
that seem, as low it lessen from the eye,
to steal away beneath the cloudless sky!

but yesterday, the misty morn be spread
in dreariness on the bleak mountain head;
no glitter prospect from the upland smile,
the drive squall come dark, the sea heave wild,
and, lose and lonely, the wayfarer sigh,
wet with the hoar spray of the flash tide.
how change be now the circle scene! the deep
stir not; the glance roof and white tower peep
along the margin of the lucid bay;
the sail, descry far in the offing grey,
hang motionless, and the pale headland height
be touch as with sweet gleam of fairy light!

oh, live there on earth busy-stirring scene,
who nature tranquil charm, her air serene,
her sea, her sky, her sunbeam, fail to move
with steal tenderness and grateful love!
go, thankless man, to misery cave — behold
captivity, stretch in her dungeon cold!
or think on those who, in yond dreary mine,
sink fathom deep beneath the roll brine,
from year to year, amid the lurid shade,
overwearied, ply their melancholy trade;
that thou may bless the glorious sun; and hail
he who with beauty clothe the hill and vale;
who bend the arch of the high heaven for thou,
and stretch in amplitude the broad blue sea!
now sink be all its murmur; and the air
but move by fit there bent, that here and there
upshoot in casual spot of fade green:
here straggle sheep the scanty pasture glean,
or, on the jut fragment that impend,
stray fearless, and gaze, as we ascend. 

mountain, no pomp of wave wood have thou,
that deck with vary shade thy hoary brow;
no sunny meadow at thy foot be spread,
no streamlet sparkle over their pebbly bed!
but thou can boast thy beauty: ample view
that catch the rapt eye of the pause muse;
headland around new-lighted; sail, and sea,
now glassy-smooth, now wrinkle to the breeze;
and when the drisly winter, wrap in sleet,
go by, and wind and rain thy rampart beat,
fancy can see thou stand thus aloof,
and frown, bleak, and bare, and tempest-proof,
look as with awful confidence, and brave
the howl hurricane, the dash wave;
more graceful, when the storm dark vapour frown,
than when the summer sun in pomp go down!

and such be he, who, clad in watchet weed,
and boast little more than nature need,
can wrap he in contentedness, and wear
a port unchanged, in season rude or fair. 
his may be fancy sunshine, and the muse
may deck his vision with her fair hue;
and he may lift his honest front, and say
to the hard storm, that rend his lock of grey,
i heed thou not; — he unappalled may stand
beneath the cloud that shade a sink land,
while heedless of the storm that onward sweep,
mad, impious riot his loud wassail keep,
pre-eminent in native worth; nor bend,
though gather ill on his bare head descend:
and when the wasteful storm sweep over its prey,
and rend the kingdom of the world away,
he, firm as stand the rock unshaken base,
yet pant for a sure resting-place,
the human hurricane unmoved can see,
and say, o god, my refuge be in thou!

state, anchor deep, that far their shadow cast,
rock, and be scatter by the almighty blast;
as when, awaken from his horrid sleep,
in fiery cave, a thousand fathom deep,
the earthquake demon hie aloft; he wait,
nigh some high-turreted proud city gate,
as listen to the mingle shout and din
of the mad crowd that feast or dance within.
mean time sad nature feel his sway, the wave
heave, and low sound moan through the mountain cave;
then all at once be still, still as midnight,
when not the lime-leaf move: oh, piteous sight!
for now the glitter dome crash from on high —
and hark, a strange and lamentable cry!
it cease, and the tide depart roar
alone be hear upon the desert shore,
that, as it sweep with slow huge swell away,
remorseless mutter over its bury prey. 

so ruin hurry over this shake ball:
he bid his blast go forth, and lo! do fall
a Carthage or a Rome. then roll the tide
of deep forgetfulness, whelm the pride
of man, his shatter and forsake bower,
his noiseless city, and his prostrate tower.
some column, eminent and awful, stand,
like egypt pillar on the lonely sand;
we read upon their base, inscribe by fame,
a Homer here, or here a shakespeare name;
yet think not of the surge, that soon may sweep
ourselves unnumbered to the oblivious deep.

yet time have be, as moulder legend say,
when all yond western tract, and this bright bay,
where now the sunshine sleep, and wheel white
the sea-mew circle in fantastic flight,
be people wide; but the loud storm have rave,
where its green top the high wood whisper wave,
and many a year the slowly-rising flood
rake, where the Druids' uncouth altar stand.
thou only, age mountain, do remain,
stern monument amid the deluge plain!
and fruitless the big wave thy bulwark beat;
the big wave slow retire, and murmur at thy foot:
thou, half-encircled by the refluent tide,
as if thy state its utmost rage defy,
do tower above the scene, as in thy ancient pride.

mountain! the curious muse may love to gaze
on the dim record of thy early day;
oft fancy that she hear, like the low blast,
the sound of mighty generation past. 
thou the phœnician, as remote he sail
along the unknown coast, exult hail,
and when he see thy rocky point aspire,
think on his native shore of Aradus or tyre.
distained with many a ghastly giant blood,
upon thy height huge corineus stand,
and clash his shield; while, hide in cave profound,
his monstrous foe cower at the fearful sound.
hark to the brazen clarion peal swell!
the shout at interval, the deepen yell!
long age speed away, yet now again
the noise of battle hurtle on the plain!
behold the dark-haired warrior! — down thy side,
o mountain! stern terrible, they stride!
even now, impatient for the promise war,
they rear their axe huge, and shout, cry to Thor.

the sound of conflict cease — at dead of night
a voice be hear: prepare the druid rite!
and hark! the bard upon thy summit ring
the deep chord of his thrill harp, and sing
to night pale queen, that through the heaven wide,
amid her still host listen seem to ride!
slow sink the cadence of the solemn lay,
and all the sombrous scenery steal away —
the shadowy druid throng, the darksome wood,
and the hoar altar, wet with human blood!

mark you the angel-spectre that appear?
by other hand the holy fane be rear
high on the point, where, gaze over the flood,
confess, the glitter apparition stand.
and now the sailor, on his watch of night,
see, like a glimmer star, the far-off light;
or, homeward bind, hear on the twilight bay
the slowly-chanted vesper die away!

these scene be flee and pass, yet still sublime,
and wear graceful the grey tint of time,
upon the steep rock craggy eminence
the embattle castle sit, survey thence
the village that strew the subject plain,
and the long wind of the lucid main:
meantime the stranger mark its turret high,
and muse on the tale of changeful year go by.
of this no more: lo! here our journey end;
wide and more wide the arch of heaven extend,
and on this topmost fragment as we lean,
we feel remove from dim earth distant scene.
lift up the hollow trump that on the ground
be cast, and let it, roll its long sound,
speak to the surge below, that we may gain
tiding from those who traverse the wide main.
or tread we now some spot of wizard-land,
and mark the sable trump, that may command
the brazen door to fly, and with loud call
scare the grim giant in his murky hall!
hail, solitary castle! that do crown
this desert summit, and supreme look down
on the long-lessening landscape stretch below;
fearless to trace thy inmost haunt we go!

we climb the step: — no warn sign be send,
no fiery shape flash on the battlement. 
we enter; the long chamber without fear
we traverse; no strange echo meet the ear;
no time-worn tapestry spontaneous shake,
no spell-bound maiden from her trance awake,
but taste fair hand array the peaceful dome,
and hither the domestic virtue come;
please, while to this seclude scene they bear
sweet that oft wither in a world of care.

castle! no more thou frown on the main
in the dark terror of thy ancient reign;
no more thy long and dreary hall affright,
sweep by the stole spirit of the night;
but calm, and heedless of the storm that beat,
here elegance and peace assume their seat;
and when the night descend, and ocean roar,
rock without upon his darken shore,
these vault roof to gentle sound reply,
the voice of social cheer, or song of harmony. 

so fade the mode of life with slow decay,
and various age various hue display!
flee be the grim shadow of romance —
and, please, we see in beauteous troop advance
new art, new manner, from the gothic gloom
escape, and scatter flower that sweetly bloom!

refinement wake; before her beam eye
disperse, the fume of feudal darkness fly.
like orient morning on the mountain head,
a soft light on life wide scene be shed;
lap in bliss the sense of human care,
hark! melody pour forth her sweet air;
and like the shade that on the still lake lie,
of rock, or fringe wood, or tint sky,
paint her hue on the clear tablet lay,
and her own beauteous world with tender touch display!
then science lift her form, august and fair,
and shake the night-dew from her glitter hair;
meantime rich culture clothes the live waste,
and pure pattern of athenian taste
invite the eye, and wake the kindle sense;
and mild manner, as they play, dispense,
like tepid air of spring, their genial influence!

such be thy boast, refinement. but deep dye
oft mar the splendour of thy noontide sky:
then fancy, sick of folly that deform
the face of day, and in the sunshine swarm;
sick of the flutter foppery that engage
the vain pursuit of a degenerate age;
sick of smooth sophistry insidious cant,
or cold impiety defy rant;
sick of the mul sentiment that sigh
over its dead bird, while want unpitied cry;
sick of the picture that pale lust inflame,
and flush the cheek of love with deep, deep shame;
will fain the shade of elder day recall,
the gothic battlement, the banner hall;
or list of elfin harp the fable rhyme,
or wrap in melancholy trance sublime,
pause over the work of some wondrous tale,
or bid the spectre of the castle hail!

oh, may i now, amid the frown storm,
behold, great vision of the mount! thy form,
such and so vast as thou be see of yore,
when look steadfast to bayonna's shore,
thou sit awful on the topmost stone,
make the rock thy solitary throne! 
for up the narrow step, wind with pain,
the watch-tower's lofty platform now we gain.
depart spirit! fruitless be the prayer,
we see alone thy long-deserted chair;
and never more, or in the storm of night,
or by the glimmer moon illusive light,
or when the flash, with red and hasty glance,
sudden illume the sea remote expanse,
the shore, the cliff, the mountain, till again
deep darkness close on the roar main,
shall thou, dread angel, with unaltered mien,
sublime upon thy cloudy seat be see!

yet, muse much on wild tradition lore,
and many a phantom tale, believe of yore,
chief remember the sweet song (who strain
shall never die) of he who weep in vain
for his love Lycidas, in the wide sea
whelm, when he cry, great angel, unto thou,
the fable scene of thy renown we trace,
and hail, with throng thought, thy hallow resting-place!

the steal morn go out — here let we end
fitly our song, and to the shore descend.
yet once more, azure ocean, and once more,
you light headland, and thou stretch shore,
down on the beauty of your scene we cast
a tender look, the long and the last!
amid the arch of heaven, extend clear,
scarce the thin fleck of feathery cloud appear;
beyond the long curve of the lessen bay
the still atlantic stretch its bright way;
the tall ship move not on the tranquil brine;
around, the solemn promontory shine;
no sound approach we, save, at time, the cry
of the grey gull, that scarce be hear so high;
the billow make no noise, and on the breast
of charm ocean, silence sink to rest!

oh, may we thus from heaven bright battlement
behold the scene humanity present;
and see, like this, all harmonise and still,
and hear no far-off sound of earthly ill!
wide landscape of the world, in pure light
array, how fair, how cheer be the sight!

alas! we think upon this seat of care,
and ask, if peace, if harmony be there.
we hear the clangour and the cry that shake
the mad world, and their dismal music make;
we see gaunt vice, of dread, enormous size,
that fearless in the broad day swelter lie,
and scorn the feeble arrow that assail
his heaven-defying crest and iron scale;
his brow with wan and wither rose crown,
and reel to the pipe lascivious sound,
we see intemperance his goblet quaff;
and mock blasphemy, with mad loud laugh,
act before high heaven a dire part,
sport with the weapon that shall pierce his heart!

if over the southern wave we turn our sight,
more dismal shape of hideous woe affright:
grim-visaged war, that ruthless, as he hie,
drown with his trumpet blast a brother cry;
and massacre, by yell fury lead,
with ghastly grin and eye-ball roll red!
over a vast field, wide heap with fester slay,
hark! how the demon passion shout amain,
and cry, exult, while the death-storm lower,
hurrah! the kingdom of the world be we!

o god! who make man, i see these thing,
and weary wish for a fleet angel wing,
that i may fly away, and hear no more
the surge that moan along this mortal shore!
but joy unclouded sunshine may not be,
till, father of all world, we rest with thou!
then truth, uplift from thy work the pall,
shall speak: in wisdom have thou make they all;
then angel and archangel, as they gaze,
and all the acclaim host of heaven, shall raise
the loud hosannah of eternal praise!

here all be mix with sorrow; and the cloud
hang awful, who shade the dim earth shroud;
therefore i mourn for man, and sigh say,
as down the steep i wind my homeward way,
oh, when will earth long mutter tempest cease,
and all be sunshine (like this scene) and peace!
