a elegiac poem, on the death of that celebrate divine, and eminent servant of Jesus Christ, the late reverend, and pious GEORGE Whitefield, chaplain to the right honourable the countess of Huntingdon, etc. etc.  who make his exit from this transitory state, to dwell in the celestial realm of bliss, on lord's-day, 30th of September, 1770, when he be seize with a fit of the asthma, at newbury-port, near BOSTON, in new-england. in which be a condolatory address to his true noble benefactress the worthy and pious lady Huntingdon, — and the orphan-children in Georgia; who, with many thousand, be leave, by the death of this great man, to lament the loss of a father, friend, and benefactor.

by Phillis, a servant girl of 17 year of age, belong to mr. J. Wheatley, of BOSTON: — and have be but 9 year in this country from Africa.

hail happy saint on thy immortal throne!
to thou complaint of grievance be unknown;
we hear no more the music of thy tongue,
thy wonted auditory cease to throng.
thy lesson in unequalled accent flow!
while emulation in each bosom glow;
thou do, in strain of eloquence refine,
inflame the soul, and captivate the mind.
unhappy we, the set sun deplore!
which once be splendid, but it shine no more.
he leave this earth for heaven unmeasured height:
and world unknown, receive he from our sight;
there Whitefield wing, with rapid course his way,
and sail to Zion, through vast sea of day.

when his americans be burden sore,
when street be crimson with their guiltless gore!
unrivalled friendship in his breast now strive:
the fruit thereof be charity and love
towards America — can thou do more
than leave thy native home, the british shore,
to cross the great atlantic watery road,
to see america distress abode?
thy prayer, great saint, and thy incessant cry,
have pierce the bosom of thy native sky!
thou moon have see, and you bright star of light
have witness be of his request by night!
he pray that grace in every heart may dwell:
he long to see America excel;
he charge its youth to let the grace divine
arise, and in their future action shine;
he offer that he do himself receive,

a great gift not god himself can give:
he urge the need of he to every one;
it be no less than god coequal son!
take he you wretched for your only good;
take he the starve soul to be your food.
you thirsty, come to this life give stream:
you preacher, take he for your joyful theme:
take he, "my dear americans," he say,
be your complaint in his kind bosom lay:
take he you african, he long for you;
impartial saviour, be his title due;
if you will choose to walk in grace road,
you shall be son, and king, and priest to god.

great countess! we americans revere
thy name, and thus condole thy grief sincere:
we mourn with thou, that tomb obscure place,
in which thy chaplain undisturbed do rest.
New-England sure, do feel the orphan smart;
reveal the true sensation of his heart:
since this fair sun, withdraw his golden ray,
no more to brighten these distressful day!
his lonely tabernacle, see no more
a Whitefield land on the british shore:
then let we view he in yond azure sky:
let every mind with this love object rise.
no more can he exert his labour breath,
seize by the cruel messenger of death.
what can his dear America return?
but drop a tear upon his happy urn,
thou tomb, shall safe retain thy sacred trust,
till life divine reanimate his dust.
