to a lady in town, soon after she leave the country.

by the same.

while you, dear maid, over thousand bear to reign,
for the gay town exchange the rural plain,
the cool breeze and evening walk forsake
for stifle crowd, which your own beauty make;
through circle joy while you incessant stray,
charm in the Mall, and sparkle at the play;
think (if successive vanity can spare
one thought to love) what cruel pang i bear,
leave in these plain all wretched, and alone,
to weep with fountain, and with echo groan,
and mourn incessant that fatal day,
that all my bliss with Chloe snatch away.

say, by what art i can relieve my pain,
music, verse, all i try, but try in vain;
in vain the breathe flute my hand employ,
late the companion of my Chloe voice.
nor handel, nor corelli tuneful air
can harmonise my soul, or sooth my care;
those once-loved medicine unsuccessful prove,
music, alas, be but the voice of love!
in vain i oft harmonious line peruse,
and seek for aid from pope and prior muse;
their treacherous number but assist the foe,
and call forth scene of sympathise woe;
here Heloise mourn her absent lover charm,
there pant Emma sigh in Henry arm;
their love like i ill-fated i bemoan,
and in their tender sorrow read my own.

restless sometime, as oft the mournful dove
forsake her nest forsake by her love,
i fly from home, and seek the sacred field,
where cam old urn its silver current yield,
where solemn tower overlook each mossy grove,
as if to guard it from the assault of love;
yet guard in vain, for there my Chloe eye
but late make whole college her prize;
her son, though few, not Pallas can defend,
nor dullness succour to she thousand lend;
love like a fever with infectious rage
scorch up the young, and thaw the frost of age;
to gaze at she, even don be see to run,
and leave unfinished pipe, and author — scarce begin.
so Helen look, and move with such a grace,
when the grave senior of the trojan race
be force those fatal beauty to admire,
that all their youth consume, and set their town on fire.

at fame Newmarket oft i spend the day,
a unconcerned spectator of the play;
there pitiless observe the ruin heir
with anger fire, or melt with despair:
for how shall i his trivial loss bemoan,
who feel one, so much great, of my own?
there while the golden heap, a glorious prize,
wait the decision of two rival dice,
while long dispute betwixt seven and five remain,
and each, like party, have their friend for gain,
without one wish i see the guinea shine,
fate, keep your gold, i cry, make Chloe i.
now see, prepare their utmost speed to try,
over the smooth turf the bound racer fly!
now more and more their slender limb they strain,
and foam stretch along the velvet plain!
ah stay! swift steed, your rapid flight delay,
no more the jockey smart lash obey:
but rather let my hand direct the rein,
and guide your step a noble prize to gain;
then swift as eagle cut the yield air,
bear i, oh bear i to the absent fair.

now when the wind be hush, the air serene,
and cheerful sunbeam gild the beauteous scene,
pensive over all the neighbour field i stray,
whereve or choice, or chance direct the way;
or view the open lawn, or private wood,
or distant bluish hill, or silver flood:
now harmless bird in silken net ensnare,
now with swift dog pursue the fly hare;
dull sport! for oh my Chloe be not there!

fatigue at length i will retire
to a small study, and a cheerful fire,
there over some folio pore; i pore, it be true,
but oh my thought be flee, and flee to you;
i hear you, see you, feast upon your eye,
and clasp with eager arm the lovely prize.
here for a while i can forget my pain,
while i by dear reflection live again;
but even these joy be too sublime to last,
and quick fade, like all the real one past:
for just when now beneath some silent grove
i hear you talk — and talk perhaps of love,
or charm with thrill note the listen ear,
sweet than angel sing, or angel hear,
my treacherous hand its weighty charge let go,
the book fall thunder on the floor below,
the please vision in a moment go,
and i once more be wretched and alone.

so when glad Orpheus from the infernal shade
have just recall his long-lamented maid,
soon as her charm have reach his eager eye,
lose in eternal night — again she die.
