Woodstock park.

a poem.

by WILLIAM Harrison.

1706. 

kind heaven at length, successful implore,
to britain arm her hero have restore:
and now our fear remove, with loud applause
joint we crown his conduct, and his cause.
transport pleasure raise each droop tongue,
the peasant shout, and the poet sing.
the poet sing, though ADDISON alone
adorn thy laurel, and maintain his own;
in he alone, great Marlborough, be see,
thy graceful motion, and thy godlike mien:
each action he exalt with rage divine,
and the full Danube flow in every line.

but we in vain to that sublime aspire;
so heatless glow-worm emulate the fire,
shine without warmth: another song prepare,
my muse; the country be the muse care;
thither thy much-loved Marlborough pursue
with eager verse, and keep thy theme in view.

but oh! what joyful number can disclose
the various rapture his approach bestow;
how vale resound, how crowd collect share
the radiant glory of the matchless pair?
the generous youth, within who bosom glow
some secret unripe long for a foe,
survey here the favourite of fame,
conceive new hope, and nurse the grow flame:
while soft maid confess a please pain,
and sigh wish he have be bear a swain.

so when the power appease bid discord cease,
and Greece obtain from jar god a peace,
the god of war, and beauteous queen of love,
to cyprian shade their peaceful chariot drive:
shepherd have and nymph attend form the train,
and mirth unusual reveal on the plain.
and shall the god once more their heaven forgo,
to range on earth, and bless mankind below,
over all the globe no region will be find,
with noble soil, or bright beauty crown.
Phoebus for this will change his Delphic grove,
Juno her Samos, and his Ida Jove.

Olympic game no long shall delight,
but neighbour plain afford a noble sight.
where England great Aeneas stand by,
impatient youth on wing courser fly:
urge by his presence they outstrip the wind
involve in smoke, and leave the muse behind.

but see! once more return the rival train,
and now they stretch, now bend loose the rein,
and fear and hope beat high in every vein,
until one (long since successful in the field)
exert that strength he first with art conceal;
then swift as lightning dart through the sky,
spring forward to the goal, and bear away the prize.

by art like these all other palm be win,
they end with glory, who with caution run.
we neither write, nor act, what long can last,
when the first heat see all our vigour past;
but, jade, both their short-lived mettle lose,
the furious statesman, and the fiery muse.

the contest end, night with gloomy face
overspread the heaven; and now with equal pace
the victor, and the vanquish, quit the place:
sleep friendly office be to all the same,
his conquest he forget, and they their shame.

next morning, ere the sun with sickly ray
over doubtful shade maintain the dawn day,
the sprightly horn proclaim some danger near,
and hound, harmonious to the sportsman ear,
with deepmouthed note rouse up the tremble deer.
startle he leap aside, and listen round,
this way and that explore the hostile sound,
arm for that fight, which he decline with shame,
too fond of life, too negligent of fame;
for nature, to display her various art,
have fortify his head, but not his heart:
those spear, which useless on his front appear,
on any else have be adore and fear.
but honour disproportioned be a load,
grandeur a specious curse, when ill bestow.

thus void of hope, and pant with surprise,
in vain he will combat, and as vain fly.
of path mysterious whether to pursue
the scent track inform the labour crew:
with speed redouble, they the hint embrace,
while animate music warm the chace:
flush be their hope, and with one general cry
they echo through the wood, and sound their conquest nigh.
not so the prey; he now for safety bend
from enemy profess, to faithless friend,
who to the wretched own no shelter due,
but fly more swift than his foe pursue.
this last disgrace with indignation fire
his droop soul, and generous rage inspire;
by all forsake, he resolve at length
to try the poor remains of waste strength;
with look and mien majestic stand at bay,
and whet his horn for the approach fray:
too late alas! for, the first charge begin,
soon he repent what cowardice have do,
own the mistake of his over-hasty flight,
and awkward maintain a languid fight;
here, and there, aim a successless blow,
and only seem to nod upon the foe.

so coward prince, who at war alarm
start from their greatness, and themselves disarm,
with recollect force strive in vain
their empire, or their honour, to regain,
and turn to rally on some distant plain,
while the fierce conqueror brave urge on,
improve the advantage, and ascend the throne.

forgive, great Denham, that in abject verse,
what rich thou adorn, i thus rehearse.
thy noble chace all other do exceed,
in artful fury, and well-tempered speed.
we read with pleasure, imitate with pain,
where faney fire, and judgement hold the rein.

goddess, proceed; and as to relic find
altar we raise, and consecrate the ground,
pay thou thy homage to a age seat,
small in itself, but in its owner great;
where Chaucer (sacred name!) whole year employ,
coy nature court, and at length enjoy;
move at his suit, the naked goddess come,
reveal her charm, and recompense his flame.
Rome pious king with like success, retire,
and teach his people, what his nymph inspire.
hence flow description regular fine,
and beauty such as never can decline:
each lively image make the reader start,
and poetry invade the painter art.

this Dryden see, and with his wonted fate
(rich in himself) endeavour to translate;
take wondrous pain to do the author wrong,
and set to modern tune his ancient song.
cadence, and sound, which we so prize, and use,
ill suit the majesty of chaucer muse;
his language only can his thought express,
old honest Clytus scorn the persian dress.

inimitable bard!
in rapture loud i will thy praise tell,
and on the inspire theme for ever dwell,
do not the maid, who wondrous beauty see,
inflame great Henry, and incense his queen,
with please sorrow move i to survey
a neighbour structure, awful in decay,
for ever sacred, and in ruin bless,
which heretofore contain that lovely guest.
admire stranger, who attentive come
to learn the tale of this romantic dome,
by faithful monument instruct, view
(though time shall spare) what civil rage can do.
where landscape once, in rich apartment high,
through various prospect lead the wander eye:
where paint river flow through flowery mead,
and hoary mountain rear their awful head:
or where by hand of curious virgin wrought,
in rich array embroider hero fight:
now hemloek thrive, and weed of powerful charm
over ragged wall extend their baleful arm.
monster obscene their poisonous root invade,
and bloat pant beneath the gloomy shade.

thus noble building be with ease efface,
and what be well write alone, will always last.

even vanbrugh frame, that do so bright shine
in rule exact, and greatness of design,
will fall a victim to devour age,
have not that hand, which build, adorn the stage.
wit so refine without the poet pain,
such artful scene in such a flow vein,
over late aeras deathless will prevail,
when doric and corinthian order fail;
when each proud pyramid its height forego,
and sink beneath the base on which it rise.

you british fair, who name but mention, give
worth to the tale, and make the poem live;
vouchsafe to hear, while brief i relate
great Henry flame, and rosamonda fate.

pierce to the soul by her resistless eye,
lo! at her foot the sceptre vassal lie,
now big with hope, now torture with despair,
nor toil, nor pleasure, can divert his care.
her voice, her look, ten thousand wound impart,
and fix the please image in his heart;
such as (if fame have draw the picture true,
her native lustre sing, nor add new)
may tempt the thunderer from his bless abode,
to court that beauty which himself bestow.

feature so wrought not venus self display,
when dress by youthful pen in vocal lay;
not equal charm in all the grace join,
and only Sunderland be more divine.

thus fatal adorn, the hapless fair
receive his suit, and listen to his prayer;
fond of her ruin, please to be undo,
she reap the conquest that her eye have win.

though tongue obscure, at humble distance place,
may censure joy which they despair to taste;
whenever the attack be make, all joint own
what bright temptation sparkle from a throne:
can love no entrance find, ambition can,
they clasp the monarch who despise the man;
beyond his bold wish the hero bless,
riot in joy too great to be express;
and now, with caution, do the mean pursue,
as they be great, to make they last too.

'amid shade obscure, remote from vulgar eye,
a artful edifice be rear on high,
through which inextricable wind run,
lose in themselves, and end where they begin.

Maeander thus, as ancient story feign,
in curl channel wander over the plain;
oft by himself overtake, himself survey,
and backward turn, to his fountain stray.

nor much unlike to these be maze find,
by loiter hind imprint on the ground;
who, when release by some distinguish day,
lead ruddy damsel forth to rural play;
and on the flowery vale, or mountain brow,
the yield glebe in wanton furrow blow.

you sylvan nymph, who with a please pride,
over shady grove, and secret vow preside,
on this mysterious pile with care attend,
protect the mistress, and the prince befriend:
with both conspire to blind the wary dame,
and screen the important tale, from babble fame.

ah faithless guard! in vain with odorous smoke
we feast your altar, and your aid invoke;
when nuptial debt be now no long pay,
more way than one the rover be betray:
affect passion do no more suffice,
and awkward kindness prove a weak disguise.

woman, by nature arm against deceit,
with indignation smile upon the cheat;
look down with scorn, and only burn to know
the uncertain author of her certain woe.

as a fierce lioness of lybian race,
strike by the hunter hand, with furious pace
stride over the sand, and red with recent gore
yell out her pain, and make the forest roar:
so rave the queen incense; and loud tell
the restless grief that in her bosom dwell,
for her love lord from her embrace flee,
her slight beauty, and her widow bed.

what dire effect her kindle fury wrought,
whether by point steel, or poison draught,
the unguarded rival fall, forbear to ask,
the unwilling muse decline the mournful task,
recoil with anguish, wound to the soul,
feel every stab, and drink the envenom bowl.

thou, beauteous fair, love make a prisoner here,
but great Eliza doom be more severe;
by hate implacable to shade confine,
where still the native grandeur of her mind
clear and unsullied shine, with radiant grace
gild the dusky horror of the place.

no noble gift can heaven itself pour down,
than to deserve, and to despise a crown.

in some dark room, for pompous sorrow make,
methinks i see the royal virgin lay;
with anxious thought employ on former time,
their various fate, their glory, and their crime;
the ill-boding place a just concernment give,
since elinora in Maria live.
Maria — but forget be her name,
in long oblivion lose, overlook by fame.

do thou, o Albion, from remembrance chace
thy persecute son, thy martyr race:
and free at length by anna mild ray,
from furious zeal, and arbitrary sway,
enjoy the present, or the future scene,
with promise blessing fraught, without one cloud serene.

stop, goddess, stop, recall thy dare flight,
i can, must not tempt the wondrous height.
theme so exalt, with proportion wing,
let ADDISON, let Garth, let Congreve sing;
while listen nation crowd the vocal lyre,
foretaste their bliss, and languish with desire.

to thou thy song, thy province be assign,
and what shall foremost stand, be yet behind.

silence be all antiquity can boast,
and let old Woodstock in the new be lose.
no more she Edwards, or her Henrys please;
their spoil of war, or monument of peace:
by Churchill hand so large be outdo,
what either prince have build, and both have win.

with admiration strike, we gaze around,
the fancy entertain, the sense confound:
and while our eye over the foundation roam,
presage the wonder of the finish dome.
thus do our hero early dawn display
the auspicious beam of his advance day.

we, who in humble cell, and learn retreat,
be stranger to the splendour of the great,
on barren cliff of speculation throw,
of all beside unknowing, and unknown,
pronounce our fabric just in every part,
and scorn the poor attempt of modern art;
(proud of his cottage so exult the swain,
who love the forest, and admire the plain,)
until here convince, unwilling we find
our wickham, and our wainfleet, leave behind;
far as the molehill by the mountain brow,
or shrub by cedar, in who shade they grow.

rise, glorious pile, the princess bid thou rise,
and claim thy title to her kindred sky:
where she preside all must be noble great,
all must be regular, and all complete;
no other hand the mighty work require,
art may inform, but she alone inspire.

when labour tyrian, with unite toil,
advance their Carthage on the destine soil,
so sit their queen, and look auspicious down,
herself the genius of the rise town.

thrice happy he, to who the task shall fall,
to grace with shine image the wall;
and in bold colour silent rehearse,
what soar above the reach of humble verse.
no fame exploit, from musty annal bring,
shall share his art, or furnish out the draught;
no foreign hero in triumphant car,
no latian victory, nor graecian war:
germania fruitful field alone afford
work for the pencil, harvest for the sword.
her welldrawn fight with horror shall surprise,
and cloud of smoke upon the canvas rise;
river distain shall reek current boast,
and wind in crimson wave the plunge host;
each mortal pang be see, each die throe,
and death look grim in all the pomp of woe.
but far, oh far distinguish from the rest!
by youth, by beauty, and a wave crest,
like young Patroclus, dormer shall be slay,
and great Achilles soul be shock again.

successful kneller, who improve air
add light to light, and grace to the fair,
thus may complete the glory of his age,
and in one piece the whole soft sex engage;
who shall in crowd the lovely dead surround,
and weep rich gem upon his stream wound;
by sad remembrance urge to fruitless moan,
and lose in dormer charm, neglect their own.

yet artist stop not here, but bold dare
next to design, what next deserve thy care.

'midst british squadron awful serene,
on rise ground let Marlborough be see,
with his draw falchion lightning on the foe,
prepare to strike the great decisive blow;
while phlegmatic ally his vengeance stay,
by absence these, and by their presence they.

ill-fated Gauls to escape his thunder so,
and by a short reprieve inhance their woe!
when they in arm again the combat try,
again their troop in wild disorder fly,
no usual tie of clemency shall bind,
no temper shall assuage the victor mind:
but heap on heap atone the fatal wrong,
and rage unbounded drive the storm along.

legion of foe resistless shall advance
over prostrate mound, to shock the power of France,
their loud demand to proud Lutetia tell,
and rouse the inglorious tyrant from his cell.

then province release shall break their chain,
forgo their bondage, and forget their pain.

Iberia, with extend arm, shall run
to liberty, to life, to austria son;
and by mild council generous sway,
own thy example, ANNA! and thy aid;
whole kingdom shall be bless, all Europe free,
and lift her hand unmanacled to thou.
