WILLIAM and MARY. 

young William once the blithe of the swain,
 that grace the flowery bank, or tread the plain;
 not rustic, but from affectation free,
 still courteous, kind, and affable be he. 
of gentle manner, ever form to please;
 his mind unruffled, ever bless with ease;
 his mien engage, sweet beyond compare;
 his breath delicious as the fragrant air;
 his nature prone, attractive sweet to impart,
 good without show, and lovely without art. 

each nymph he prize, and oft they seek, in vain,
 the noble conquest of his heart to gain,
 their gentle art unable be to move,
 his soul serene, yet undisturbed by love. 
ah! transient happiness! how short thy sway! 
how swift thy flight! how sudden thy decay! 
thy absence now the youth, deject, mourn,
 while in his heart love kindle passion burn. 

a lovely nymph, adorn with every grace,
 fair than fame, of old, arcadia race:
 a easy shape, and graceful in her air,
 the virgins envy, and the swain' despair. 
her name be mary, from the bank of Clyde,
 she come to taste the summer in its pride. 
one fatal eve, this charm youth pass by,
 and on this bloom damsel cast his eye:
 her charm, resistless, smite his generous heart,
 surprise, confound, then he feel the smart. 
sometime with wonder on the maid he gaze,
 then silence break, and thus, like one amaze:
 "what do i feel! from whence this magic spell! 
be this that love of which the poet tell? 
it must be so; else why this please pain,
 these sweet enchant hope the nymph to gain? 
this fear, this dread, which do my soul molest? 
such thing till now be stranger to my breast." 

he own it be love, and wish to find relief;
 but warble songster can assuage his grief. 
the sweet of spring no pleasure now can yield,
 nor all the verdure which adorn the field. 
to this lose passion all his power give way,
 and in his heart young mary bear the sway. 
go then, fond youth, and tell the maid thy care,
 who know, perhaps she may be kind as fair. 
yes, mary sure will hear thy plaintive strain;
 it be her who cause, she too must cure thy pain. 
thy passion urge, her tender love confess,
 what maid so happy, or what swain so bless? 
