a epistle from a lady in England, to a gentleman at Avignon.

by the same.

to thou, dear rover, and thy vanquish friend,
the health she want, thy gentle Chloe send;
though much you suffer, think i suffer more,
worse than a exile on my native shore.
companion in your master flight you roam,
unenvied by your haughty foe at home;
foreve near the royal out-law's side,
you share his fortune, and his hope divide;
on glorious scheme, and thought of empire dwell,
and with imaginary title swell.

say, (for thou know i own his sacred line,
the passive doctrine, and the right divine)
say, what new succour do the chief prepare?
the strength of army? or the force of prayer?
do he from heaven or earth his hope derive?
from saint depart? or from priest alive?
nor saint nor priest can brunswick troop withstand,
and bead drop useless through the zealot hand;
heaven to our vow may future kingdom owe,
but skill and courage win the crown below.

ere to thy cause, and thou, my heart incline,
or love to party have seduce my mind,
in female joy i take a dull delight,
sleep all the morn, and punt half the night;
but now, with fear and public care possess,
the church, the church, forever break my rest.
the post-boy on my pillow i explore,
and sift the news of every foreign shore,
studious to find new friend, and new ally;
what army march from Sweden in disguise;
how Spain prepare her banner to unfold,
and Rome deal out her blessing, and her gold:
then over the map my finger teach to stray,
cross many a region mark the wind way;
from sea to sea, from realm to realm i rove,
and grow a mere geographer by love.
but still Avignon, and the please coast
that hold thou banish, claim my care the most;
oft on the wellknown spot i fix my eye,
and span the distance that between we lie.

let not our James, though foil in arm, despair,
while on his side he reckon half the fair:
in britain lovely isle a shine throng
war in his cause, a thousand beauty strong.
the unthinking victor vain boast their power;
be they the musket, while the tongue be we.
we reason with such fluency and fire,
the beaux we baffle, and the learned tire,
against the prelate plead the church cause,
and from our judge vindicate the law.
then mourn not, hapless prince, thy kingdom lose,
a crown, though late, thy sacred brow may boast;
heaven seem through we thy empire to decree,
those who win heart, have give their heart to thou.

have thou not hear that, when profuse gay,
our well-dressed rival grace their sovereign day,
we stubborn damsel meet the public view
in loathsome wormwood, and repent rue?
what whig but tremble, when our spotless band
in virgin rose whiten half the land!
who can forget what fear the foe possess,
when oaken bough mark every loyal breast!
less scar near medway stream the norman stand,
when cross the plain he spy a march wood,
until near at hand, a gleam of sword betray
the youth of Kent beneath its wander shade.

those, who the succour of the fair despise,
may find that we have nail as well as eye.
the female band, o prince by fortune cross,
at least more courage than thy man may boast;
our sex have dare the mug-house chief to meet,
and purchase fame in many a well-fought street.
from Drury-lane, the region of renown,
the land of love, the paphos of the town,
fair patriot sally oft have put to flight
with all their pole the guardian of the night,
and bear, with scream of triumph, to their side
the leader staff in all its paint pride.
nor fear the hawker in her warble note
to vend the discontent statesman thought.
though red with stripe, and recent from the thong,
sore smite for the love of sacred song,
the tuneful sister still pursue their trade,
like Philomela darkling in the shade.
poor Trott attend, forgetful of a fare,
and hum in concert over his empty chair.

mean while, regardless of the royal cause,
his sword for James no brother sovereign draw.
the pope himself surround with alarm,
to France his bull, to Corfu send his arm,
and though he hear his darling son complaint,
can hardly spare one tutelary saint;
but list they all to guard his own abode,
and into ready money coin his god.
the dauntless Swede, pursue by vengeful foe,
scarce keep his own hereditary snow;
nor must the friendly roof of kind Lorrain
with feast regale our garter youth again:
safe, bar-le-duc, within thy silent grove
the pheasant now may perch, the hare may rove:
the knight, who aim unerring from afar,
the adventurous knight, now quit the sylvan war:
the brind boar may slumber undismayed,
or grunt secure beneath the chesnut shade.
inconstant Orleans (still we mourn the day
that trust Orleans with imperial sway)
far over the Alps our helpless monarch send,
far from the call of his despond friend.
such be the term to gain britannia grace!
and such the terror of the Brunswick race!

be it for this the sun whole lustre fail,
and sudden midnight over the noon prevail!
for this do heaven display to mortal eye
aërial knight and combat in the sky?
be it for this northumbrian stream look red,
and Thames drive backward show his secret bed!
false augury! the insult victor scorn!
even our own prodigy against we turn!
o portent construe on our side in vain!
let never Tory trust eclipse again!
run clear, you fountain! be at peace, you sky!
and, Thames, henceforth to thy green border rise!

to Rome then must the royal wanderer go,
and fall a suppliant at the papal toe?
his life in sloth inglorious must he wear,
one half in luxury, and one in prayer?
his mind perhaps at length, debauch with ease,
the proffer purple and the hat may please.
shall he, who ancient patriarchal race
to mighty Nimrod in one line we trace,
in solemn conclave sit, devoid of thought,
and poll for point of faith his trusty vote!
be summon to his stall in time of need,
and with his cast suffrage fix a creed!
shall he in robe on state day appear,
and english heretic curse once a year!
Garnet and Faux shall he with prayer invoke,
and beg that Smithfield pile once more may smoke!
forbid it heaven! my soul, to fury wrought,
turn almost hanoverian at the thought.

from James and Rome i feel my heart decline,
and fear, o Brunswick, it will be whole thy;
yet still his share thy rival will contest,
and still the double claim divide my breast:
the fate of James with pity eye i view,
and wish my homage be not brunswick due;
to James my passion and my weakness guide,
but reason sway i to the victor side.
though grieve i speak it, let the truth appear;
(you know my language, and my heart, sincere.)
in vain do falsehood his fair fame disgrace;
what force have falsehood, when he show his face!
in vain to war our boastful clan be lead;
heap drive on heap, in the dire shock they flee:
France shun his wrath, nor raise to our shame
a second Dunkirk in another name:
in britain fund their wealth all Europe throw,
and up the Thames the world abundance flow:
spite of feign fear, and artificial cry,
the pious town see fifty church rise:
the hero triumph as his worth be know,
and sit more firm on his shake throne.

to my sad thought no beam of hope appear
through the long prospect of succeed year;
the son aspire to his father fame,
show all his sire: another and the same.
he bless in lovely carolina arm,
to future age propagate her charm:
with pain and joy at strife, i often trace
the mingle parent in each daughter face;
half sicken at the sight, too well i spy
the father spirit through the mother eye:
in vain new thought of rage i entertain,
and strive to hate their innocence in vain.

o princess! happy by thy foe confess!
bless in thy husband! in thy child bless!
as they from thou, from they new beauty horn,
while Europe last, shall europe throne adorn.
transplant to each court, in time to come,
thy smile celestial and unfading bloom
great austria son with soft line shall grace,
and smooth the frown of bourbon haughty race.
the fair descendent of thy sacred bed
wide-branching over the western world shall spread,
like the fame banian tree, who pliant shoot
to earthward bend of itself take root,
till like their mother plant, ten thousand stand
in verdant arch on the fertile land;
beneath her shade the tawny indian rove,
or hunt at large through the wide echo grove.

o thou, to who these mournful line i send,
my promise husband, and my dear friend;
since heaven appoint this favour race to reign,
and blood have drench the scottish field in vain;
must i be wretched, and thy flight partake?
or will not thou, for thy love Chloe sake,
tire out at length, submit to fate decree?
if not to Brunswick, o return to i!
prostrate before the victor mercy bend:
what spare whole thousand, may to thou extend.
shall blind friend thy doubtful conduct blame,
great brunswick virtue will secure thy fame:
say, these invite thou to approach his throne,
and own the monarch heaven vouchsafe to own.
the world, convince, thy reason will approve;
say this to they; but swear to i it be love.
