the horse and the olive:

 or, war and peace.

with moral tale let ancient wisdom move,
 which thus i sing to make the modern wise:
 strong Neptune once with sage Minerva strive,
 and rise Athens be the victor prize. 

by Neptune, Plutus (guardian power of gain),
 by great Minerva, bright Apollo stand:
 but Jove superior bad the side obtain
 which best contrive to do the nation good. 

then Neptune strike, from the part ground
 the warlike horse come paw on the plain,
 and as it toss its mane, and prance around,
 by this, he cry, i will make the people reign. 

the goddess smile gentle bow the spear,
 and, rather thus they shall be bless, she say;
 then upward shoot in the vernal air
 with load bough the fruitful olive spread. 

Jove see what gift the rival power design,
 and take the impartial scale, resolve to show,
 if great bliss in warlike pomp we find,
 or in the calm which peaceful time bestow. 

on neptune part he place victorious day,
 gay trophy win, and fame extend wide:
 but plenty, safety, science, art, and ease,
 minerva scale with great weight supply. 

fierce war devour who gentle peace will save,
 sweet peace restore what angry war destroy,
 war make for peace with that reward the brave,
 while peace its pleasure from it self enjoy. 

hence vanquish Neptune to the sea withdraw,
 hence wise Minerva rule athenian land,
 her Athens hence in art and honour grow,
 and still her olive deck pacific hand. 

from Fables thus disclose, a monarch mind
 may form just rule to choose the truly-great:
 and subject weary with distress find
 who kind endeavour most befriend the state. 

even Britain here may learn to place her love,
 if city win her kingdom wealth have cost,
 if anna thought the patriot-soul approve
 who care restore that wealth the war have lose. 

but if we ask the moral to disclose
 who best europa patroness it call,
 great anna title no exception know,
 and unapplied in this the fable fall. 

with her not Neptune or Minerva vye;
 whenever she please her troop to conquest fly,
 whenever she please peaceful time arise:
 she give the horse, and give the olive too. 
