the woman labour:

to mr. Stephen duck. 

immortal bard! thou favourite of the nine! 
enrich by peer, advance by Caroline! 
deign to look down on one that be poor and low,
 remember you yourself be late so;
 accept these line: alas! what can you have
 from she, who ever be, and his still a slave? 
no learning ever be bestow on i;
 my life be always spend in drudgery:
 and not alone; alas! with grief i find,
 it be the portion of poor womankind. 
oft have i think as on my bed i lay,
 ease from the tiresome labour of the day,
 our first extraction from a mass refine,
 can never be for slavery design;
 till time and custom by degree destroy
 that happy state our sex at first enjoy. 
when man have use their utmost care and toil,
 their recompense be but a female smile;
 when they by art or arm be render great,
 they lay their trophy at a woman foot;
 they, in those day, unto our sex do bring
 their heart, their all, a freewill offer;
 and as from we their be they derive,
 they back again shall all due homage give. 

Jove once descend from the cloud, do drop
 in shower of gold on lovely danae lap;
 the sweet-tongued poet, in those generous day,
 unto our shrine still offer up their lay:
 but now, alas! that golden age be past,
 we be the object of your scorn at last. 
and you, great duck, upon who happy brow
 the muse seem to fix their garland now,
 in your late poem bold do declare
 alcides labour cant with you compare;
 and of your annual task have much to say,
 of thresh, reap, mow corn and hay;
 boast your daily toil, and nightly dream,
 but can conclude your never-dying theme,
 and let our hapless sex in silence lie
 forget, and in dark oblivion die;
 but on our abject state you throw your scorn,
 and woman wrong, your verse to adorn. 
you of hay-making speak a word or two,
 as if our sex but little work can do:
 this make the honest farmer smile say,
 he will seek for woman still to make his hay;
 for if his back be turn the work they mind
 as well as man, as far as he can find. 
for my own part, i many a summer day
 have spend in throw, turn, make hay;
 but never can see, what you have late find,
 our wage pay for sit on the ground. 
it be true, that when our morning work be do,
 and all our grass expose unto the sun,
 while that his scorch beam do on it shine,
 as well as you we have a time to dine:
 i hope, that since we free toil and sweat
 to earn our bread, you will give we time to eat;
 that over, soon we must get up again,
 and nimble turn our hay upon the plain:
 nay, rake and row it in, the case be clear;
 or how shall cock in equal row appear? 
but if you will have what you have write believe,
 i find, that you to hear we talk be grieve:
 in this, i hope, you do not speak your mind,
 for none but Turk, that ever i can find,
 have mute to serve they, or do ever deny
 their slave, at work, to chat it merry. 
since you have liberty to speak your mind,
 and be to talk, as well as we, incline,
 why shall you thus repine, because that we,
 like you, enjoy that please liberty? 
what! will you lord it quite, and take away
 the only privilege our sex enjoy? 

when evening do approach, we homeward hie,
 and our domestic toil incessant ply:
 against your come home prepare to get
 our work all do, our house in order set;
 Bacon and dumpling in the pot we boil,
 our bed we make, our swine we feed the while;
 then wait at door to see you come home,
 and set the table out against you come:
 early next morning we on you attend,
 our child dress and feed, their clothes we mend
 and in the field our daily task renew,
 soon as the rise sun have dry the dew. 

when harvest come, into the field we go,
 and help to reap the wheat as well as you;
 or else we go the ear of corn to glean;
 no labour scorn, be it ever so mean;
 but in the work we free bear a part,
 and what we can, perform with all our heart. 
to get a live we so will be,
 our tender babe unto the field we bear,
 and wrap they in our clothes to keep they warm,
 while round about we gather up the corn;
 and often unto they our course do bend,
 to keep they save, that nothing they offend:
 our child that be able bear a share,
 in glean corn, such be our frugal care. 
when night come on, unto our home we go,
 our corn we carry, and our infant too;
 weary indeed! but it be not worth our while
 once to complain, or rest at every stile;
 we must make haste, for when we home be come,
 we find again our work but just begin:
 so many thing for our attendance call,
 have we ten hand, we can employ they all. 
our child put to bed, with great care
 we all thing for your come home prepare:
 you sup, and go to bed without delay,
 and rest yourself till the ensue day;
 while we, alas! but little sleep can have,
 because our froward child cry and rave;
 yet, without fail, soon as day-light do spring,
 we in the field again our work begin,
 and there, with all our strength, our toil renew,
 till titan golden ray have dry the dew;
 then home we go unto our child dear,
 dress, feed, and bring they to the field with care. 
be this your case, you just may complain
 that day nor night you be secure from pain;
 those mighty trouble which perplex your mind,
 (thistle before, and female come behind)
 will vanish soon, and quick disappear,
 be you, like we, encumber thus with care. 
what you will have of we we do not know:
 we oft take up the corn that you do mow;
 we cut the pea, and always ready be
 in every work to take our proper share;
 and from the time that harvest do begin,
 until the corn be cut and carry in,
 our toil and labour daily so extreme,
 that we have hardly ever time to dream. 

the harvest end, respite none we find;
 the hard of our toil be still behind:
 hard labour we most cheerful pursue,
 and out, abroad, a chair often go:
 of which i now will brief tell in part,
 what full to describe be past my art;
 so many hardship daily we go through,
 i bold say, the like you never know. 

when bright Orion glitter in the sky
 in winter night, then early we must rise;
 the weather never so bad, wind, rain, or snow,
 our work appoint, we must rise and go;
 while you on easy bed may lie and sleep,
 till light do through your chamber window peep
 when to the house we come where we shall go,
 how to get in, alas! we do not know:
 the maid quite tire with work the day before,
 overcome with sleep; we stand at the door
 oppress with cold, and often call in vain,
 ever to our work we can admittance gain:
 but when from wind and weather we get in,
 brisk with courage we our work begin;
 heap of fine linen we before we view,
 whereon to lay our strength and patience too;
 cambrick and muslin which our lady wear,
 lace and edge, costly, fine, and rare,
 which must be wash with utmost skill and care;
 with holland shirt, ruffle and fringe too,
 fashion, which our forefather never know. 
for several hour here we work and slave,
 before we can one glimpse of day-light have;
 we labour hard before the morning past,
 because we fear the time run on too fast. 

at length bright Sol illuminate the sky,
 and summons drowsy mortal to arise;
 then come our mistress to we without fail,
 and in her hand, perhaps, a mug of ale
 to cheer our heart, and also to inform
 herself what work be do that very morn;
 lay her command upon we, that we mind
 her linen well, nor leave the dirt behind:
 nor this alone, but also to take care
 we do she cambrick nor her ruffle tear;
 and these most strict do of we require,
 to save her soap, and spare by of fire;
 tell we her charge be great, nay furthermore,
 her clothes be few than the time before:
 now we drive on, resolve our strength to try,
 and what we can we do most will;
 until with heat and work, it be often know,
 not only sweat, but blood run trickle down
 our wrist and finger; still our work demand
 the constant action of our labour hand. 

now night come on, from whence you have relief,
 but that, alas! do but increase our grief;
 with heavy heart we often view the sun,
 fear he will set before our work be do;
 for either in the morning, or at night,
 we piece the summer day with candlelight. 
though we all day with care our work attend,
 such be our fate, we know not when it will end:
 when evening come, you homeward take your way,
 we, till our work be do, be force to stay;
 and after all our toil and labour past,
 sixpence or eight-pence pay we off at last;
 for all our pain, no prospect can we see
 attend we, but old age and poverty. 

the wash be not all we have to do:
 we oft change work for work as well as you. 
our mistress of her pewter do complain,
 and it be our part to make it clean again. 
this work, though very hard and tiresome too,
 be not the worst we hapless female do:
 when night come on, and we quite weary be,
 we scarce can count what fall unto our share;
 pot, kettle, saucepan, skillet, we may see,
 skimmer, and ladle, and such trumpery,
 bring in to make complete our slavery. 
though early in the morning it be begin,
 it be often very late before we have do;
 alas! our labour never know no end,
 on brass and iron we our strength must spend;
 our tender hand and finger scratch and tear:
 all this, and more, with patience we must bear,
 colour with dirt and filth we now appear;
 your thresh sooty pea will not come near. 
all the perfection woman once can boast,
 be quite obscure, and altogether lose. 

once more our mistress send to let we know
 she want our help, because the beer run low:
 then in much haste for brew we prepare,
 the vessel clean, and scald with great care;
 often at midnight from our bed we rise
 at other time even that will not suffice;
 our work at evening oft we do begin,
 and ever we have do, the night come on again. 
water we pump, the copper we must fill,
 or tend the fire; for if we ever stand still,
 like you, when thresh, we a watch must keep,
 our wort boil over, if we dare to sleep. 

but to rehearse all labour be in vain,
 of which we very just may complain:
 for we, you see, but little rest be find;
 our toil increase as the year run round,
 while you to sysiphus yourself compare,
 with danaus' daughter we may claim a share;
 for while he labour hard against the hill,
 bottomless tub of water they must fill. 

so the industrious bee do hourly strive
 to bring their load of honey to the hive;
 their sordid owner always reap the gain,
 and poor recompense their toil and pain. 
