a pindaric poem on habbakuk.

i 

when god from Teman come,
 and clothe in glory from Mount-Paran shine,
 dress in the unsufferable flame
 that hide his dazzle throne,
 his glory soon eclipse the once bright titan ray,
 and fill the tremble earth with terror and amaze. 
resplondent beam do crown his awful head,
 and shine brightness all around he spread;
 omnipotence he grasp in his strong hand,
 and listen death stand wait on his dread command;
 wait until his resistless bolt he will throw;
 devour coal beneath his foot do glow:
 all nature frame do quake beneath his foot,
 and with his hand he the vast globe do meet;
 the fright nation scatter,
 and at his sight the bashful mountain sle,
 the everlasting hill their founder voice obey,
 and stoop their lofty head to make the eternal way. 
the distant ethiops all confusion be,
 and midian tremble curtain can hide their fear:
 when thy swift chariot pass the yield sea,
 the blush wave back in amazement flee,
 affright Iordan stop his flow urn,
 and bid his forward stream back to their fountain turn. 

(2.)

arm with thy mighty bow,
 thou marchedst out against thy dare foe:
 and very terrible thou do appear
 to they, but thus thy darling people cheer. 
 "know, iacob son, i be the god of truth,
" your father iacob god, nor can i break my oath. 
the mountain shake as our dread lord advance,
 and all the little hill around they dance:
 the neighbour stream their verdant bank overflow,
 the water see and tremble at the sight,
 back to their old abyss they go,
 and bear the news to everlasting night:
 the mother deep within its hollow cavern roar. 
and beat the silent shore. 
the sun above no long dare to strive,
 nor will his fright steed their wonted journey drive. 
the moon, to see her brother stop his car,
 grow pale, and curb her sable reins for fear,
 thy threaten arrow gild their flame way,
 and at the glitter of thy spear the heathen dare not stay;
 the very sight of thou do they subdue,
 and arm with fury thou the victory do pursue. 
so now, great god, wrap in avenge thunder,
 meet thy and William foe, and tread they grovel under. 
