THELMON and Carmel;

a irregular poem.

part the first.

in thelmon breast contend passion rise,
 while, with resentment sting, he proud fly;
 the harmonist divine, to madness fire,
 rash to carmel youthful charm aspire;
 but she, with virtue awful power possess,
 teach he to blush, and drive he from her breast. 
first anger in his heat bosom rise,
 with pride he burn, for speedy vengeance glow:
 his instrument, of heaven-inspired sound,
 touch by dire discord wound the air around;
 then vengeance die, and fierce disdain succeed;
 he fly, while carmel heart with sorrow bleed;
 his agony be change to bitter scorn,
 nor can the lofty spirit stoop to mourn;
 disown every tie that link the heart,
 he lose in vice the rack sense of smart;
 he give a scope to all his mad desire. 
(pervert genius deep crime inspire)
 the wanton chord he strike with loose delight,
 and wit strong flash shed luxuriant light;
 till, satiate with the empty joy of sense,
 and oft disgust with their impotence,
 weary of folly reap without controul,
 with self-reproach he smart to the soul;
 with shame and scorn from noisy pleasure fly,
 and to the calm of solitude withdraw;
 nature explore, and with music fire,
 lose in research he wander as inspire. 

part the second.

remove from man, and summer tuneful grove,
 alone harmonious THELMON stray to muse;
 over rugged hill, through long rough path he rove,
 to where, impel by wind, the ocean roar,
 heave its vast surge on the echo shore,
 foam amid the rock, and dash the thick ooze. 

now on the sound beech, sublime in thought,
 he view the wonder of the horrid deep,
 which from the heaven the ponderous torrent catch,
 while briny mountain brave the darken sky,
 where lower cloud replete with water fly,
 and stormy wind the heaven and ocean sweep. 

nor jar element untuned his soul,
 each natural cause still trace to its source,
 while drive on wind the wave tremendous roll;
 curious to meditate on nature law,
 the vast creator in his work he see,
 and contemplation guide his wander course. 

humble by youthful crime and curb desire,
 abstract through life mazy path he tread,
 the love of science damp his former fire;
 and with a heart form to converse with man,
 a genius raise on nature noble plan,
 he inward draw his power, and seek his god. 

ponder on man vain passion as he stand,
 he hear the transport of the empty wind,
 the vain contention of the mighty flood,
 till the tire storm scowl cross the heave main;
 the spray no more fly over the distant plain,
 and the faint sun through filmy vapour shine. 

calm amid advance shade dissolve the day,
 the silence wind scarce shake the showery leave,
 and through the heaven the watery vapour stray;
 then over the sea (tumultuous now no more)
 which beat the rock, and gentle dash the shore,
 a solemn melody his spirit breathe. 

THELMON, who passion now no more controul,
 to science and to music give his soul;
 fair carmel charm alone his love have fire,
 unmarked the mind which every grace inspire,
 with violence it flame, but soon expire. 
his heedless wander fate or chance decide,
 but now again near carmel dwelling guide;
 of which unmindful, still he rove the plain,
 and to the set sun pour forth sublime his strain. 

part the third.

the grove be hush, the saffron-tinged cloud
 shoot down their soften colour to the west;
 advance night the sable mountain shroud,
 and with her dewy foot be mead and flowret press. 

slow the solemn moon its full orb rear,
 and through the sky its lucid influence throw,
 each glitter star amid fleecy cloud appear,
 and through the immeasurable path of heaven
 the high galaxy glow. 

the moonbeam glide serene across the lake,
 who glassy bosom gloomy branch shade;
 the die gale the murmur sedge shake,
 while sound melodious, pour through the grove,
 the solemn stillness of the night invade. 

cool as the eve, mild as the lucid sphere,
 fair Carmel wander amid the nightly dew;
 but wonder stand, as through her well-tuned ear
 she listen soft harmonious number draw. 

on the chaste moon she fix her crystal eye,
 her ear attentive catch the tremble sound;
 responsive her lone bosom utter sigh,
 while the musician pour his lofty strain,
 they fill the wood, they echo over the plain,
 the distant air with heavenly note resound. 

song of THELMON.

 "in the cool bosom of the solemn night
" with song sublime i hail the power divine,
 "as from yond orb the quiver beam of light
" surround the shade, and through the ether bright
 "soften the scene, and over the tremble water shine. 

 "amid splendent day oft jar passion be,
" but calm at eve i tread the silent grove,
 "and feel delight from every brook and star:
" each solemn scene i view with sacred awe,
 "while from a mental glance of nature law
" i learn the wonder of almighty love. 

 "rude be the storm which deep through my sad breast
" have strive the germ of virtue to expel;
 "rebellious passion rob my soul of rest:
" but in despondency most baleful hour
 "i feel within a renovate power
" strengthen my soul, and all at last be well. 

 "my mind, no more in boisterous transport drown,
" reflective feel a bosom form for love,
 "sense which touch the string of thought profound,
" and taste each bliss in nature calm retreat;
 "while over this wilderness of thorny sweet
" wander, with harmony of soul i move. " 

he cease, and amid the thicket stray along. 
the listen virgin bosom swell with woe,
amid silent tear she hear the solemn song —
 well do her soul his heavenly accent know. 

rekindled passion warm her heave breast,
 while memory teem with proof of former love;
 deep in her heart each accent be impress,
 scarce can she quit the lake, or shadowy wave grove. 

her fancy hear amid the murmur gale
 still the faint echo of his music roll,
 homeward she bend at last, fatigue and pale,
 and vain strive to calm her tremble soul. 

part the four.

the moon be sink, and heaven resplendent star
 glimmer amid nightly shade and morning grey,
 over the low plain a whitish mist appear;
 while sliver every eastern cloud, the dawn,
 infuse slow the promise of the morn,
 faint-tinged the couch where Carmel thoughtful lay. 

from her clear eye large pear drop descend,
 unusual fire thrill through her tremble vein:
 as when the potent solar ray extend
 over tract where long congeal ice and snow
 like mountain rise, near polar circle freeze,
 and melt by its heat wild deluge the vast plain. 

remembrance pour its influence through her soul;
 her ache bosom heave with bitter sigh,
 her agitate thought distract roll;
 and to her feverish fancy THELMON rise —
 now lofty verse in strain harmonious flow,
 now passion speak in his all-potent eye. 

like a imperfect dream the past appear,
 his error fleet like a dissolve cloud;
 his virtue shine like uneclipse star:
 no more the sense of wrong secure her heart,
 her bosom burn with unavailing smart,
 and all within the hopeless flame avow. 

restless she lie, till over the mantling sky
 the dazzle radiance of the morning rise;
 from the broad light she turn her weep eye,
 and, spend with passion and the weight of thought,
 the transient comfort of soft sleep she seek,
 and listless sink at length to half repose. 

thus a sad prey to misery, Carmel find
 no kind resource to mitigate the wound;
 void of pursuit, her heart seek no relief,
 no active duty rouse she from grief:
 though calm she seem, within the poison wrought;
 and her affection quite absorb each thought;
 the light of day her sorrow mind oppress;
 night be alone congenial to her breast;
 each eve she stray to soothe her joyless soul,
 and please behold the lengthen shadow roll. 

part the five.

in the mild west dissolve the blaze of day;
 the rosy heaven rich vary tint overspread;
 bright shine the hill beneath the evening ray;
 amid the corn wild crimson poppy blow,
 all nature wear a universal glow,
 and joy be echo over the illumine mead. 

untouched by every accent of delight,
 amid the smile harvest Carmel stray;
 then climb a craggy hill of tower height,
 where hang wood luxuriant foliage spread,
 and wild blow flower their spicy odour shed;
 thence she the grand extensive scene survey. 

night do not yet possess its dark domain,
 but gradual shade overspread the burn sky;
 the solemn lake, the flower-enameled plain,
 catch the last ray of the descend orb,
 who fiery blaze the distant sea absorb,
 while through the western cloud the crimson glory fly. 

nature in glow plenty smile below,
 above the cloud incessant vary roll;
 as Carmel view the fertile landscape glow,
 touch by the view, the glorious work she praise,
 and to the universal parent raise,
 fervent in prayer, her energetic soul. 

the fade landscape lessen on her sight,
 amid the ether star celestial shine;
 some scatter cloud still catch the ebb light,
 and by the glimmer ray distinct she view
 THELMON, who lose in contemplation stand,
 as if in converse with the heavenly nine. 

she strive to speak, but all her power be bind:
 over her fair breast fast flow a silent flood,
 while he with muse pace be wander round
 the rugged path, and pass regardless by;
 he see she not, but draw unconscious nigh,
 then mingle in the umbrage of the wood. 

in vain again to calm her breast she try,
 her livid eye survey the ruthess heaven;
 the briny shower she shed, the deep-felt sigh,
 which mix with prayer her wretched bosom heave,
 alike amid a friendless void be breathe,
 or by the wind to neighbour mountain drive. 

now when the cloud roll heavy over the star,
 and chill midnight spread a dreary gloom,
 she dry the painful sluice of her tear;
 devoid of hope she wish not for its light,
 and, thoughtless of the danger of the night,
 restless return in silence to she home. 

part the sixth.

the shade of night and glimmer dawn be flee,
 the rise sun the part cloud have fire;
 the purple hill illumine flame with red,
 while THELMON, fraught with praise, forsake his bed,
 with love of nature and her truth inspire. 

the wave corn, moist with the pearly dew,
 glitter beneath the sun refulgent ray;
 luxuriant over each hedge wild rose grow,
 and ripen fruit prolific greet his view —
 all nature smile a thousand various way. 

silent this morn be his melodious tongue,
 and listen to the songster of the grove,
 he envy their sweet lay, as blythe they sing;
 for with a transient pang his heart be wring,
 reflect on their pure and artless love. 

bitter remembrance deep pervade his soul,
 the glisten lake, the high-grown tree he know;
 over the sweet plain his eye rekindle roll,
 "here carmel virtue do his fire control,"
 deep he blush, and quick his eye withdraw. 

touch by her wrong, his soul its guilt confess;
 his breast, which heave with deep remorse and smart,
 mourning past crime, a anxious wish possess,
 a wish which no obtrude pride suppress,
 to own the error of his alter heart. 

part the seven.

Carmel he seek: the wander maid he find,
 and with each look inflict a deep wound;
 she strive to veil her blush from his sight,
 and hide her terror by a sudden flight;
 yet can not fly, nor scarce resolve to stay,
 her burn heart contend passion sway. 

approach she, with awe serene he speak,
 while from his eye the light of virtue break;
 with humble dignity his crime confess,
 no rage against himself his word express:
 too well he know, when swell by passion tide,
 how hard the task the throb heart to guide;
 and penitence he feel, devoid of pride. 

he view she with surprise, for while he speak,
 delight — not anger, flush her modest cheek;
 the emotion of her soul her eye portray,
 where transient fire in vivid flash play:
 rekindle transport as he gaze arise,
 which tinge his lip, and fire his rapturous eye;
 new sympathy within his bosom spring,
 which warm in hope impel his glow tongue:
 pure and refine his passion now appear,
 his virtue strengthen, and his heart sincere;
 his voice sublime, his eye alike inspire,
 pervade her soul, and fill her breast with fire:
 dubious no more, she seek not to retreat,
 too strong love do in her bosom beat;
 fast from her eye the tear of transport flow,
 joy take the language of her former woe;
 amid the shower a smile seraphic break —
 she give her hand, and thus impassion speak:

 "i seek not to restrain my throb heart,
" nor veil its candour with the show of art;
 "forgiveness beam upon thou from my eye,
" while all thy virtue to my memory rise. 
 "within i feel such powerful sympathy,
" such strong attraction of my soul to thou,
 "that no false pride in this important hour
" swerve my pure heart with its tyrannic power. 
 "with agony i see excess control
" a mind who grandeur ever awe my soul;
 "thy wondrous song, replete with genuine fire,
" the love of nature which those song inspire,
 "be in my heart impress with power divine;
" in vain i strive thy image to resign,
 "and mourn the fall of such a soul as thy:
" but now thy penitence overjoy i view,
 "and yield my heart, as to thy virtue due." 

he hear, while joy redouble in his breast,
 and strong emotion every look express;
 sublime his soul its ardent love portray,
 but most his future life his gratitude display. 
