the squire of dame.

a poem. in spenser stile.

prologue.

i 

hard be the heart that never know to love,
ne feel the please anguish of desire.
you british maid, more fair than venus dove,
for you alone i tune my humble lyre;
adopt i, nymph, receive i in your choir,
make i your bard; for that be all my care:
then shall i envy not that age sire,
who do for court his annual song prepare:
i lever myrtle wreath than kesar laurel wear.

ii.

think not because i write of columbel
i thence will blast the sex with impious tale;
transaction vile of foreign strond i tell,
ne against a british female will i rail
for all the wealth that roll on indian grail.
here, beauty, truth, and chastity be find:
Eleonora here, with visage pale,
do suck the poison from her Edward wound,
and anna nuptial faith shall stand for aye renowned.

iii.

see the fair swan on thamis lovely tide,
the which do trim their pennon silver bright,
in shine rank they down the water ride;
oft have my eye devour the gallant sight.
then cast thy look with wonder and delight,
where yond sweet nymph enjoy the evening air,
some dance along the green, like fairy light,
some floweret cull to deck their flow hair;
then tell i, sooth, swain, which sight thou deem most fair.

iv.

to you, bright star, that sparkle on our isle,
i give my life, my fortune, and my fame;
for my whole guerdon grant i but a smile,
a smile from you be all i hope or claim;
nor age ice my ardent zeal shall tame,
to my life end i shall your name adore,
not hermit bosom feel so pure a flame,
warm by approval i more high shall soar:
receive my humble lay, my heart be you before.

v. 

shall you consent, i will quit my shepherd grey,
and don more graceful and more costly gear,
my crook and scrip i will throw with scorn away,
and in a samite garment strait appear.
farewell, you grove, which once i hold so dear;
farewell, you glen, i other joy pursue;
then shall the world your matchless power revere,
and own what wonder your sweet smile can do,
that can a simple clown into a bard transmew.

Canto i 

i 

the squire of dame his tale thus begin to tell;
sith you command my tongue, sir Satyrane,
i now will all declare that i befall
the cause of muchel scathe and dolorous pain,
ne shall thy gentle eye from tear refrain.
i columbel command far to go
until i shall full three hundred nymph attain,
who heart shall aye with virtue lesson glow,
and to all swain but one cry out for ever, no.

ii.

to find the fortilage that never will yield
be not a easy matter, good sir knight;
Troy town, they say, be now a grass-grown field,
that long withstand the force of grecian might;
and castle fall though deep in earth empight;
ne ought so strong be find but what may fail,
the sun at last shall lose his glorious light,
and vow or bribe over woman may prevail;
their heart be make of flesh, and mortal flesh be frail.

iii.

with heavy heart, and full of cark i go
and take my congé of my bloom maid,
i kiss she hound, and, lout very low,
to her behest at length myself array:
the fair we love expect to be obey,
although she bid we with the kestrel fly;
so forth i prick, though much by doubt dismay,
the hard experiment resolve to try:
for she be wondrous fair, and much in love be i.

iv.

a grove i reach, where tuneful throstle sing,
the linnet here do open his little throat,
his twit jest around the cuckoo fling,
and the proud goldsinch show his paint coat,
and hail we with no inharmonious note:
the robin eke here tune his sonnet shrill,
and tell the soothe ditty all by rote,
how he with leave his pious beak do fill,
to shroud those pretty babe, who sib unkind will kill.

v. 

and many a fair Narcissus deck the plain,
that seem anew their passion to admire;
here Ajax tell his dolour over again,
and amorous Clytie sicken with desire;
here the blow rose her odour sweet do spire;
through the dun grove a murmur river lead
his crystal stream that wind in many a gyre;
the baleful willow all the bank bespread,
and ever to the breeze curl his hoary head.

vi.

soon to the grove there come a lovely maid,
for maiden sure she do to i appear,
in plain check-laton be the nymph array,
her sparkle eye stand full of many a tear,
and she beweep the absence of her dear.
alas! shall beauty be to woe allay?
beauty, methinks, shall meet with better cheer,
content shall never wander from her side;
good luck, i pray to heaven, the face that be fair betide.

vii.

"ah! woe be i, she cry, since colin flee,
"who gentle presence do these plain adorn,
"soon be he ravish from the nuptial bed,
"tear from these arm, from his dear leman tear!
"o grief! far sharp than the point thorn,
"i see he ill-bestad by martial band.
"alas the day that ever i be bear!
"where rove my Colin, on what foreign strand,
"arreached from laura eye, and his dear native land?

viii.

"alas! he only know to prune the vine,
"or through the earth to urge the bite share,
"to twist the bower with fragrant eglantine,
"where free from heat we shun the noontide air,
"or to the mart to lead his fleecy care.
"and be it fit in hacqueton and mail
"the youth for war grim terror shall prepare!
"his voice outsung the love-lorn nightingale,
"and dest can he dance, or pipe along the dale.

ix.

"the goshawk fierce may pounce the tremble dove,
"the savage wolf may tear the bound fawn,
"but sparrow mild be form for seat of love,
"and kid dew not with blood the flowery lawn;
"then how shall he, in who all grace dawn,
"in the red field the cruel paynim kill?
"for scene like these find man of hellish spawn.
"it be his with joy the virgin heart to fill,
'and not on foreign shore his foemen blood to spill.

x. 

"no day of bliss my sorrow shall aslake,
"for he i will ever drop the dolorous tear.
"adieu the circle green, the buxom wake,
"since colin go i taste of nought but drear.
"stretch i, you maiden, stretch i on the bier,
"and let thy gravestone these true word adorn:
"a wretched maiden lie entomb here,
"who see a shepherd bright than the morn,
"then pine her heart away, and die of love forlorn."

xi.

much be i grieve at her piteous plaint,
and greet to myself, o happy squire!
at length, though late, thou have find out a saint,
who, but for Colin, feel no warm desire.
Perdie, quoth Satyrane, i she admire;
no lozel lose shall here discover be.
the other answer with his cheek on fire,
now by my hallidom you soon shall see
that word may with the heart full often ill agree.

xii.

i, nought accoy, come up unto the fair,
and swear to love she all my length of life;
then offer she to gorgeous dome to bear,
where haidegive be dance to harp and fife.
she soon forget she be another wife,
and grant with i to desert the plain.
be such ensample among woman rife?
if so, my columbel i never shall gain,
but hunt around the world, and find my labour vain.

xiii.

my lip i begin to royne in fell despite,
and forth i rush from her false embrace,
through the thick wood i wander day and night,
ne meet i live creature face to face:
at length a rise city far i trace;
thither in hope my hasty step i bend.
perchance, think i, true virtue may embrace
the courtly dome, and from the country wend.
thus, where the least expect, we often find a friend.

xiv.

at even the town i reach, and eke a hall,
which waxen taper make as light as day;
fair jovisaunce sit on the face of all,
and to the dance the sprightly minstrel play,
each seem as sportive as the wanton jay.
the dame, who own the house, be pass old,
and have, it seem, that morning deal away
to her kind grandson many bag of gold,
who take a bonnibel to haven and to hold.

XV. 

the bride be name Viola the fair,
the load rosiere be not half so sweet.
aye, aye, quoth i, ensample be but rare
to find so many charm in one discreet;
with you, fair lass, i mean not now to treat.
the springal be in wholesome lustihood,
and he by name of Pamphilus they greet;
he be to doughty chevisance breed,
yet oft in courtly hall the active measure lead.

xvi.

the ancient dame they do Avara call,
and much she hobble as she tread the ground;
yet many angel in her crumenal,
if fair report speak true, be always find.
where riches flow there virtue too abound.
her pannikel be as a badger grey,
and, as she walk the company around,
it nod with such force, that, by my say,
i think it mean to fly from her old crag away.

xvii.

the lofty roof be fret over with gold,
and all around, the wall depeinten be
with many history of time of old,
which bring not muchel credit to the fair.
there Leda hold her swan, with shoulder bare,
and here the dame of Ephesus be find,
lick other dame, who my kind tongue shall spare,
and here stand Helen for her charm renowned,
who soon her lord forsake, when she a leman find.

xviii.

and many a beauteous dame and courtly knight
come there the nuptial to celebrate:
some verse to wing from bow the nimble flight,
some the near foe with brondir'n to amate;
i too they welcome to the hall of state;
with bel acoil they wish i to take
a round or two, and choose i out a mate:
but my fond love which nothing can aslake,
cause i to slight they all, for columbella sake.

xix.

and now to artful step the floor rebound,
in graceful ease the shine beavy move,
the noise like thunder at a distance sound,
mean time i sit beneath a proud alcove,
and tell Avara gentle tale of love.
thought i, in eld the passion be more tame,
and here by craft i may successful prove;
for she perforce must now be void of blame
as wise ulysses wife, penelopé by name.

xx.

ne want she geld, which oft the mind mislead
to action which it otherwise will shun.
the courtier lythe, if right report aread,
will unawhaped to seize his vantage run;
and so will most man underneath the sun,
or be they patriot call, or bard, or knight;
but when they once the gild prize have win,
they seek to clear their name, with shame bedight:
befit to scour the steel, when rust offend the sight.

xxi.

at every word i say she look askance,
then say, in unsoot whisper, fie! sir, fie!
and turn as though she seem to mind the dance,
nevertheless on i she cast a languid eye:
bless by thy form, my lief life, quoth i,
cast your belgard upon a humble slave;
from love, alas! in vain my heart will fly;
then with a word thy quail leman save,
for if you frown, perdie, you doom i to the grave.

xxii.

it hap by chance she see a golden heart
with flame diamond around beset;
this, the whole guerdon of my tedious smart,
i, on a time, from Columbel do get.
as simple bird be catch in fowler net,
and because they see no danger none they fear,
even so Avara her eye here do set,
and turn round and whisper in my ear,
give i that diamond heart, and be my leman dear.

xxiii.

i start from the couch where i be pight,
and thus i she bespeak with muchel rage,
avaunt, thou faitour false, thou imp of night!
i hate myself, that i shall thus engage,
on any term, to treat with wrizzle age.
so, forth i fling, and leave the frowy witch
to share her bed with coachman, groom or page;
the castle too i quit, my ire be such,
and out i set again, though night be dark as pitch.

xxiv.

but do i here relate, sir Satyrane,
the many weary mile i have travel,
what danger i have assoil, yet all in vain,
(for, by my truth, but ill my day i have speed)
your hair will stand upright upon your head.
three hundred virtuous female side by side,
by i to Columbella must be lead:
can you direct i where for such to ride?
can, in good sooth, the courteous knight reply.

xxv.

the squire pursue his tale; it be now three year
since curse avara visage first i see;
convent i have try, but there the luscious freer
the fair-faced nun to fornication draw;
nor palace be free from Cupid law;
his dart be fierce than the levin-brond;
few, very few, there escape his mighty paw,
and those in golden pall, who proud stand,
have lief kiss their love, than keysar royal hound.

xxvi.

fair Jenny of the mill i strive to win,
and her benempt pastora of the dale;
but they believe agree with i to sin;
one ask a owch, and one a watchet veil.
some wish over every female to prevail;
my hope, my conquest be to be deny.
the stage i have try, but there my project fail;
for there be scarce a single wed bride
but do her husband noul with horn of ront provide.

xxvii.

as couthful fisher at the benty brook,
by various art assot the silly fry,
now wriggle worm, now paste conceal the hook,
and now they hide it with a colour fly;
this take the perch, and that the tench eye;
so different nymph a different charm invite,
some yield for vantage, some for vanity,
a song this one, a dance that maid delight:
man throw the wimble bait, and greedy woman bite.

xxviii.

with sorrow overhent, the other day
i lay my weary limb down to rest,
where a tall beech overspread the dusky way;
my noyous thought a dream awhile suppress,
oft weighty truth be in this garb dress.
grant that it so may happy unto i;
then joyous once again shall sooth this breast,
my pine soul shall be from anguish free,
and i shall taste true bliss, dear columbel, with thou.

xxix.

methinks i see a figure fair and tall,
and gentle smile sit dimple on her face,
yet seem of a beauty nought at all,
until much behold do improve each grace;
at length she seem too fair for human race.
her kirtle white may vie with winter snow,
ne can you ought of her fair bosom trace,
nought but her face will she to sight expose,
so modest maiden wend, the frannion muchel show.

xxx.

with visage bland, methinks she hail i oft;
"ne fear, quoth she, a female mild request.
"the bark by tempest that be whirl aloft,
"at length, the tempest over, enjoy rest.
"my name be chastity, though out of quest
"with modern dame, yet thou shall still survey
"a clime where beauty be with virtue bless.
"good fortune speed you on your happy way;
"go, gentle squire of dame, and here no long stay.

xxxi.

"to fairy land your instant journey bend,
"there Columbel may find her will obey;
"there chastity may boast of many a friend,
"she visit there each rosy-featured maid.
"go on, nor be by former toil afraid:
"go where yond oak display their verdant pride,
"until, from the mountain tear and strip of shade,
"on neptune billow they triumphant ride,
"protect their happy land, and conquer all beside.

xxxii.

"hail happy land! for arm and art renowned,
"for bloom virgin free from loose desire;
"a drake, a Bacon, there a birth-place find,
"and chaste Eliza time shall ever admire:
"the hero wield the sword and poet lyre:
"this Sidney know, who still with lustre shine,
"for who than Spenser wake the warble choir,
"and many more who name may grace his line;
"there round the warrior palm the lover myrtle twine."

xxxiii.

at this i wake, and now resolve to brave
the utmost peril for my columbel;
for, know, i mean to cross the briny wave,
where albion chalky cliff the sea repel:
and, if no magè have lay a magic spell,
perchance my lot may be at length to find
three hundred nymph, who wicked love can quell;
if not, i must desert all womankind,
and, what i most amate, leave Columbel behind.

xxxiv.

the squire of dame surcease here his say,
and forth he yode to seek the british isle,
sir Satyrane prick on his dapple-grey,
ne ought foreswonk he travel many a mile
to spend his day in hardiment and toil:
but first in courteous guise they bid farewell,
as well befit man breed in courtly soil.
now how the squire have speed, or ill, or well,
a future canto may, perhaps, at leisure tell.

XXXV. 

for see, how Phoebus welk in the west,
my ox from their yoke i must untie,
the collar much have chafe their tender chest,
who labour much the sweet of rest shall try.
to their warm nest the daw and raven fly
deep in the ruin dome or dusky wood;
and beast and bird fast lock in slumber lie,
save the fell bat, that flutter out for food,
and the soothsay owl, with her unlovely brood.

Canto ii.

i 

to gain the point to which our soul aspire
we nourish toil, and reek hard labour sweet;
for this, through greenland frost, or india fire,
the hardy sailor death and danger meet;
and the prow chieftain, bold than discreet,
in blood imbrue pursue the martial fray,
and lover eke through life loud tempest beat,
lead on by hope, that never-dying ray;
hope wanton in their breast, and strew with flower the way.

ii.

and sure of all mankind the squire of dame
shall stand the first ensample of true love,
who aye, untouched by any foreign flame,
preserve his passion for his gentle dove;
blush, modern youth, who pulse quick move,
fond you glote upon the witch fair;
yet, when a sweet enjoyment once you prove,
you leave the nymph entangle in the snare,
her tear flow trickle down, her singult pierce the air.

iii.

oh think of transport which you whilom taste,
and let the glad remembrance charm your mind,
be not the fruit of joyment quick waste,
and to your heart her happy image bind:
think what she merit who whilear be kind,
nor by inconstancy her peace destroy;
inconstancy, that monster fall and blind:
that vain fond of every pass toy,
tread down its late delight, and poison rapturous joy.

iv.

return we now unto our gentle youth,
who little bark dance light on the main,
his breast divide atween joy and ruth;
now gay idea wanton in his brain,
now woe-begone his heart be rend in twain,
on his success depend his columbel;
and now he hope, and now despond again;
the various turn of mind, when thought rebel,
sure pen mote never describe, and none but lover tell.

v. 

methinks i see he on the beachy strand,
where neptune wave affrap the sturdy pier;
his hardy steed neigh at the sight of land,
in all adventure a most faithful seer;
and through that city he do quick steer,
which Ethelbert to holy Austin give:
the king of Kent do erst inhabit here,
here haughty Becket sink into the grave,
here through the smile mead, stour roll his dimple wave.

vi.

long travel he, ne venture to assay
the nymph he meet, for much he be afraid
to bribe or prayer few woman will cry nay;
at flattery tongue full oft will virtue fade;
what shall he do? to win his lovely maid
he must three hundred virtuous female find,
perdie, quoth he, my fortune be essay,
i will bold try the strength of womankind:
for craven heart, they say, never win fair lady mind.

vii.

so on he prick, and from a rise ground
discern before he, in a distant vale,
a castle fair: and ancient oak around
do to the breeze their lofty head avail;
a silver stream refresh the fragrant dale;
their leaden loud fat ox do repeat,
and nibble sheep display their fleece pale,
the woodbine shed a odour matchless sweet,
and to their patient dam the frisk lambkin bleat.

viii.

to that same castle our adventurer yode,
the merry bird he welcome on the way,
a hundred flower aumailed the wind road,
and all be bright, and all be pass gay,
you will have swear it be the month of may.
without dread he thunder at the gate,
who won within, or giant, knight or say,
shall never, in sooth, our imp of fame amate:
unto the summons loud the portal open strait.

ix.

and forth there issue the seneschal,
of middle age he be, if right i ween,
he be in personage both plump and tall,
ne seem he to taste of dolorous teen,
ne wrinkle deep be on his forehead see,
but jovisaunce sit bask on his brow,
at every word he speak, he smile atween,
his temple be crown with myrtle bough,
and virelay he song with matchless grace, i vow.

x. 

"whoever thou be, thrice welcome to these plain,
"where bitter dole never show her hateful head,
"good-fellowship won here, and free from pain
"both youth and eld the path of pleasure tread;
"catch fly bliss, ne be by ought foresaid;
"think that this life be but a little span;
"then laugh, and sport, and shun all dreryhed,
"thy roll day in present pleasure plan,
"come, spend thy hour in joy, thou son of mortal man.

xi.

"know thou my name! i be l'allegro hight,
"let i conduct thou to our jovial hall,
"where bon-vivant in revel spend the night,
"who bid a hearty welcome unto all,
"or wear he red cross-stole, or paynim pall."
with that he lad he with a courtly air
into a chamber deck for feast and ball;
and though no tede or taper glimmer there,
yet all within be bright, as all without be fair.

xii.

as at the close of a hot summer day,
when Phoebus in the west desert the sky,
bright stream of light along the aether play,
and though his fiery orb forsake our eye,
the beamy gush gild each object nigh;
the paint mead be tinge with golden light,
and river roll their glitter water by;
so in this house of joy with ease you may
perceive celestial ray, that cherish human sight.

xiii.

the squire of dame his jolly host salew,
and bon-vivant his hound in friendship press;
"come, sit thou down, and taste our choice food;
"we entertake, quoth he, no vulgar guest.
"enure to toil, come taste the sweet of rest,
"doff thy hard arm, this samite garment wear,
"this better far than mail shall bind thy breast,
"this coronal shall deck thy auburn hair;
"push the brisk goblet round, and drown intrude care.

xiv.

"for we the lark attune his morning song,
"for we the spring depeint her every flower,
"to sooth our sleep yond fountain purl along,
"and oak to shade we, twine into a bower,
"the pensive bard sit many a watchful hour,
"in ditty sweet, to carol forth our praise:
"while valour spend his day in dole and stour,
"we, wise we, undying trophy raise
"to ever-blooming bliss, ne reek what wisdom say.

XV. 

"with sprightly note we make the welkin ring,
"in mazy dance we tread the chequer ground,
"to yield nymph transport shepherd sing,
"ne hard misfare amongst our train be find.
"the simple swain, who look with cark astound
"because his leman ill reward his care,
"oh, let he stand to all a lout renowned,
"ne gibe scorn her twit board forbear;
"be there not other nymph less coy, and full as fair?"

xvi.

at this the squire wex pale, "ne eath it be,
"most courteous knight, he cry, far to remove
"the thought of she in who we place all bliss."
quoth bon-vivant, "what, then thou be in love?"
"that i be so these many singult prove,"
return the squire. l'allegro then reply,
"thou'dst better wend to yonder willow grove,
"where shoal of lover hang side by side,
"feed the vile carrion crow, and heighten female pride."

xvii.

with that he brace into a scornful laugh,
and much abash appear our constant squire;
the other sportful the brisk vintage quaff.
while thus the springal.  "yes, i do aspire
"to love the fair of the female choir.
"three hundred virtuous damsel in this isle
"i come to find." "perdie, your odd desire,
"quoth bon-vivant, will ask thou muchel toil;
"and thou shall travel too full many a weary mile.

xviii.

"it be not enough the conduct of the fair
"be form by frown virtue strict leer:
"the blatant-beast do here in piece tear
"the fame of those breed in school severe;
"he rankle tongue throughout the roll year
"with baleful venom every thing consume;
"where beauty splendour gild our northern sphere
"he sly creep, and to destruction doom
"the honour of the spring, and wisdom early bloom.

xix.

"the brindle lion in the lonely wood
"hide his grim aspect from the sight of man;
"the pardelis and leopard spot brood
"reside content in sequester den;
"not so the blatant-beast, he live in ken
"of the proud city or well-peopled town;
"thence with detest fury he will ren,
"ne spare the prelate lawn, or monarch crown:
"all fare alike with he, for all he tumble down.

xx.

"what then avail it to be fair or wise?
"or what avail it to be warlike knight?
"whereve the monster cast his fiery eye,
"each grace, each virtue sicken at the sight.
"then goodly squire, until the morning light
"quaff the thick darkness of the night away;
"and, when the morn shall rise, in arm bedight
"proceed, and luck attend you on your way;
"algates we wish in truth with we you will ever stay."

xxi.

the squire agree, but vow, when rise morn
shall gild the glitterand portal of the east,
himself he will in habergeon adorn,
and seek around the isle the blatant-beast:
mean while in buxom mirth they spend the feast.
ill fare the mortal man too much who know;
oft shall he wish himself from thought release;
the fatal knowledge in his bosom glow,
and mar his golden rest, and murder soft repose.

xxii.

sir chaunticleer now eye the rise day,
and call dame Partlet from her vetchy bed;
now wakeful phospher spread his gleamy ray,
and the pale moon conceal her silver head;
the cattle brouze the lawn with dew bespread,
while every bird from out the busket fly.
then to the field our lover issue;
but sleep have seal l'allegro drousy eye,
and bon-vivant also in downy slumber lie.

xxiii.

our squire, without dread, pursue his way,
and look around to spy this monster fall,
and many a well conceit roundelay
he sing in honour of his columbel:
mote he, perchance, destroy this spawn of hell,
how easy be the task to he assign?
the land of fairy do each land excel;
view there the paragon of womankind;
view the bright virgin there, and leave thy heart behind.

xxiv.

ah! lief shall thou try the female there
than thus unwise another course pursue;
there every nymph be innocent as fair:
try what i here advance, you will find it true.
hard be our fate while bliss in hope we sew,
some deadly fiend to blast our joy appear;
contentment sweet, alas, be know to few.
thus for awhile the sun the welkin cheer,
but soon he hide his head, and melt in drop tear.

xxv.

life be a scene of conteck and distress,
ne be it long than a winter day;
and shall we make our few enjoyment less?
far from my cot, thou blatant-beast away.
no husband noul will i with horn array,
ne shall my tongue its venom malice wreak
on tuneful bard, who laurel crown apay;
ne will i against the comely matron speak,
or draw one pear drop down beauty rosy cheek.

xxvi.

the squire of dame ride on with muchel tine,
and, as he cast askance his greedy look,
he see empight beneath a ancient pine
a hoary shepherd lean on his crook;
his fall tear increase the swell brook:
and he do sigh as he will break his heart.
"o thou deep-read in sorrow baleful book,
"the squire exclaim, aread thy burn smart;
"our dolour grow more light when we the tale impart."

xxvii.

to who the swain reply, "o gentle youth,
"yond fruitful mead my numerous herd possess,
"my day roll on unknown to pain or ruth,
"and one fair daughter my old age bless.
"oh, have you see she for the wake dress
"with kirtle tie with many a colour string,
"thy tongue to all the world have then confess
"that she be sheen than the pheasant wing,
"and, when she raise her voice, ne lark so soot can sing.

xxviii.

"in virtue thew i breed the lovely maid,
"and she right well the lesson do pursue;
"too wise she be to be by man betray;
"but the curse blatant-beast her form do view,
"and round our plain do spread a tale untrue,
"that Rosabella, spurn marriage band,
"have feel those pang which virgin never know,
"and that sir Topas my poor girl trepan;
"he, who in sable stole do in our pulpit stand.

xxix.

"nay, more, the hellish monster have invent,
"how a young swain on shannon bank bear
"(have not my care the deep-laid plot prevent)
"will from my arm my Rosabel have bear.
"have i not cause to weep from rise morn
"until Phoebus welk in the western main,
"to see my dearling's fame thus vild tear?
"have i not cause to nourish endless pain? "
at this he deep sigh, and weep full sore again.

xxx.

"curse be this blatant-beast, reply the squire,
"that thus insect your sea-begirted isle;
"show i his face, that i may wreak my ire
"upon this imp of hell, this monster vile. "
"away from hence not pass sure a mile,
"may i advise you, you have better wend,"
return the swain, "deep-read in magic-style
"there Merlin won, sue he to be your friend;
"and lest you miss your way, myself will you attend."

xxxi.

together now they seek the hermitage
deep in the covert of a dusky glade,
where in his dortour won the hoary sage.
the moss-grown tree do form a gloomy shade,
their rustle leaf a solemn music make,
and fairy nightly trip the awful green,
and if the tongue of fame have truth display,
full many a spectre be at midnight see,
tear from his earthly grave, a horrid sight! i ween.

xxxii.

ne rose, ne violet glad the cheerless bower,
ne fringe pink from earth green bosom grow:
but hemlock dire, and every baleful flower
may here be find, and knot of mystic rue.
close to the cell spring up a ancient yew,
and store of imp be on its bough pight,
at his behest they from its branch fly,
and, in a thousand various form bedight,
frisk to the moon pale wain, and reveal all the night.

xxxiii.

around the cave a cluster ivy spread
in wide embrace his over-twining arm,
within, the wall with character bespread
declare the powerful force of magic charm.
here drug be place destructive of all harm,
and book that deep futurity can scan:
here stand a spell that of his rage disarm
the mountain lion until he yield to man;
with many secret more, which scarce repeat i can.

xxxiv.

the squire of dame deep enter in the cell:
what will not valiant heart for beauty dare?
his borrel fere here bid his friend farewell,
and home he wend renew cark and care.
when, lout low with a become air,
the youth cry out, "o thrice renown magè,
"vouchsafe to cure i of my black despair;
"for thou not only art grow wise through age,
but art of mortal man by far the wise sage."

XXXV. 

then Merlin with a look benign reply,
(for he be breed with every courteous thew)
"i know to make fair columbel your bride
"the blatant-beast you through the land pursue;
"the fate of empire now demand my view,
"and for awhile deny my presence here;
"soon in this cell i will thou again salew,
"what most thou like partake without fear,
"share all my cave afford, nor think i grudge my cheer.

xxxvi 

"yet mark my counsel, open not that door,
"lest thou repent thy folly when too late,
"ten thousand pang shall make thy heart full sore,
"for horror scoul behind that ebony gate,
"and future ill shall thy dear peace amate;
"there stand a mirror, wrought by magic leer,
"in which be read the dark decree of fate,
"and who you wish to see will strait appear,
"devoid of art false mask, to human eye-sight clear.

xxxvii.

"ah how unlike the godlike man he seem
"in this my glass the patriot i have descry,
"by the vile rabblement a saint esteem?
"he be oft a wretch compose of sloth and pride:
"and kesar too, not seldom deify,
"with other man their vice and folly share;
"and by my mirror if the nymph be try,
"it will without reserve the truth declare,
"ne flatter head that be crown, ne flatter face that be fair.

xxxviii.

"once more let i advise thou, gentle squire,
"forbear to look at this same magic glass;
"do not too rash into fate inquire —
"but i to foreign strond awhile must pass. "
the unweeting youth cry to himself, "alas!
"will i can know the lot to i assign."
"patience, quoth Merlin, do all thing surpass."
then to his car be wing dragon join,
with which he sail through air, and far outstrip the wind.

xxxix.

and now the squire survey the lonesome cave,
his waver mind be in a whirlwind tost,
and now the mirror he resolve to brave,
and now he find his boast courage lose.
at length determine whatsoever it cost,
to see the glass, he dart into the cell;
and, lest his eye by vild retrait be cross,
thrice he invoke his lovely columbel.
as Adam fall of yore, the squire of dame yfall.

XL. 

the ebony door full wide he display,
and see the lovely queen of all his heart,
fair as the lily in the watery glade,
bright as the morn, and bright without art,
through every vein he feel a thrillant smart:
for the dear maid lie on her bed undress,
and, may i unreproved the truth impart,
she hug a lusty stripling to her breast,
who she full close clip, and wanton caress.

xli 

"o faitour false, o wicked imp of night!
exclaim the squire astound," ah! wealaway!
"let Erebus in pitchy stole bedight
"with foul sprite the son of man affray,
"and blot for ever the fair face of day.
"you haggard sister, sound my passing-bell;
"oh! never believe, you youth, what woman say.
"o losel loose, o impious Columbel! "
then like a stean to earth full heavy he fall.

xlii 

there shall we leave he, for my leaky boat
let in the water, and i must recure
her much-worn hulk, that scarce now can float,
and moor in harbour she shall ride secure;
then if i can a pilot wise procure,
mayhap i may again hoist forth my sail,
and other hardy voyage endure
through shelf and shallows: now the adverse gale
give i some time to rest, and land with joy i hail.

glossary.

