strephon love for Delia justify: in a epistle to celadon.

all man have folly, which they blind trace
 through the dark turn of a dubious maze:
 but happy those, who by a prudent care,
 retreat betimes, from the fallacious snare. 

the old son of wisdom be not free
 from the same failure you condemn in i;
 they love, and by that glorious passion lead,
 forget what Plato, and themselves have say. 
love triumph over those dull pedantic rule,
 they have collect from the wrangle school;
 and make they to his noble sway submit,
 in spite of all their learning, art, and wit:
 their grave starch moral then unuseful prove,
 those dusty character he soon remove;
 for when his shine squadron come in view,
 their boast reason murmur, and withdraw:
 unable to oppose their mighty force
 with phlegmatic resolve, and dry discourse. 

if, as the wise of the wise, have err,
 i go astray, and be condemn unheard;
 my fault you too severe reprehend,
 more like a rigid censor, than a friend. 
love be the monarch passion of the mind,
 know no superior, by no law confine;
 but triumph still, impatient of controul,
 over all the proud endowment of the soul. 

you own my Delia friend, divine fair,
 when in the bud her native beauty be:
 your praise do then she early charm confess,
 yet you will persuade i to adore she less,
 you but the nonage of her beauty see,
 but may from thence sublime idea draw;
 and what she be, by what she be, conclude,
 for now she govern those, she then subdue. 

her aspect noble, and mature be grow,
 and every charm in its full vigour know. 
there we may wonder view, distinct write,
 the line of goodness, and the mark of wit:
 each feature emulous, of please most,
 do just, some peculiar sweetness boast:
 and her composure of so fine a frame,
 pride can hope to mend, nor envy blame. 

when the immortal beauty of the sky
 contend naked for the golden prize,
 the apple have not fall to Venus share,
 have i be Paris, and my Delia there:
 in who alone we all their grace find,
 the move gaiety of Venus join
 with Juno aspect, and minerva mind. 

view but those nymph, which other swain adore
 you will value charm Delia still the more. 
dorinda mien majestic, but her mind
 be to revenge and peevishness incline:
 myrtilla's fair, and yet myrtilla's proud;
 cloe have wit, but noisy, vain, and loud:
 Melania dote upon the silly thing,
 and yet Melania like a angel sing. 
but in my Delia all endowment meet,
 all that be just, agreeable, or sweet;
 all that can praise, and admiration move;
 all that the wise, and the brave love. 

in all discourse she be apposite and gay,
 and never want something pertinent to say:
 for if the subject of a serious kind,
 her thought be manly, and her sense refine,
 but if divertive, her expression fit
 good language, join with inoffensive wit
 so cautious always, that she never afford
 a idle thought the charity of word. 

the vice common to her sex, can find
 no room, even in the suburb of her mind. 
conclude wise, she be in danger still,
 from the mere neighbourhood of industrious ill;
 therefore at distance keep the subtle foe,
 who near approach will formidable grow. 
while the unwary virgin be undo,
 and meet the misery which she ought to shun. 

he wit be penetrate, clear, and gay,
 but let we true judgement, and right-reason sway:
 modest bold, and quick to apprehend,
 prompt in reply, but cautious to offend. 
her dart be keen, but level with such care,
 they never fall short, and seldom fly too far:
 for when she rally, it be with so much art,
 we blush with pleasure, and with rapture smart. 

o celadon! you will my flame approve
 do you but hear she talk, and talk of love;
 that tender passion to her fancy bring
 the pretty notion, and the soft thing:
 which be by she so move express,
 they fill with ecstasy my throb breast. 
it be then the charm of eloquence impart
 their native glory, unimproved by art:
 by what she say, i measure thing above,
 and guess the language of seraphic love. 

to the cool bosom of a peaceful shade,
 by some wild beech, or lofty poplar make,
 when evening come, we secret repair,
 to breath in private, and unbend our care:
 and, while our flock in fruitful pasture feed,
 some well-designed instructive poem read. 
where useful moral, with soft number join,
 at once delight, and cultivate the mind:
 which be by she to more perfection bring,
 by wise remark upon the poet thought. 
so well she know the stamp of eloquence,
 the empty sound of word from solid sense;
 the florid fustian of a rhyme spark,
 who random arrow never come never the Mark,
 can on her judgement be impose, and pass
 for standard gold, when it be but gild brass,
 oft in the walk of a adjacent grove,
 where first we mutual engage to love;
 she will smile ask i, whether i will prefer,
 a humble cottage on the plain with she,
 before the pompous building of the great,
 and find content, in that inferior state? 
say i, the question you propose to i,
 perhaps a matter of debate may be;
 be the degree of my affection less,
 than burn martyr to the god express. 
in you I have all i can desire below,
 that earth can give i, or the god bestow;
 and bless with you, i know not where to find
 a second choice; you take up all my mind. 
i will not forsake that dear delightful plain,
 where charm Delia, love and Delia reign;
 for all the splendour that a court can give,
 where gaudy fool, and busy statesman live. 
though youthful Paris, when his birth be know,
 too fatal relate to a throne,
 forsake Oenone, and his rural sport,
 for dangerous greatness, and tumultuous court,
 yet fate shall still offer its power in vain,
 for what be power to such a humble Swain? 
i will not leave my Delia, leave my fair,
 though half the globe shall be assign my share. 

and will you have i friend, reflect again,
 become the base and the worst of man? 
o do not urge i celadon, forbear! 
i can leave she, she be too charm fair! 
shall i your counsel in this case pursue,
 you may suspect i for a villain too:
 for sure that perjure wretch can never prove
 just to his friend, who be faithless to his love. 
