CLIFTON hill.

write in January 1785. 

in this lone hour, when angry storm descend,
 and the chill soul deplore her distant friend;
 when all her sprightly fire inactive lie,
 and gloomy object fill the mental eye;
 when hoary winter stride the northern blast,
 and Flora beauty at his foot be cast;
 earth by the grisly tyrant desert make,
 the feather warbler quit the leafless shade;
 quit those dear scene where life and love begin,
 and, cheerless, seek the savage haunt of man;
 how mourn each tenant of the silent grove! 
no soft sensation tune the heart to love;
 no flutter pulse awake to rapture call;
 no strain responsive aid the water fall. 
the Swain neglect his nymph, yet know not why;
 the nymph, indifferent, mourn the freeze sky;
 alike insensible to soft desire,
 she ask no warmth — but from the kitchen fire;
 love seek a mild zone; half sink in snow,
 Lactilla, shiver, tend her favourite cow;
 the bleat flock now ask the bounteous hand,
 and crystal stream in freeze fetter stand. 
the beauteous red-breast, tender in her frame,
 who murder mark the fool with triple shame,
 near the low cottage door, in pensive mood,
 complain, and mourn her brother of the wood. 
her song oft wake the soul to gentle joy,
 all but his ruthless soul who gun destroy. 
for this, rough clown, long pain on thou shall wait,
 and freeze want avenge their hapless fate;
 for these fell murder may thou change thy kind,
 in outward form as savage as in mind;
 go, be a bear of pythagorean name,
 from man distinguish by thy hideous frame. 

though slow and pensive now the moment roll,
 successive month shall from our torpid soul
 hurry these scene again; the laugh hour
 advance swift, shall strew spontaneous flower;
 the early-peeping snowdrop, crocus mild,
 and modest violet, grace the secret wild;
 pale primrose, daisy, maypole-decking sweet,
 and purple hyacinth together meet:
 all nature sweet in joyous circle move,
 and wake the freeze soul again to love. 

the ruddy swain now stalk along the vale,
 and snuff fresh ardour from the fly gale;
 the landscape rush on his untaught mind,
 strong rapture rise, but rapture undefined;
 he loud whistle, stretch over the green,
 by scream milkmaid, not unheeded, see;
 the downcast look never fix on the swain,
 they dread his eye, retire, and gaze again. 
it be mighty love — you bloom maid, beware,
 nor the lone thicket with a lover dare. 
no high romantic rule of honour bind
 the timid virgin of the rural kind;
 no conquest of the passion ever be teach,
 no meed ever give they for the vanquish thought. 
to sacrifice, to govern, to restrain,
 or to extinguish, or to hug the pain,
 be never they; instead, the fear of shame
 prove a strong bulwark, and secure their fame;
 shield by this, they flout, reject, deny,
 with mock disdain put the fond lover by;
 unreal scorn, stern look, affect pride,
 awe the poor swain, and save the tremble bride. 

as over the upland hill i take my way,
 my eye in transport boundless scene survey:
 here the neat dome where sacred rapture rise,
 from whence the contrite groan shall pierce the sky;
 where sin-struck soul bend low in humble prayer,
 and waft that sigh which never be lose in air. 

ah! sacred turf! here a fond parent lie,
 how my soul melt while dreadful scene arise! 
the past! ah! shield i, mercy! from that thought,
 my ache brain now whirl, with horror fraught. 
dead! can it be? it be here we frequent stray,
 and these sad record mournful survey. 
i mark the verse, the skull her eye invite,
 while my young bosom shudder with affright! 
my heart recoil, and shun the loathsome view;
 "start not, my child, each human thought subdue,"
 she calm say; "this fate shall once be thy,
 my woe pronounce that it shall first be i."
abash, i catch the awful truth she sing,
 and on her firm resolve one moment hang;
 vain boast — my bulwark tumble to the deep,
 amaze — alone i climb the craggy steep;
 my shriek soul desert, sullen view
 the depth below, and hope fond strain refuse;
 i listen not — she loud strike the lyre,
 and love divine, and moral truth conspire. 

the proud croesean crew, light, cruel, vain,
 who deed have never swell the muse strain,
 who bosom other sorrow never assail,
 who hear, unheeding, misery bitter tale,
 here call for satire, will the verse avail. 
rest, impious race! — the muse pursue her flight,
 breathe pure air on Vincent rugged height;
 here nibble flock of scanty herbage gain
 a meal penurious from the barren plain;
 crop the low niggard bush; and, patient, try
 the distant walk, and every hillock nigh:
 some bask, some bind, nor terror ever know,
 save from the human form, their only foe. 
you bleat innocent! dispel your fear,
 my woe-struck soul in all your trouble share;
 it be but Lactilla — fly not from green:
 long have i share with you this guiltless scene. 
it be mine to wander over the dewy lawn,
 and mark the pallid streak of early dawn;
 lo! the grey dusk that fill the vacant space,
 now fleet, and infant light pursue the chace;
 from the hill top it seek the valley low;
 inflame, the cheek of morn with blush glow;
 behold it 'whelm in a bright flood of day,
 it strive no more, but to the god give way. 

you silent, solemn, strong, stupendous height,
 who terror-striking frown the school-boy fright
 from the young daw; while in your rugged breast
 the chatter brood, secure by horror, rest. 
say, Muse, what arm the lower brother cleave,
 and the calm stream in this low cradle leave? 
Coëval with creation they look down,
 and, sunder, still retain their native frown. 
beneath those height, lo! balmy spring arise,
 to which pale beauty fade image fly;
 their kindly power life genial heat restore,
 the tardy pulse, who throb be almost over,
 here beat a lively tune. the breezy air,
 to the wild hill invite the languid fair:
 fear not the western gale, thou timorous maid,
 nor dread its blast shall thy soft form invade;
 though cool and strong the quicken breeze blow,
 and meet thy pant breath, it will quick grow
 more strong; then drink the odoriferous draught,
 with unseen particle of health it be fraught. 
sit not within the threshold of despair,
 nor plead a weakness fatal to the fair;
 soft term for indolence, polite give,
 by which we win no joy from earth or heaven. 
foul fiend! thou bane of health, fair virtue bane,
 death of true pleasure, source of real pain! 
keen exercise shall brace the faint soul,
 and bid her slacken power more vigorous roll. 

blame not my rustic lay, nor think i rude,
 if i avow conceit the grand prelude
 to dire disease and death. your highborn maid,
 who fashion guide, in youth first bloom shall fade;
 she seek the cause, the effect will fain elude,
 by death o'erstretching stride too close pursue,
 she faint within his icy grasp, yet stare,
 and wonder why the tyrant yet appear —
 abrupt — so soon — thy, fashion, be the crime,
 fall dissipation do the work of time. 

how thick clothe, yond rock of scanty soil,
 its lovely verdure scorn the hand of toil. 
here the deep green, and here the lively play,
 the russet birch, and ever-blooming bay;
 the vengeful black-thorn, of wild beauty proud,
 bloom beauteous in the gloomy-chequered crowd:
 the barren elm, the useful feed oak,
 who hamadryad never shall feel the stroke
 of axe relentless, until twice fifty year
 have crown her woodland joy, and fruitful care. 

the poisonous reptile here their mischief bring,
 and through the helpless sleeper dart the sting;
 the toad envenom, hate human eye,
 here spring to light, live long, and age die. 
the harmless snail, slow-journeying, creep away,
 suck the young dew, but shun the bold day. 
(alas! if transmigration shall prevail,
 i fear lactilla soul must house in snail.) 
the long-nosed mouse, the woodland rat be here,
 the sightless mole, with nicely-pointed ear;
 the timid rabbit hail impervious gloom,
 elude the dog keen scent, and shun her doom. 

various the tenant of this tangle wood,
 who skulk all day, all night review the flood,
 chew the wash weed drive by the beat wave,
 or feast on dreadful food, which hope a mild grave. 
hail, useful channel! commerce spread her wing,
 from either pole her various treasure bring;
 waft by thou, the mariner long stray,
 clasp the fond parent, and the sigh maid;
 joy tune the cry; the rock rebound the roar;
 the deep vibration quiver along the shore;
 the merchant hear, and hail the peep mast,
 the wave-drenched sailor scorn all peril past;
 now love and joy the noisy crew invite,
 and clumsy music crown the rough delight. 

you be the vulgar dissonance, while i
 cross the low stream, and stretch the ardent eye
 over nature wild; it be peace, it be joy serene,
 the thought as pure as calm the vernal scene. 
ah, lovely mead! my bosom light grow,
 shake off her huge oppressive weight of woe,
 and swell in guiltless rapture; ever hail,
 the tuft grove, and the low-winding vale! 

low not, you herd, your lusty master bring
 the crop of summer; and the genial spring
 feel for your want, and soften winter rage,
 the hoard hay-stack shall your woe assuage;
 woe sum in one alone, it be nature call,
 that secret voice which fill creation all. 

beneath this stack louisa dwelling rise,
 here the fair maniac bear three winter snow. 
here long she shiver, stiffen in the blast,
 the lightning round their livid horror cast;
 the thunder roar, while rush torrent pour,
 and add new woe to bleak affliction hour;
 the heaven lour dismal while the storm descend,
 no mother bosom the soft maid befriend;
 but, frighten, over the wild she swift fly,
 and drench with rain, the roofless hay-stack try. 
the morn be fair, and gentle — seek
 these lonely woodland, friend to sober thought;
 with solitude, the slow-paced maid be see
 tread the dark grove, and unfrequented green,
 well — know their lurking; Phoebus shine,
 while, muse, she pursue the track alone. 
o, thou kind friend! who here i dare not name,
 who to louisa shed of misery come,
 lure by the tale, sigh over her beauteous form,
 and gentle draw she from the beat storm,
 stand forth — defend, for well thou can, the cause
 of heaven, and justify its rigid law;
 yet own that human law be harsh give,
 when they extend beyond the will of heaven. 
say, can thy pen for that hard duty plead,
 by which the meek and helpless maid decree
 to dire seclusion? snatch from guiltless joy,
 to where corrod grief the frame destroy;
 monastic gloom, which active virtue cramp,
 where horrid silence chill the vital lamp;
 slow and faint the languid pulse beat,
 and the chill heart forget its genial heat;
 the dim sink eye, with hopeless glance, explore
 the solemn aisle, and death-denouncing door,
 never to be pass again. — now heave the sigh,
 now unavailing sorrow fill the eye:
 fancy once more bring back the long-lost youth
 to the fond soul, in all the charm of truth;
 she welcome the love image; busy thought
 portray the past, with guiltless pleasure fraught;
 it be momentary bliss, it be rapture high,
 the heart overflow, and all be ecstasy. 
memory! i charge thou yet preserve the shade,
 ah! let not yet the glitter colour fade! 
forbear the cruel future yet to view,
 when the sad soul must bid a long adieu,
 even to its fancy bliss — ah! turn not yet
 thou wretched bankrupt, that must soon forget
 this farewell draught of joy: lo! fancy die,
 even the thin phantom of past pleasure fly. 
thought sink in real woe; too poor to give
 her present bliss, she bid the future live;
 the spirit soon quit that fond clasp, for see,
 the future offer finish misery. 
hope quite extinct, lo! frantic through the aisle
 she rave, while superstition grim smile. 
th'exhausted mourner mope, then wild stalk
 round the drear dome, and seek the dark walk. 
the glance distract each sad sister meet,
 the sorrow-speaking eye in silence greet
 each death-devoted maid; Louisa here
 run through each various shape of sad despair;
 now swell with gust of hope, now sicken die;
 alternate thought of death and life arise
 within her pant soul; the firm resolve,
 the new desire, in strong fear dissolve. 
she start — then seize the moment of her fate,
 quit the lone cloister and the horrid grate,
 while wild horror to receive she wait;
 muffle, on freedom happy plain they stand,
 and eager seize she not reluctant hand;
 too late to these mild shore the mourner come,
 for now the guilt of flight overwhelm her frame:
 her break vow in wild disorder roll,
 and stick like serpent in her tremble soul;
 thought, what be thou? of thou she boast no more,
 overwhelm, thou dy amid the wild roar
 of lawless anarchy, which sweep the soul,
 while her drown faculty like pebble roll,
 unloosed, uptorn, by whirlwind of despair,
 each well-taught moral now dissolve in air;
 dishevel, lo! her beauteous tress fly,
 and the wild glance now fill the stare eye;
 the ball, fierce glare in their orbit move,
 bright sphere, where beam the sparkle fire of love,
 now roam for object which once fill her mind,
 ah! long-lost object the must never find. 
ill starred Louisa! memory, it be a strain,
 which fill my soul with sympathetic pain. 
remembrance, hence, give thy vain struggle over,
 nor swell the line with form that live no more. 
