[the botanic garden. part ii. the love of the plant.]

the love of the plant.

Canto i 

descend, you hover sylph! aerial quire,
 and sweep with little hand your silver lyre;
 with fairy footstep print your grassy ring,
 you gnome! accordant to the tinkle string;
 while in soft note i tune to oaten reed
 gay hope, and amorous sorrow of the mead. —
 from giant oak, that wave their branch dark,
 to the dwarf moss, that cling upon their bark,
 what beaux and beauty crowd the gaudy grove,
 and woo and win their vegetable love. 
how snowdrop cold, and blue-eyed harebell blend
 their tender tear, as over the stream they bend;
 the lovesick violet, and the primrose pale
 bow their sweet head, and whisper to the gale;
 with secret sigh the virgin lily droop,
 and jealous cowslip hang their tawny cup. 
how the young rose in beauty damask pride
 drink the warm blush of his bashful bride;
 with honeyed lip enamour woodbine meet,
 clasp with fond arm, and mix their kiss sweet. —

stay thy soft-murmuring water, gentle rill;
 hush, whisper wind, you rustle leaf, be still;
 rest, silver butterfly, your quiver wing;
 alight, you beetle, from your airy ring;
 you paint moth, your gold-eyed plumage furl,
 bow your wide horn, your spiral trunk uncurl;
 glitter, you glow-worm, on your mossy bed;
 descend, you spider, on your lengthen thread;
 slide here, you horn snail, with varnish shell;
 you bee-nymph, listen in your waxen cell! —

botanic Muse! who in this latter age
 lead by your airy hand the swedish sage,
 bad his keen eye your secret haunt explore
 on dewy dell, high wood, and wind shore;
 say on each leaf how tiny grace dwell;
 how laugh the pleasure in a blossom bell;
 how insect love arise on cobweb wing,
 aim their light shaft, and point their little sting. 

 "first the tall can lift he curl brow
 erect to heaven, and plight his nuptial vow;
 the virtuous pair, in mild region bear,
 dread the rude blast of autumn icy morn;
 round the chill fair he fold his crimson vest,
 and clasp the timorous beauty to his breast. 

thy love, callitriche, two virgin share,
 smite with thy starry eye and radiant hair; —
 on the green margin sit the youth, and lave
 his float train of tress in the wave;
 see his fair feature paint the stream that pass,
 and bend for ever over the watery glass. 

two brother swain, of collin gentle name,
 the same their feature, and their form the same,
 with rival love for fair COLLINIA sigh,
 knit the dark brow, and roll the unsteady eye. 
with sweet concern the pity beauty mourn,
 and sooth with smile the jealous pair by turn. 
sweet bloom genista in the myrtle shade,
 and ten fond brother woo the haughty maid. 

two knight before thy fragrant altar bend,
 adore Melissa! and two squire attend. 
meadia soft chain five suppliant beaux confess,
 and hand in hand the laugh belle address;
 alike to all, she bow with wanton air,
 roll her dark eye, and wave her golden hair. 

woo with long care, curcuma cold and shy
 meet her fond husband with avert eye:
 four beardless youth the obdurate beauty move
 with soft attention of platonic love. 

with vain desire the pensive alcea burn,
 and, like sad eloisa, love and mourn. 
the freckle Iris own a fierce flame,
 and three unjealous husband wed the dame. 
cupressus dark disdain his dusky bride,
 one dome contain they, but two bed divide. 
the proud osyris fly his angry fair,
 two house hold the fashionable pair. 

with strange deformity plantago tread,
 a monster-birth! and lift his hundred head;
 yet with soft love a gentle belle he charm,
 and clasp the beauty in his hundred arm. 
so hapless Desdemona, fair and young,
 win by othello captivate tongue,
 sigh over each strange and piteous tale, distress,
 and sink enamour on his sooty breast. 

two gentle shepherd and their sister-wive
 with thou, ANTHOXA! lead ambrosial life;
 where the wide heath in purple pride extend,
 and scatter furze its golden lustre blend,
 close in a green recess, unenvied lot! 
the blue smoke rise from their turf-built cot;
 bosomed in fragrance blush their infant train,
 eye the warm sun, or drink the silver rain. 

the fair osmunda seek the silent dell,
 the ivy canopy, and drip cell;
 there hide in shade clandestine rite approve,
 till the green progeny betray her love. 

with charm despotic fair chondrilla reign
 over the soft heart of five fraternal swain;
 if sigh the changeful nymph, alike they mourn;
 and, if she smile, with rival rapture burn. 
so, tune in unison, Eolian lyre! 
sound in sweet symphony thy kindred wire;
 now, gentle sweep by zephyr vernal wing,
 sink in soft cadence the lovesick string;
 and now with mingle chord, and voice high,
 peal the full anthem of the aerial choir. 

five sister-nymph to join diana train
 with thou, fair lychnis! vow, — but vow in vain;
 beneath one roof reside the virgin band,
 fly the fond swain, and scorn his offer hand;
 but when soft hour on breezy pinion move,
 and smile may attune her lute to love,
 each wanton beauty, trick in all her grace,
 shake the bright dew-drop from her blush face;
 in gay undress display her rival charm,
 and call her wonder lover to her arm. 

when the young hour amid her tangle hair
 weave the fresh rose-bud, and the lily fair,
 proud gloriosa lead three choose swain,
 the blush captive of her virgin chain. —
 — when time be rude hand a bark of wrinkle spread
 round her weak limb, and silvered over her head,
 three other youth her riper year engage,
 the flatter victim of her wily age. 

so, in her wane of beauty, Ninon win
 with fatal smile her gay unconscious son. —
 clasp in his arm she own a mother name, —
 "desist, rash youth! restrain your impious flame,
"first on that bed your infant-form be press,
 "bear by my throe, and nurture at my breast. " —
 back as from death he spring, with wild amaze
 fierce on the fair he fix his ardent gaze;
 drop on one knee, his frantic arm outspread,
 and steal a guilty glance towards the bed;
 then breathe from quiver lip a whisper vow,
 and bend on heaven his pale repentant brow;
 "thus, thus!" he cry, and plunge the furious dart,
 and life and love gush mingle from his heart. 

the fell silene and her sister fair,
 skill in destruction, spread the viscous snare. 

the harlot-band ten lofty bravo screen,
 and frown guard the magic net unseen. —
 haste, glitter nation, tenant of the air,
 oh, steer from hence your viewless course afar! 
if with soft word, sweet blush, nod, and smile,
 the three dread siren lure you to their toil,
 lime by their art in vain you point your sting,
 in vain the effort of your whirr wing! —
 go, seek your gild mate and infant hive,
 nor taste the honey purchase with your life! 

when heaven high vault condense cloud deform,
 fair Amaryllis fly the incumbent storm,
 seek with unsteady step the shelter vale,
 and turn her blush beauty from the gale. —
 six rival youth, with soft concern impress,
 calm all her fear, and charm her care to rest. —
 so shine at eve the sun-illumined fane,
 lift its bright cross, and wave its golden vane;
 from every breeze the polish axle turn,
 and high in air the dance meteor burn. 

four of the giant brood with ilex stand,
 each grasp a thousand arrow in his hand;
 a thousand steely point on every scale
 form the bright terror of his bristly male. —
 so arm, immortal Moore uncharmed the spell,
 and slay the wily dragon of the well. —
 sudden with rage their injure bosom burn,
 retort the insult, or the wound return;
 unwronged, as gentle as the breeze that sweep
 the unbend harvest or undimpled deep,
 they guard, the king of needwood wide domain,
 their sister-wive and fair infantine train;
 lead the lone pilgrim through the trackless glade,
 or guide in leafy wild the wander maid. 

so wright bold pencil from vesuvio hight
 hurl his red lavas to the trouble night;
 from Calpè start the intolerable flash,
 sky burst in flame, and blaze ocean dash; —
 or bid in sweet repose his shade recede,
 wind the still vale, and slope the velvet mead;
 on the pale stream expire zephyr sink,
 and moonlight sleep upon its hoary brink. 

gigantic nymph! the fair kleinhovia reign,
 the grace and terror of orixa plain;
 over her warm cheek the blush of beauty swim,
 and nerve herculean bend her sinewy limb;
 with frolic eye she view the affright throng,
 and shake the meadow, as she tower along,
 with playful violence display her charm,
 and bear her tremble lover in her arm. 
so fair Thalestris shake her plumy crest,
 and bind in rigid mail her jut breast;
 poise her long lance amid the walk of war,
 and beauty thunder from bellona car;
 Greece arm in vain, her captive hero weave
 the chain of conquest with the wreath of love. 

when over the culture lawn and dreary waste
 retire autumn fling her howl blast,
 bend in tumultuous wave the struggle wood,
 and shower their leafy honour on the flood,
 in wither heap collect the flowery spoil,
 and each chill insect sink beneath the soil;
 quick fly fair tulipa the loud alarm,
 and fold her infant close in her arm;
 in some lone cave, secure pavilion, lie,
 and wait the courtship of serener sky. —
 so, six cold moon, the dormouse charm to rest,
 indulgent sleep! beneath thy eider breast,
 in field of fancy climb the kernel grove,
 or share the golden harvest with his love. —
 but bright from earth amid the trouble air
 ascend fair colchica with radiant hair,
 warm the cold bosom of the hoary year,
 and light with beauty blaze the dusky sphere. 
three blush maid the intrepid nymph attend,
 and six gay youth, enamour train! defend. 
so shine with silver guard the georgian star,
 and drive on night blue arch his glitter car;
 hang over the billowy cloud his lucid form,
 wade through the mist, and dance in the storm. 

great helianthus guide over twilight plain
 in gay solemnity his dervise-train;
 marshale in five each gaudy band proceed,
 each gaudy band a plume lady lead;
 with zealous step he climb the upland lawn,
 and bow in homage to the rise dawn;
 imbibe with eagle-eye the golden ray,
 and watch, as it move, the orb of day. 

queen of the marsh, imperial Drosera tread
 rush-fringed bank, and moss-embroidered bed;
 redundant fold of glossy silk surround
 her slender waist, and trail upon the ground;
 five sister-nymph collect with graceful ease,
 or spread the float purple to the breeze;
 and five fair youth with duteous love comply
 with each soft mandate of her move eye. 
as with sweet grace her snowy neck she bow,
 a zone of diamond tremble round her brow;
 bright shine the silver halo, as she turn;
 and, as she step, the live lustre burn. 

fair lonicera print the dewy lawn,
 and deck with bright blush the vermil dawn;
 wind round the shadowy rock, and pansy vale,
 and scent with sweet breath the summer-gale;
 with artless grace and native ease she charm,
 and bear the horn of plenty in her arm. 
five rival swain their tender care unfold,
 and watch with eye askance the treasure gold. 

where rear huge tenerif his azure crest,
 aspire draba build her eagle nest;
 her pendant eyry icy cave surround,
 where erst volcano mine the rocky ground. 
please round the fair four rival lord ascend
 the shaggy steep, two menial youth attend. 
high in the set ray the beauty stand,
 and her tall shadow wave on distant land. 

stay, bright inhabitant of air, alight,
 ambitious VISCA, from thy eagle-flight! —
 — scorn the sordid soil, aloft she spring,
 shake her white plume, and clap her golden wing;
 high over the field of boundless ether rove,
 and seek amid the cloud her soar love! 

stretch on her mossy couch, in trackless deep,
 queen of the coral grove, zostera sleep;
 the silvery sea-weed mat round her bed,
 and distant surge murmur over her head. —
 high in the flood her azure dome ascend,
 the crystal arch on crystal column bend;
 roof with translucent shell the turret blaze,
 and far in ocean dart their colour ray;
 over the white floor successive shadow move,
 as rise and break the ruffle wave above. —
 around the nymph her mermaid-train repair,
 and weave with orient pearl her radiant hair;
 with rapid fin she cleave the watery way,
 shoot like a silver meteor up to day;
 sound a loud conch, convoke a scaly band,
 her sea-born lover, and ascend the strand. 

even round the pole the flame of love aspire,
 and icy bosom feel the secret fire! —
 cradle in snow and fan by arctic air
 shine, gentle barometz! thy golden hair;
 root in earth each cleave hoof descend,
 and round and round her flexile neck she bend;
 crop the grey coral moss, and hoary thyme,
 or lap with rosy tongue the melt rhyme;
 eye with mute tenderness her distant dam,
 or seem to bleat, a vegetable lamb. 
— so, warm and buoyant in his oily mail,
 gambol on sea of ice the unwieldy whale;
 wide-waving fin round float island urge
 his bulk gigantic through the trouble surge;
 with hideous yawn the fly shoal he seek,
 or clasp with fringe of horn his massy cheek;
 lift over the toss wave his nostril bare,
 and spout pellucid column into air;
 the silvery arch catch the set beam,
 and transient rainbow tremble over the stream. 

weak with nice sense, the chaste mimosa stand,
 from each rude touch withdraw her timid hand;
 oft as light cloud overpass the summer-glade,
 alarm she tremble at the move shade;
 and feel, alive through all her tender form,
 the whisper murmur of the gather storm;
 shut her sweet eye-lid to approach night;
 and hail with freshen charm the rise light. 
veil, with gay decency and modest pride,
 slow to the mosque she move, a eastern bride;
 there her soft vow unceasing love record,
 queen of the bright seraglio of her lord. —
 so sink or rise with the changeful hour
 the liquid silver in its glassy tower. 
so turn the needle to the pole it love,
 with fine libration quiver as it move. 

all wan and shiver in the leafless glade
 the sad anemone recline her head;
 grief on her cheek have pale the roseate hue,
 and her sweet eye-lid drop with pearly dew. 
— "see, from bright region, bear on odorous gale
 the swallow, herald of the summer, sail;
 "breathe, gentle air! from cherub-lip impart
"thy balmy influence to my anguish heart;
 "thou, who soft voice call forth the tender bloom,
"who pencil paint they, and who breath perfume;
 "o chase the fiend of frost, with leaden mace
"who seal in deathlike sleep my hapless race;
 "melt his hard heart, release his iron hand,
"and give my ivory petal to expand. 
 "so may each bud, that deck the brow of spring,
"shed all its incense on thy waft wing! "—

to her fond prayer propitious zephyr yield,
 sweep on his slide shell through azure field,
 over her fair mansion wave his whisper wand,
 and give her ivory petal to expand;
 give with new life her filial train to rise,
 and hail with kindle smile the genial sky. 
so shine the nymph in beauty blush pride,
 when zephyr waft her deep calash aside;
 tear with rude kiss her bosom gauzy veil,
 and fling the flutter kerchief to the gale. 
so bright, the fold canopy undrawn,
 glide the gilt Landau over the velvet lawn,
 of beaux and bell display the glitter throng;
 and soft air fan they, as they roll along. 

where frown Snowden bend his dizzy brow
 over Conway, listen to the surge below;
 retire lichen climb the topmost stone,
 and 'amid the airy ocean dwell alone. —
 bright shine the star unnumbered over her head,
 and the cold moonbeam gild her flinty bed;
 while round the rift rock hoarse whirlwind breathe,
 and dark with thunder sail the cloud beneath. —
 the steepy path her plight swain pursue,
 and track her light step over the imprint dew,
 delight HYMEN give his torch to blaze,
 wind round the crag, and light the mazy way;
 shed over their secret vow his influence chaste,
 and deck with rose the admire waste. 

high in the front of heaven when Sirius glare,
 and over Britannia shake his fiery hair;
 when no soft shower descend, no dew distil,
 her wave-worn channel dry, and mute her rill;
 when droop the sicken herb, the blossom fade,
 and parch earth gape beneath the wither glade. 
— with languid step fair DYPSACA retreat;
 "fall gentle dew!" the faint nymph repeat;
 seek the low dell, and in the sultry shade
 invoke in vain the naiad to her aid. —
 four silvan youth in crystal goblet bear
 the untasted treasure to the grateful fair;
 please from their hand with modest grace she sip,
 and the cool wave reflect her coral lip. 

with nice selection modest Rubia blend,
 her vermil dye, and over the cauldron bend;
 warm 'amid the rise steam the beauty glow,
 as blush in a mist the dewy rose. 

with chemic art four favour youth aloof
 stain the white fleece, or stretch the tint woof;
 over age cheek the warmth of youth diffuse,
 or deck the pale-eyed nymph in roseate hue. 
so when Medea to exult Greece
 from plunder Colchis bear the golden fleece;
 on the loud shore a magic pile she raise,
 the cauldron bubble, and the faggot blaze; —
 please on the boil wave old Aeson swim,
 and feel new vigour stretch his swell limb;
 through his thril nerve forget ardour dart,
 and warm eddy circle round his heart;
 with soft fire he kindle eye-ball glow,
 and dark tress wanton round his brow. 

as dash the wave on india breezy strand,
 her flush cheek press upon her lily hand,
 VALLISNER sit, up-turns her tearful eye,
 call her lose lover, and upbraid the sky;
 for he she breathe the silent sight, forlorn,
 each setting-day; for he each rise morn. —
 "bright orb, that light you high etherial plain,
"or bathe your radiant tress in the main;
 "pale moon, that silver over night sable brow; —
"for you be witness to his part vow! —
 "you shelve rock, dark wave, and sound shore, —
"you echo sweet the tender word he swear! —
 "can star or sea the sail of love retain? 
"o guide my wanderer to my arm again! "—

her buoyant skiff intrepid ulva guide,
 and seek her lord amid the trackless tide;
 her secret vow the cyprian queen approve,
 and hover halcyon guard her inftant-loves;
 each in his float cradle round they throng,
 and dimple ocean bear the fleet along. —
 thus over the wave, which gentle bend and swell,
 fair Galatea steer her silver shell;
 her playful dolphin stretch the silken rein,
 hear she sweet voice, and glide along the main. 
as round the wild meander coast she move
 by gush rill, rude cliff, and nod grove;
 each by her pine the wood-nymph wave their lock,
 and wonder naiad peep amid the rock;
 please train of mermaid rise from coral cell,
 admire Triton find their twist shell;
 charm over the car pursue cupid sweep,
 their snow-white pinion twinkle in the deep;
 and, as the lustre of her eye she turn,
 soft sigh the gale, and amorous ocean burn. 

on dove green brink the fair tremella stand,
 and view her playful image in the flood;
 to each rude rock, lone dell, and echo grove
 sing the sweet sorrow of her secret love. 
 "oh, stay! — return!" — along the sound shore
 cry the sad naiad, — she return no more! —
 now gird with cloud the sullen evening frown,
 and wither eurus sweep along the ground;
 the misty moon withdraw her horn light,
 and sink with Hesper in the skirt of night;
 no dim electric stream, (the northern dawn,)
 with meek effulgence quiver over the lawn;
 no star benignant shoot one transient ray
 to guide or light the wanderer on her way. 
round the dark crag the murmur whirlwind blow,
 wood groan above, and water roar below;
 as over the steep with pause foot she move,
 the pity dryad shriek amid their grove;
 she fly, — she stop, — she pant — she look behind,
 and hear a demon howl in every wind. 
— as the bleak blast unfurl her flutter vest,
 cold beat the snow upon her shudder breast;
 through her numb limb the chill sensation dart,
 and the keen ice-bolt tremble at her heart;
 "i sink, i fall! oh, help i, help!" she cry,
 her stiffen tongue the unfinished sound deny;
 tear after tear down her cheek succeed,
 and pearl of ice bestrew the glitter mead;
 congeal snow her linger foot surround,
 arrest she flight, and root she to the ground;
 with suppliant arm she pour the silent prayer;
 her suppliant arm hang crystal in the air;
 pellucid film her shiver neck overspread,
 seal she mute lip, and silver over her head,
 veil her pale bosom, glaze she lift hand,
 and shrine in ice the beauteous statue stand
 — dove azure nymph on each revolve year
 for fair tremella shed the tender tear;
 with rush-wove crown in sad procession move,
 and sound the sorrow shell to hapless love. " 

here pause the Muse, — across the darken pole
 sail the dim cloud, the echo thunder roll;
 the tremble wood-nymph, as the tempest lower,
 lead the gay goddess to their inmost bower;
 hang the mute lyre the laurel shade beneath,
 and round her temple bind the myrtle wreath. 
— now the light swallow with her airy brood
 skim the green meadow, and the dimple flood;
 loud shriek the lone thrush from his leafless thorn,
 the alarm beetle sound his bugle horn;
 each pendant spider wind with singer sine
 he ravel clue, and climb along the line;
 gay gnome in glitter circle stand aloof
 beneath a spread mushroom fret roof;
 swift bee return seek their waxen cell,
 and sylph cling quiver in the lily bell. 
through the still air descend the genial shower,
 and pear rain-drop deck the laugh flower. 

interlude.

bookseller.

poet.

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

the love of the plant.

Canto ii.

again the goddess strike the golden lyre,
 and tune to wild note the warble wire;
 with soft suspend step attention move,
 and silence hover over the listen grove;
 orb within orb the charm audience throng,
 and the green vault reverberate the song. 

 "breathe soft, you gale!" the fair carlina cry,
 "bear on broad wing your votress to the sky. 
"how sweet mutable yond orient hue,
 "as morn fair hand she open rose strew;
"how bright, when Iris blend many a ray
 "bind in embroider wreath the brow of day;
"soft, when the pendant moon with lustre pale
 "over heaven blue arch unsurl her milky veil;
"while from the north long thread of silver light
 "dart on swift shuttle over the tissue night! 
breathe soft, you zephyr! hear my fervent sigh,
"bear on broad wing your votress to the sky! "—
 — plume over plume in long divergent line
 on whale-bone rib the fair mechanic join;
 inlay with eider down the silken string,
 and weave in wide expanse daedalian wing;
 round her bold son the wave pennon bind,
 and walk with angel-step upon the wind. 

so on the shoreless air the intrepid Gaul
 launch the vast concave of his bouyant ball. —
 journey on high, the silken castle glide
 bright as a meteor through the azure tide;
 over town and tower and temple win its way,
 or mount sublime, and gild the vault of day. 
silent with upturned eye unbreathing crowd
 pursue the float wonder to the cloud;
 and, flush with transport or benumb with fear,
 watch, as it rise, the diminish sphere. 
— now less and less! — and now a speck be see! —
 and now the fleet rack obtrude between! —
 with bend knee, raise arm, and suppliant brow
 to every shrine with mingle cry they vow. —
 "save he, you saint! who over the good preside;
"bear he, you wind! you star benignant! guide. 
— the calm philosopher in ether sail,
 view broad star, and breathe in pure gale;
 see, like a map, in many a wave line
 round earth blue plain her lucid water shine;
 see at his foot the forky lightning glow,
 and hear innocuous thunder roar below. 
— rise, great MONGOLFIER! urge thy venturous flight
 high over the moon pale ice-reflected light;
 high over the pearly star, who beamy horn
 hang in the east, gay harbinger of morn;
 leave the red eye of Mars on rapid wing,
 Jove silver guard, and Saturn dusky ring;
 leave the fair beam, which, issue from afar,
 play with new lustre round the georgian star;
 shun with strong oar the sun attractive throne,
 the sparkle zodiac, and the milky zone;
 where headlong comet with increase force
 through other system bend their blaze course, —
 for thou Cassiope her chair withdraw,
 for thou the bear retract his shaggy paw;
 high over the north thy golden orb shall roll,
 and blaze eternal round the wonder pole. 
so Argo, rise from the southern main,
 light with new star the blue etherial plain;
 with favour beam the mariner protect,
 and the bold course, which first it steer, direct. 

inventress of the woof, fair Lina fling
 the fly shuttle through the dance string;
 inlay the broider west with flowery dye,
 quick beat the reed, the pedal fall and rise;
 slow from the beam the length of warp unwind,
 and dance and nod the massy weight behind. —
 teach by her labour, from the fertile soil
 immortal Isis clothe the bank of Nile;
 and fair Arachne with her rival loom
 find undeserved a melancholy doom. —
 five sister-nymph with dewy finger twine
 the beamy flax, and stretch the fibre-line;
 quick eddy thread from rapid spindle reel,
 or whirl with beat foot the dizzy wheel. 
— charm round the busy fair five shepherd press,
 praise the nice texture of their snowy dress,
 admire the artist, and the art approve,
 and tell with honeyed word the tale of love. 

so now, where Derwent roll his dusky flood
 through vault mountain, and a night of wood,
 the nymph, GOSSYPIA, tread the velvet sod,
 and warm with rosy smile the watery god;
 his ponderous oar to slender spindle turn,
 and pour over massy wheel his foamy urn;
 with playful charm her hoary lover win,
 and wield his trident, — while the monarch spin. 
— first with nice eye emerge naiad cull
 from leathery pod the vegetable wool;
 with wiry tooth revolve card relea
 the tanged knot, and smooth the ravel fleece;
 next move the iron-hand with finger fine,
 Combs the wide card, and form the eternal line;
 slow, with soft lip, the whirl can acquire
 the tender skein, and wrap in rise spire;
 with quicken pace successive roller move,
 and these retain, and those extend the rove;
 then fly the spole, the rapid axle glow; —
 and slow circumvolve the labour wheel below. 
PAPYRA, throne upon the bank of Nile,
 spread she smooth leaf, and wave her silver style. 
— the story pyramid, the laureled bust,
 the trophy arch have crumble into dust;
 the sacred symbol, and the epic song,
 (unknown the character, forget the tongue,)
 with each unconquered chief, or saint maid,
 sink undistinguished in oblivion shade,
 sad over the scatter ruin genius sgh,
 and infant art but learn to lisp and die. 
till to astonish realm PAPYRA teach
 to paint in mystic colour sound and thought. 
with wisdom voice to print the page sublime,
 and mark in adamant the step of time. 
— three favour youth her soft attention share,
 the fond disciple of the studious fair,
 hear she sweet voice, the golden process prove;
 gaze, as they learn; and, as they listen, love. 
the first from Alpha to Omega join
 the letter tribe along the level line;
 weigh with nice ear the vowel, liquid, surd,
 and break in syllable the volant word. 
then form the next upon the marsale plain
 in deepen rank his dexterous cypher-train;
 and count, as wheel the decimate band,
 the dew of aegypt, or arabia sand. 
and then the third on four concordant line
 print the lone crotchet, and the quaver join;
 mark the gay trill, the solemn pause inscribe,
 and part with bar the undulate tribe. 
please round her cane-wove throne, the applaud crowd
 clape their rude hand, their swarthy forehead bow;
 with loud acclaim "a present god!" they cry,
 "a present god!" rebellow shore reply, —
 then peal at interval with mingle swell
 the echo harp, shill clarion, horn, and shell;
 while bard ecstatic, bend over the lyre,
 strike deep chord, and winge the song with fire,
 then mark astronomer with keen eye
 the moon refulgent journey through the sky;
 watch the swift comet urge their blaze car,
 and weigh the sun with his revolve star. 
high raise the chemist their hermetic wand,
 (and change form obey their wave hand,)
 her treasure gold from earth deep chamber tear,
 or fuse and harden her chalybeate over. 
all with bent knee from fair PAPYRA claim
 weave by her hand the wreath of deathless fame. 
— exult genius crown his darling child,
 the young art clasp her knee, and virtue smile. 
so now Delany form her mimic bower,
 her paper foliage, and her silken flower;
 her virgin train the tender scissors ply,
 vein the green leaf, the purple petal die:
 round wiry stem the flaxen tendril bend,
 moss creep below, and waxen fruit impend. 
cold winter view amid his realm of snow
 DELANY vegetable statue blow;
 smooth his stern brow, delay his hoary wing,
 and eye with wonder all the bloom of spring. 

the gentle lapsana, Nymphaea fair,
 and bright calendula with golden hair,
 watch with nice eye the earth diurnal way,
 mark her solar and sidereal day,
 her slow nutation, and her vary clime,
 and trace with mimic art the march of time;
 round his light foot a magic chain they fling,
 and count the quick vibration of his wing. —
 first in its brazen cell reluctant roll
 bend the dark spring in many a steely fold;
 on spiral brass be stretch the wiry thong,
 tooth urge tooth, and wheel drive wheel along;
 in diamond eye the polish axle flow,
 smooth slide the hand, the balance pant below. 
round the white circlet in relievo bold
 a serpent twine his scaly length in gold;
 and bright pencil on the enamel sphere
 live the fair trophy of the pass year. 
— here time be huge finger grasp his giant-mace,
 and dash proud superstition from her base,
 rend she strong tower and gorgeous fane, and shed
 the crumble fragment round her guilty head. 
there the gay hour, who wreath of rose deck,
 lead their young train amid the cumbrous wreck;
 and, slow purple over the mighty waste,
 plant the fair growth of science and of taste. 
while each light moment, as it dance by
 with feathery soot and pleasure-twinkling eye,
 feed from its baby-hand, with many a kiss,
 the callow nestling of domestic bliss. 

as yond gay cloud, which canopy the sky,
 change their thin form, and lose their lucid dye;
 so the soft bloom of beauty vernal charm
 fade in our eye, and withereth in our arm. 
— bright as the silvery plume, or pear shell,
 the snow-white rose, or lily virgin bell,
 the fair HELLEBORAS attractive shine,
 warm every sage, and every shepherd win. —
 round the gay sister press the enamour band,
 and seek with soft solicitude their hand. 
— ere while how change! — in dim suffusion lie
 the glance divine, that lighten in their eye;
 cold be those lip, where smile seductive hang,
 and the weak accent linger on their tongue;
 each roseate feature fade to livid green, —
 — disgust with face avert shut the scene. 

so from his gorgeous throne, which awe the world,
 the mighty monarch of the east be hurl,
 to dwell with brute beneath the midnight storm,
 by heaven just vengeance change in mind and form. 
— prone to the earth he bend his brow superb,
 crop the young floret and the bladed herb;
 loll his red tongue, and from the reedy side
 of slow Euphrates lap the muddy tide. 
long eagle plume his arch neck invest,
 steal round his arm, and clasp his sharpen breast;
 dark brind hair in bristle rank, behind,
 rise over his back, and rustle in the wind,
 cloth his lank side, his shrivel limb surround,
 and human hand with talon print the ground. 
silent in shine troop the courtier-throng
 pursue their monarch as he crawl along;
 even beauty plead in vain with smile and tear,
 nor flattery self can pierce his pendant ear. 

two sister-nymph to ganges flowery brink
 bend their light step, the lucid water drink,
 wind through the dewy rice, and nod cane,
 (as eight black eunuch guard the sacred plain),
 with playful malice watch the scaly brood,
 and shower the inebriate berry on the flood. —
 stay in your crystal chamber, silver tribe! 
turn your bright eye, and shun the dangerous bribe;
 the trammel net with less destruction sweep
 your curl shallows, and your azure deep;
 with less deceit, the gild fly beneath,
 lurk the fell hook unseen, — to taste be death! —
 — dim your slow eye, and dull your pearly coat,
 drink on the wave your languid form shall float,
 on useless fin in giddy circle play,
 and heron and otter seize you for their prey. —

so, when the saint from padua graceless land
 in silent anguish seek the barren strand,
 high on the shatter beech sublime he stand,
 still with his wave arm the babble flood;
 "to man dull ear," he cry, "i call in vain,
 hear i, you scaly tenant of the main!" —
 misshape Seals approach in circle flock,
 in dusky mail the tortoise climb the rock,
 Torpedoes, shark, ray, porpoise, dolphin, pour
 their twinkle squadron round the glitter shore;
 with tangle fin, behind, huge phocae glide,
 and whale and Grampi swell the distant tide. 
then kneel the hoary seer, to heaven address
 his fiery eye, and smite his sound breast;
 "bless you the lord!" with thunder voice he cry,
 "bless you the lord!" the bend shore reply;
 the wind and water catch the sacred word,
 and mingle echo shout "bless the lord!" 
the listen shoal the quick contagion feel. 
Pant on the flood, inebriate with their zeal,
 open their wide jaw, and bow their slimy head,
 and dash with frantic sin their foamy bed. 

Sopha'd on silk, amid her charm-built tower,
 her mead of asphodel, and amaranth bower,
 where sleep and silence guard the soft abode,
 in sullen apathy papaver nod. 
faint over her couch in scintillate stream
 pass the thin form of fancy and of dream;
 freeze by enchantment on the velvet ground
 fair youth and beauteous lady glitter round;
 on crystal pedestal they seem to sigh,
 bend the meek knee, and lift the implore eye. 
— and now the sorceress bare her shrivel hand,
 and circle thrice in air her ebon wand;
 flush with new life descend statue talk,
 the pliant marble soften as they walk;
 with deep sob revive lover breathe,
 fair bosom rise and soft heart pant beneath;
 with warm lip relent damsel speak,
 and kindle blush tinge the parian cheek;
 to viewless lute aërial voice sing,
 and hover love be hear on rustle wing. 
— she wave her wand again! — fresh horror seize
 their stiffen limb, their vital current freeze;
 by each cold nymph her marble lover lie,
 and iron slumber seal their glassy eye. 
so with his dread caduceus Hermes lead
 from the dark region of the imprison dead,
 or drive in silent shoal the linger train
 to night dull shore, and Pluto dreary reign. 

so with her wave pencil Crewe command
 the realm of taste, and fancy fairy land;
 call up with magic voice the shape, that sleep
 in earth dark bosom, or unfathomed deep;
 that shrine in air on viewless wing aspire,
 or blaze bathe in elemental fire. 
as with nice touch her plaistic hand she move,
 rise the fine form of beauty, grace, love;
 kneel to the fair inchantress, smile or sigh,
 and fade or flourish, as she turn her eye. 

fair cista, rival of the rosy dawn,
 call her light choir, and tread the dewy lawn;
 hail with rude melody the new-born may,
 as cradle yet in april lap she lie. 

i 

 "bear in yond blaze of orient sky,
"sweet may! thy radiant form unfold;
 "unclose thy blue voluptuous eye,
"and wave thy shadowy lock of gold,

ii.

 "for thou the fragrant zephyr blow,
"for thou descend the sunny shower;
 "the rill in soft murmur flow,
"and bright blossom gem the bower. 

iii.

 "light grace dress in flowery wreath
"and tiptoe joy their hand combine;
 "and love his sweet contagion breathe,
"and laugh dance round thy shrine. 

iv.

 "warm with new life the glitter throng
"on quiver fin and rustle wing
 "delight join their votive song,
"and hail thou, goddess of the spring. " 

over the green brink of severn oozy bed,
 in changeful ring, her sprightly troop she lead;
 Pan trip before, where eudness shade the mead,
 and blow with glow lip his sevenfold reed;
 emerge naiad swell the jocund strain,
 and ape with mimic step the dance train. —
 "i faint, i fall!" — at noon the beauty cry,
 "weep over my tomb, you nymph!" — and sink and die. 
— thus, when white winter over the shiver clime
 drive the still snow, or shower the silver rhyme;
 as the lone shepherd over the dazzle rock
 print his steep step, and guide his vagrant flock;
 view the green holly veil in network nice,
 her vermil cluster twinkle in the ice;
 admire the lucid vale, and slumber flood,
 fantastic cataract, and crystal wood,
 transparent town, with sea of milk between,
 and eye with transport the refulgent scene: —
 if break the sunshine over the spangle tree,
 or flit on tepid wing the western breeze,
 in liquid dew descend the transient glare,
 and all the glitter pageant melt in air. 

where Andes hide his cloud-wreathed crest in snow,
 and root his base on burn sand below;
 cinchona, fair of Peruvian maid,
 to health bright goddess in the breezy glade
 on quito temperate plain a altar rear,
 trill the loud hymn, the solemn prayer prefer:
 each balmy bud she cull, and honeyed flower,
 and hang with fragrant wreath the sacred bower;
 each pearly sea the search, and sparkle mine,
 and pile their treasure on the gorgeous shrine;
 her suppliant voice for sicken Loxa raise,
 sweet breathe the gale, and bright the censor blaze. 
— "divine hygeia! on thy votary bend
"thy angel-looks, oh, hear we, and defend! 
 "while stream over the night with baleful glare
"the star of autumn ray his misty hair;
 "fierce from his fen the giant ague spring,
"and wrap in fog descend on vampire wing;
 "before, with shudder limb cold tremor reel,
"and fever burn nostril dog his heel;
 "loud clap the grin fiend his iron hand,
"stamp with his marble foot, and shout along the land;
 "withereth the damask cheek, unnerve the strong,
"and drive with scorpion-lash the shriek throng. 
 "oh, goddess! on thy kneel votary bend
"thy angel-looks, oh, hear we, and defend! "
— hygeia, lean from the bless abode,
 the crystal mansion of the immortal god,
 see the sad nymph uplift her dewy eye,
 spread she white arm, and breathe her fervid sigh;
 call to her fair associate, youth, and joy,
 and shoot all-radiant through the glitter sky;
 loose wave behind her golden train of hair,
 her sapphire mantle swim diffuse in air. —
 over the grey mat moss, and pansy sod,
 with step sublime the glow goddess tread,
 gild with her beamy eye the conscious shade,
 and with her smile celestial bless the maid. 
"come to my arm, "with seraph voice she cry,
"thy vow be hear, benignant nymph! arise;
 "where yond aspire trunk fantastic wreath
"their mingle root, and drink the rill beneath,
 "yield to the bite axe thy sacred wood,
"and strew the bitter foliage on the flood. " 
in silent homage bow the blush maid, —
 five youth athletic hasten to her aid,
 over the scar hill re-echo stroke resound,
 and headlong forest thunder on the ground. 
round the dark root, rent bark, and shatter bough,
 from ochreous bed the swell fountain flow;
 with stream austere its wind margin lave,
 and pour from vale to vale its dusky wave. 
— as the pale squadron, bend over the brink,
 view with a sigh their alter form, and drink;
 slow-ebbing life with refluent crimson break
 over their wan lip, and paint their haggard cheek;
 through each fine nerve rekindle transport dart,
 light the quick eye, and swell the exult heart. 
— thus israel heaven-taught chief over trackless sand
 lead to the sultry rock his murmur band. 
bright over his brow the forky radiance blaze,
 and high in air the rod divine he raise. —
 wide yawn the cliff! — amid the thirsty throng
 rush the redundant wave, and shine along;
 with gourd and shell and helmet press the band,
 open their parch lip, and spread their eager hand,
 snatch their pale infant to the exuberant shower,
 kneel on the shatter rock, and bless the almighty power,

bolster with down, amid a thousand want,
 pale dropsy rear his bloat form, and pant;
 "quench i, you cool pellucid rill!" he cry,
 wet his parch tongue, and roll his hollow eye,
 so bend torment Tantalus to drink,
 while from his lip the refluent water shrink;
 again the rise stream his bosom lave,
 and thirst consume he 'amid circumfluent wave. 
— divine hygeia, from the bend sky
 descend, listen to his pierce cry;
 assume bright digitalis' dress and air,
 her ruby cheek, white neck, and raven hair;
 four youth protect she from the circle throng,
 and like the nymph the goddess step along. —
 — over he she wave her serpent-wreathed wand,
 cheer with her voice, and raise with her hand,
 warm with rekindle bloom his visage wan,
 and charm the shapeless monster into man. 

so when contagion with mephitic breath
 and wither famine urge the work of death;
 marseilles good bishop, London generous mayor,
 with food and faith, with medicine and with prayer,
 raise the weak head and stay the part sigh,
 or with new life relumed the swim eye. —
 — and now, philanthropy! thy ray divine
 dart round the globe from Zembla to the line;
 over each dark prison play the cheer light,
 like northern lustre over the vault of night. —
 from realm to realm, with cross or crescent crown,
 wherever mankind and misery be find,
 over burn sand, deep wave, or wild of snow,
 thy Howard journey seek the house of woe. 
down many a wind step to dungeon dank,
 where anguish wail aloud, and fetter clank;
 to cave bestrew with many a moulder bone,
 and cell, who echo only learn to groan;
 where no kind bar a whisper friend disclose,
 no sunbeam enter, and no zephyr blow,
 he tread, inemulous of fame or wealth,
 profuse of toil, and prodigal of health;
 with soft assuasive eloquence expand
 power rigid heart, and open his clench hand;
 lead stern-eyed justice to the dark domain,
 if not to sever, to relax the chain;
 or guide awaken mercy through the gloom,
 and show the prison, sister to the tomb! —
 give to her babe the self-devoted wife,
 to her fond husband liberty and life! —
 — the spirit of the good, who bend from high
 wide over these earthly scene their partial eye,
 when first, array in virtue pure robe,
 they see she Howard traverse the globe;
 see round his brow her sunlike glory blaze
 in arrowy circle of unwearied ray;
 mistake a mortal for a angel-guest,
 and ask what seraph-foot the earth impress. 
— onward he move! — disease and death retire,
 and murmur demon hate he, and admire. " 

here pause the goddess, — on hygeia shrine
 obsequious gnome repose the lyre divine;
 descend sylph relax the tremble string,
 and catch the rain-drop on their shadowy wing. 
— and now her vase a modest naiad fill
 with liquid crystal from her pebbly rill;
 pile the dry cedar round her silver urn,
 (bright climb the blaze, the crackle faggot burn),
 cull the green herb of china envy bower,
 in gaudy cup the steamy treasure pour;
 and, sweetly-smiling, on her bend knee
 present the fragrant quintessence of tea. 

interlude ii.

bookseller.

poet.

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

the love of the plant.

Canto iii.

and now the goddess sound her silver shell,
 and shake with deep tone the enchant dell;
 pale, round her grassy throne, bedew with tear,
 flit the thin form of sorrow, and of fear;
 soft sigh responsive whisper to the chord,
 and indignation half-unsheath their sword. 

 "thrice round the grave circaea print her tread,
 and chant the number, which disturb the dead;
 shake over the holy earth her sable plume,
 wave her dread wand, and strike the echo tomb!
 — pale shoot the star across the trouble night,
 the timorous moon withhold her conscious light;
 shrill scream the famish bat, and shiver owl,
 and loud and long the dog of midnight howl! —
 — then yawn the burst ground! — two imp obscene
 rise on broad wing, and hail the baleful queen;
 each with dire grin salute the potent wand,
 and lead the sorceress with his sooty hand;
 onward they glide, where shed the sickly yew
 over many a moulder bone its nightly dew;
 the ponderous portal of the church unbar, —
 hoarse on their hinge the ponderous portal jar;
 as through the colour glass the moonbeam fall,
 huge shapeless spectre quiver on the wall;
 low murmur creep along the hollow ground,
 and to each step the peal ail resound;
 by glimmer lamp, protect saint among,
 the shrine all tremble as they pass along,
 over the still choir with hideous laugh they move,
 (fiend yell below, and angel weep above!) 
their impious march to God high altar bend,
 with foot impure the sacred step ascend;
 with wine unblessed the holy chalice stain,
 assume the mitre, and the cope profane;
 to heaven their eye in mock devotion throw,
 and to the cross with horrid mummery bow;
 adjure by mimic rite the power above,
 and plite alternate their satanic love. 

avaunt, you vulgar! from her sacred grove
 with maniac step the pythian Laura move;
 full of the god her labour bosom sigh,
 foam on her lip, and fury in her eye,
 strong writhe her limb, her wild dishevel hair
 start from her laurel-wreath, and swim in air. —
 while twenty priest the gorgeous shrine surround
 cinctured with ephod, and with garland crown,
 contend host and tremble nation wait
 the firm immutable behest of fate;
 — she speak in thunder from her golden throne
 with word unwilled, and wisdom not her own. 

so on his nightmare through the evening fog
 flit the squab fiend over fen, and lake, and bog;
 seek some love-wildered maid with sleep oppress,
 alight, and grin sit upon her breast. 
— such as of late amid the murky sky
 be mark by fuseli poetic eye;
 who dare tint, with shakespear happy grace,
 give to the airy phantom form and place —
 back over her pillow sink her blush head,
 her snow-white limb hang helpless from the bed;
 while with quick sigh, and suffocative breath,
 her interrupt heart-pulse swim in death. 
— then shriek of capture town, and widow tear,
 pale lover stretch upon their blood-stained bier,
 the headlong precipice that thwart her flight,
 the trackless desert, the cold starless night,
 and stern-eyeed murderer with his knife behind,
 in dread succession agonise her mind. 
over her fair limb convulsive tremor fleet,
 start in her hand, and struggle in her foot;
 in vain to scream with quiver lip she try,
 and strain in palsy lid her tremulous eye;
 in vain she will to run, fly, swim, walk, creep;
 the will preside not in the bower of sleep. 
— on her fair bosom sit the demon-ape
 erect, and balancés his bloat shape;
 roll in their marble orb his gorgon-eye,
 and drink with leathern ear her tender cry. 

arm with her ivory beak, and talon-hand,
 descend fica dive into the sand;
 chamber in earth with cold oblivion lie;
 nor heed, you suitor-train, your amorous sigh;
 erewhile with renovate beauty bloom,
 mount into air, and move her leafy plume. 
— where hamp and manifold, their cliff among,
 each in his flinty channel wind along;
 with lucid line the dusky moor divide,
 hurry to intermix their sister tide. 
where still their silver-bosomed nymph abhor,
 the blood-smeared mansion of gigantic Thor, —
 — erst, fire volcanic in the marble womb
 of cloud-wrapped Wetton raise the massy dome;
 rock rear on rock in huge disjointed pile
 form the tall turret, and the lengthen ail;
 broad ponderous pier sustain the roof, and wide
 branch the vast rainbow rib from side to side. 
while from above descend in milky stream
 one scanty pencil of illusive beam,
 suspend crag and gape gulf illume,
 and gild the horror of the deepen gloom. 
— here oft the naiad, as they chance to play
 near the dread Fane on thor return day,
 see from red altar stream of guiltless blood
 stain their green reed-bed, and pollute their flood;
 hear die babe in wicker prison wail,
 and shriek of matron thrill the affright gale;
 while from dark cave infernal echo mock,
 and fiend triumphant shout from every rock!
 — so still the nymph emerge lift in air
 their snow-white shoulder and their azure hair;
 sail with sweet grace the dimple stream along,
 listen the shepherd or the miner song;
 but, when afar they view the giant-cave,
 on timorous fin they circle on the wave,
 with stream eye and throb heart recoil,
 plunge their fair form, and dive beneath the soil. —
 close round their head reluctant eddy sink,
 and wide ring successive dash the brink. —
 three thousand step in sparry cleft they stray,
 or seek through sullen mine their gloomy way;
 on bed of lava sleep in coral cell,
 or sigh over jasper fish, and agate shell. 
till, where fame Ilam lead his boil flood
 through flowery meadow and impend wood,
 please with light spring they leave the dreary night,
 and 'amid circumfluent surge rise to light;
 shake their bright lock, the widen vale pursue,
 their sea-green mantle fringe with pearly dew;
 in playful group by tower Thorp they move,
 bind over the foam wear, and rush into the dove. 

with fierce distract eye impatiens stand,
 swell her pale cheek, and brandish her hand,
 with rage and hate the astonish grove alarm,
 and hurl her infant from her frantic arm. 
— so when medaea leave her native soil
 unawed by danger, unsubdued by toil;
 her weep sire and beckon friend withstand,
 and launch enamour on the boil flood;
 one ruddy boy her gentle lip caress,
 and one fair girl be pillowed on her breast
 while high in air the golden treasure burn,
 and love and glory guide the prow by turn. 
but, when thessalia inauspicious plain
 receive the matron-heroine from the main;
 while horn of triumph find, and altar burn,
 and shout nation hail their chief return;
 aghast, she see new deck the nuptial bed,
 and proud Creusa to the temple lead;
 see she in jason mercenary arm
 deride her virtue, and insult her charm;
 see her dear babe from fame and empire tear,
 in foreign realm desert and forlorn;
 her love reject, and her vengeance brave,
 by he her beauty win, her virtue save. —
 with stern regard she eye the traitor-king,
 and feel, ingratitude! thy keen sting;
 "nor heaven," she cry, "nor earth, nor hell can hold
"a heart abandon to the thirst of gold! " 
stamp with wild foot, and shake her horrent brow,
 and call the fury from their den below. 
— slow out of earth, before the festive crowd,
 on wheel of fire, amid a night of cloud,
 draw by fierce fiend arise a magic car,
 receive the queen, and hover flame in air. —
 as with raise hand the suppliant traitor kneel
 and fear the vengeance they deserve to feel,
 thrice with parch lip her guiltless babe she presr,
 and thrice she clasp they to her torture breast;
 awhile with white uplift eye she stand,
 then plunge her tremble poniard in their blood. 
"go, kiss your sire! go, share the bridal mirth! " 
she cry, and hurl their quiver limb on earth. 
rebellow thunder rock the marble tower,
 and red-tongued lightning shoot their arrowy shower;
 earth yawn! — the crash ruin sink! — over all
 death with black hand extend his mighty pall;
 their mingle gore the fiend of vengeance quaff,
 and hell receive they with convulsive laugh. 
round the vex isle where fierce tornado roar,
 or tropic breeze sooth the sultry shore;
 what time the eve her gauze pellucid spread
 over the dim flower, and veil the misty mead;
 slow, over the twilight sand or leafy walk,
 with gloomy dignity DICTAMNA stalk;
 in sulphurous eddy round the weird dame
 play the light gas, or kindle into flame. 
if rest the traveller his weary head,
 grim mancinella haunt the mossy bed,
 brew her black hebenon, and, steal near. 
pour the curse venom in his torture ear. —
 wide over the madden throng urtica sling
 her barb shaft, and dart her poison sting. 
and fall lobelia suffocate breath
 load the dank pinion of the gale with death. 
— with fear and hate they blast the affright grove,
 yet own with tender care their kindred love! —

so, where palmira 'amid her waste plain,
 her shatter aqueduct, and prostrate fane,
 (as the bright orb of breezy midnight pour
 long thread of silver through her gape tower,
 over moulder tomb, and totter column gleam,
 and frost her desert with diffusive beam),
 sad over the mighty wreck in silence bend,
 lift her wet eye, her tremulous hand extend. —
 if from lone cliff a burst rill expand
 its transient course, and sink into the sand;
 over the moist rock the fell hyaena prowl,
 the Leopard hiss, and the panther growl;
 on quiver wing the famish vulture scream,
 dip his dry beak, and sweep the gush stream;
 with foamy jaw, beneath, and sanguine tongue,
 lap the lean wolf, and pant, and run along;
 stern stalk the lion, on the rustle brink
 hear the dread snake, and tremble as he drink;
 quick dart the scaly monster over the plain,
 fold after fold, his undulate train;
 and, bend over the lake his crest brow,
 start at the crocodile, that gape below. 

where sea of glass with gay reflection smile
 round the green coast of java palmy isle;
 a spacious plain extend its upland scene,
 rock rise on rock, and fountain gush between;
 soft zephyr blow, eternal summer reign,
 and shower prolific bless the soil, — in vain!
 — no spicy nutmeg scent the vernal gale,
 nor tower plaintain shade the midday vale;
 no grassy mantle hide the fable hill,
 no flowery chaplet crown the trickle rill;
 nor tuft moss, nor leathery lichen creep
 in russet tapestry over the crumble steep. 
— no step retreat, on the sand impress,
 invite the visit of a second guest;
 no refluent fin the unpeopled stream divide,
 no revolant pinion cleave the airy tide;
 nor hand mole, nor beak worm return,
 that mine pass the irremeable bourn. —
 fierce in dread silence on the blast heath
 fall upas sit, the hydra-tree of death. 
lo! from one root, the envenom soil below,
 a thousand vegetative serpent grow;
 in shine ray the scaly monster spread
 over ten square league his far-diverging head;
 or in one trunk entwist his tangle form,
 look over the cloud, and hiss in the storm. 
steep in fell poison, as his sharp tooth part,
 a thousand tongue in quick vibration dart;
 snatch the proud eagle tower over the heath,
 or pounce the lion, as he stalk beneath;
 or strew, as marshale host contend in vain,
 with human skeleton the whiten plain. 
— chain at his root two scion-demon dwell,
 breathe the faint hiss, or try the shrill yell;
 rise, flutter in the air on callow wing,
 and aim at insect-prey their little sting. 
so time be strong arm with sweep scythe erase
 art cumbrous work, and empire, from their base;
 while each young hour its sickle fine employ,
 and crop the sweet bud of domestic joy! 

with blush bright as morn fair orchis charm,
 and lull her infant in her fondle arm;
 soft play affection round her bosom throne,
 and guard his life, forgetful of her own. 

so wing the wound deer her headlong flight,
 pierce by some ambush archer of the night,
 shoot to the woodland with her bound fawn,
 and drop of blood bedew the conscious lawn;
 there hide in shade she shun the cheerful day,
 hang over her young, and weep her life away. 

so stand Eliza on the wood-crowned height,
 over minden plain, spectatress of the fight,
 seek with bold eye amid the bloody strife
 her dear self, the partner of her life;
 from hill to hill the rush host pursue,
 and view his banner, or believe she view. 
please with the distant roar, with quick tread
 fast by his hand one lisp boy she lead;
 and one fair girl amid the loud alarm
 sleep on her kerchief, cradle by her arm;
 while round her brow bright beam of honour dart,
 and love warm eddy circle round her heart. 
— near and more near the intrepid beauty press,
 see through the drive smoke his dance crest,
 hear the exult shout, "they run! they run!" 
 "great god!" she cry, "he be safe! the battle win!"
 — a ball now hiss through the airy tide,
 (some fury winge it, and some demon guide!) 
part the fine lock, her graceful head that deck,
 wound her fair ear, and sink into her neck;
 the red stream, issue from her azure vein,
 dye her white veil, her ivory bosom stain. —
 — "ah i!" she cry, and, sink on the ground,
 kiss her dear babe, regardless of the wound;
 "oh, cease not yet to beat, thou vital urn! 
"wait, gush life, oh, wait my love return! —
 "hoarse bark the wolf, the vulture scream from far! —
"the angel, pity, shun the walk of war! —
 "oh, spare you war-hound, spare their tender age! —
"on i, on i, "she cry," exhaust your rage! "—
 then with weak arm her weep babe caress,
 and sigh bid they in her blood-stained vest. 

from tent to tent the impatient warrior fly,
 fear in his heart, and frenzy in his eye;
 Eliza name along the camp he call,
 Eliza echo through the canvas wall;
 quick through the murmur gloom his footstep tread,
 over groan heap, the die and the dead,
 vault over the plain, and in the tangle wood,
 lo! dead Eliza welter in her blood! —
 — soon hear his listen son the welcome sound,
 with open arm and sparkle eye he bound: —
 "speak low," he cry, and give his little hand,
 "Eliza sleep upon the dew-cold sand;
"poor weep babe with bloody finger press,
 "and try with pout lip her milkless breast;
"alas! we both with cold and hunger quake —
 "why do you weep? — mama will soon awake. "
 — "she will wake no more!" the hopeless mourner cry,
 upturned his eye, and clasp his hand, and sigh;
 stretch on the ground awhile entranced he lie,
 and press warm kiss on the lifeless clay;
 and then unsprung with wild convulsive start,
 and all the father kindle in his heart;
 "oh, heaven!" he cry, "my first rash vow forgive! 
these bind to earth, for these i pray to live!" —
 round his chill babe he wrap his crimson vest,
 and clasp they sob to his ache breast. 

two harlot-nymph, the fair cuscutas, please
 with labour negligence, and study ease;
 in the meek garb of modest worth disguise,
 the eye avert, and the smile chastise,
 with sly approach they spread their dangerous charm,
 and round their victim wind their wiry arm. 
so by Scamander when Laocoon stand,
 where troy proud turret glitter in the flood,
 raise high his arm, and with prophetic call
 to shrink realm announce her fatal fall;
 whirl his fierce spear with more than mortal force,
 and pierce the thick rib of the echo horse;
 two serpent-form incumbent on the main,
 lash the white wave with redundant train,
 arch their blue neck, and shake their tower crest,
 and plough their foamy way with speckle breast;
 then dart fierce amid the affright throng,
 roll their red eye, and shoot their fork tongue. —
 — two dare youth to guard the hoary sire
 thwart their dread progress, and provoke their ire. 
round fire and son the scaly monster roll,
 ring above ring, in many a tangle fold,
 close and more close their writhe limb surround,
 and fix with foamy tooth the envenom wound. 
— with brow upturned to heaven the holy sage
 in silent agony sustain their rage;
 while each fond youth, in vain, with pierce cry
 bend on the torture sire his die eye. 

 "drink deep, sweet youth," seductive Vitis cry,
 the maudlin tear-drop glitter in her eye;
 green leaf and purple cluster crown her head,
 and the tall Thyrsus stay her totter tread. 
— five hapless swain with soft assuasive smile
 the harlot mesh in her deathful toil;
 "drink deep," she carol, as she wave in air
 the mantling goblet, "and forget your care. " —
 over the dread feast malignant chemia scowl,
 and mingle poison in the nectar bowl;
 fell gout peep grin through the flimsy scene,
 and bloat dropsy pant behind unseen;
 wrap in his robe white lepra hide his stain,
 and silent frenzy writhe bite his chain. 

so when Prometheus brave the thunderer ire,
 steal from his blaze throne etherial fire,
 and, lantern in his breast, from realm of day
 bear the bright treasure to his man of clay; —
 high on cold Caucasus by Vulcan bind,
 the lean impatient vulture flutter round,
 his writhe limb in vain he twist and strain
 to break or loose the adamantine chain. 
the gluttonous bird, exult in his pang,
 tear his swell liver with remorseless fang. 

the gentle cyclamen with dewy eye
 breathe over her lifeless babe the part sigh;
 and, bend low to earth, with pious hand
 Inhumes her dear depart in the sand. 
 "sweet nursling! wither in thy tender hour,
 oh, sleep," she cry, "and rise a fair flower!"
 — so when the plague over London gasp crowd
 shake her dank wing, and steer her murky cloud;
 when over the friendless bier no rite be read,
 no dirge slow-chanted, and no pall outspread;
 while death and night pile up the naked throng,
 and silence drive their ebon car along;
 six lovely daughter, and their father, sweep
 to the throng grave cleone see, and weep;
 her tender mind, with meek religion fraught,
 drink all-resigned affliction bitter draught;
 alive and listen to the whisper groan
 of other woe, unconscious of her own! —
 one smile boy, her last sweet hope, she warm
 hush on her bosom, circle in her arm, —
 daughter of woe! ere morn, in vain caress,
 cling the cold babe upon thy milkless breast,
 with feeble cry thy last sad aid require,
 stretch its stiff limb, and on thy lap expire! —
 — long with wide eye-lid on her child she gaze,
 and long to heaven their tearless orb she raise;
 then with quick foot and throb heart she find
 where chartreuse open deep his holy ground;
 bear her last treasure through the midnight gloom,
 and kneel drop it in the mighty tomb;
 "i follow next!" the frantic mourner say,
 and live plunge amid the fester dead. 

where vast Ontario roll his brineless tide,
 and feed the trackless forest on his side,
 fair Cassia tremble hear the howl wood,
 and trust her tawny child to the flood. —
 cinctured with gold while ten fond brother stand,
 and guard the beauty on her native land,
 soft breathe the gale, the current gentle move,
 and bear to norway coast her infant-loves. 
— so the sad mother at the noon of night
 from bloody Memphis steal her silent flight;
 wrap her dear babe beneath her fold vest,
 and clasp the treasure to her throb breast,
 with soothe whisper hush its feeble cry,
 press the soft kiss, and breathe the secret sigh. —
 — with dauntless step she seek the wind shore,
 hear unappalled the glimmer torrent roar;
 with paper-flag a float cradle weave,
 and hide the smile boy in lotus-leave;
 give her white bosom to his eager lip,
 the salt tear mingle with the milk he sip;
 wait on the reed-crowned brink with pious guile,
 and trust the scaly monster of the Nile. —
 — erewhile majestic from his lone abode,
 ambassador of heaven, the prophet tread;
 wrench the red scourge from proud oppression hand,
 and break, curse slavery! thy iron band. 
hark! hear you not that pierce cry,
 which shake the wave and rent the sky! —
 even now, even now, on yonder western shore
 weep pale despair, and writhe anguish roar:
 even now in afric grove with hideous yell
 fierce slavery stalk, and slip the dog of hell;
 from vale to vale the gather cry rebound,
 and sable nation tremble at the sound! —
 — you band of senator! who suffrage sway
 britannia realm, who either ind obey;
 who right the injure, and reward the brave,
 stretch your strong arm, for you have power to save! 
throne in the vault heart, his dread resort,
 inexorable conscience hold his court. 
with still small voice the plot of guilt alarm,
 Bares his mask brow, his lift hand disarm;
 but, wrap in night with terror all his own,
 he speak in thunder, when the deed be do. 
hear he, you senate! hear this truth sublime,
 "he, who allow oppression, share the crime." 

no radiant pearl, which crest fortune wear,
 no gem, that twinkle hang from beauty ear,
 not the bright star, which night blue arch adorn,
 nor rise sun that gild the vernal morn,
 shine with such lustre as the tear, that break
 for other woe down virtue manly cheek. " 

here cease the Muse, and drop her tuneful shell,
 tumultuous woe her pant bosom swell,
 over her flush cheek her gauzy veil she throw,
 fold her white arm, and bend her laureled brow;
 for human guilt awhile the goddess sigh,
 and human sorrow dim celestial eye. 

interlude iii.

bookseller.

poet.

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

B. 

p. 

the love of the plant.

Canto iv.

now the broad sun his golden orb unshroud,
 flame in the west, and paint the part cloud;
 over heaven wide arch refract lustre flow,
 and bend in air the many-coloured bow. —
 — the tuneful goddess on the glow sky
 fix in mute ecstasy her glisten eye;
 and then her lute to sweet tone she string,
 and swell with soft chord the paphian song. 
long ail of oak return the silver sound,
 and amorous echo talk along the ground;
 please Lichfield listen from her sacred bower,
 bow her tall grove, and shake her stately tower. 

 "nymph! not for thou the radiant day return,
 nymph! not for thou the golden solstice burn,
 refulgent Cerea! — at the dusky hour
 she seek with pensive step the mountain-bower,
 bright as the blush of rise morn, and warm
 the dull cold eye of midnight with her charm. 
there to the sky she lift her pencil brow,
 open her fair lip, and breathe her virgin vow;
 eye the white zenyth; count the sun, that roll
 their distant fire, and blaze around the pole;
 or mark where Jove direct his glitter car
 over heaven blue vault, — herself a bright star. 
— there as soft zephyr sweep with pause air
 thy snowy neck, and part thy shadowy hair,
 sweet maid of night! to cynthia sober beam
 glow thy warm cheek, thy polish bosom gleam. 
in crowd around thou gaze the admire swain,
 and guard in silence the enchant plain;
 drop the still tear, or breathe the impassion sigh,
 and drink inebriate rapture from thy eye. 
thus, when old needwood hoary scene the night
 paint with blue shadow, and with milky light;
 where Mundy pour, the listen nymph among,
 loud to the echo vale his part song;
 with measure step the fairy sovereign tread,
 shake her high plume, and glitter over the mead;
 round each green holly lead her sportive train,
 and little footstep mark the circle plain;
 each haunt rill with silver voice ring,
 and night sweet bird in lively accent sing. 

ere the bright star, which lead the morning sky,
 hang over the blush east his diamond eye,
 the chaste TROPAEO leave her secret bed;
 a saint-like glory tremble round her head;
 eight watchful swain along the lawn of night
 with amorous step pursue the virgin light;
 over her fair form the electric lustre play,
 and cold she move amid the lambent blaze. 
so shine the glow-fly, when the sun retire,
 and gem the night-air with phosphoric fire;
 thus over the marsh aërial light betray,
 and charm the unwary wanderer from his way. 
so when thy king, Assyria, fierce and proud,
 three human victim to his idol vow;
 rear a vast pyre before the golden shrine
 of sulphurous coal, and pitch-exsuding pine; —
 — loud roar the flame, the iron nostril breathe,
 and the huge bellows pant and heave beneath;
 bright and more bright the blaze deluge flow,
 and white with seven-fold heat the furnace glow. 
and now the monarch fix with dread surprise
 deep in the burn vault his dazzle eye. 
 "lo! three unbind amid the frightful glare,
"unscorch their sandal, and unsinge their hair! 
 "and now a four with seraph-beauty bright
"descend, accost they, and outshine the light! 
 "fierce flame innocuous, as they step, retire! 
"and slow they move amid a world of fire! " 
he speak, — to heaven his arm repentant spread,
 and kneel bow his gem-incircled head. 

two sister-nymph, the fair avena, lead
 their fleecy squadron on the lawn of Tweed;
 pass with light step his wave-worn bank along,
 and wake his echo with their silver tongue;
 or touch the reed, as gentle love inspire,
 in note accordant to their chaste desire. 

i 

 "sweet echo! sleep thy vocal shell,
"where this high arch overhang the dell;
 "while Tweed with sun-reflecting stream
"chequers thy rock with dance beam? 

ii.

 "here may no clamour harsh intrude,
"no brawl hound or clarion rude;
 "here no fell beast of midnight prowl,
"and teach thy torture cliff to howl! 

iii.

 "be thy to pour these vale along
"some artless shepherd evening song;
 "while night sweet bird, from yond high spray
"responsive, listen to his lay

iv.

 "and if, like i, some love-lorn maid
"shall sing her sorrow to thy shade,
 "oh, sooth her breast, you rock around! 
"with soft sympathy of sound. " 

from ozier bower the brood halcyon peep,
 the swan pursue cleave the glassy deep,
 on hover wing the wonder reed-lark play,
 and silent bittern listen to the lay. —
 three shepherd-swain beneath the beechen shade
 twine rival garland for the tuneful maid;
 on each smooth bark the mystic love-knot frame,
 or on white sand inscribe the favour name. 

from time be remote dawn where china bring
 in proud succession all her patriot-king;
 over desert-sand, deep gulf, and hill sublime,
 extend her massy wall from clime to clime;
 with bell and dragon crest her pagod-bower,
 her silken palace, and porcelain tower;
 with long canal a thousand nation lave;
 plant all her wild, and people all her wave;
 slow tread fair cannabis the breezy strand,
 the distaff stream dishevel in her hand;
 now to the leave her ivory neck incline,
 and lead in paphian curve its azure line;
 dark wave the fringe lid, the warm cheek glow,
 and the fair ear the part lock disclose;
 now to the right with airy sweep she bend,
 quick join the thread, the dance spole depend. 
— five swain attract guard the nymph, by turn
 her grace inchant they, and her beauty burn;
 to each she bow with sweet assuasive smile,
 hear his soft vow, and turn her spole the while. 

so when with light and shade, concordant strife! 
stern Clotho weave the chequer thread of life;
 hour after hour the grow line extend,
 the cradle and the coffin bind its end;
 soft cord of silk the whirl spole reveal,
 if smile fortune turn the giddy wheel;
 but if sweet love with baby-finger twine,
 and wet with dewy lip the lengthen line,
 skein after skein celestial tint unfold,
 and all the silken tissue shine with gold. 

warm with sweet blush bright Galantha glow,
 and print with frolic step the melt snow;
 over silent flood, white hill, and glitter mead
 six rival swain the playful beauty lead,
 chide with her dulcet voice the tardy spring,
 bid slumber zephyr stretch his fold wing,
 wake the hoarse cuckoo in his gloomy cave,
 and call the wonder dormouse from his grave,
 bid the mute redbreast cheer the bud grove,
 and plaintive ringdove tune her note to love. 

spring! with thy own sweet smile, and tunesul tongue,
 delight bellis call her infant throng. 
each on his reed astride, the cherub-train
 watch her kind look, and circle over the plain;
 now with young wonder touch the slide snail,
 admire his eye-tipped horn, and paint mail;
 chase with quick step, and eager arm outspread,
 the pause butterfly from mead to mead;
 or twine green ozier with the fragrant gale,
 the azure harebel, and the primrose pale,
 join hand in hand, and in procession gay
 adorn with votive wreath the shrine of may. 
— so move the goddess to the idalian grove,
 and lead her gold-haired family of love. 
these, from the flame furnace, strong and bold
 pour the red steel into the sandy mould;
 on tinkle anvil (with vulcanian art),
 turn with hot tong, and forge the dreadful dart;
 the barb head on whirl jasper grind,
 and dip the point in poison for the mind;
 each polish shaft with snow-white plumage wing,
 or strain the bow reluctant to its string. 
those on light pinion twine with busy hand,
 or stretch from bough to bough the flowery band;
 scare the dark beetle, as he wheel on high,
 or catch in silken net the gild fly;
 call the young zephyr to their fragrant bower,
 and stay with kiss sweet the vernal hour. 

where, as proud Masson rise rude and bleak,
 and with mishapen turret crest the peak,
 old Matlock gape with marble jaw, beneath,
 and over scar Derwent bend his flinty tooth;
 deep in wide cave below the dangerous soil
 blue sulphur flame, imprison water boil. 
impetuous steam in spiral column rise
 through rift rock, impatient for the sky;
 or over bright sea of bubble lavas blow,
 as heave and toss the billowy fire below;
 condense on high, in wander rill they glide
 from masson dome, and burst his sparry side;
 round his grey tower, and down his fringe wall,
 from cliff to cliff, the liquid treasure fall;
 in bed of stalactite, bright oar among,
 over coral, shell, and crystal, wind along;
 crust the green moss, and the tangle wood,
 and sparkle plunge to its parent flood. 
— over the warm wave a smile youth preside,
 attune its murmur, its meander guide,
 (the bloom fucus), in her sparry cove
 to amorous echo sing his secret love,
 bath his fair forehead in the misty stream,
 and with sweet breath perfume the rise steam,
 — so, erst, a angel over bethesda spring,
 each morn descend, shake his dewy wing;
 and as his bright tranflucent form he lave,
 salubrious power enrich the trouble wave. 

amphibious nymph, from nile prolific bed
 emerge TRAPA lift she pear head;
 fair glow her virgin cheek and modest breast,
 a panoply of scale deform the rest;
 her quiver fin and pant gills she hide,
 but spread her silver arm upon the tide;
 slow as she sail, her ivory neck she lave,
 and shake her golden tress over the wave. 
charm round the nymph, in circle gambol glide
 four nereid-form, or shoot along the tide;
 now all as one they rise with frolic spring,
 and beat the wonder air on humid wing;
 now all descend plunge beneath the main,
 and lash the foam with undulate train;
 above, below, they wheel, retreat, advance,
 in air and ocean weave the mazy dance;
 bow their quick head, and point their diamond eye,
 and twinkle to the sun with everchanging dye. 

where Andes, crest with volcanic beam,
 shed a long line of light on plata's stream;
 open all his spring, unlock his golden cave,
 and feed and freight the immeasurable wave;
 delight OCYMA at twilight hour
 call her light car, and leave the sultry bower; —
 love rise ray, and youth seductive dye,
 bloom on her cheek, and brighten in her eye;
 chaste, pure, and white, a zone of silver grace
 her tender breast, as white, as pure, as chaste; —
 by four fond swain in playful circle draw,
 on glow wheel she track the moon-bright lawn,
 mount the rude cliff, unveil her blush charm,
 and call the pant zephyr to her arm. 
emerge from ocean spring the vaporous air,
 bath her light limb, uncurl her amber hair,
 incrust her beamy form with film saline,
 and beauty blaze through the crystal shrine. —
 so with pellucid stud the ice-flower gem
 her rimy foliage, and her candy stem. 
so from his glassy horn, and pear eye,
 the diamond-beetle dart a thousand dye;
 mount with enamel wing the vesper gale,
 and wheel shine in adamantine mail
 thus when loud thunder over Gomorrah burst,
 and heave earthquake shake his realm accurse,
 a angel-guest lead forth the tremble fair
 with shadowy hand, and warn the guiltless pair;
 "haste from these land of sin, you righteous! fly,
"speed the quick step, nor turn the linger eye! "—
 — such the command, as fable bard indite,
 when Orpheus charm the grisly king of night;
 soothe the pale phantom with his plaintive lay,
 and lead the fair assurgent into day. —
 wide yawn the earth, the fiery tempest flash,
 and town and tower in one vast ruin crash; —
 onward they move, — loud horror roar behind,
 and shriek of anguish bellow in the wind. 
with many a sob, amid a thousand fear,
 the beauteous wanderer pour her gush tear;
 each soft connection rend her trouble breast,
 — she turn, unconscious of the stern behest! —
"i faint! — i fall! — ah, i! — sensation chill
 "shoot through my bone, my shudder bosom thrill! 
"i freeze! i freeze! just heaven regard my fault,
 "numb my cold limb, and harden into salt! —
"not yet, not yet, your die love resign! —
 "this last, last kiss receive! — no long thy!" —
 she say, and cease, — her stiffen form he press,
 and strain the briny column to his breast;
 print with quiver lip the lifeless snow,
 and weep, and gaze the monument of woe. —
 so when Aeneas through the flame of Troy
 bear his pale fire, and lead his lovely boy;
 with loiter step the fair Creusa stay,
 and death involve she in eternal shade. —
 — oft the lone pilgrim, that his road forsake,
 mark the wide ruin, and the sulphured lake;
 on moulder pile amid asphaltic mud
 hear the hoarse bittern, where Gomorrah stand;
 recall the unhappy pair with lift eye,
 lean on the crystal tomb, and breathe the silent sigh. 

with net-wove sash and glitter gorget dress,
 and scarlet robe lapel upon her breast,
 stern Ara frown, the measure march assume,
 trail her long lance, and nod her shadowy plume;
 while love soft beam illume her treacherous eye,
 and beauty lighten through the thin disguise. 
so erst, when Hercules, untamed by toil,
 own the soft power of dejanira smile; —
 his lion-spoil the laugh fair demand,
 and give the distaff to his awkward hand;
 over her white neck the bristly mane she throw,
 and bind the gape whisker on her brow;
 plait round her slender waist the shaggy vest,
 and clasp the velvet paw across her breast. 
next with soft hand the knot club she rear,
 heave up from earth, and on her shoulder bear. 
onward with lofty step the beauty tread,
 and trail the brind ermine over the mead;
 wolf, bear, and bard, forsake the affright grove,
 and grin satyr tremble, as she move. 

caryo's sweet smile dianthus proud admire,
 and gaze burn with unallowed desire;
 with sigh and sorrow her compassion move,
 and win the damsel to illicit love. 
the monster-offspring heir the father pride,
 mask in the damask beauty of the bride. 
so, when the nightingale in eastern bower
 on quiver pinion woo the queen of flower;
 inhale her fragrance, as he hang in air,
 and melt with melody the blush fair;
 half-rose, half-bird, a beauteous monster spring,
 wave his thin leaf, and clap his glossy wing;
 long horrent thorn his mossy leg surround,
 and tendril-talon root he to the ground;
 green film of rind his wrinkle neck o'espread,
 and crimson petal crest his curl head;
 soft-warbling beak in each bright blossom move,
 and vocal rosebud thrill the enchant grove! —
 admire evening stay her beamy star,
 and still night listen from his ebon car;
 while on white wing descend houry throng,
 and drink the flood of odour and of song. 

when from his golden urn the solstice pour
 over afric sable son the sultry hour;
 when not a gale flit over her tawny hill,
 save where the dry harmattan breathe and kill;
 when stretch in dust her gasp panther lie,
 and writhe in foamy fold her serpent die;
 indignant Atlas mourn his leafless wood,
 and gambia tremble for his sink flood;
 contagion stalk along the briny sand,
 and ocean roll his sicken shoal to land. 
— fair CHUNDA smile amid the burn waste,
 her brow unturbaned, and her zone unbrace;
 ten brother-youth with light umbrella's shade,
 or fan with busy hand the pant maid;
 loose wave her lock, disclose, as they break,
 the rise bosom and avert cheek;
 clasp round her ivory neck with stud of gold
 flow her thin vest in many a gauzy fold;
 over her light limb the dim transparence play,
 and the fair form, it seem to hide, betray. 

where lead the northern star his lucid train
 high over the snow-clad earth, and icy main,
 with milky light the white horizon stream,
 and to the moon each sparkle mountain gleam. —
 slow over the print snow with silent walk
 huge shaggy form across the twilight stalk;
 and ever and anon with hideous sound
 burst the thick rib of ice, and thunder round. —
 there, as old winter flap his hoary wing,
 and linger leaf his empire to the spring,
 pierce with quick shaft of silver-shooting light
 fly in dark troop the dazzle imp of night. —

 "awake, my love!" enamour MUSCHUS cry
 "stretch thy fair limb, refulgent maid! arise;
"open thy sweet eye-lid to the rise ray,
 "and hail with ruby lip return day. 
"down the white hill dissolve torrent pour,
 "green spring the turf, and purple blow the flower;
"he torpid wing the rail exult try,
 "mount the soft gale, and wanton in the sky;
"rise, let we mark how bloom the awaken grove,
 "and 'amid the bank of rose hide our love." 

night tinsel beam on smooth lock-lomond dance,
 impatient Aega view the bright expanse; —
 in vain her eye the pass flood explore,
 wave after wave roll freightless to the shore. 
— now dim amid the distant foam she spy
 a rise speck, — "it be he! it be he!" she cry;
 as with firm arm he beat the stream aside,
 and cleave with rise chest the toss tide,
 with bend knee she print the humid sand,
 up-turns her glisten eye, and spread her hand;
 — "it be he, it be he! — my lord, my life, my love! —
"slumber, you wind; you billow, cease to move! 
 "beneath his arm your buoyant plumage spread,
"you swan! you halcyon! hover round his head! "—
 — with eager step the boil surf she brave,
 and meet her refluent lover in the wave;
 loose over the flood her azure mantle swim,
 and the clear stream betray her snowy limb. 

so on her sea-girt tower fair hero stand
 at part day, and mark the dash flood;
 while high in air, the glimmer rock above,
 shine the bright lamp, the pilot-star of love. 
— with robe outspread the waver flame behind
 she kneel, and guard it from the shift wind;
 breathe to her goddess all her vow, and guide
 her bold Leander over the dusky tide;
 wring his wet hair, his briny bosom warm,
 and clasp her pant lover in her arm. 

deep, in wide cavern and their shadowy ail,
 daughter of earth, the chaste TRUFFELIA smile;
 on silvery bed, of soft asbestus weave,
 meet her gnome-husband, and avow her love. 
— high over her couch impend diamond blaze,
 and branch gold the crystal roof inlay;
 with verdant light the modest emerald glow,
 blue sapphire glare, and ruby blush, below;
 light pier of lazuli the dome surround,
 and picture mochoe tesselate the ground;
 in glitter thread along reflective wall
 the warm rill murmur twinkle, as it fall;
 now sink the Eolian string, and now they swell,
 and echo woo in every vault cell;
 while on white wing delight cupid play,
 shake their bright lamp, and shed celestial day. 

close in a azure fig by fairy spell,
 bosomed in down, fair capri-fica dwell; —
 so sleep in silence the curculio, shut
 in the dark chamber of the cavern nut,
 erode with ivory beak the vault shell,
 and quit on filmy wing its narrow cell. 
so the please linnet in the moss-wove nest,
 wake into life beneath its parent breast,
 chirp in the gape shell, burst forth erelong,
 shake its new plume, and try its tender song. —
 — and now the talisman she strike, that charm
 her husband-sylph, — and call he to her arm. —
 quick, the light gnat her airy lord bestride,
 with cobweb reins the fly courser guide,
 from crystal steep of viewless ether spring,
 cleave the soft air on still expand wing;
 dart like a sunbeam over the boundless wave,
 and seek the beauty in her secret cave. 
so with quick impulse through all nature frame
 shoot the electric air its subtle flame. 
so turn the impatient needle to the pole,
 though mountain rise between, and ocean roll. 

where round the Orcades white torrent roar,
 scoop with ceaseless rage the incumbent shore,
 wide over the deep a dusky cavern bend
 its marble arm, and high in air impend;
 basaltic pier the ponderous roof sustain,
 and steep their massy sandal in the main;
 round the dim wall, and through the whisper ail
 hoarse breathe the wind, the glitter water boil. 
here the charm byssus with his bloom bride
 spread his green sail, and brave the foam tide;
 the star of Venus gild the twilight wave,
 and light her votary to the secret cave;
 light cupid flutter round the nuptial bed,
 and each coy sea-maid hide her blush head. 

where cool by rill, and curtained round by wood,
 slope the green dell to meet the briny flood,
 the sparkle noon-beam tremble on the tide,
 the proteus-lover woo his playful bride,
 to win the fair he try a thousand form,
 bask on the sand, or gambol in the storm. 
a dolphin now, his scaly side he lave,
 and bear the sportive damsel on the wave;
 she strike the cymbal as he move along,
 and wonder ocean listen to the song. 
— and now a spot pard the lover stalk,
 play round her step, and guard her favour walk;
 as with white tooth he print her hand, caress,
 and lay his velvet paw upon her breast,
 over his round face her snowy finger strain
 the silken knot, and fit the ribbon-rein. 
— and now a swan, he spread his plumy sail,
 and proud glide before the fan gale;
 please on the flowery brink with graceful hand
 she wave her float lover to the land;
 bright shine his sinuous neck, with crimson beak
 he print fond kiss on her glow cheek,
 spread his broad wing, elate his ebon crest,
 and clasp the beauty to his downy breast. 

a hundred virgin join a hundred swain,
 and fond Adonis lead the sprightly train;
 pair after pair, along his sacred grove
 to Hymen fane the bright procession move;
 each smile youth a myrtle garland shade,
 and wreath of rose veil the blush maid;
 light joy on twinkle foot attend the throng,
 weave the gay dance, or raise the frolic song;
 — thick, as they pass, exult cupid fling
 promiscuous arrow from the sound string;
 on wing of gossamer soft whisper fly,
 and the fly glance steal sidelong from the eye. 
— as round his shrine the gaudy circle bow,
 and seal with mutter lip the faithless vow,
 licentious HYMEN join their mingle hand,
 and loose twine the meretricious band. —
 thus where please Venus, in the southern main,
 shed all her smile on otaheite plain,
 wide over the isle her silken net she draw,
 and the love laugh at all, but nature law. " 

here cease the goddess, — over the silent sring
 applaud zephyr sweep their flutter wing;
 enrapture sylph arise in murmur crowd
 to air-wove canopy and pillowy cloud;
 each gnome reluctant seek his earthy cell,
 and each bright floret close her velvet bell. 
then, on soft tiptoe, night approach near
 hang over the tuneless lyre his sable ear;
 gem with bright star the still etherial plain,
 and bad his nightingale repeat the strain. 
