to the honourable h—e w—e, on read the castle of Otranto.

December, 1784. 

to praise thou, Walpole, ask a pen divine,
and common sense to i be hardly give,
 bianca pen now own the dare line,
and who expect her muse shall drop from heaven. 

my flutter tongue, light, ever veer round,
 on wisdom narrow point have never fix;
 i dear love to hear the ceaseless sound,
 where noise and nonsense be complete mix. 

the empty tattle, true to female rule,
 in which thy happy talent never appear,
 be i, nor my alone, for mimic fool,
 who boast thy sex, bianca foible wear. 

supreme in prate shall woman ever sit,
 while wisdom smile to hear the senseless squall;
 nature, who give i tongue, deny i wit,
 folly i worship, and she claim i all

the drowsy eye, half-closing to the lid,
 stare on otranto wall; grim terror rise,
 the horrid helmet strike my soul unbid,
 and with thy Conrad, lo! Bianca die. 

funereal plume now wave; alphonso ghost
 frown over my shoulder; silence aid the scene,
 the taper flame, in fancy blueness lose,
 pale spectre show, to Manfred only see. 

ah! Manfred! thy be bitter draught of woe,
 strong gust of passion hurl thou on thy fate;
 though eager to elude, thou meet the blow,
 and for Ricardo Manfred weep in state. 

by all the joy which treasure virtue yield,
 i feel thy agony in Walpole line;
 love, pride, revenge, by turn maintain the field,
 and hourly torture rend my heart for thy. 

hail, magic pen, that strong paint the soul,
 where fall ambition hold his wild roar,
 the whirlwind rage to the distant pole,
 and virtue, strand, plead her cause no more. 

where be manfred refuge? Walpole, tell i where? 
thy pen to great saint Nicholas point the eye;
 even Manfred call to guard alphonso heir,
 though conscious shame oft give his tongue the lie. 

Matilda! ah, how soft thy yield mind,
 when hard obedience cleave thy timid heart! 
how noble strong, when love and virtue join
 to melt thy soul and take a lover part! 

ah, rigid duty, which two soul divide! 
who iron talon rend the pant breast! 
pluck the dear image from the widow side,
 where love have lull its every care to rest. 

hypolita! fond, passive to excess,
 her low submission suit not soul like i;
 Bianca may have love she Manfred less,
 not offer less at great religion shrine. 

implicit faith, all hail! imperial man
 exact submission; reason we resign;
 against our sense we adopt the plan
 which reverence, fear, and folly think divine. 

but be it so, Bianca never shall prate,
 nor Isabella equal power reveal;
 you manfreds boast your power, and prize your state;
 we lady our omnipotence conceal. 

but, oh! then strange-inventing Walpole, guide,
 ah! guide i through thy subterranean isle,
 open the trap-door where all thy power reside,
 and mimic fancy real woe beguile. 

the kind inventress dry the stream tear,
 the deep-resounding groan shall faint die,
 the sigh shall sicken ere it meet the air,
 and sorrow dismal troop affright fly. 

thy jawless skeleton of joppa wood
 stare in my face, and fright my mental eye;
 not stiffen worse the lovesick Frederic stand,
 when the dim spectre shriek the dismal cry. 

but while the hermit do my soul affright,
 love die — lo! in yond corner down he kneel;
 i shudder, see the taper sink in night,
 he rise, and his fleshless form reveal. 

hide i, thou parent earth! see low i fall,
 my sin now meet i in the faint hour;
 say, do thy mane for heaven vengeance call,
 or can i free thou from a angry power? 

Stella! if Walpole spectre thus can scare,
 then near that great magician wall never tread,
 he will sure conjure many a spirit there,
 till, fear-struck, thou be number with the dead. 

oh! with this noble sorcerer never converse;
 fly, Stella, quick from the magic storm;
 or, soon he will close thou in some high-plumed hearse,
 then raise another angel in thy form. 

trust not his art, for shall he stop thy breath,
 and good alphonso ghost unbidden rise;
 he will vanish, leave thou in the jaw of death,
 and quite forget to close thy ache eye. 

but be Bianca safe in this slow vale? 
for shall his goblin stretch their dusky wing,
 will they not bruise i for the saucy tale,
 will they not pinch i for the truth i sing? 

yet whisper not I have call he name, i fear
 his Ariel will my hapless sprite torment,
 he will cramp my bone, and all my sinew tear,
 shall Stella blab the secret i will prevent. 

but hush, you wind, you cricket chirp no more,
 i will shrink to bed, nor these sad omen hear;
 a hideous rustle shake the latticed door,
 his spirit hover in the sightless air. 

now, Morpheus, shut each entrance of my mind,
 sink, sink, Otranto, in this vacant hour;
 to thou, oh, balmy god! i be all resign,
 to thou even Walpole wand resign its power. 
