the banish man,

on a distant view of his country, which he be quit for ever.

dear distant land, who mountain blue
 still bind this wild and watery view, —
 dear distant land, where fate have throw
 all that my heart delight to own! 
bless be yond gleam of partial light,
 which give thou to my part sight! 

those wellknown cliff, who shadow throw
 soft coolness over the beech below,
 where i so oft, a happy child,
 pick or shell or weed, beguile
 light reckless hour, that pass away,
 like night-spark on the briny spray, —
 dear pleasant shore, thy sandy bed,
 these foot unblessed no more shall tread! 

still thy rich vale with autumn store,
 and cheerful hamlet mottled over;
 thy upland peak who stately form
 be mantle oft in gather storm;
 thy blue stream widen on their way,
 thy broad lake gleam to the day;
 thy smoke town, who tower of war
 and dusky spire be see afar,
 thy child boastful pride will raise,
 and fix the admire stranger gaze, —
 but now, for ever lose to i,
 these eye unblest no more shall see. 

thy wild pipe, touch with rustic hand,
 thy reapers song from merry band;
 thy boatman call and dash oar,
 thy fall torrent deafen roar;
 thy busy city hum sound,
 with all its sweet bell chime round,
 far, on a strange and cheerless shore,
 these ear unblest shall hear no more. 

happy be he, beyond all gain,
 who hold in thou his free domain,
 and rove with careless foot at will
 over his paternal mead and hill,
 and store the fruit he harvest yield
 from his own orchard and his field! 
happy be he who lead at dawn
 his harness steer across thy lawn! 
yea, happy he, bend down with toil,
 who glisten brow bedew thy soil! 

how gentle heave the evening sea,
 as all thing homeward tend to thou! 
Borne light on the gentle gale,
 now homeward point each little sail! 
far, scream from their airy height,
 the sea-fowl homeward take their flight;
 the float plank and spread weed,
 upon the set current speed;
 the light cloud pass on the wind,
 while i alone be leave behind. 

ah, woe be i! where shall i stray,
 and whither bend my reckless way? 
a waste of world before i lie,
 but in the thought my spirit die. 
there be no home nor joy for i,
 my native land, remove from thou. 
for i the sun of heaven do shine
 upon no hill, no plain but thy;
 for i the voice of kindness sound
 only within thy cheerful bound. 

rise, surgy deep, you wild wind blow
 and whelm my bark these wave below! 
then bear i to my native land:
 a breathless corpse upon her strand,
 some hand, in pity of the dead,
 will lay her greensward on my head,
 and there for ever let i rest,
 as sleep the froward child, still on his mother breast. 
