the way of the world.

some herb there be, who deadly juice fill
 the heart with venom, and direct kill:
 some operate more slow, but as sure;
 the dart less sudden, but admit no cure. 
yet there be a drug, nor plain nor mountain yield,
 not libya desert nor britannia field,
 destructive more than all the baneful kind;
 it be flattery call — the poison of the mind. 
this, soft sir wealthy feed on all the day:
 this, Delia swallow with her soft bohea,
 to this we owe sublimo scornful eye,
 and thalia Cheeks that blush with borrow dye. 
sublimo once can like his neighbour walk,
 bow to his friend, or with his tenant talk;
 nor have be seize with this majestic fit,
 if subtle florio have not praise his wit. 
grey Thalia too will now her art give over,
 and rest those eye-ball that must slay no more;
 nor will that face engross her morning care,
 do not Philander tell she she be fair. 

Alcidas tell you with a artful smile,
 that women eye be give they to beguile:
 he way be cunning and mischievous too,
 he will praise in other what he find in you. 
you hear delight, nor perceive the foe;
 but drink in flattery ere you think it be so. 
and when he be run the gay description through,
 the smart conclusion be apply to you:
 but turn your back — Alcidas with a grin
 will vow you be ugly as a sooterkin. 

how oft you hear from a design knave,
 sir, i be your servant, madam, i be your slave;
 yet if you be bless with penetrate eye,
 you will in his feature read the villain lie. 

see soft courtine, who hat with silver bind,
 be so obsequious that it will kiss the ground:
 who action point to some unworthy end,
 and never be patron, counsellor, or friend:
 who narrow view be to himself confine,
 yet he be the humble slave of all mankind. 

these fawn rogue be irksome creature — true,
 but then a clown be full as odious too:
 the face unpractised in the art of guile,
 need not be stretech with a eternal smile:
 nor yet affect the cynic awful scowl,
 screw like the visage of minerva owl;
 for some reject (and hold it as a rule,)
 the crab-faced student for the tender fool. 

the phrase unstudied flow with graceful ease,
 and careless gesture never fail to please:
 the heart instruct the feature and the tongue;
 let that be right, and these will never be wrong. 

ask cynthio judgement in some nice affair,
 he will praise your conduct with a charm air,
 extol your sense and prudence to the sky:
 "and sure such merit be design to rise."
his candid eye can hide beauty see,
 even fault be useful, or they cease to be:
 and each no-meaning cynthio can explore;
 but ask his friendship, and he speak no more. 

but the worst flatterer that wear a tongue,
 be he who power aggravate the wrong:
 to who grand levee crowd of suppliant run,
 and bow like persian to the rise sun:
 where starve dependent linger out their day,
 yet proud to share his snuff-box and his praise,
 grow stiff with stand and with stare thin,
 to watch the dimple on their patron chin:
 who with a nod can make the wretch believe,
 and smile on hunger which he will never relieve. 

surround thick with business and with gold,
 yet dress in smile Virginius you behold:
 the expect crowd around his table stand,
 you ask a favour and he grasp your hand:
 another come with a obsequious air,
 he wink and whisper. — "leave it to my care."
then to the next — "oh i will remember you;
"sir, trust my honour, you shall find i true: "
then bow a third. —"good sir, your pardon.  "— why? 
"i see you not. — forgive my careless eye. 
 "next Tuesday se'en-night, let i see you pray,
"perhaps you will find it hundred in your way. "

the meager wight depart with happy soul,
 romantic vision in his bosom roll:
 he fast in rapture, as of late in sorrow;
 for who can eat, that be to be rich tomorrow? 
but Tuesday see, the joyful day be come;
 now to his patron. — "but he be not at home. 
"alas! but then tomorrow morn will do,
 "and i will be early. — gentleman, adieu. 
next day at six before the gate appear,
 the wretch divide by his hope and fear. 
the haughty servant meet he with a frown. 
i will see his honour. —"but he be not come down;
 "your servant, sir — i will stay then in the hall:
"but he be sick and can be speak withal. 
 "i will wait with patience till another day,
"and for his honour and his health shall pray. 
at last the knight (his fate have order so)
 be seize and board by the lurk foe;
 and wise think it be in vain to fly,
 smooth up his face and with a leer eye
 begin.  "oh mr. what-d'ye-call, be it you? 
"I be glad to see you: yet i be sorry too,
 "sure some ill star preside over your fate,
"i can have serve you, but you be come too late. 

yet sure, there be who honest soul be make
 too grand a be for the soothe trade;
 who wit can neither flatter nor offend,
 a gay companion, yet a constant friend;
 will to please where honesty may win,
 averse to slander, though it be no sin. 
with native manner as with sense endue;
 not soft as cynthio, nor as Damon rude;
 not base humble, yet a foe to pride:
 who tongue never promise what his heart deny. 
who satire charm, nor mirth offend the ear;
 though wife not froward, just but not severe;
 not sway by interest, nor in passion hurl:
 but walk a calm spectator through the world,
 who breast (where no unmanly vapour grow)
 can feel compassion for another woe;
 where courage, mercy, justice, candour lie,
 that shine celestial in the speak eye. 
this man be great, whatever be his degree;
 o bless he, heaven, if such a one there be:
 may life be best comfort on his day attend,
 bless in himself, and happy in his friend:
 far from his gate fly poverty and woe;
 let not a sigh his quiet mansion know:
 but the fair dome each rove eye allure,
 with peace and plenty smile at the door:
 let he soft day and happy evening find,
 and live still bless, and bless all mankind. 
