on poverty.

no ill on earth we timorous mortal fly
 with so much dread, as abject poverty:
 o despicable name! we, thou to shun,
 on every other evil blind run. 
for fear of thou, distrustful niggard go
 in tatter rag, and starve their body too,
 and still be poor, for fear of be so. 
for fear of thou, the cheat trader vow,
 his ware be good, although his conscience know,
 he have employ his utmost skill and care,
 to hide their fault, and make their beauty glare. 
the sailor, terrify with thought of thou,
 bold attempt the danger of the sea;
 from east to west, over rock and quicksand steer;
 it be poverty, and that alone, he fear;
 the soldier too, who nought but thou can scare,
 in hope of plunder, brave meet the war;
 to fly from poverty, he run on death,
 and show he prize riches more than breath. 
strange terror of mankind! by thou mislead,
 not conscience, quicksand, rock, or death they dread! 
and yet thou be no formidable foe,
 except to little soul, who think thou so:
 who through the glass of prejudice survey
 thy face, a thousand frightful form display. 

thus man, at night, in foolish fear grow old,
 who mind the fairy tale their nurse tell,
 start at a goblin, which their fancy make,
 and, for a spectre, often take a shade. 

content poverty no dismal thing,
 free from the care unwieldy riches bring:
 at distance both alike deceive our view;
 near approach, they take another hue. 
the poor man labour relish his meat;
 his morsel's pleasant, and his rest be sweet:
 not so the rich, who find their weary taste
 pall with the prospect of the cumbrous feast;
 for what they have more than they can enjoy,
 instead of satisfy, do but cloy. 

but let we state the case another way:
 be poverty so hideous as they say,
 it be noble cheerful to bear our fate,
 than murmur and repine beneath its weight. 
that man deserve the praise of human kind,
 who bear ill fortune with a christian mind:
 how do his great heroic soul aspire
 above that sordid wealth the rest admire! 
his noble thought be fix on thing above;
 his faithful eye survey the god of love
 hold forth the heavenly prize, which make he run
 his mortal race, to gain the immortal crown. 
not all the snare a crafty devil can lay,
 can intercept, or daunt he in his way. 
not all the scornful insult of the proud,
 not all the censure of the grovel croud,
 not poverty, in all her terror dress,
 can shake the solid quiet of his breast:
 unmoved he stand against the worst of foe,
 and mock the dart, which adverse fortune throw,
 calm and compose, amid or ease or pain;
 and find content, which other seek in vain. 

so stand a steady rock, sublime steep,
 within the confine of the briny deep;
 lash by the foam surge on every side,
 yet can be shake by the furious tide. 

then why shall phantom discompose the mind;
 or woe, so far from real, fright mankind? 
since wealth can never make the vicious bless,
 nor poverty subdue the virtuous breast;
 since both from heaven unerring hand be send,
 lord, give i either; give i but content. 
