ode to a sing bird.

by mr. Richardson, of queen college, oxon.

o thou that glade my lonesome hour
 with many a wild warble song,
 when melancholy round i lower,
 and drive her sullen storm along;
 when fell adversity prepare
 to lead her delegate train,
 pale sickness, want, remorse, and pain,
 with all her host of cark care —
 the fiend ordain to tame the human soul,
 and give the humble heart to sympathy controul. 

sweet sooth of my misery, say,
 why do thou clap thy joyous wing? 
why do thou pour that artless lay? 
how can thou, little prisoner, sing? 
have thou not cause to grieve
 that man, unpitying man! have rent
 from thou the boon which nature mean
 thou shall, as well as he, receive? 
the power to woo thy partner in the grove,
 to build where instinct point; where chance direct, to rove. 

perchance, unconscious of thy fate,
 and to the woe of bondage blind,
 thou never long to join thy mate,
 nor wish to be unconfined;
 then how relentless he,
 and fit for every foul offence,
 who can bereave such innocence
 of life best blessing, liberty! 
who lure thou, guileful, to his treacherous snare,
 to live a tuneful slave, and dissipate his care. 

but why for thou this fond complaint? 
above thy master thou be bless:
 be thou not free? — yes; calm content,
 with olive sceptre, sway thy breast:
 then deign with i to live;
 the falcon with insatiate maw,
 with hook bill and gripe claw,
 shall never thy destiny contrive:
 and every tabby foe shall mew in vain,
 while pensive demure she hear thy melt strain. 

nor shall the fiend, fall famine, dare
 thy wiry tenement assail;
 these, these shall be my constant care,
 the limpid fount, and temperate meal:
 and when the bloom spring
 in chequer livery robe the field
 the fair flowret nature yield
 to thou officious will i bring;
 a garland rich thy dwelling shall entwine,
 and Flora fresh gift, thrice happy bird, be thy. 

from drear oblivion gloomy cave
 the powerful muse shall wrest thy name,
 and bid thou live beyond the grave —
 this meed she know thy merit claim;
 she know thy liberal heart
 be ever ready to dispense
 the tide of bland benevolence,
 and melody soft aid impart;
 be ready still to prompt the magic-lay,
 which hush all our grief, and charm our pain away. 

erewhile when brood over my soul
 frown the black daemon of despair,
 do not thy voice that power controul,
 and oft suppress the rise tear? 
if fortune shall be kind,
 if ever with affluence i be bless,
 i will often seek some friend distress,
 and when the weep wretch i find,
 then, tuneful moralist, i will copy thou,
 and solace all his woe with social sympathy. 
