[fragment] x.

it be night; and i be alone, forlorn on the hill of storm. the wind be hear in the mountain. the torrent shriek down the rock. no hut receive i from the rain; forlorn on the hill of wind.

rise, moon! from behind thy cloud; star of the night, appear! lead i, some light, to the place where my love rest from the toil of the chace! his bow near he, unstring; his dog pant around he. but here i must sit alone, by the rock of the mossy stream. the stream and the wind roar; nor can i hear the voice of my love.

why delay my shalgar, why the son of the hill, his promise? here be the rock; and the tree; and here the roar stream. thou promise with night to be here. ah! whither be my shalgar go? with thou i will fly my father; with thou, my brother of pride. our race have long be foe; but we be not foe, o shalgar!

cease a little while, o wind! stream, be thou silent a while! let my voice be hear over the heath; let my wanderer hear i. shalgar! it be i who call. here be the tree, and the rock. shalgar, my love! i be here. why delay thou thy come? alas! no answer.

lo! the moon appear. the flood be bright in the vale. the rock be grey on the face of the hill. but i see he not on the brow; his dog before he tell not that he be come. here i must sit alone.

but who be these that lie beyond i on the heath? be they my love and my brother? — speak to i, o my friend! they answer not. my soul be torment with fear. — ah! they be dead. their sword be red from the fight. o my brother! my brother! why have thou slay my shalgar? why, o shalgar! have thou slay my brother? dear be you both to i! speak to i; hear my voice, son of my love! but alas! they be silent; silent for ever! cold be their breast of clay!

oh! from the rock of the hill; from the top of the mountain of wind, speak you ghost of the dead! speak, and i will not be afraid. — whither be you go to rest? in what cave of the hill shall i find you?

i sit in my grief. i wait for morning in my tear. rear the tomb, you friend of the dead; but close it not till i come. my life fly away like a dream: why shall i stay behind? here shall i rest with my friend by the stream of the sound rock. when night come on the hill; when the wind be up on the heath; my ghost shall stand in the wind, and mourn the death of my friend. the hunter shall hear from his booth. he shall sear, but love my voice. for sweet shall my voice be for my friend; for pleasant be they both to i.

