advice to myrtillo.

since you, myrtillo, will devote your time
 to the lean study of delusive rhyme:
 since you be content to slumber out your day,
 to dream of dinner, but to feed on praise;
 receive this counsel, ever your flight begin,
 from one long practise in the darling sin. 

now fame broad ocean lie before your way;
 yet, friend, be careful; it be a dangerous sea:
 where (though some few may reach the happy land)
 number be wreck upon the treacherous sand:
 then guard your spirit, as you prize your ease,
 nor once indulge they in a thirst of praise;
 for fame, like fortune, (proud, yet wanton too)
 be please to fly and make the wretch pursue;
 frown on her slave, but to the careless mind
 that slight her favour she be always kind. 

will you the lady shall approve your song? 
paint sylvia eye, or praise clarinda tongue;
 describe the charm of cloe sprightly air,
 or bloom Daphne more divine fair;
 or venus son that hurl the flame dart,
 and tag each stanza with a bleed heart:
 tell they of rock where tear eternal flow,
 dissolve to fountain by a lover woe:
 of icy bosom that in summer freeze,
 and sigh much strong than a southern breeze. 

perhaps the fair, who for a theme you choose,
 must owe her beauty to your skilful muse:
 have err nature raise her nose too high,
 sink down her cheek, or draw her lip awry? 
no matter how the twist feature stand,
 they will grow divine beneath a poet hand:
 though her dim eye-ball roll within her head,
 like two grey bullet in a verge of red;
 you like promotheus must their ray inspire,
 and fill their orb with more than mortal fire. 

do you the levee of his grace attend,
 and (like most poet) shall you want a friend,
 make not his worth the measure of your song;
 but learn his humour, and you can be wrong:
 perhaps this maxim may offend the wise;
 but you must flatter, if you mean to rise:
 observe what passion in his bosom roll,
 and watch the secret motion of his soul:
 mind what false guard have leave a breach within,
 for some choice folly, or some darling sin:
 these you must hide — but draw his virtue nigh,
 lest the rude picture shock the gaze eye. 

the heralds-office you must search with care;
 and look you find no pimp nor tailor there:
 bring none to light but honourable knave;
 shut up the peasant in their mouldy grave:
 if knight be want in the dusky breed,
 Arthur round table will supply your need. 

no more — for i (as many teacher do)
 show my own folly by instruct you;
 and you perhaps disdain my wholesome rule;
 so saucy pupil count their master fool:
 but shall your pride the common track refuse,
 you will find small pension for your haughty muse:
 still you may scribble on; and in the end
 be just as rich as — sir, your humble friend. 
