a elegy write in a empty assembly-room.

by the same.

in scene where hallet genius have combine
with bromwich to amuse and cheer the mind;
amid this pomp of cost, this pride of art,
what mean these sorrow in a female heart?

you crowd wall, who well-enlightened round
with lover sigh and protestation sound,
you picture flatter by the learn and wise,
you glass ogle by the bright eye,
you card, which beauty by their touch have bless,
you chair, which peer and minister have press,
how be you change! like you my fate i moan,
like you, alas! neglect and alone —
for ah! to i alone no card be come,
i must not go abroad — and can be at home. 

bless be that social power, the first who pair
the err footman with the unerring card.
it be Venus sure; for by their faithful aid
the whisper lover meet the blush maid:
from solitude they give the cheerful call
to the choice supper, or the sprightly ball:
speed the soft summons of the gay and fair,
from distant Bloomsbury to grosvenor square;
and bring the colonel to the tender hour,
from the parade, the senate, or the tower.

you record, patent of our worth and pride!
our daily lesson, and our nightly guide!
wherever you stand dispose in proud array,
the vapour vanish, and the heart be gay;
but when no card the chimney-glass adorn,
the dismal void with heart-felt shame we mourn;
conscious neglect inspire a sullen gloom,
and brood sadness fill the slight room.

if but some happy female card i have see,
i swell with rage, or sicken with the spleen;
while artful pride conceal the burst tear,
with some force banter or affect sneer:
but now grow desperate, and beyond all hope,
i curse the ball, the d—ss, and the pope.
and as the load of borrow plate go by,
tax it! you greedy minister, i cry.

how shall i feel, when Sol resign his light
to this proud splendid goddess of the night!
then when her awkward guest in measure beat
the crowd floor, which groan beneath their foot!
what thought in solitude shall then possess
my torture mind, or soften my distress!
not all that envious malice can suggest
will sooth the tumult of my rage breast.
(for envy lose amid the numerous train,
and hiss with her hundred snake in vain)
though with contempt each despicable soul
single i view, — i must revere the whole.

the methodist in her peculiar lot,
the world forget, by the world forget,
though single happy, though alone be proud,
she think of heaven (she think not of a crowd)
and if she ever feel a vapourish qualm,
some drop of honey, or some holy balm,
the pious prophet of her sect distil,
and her pure soul seraphic rapture fill;
grace shine around she with serene beam,
and whisper W*** prompt her golden dream.

far other dream my sensual soul employ,
while conscious nature taste unholy joy:
i view the trace of experience charm,
and clasp the regimental in my arm.
to dream last night i close my blubber eye;
you soft illusion, dear deceit arise;
alas! no more; methinks i wander go
to distant quarter amid the Highland snow:
to the dark inn where never wax-light burn,
where in smoke tapestry fade Dido mourn;
to some assembly in a country town,
and meet the colonel — in a parson gown —
i start — i shriek —

o! can i on my wake brain impose,
or but forget at least my present woe!
forget they — how! — each rattle coach suggest
the loathe idea of the crowd guest.
to visit — be to publish my disgrace;
to meet the spleen in every other place;
to join old maid and dowager forlorn;
and be at once their comfort and their scorn!
for once, to read with this distemper brain,
even modern novel lend their aid in vain.
my mandoline — what place can music find
amid the discord of my restless mind?

how shall i waste this time which slow fly!
how lull to slumber my reluctant eye!
this night the happy and the unhappy keep
vigil alike, — N*** have murder sleep. 
