to ANNA Matilda. 

on the seashore with fold arm i stand,
 the sun, just sink, shoot a level ray,
 luxuriant crimson glow upon the flood,
 and the curl surf be tinge with golden spray. 

far of i faint track the feathery sail;
 when thy sweet number catch my yield ear,
 bear on the bosom of the flutter gale,
 they strike my heart — and rouse i to a tear. 

yet flow no bitter anguish from my eye,
 a while remembrance leave my wayward state;
 and the soft cadence of thy warble sigh,
 pour heal balm into the wound of fate. 

what though grim winter desolate frown,
 the wild wave uproar when rough eurus blow,
 the tangle forest, and the desert down,
 be all the solace Della Crusca know:

yet from matilda pure celestial fire,
 one ruby spark shall to his gloom be give,
 lure by its light, his fancy may aspire,
 and catch a ray of bliss — a glimpse of heaven. 

vain in the morn of life, and thoughtless too,
 he rush impetuous as strong passion drive,
 but soon each flatter prospect flee his view,
 deceive by friendship much, but more by love. 

yes, he have love to transport dire excess,
 have feel the potent eye inflict the wound;
 have feel the female voice each pulse oppress,
 and grow a breathless statue at the sound. 

but why recall the moment that be flee? 
for ever flee, like yonder sweep blast;
 with love, each active principle be dead,
 and all, except its sad regret, be past. 

ah! have he meet thou in this happy hour,
 ere yet he languish in the gripe of care,
 thy minstrel then have fond own thy power,
 thy minstrel then may have escape despair. 

o different lot! for he who daily grieve,
 then with thy beauty bless, and generous mind,
 have not, like sallow autumn fall leaf,
 be shrink, alas! and scatter in the wind. 

haply, he have not roam for linger year
 on many a rugged alp, and foreign shore;
 he never have know the cause of all his tear,
 the cherish cause, that bid he — hope no more. 

he will have lead thou with attentive gaze,
 where the brown hamlet neighbour shade retire,
 have hang entranced upon thy live lay,
 and sweep with feeble hand a kindred lyre. 

while the dear songstress have melodious steal
 over every sense, and charm each nerve to rest,
 thy bard, in silent ecstasy of soul,
 have strain the dear woman to his breast. 

or have she say, that war be the worthy grave,
 he will have feel his proud heart burn the while;
 have dare, perhaps, to rush among the brave,
 have gain, perhaps, the glory — of a smile. 

and it be most true, while time be relentless hand,
 with sickly grasp drag other to the tomb,
 the soldier scorn to wait the dull command,
 but spring impatient to a noble doom. 

though on the plain he lie, outstretch, and pale,
 without one friend his steadfast eye to close;
 yet on his honour corpse shall many a gale,
 waft the moist fragrance of the weep rose. 

over that dread spot, the melancholy moon
 shall pause a while, a sad beam to shed,
 and starry night, amid her awful noon,
 sprinkle light dew upon his hallow head. 

there too the solitary bird shall swell
 with long-drawn melody her plaintive throat;
 while distant echo from responsive cell,
 shall oft with fade force return the note. 

such recompense be valour due alone! 
to i, no proffer meed must ever belong;
 to i, who tread the vale of life unknown,
 who proud boast be but a idle song. 
