A DESCRIPTIVE POEM: ADDRESSED TO TWO LADIES, AT THEIR RETURN FROM VIEWING THE MINES NEAR WHITEHAVEN.

BY DR. DALTON.

WELCOME to light, advent'rous pair! 
Thrice welcome to the balmy air
 From sulph'rous damps in caverns deep,
 Where subterranean thunders sleep,
 Or, wak'd, with dire Aetnaean sound
 Bellow the trembling mountain round,
 Till to the srighted realms of day
 Thro' flaming mouths they force their way;
 From bursting streams, and burning rocks,
 From nature's fierce intestine shocks;
 From the dark mansions of despair,
 Welcome once more to light and air! 

But why explore that world of night
 Conceal'd till then from female sight? 
Such grace and beauty why confine
 One moment to a dreary mine? 

Was it because your curious eye
 The secrets of the earth would spy,
 How intervein'd rich minerals glow,
 How bubbling fountains learn to flow? 

Or rather that the sons of day
 Already own'd your rightful sway,
 And therefore, like young Ammon, you
 Another world would fain subdue? 

What tho' sage Prospero attend,
 While you the cavern'd hill descend,
 Tho', warn'd by him, with bended head
 You shun the shelving roof, and tread
 With cautious foot the rugged way,
 While tapers strive to mimic day? 
Tho' he with hundred gates and chains
 The Daemons of the mine restrains,
 To whom their parent, jealous earth,
 To guard her hidden stores gave birth,
 At which, while kindred furies sung,
 With hideous joy pale Orcus rung;
 Tho' boiling with vain rage they sit
 Fix'd to the bottom of the pit,
 While at his beck the spi'rits of air
 With breath of heaven their taints repair;
 Or if they seek superior skies,
 Thro' ways assign'd by him they rise,
 Troop after troop at day expire
 In torments of perpetual fire;
 Tho' he with fury-quelling charms
 The whole infernal host disarms,
 And summons to your guarded sides
 A squadron of etherial guides,
 You still, when we together view
 The dreadful enterprize and you,
 The public care and wonder go
 Of all above and all below. 

For at your presence toil is o'er,
 The restless miner works no more. 
Nor strikes the flint, nor whirls the steel
 Of that strange spark-emitting wheel,
 Which, form'd by Prospero's magic care,
 Plays harmless in the sulphurous air,
 Without a flame diffuses light,
 And makes the grisly cavern bright. 
His task secure the miner plies,
 Nor hears Tartarian tempests rise;
 But quits it now, and hastes away
 To this great Stygian holiday. 

Agape the sooty collier stands,
 His axe suspended in his hands,
 His Aethiopian teeth the while
 "Grin horribly a ghastly smile,"
 To see two goddesses so fair
 Descend to him from fields of air. 
Not greater wonder seiz'd th' abode
 Of gloomy Dis, infernal god,
 With pity when th' Orphean lyre
 Did every iron heart inspire,
 Sooth'd tortur'd ghosts with heavenly strains,
 And respited eternal pains. 

But on you move thro' ways less steep
 To loftier chambers of the deep,
 Whose jetty pillars seem to groan
 Beneath a ponderous roof of stone. 
Then with increasing wonder gaze
 The dark inextricable maze,
 Where cavern crossing cavern meets,
 (City of subterraneous streets!) 
Where in a triple story end
 Mines that o'er mines by flights ascend. 

But who in order can relate
 What terror still your steps await? 
How issuing from the sulphurous coal
 Thick Acherontic rivers roll? 
How in close center of these mines,
 Where orient morning never shines,
 Nor the wing'd zephyrs e'er resort,
 Infernal darkness holds her court? 
How, breathless, with faint pace, and slow,
 Thro' her grim sultry realm you go,
 Till purer rising gales dispense
 Their cordials to the sickening sense? 

Your progress next the wondering muse
 Thro' narrow galleries pursues;
 Where earth, the miner's way to close,
 Did once the massy rock oppose:
 In vain: his daring axe he heaves,
 Tow'rds the black vein a passage cleaves:
 Dissever'd by the nitrous blast,
 The stubborn barrier bursts at last. 
Thus urg'd by hunger's clamorous call,
 Incessant labour conquers all. 

In spacious rooms once more you tread,
 Whose roofs with figures quaint o'erspread
 Wild nature paints with various dyes,
 With such as tinge the evening skies. 

A different scene to this succeeds:
 The dreary road abruptly leads
 Down to the cold and humid caves,
 Where hissing fall the turbid waves. 
Resounding deep thro' glimmering shades
 The clank of chains your ears invades. 
Thro' pits profound from distant day,
 Scarce travels down light's languid ray. 
High on huge axis heav'd, above,
 See ballanc'd beams unweary'd move! 
While pent within the iron womb
 Of boiling caldrons pants for room,
 Expanded steam, and shrinks, or swells,
 As cold restrains, or heat impells,
 And, ready for the vacant space,
 Incumbent air resumes his place,
 Depressing with stupendous force
 Whate'er resists his downward course,
 Pumps mov'd by rods from ponderous beams
 Arrest the unsuspecting streams,
 Which soon a sluggish pool would lie;
 Then spout them foaming to the sky. 

Sagacious Savery! taught by thee
 Discordant elements agree,
 Fire, water, air, heat, cold unite,
 And lifted in one service fight,
 Pure streams to thirsty cities send,
 Or deepest mines from floods defend. 
Man's richest gift thy work will shine;
 Rome's aqueducts were poor to thine! 

At last the long descent is o'er;
 Above your heads the billows roar:
 High o'er your heads they roar in vain;
 Not all the surges of the main
 The dark recess can e'er disclose,
 Rocks heap'd on rocks th'attempt oppose:
 Thrice Dover's cliff from you the tides
 With interposing roof divides! 

From such abyss restor'd to light,
 Invade no more the realms of night. 
For heroines it may well suffice
 Once to have left these azure skies. 
Heroes themselves, in days of yore,
 Bold as they were, atchiev'd no more. 
Without a dread descent you may
 The mines in their effects survey,
 And with an easy eye look down
 On that fair port and happy town. 

Where late along the naked strand
 The fisher's cot did lonely stand,
 And his poor bark unshelter'd lay,
 Of every swelling surge the prey,
 Now lofty piers their arms extend,
 And with their strong embraces bend
 Round crowded fleets, which safe defy
 All storms that rend the wintry sky,
 And bulwark, beyond bulwarks chain
 The fury of the roaring main. 
The peopled vale fair dwellings fill,
 And length'ning streets ascend the hill;
 Where industry, intent to thrive,
 Brings all her honey to the hive;
 Religion strikes with reverent awe,
 Example works th' effect of law,
 And plenty's flowing cup we see
 Untainted yet by luxury. 

These are the glories of the mine! 
Creative commerce, these are thine! 

Here while delighted you impart
 Delight to every eye and heart,
 Behold, grown jealous of your stay,
 Your native stream his charms display,
 To court you to his banks again;
 Now wind in wanton waves his train,
 Now spread into a chrystal plain;
 Then hid by pendent rocks would steal,
 But tuneful falls his course reveal,
 As down the bending vale he roves
 Thro' Yanwath woods, and Buckholme's groves;
 Whose broad o'erspreading boughs beneath
 Warbling he flows, while zephyrs breathe. 

Here softly swells the spacious lawn,
 Where bounds the buck, and skips the fawn,
 Or, couch'd beneath the hawthorn-trees,
 In dappled groups enjoy the breeze. 

Amid yon sunny plain, alone,
 To patriarchal reverence grown,
 An oak for many an age has stood
 Himself a widely waving wood,
 While men and herds, with swift decay,
 Race after race, have pass'd away. 
See still his central trunk sustain
 Huge boughs, which round o'erhang the plain,
 And hospitable shade inclose,
 Where flocks and herds at ease repose! 

There the brown fells ascend the sky,
 Below, the green inclosures lie;
 Along their sloping sides supine
 The peaceful villages recline:
 On azure roofs bright sun-beams play. 
And make the meanest dwelling gay. 
Thus oft the wise all-ruling Mind
 Is to the lowly cottage kind,
 Bids there his beams of favour fall,
 While sorrow crowds the lofty hall,
 That this may fear his awful frown,
 And grateful that his goodness own. 

If, grown familiar to the sight,
 Lowther itself should less delight,
 Then change the scene: to nature's pride,
 Sweet Keswick's vale, the muse will guide. 
The muse, who trod th'inchanted ground,
 Who sail'd the wonderous lake around,
 With you will haste once more to hail
 The beauteous brook of Borrodale. 

From savage parent, gentle stream! 
Be thou the muse's favourite theme:
 O soft insinuating glide
 Silent along the meadow's side,
 Smooth o'er the sandy bottom pass
 Resplendent all thro' fluid glass,
 Unless upon thy yielding breast
 Their painted heads the lilies rest,
 To where in deep capacious bed
 The widely liquid lake is spread. 

Let other streams rejoice to roar
 Down the rough rocks of dread Lodore,
 Rush raving on with boisterous sweep,
 And foaming rend the frighted deep,
 Thy gentle genius shrinks away
 From such a rude unequal fray;
 Thro' thine own native dale, where rise
 Tremendous rocks amid the skies,
 Thy waves with patience slowly wind,
 Till they the smoothest channel find,
 Soften the horrors of the scene,
 And thro' confusion flow serene. 

Horrors like these at first alarm,
 But soon with savage grandeur charm,
 And raise to noblest thoughts your mind:
 Thus by thy fall, Lodore, reclin'd,
 The cragged cliff, impendent wood,
 Whose shadows mix o'er half the flood,
 The gloomy clouds, which solemn sail,
 Scarce lifted by the languid gale
 O'er the capp'd hill, and darken'd vale;
 The ravening kite, and bird of Jove,
 Which round th' aëreal ocean rove,
 And, floating on the billowy sky,
 With full expanded pennons fly,
 Their fluttering or their bleating prey
 Thence with death-dooming eye survey;
 Channels by rocky torrents torn,
 Rocks to the lake in thunder borne,
 Or such as o'er our heads appear
 Suspended in their mid career,
 To start again at his command,
 Who rules fire, water, air, and land,
 I view with wonder and delight,
 A pleasing, tho' an awful sight:
 For, seen with them, the verdant isles
 Soften with more delicious smiles,
 More tempting twine their opening bowers,
 More lively glow the purple flowers,
 More smoothly slopes the border gay,
 In fairer circle bends the bay,
 And last, to fix our wandering eyes,
 Thy roofs, O Keswick, brighter rise
 The lake and lofty hills between,
 Where giant Skiddow shuts the scene. 

Supreme of mountains, Skiddow, hail! 
To whom all Britain sinks a vale! 
Lo, his imperial brow I see
 From foul usurping vapours free! 
'Twere glorious now his side to climb,
 Boldly to scale his top sublime! 
And thence — my muse, these flights forbear,
 Nor with wild raptures tire the fair. 
Hills, rocks, and dales have been too long
 The subject of thy rambling song. 
Far other scenes their minds employ,
 And move their hearts with soster joy. 
For pleasures they need never roam,
 Theirs with affection dwell, at home. 
Thrice happy they at home to prove
 A parent's and a brother's love,
 Her bright example pleas'd to trace,
 Learn every virtue, every grace,
 Which lustre give in female life
 To daughter, sister, parent, wife;
 Grateful to see her guardian care
 A tender father's loss repair,
 And, rising far o'er grief and pain,
 The glories of her race maintain. 

Their antient seats let others fly,
 To stroll beneath a foreign sky,
 Or loitering in their villas stay,
 Till useless summers waste away,
 While, hopeless of their lord's return,
 The poor exhausted tenants mourn;
 From Lowther she disdains to run
 To bask beneath a southern sun,
 Opens the hospitable door,
 Welcomes the friend, relieves the poor;
 Bids tenants share the lib'ral board,
 And early know and love their lord,
 Whose courteous deeds to all extend,
 And make each happy guest a friend. 
To smiling earth the grateful main
 Thus gives her gather'd streams again
 In showers on hill, and dale, and plain. 

O may the virtues, which adorn
 With modest beams his rising morn,
 Unclouded grow to perfect day! 
May he with bounty's brightest ray
 The natives chear, enrich the soil,
 With arts improve, reward their toil,
 Glad with kind warmth our northern sky,
 And generous Lonsdale's loss supply. 
