ode to horror.

in the allegoric, descriptive, alliterative, epithetical, fantastic, hyperbolical, and diabolical style of our modern ode-wright, and monody-monger.

by —.

o goddess of the gloomy scene,
 of shadowy shape thou black-browed queen. 
thy tress dark with ivy crown,
 on yonder moulder abbey find;
 oft wont from charnel damp and dim
 to call the sheet spectre grim,
 while as his loose chain loud clink,
 thou ad a length to every link:
 o thou, that love at eve to seek
 the pensive-pacing pilgrim meek,
 and set before his shudder eye
 strange form, and fiend of giant-size,
 as wild work thy wizard will,
 till fear-struck fancy have her fill:
 dark power, who magic might prevail
 over hermit-rock, and fairy-vale;
 o goddess, erst by Spenser view,
 what time the enchanter vile embrue,
 his hand in florimel pure heart,
 till loose by steelclad britomart:
 o thou that erst on fancy wing
 do terror-trembling Tasso bring,
 to grove where keep damn fury dire
 their blue-tipt battlement of fire:
 thou that through many a darksome pine,
 over the rugged rock recline,
 do wake the hollow-whispering breeze
 with care-consumed Eloise:
 o thou, with who in cheerless cell,
 the midnight-clock pale prisoner tell;
 o haste thou, mild miltonic maid,
 from yonder yew sequester shade;
 more bright than all the fable nine,
 teach i to breathe the solemn line! 
o bid my well-ranged number rise
 pervious to none but attic eye;
 o give the strain that madness move,
 till every start sense approve! 

what feel the Gallic traveller,
 when far in arab-desert drear
 he find within the catacomb,
 alive, the terror of a tomb? 
while many a mummy through the shade,
 in hieroglyphic stole array,
 seem to uprear the mystic head,
 and trace the gloom with ghostly tread;
 thou hear he pour the stifle groan,
 horror! his soul be all thy own! 

o mother of the fire-clad thought,
 o haste thou from thy gravelike grot! 
(what time the witch perform her rite)
 spring from the embrace of taste and night! 
o queen! that erst do thin spread
 the willowy leaf over isis head,
 and to her meek mien do dispense
 woe most awful negligence;
 what time, in cave, with visage pale,
 she tell her elegiac tale:
 o thou! who wander Warton see,
 amaze with more than youthful awe,
 as by the pale moon glimmer gleam
 he muse his melancholy theme:
 o curfeu-loving goddess, haste! 
o waft i to some scythian waste,
 where, in gothic solitude,
 amid prospect most sublime rude,
 beneath a rough rock gloomy chasm,
 thy sister sit, enthusiasm:
 let i with she, in magic trance,
 hold most delirious dalliance;
 till i, thy pensive votary,
 horror, look mad wild like thou;
 until i gain true transport shore,
 and life retire scene be over;
 aspire to some more azure sky,
 remote from dim mortality;
 at length, recline the faint head,
 in druid-dream dissolve and dead. 
