ODE TO HORROR.

IN THE ALLEGORIC, DESCRIPTIVE, ALLITERATIVE, EPITHETICAL, FANTASTIC, HYPERBOLICAL, AND DIABOLICAL STYLE OF OUR MODERN ODE-WRIGHTS, AND MONODY-MONGERS.

BY —.

O GODDESS of the gloomy scene,
 Of shadowy shapes thou black-brow'd queen. 
Thy tresses dark with ivy crown'd,
 On yonder mouldering abby found;
 Oft wont from charnels damp and dim
 To call the sheeted spectre grim,
 While as his loose chains loudly clink,
 Thou add'st a length to every link:
 O thou, that lov'st at eve to seek
 The pensive-pacing pilgrim meek,
 And set'st before his shuddering eyes
 Strange forms, and fiends of giant-size,
 As wildly works thy wizzard will,
 Till fear-struck Fancy has her fill:
 Dark power, whose magic might prevails
 O'er hermit-rocks, and fairy-vales;
 O Goddess, erst by Spenser view'd,
 What time th' enchanter vile embrued,
 His hands in Florimel's pure heart,
 Till loos'd by steel-clad Britomart:
 O thou that erst on Fancy's wing
 Didst terror-trembling Tasso bring,
 To groves where kept damn'd Furies dire
 Their blue-tipt battlements of fire:
 Thou that thro' many a darksome pine,
 O'er the rugged rock recline,
 Did'st wake the hollow-whispering breeze
 With care-consumed Eloise:
 O thou, with whom in chearless cell,
 The midnight-clock pale pris'ners tell;
 O haste thee, mild Miltonic maid,
 From yonder yew's sequester'd shade;
 More bright than all the fabled Nine,
 Teach me to breathe the solemn line! 
O bid my well-rang'd numbers rise
 Pervious to none but Attic eyes;
 O give the strain that madness moves,
 Till every starting sense approves! 

What felt the Gallic traveller,
 When far in Arab-desert drear
 He found within the catacomb,
 Alive, the terrors of a tomb? 
While many a mummy thro' the shade,
 In hieroglyphic stole array'd,
 Seem'd to uprear the mystic head,
 And trace the gloom with ghostly tread;
 Thou heardst him pour the stifled groan,
 Horror! his soul was all thy own! 

O mother of the fire-clad thought,
 O haste thee from thy grave-like grot! 
(What time the witch perform'd her rite)
 Sprung from th' embrace of Taste and Night! 
O queen! that erst did'st thinly spread
 The willowy leaves o'er Isis' head,
 And to her meek mien did'st dispense
 Woe's most awful negligence;
 What time, in cave, with visage pale,
 She told her elegiac tale:
 O thou! whom wandering Warton saw,
 Amaz'd with more than youthful awe,
 As by the pale moon's glimmering gleam
 He mus'd his melancholy theme:
 O curfeu-loving goddess, haste! 
O waft me to some Scythian waste,
 Where, in Gothic solitude,
 'Mid prospects most sublimely rude,
 Beneath a rough rock's gloomy chasm,
 Thy sister sits, Enthusiasm:
 Let me with her, in magic trance,
 Hold most delirious dalliance;
 Till I, thy pensive votary,
 Horror, look madly wild like thee;
 Until I gain true transport's shore,
 And life's retiring scene is o'er;
 Aspire to some more azure sky,
 Remote from dim mortality;
 At length, recline the fainting head,
 In Druid-dreams dissolv'd and dead. 
