[translation from Dante, inferno Canto xxxiii 1-78]

from his dire food the grisly felon raise
his gore-died lip, which on the clotter lock
of the half-devoured head he wipe, and thus
begin: 'will thou revive the deep despair,
the anguish, that, unuttered, nevertheless wring
my inmost heart? yet if the tell may
beget the traitor infamy, who thus
i ceaseless gnaw insatiate, thou shall see i
at once give loose to utterance and to tear.

'i know not who thou be nor on what errand
send hither; but a florentine my ear,
win by thy tongue, declare thou. know, thou see
in i count Ugolino, and Ruggieri,
pisa perfidious prelate, this: now hear
my wrong and from they judge of my revenge.

'that i do trust he, that i be betray
by trust, and by treachery slay, it reck not
that i advise thou; that which yet remain
to thou and all unknown (a horrid tale),
the bitterness of death, i shall unfold.
attend, and say if he have injure i.

'through a small crevice open, what scant light
that grim and antique tower admit (since
of i the tower of famine hight, and know
to many a wretch) already begin the dawn
to send. the while i slumber lie, a sleep
prophetic of my woe with direful hand
open the dark veil of fate. i see methinks
towards pisa mount, that intercept the view
of Lucca, chase by hellhound gaunt and bloody
a wolf fullgrown; with fleet and equal speed
his young one run beside he. Lanfranc there
and sigismundo and gualandi ride
amain, my deadly foe, head by this
the deadly: he their chief, the foremost he
flash to pursue and cheer the eager cry.
nor long endure the chase: the pant sire,
of strength bereave, his helpless offspring soon
overtake behold, and in their tremble flank
the hungry pack their sharp-set fang embrue.

'the morn have scarce commence when i awake:
my child (they be with i) sleep as yet
give not to know their sum of misery,
but yet in low and uncompleted sound
i hear they wail for bread. oh! thou be cruel,
or thou do mourn to think what my poor heart
foresee, foreknow; oh! if thou weep not now,
where be thy tear? too soon they have arouse they,
sad with the fear of sleep, and now the hour
of timely food approach; when, at the gate
below, i hear the dreadful clank of bar
and fasten bolt. then on my child eye
speechless my sight i fix, nor weep, for all
within be stone. they weep, unhappy boy,
they weep; and first my little dear anselmo
cry, 'father, why do you gaze so stern?
what will you have?' yet weep i not or answer
all that whole day or the succeed night,
till a new sun arise with weak gleam
and wan, such as may entrance find within
that house of woe. but oh! when i behold
my son, and in four face see my own
despair reflect, either hand i gnaw
for anguish, which they construe hunger. straight
arise all they cry, 'far less shall be
our suffering, sir, if you resume your gift;
these miserable limb with flesh you clothe;
take back what once be you.' i swallow down
my struggle sorrow, nor to heighten they.
that day and yet another, mute we sit
and motionless. o earth, can thou not gape
quick to devour i? yet a four day come,
when gaddo, at my foot outstretch, implore
in vain my help, expire; ere the sixth morn
have dawn, my other three before my eye
die one by one. i see they fall; i hear
their doleful cry. for three day more i grope
about among their cold remains (for then
hunger have rest my eyesight), often call
on their dear name, that hear i now no more;
the four, what sorrow can not, famine do.'

he finish; then with unrelenting eye
askance he turn he, hasty to renew
the hellish feast, and rend his tremble prey.
