Carmen seculare, for the year 1700. 

to the king.

i 

thy elder look, great Janus, cast
 into the long record of age past:
 review the year in fair action dress
 with note white, superior to the rest;
 Æra's derive, and chronicle begin
 from empire found, and from Battels win:
 show all the spoil by valiant king achieve,
 and groan nation by their arm relieve;
 the wound of patriot in their country be cause,
 and happy power sustain by wholesome law:
 in comely rank call every merit forth:
 imprint on every act it be standard worth:
 the glorious parallel then downward bring
 to modern wonder, and to britain king:
 with equal justice and historic care
 their law, their toil, their arm with his compare:
 confess the various attribute of fame
 collect and complete in William name:
 to all the listen world relate
 (as thou do his story read)
 that nothing go before so great,
 and nothing great can succeed. 

ii.

thy native Latium be thy darling care,
 prudent in peace, and terrible in war:
 the bold virtue that have govern earth
 from latium fruitful womb derive their birth. 
then turn to her fair-written page:
 from dawn childhood to establish age,
 the glory of her empire trace:
 confront the hero of thy roman race:
 and let the just palm the victor temple grace. 

iii.

the son of Mars reduce the tremble swain,
 and spread his empire over the distant plain:
 but yet the sabin violate charm
 obscure the glory of his rise arm.
 Numa the right of strict religion know;
 on every altar lay the incense due;
 unskilled to dart the point spear,
 or lead the forward youth to noble war. 
stern Brutus be with too much horror good,
 hold his fasces stain with filial blood. 
Fabius be wise, but with excess of care;
 he save his country; but prolong the war:
 while Decius, Paulus, Curius great fight;
 and by their strict example teach,
 how wild desire shall be control;
 and how much bright virtue be, than gold;
 they scarce their swell thirst of fame can hide;
 and boast poverty with too much pride. 
excess in youth make Scipio less revere:
 and Cato die seem to own, he fear. 
Julius with honour tame Rome foreign foe:
 but patriot fall, ever the dictator rise. 
and while with clemency Augustus reign;
 the monarch be adore; the city chain. 

iv.

with just honour be their merit dress:
 but be their fail too confess:
 their virtue, like their tiber flood
 roll, it be course design the country be good:
 but oft the torrent too impetuous speed
 from the low earth tear some pollute weed:
 and with the blood of Jove there always run
 some vile part, some tincture of the man. 

v. 

few virtue after these so far prevail,
 but that their vice more than turn the scale:
 valour grow wild by pride, and power by rage,
 do the true charm of majesty impair:
 Rome by degree advance more in age,
 show sad remains of what have once be fair;
 until heaven a better race of man supply;
 and glory shoot new beam from western sky. 

vi.

turn then to pharamond, and charlemain,
 and the long hero of the Gallic strain;
 experience chief, for hardy prowess know,
 and bloody wreath in venturous Battels win. 
from the first William, our great norman king,
 the bold plantagenet, and Tudors bring;
 illustrious virtue, who by turn have rise,
 in foreign field to check britannia foe;
 with happy law her empire to sustain,
 and with full power assert her ambient main:
 but sometime too industrious to be great,
 nor patient to expect the turn of fate,
 they open camp deform by civil fight,
 and make proud conquest trample over right:
 dispart Britain mourn their doubtful sway,
 and dread both, when neither will obey. 

vii.

from didier, and imperial Adolph trace
 the glorious offspring of the nassaw race,
 devote live to public liberty;
 the chief still die, or the country free. 
then see the kindred blood of orange flow,
 from warlike cornet, through the loin of beau;
 through chalon next; and there with nassaw join,
 from rhone fair bank transplant to the Rhine. 
bring next the royal list of Stuarts forth,
 undaunted mind, that rule the rugged north;
 until heaven decree by ripen time be show;
 until Scotland king ascend the english throne;
 and the fair rival live for ever one. 

viii.

Janus, mighty deity,
 be kind; and as thy search eye
 do our modern story trace,
 find some of stuart race
 unhappy, pass their annal by:
 no harsh reflection let remembrance raise:
 forbear to mention, what thou can not praise:
 but as thou dwell upon that heavenly name,
 to grief for ever sacred, as to fame,
 oh! read it to thy self; in silence weep;
 and thy convulsive sorrow inward keep;
 lest britain grief shall waken at the sound;
 and blood gush fresh from her eternal wound. 

ix.

whither will thou further look? 
read William act, and close the ample book:
 peruse the wonder of his dawn life;
 how, like alcides, he begin;
 with infant patience calm seditious strife,
 and quell the snake which round his cradle run. 

x. 

describe his youth, attentive to alarm,
 by danger form, and perfect in arm:
 when conquer, mild; when conquer, not disgrace;
 by wrong not lessen, nor by triumph raise:
 superior to the blind event
 of little human accident;
 and constant to his first decree,
 to curb the proud, to set the injure free;
 to bow the haughty neck, and raise the suppliant knee. 

xi.

his open year to riper manhood bring;
 and see the hero perfect in the king:
 imperious arm by manly reason sway,
 and power supreme by free consent obey:
 with how much haste his mercy meet his foe:
 and how unbounded his forgiveness flow:
 with what desire he make his subject bless,
 his favour grant ere his throne address:
 what trophy over our captive heart he rear,
 by art of peace more potent, than by war:
 how over himself, as over the world, he reign,
 his moral strengthen, what his law ordain. 

xii.

through all his thread of life already spin,
 become grace and proper action run:
 the piece by virtue equal hand be wrought,
 mix with no crime, and shade with no fault:
 no footstep of the victor rage
 leave in the camp, where William do engage:
 no tincture of the monarch pride
 upon the royal purple spy:
 he fame, like gold, the more it be try,
 the more shall its intrinsic worth proclaim;
 shall pass the combat of the search flame,
 and triumph over the vanquish heat,
 for ever come out the same,
 and lose nor it be lustre, nor it be weight. 

xiii.

Janus be to William just;
 to faithful history his action trust:
 command she, with peculiar care
 to trace each toil, and comment every war:
 his save wonder bid she write
 in character distinct bright;
 that each revolve age may read
 the patriot piety, the hero deed:
 and still the sire inculcate to his son
 transmissive lesson of the king renown:
 that William glory still may live;
 when all that present art can give,
 the pillare marble, and the tablet brass,
 moulder, drop the victor praise:
 when the great monument of his power
 shall now be visible no more:
 when Sambre shall have change her wind flood;
 and child ask, where Namur stand. 

xiv.

Namur, proud city, how her towr be arm! 
how she contemn the approach foe! 
till she by William trumpet be alarm,
 and shake, and sink, and fall beneath his blow. 
Jove and Pallas, mighty power,
 guide the hero to the hostile tower. 
Perseus seem less swift in war,
 when, winge with speed, he fly through air. 
embattle nation strive in vain
 the hero glory to restrain:
 stream arm with rock, and mountain red with fire
 in vain against his force conspire. 
behold he from the dreadful height appear! 
and lo! britannia lion wave there. 

XV. 

Europe free, and France repel
 the hero from the height behold:
 he speak the word, that war and rage shall cease:
 he bid the maese and Rhine in safety flow;
 and dictate a last peace
 to the rejoice world below:
 to rescue state, and vindicate crown
 his equal hand prescribe their ancient bound;
 ordain who every province shall obey;
 how far each monarch shall extend his sway:
 teach they how clemency make power revere;
 and that the prince belove be true fear. 
firm by his side unspotted honour stand,
 please to confess he not so great as good:
 he head with bright beam fair virtue deck,
 than those which all his numerous crown reflect:
 establish freedom clape her joyful wing;
 proclaim the first of man, and best of king. 

xvi.

whither will the muse aspire
 with pindar rage without his fire? 
pardon i, Janus, it be a fault,
 create by too great a thought:
 mindless of the god and day,
 i from thy altar, Janus, stray,
 from thou, and from my self bear far away. 
the fiery Pegasus disdain
 to mind the rider voice, or hear the reins:
 when glorious field and open camp he view;
 he run with a unbounded loose:
 hardly the muse can sit the headstrong horse:
 nor will she, if she can, check his impetuous force:
 with the glad noise the cliff and valley ring;
 while she through earth and air pursue the king. 

xvii.

she now behold he on the belgic shore;
 while britain tear his ready help implore,
 dissemble for her sake his rise care,
 and with wise silence ponder vengeful war. 
she through the rage ocean now
 view he advance his auspicious prow;
 combat adverse wind and winter sea,
 sigh the moment that defer our ease;
 dare to wield the sceptre dangerous weight,
 and take the command, to save the state:
 though ever the doubtful gift can be secure,
 new war must be sustain, new wound endure. 

xviii.

through rough ierne camp she sound alarm,
 and kingdom yet to be redeem by arm;
 in the dank marsh find her glorious theme;
 and plunge after he through boyn fierce stream. 
she bid the nereid run with tremble haste,
 to tell old ocean how the hero past. 
the god rebuke their fear, and own the praise
 worthy that arm, who empire he obey. 

xix.

back to his Albion she delight to bring
 the humble victor, and the kind king. 
Albion, with open triumph will receive
 her hero, nor obtain his leave:
 firm he reject the altar she will raise;
 and thank the zeal, while he decline the praise. 
again she follow he through belgia land,
 and country often save by William hand;
 hear joyful nation bless those happy toil,
 which free the people, but return the spoil. 
in various view she try her constant theme;
 find he in council, and in arm the same:
 when certain to overcome, incline to save,
 tardy to vengeance, and with mercy, brave. 

xx.

sudden another scene employ her sight:
 she set her hero in another light:
 paint his great mind superior to success,
 decline conquest, to establish peace:
 she bring astrea down to earth again,
 and quiet, brood over his future reign. 

xxi.

then with unwearied wing the goddess soar
 east, over Danube and Propontis shore;
 where jar empire ready to engage,
 retard their army, and suspend their rage;
 until William word, like that of fate, declare,
 if they shall study peace, or lengthen war. 
how sacred his renown for equal law,
 to who the world defer it be common cause! 
how fair his friendship, and his league how just,
 who every nation court, who all religion trust! 

xxii.

from the Mæotis to the northern sea,
 the goddess wing her desperate way;
 see the young Muscovite, the mighty head,
 who sovereign terror forty nation dread,
 enamour with a great monarch praise,
 and pass half the earth to his embrace:
 she in his rule behold his volga force,
 over precipice, with impetuous sway
 break, and as he rowl his rapid course,
 drown, or bear down, whatever meet his way. 
but her own king she liken to his Thames,
 with gentle course devolve fruitful stream:
 serene yet strong, majestic yet sedate,
 swift without violence, without terror great. 
each ardent nymph the rise current crave:
 each shepherd prayer retard the part wave:
 the vale along the bank their sweet disclose:
 fresh flower for ever rise: and fruitful harvest grow. 

xxiii.

yet whither will th'advent'rous goddess go? 
see she not cloud, and earth, and main below? 
mind she the danger of the lycian coast,
 and field, where mad Belerophon be lose? 
or be her tower flight reclaim
 by sea from icarus downfall name? 
vain be the call, and useless the advice:
 to wise persuasion deaf, and human cry,
 yet upward she incessant fly;
 resolve to reach the high empyrean sphere,
 and tell great Jove, she sing his image here;
 to ask for William a Olympic crown,
 to chromius strength, and theron speed unknown:
 till lose in trackless field of shine day,
 unable to discern the way
 which nassaw virtue only can explore,
 untouched, unknown, to any muse before,
 she, from the noble precipice throw,
 come rush with uncommon ruin down. 
glorious attempt! unhappy fate! 
the song too dare, and the theme too great! 
yet rather thus she will to die,
 than in continue annal live, to sing
 a second hero, or a vulgar king;
 and with ignoble safety fly
 in sight of earth, along a middle sky. 

xxiv.

to janus altar, and the numerous throng,
 that round his mystic temple press,
 for William life, and albion peace,
 ambitious Muse reduce the rove song. 
Janus, cast thy forward eye
 future, into great rhea pregnant womb;
 where young idea brood lie,
 and tender image of thing to come:
 until by thy high command release;
 until by thy hand in proper atom dress,
 in decent order they advance to light;
 yet then too swift fleet by human sight;
 and meditate too soon their everlasting flight. 

xxv.

nor beak of ship in naval triumph bear,
 nor standard from the hostile rampart tear,
 nor trophy bring from battle win,
 nor oaken wreathe, nor mural crown
 can any future honour give
 to the victorious monarch name:
 the plenitude of William fame
 can not accumulate store receive. 
shut then, auspicious god, thy sacred gate,
 and make we happy, as our king be great. 
be kind, and with a mild hand,
 close the volume of the finish age,
 (though noble, it be a iron page)
 a more delightful leaf expand,
 free from alarm, and fierce bellona rage:
 bid the great month begin their joyful round,
 by Flora some, and some by Ceres crown:
 teach the glad hour to scatter, as they fly,
 soft quiet, gentle love, and endless joy:
 lead forth the year for peace and plenty fame,
 from Saturn rule, and better metal name. 

xxvi.

secure by William care let Britain stand;
 nor dread the bold invader hand:
 from adverse shore in safety let she hear
 foreign calamity, and distant war;
 of which let she, great heaven, no portion bear. 
betwixt the nation let her hold the scale;
 and as she will, let either part prevail:
 let she glad valley smile with wavy corn:
 let fleecy flock she rise hill adorn:
 around her coast let strong defence be spread:
 let fair abundance on her breast be shed:
 and heavenly sweet bloom round the goddess head. 

xxvii.

where the white tower and ancient roof do stand,
 remains of wolsey or great Henry hand,
 to age now yield, or devour by flame;
 let a young Phoenix raise her tower head:
 her wing with lengthen honour let her spread;
 and by her greatness show her builder fame. 
august and open, as the hero mind,
 be her capacious court design:
 let every sacred pillar bear
 trophy of arm, and monument of war. 
the king shall there in parian marble breath,
 his shoulder bleed fresh: and at his foot
 disarm shall lie the threaten death:
 (for so be save Jove decree complete.) 
behind, that angel shall be place, who shield
 save Europe, in the blow repel:
 on the firm basis, from his oozy bed
 boyn shall raise his laureled head;
 and his immortal stream be know,
 artful wave through the wound stone. 

xxviii.

and thou, imperial Windsor, stand enlarge,
 with all the monarch trophy charge:
 thou, the fair heaven, that do the star enclose,
 which William bosom wear, or hand bestow
 on the great champion who support his throne,
 and virtue near to his own. 

xxix.

round ormond knee thou ty the mystic string,
 that make the knight companion to the king. 
from glorious camp return, and foreign field,
 bow before thy saint warrior shrine,
 fast by his great forefather coat, and shield
 blazon from bohun, or from butler line,
 he hang his arm; nor fear those arm shall shine
 with a unequal ray; or that his deed
 with pale glory shall recede,
 eclipse by they; or lessen by the fame
 even of his own maternal nassaw name. 

xxx.

thou smile see great dorset worth confess,
 the ray distinguish the patriot breast:
 bear to protect and love, to help and please;
 sovereign of wit, and ornament of peace. 
o! long as breath inform this fleet frame,
 never let i pass in silence dorset name;
 never cease to mention the continue debt,
 which the great patron only will forget,
 and duty, long as life, must study to acquit. 

xxxi.

renown in thy record shall ca'ndish stand,
 assert legal power, and just command:
 to the great house thy favour shall be show,
 the father star transmissive to the son. 
from thou the Talbot and the seymour race
 inform, their sire immortal step shall trace:
 happy may their son receive
 the bright reward, which thou alone can give. 

xxxii.

and if a god these lucky number guide;
 if sure Apollo over the verse preside;
 Jersey, belove by all (for all must feel
 the influence of a form and mind,
 where comely grace and constant virtue dwell,
 like mingle stream, more forcible when join.) 
Jersey shall at thy altar stand;
 shall there receive the azure band,
 that fair mark of favour and of fame,
 familiar to the vilier name. 

xxxiii.

science to raise, and knowledge to enlarge,
 be our great master future charge;
 to write his own memoir, and leave his heir
 high scheme of government, and plan of war;
 by fair reward our noble youth to raise
 to emulous merit, and to thirst of praise;
 to lead they out from ease ever open dawn,
 through the thick forest and the distant lawn,
 where the fleet stag employ their ardent care;
 and chase give they image of war. 
to teach they vigilance by false alarm;
 inure they in feign camp to real arm;
 practice they now to curb the turn steed,
 mock the foe; now to his rapid speed
 to give the rein; and in the full career,
 to draw the certain sword, or send the point spear. 

xxxiv.

let he unite his subject heart,
 plant society for peaceful art;
 some that in nature shall true knowledge find,
 and by experiment make precept sound;
 some that to moral shall recall the age,
 and purge from vicious dross the sink stage;
 some that with care true eloquence shall teach,
 and to just idiom fix our doubtful speech:
 that from our writer distant realm may know,
 the thanks we to our monarch owe;
 and school profess our tongue through every land,
 that have invoke his aid, or bless his hand. 

XXXV. 

let his high power the droop muse rear. 
the muse only can reward his care:
 it be they that guard the great atrides spoil:
 it be they that still renew ulysses toil:
 to they by smile Jove it be give, to save
 distinguish patriot from the common grave;
 to they, great William glory to recall,
 when statue moulder, and when arch fall. 
nor let the muse, with ungrateful pride,
 the source of their treasure hide:
 the hero virtue do the string inspire,
 when with big joy they strike the live lyre:
 on William fame their fate depend:
 with he the song begin: with he it end. 
from the bright effluence of his deed
 they borrow that reflect light,
 with which the last lamp they feed,
 who beam dispel the damp of envious night. 

xxxvi 

through various clime, and to each distant pole
 in happy tide let active commerce roll:
 let britain ship export a annual fleece,
 rich than Argos bring to ancient Greece;
 return load with the shine store,
 which lie profuse on either india shore. 
as our high vessel pass their watery way,
 let all the naval world due homage pay;
 with hasty reverence their top-honour lower,
 confess the assert power,
 to who by fate it be give, with happy sway
 to calm the earth, and vindicate the sea. 

xxxvii.

our prayer be hear, our master fleet shall go,
 as far as wind can bear, or water flow,
 new land to make, new Indies to explore,
 in world unknown to plant britannia power;
 nation yet wild by precept to reclaim,
 and teach they arm, and art, in William name. 

xxxviii.

with humble joy, and with respectful fear
 the listen people shall his story hear,
 the wound he bear, the danger he sustain,
 how far he conquer, and how well he reign;
 shall own his mercy equal to his fame;
 and form their child accent to his name,
 inquire how, and when from heaven he come. 
their regal tyrant shall with blush hide
 their little lust of arbitrary pride,
 nor bear to see their vassal tie:
 when William virtue raise their open think,
 his forty year for public freedom fight,
 Europe by his hand sustain,
 his conquest by his piety restrain,
 and over himself the last great triumph gain. 

xxxix.

no long shall their wretched zeal adore
 idea of destructive power,
 spirit that hurt, and godhead that devour:
 new incense they shall bring, new altar raise,
 and fill their temple with a stranger praise;
 when the great father character they find
 visible stamp upon the hero mind;
 and own a present deity confess,
 in valour that preserve, and power that bless. 

XL. 

through the large convex of the azure sky
 (for thither nature cast our common eye)
 fierce meteor shoot their arbitrary light;
 and comet march with lawless horror bright:
 these hear no rule, no righteous order own;
 their influence dread, as their way unknown:
 through threaten land they wild destruction throw;
 until ardent prayer avert the public woe:
 but the bright orb that bless all above,
 the sacred fire, the real son of Jove,
 rule not his action by capricious will;
 nor by ungoverned power decline to ill:
 fix by just law he go for ever right:
 man know his course, and thence adore his light. 

xli 

o Janus! will entreat fate conspire
 to grant what britain wish can require;
 above, that sun shall cease his way to go,
 ever William cease to rule, and bless below:
 but a relentless destiny
 urge all that ever be bear:
 snatch from her arm, Britannia once must mourn
 the demi-god: the earthly half must die. 
yet if our incense can your wrath remove;
 if human prayer avail on mind above;
 exert, great god, thy interest in the sky;
 gain each kind power, each guardian deity,
 that conquer by the public vow,
 they bear the dismal mischief far away:
 o! long as utmost nature may allow,
 let they retard the threaten day:
 still be our master life thy happy care:
 still let his blessing with his year increase:
 to his laborious youth consume in war,
 add last age, adorn and crown with peace:
 let twist olive bind those laurel fast,
 who verdure must for ever last. 

xlii 

long let this grow Æra bless his sway:
 and let our son his present rule obey:
 on his sure virtue long let earth rely:
 and late let the imperial eagle fly,
 to bear the hero through his father sky,
 to leda twin, or he who glorious speed
 on foot prevail, or he who tame the steed;
 to Hercules, at length absolve by fate
 from earthly toil, and above envy great;
 to virgil theme, bright cytherea son,
 sire of the latian, and the british throne;
 to all the radiant name above,
 revere by man, and dear to Jove. 
late, Janus, let the nassaw-star
 new bear, in rise majesty appear,
 to triumph over vanquish night,
 and guide the prosperous mariner
 with everlasting beam of friendly light. 
