a miller, his son, and their ass.  

a fable translate from monsieur de la fontaine. 

though to antiquity the praise we yield
 of please art; and fable early field
 own to be fruitful Greece; yet not so clean
 those ear be reap, but still there be some to glean:
 and from the land of vast invention come
 daily new author, with discovery home. 
this curious piece, which i shall now impart,
 fall from Malherbe, a master in his art,
 to racan, fill with like poetic fire,
 both tuneful servant of apollo choir,
 rival and heir to the horatian lyre:
 who meet he, one day, free and alone,
 (for still their thought be to each other know)
 thus ask his aid — some useful counsel give,
 thou who, by live long, have learn to live;
 who observation nothing can escape;
 tell i, how i my course of life shall shape:
 to something i will fix eree be too late. 
you know my birth, my talent, my estate:
 shall i with these content, all search resign,
 and to the country my desire confine? 
or in the court, or camp, advancement gain? 
the world be a mixture of delight and pain:
 though rough it seem, there be pleasure in the war,
 and Hymen joy be not without their care. 
i need not ask, to what my genius tend,
 but will content the world, the court, my friend. 

please all the world (in haste) Malherbe reply? 
how vain the attempt will prove in he, that try,
 learn from a fable, i have somewhere find,
 before i answer all that you propound. 

a miller and his son (the father old,
 the boy about some fifteen year have tell)
 design their ass to sell, and for the fair,
 some distance off, accord prepare. 
but lest she in the walk shall lose her flesh,
 and not appear, for sale, so full and fresh,
 her foot together tie; between they two
 they heave she up; and on the rustic go:
 till those, who meet they bear thus the ass,
 cry, be these fool about to act a farce? 
sure the beast (however it seem to be)
 be not the great ass of all the three. 
the miller in their mirth his folly find,
 and down he set she, and again unbind;
 and though her grumble show, she like much more
 the lazy way, she travel in before,
 he mind she not; but up the boy he set
 upon she back, and on the crupper get. 
thus on they jog, when of three man that pass. 
the old think age to be disgrace,
 call to the youth, ho! you, young man for shame! 
come down, lest passenger your manner blame,
 and say, it ill become your tender year
 to ride before a grandsire with grey hair. 
true, the gentleman be in the right,
 the miller cry, and make the boy alight;
 then forward slide himself into his place,
 and with a mind content, renew his pace:
 but much he have not gain upon his way,
 before a troop of damsel, neat and gay,
 (partial to youth) to one another cry,
 see, how with walk by that dotard side,
 the boy be tire; while with a prelate state
 he ride alone, and dangle in the seat,
 hang like a calf throw up, across the beast. 
the miller, think to have spoil that jest,
 reply, he be too old for veal to pass,
 but after more on he, and on his ass,
 he stand convince, and take his son again
 to ride at ease himself, still next the mane. 
yet ere he will thirty pace bear the lad,
 the next they meet, cry — be these fellow mad
 have they no pity thus t'o'erload the jade! 
sure, at the fair, they for her skin may trade. 
see, how be she spend, and sink beneath their stroke
 the miller, who this most of all provoke,
 swear by his cap, he show his want of brain,
 who thus to please the world, bestow his pain
 however we will try, if this weigh may be do;
 and off he come, and fetch down his son. 
behind they walk, and now the creature drive,
 but can no better in their purpose thrive;
 nor scape a fellow censure, who they meet,
 that cry, to spare the ass they break their foot;
 and while unladen at her ease she go,
 trudge in the dirt, and batter out their shoe;
 as if to burden she they be afraid,
 and man for beast, not beast for man be make. 
the proverb right, the cart before the horse. 
the miller, find thing grow worse and worse,
 cry out, i be a ass, it be agree,
 and so be all, who will in this succeed. 
hereafter, though reproof or praise i find,
 i will neither heed, but follow my own mind,
 take my own counsel, how my beast to sell. 
this he resolve, and do it, and do well. 

for you, sir, follow love, the court, the war;
 obtain the crosier, or the city Furr;
 live single all your day, or take a wife;
 trust i, a consure wait each state of life. 
