a pipe of tobacco

in imitation of six several author.

imitation i  a new-year ode.

recitativo.

old battle-array, big with horror be flee,
and olive-robed peace again lift up her head.
sing, you muse, tobacco, the blessing of peace;
be ever a nation so bless as this?

air.

when summer sun grow red with heat,
tobacco temper phoebus ire,
when wintery storm around we beat,
tobacco cheer with gentle fire.
yellow autumn, youthful spring,
in thy praise joint sing.

recitativo.

like Neptune, Caesar guard Virginian fleet,
fraught with tobacco balmy sweet;
old ocean tremble at britannia power,
and Boreas be afraid to roar.

air.

happy mortal! he who know
pleasure which a pipe bestow;
curl eddy climb the room,
waft round a mild perfume.

recitativo.

let foreign clime the vine and orange boast,
while waste of war deform the teem coast;
Britannia, distant from each hostile sound,
enjoy a pipe, with ease and freedom crown;
even restless faction find itself most free,
or if a slave, a slave to liberty.

air.

smile year that gayly run
round the zodiac with the sun,
tell, if ever you have see
realm so quiet and serene.
british son no long now
hurl the bar, or twang the bow,
nor of crimson combat think,
but secure smoke and drink.

chorus.

smile year, that gayly run
round the zodiac with the sun,
tell, if ever you have see
realm so quiet and serene.

imitation ii.

little tube of mighty power,
charmer of a idle hour,
object of my warm desire,
lip of wax, and eye of fire:
and thy snowy taper waist,
with my finger gentle brace;
and thy pretty swell crest,
with my little stopper press,
and the sweet bliss of bliss,
breathe from thy balmy kiss.
happy thrice, and thrice again,
happy he of happy man;
who when again the night return,
when again the taper burn;
when again the cricket gay,
(little cricket, full of play)
can afford his tube to feed
with the fragment indian weed:
pleasure for a nose divine,
incense of the god of wine.
happy thrice, and thrice again,
happy he, of happy man.

imitation iii.

o thou, mature by glad hesperian sun,
tobacco, fountain pure of limpid truth,
that look the very soul; whence pour thought
swarm all the mind; absorb be yellow care,
and at each puff imagination burn:
flash on thy bard, and with exalt fire
touch the mysterious lip that chant thy praise,
in strain to mortal son of earth unknown.
behold a engine, wrought from tawny mine
of ductile clay, with plastic virtue form,
and glaze magnific over, i grasp, i fill.
from paetotheke with pungent power perfume
itself one tortoise, all, where shine imbibe
each parent ray; then rude ram illume,
with the red touch of zeal-enkindling sheet,
mark with gibsonian lore; forth issue cloud,
thought-thrilling, thirst-inciting cloud around,
and many-mining fire: i all the while,
loll at ease, inhale the breezy balm.
but chief, when Bacchus wont with thou to join,
in genial strife and orthodoxal ale,
stream life and joy into the muse bowl.
oh be thou still my great inspirer, thou
my muse; oh fan i with thy zephyr boon,
while i, in cloud tabernacle shrine,
burst forth all oracle and mystic song.

imitation iv.

critic avaunt; tobacco be my theme;
tremble like hornet at the blast steam.
and you, court-insect, flutter not too near
its light, nor buzz within the scorch sphere.
Pollio, with flame like thy, my verse inspire,
so shall the muse from smoke elicit fire.
coxcomb prefer the tickle sting of snuff;
yet all their claim to wisdom be — a puff:
lord foplin smoke not — for his tooth afraid:
sir tawdry smoke not — for he wear brocade.
lady, when pipe be bring, affect to swoon;
they love no smoke, except the smoke of town;
but courtier hate the puff tribe, — no matter,
strange if they love the breath that can flatter!
its foe but show their ignorance; can he
who scorn the leaf of knowledge, love the tree?
the taint templar (more prodigious yet)
rail at tobacco, though it make he — spit.
critonia vow it have a odious stink;
she will not smoke (you god!) — but she will drink:
and chaste prudelia (blame she if you can)
say, pipe be use by that vile creature man:
yet crowd remain, who still its worth proclaim,
while some for pleasure smoke, and some for fame:
fame, of our action universal spring,
for which we drink, eat, sleep, smoke — every thing.

imitation v. 

bless leaf! who aromatic gale dispense
to templar modesty, to parson sense:
so rapture priest, at fame dodona shrine
drink inspiration from the steam divine.
poison that cure, a vapour that afford
content, more solid than the smile of lord:
rest to the weary, to the hungry food,
the last kind refuge of the wise and good.
inspire by thou, dull cit adjust the scale
of europe peace, when other statesman fail.
by thou protect, and thy sister, beer,
poet rejoice, nor think the bailiff near.
nor less the critic own thy genial aid,
while supperless he ply the piddle trade.
what though to love and soft delight a foe,
by lady hate, hate by the beau,
yet social freedom, long to court unknown,
fair health, fair truth, and virtue be thy own.
come to thy poet, come with heal wing,
and let i taste thou unexcised by king.

imitation vi.

boy! bring a ounce of freeman best,
and bid the vicar be my guest:
let all be place in manner due,
a pot wherein to spit or spue,
and London journal, or free-briton,
of use to light a pipe, or **
this village, unmolested yet
by trooper shall be my retreat:
who can flatter, bribe, betray;
who can write or vote for *.
far from the vermin of the town,
here let i rather live, my own,
doze over a pipe, who vapour bland
in sweet oblivion lull the land;
of all which at Vienna pass,
as ignorant ** brass be:
and scorn rascal to caress,
extol the day of good queen Bess,
when first tobacco bless our isle,
then think of other queen — and smile.
come jovial pipe, and bring along
midnight revelry and song;
the merry catch, the madrigal,
that echo sweet in city hall;
the parson pun, the smutty tale
of country justice over his ale.
i ask not what the french be do,
or Spain to compass britain ruin:
briton, if undo, can go,
where tobacco love to grow.
