a elegy, on the death of a lady.

write in 1760. 

by WILLIAM Mason, m.a. 

the midnight clock have toll; and hark, the bell
 of death beat slow! hear you the note profound? 
it pause now; and now, with rise knell,
 fling to the hollow gale its sullen sound. 
yes *** be dead. attend the strain,
 daughter of Albion! you that, light as air,
 so oft have trip in her fantastic train,
 with heart as gay, and face half as fair:
 for she be fair beyond your bright bloom:
 (this envy own, since now her bloom be flee)
 fair as the form that, weave in fancy loom,
 float in light vision round the poet head. 
whenever with soft serenity she smile,
 or catch the orient blush of quick surprise,
 how sweet mutable, how bright wild,
 the liquid lustre dart from her eye? 
each look, each motion wake a new-born grace,
 that over her form its transient glory cast:
 some lovely wonder soon usurp the place,
 chase by a charm still lovely than the last. 
that bell again! it tell we what she be:
 on what she be no more the strain prolong:
 luxuriant fancy pause: a hour like this
 demand the tribute of a serious song. 
Maria claim it from that sable bier,
 where cold and wan the slumberer rest her head;
 in still small whisper to reflection ear,
 she breathe the solemn dictate of the dead. 
o catch the awful note, and lift they loud;
 proclaim the theme, by sage, by fool revere;
 hear it, you young, you vain, you great, you proud! 
it be nature speak, and nature will be hear. 
yes, you shall hear, and tremble as you hear,
 while, high with health, your heart exult leap:
 even in the midst of pleasure mad career,
 the mental monitor shall wake and weep. 
for say, than ***'s propitious star,
 what bright planet on your birth arise;
 or give of Fortune gift a ampler share,
 in life to lavish, or by death to lose! 
early to lose; while, bear on busy wing,
 you sip the nectar of each vary bloom:
 nor fear, while bask in the beam of spring,
 the wintery storm that sweep you to the tomb;
 think of her fate! revere the heavenly hand
 that lead she hence, though soon, by step so slow;
 long at her couch death take his patient stand,
 and menace oft, and oft withhold the blow:
 to give reflection time, with lenient art,
 each fond delusion from her soul to steal;
 teach she from folly peaceable to part,
 and wean she from a world she love so well. 
say, be you sure his mercy shall extend
 to you so long a span? alas, you sigh:
 make then, while yet you may, your god your friend,
 and learn with equal ease to sleep or die! 
nor think the muse, who sober voice you hear,
 contract with bigot frown her sullen brow;
 cast round religion orb the mist of fear,
 or shade with horror, what with smile shall glow. 
no; she will warm you with seraphic fire,
 heir as you be of heaven eternal day;
 will bid you bold to that heaven aspire,
 not sink and slumber in your cell of clay. 
know, you be form to range yond azure field,
 in yond aethereal fount of bliss to lave;
 force then, secure in faith protect shield,
 the sting from death, the victory from the grave. 
be this the bigot rant? away you vain,
 your hope, your fear in doubt, in dullness steep:
 go sooth your soul in sickness, grief, or pain,
 with the sad solace of eternal sleep. 
yet will i praise you, trifler as you be,
 more than those preacher of your favourite creed,
 who proud swell the brazen throat of war,
 who form the phalanx, bid the battle bleed;
 nor wish for more: who conquer, but to die. 
hear, folly, hear; and triumph in the tale:
 like you, they reason; not, like you, enjoy
 the breeze of bliss, that fill your silken sail:
 on pleasure glitter stream you gay steer
 your little course to cold oblivion shore:
 they dare the storm, and, through the inclement year,
 stem the rough surge, and brave the torrent roar. 
be it for glory? that just fate deny. 
long must the warrior moulder in his shroud,
 ever from her trump the heav'n-breathed accent rise,
 that lift the hero from the fighting crowd. 
be it his grasp of empire to extend? 
to curb the fury of insult foe? 
ambition, cease: the idle contest end:
 it be but a kingdom thou can win or lose. 
and why must murder myriad lose their all,
 (if life be all) why desolation lour,
 with famish frown, on this affright ball,
 that thou may flame the meteor of a hour? 
go wise you, that flutter life away,
 crown with the mantling juice the goblet high;
 weave the light dance, with festive freedom gay,
 and live your moment, since the next you die. 
yet know, vain sceptic, know, the almighty mind,
 who breathe on man a portion of his fire,
 bad his free soul, by earth nor time confine,
 to heaven, to immortality aspire. 
nor shall the pile of hope, his mercy rear,
 by vain philosophy be ever destroy:
 eternity, by all or wish or fear,
 shall be by all or suffer or enjoy. 
