part of the five scene in the second act of athalia, a tragedy, write in french by monsieur Racine. 

mathan.

why, to our wonder, in this place be see,
 thus discompose, and alter, juda queen? 
may we demand, what terror seize your breast,
 or, why your step be to this house address,
 where your unguarded person stand expose
 to secret foe, within its wall enclose? 
can it be think that you remit that hate? 

athalia.

no more! but both observe what i relate:
 not, that i mean (recall time of blood)
 to make you judge of the path i tread,
 when to the empty throne i bold rise,
 treat all intercepter as my foe. 
it be heaven decree, that i shall thus succeed,
 who follow favour justify the deed,
 extend my unlimited command
 from sea to sea over the obedient land:
 while your Jerusalem all peace enjoy,
 nor now the encroach philistine destroy,
 nor wander Arab his pavilion spread,
 near Jordan bank, nor waste his flowery mead. 
the great assyrian, terror of your king,
 who buy his friendship with their holy thing,
 yield that a sister, of his powerful race,
 shall sway these realm, and dignify the place. 
nor need we add the late insult foe,
 the furious Jehu do this sceptre know,
 and sink beneath the load of conscious fear,
 when in Samaria he my action hear. 
distress by foe, which i have against he raise,
 he see i unmolested, fix, and please;
 at least, till now thus glorious be my state;
 but something be threaten from relax fate,
 and the last night, which shall have bring i rest,
 have all these great idea dispossess. 
a dream, a vision, a apparent view
 of what, methinks, do still my step pursue,
 hang on my pensive heart, and bear it down
 more than the weight of a object crown,
 my mother (be the name with reverence speak!) 
ere cheerful day through horrid shade have break,
 approach my bed, magnificent her dress,
 her shape, her air do jesabel confess:
 nor seem her face to have refuse that art,
 which, in despite of age, do youth impart,
 and which she practise, scorn to decay,
 or to be vanquish even in nature way. 
thus all array, in such defy pride
 as when the injurious conqueror she descry,
 and do in height of power for ill-got power deride. 
to i she speak, these accent to i come:
 "thou worthy daughter of my soar fame,
"though with a more transcendent spirit fill,
 "though struggle power attempt thy life to shield,
"the hebrew god (oh, tremble at the sound!)
 "shall thou and they, and all their right confound. 
a pity groan conclude, no word of aid. 
my arm i think to throw about the shade
 of that love parent, but my trouble sight
 no more direct they to aim aright,
 nor ought present, but a heap of bone,
 for which fierce dog contend on the stone,
 with flake of mangle flesh, that quiver still
 proclaim the freshness of the suffer ill;
 distain with blood the pavement, and the wall,
 appear as in that memorable fall —

Abner.

oh! just avenge heaven! —

mathan.

sure, dream like these, be for prevention give. 
