Penelope to Ulysses.

paraphrase from Ovid.

these line i send, impatient of your stay,
 to you, my lord, who kill i with delay;
 yet crave not any answer back, beside
 yourself, the best of answer to your bride. 
sure Troy, so hateful to the grecian dame,
 be ruin now, with dire, consume flame;
 though scarce Troy, nor all her king can boast,
 be worth the trouble, which her ruin cost. 
o! have lewd Paris sink beneath the tide,
 when, over the sea, he seek the spartan bride;
 i have not then accuse the linger day,
 nor weave, to charm the tedious night away;
 nor in the bed, desert and forlorn,
 lie weep, cold and comfortless, till morn. 

whenever of danger in your camp i hear,
 those danger threaten you, i always fear:
 for love, like i, no cold indifference bear;
 it feed on timorous thought, and anxious care. 
i fancy, furious trojan round thou come;
 and tremble, ever dread hector name:
 if any say, Antilochus be slay,
 Antilochus be he who cause my pain:
 or, if in borrow arm Patroclus bleed,
 i weep, because his craft no better speed:
 when rhodian blood have bathe the lycian spear,
 the rhodian youth again renew my care:
 in fine, whatever grecian chief be kill,
 my fearful heart, like frigid ice, be chill;
 lest flatter fame my doubtful ear shall cheat,
 and, for my lord, proclaim another fate:
 but heaven, propitious to my chaste desire,
 preserve you safe, and Troy consume with fire. 

but now the other grecian chief return,
 and on their smoke altar offering burn;
 their useless arm they consecrate to peace,
 and trojan spoil the grecian temple grace:
 each youthful bride some please gift afford,
 to welcome home their safe-returning lord;
 their safe-returning lord, in song of joy,
 resound the vanquish fate of ruin Troy:
 the wonder sage crowd around to hear,
 the tremble girl admire the tale of war:
 the wife stand listen, while their husband tell,
 how Greece have conquer, and how Ilion fall:
 one stain a table with the purple draught,
 and show the furious battle, which you fight;
 paint, with the wine, which from the glass he pour,
 camp, river, hill, and all the trojan tower:
 and, this, say he, be the sigean plain;
 and here the silver Simois roll his train;
 there stand old priam stately palace, here
 Achilles pitch his tent, Ulysses there:
 here mangle Hector, dreadful in his fall,
 affright the steed, that drag he round the wall. 
your son, who send by i to nestor court,
 to seek his father, bring i this report
 from nestor mouth, and how the thracian lord,
 in sleep, become a victim to your sword;
 how Dolon fall into your crafty snare —
 but, o! Ulysses, you too bold dare;
 too fearless, through the camp of foe you rove,
 mindful of wile, forgetful of your love;
 slay so many in the gloomy night,
 one friend alone, to aid you in the fight. 
it be not thus you rash use to go
 among the midnight terror of the foe;
 fond of i you former have think,
 with prudence act, and with caution fight. 
heaven know, with fear my tremble bosom beat,
 to hear my son your dare deed relate;
 till tell how you victorious return,
 safe, to your camp, with thracian spoil adorn. 

but what avail it i, your arm have throw
 troy stately wall, and lofty turret down? 
as when they stand, if i be rob of thou,
 troy fall to other, stand still to i;
 to other, who, with captive ox, toil
 to turn the glebe, and till the trojan soil;
 and while, with crooked plough, they discompose
 the ill-buried ash of their slaughter foe;
 while phrygian field, grow fat with native blood,
 bear fruitful crop, where stately Ilion stand;
 while verdant harvest hide their ruin wall,
 i mourn my absent lord, who wrought its fall;
 nor can i know the land, where you reside,
 nor who, nor what detain you from your bride. 

whatever sailor on our coast appear,
 (hopeful to find some tiding of my dear)
 i fly to they, and ask they over and over,
 if ever they see you on some foreign shore? 
then to their hand a letter i impart,
 to give it you, the partner of my heart;
 if chance, or destiny shall ever prove
 so kind to lead they to my absent love. 

we seek for you at ancient nestor court;
 but seek in vain, we hear no true report:
 we send to ask the spartan too; but they
 know not the climate, where you, linger, stay. 
o! have Apollo save his sacred town —
 you god! why do i ever wish it down? 
if that be stand, and Ulysses there,
 i nothing, but the chance of war, shall fear:
 i shall not then be single curse to cry;
 other will fear the war, no less than i. 
but now a thousand whimsy feed my care,
 nor know i what to hope, or what to fear;
 yet fear all, that fancy can suggest,
 unnumbered trouble rack my anxious breast:
 upon the land whatever danger reign,
 i fear those danger make you there remain;
 upon the sea whatever storm increase,
 i fear those storm detain you on the sea. 
while thus my foolish thought uncertain rove,
 perhaps you revel with a foreign love;
 perhaps you ridicule your bride at home,
 tell how she spin, or drudge in the loom:
 suspicious thought! that vex my jealous mind,
 begone, and vanish into empty wind! 
if cruel fate do not obstruct the way,
 my lord will never make so long delay. 
your long delay my father often blame,
 and often chide i for my constant flame:
 my constant flame shall ever true remain;
 let father chide, and suitor court in vain. 
at length my sire, who find he can remove
 my faith from you, nor shake my settle love,
 remit his anger, soften with my prayer;
 yet still a crowd of suitor teaze my ear;
 from various realm they come to seek your crown,
 and feast, and reign secure in your throne:
 it will tire i even to count their number over,
 Medon, Pisander, and a hundred more! 
all bend on love, and robber of the state,
 and all, by your pernicious absence, great! 
to crown your shame, the beggar Irus prey
 upon your sheep, and all the fat slay:
 and even your shepherd, faithless to his lord,
 slaughter your lamb, to grace the suitor board:
 nor have we strength, their rapine to oppose;
 for how can three resist so many foe? 
your feeble wife, your father wear with age,
 your tender son, too weak to check their rage;
 for who they late crafty ambush lay,
 and menace death on his devote head;
 when, mock all their stratagem, he cross
 the sea, to seek you on the pylian coast. 
o! may the god extend his vital date,
 and guard his life, till we submit to fate:
 so may he close our eye with decent care;
 such be your servant, such his nurse prayer. 

since then your age father, feeble grow,
 amid your foe, can defend your crown;
 your wife, too weak to chase the foe away,
 your son, too young to bear the regal sway;
 haste, haste, Ulysses, to your royal seat;
 for you alone can cure our trouble state:
 think of your son, who want you to inspire
 his soul with all the virtue of his sire:
 think, on the brink of fate your father lie:
 return, my lord, return and close his eye:
 think of your faithful wife, who youthful face,
 at your departure, blush with bloom grace:
 but now i blush with bloom grace no more;
 tear, for your absence, cloud my beauty over. 
o! may you soon return, before i prove
 a ancient dame, unworthy of your love. 
