[pastoral 05] the five pastoral.

Cuddy.

in rural strain we first our music try,
 and bashful into wood and thicket fly,
 mistrust then our skill. yet, if through time
 our voice improve gain a pitch sublime;
 thy grow virtue, sackvil, shall engage
 my riper verse, and more settle age. 

the sun, now mount to the noon of day,
 begin to shoot direct his burn ray,
 when, with the flock, their feeder seek the shade,
 a venerable oak, wide-spreading make. 
what shall they do to pass the loiter time? 
as fancy lead, each form his tale in rhyme:
 and some the joy, and some the pain of love,
 and some to set out strange adventure strive;
 the trade of wizard some, and merlin skill,
 and whence to charm such empire over the will. 
then Cuddy last (who Cuddy can excel
 in neat device?) his tale begin to tell. 

when shepherd have flourish in Eliza reign,
 there live in great esteem a jolly Swain,
 young Colin clout; who well can pipe and sing,
 and by his note invite the lag spring. 
he, as his custom be, at leisure lay
 in silent shade, without a rival play. 
draw by the magic of the entice sound,
 what croud of mute admirer flock around! 
the steerling leave their food; and creature, wild
 by nature form, insensible grow mild. 
he make the bird in troop about he throng,
 and load the neighbour branch with his song. 

among the rest, a nightingale of fame,
 jealous, and fond of praise, to listen come. 
she turn her ear, and emulous, with pride,
 like echo to the shepherd pipe reply. 
the shepherd hear with wonder; and again,
 to try she more, renew his various strain. 
to all the various strain she shape her throat,
 and add peculiar grace to every note. 
if Colin, in complain accent grieve,
 or brisk motion to his measure give,
 if gentle sound he modulate, or strong,
 she, not a little vain, repeat the song:
 but so repeat, that Colin half despise
 his pipe and skill, so much by other prize. 
and, sweet songster of the wing kind,
 what thanks, say he, what praise can i find
 to equal thy melodious voice? in thou
 the rudeness of my rural fife i see;
 from thou i learn no more to vaunt my skill. 

aloft in air she sit, provoke still
 the vanquish Swain. provoke at last, he strive
 to show the little minstrel of the grove
 his utmost art; if so some small esteem
 he may obtain, and credit lose, redeem. 
he draw in breath, his rise breast to fill;
 through all the wood his pipe be hear to shrill. 
from note to note in haste his finger fly;
 still more and more his number multiply;
 and now they trill, and now they fall and rise,
 and swift and slow they change, with sweet surprise. 

attentive she do scarce the sound retain,
 but to herself first conn the puzzle strain;
 and trace careful, note by note, repay
 the shepherd, in his own harmonious lay;
 through every change cadence run at length,
 and add in sweetness, what she want in strength. 

then Colin throw his fife disgrace aside;
 while she loud triumph sing, proclaim wide
 her mighty conquest. what can Colin more? 
a little harp, of maple ware, he bear:
 the harp it self be old, but new string,
 which usual he across his shoulder hang. 
now take, delightful bird, my last farewell,
 he say; and learn from hence, thou do excel
 no trivial artist. and at last he wind
 the murmur string, and order every sound. 
then earnest to his instrument he bend,
 and both his hand upon the string extend. 
the string obey his touch, and various move,
 the low, answer still to those above. 
his restless finger traverse to and fro,
 and in pursuit of harmony they go;
 now, light skim, over the string they pass,
 like wind, that gentle brush the ply grass,
 and melt air arise at their command:
 and now, laborious, with a weighty hand
 he sink into the cord with solemn pace,
 and give the swell tone a bold grace:
 then, intricate he blend agree sound,
 while music through the tremble harp adound. 

the double sound the nightingale perplex,
 and pose, she do her trouble spirit vex. 
she warble diffident, betwixt hope and fear,
 and hit imperfect accent here and there. 
then Colin play again, and play sing. 
she, with the fatal love of glory sting,
 hear all in pain: her heart begin to swell;
 in piteous note she sigh, in note which tell
 her bitter anguish. he, still sing, ply
 his limber joint: her sorrow high rise. 
how shall she bear a conqueror, who before
 no equal, through the grove, in music bore? 
she droop, she hang her flag wing, she moan,
 and fetch from her breast melodious groan. 
oppress with grief at last, too great to quell,
 down breathless on the guilty harp she fall. 

then Colin loud lament over the dead,
 and unavailing tear profuse shed,
 and break his wicked string, and curse his skill;
 and, best to make atonement for the ill,
 (if for such ill atonement may be make)
 he build her tomb beneath a laurel shade:
 then add a verse, and set with flower the ground,
 and make a fence of wind osier round:
 a verse and tomb be all i now can give,
 and here thy name at least, he say, shall live. 

thus end Cuddy with the set sun,
 and by his tale unenvied praise win. 
