Studley.

to miss B— F—.

nor Phoebus, nor his tuneful choir,
 to note poetic wake my string:
 a mortal muse demand my lyre,
 o, be she present while i sing! 

to soar aloft, beyond the ken
 of human eye, let other boast:
 it be Betsy that direct my pen;
 my verse, not see by she, be lose. 

no long prate, you critic vain,
 that poet be not make, but bear:
 if Betsy smile upon the strain,
 your censure keen lash i scorn. 

yet be my creep muse to soar,
 sure reason good may still be give:
 Studley be paradise before;
 but betsy presence make it heaven. —

o for a quill pluck from the eagle-wing
 of bright imagination, first of power! 
then may my earth-born muse aspire to sing
 strain not unworthy studley charm bower. 

come, nymph, and with thou, memory, kind maid,
 the sweet remembrancer of pleasure past:
 how there with Betsy hand in hand i stray. 
ay i, such pleasure be too great to last! 

she come, she come! enthrone in F—'s eye,
 she deign to smile on such a wretch as i:
 her foster art its kindly aid supply,
 and from gross film my visual nerve set free. 

conduct i, goddess, to that bless retreat,
 in union fair, where all the grace join;
 where elegance have fix her best-loved seat,
 and taste and nature every power combine. 

and lo! the park first open to the view! 
Mark well its verdant hill, its flowery dell:
 not windsor-forest noble scene can show;
 not Stowe, where Cobham dwell, where temple dwell. 

the curious eye, entranced in wonder, see
 here gurgle streamlet tremble through the shade;
 here nimble squirrel gambol in the tree,
 there bound fawn trip wanton through the glade. 

look back on rippon venerable pile! 
there cloister monk their nightly vesper sing,
 while through the solemn, gloomy, gothic ail,
 the hollow vault responsive echo ring. 

see slope on slope the enchant prospect bind,
 nor know the dubious fancy where to rest:
 new sweet invite above, below, around;
 giddy with rapture, she scarce feel she be bless. 

the gate fly open! Elysium stand confess,
 and burst upon we in a blaze of charm;
 even such a transport throb in damon breast,
 when yield Chloe melt into his arm. 

no more, you gaudy poet, deck with flower
 your fairy garden on the western shore,
 or add fresh bloom to fame alcinous bower;
 vain Greece, thy fable Tempe boast no more. 

whatever creation form, or rule can frame,
 refine or simple, natural or new,
 compound together. can it need a name? 
view studley lawn, and own the picture true. 

where to begin? where end? the labour soul,
 lose and bewilder in a world of sweet,
 vain attempt at once to grasp the whole;
 such various joy its various sense greet. 

ambrosial scent the ravish smell regale;
 each shrub around a balmy odour fling:
 such as arabia spicy grove exhale,
 waft by zephyr on their rosy wing. 

the bird salute we with their artless note,
 the bulfinch, linnet, nightingale, and thrush;
 wild harmony, strain through a thousand throat,
 trill in each tree, and die in every bush. 

proud to adorn the pendent shade it lave,
 see thou that lake its heave bosom swell? 
in headlong sheet pour its enamour wave,
 amid such beauty well content to dwell? 

but other wave to other wave succeed,
 course each other to the seat they love;
 with eager haste they glide along the mead,
 and murmur struggle through the grot above. 

retire from public haunt one structure stand,
 sacred to Comus and his festive train;
 where genial freedom unrestrained command,
 where none be stranger deem but care and pain. 

all elegance and ease, without, within,
 they bid defiance to the frown of fate;
 nor care what man go out, or who come in,
 whirl in the topsy-turvy wheel of state. 

climb we yond lofty summit, crown with wood,
 the quiver poplar, the wide-branching oak,
 the taper fir, the ash, for all thing good. 
long may they, long defy the woodman stroke. 

here rest we then — and each way turn our eye;
 no where our eye a empty chasm can find;
 dome, temple, obelisk at each point arise;
 we half forget the wonder leave behind. 

object at every point our sight invade,
 yet the keen judgement find not where to chide:
 aislabie still call nature to his aid,
 nor make a sacrifice of sense to pride. 

but can we then that ruin, reverend tower,
 leave undistinguished amid the common throng,
 there many a hoary devotee of yore
 awake the skylark with his early song. 

what though the lazy bat and screech owl dire
 reign sole possessor of the gloomy fane? 
soul once be there, in who poetic fire
 beat in each pulse, and glow in every vein. 

observe its moulder base and moss-grown head
 threaten its final dissolution nigh! 
to man what better lesson can be read? 
what moralist can better teach to die? 

ah! let we, ere the fatal die be cast,
 think well (for sure one day think we must)
 that stately studley pride must fall at last,
 and lovely betsy form submit to dust! 
