the progress of dullness.

[part ii.]

it be in a town remote (the place
we leave the reader wise to guess;
for reader wise can guess full well,
what author never mean to tell)

there dwell secure a country-clown,
the wealthy farmer of the town;
though rich by villainy and cheat,
he buy respect by frequent treat;
gain office by constant seek,
squire, captain, deputy and deacon;
great be his power; his pride as arrant:
one only son his heir apparent.
he think the stripling part be quick,
and vow to make a man of Dick;
bless the pert dunce, and praise his look,
and put he early to his book.

more oath than word Dick learn to speak,
and study knavery more than greek;
three year at school, as usual, spend,
then all equip to college go,
and please in prospect, thus bestow
his meditation, as he ride.

"all hail, unvexed with care and strife,
the bliss of academic life;
where kind repose protract the span,
while childhood ripen into man;
where no hard parent dread rage
curb the gay sport of youthful age;
where no vile fear the genius awe
with grim severity of law;
where annual troop of buck come down,
the flower of every neighbour town;
where wealth and pride and riot wait,
and every rogue may find his mate.

far from those wall, from pleasure eye,
let care and grief and labour fly,
the toil to gain the laurel-prize.
that dim the anxious student eye,
the pedant-air of learned look,
and long fatigue of turn book.
let poor, dull rogue, with weary pain,
to college come to mend their brain,
and drudge four year, with grave concern,
how they may wise grow and learn.
be wealth of indolence afraid,
or do wit need pedantic aid?
the man of wealth the world descry,
without the help of learning, wise;
the magic power of gold, with ease,
transform we to what shape we please,
give knowledge bright and courage brave,
and wit, that nature never give.
but nought avail the hoard treasure;
in spend only lie the pleasure.

there vice shall lavish all her charm,
and rapture fold we in her arm,
riot shall court the frolic soul,
and swear crown the sparkle bowl;
while wit shall sport with vast applause,
and scorn the feeble tie of law;
our midnight joy no rule shall bound,
while game and dalliance revel round.
such pleasure youthful year can know,
and school there be, that such bestow.

and oh, that school how great bless,
by fate distinguish from the rest,
who seat be fix on sacred ground,
by Venus 'nunn'ry circle round;
where not, like monk, in durance hard,
from all the joy of love debar,
the solitary youth in pain
for rapture sigh, yet sigh in vain:
but kind occasion prompt desire
and crown the gay, licentious fire,
and pleasure court the son of science,
and whore and muse hold alliance.

not those so bless, for ease and sport,
where wealth and idleness resort,
where free from censure and from shame,
they seek of learning, but the name,
their crime of all degree and size
atone by golden sacrifice:
where kind instructor fix their price,
in just degree on every vice,
and fierce in zeal against wicked course,
demand repentance — of their purse;
till sin, thus tax, produce clear
a copious income every year,
and the fair school thus free from scruple,
thrive by the knavery of their pupil.

even thus the pope, long since have make
of human crime a gainful trade;
keep every please vice for sale,
for cash, by wholesale, or retail.
there, pay the price and the fee,
buy rape, or lie, or what you please,
then sin secure, with firm reliance,
and bid the ten command defiance.

and yet, alas, these happy school
preserve a set of musty rule,
and in their wise progress show,
perfection be not find below.
even there, indulge, in humble station,
learning reside by toleration;
no law forbid the youth to read;
for sense, no torture be decree;
there study injure but the name,
and meet no punishment, but shame. "

thus reason, Dick go forth to find
a college suit to his mind;
but breed in distant wood, the clown
bring all his country-air to town;
the odd address with awkward grace,
that bow with all-averted face;
the half hear compliment, who note
be swallow in the tremble throat;
the stiffen gait, the drawl tone,
by which his native place be know;
the blush, that look, by vast degree,
too much like modesty to please:
the proud display of awkward dress,
that all the country-fop express,
the suit right gay, though much belated,
who fashion superannuate;
the watch, depend far in state,
who iron chain may form a grate;
the silver buckle, dread to view,
overshadow all the clumsy shoe;
the white-gloved hand, that try to peep
from ruffle, full five inch deep;
with fifty odd affair beside,
the foppishness of country-pride.

poor Dick! though first thy air provoke
the obstreperous laugh and scornful joke,
doom all the ridicule to stand,
while each gay dunce shall lend a hand;
yet let not scorn dismay thy hope
to shine a witling and a fop.
bless impudence the prize shall gain,
and bid thou sigh no more in vain.
thy vary dress shall quick show
at once the spendthrift and the beau.
with pert address and noisy tongue,
that scorn the fear of prate wrong,
among listen coxcomb shall thou shine,
and every voice shall echo thy.
as when, disjointed from the stock,
we view with scorn the shapeless block,
the skilful statuary hew we
the wood in any form he choose;
so shall the art of fop in town
from thou smooth off the rugged clown,
the rubbish of thy mien shall clear,
till all the beau in pomp appear.

how bless the brainless fop, who praise
be doom to grace these happy day,
when wellbred vice can genius teach,
and fame be place in folly reach;
impertinence all taste can hit,
and every rascal be a wit.
the low dunce, without despair,
may learn the true sublime, of swear,
learn the nice art of jest obscene,
(while lady wonder what they mean)
the heroism of brazen lung,
the rhetoric of eternal tongue;
while whim usurp the name of spirit,
and impudence take place of merit,
and every moneyed clown and dunce
commence gentleman at once.

for now, by easy rule of trade,
mechanic gentleman be make!
from handicraft of fashion bear;
those very art so much their scorn.
to tailor half themselves they owe,
who make the clothes, that make the beau.

lo! from the seat, where (fop to bless)
learnt artist fix the form of dress,
and sit in consultation grave,
on fold skirt, or straiten sleeve,
the coxcomb trip with sprightly haste,
in all the flush of modern taste:
oft turn, if the day be fair,
to view his shadow graceful air;
wellplease with eager eye run over
the lace suit glitter gay before;
the ruffle, where from open vest
the rubied brooch adorn the breast;
the coat with lengthen waist behind,
who short skirt dangle in the wind;
the modish hat, who breadth contain
the measure of its owner brain;
the stocking gay with silken hue;
the little toe-encircling shoe;
the cane, on who carve top be show
and head just emblem of his own;
while wrap in self, with lofty stride,
his little heart elate with pride,
he strut in all the joy of show,
that tailor give, or beau can know.

and who for beauty need repine,
that be sell at every barber sign;
nor lie in feature or complexion,
but curl dispose in meet direction,
with strong pomatum grateful odour,
and quantum sufficit of powder?
these charm can shed a sprightly grace,
over the dull eye and clumsy face;
while the trim dancing-master art
shall gesture, trip and bow impart,
give the gay piece its final touch,
and lend those air, will lure a Dutchess.

thus shine the form, nor aught behind,
the gift that deck the coxcomb mind;
then hear the dare muse disclose
the sense and piety of beau.

to grace his speech, let France bestow
a set of compliment for show;
land of politeness! that afford
the treasure of newfangled word,
and endless quantity disburse
of bow and compliment and curse:
the soft address, with air so sweet,
that cringe at the lady foot;
the pert, vivacious, playhouse style,
that wake the gay assembly smile;
jest that his brother-beaus may hit,
and pass with young coquette for wit,
and, prize by fop of true discern,
outface the pedantry of learning.
yet learning too shall lend its aid,
to fill the coxcomb spongy head,
and studious oft he shall peruse
the labour of the modern muse.
from endless load of novel gain
soft, simper tale of amorous pain,
with double meaning, neat and handy,
from Rochester and Tristram Shandy. 
the blunder aid of weak review,
that forge the fetter of the muse,
shall give he air of criticise
on fault of book, he never seteye on.
the magazine shall teach the fashion,
and commonplace of conversation,
and where his knowledge fail, afford
the aid of many a sound word.

then lest religion he shall need,
of pious Hume he will learn his creed,
by strong demonstration show,
evince that nothing can be know;
take argument, unvexed by doubt,
on voltaire trust, or go without;
against scripture rail in modern lore,
as thousand fool have rail before:
or please, a nice art display
the expound its doctrine all away,
suit it to modern taste and fashion
by various note and emendation;
the rule the ten command contain,
with new provisos well explain;
prove all religion be but fashion,
beneath the Jewish dispensation,
a ceremonious law, deep-hooded
in type and figure long explode;
its stubborn fetter all unfit
for these free time of gospel-light,
this rake millennium, since the day
when sabbath first be do away;
since shame, the worst of deadly fiend,
on virtue, as its 'squire, attend;
since pandar-conscience hold the door,
and lewdness be a vice no more;
and fool may, swift as crime convey they,
flee to their place, and no man stay they.

alike his poignant with display
the darkness of the former day,
when man the path of duty seek,
and own what revelation teach;
ever human reason grow so bright,
man can see all thing by its light,
and summon scripture to appear,
and stand before its bar severe,
to clear its page from charge of fiction,
and answer plea of contradiction;
ever mystery first be hold in scorn,
or Bolingbroke, or Hume be bear.

and now the fop, with great energy,
level at priestcraft and the clergy,
at holy cant and godly prayer,
and bigot hypocritic air;
muster each veteran jest to aid,
call piety the parson trade;
cry out it be shame, past all abide,
the world shall still be so priestridden;
applaud free thought, that scorn controul,
and generous nobleness of soul,
that act its pleasure, good or evil,
and fear nor deity, nor devil.
these stand topic never fail
to prompt our little wit to rail,
with mimic drollery of grimace,
and please impertinence of face,
against virtue arm their feeble force,
and sound the charge in peal of curse.

bless be his ash! (under ground
if any particle be find)
who, friendly to the coxcomb-race,
first teach these art of commonplace,
these topic fine, on which the beau
may all his little wit bestow,
secure the simple laugh to raise,
and gain the dunce palm of praise.
for where be the theme that beau can hit
with least similitude of wit,
do not religion and the priest
supply material for the jest?
the poor in purse, with metal vile
for current coin, the world beguile;
the poor in brain, for genuine wit
pass off a vile counterfeit;
(while various thus their doom appear,
these lose their soul, and those their ear)
the want of fancy, whim supply,
and native humour, mad caprice;
loud noise for argument go off,
for mirth polite, the ribald scoff;
for sense, lewd droll'ryentertain we,
and wit be mimic by profaneness.

thus betwixt the tailor and the player,
and Hume, and Tristram and Voltaire,
complete in modern trim array.
the clock work-gentleman be make;
as thousand fop ever Dick have shine,
in air, which Dick ever long shall own.

but not immediate from the clown,
he gain this zenith of renown;
slow dawn the coxcomb open ray:
Rome be not finish in a day.
perfection be the work of time;
gradual he mount the height sublime;
first shine abroad with bold grace,
in suit of second-handed lace,
and learn by rote, like studious player,
the fop infinity of air;
till merit, to full ripeness grow,
by constancy attain the crown.

now shall our tale at large proceed
here i may tell, and you may read
at college next how Dick go on,
and prate much and study none;
yet shine with fair, unborrowed ray,
and steer where nature lead the way.
what though each academic science
bid all his effort bold defiance!
what though in algebra his station
be negative in each equation;
though in astronomy survey,
his constant course be retrograde;
over Newton system though he sleep,
and find his wit in dark eclipse!
his talent prove of high price
at all the art of card and dice;
his genius turn, with great skill,
to whist, loo, cribbage and quadrille,
and teach, to every rival shame,
each nice distinction of the game.

as noonday sun, the case be plain,
nature have nothing make in vain.
the blind mole can fly; it be find
his genius lead he under ground;
the man, that be not make to think,
be bear to game, and swear, and drink:
let fop defiance bid to satire,
mind tully rule, and follow nature.

yet here the muse, of Dick, must tell
he shine in active seen as well;
the foremost place in riot hold;
in all the gift of noise excel;
his tongue, the bell, who rattle din will
summon the rake nocturnal synod;
swear with a grace, that seem design
to emulate the infernal kind,
nor only make their realm his due,
but learn, betimes, their language too;
and well expert in art polite,
drink wine by quart to mend his sight,
(for he that drink, till all thing reel,
see double, and that be twice as well)
and ever its force confine his foot,
lead out his mob to scour the street;
make all authority his may game,
and strain his little wit toplague they.
then, every crime atone with ease,
pro meritis receive degree;
and soon, as fortune chance to fall,
his father die and leave he all:
then, bend to gain all modern fashion,
he sail to visit foreign nation,
resolve, by toil unawed to import,
the folly of the british court;
but in his course overlook whatever
be learn or value, rich or rare.

as fire electric draw together
each hair and straw and dust and feather,
the travel dunce collect betimes
the levity of other clime;
and when long toil have give success,
return his native land to bless,
a patriot-fop, that strut by rule,
and knight of all the shire of fool.

the praise of other learning lose,
to know the world be all his boast,
by conduct teach our country-wigeons,
how coxcomb shine in other region,
display his travel air and fashion,
and scoff at college-education. 

whoever at college point his sneer,
prove that himself learn nothing there,
and wise make his honest aim
to pay the mutual debt of shame.

mean while our hero anxious care
be all employ to please the fair;
with vow of love and air polite,
oft sigh at some lady foot;
please, while he thus in form address she,
with his own gracefulness of gesture,
and gaudy flattery, that display
a study elegance of phrase.
so gay at ball the coxcomb shine,
he think the female world his own.
by beauty charm he never be fire;
he flatter where the world admire.
himself (so well he prize desert)
possess his own unrivaled heart;
nor charm, nor chance, nor change can move
the firm foundation of his love:
he heart, so constant and so wise,
pursue what sage old advise,
bid other seek for fame or pelf;
his only study be himself.

yet Dick allow the fair, desert,
nor whole scorn they in his heart;
there be a end (as oft he say)
for which alone the sex be make,
whereto, of nature rule observant,
he strive to render they subservient;
and hold the fair by inclination,
be form exact for their station,
that real virtue never can find
her lodging in a female mind;
quote from pope, in phrase so smart,
that all the sex be "rake at heart,"
and praise mahomet sense, who hold
that woman never be bear with soul.

thus bless, our hero see his name
rank in the foremot list of fame.
what though the learn, the good, the wise,
his light, affect air despise!
what though the fair, of high mind,
with bright thought and sense refine,
who fancy rise on noble wing,
scorn the vain, gilt, gay, noisy thing!
each light coquette spread forth her charm,
and lure the hero to her arm.
for beau and light coquette, by fate
be each design the other mate,
by instinct love, for each may find
it be likeness in the other mind;
then let the wise sort desert they,
for it be a sin to try to part 'they.

nor do the coxcomb-loving climate
to these alone his praise limit.
each gay fop of modern day
allow to Dick the foremost praise,
borrow his style, his air, grimace,
and ape his modish form of dress.
even some, with sense endue, feel hope
and raise ambition to be fop:
but man of sense, it be fix by fate,
be coxcomb but of second rate.
the pert and lively dunce alone
can steer the course that Dick have show;
the lively dunce alone can climb
the summit, where he shine sublime.

but ah! how short the fair name
stand on the slippery steep of fame!
the noble height we be soongiddy on:
the sun never stay in his meridian;
the bright star must quick set;
and Dick have deep run in debt.
now what avail his splendid show,
with all the art, that grace the beau!
not all his oath can dun dismay,
or deadly bailiff fright away;
not all his compliment can bail,
or minuet dance he from the jail.
law not the least respect can give
to the lace coat, or ruffle sleeve.
off fly at once, in sad woe,
the dress and trappings of the beau;
his splendid ornament must fall,
and all be lose; for these be all.

what then remain? in health decline,
by lewdness, luxury and wine,
wear by disease, with purse too shallow,
to lead in fashion, or to follow,
the meteor gaudy light be go;
lone age with hasty step come on;
the charm he once with pride display,
all vanish into empty shade;
and only leave, in tawdry show,
the superannuate beau.
how pale the palsy fop appear,
low-shivring in the vale of year;
the ghost of all his former day,
when folly lend the ear of praise.
and beau with please attention hang
on accent of his chatter tongue.
now all those day of pleasure over,
that chatter tongue must prate no more.
from every place, that bless his hope,
he be elbow out by young fop.
each please thought unknown, that cheer
the sadness of decline year,
in lonely age he sink forlorn,
of all, and even himself, the scorn.

the coxcomb course be wondrous clever,
will health and money last forever,
do conscience never break the charm,
nor fear of future world alarm.

but oh, since youth and year decay,
and life vain folly fleet away,
since age have no respect for beau,
and death the gaudy scene must close,
happy the man, who early bloom
provide for endless year to come;
that learning seek, who useful gain
repay the course of studious pain,
who fame the thankful age shall raise,
and future time repeat its praise;
attain that heart-felt peace of mind,
to all the will of heaven resign,
which calm in youth, the blast of rage,
add sweet hope to sink age,
with value use prolong the breath,
and give a placid smile to death.

then let we scorn the praise that spring
from gaudy, sublunary thing.
hate the vain joy, that vice can claim,
to noble thought exalt our aim,
with ardour seek the immortal prize,
and seize our portion in the sky.
