elegy, to the memory of mr. THOMAS Chatterton, late of Bristol.

how shall my pen make know the sad event,
 how tell the loss, o, earth, by thou sustain;
 in what expression give the tiding vent,
 of which the thought, my soul, so oft have pain? 

why will thou, torture reflection, mad
 each fond idea of the blessing past;
 blessing which only to the anguish add;
 o, do their please efficacy last! 

think of his tender open unfledged year,
 bring to a final crisis here mature:
 as fate have grudge the wonder nature rear,
 bright genius in oblivion to immure. 

weep, nature, weep, the mighty loss bewail,
 the wonder of our droop isle be dead;
 o, can but tear or plaintive sigh avail,
 by night and day will i bedew my bed. 

o, give his memory reverential due,
 his worth a tributary tear demand:
 still hold his many virtue in your view,
 then must a free-will offer escape your hand. 

have but his tender bud genius thrive,
 still bloom on, spite of the frosty blast;
 till ripen into manhood still survive,
 the fruit full ripe — how rich the sweet repast! 

 before vital utterance can scarce transpire,
 his infant lip evince a manly soul;
 predict that heroic mental fire,
 which reign supreme within the mighty whole. 

friendship cement by the slight tie,
 full hardly brook the intervene cause
 that separate the friend we light prise,
 burst the bond of friendship sacred law. 

then how can i but feel the dire effect,
 where infancy begin the social tie,
 which still increase, void of the least defect,
 as each revolve year do multiply. 

though great the loss to i — heaven know how great! 
be it but individual know,
 i will not vain thus repine at fate,
 but providential justice ever own. 

o, that be not all — my country feel the stroke,
 the public good be ever in his view,
 his pen his lofty sentiment bespeak,
 nor fear he virtuous freedom to pursue. 

yes, liberty! thy fair, thy upright cause,
 he dare defend, spite of despotic force,
 to crush his much-loved country wholesome law,
 its noble constitution only source. 

you muse, leave your florid airy smile,
 and thou, mercurial Euphrosyne,
 forget thy wanton crank and amorous wile,
 to sympathize with sad Melpomene. 

your pride be fall — your chief, your great support,
 lie moulder to his own primaeval dust:
 to you, while live, ever be his court,
 dead, in return, let not his memory rust. 

what ease within his sweeten number flow,
 what symmetry each well-penned line evince;
 such just connection on each verse bestow
 even envy, of his worth, must stand convince. 

his lofty number how sublime great! 
lift the ravish sense to height supreme,
 again with fancy paint woe elate,
 he show the passion of the tragic theme. 

sharp visaged satire own he as her lord,
 exclusive of her handmaid in her train,
 ill-nature, curse attendant of the board
 of those who stigmatise mankind for gain. 

not so with he — he paint each reign vice
 in strong colour of their genuine hue! 
sweeten the bitter draught with savoury spice,
 the moral picture relish the view. 

o, can my pen but catch his livid fire,
 hear thou my invocation, mighty dead! 
my infant muse with life mature inspire,
 thy shade may dictate, though the substance flee. 

antiquity, bewail his cruel sit,
 he pay thy hoary head the reverence due;
 thy value act revive out of date,
 recall age past to present view. 

to truth long dead, he give a second birth,
 rescue from oblivion occult store:
 treasure within the bowel of the earth,
 unheeded by the vulgar mind — explore. 

most strange! idea of so vast extent
 can ever within his tender mind reside,
 no art or science but some influence lend,
 his intellectual part to make more wide. 

why, fancy, will thou paint he to my eye,
 why form the fond idea in my mind;
 o, can thou but some plastic mean devise,
 the substance with the shadow still to find. 
