the air balloon.

no more of phaeton let poet tell,
 i care not where he drive nor where he fall;
 no more i will wish for fame aurora car,
 to drive i forth, high as the morning star;
 in air balloon to distant realm i go,
 "and leave the gaze multitude below." 

no more i will hear of Venus and her dove,
 nor Cupid fly with the little love;
 nor will i now in Juno chariot ride
 in princely pomp, with peacock by my side;
 in high state, in air balloon i go,
 i will have the god and goddess to know. 

no more in oriental language fair
 i will read of genii waft through the air;
 nor long will i seek (by persian wrought)
 a carpet, to transport i by a thought;
 enough for i in air balloon to go,
 and leave the inquire multitude below. 

no more of Pegasus (unruly steed)
 to reach parnassus mount, shall i have need;
 nor will i now the muse favour court,
 to show i pindus hill, their chief resort;
 to these fair realm in air balloon i go,
 and leave the grovel multitude below. 

no more shall fancy now (betwitch fair!) 
erect i castle, float in the air;
 such vague, such feeble structure i despise,
 i will kick they down as i ascend the sky;
 for high far in air balloon i go,
 and leave the wonder multitude below. 

no long, now, at distance need i try
 to trace each planet with perspective eye;
 nor long wish, with fairy from afar;
 to slide i gentle down on fall star;
 for up or down with equal ease i steer,
 and view with naked eye the splendid sphere. 

alas poor Newton! late for learning fame,
 no more shall thy research ever be name;
 for great newton now each day shall soar,
 high up to heaven, and new world explore;
 since swift, in air balloon, aloft we go,
 and leave the stupid multitude below. 

no more the terror of the deep i fear;
 alike to i, if friend be far or near;
 this sea-girt isle i distant leave behind,
 visit each kingdom and survey mankind;
 for now with ease in air balloon i ride,
 no more compel to wait for wind or tide. 

hail, happy lover! late by distance curse,
 (of all the worldly torture sure the worst)
 no more condemn a absence to deplore,
 and, sigh, breathe your vow from shore to shore;
 for through the air, swift in balloon you roll,
 "and waft yourself from India to the pole." 

in vain may party rage assail my ear;
 if war or peace, alike i be free from care;
 shall plague or pestilence insect the land,
 the pure region be at my command;
 where safe from harm, in air balloon i go,
 and leave the sickly multitude below. 

no more of judge or jury will i hear,
 the law of land extend not to the air;
 nor bailiff now my spirit can affright,
 for up i mount, and soon be out of sight;
 thus, screen from justice, in balloon i go,
 and leave the insolvent multitude below. 

how few the worldly evil now i dread,
 no more confine this narrow earth to tread:
 shall fire, or water, spread destruction drear,
 or earthquake shake this sublunary sphere,
 in air balloon to distant realm i fly,
 and leave the creep world to sink and die. 
