epistle to the reverend mr. Catcott.

what strange infatuation rule mankind! 
how narrow be our prospect, how confine! 
with universal vanity possess,
 we fond think our own idea best:
 our totter argument be ever strong;
 we be always self-sufficient in the wrong. 

what philosophic sage of pride austere
 can lend conviction a attentive ear? 
what pattern of humility and truth
 can bear the jeer ridicule of youth? 
what blush author ever rank his muse
 with fowler poet-laureate of the stew? 
dull penny, nod over his wooden lyre,
 conceit the vapour of Geneva fire. 
all in the language of Apostles cry,
 if angel contradict i, angel lie? 
as all have interval of ease and pain,
 so all have interval of be vain;
 but some of folly never shift the scene,
 or let one lucid moment intervene;
 dull single act of many-footed prose
 their tragi-comedys of life compose;
 incessant mad for a system toy
 the great of creation blessing cloy;
 their sense dose a continual dream,
 they hang enrapture over the hideous scheme:
 so virgin totter into ripe three score,
 their great likeness in baboon adore. 

when you advance new system, first unfold
 the various imperfection of the old;
 prove nature hitherto a gloomy night,
 you the first focus of primaeval light. 
it be not enough you think your system true,
 the busy world will have you prove it too:
 then, rise on the ruin of the rest,
 plain demonstrate your idea best. 
many be best; one only can be right
 though all have inspiration to indite. 

some this unwelcome truth perhaps will tell,
 where clogher stumble, Catcott fair fall. 
writer on roll of science long renowned
 in one fell page be tumble to the ground. 
we see their system unconfuted still;
 but Catcott can confute they — if he will. 
will you the honour of a priest mistrust
 a excommunication prove he just. 

can Catcott from his better sense be draw
 to bow the knee to baal sacred lawn? 
a mitred rascal to his long-eared flock
 give ill example, to his wh—s, the p-x
 yet we must reverence sacerdotal black,
 and saddle all his fault on nature back. 
but hold, there be solid reason to revere;
 his lordship have six thousand pound a year;
 in game solitude he spend the night,
 he fast at Arthur and he pray at White;
 roll over the pavement with his swiss-tailed six,
 at White the Athanasian creed for trick. 
whilst the poor curate in his rusty gown
 trudge unnoticed through the dirty town. 

if god make order, order never make
 these nice distinction in the preach trade. 
the servant of the devil be revere,
 and bishop pull the father by the beard. 
yet in these horrid form salvation live,
 these be religion representative;
 yet to these idol must we bow the knee —
 excuse i, Broughton, when i bow to thou. 
but sure religion can produce at least,
 one minister of god — one honest priest. 

search nature over, procure i, if you can,
 the fancy character, a honest man
 (a man of sense, not honest by constraint
 for fool be canvas, live but in paint)
 to Mammon, or to superstition slave,
 all order of mankind be fool, or knave:
 in the first attribute by none surpass,
 Taylor endeavour to obtain the last. 

imagination may be too confine;
 few see too far; how many be half blind? 
how be your feeble argument perplex
 to find out meaning in a senseless text? 
you rack each metaphor upon the wheel,
 and word can philosophic truth conceal. 
what Paracelsus humoured as a jest,
 you realize to prove your system best. 
may we not, Catcott, then infer from hence,
 your zeal for scripture have devour your sense? 
apply the glass of reason to your sight,
 see nature marshal oozy atom right. 
think for yourself, for all mankind be free;
 we need not inspiration how to see. 
if scripture contradictory you find,
 be orthodox, and own your sense blind. 

how blind be their optic, who aver,
 what inspiration dictate can err. 
whence be this boast inspiration send,
 which make we utter truth, we never mean? 
which couch system in a single word,
 at once deprave, abstruse, sublime, absurd. 

what Moses tell we might perhaps be true,
 as he be learn in all the egyptian know. 

but to assert that inspiration give,
 the copy of philosophy in heaven,
 strike at religion root, and fair sell
 the awful terror of ten thousand hell. 
attentive search the scripture and you will find
 what vulgar error be with truth combine. 
your torture truth, which Moses seem to know,
 he can not unto inspiration owe;
 for if from god one error you admit,
 how dubious be the rest of holy write? 

what knotty difficulty fancy solve? 
the heaven irradiate, and the earth revolve;
 but here imagination be allow
 to clear this voucher from its mantling cloud:
 from the same word we different meaning quote,
 as David wear a many colour coat. 

o inspiration, ever hide in night,
 reflect various each adjacent light;
 if Moses catch thou in the part flood;
 if David find thou in a sea of blood;
 if Mahomet with slaughter drench thy soil,
 on load ass bear off thy spoil;
 if thou have favour pagan, Turk, or Jew,
 say have not Broughton inspiration too? 
such rank absurdity debase his line,
 i almost can have swear he copy thy. 

confute with candour, where you can confute,
 reason and arrogance but poor suit. 
yourself may fall before some able pen,
 infallibility be not for man. 
with modest diffidence new scheme indite,
 be not too positive, though in the right. 
what man of sense will value vulgar praise,
 or rise on penny prose, or dull lay? 
though point finger mark the man of fame,
 and literary grocer chant your name;
 though in each tailor book-case Catcott shine,
 with ornamental flower and gild line;
 though youthful lady who by instinct scan
 the natural philosophy of man,
 can every reason of your work repeat,
 as sand in Africa retain the heat:
 yet check your flow pride: will all allow
 to wreathe the labour laurel round your brow? 
some may with seem argument dispense,
 tickle your vanity to wound your sense:
 but Clayfield censure, and demonstrate too,
 your theory be certain untrue;
 on reason and newtonian rule he prove,
 how distant your machine from either move. 
but my objection may be reckon weak,
 as nothing but my mother tongue i speak;
 else will i ask; by what immortal power
 all nature be dissolve as in a hour. 
how, when the earth acquire a solid state,
 and rise mountain see the wave abate,
 each particle of matter seek its kind,
 all in a strata regular combine? 
when instantaneous the liquid heap
 harden to rock, the barrier of the deep,
 why do not earth unite a stony mass;
 since stony filament through all must pass? 
if on the wing of air the planet run,
 why be they not impel into the sun? 
philosophy, nay common sense, will prove
 all passive with their active agent move. 
if the diurnal motion of the air,
 revolve the planet in their destine sphere;
 how be the secondary orb impel? 
how be the moon from fall headlong hold? 

it be the eternal fiat you reply;
 and who will give eternity the lie? 
i own the awful truth, that god make all,
 and by his fiat world and system fall. 
but study nature; not a atom there
 will unassisted by her power appear;
 the fiat, without agent, be, at best,
 for priestcraft or for ignorance a vest. 

some fancy god be what we nature call,
 be itself material, all in all. 
the fragment of the deity we own,
 be vulgar as various matter know. 
no agent can assist creation birth:
 we trample on our god, for god be earth. 
it be past the power of language to confute
 this latitudinary attribute. 

how lofty must imagination soar,
 to reach absurdity unknown before? 
thanks to thy pinion, Broughton, thou have bring
 from the moon orb a novelty of thought. 
restrain, o Muse, thy unaccomplished line,
 fling not thy saucy satire at divine;
 this single truth thy brother bard must tell;
 thou have one excellence, of rail well. 
but disputation be befit those
 who settle hebrew point, and scold in prose. 

o learning, where be all thy fancy joy
 thy empty pleasure and thy solemn toy? 
proud of thy own importance; though we see
 we have little reason to be proud of thou:
 thou putrid foetus of a barren brain,
 thou offspring illegitimate of pain. 

tell i, sententious mortal, tell i whence
 you claim the preference to man of sense?
 — want learn; see the letter throng
 banter his english in a latin song. 
oxonian sage hesitate to speak
 their native language, but declaim in greek. 
if in his jest a discord shall appear,
 a dull lampoon be innocent clear. 
you classic dunce, self-sufficient fool,
 be this the boast justice of your school?
 — have part; part which will set aside
 the labour acquisition of your pride;
 uncultivated now his genius lie,
 instruction see his latent beauty rise;
 his gold be bullion, you debase with brass,
 impress with folly head to make it pass. 

but — swear so loud, so indiscreet,
 his thunder rattle through the listen street:
 you rigid christian, formal severe,
 blind to his charity, his oath you hear;
 observe his virtue: calumny must own
 a noble soul be in his action show;
 though dark this bright original you paint,
 i will rather be a — than a saint. 

excuse i, Catcott, if from you i stray,
 the muse will go where merit lead the way;
 the owl of learning may admire the night,
 but — shine with reason glow light. 

still admonition press to my pen,
 the infant Muse will give advice to man. 
but what avail it, since the man i blame
 own no superior in the path of fame? 
in spring, in mountain, stratum, mine, and rock,
 Catcott be every notion orthodox. 
if to think otherwise you claim pretence,
you be a detest heretic in sense. 
but oh! how lofty your idea roar,
 in show wonder cit the fossil store! 
the lady be quite ravish, as he tell
 the short adventure of the pretty shell;
 miss Biddy sicken to indulge her touch,
 madam more prudent think it will seem too much;
 the door fly open, instant he draw
 the sparry lood, and wonder of applause;
 the full dress lady see with envy eye
 the sparkle of her diamond pendant die;
 sage natural philosopher adore
 the fossil whimsy of the numerous store. 
but see! the purple stream begin to play,
 to show how fountain climb the hilly way. 
hark what a murmur echo through the throng. 
god! that the pretty trifle shall be wrong! 
experience in the voice of reason tell
 above its surface water never swell. 

where be the priestly soul of Catcott now? 
see what a triumph sit upon his brow:
 and can the poor applause of thing like these,
 who soul and sentiment be all disease,
 raise little triumph in a man like you,
 Catcott, the foremost of the judge few? 
so at llewellins your great brother sit,
 the laughter of his tributary wit;
 rule the noisy multitude with ease,
 empty his pint and sputter his decree. 
