fragment of a poem.

gloomy and still be the broad solemn deep,
 who roll tide for twice a hundred year,
 have lash the rugged wall of tora tower,
 the strong abode of curdmore haughty king. 
its frown battlement overhang the sea,
 where in the fair serene of summer day,
 each answer tower a nether heaven do meet,
 and cast its picture shadow on the wave. 
but now, no mild blue sky in gentle grandeur,
 do lend its azure cover to the main,
 soften the most majestic work of nature,
 nor even a sunbeam through the rift cloud,
 glance on the distant wave. 
dull heavy cloud hang in the low air,
 misty and shapeless, like the humid chaos,
 ere god divide it and call it water. 
the creature of the deep forget their prey,
 leave the upper wave to seek the bottom;
 the flock sea-fowl homeward bend their flight,
 in dusky band to caverned rock or cliff. 
a deadly calm reign in the stately wood,
 that hang aloft upon the hardy shore;
 the mingle music of the forest cease
 before the day have run its wonted term,
 yet bird of night forget their twilight song,
 and every creature, whether fierce or tame,
 skulk in its hole, seize with unwonted fear. 

nor be that creature style the lord of earth
 without his fear: that secret worst of fear,
 the mind unknowing what it have to dread. 
fence in the seem safety of his home,
 man sometime-haughty spirit sink within he,
 and dark uncertainty of ill unseen
 increase the somber gloom of tora hall. 
the sullen watch do lean upon their arm,
 with quicken breath half-checked and listen ear,
 in expectation of some unknown thing. 
each smother in his breast his untold fear,
 and wish within himself the hour may speed,
 but that the night with tenfold horror come,
 to close the frightful day. 
no cheerful converse grace the evening board,
 slow go the goblet round, each face be grave;
 and ere the first dark watch fulfil its term,
 all be retire to rest in tora hall. 

sleep come, and close full many a weary eye,
 but not that gentle kindly visitor,
 that ofttimes bring to the poor man cot,
 more wealth than ever enjoy his haughty lord;
 or to the couch of the deject lover
 bring true love-knot, and kind remembrance,
 and cheer glance, make he by night
 the favour man he fain will be by day;
 nor yet that haggard tyrant of the night,
 who come ofttimes to shake the ill man bed,
 tear he from his heap of silk and down,
 to hang his quiver carcase over the gulf,
 or through the air by foul fiend goad on,
 bear he with dizzy, furious speed along;
 but she, stiff shroud in her black weed,
 and swathe with leaden band, awful and still,
 who by the couch of the condemn wretch,
 harass and spend, before the morning break,
 who set sun he never shall behold,
 oft take her stand, and scarce be know from death. 

but still the red lamp, pendent from the roof,
 do cast its tremble and unjoyous light
 athwart the lofty chamber of the king;
 for he alone feel not her weighty power. 
a load of care lie heavy at his heart;
 his thoughtful eye be bend upon the ground;
 and the unsuiting gravity of age,
 have sad sober over his cheek of youth,
 that new blush beneath a gall crown. 

long have his warlike father rule the land,
 who vengeful bloody sword no scabbard know. 
wild be his fury in the field of battle,
 and dreadful be his wrath to nation round,
 but kind and glow yearn his manly heart,
 to the brave hardy son of his blue hill. 
he own a friend and brother of the field,
 in each broad-chested brawny warrior,
 who follow to the fight his dare step. 
one deed of fame, do by a son of Curdmore,
 he prize more than the wealth of peaceful realm,
 and deal they death and ruin in his love. 
unshaped and rude the state, and know no law,
 save that plain sense which nature give to all,
 of right and wrong within the monarch breast;
 and when no storm of passion shake his soul,
 it be a court of mild equity. 

one distant nation only in the field,
 can meet his boast arm with equal strength. 
impetuous, rush from their mountain rude,
 oft have they strive like two adverse wind,
 that burst from their pent and narrow glen,
 on the wide desert meet, — in wild contention
 toss aloft in air dun cloud of sand,
 tear the blast herbage from its bed,
 and bloat the clear face of beauteous heaven
 with the dissever fragment of the earth,
 till spend their force, low growl they retire,
 and for a time within their cavern keep,
 gather new force with which they issue forth
 to rage and roar again. — so hold they strife. 
but even while corvan glory in his might,
 death come and lay he low. 

his spear be hang high in the somber hall,
 who lofty wall with darken armour clad,
 speak to the valiant of depart hero,
 a fellow now to those which rest ungrasped,
 unburnish, and know no master hand. 
a hardy people, scatter over the hill,
 and wild uncultivated plain of Curdmore,
 depend more upon tomorrow chace,
 than on the scanty produce of their field,
 where the proud warrior, as debase by toil,
 throw down unwilling his boast weapon,
 to mar the mossy earth with his rude tillage,
 bedding his dwarfish grain in track less deep,
 than he will plough the bosom of a foe;
 a people rude but generous now look up,
 with wistful and expect eye, to allener,
 the son of their belove, their only hope. 
the general burden, though but new to care,
 be lay on he. his heart within he whisper
 that he be leave in rough and perilous time,
 like elder brother of a needy race,
 to watch and care for all, and it be thoughtful;
 somber and thoughtful as unjoyous age. 
but never have he feel his mind so dark,
 as in this heavy and mysterious hour. 

with droop head and arm cross over his breast,
 his spirit all collect in itself,
 as it have cease to animate the body,
 he sit, when like pen air from a dank cave,
 he feel a cold and shiver wind pass over he,
 and from his sink bosom raise his head. 
a thick and mazy mist have fill the chamber,
 through which the feeble lamp its blue flame show
 with a pale moony circlet compass round,
 as when the star through dank unwholesome air
 show through the night their blunt head, enlarge,
 foretell plague to some affright land. 
when, lo! a strange light, break through the gloom,
 strike his astonish mind with awe and wonder. 
it rise before he in a streamy column,
 as, see upon the dim benight ocean,
 by partial moonbeam through some sever cloud,
 the tower, wan, majestic waterspout
 delight and awe the wonder mariner. 

soul-awed within himself shrink curdmore king;
 thick beat his flutter heart against his breast,
 as towards he the move light approach,
 while open by degree its beamy side,
 a mighty phantom show his awful form,
 gigantic, far above the son of man. 
a robe of watery blue in wreathy fold,
 do light float over his majestic limb:
 firm in their strength more than be ever picture,
 of fable hero in their field of war. 
one hand be wide outstretchd in threaten act,
 as if to draw down vengeance from the sky,
 the other, spread upon his ample breast,
 seem to betoken what restrain its fellow. 
thus far to mortal eye he stand reveal,
 but misty vapour shroud all above,
 save that a ruddy glow do oft break through
 with hasty flash, accord with the vehemence
 and agitation of the form beneath,
 speak the terror of that countenance,
 the friendly darkness veil. 
commotion strange disturb the heave earth. 
a hollow muffle rumble from beneath,
 roll deep in its dark and secret course. 
the castle tremble on its rocky base;
 and loosen fragment from the nod tower,
 fall on the flinty ground with hideous crash. 
the burst gate against the portal ring,
 and window clatter in their tremble wall;
 and as the phantom tread, far echo loud,
 the smite pavement give a fearful sound. 
he stop, the tremble wall their motion cease,
 the earth be still; he raise his awful voice. 

 "thou creature, set over creature like thyself,
 to bear the rule for a appoint season,
 bethink thou well, and commune with thy heart. 
if one man blood can mark the unblest front,
 and visit with extreme of inward pang
 the dark breast of the secret murderer,
 can thou have strength all single in thyself,
 to bear the blood of thousand on thy head,
 and wrong which cry to heaven and shall be hear? 
king to the slaughter lead their people forth,
 and home return again with thin band,
 bear to every house its share of mourning,
 while high in air they hang their trophy spoil,
 and call themselves the hero of the earth. 

 "thy race be stain with blood: such be thy father:
 but they be pass away and have their place,
 and thou still breathe in thy weed of clay,
 therefore to thou their doom be veil in night. 
yet may thou be assure, that mighty power
 who give to thou thy form of breathe flesh,
 of such like creature as thyself endow,
 although innumerable on this earth,
 do knowledge take, and care for the least,
 and will prepare his vengeance for the man
 who wasteful pride uproot what he have sow. 
and now he set two path before thy choice,
 which be permit thou: even thou thyself
 may fix thy doom, — a doom which can change. 
will thou draw out secure on thy throne
 a life of such content and happiness
 as thy wild country and rude people yield,
 lay thou late to rest in peaceful age,
 where thy forefather sleep; thy name respect,
 thy child after thou to fill thy seat? 
or will thou, as thy secret thought incline,
 across the untried deep conduct thy band,
 attack the foe on their unguarded coast,
 overcome their strength at little cost of blood,
 and raise thy trophy on a distant shore,
 where none of all thy race have footing gain, —
 gain for Curdmore wealth, and power, and fame,
 but not that better gain, content and happiness? 
wealth, power, renown, thou may for Curdmore earn,
 but may not live to see her rise state:
 for far from hence, upon that hostile shore,
 a sepulchre which own no kindred bone,
 gape to receive thou in the pride of youth. 
this be the will of heaven: then choose thy fate,
 weak son of earth, i leave thou to thy trouble;
 a little while shall make we more alike,
 a spirit shall thou be when next we meet. 

it vanish. black mist thicken where it stand. 
a hollow sound wind rush through the chamber,
 and rend in twain the deep embody darkness
 which, curl round in many a pitchy volume,
 on either side, do slow roll away,
 like two huge wave of death. 

and now the wave banner of the castle,
 in early breath of morn begin to play,
 and faint through the lofty window look
 the doubtful grey-light on the silent chamber
 sleep deadly heaviness flee with the night,
 and light airy fancy of the dawn
 confuse float in the half-waked mind,
 till rouse with full beam of powerful light,
 up spring the dreamer from their easy bed,
 and see with a relieve and thankful heart,
 the fair blue sky, the uncapped distant hill,
 the wood, and stream, and valley brighten glad,
 in the bless light of heaven. 

but neither hill, nor vale, nor wood, nor stream,
 nor yet the sun high ride in his strength,
 that beauty give to all, cheer allener,
 who wist not when it rise, nor when it set. 
silent but trouble in his lofty chamber
 two day he sit and shun the search eye,
 the sidelong look of many a friendly chief. 
oft in his downcast eye the round tear hang,
 while by his side he clench his tremble hand,
 as if to rouse the ardour of his soul. 
his seat beneath he shake, — high heave his breast,
 and burst the brace of its tighten vestment. 
the change passion of his trouble soul
 pass with dark speed across his vary face;
 each pass shadow follow by a brother,
 like cloud across the moon in a wild storm:
 so war his doubtful mind, till by degree
 the storm subside, calm thought prevail;
 slow wear the gloom away like morning mist;
 a gleam of joy spread over his lighten visage,
 and from his eye-ball shoot that vivid fire,
 which kindle in the bosom of the brave,
 when the loud trumpet call they forth to battle. 
 "Gird on my armour," say the rise youth,
 "i be the son of corvan!" 
