a satire in the manner of Persius, in a dialogue between Atticus and Eugenio.

by the late lord Hervey.

Atticus.

why wear my pensive friend that gloomy brow?
say, whence proceed the imaginary woe?
what prosperous villain have thou meet today?
or have afflict virtue cross thy way?
be it some crime unpunished you deplore,
or right subvert by injurious power?
be this or that the cause, it be wise do
to make the sorrow of mankind your own:
to see the injure plead unredressed,
the proud exalt, and the meek oppress,
can hurt thy health, and rob thou of thy rest.
your care be in a hopeful way to cease,
if you must find perfection to find peace.
but reck thy malice, vent thy stifle rage,
inveigh against the time and lash the age. —
perhaps just recent from the court you come,
over public ill to ruminate at home:
say, which of all the wretch thou have see
have throw a morsel to thy hungry spleen?
what worthless member of that medley throng,
who base act, or tame suffer wrong?
he, who to nothing but his interest true,
cajole the fool he be work to undo:
or that more despicable timorous slave,
who know himself abuse, yet hug the knave?
perhaps you mourn our senate sink fame,
that show of freedom dwindle to a name:
where hireling judge deal their venal law,
and the best bidder have the just cause;
what then?
they have the power, and who shall dare to blame
the legal wrong that bear astraea name?
beside, such thought shall never stir the rage
of youthful gall; — reflection come with age:
it be our decay life autumnal fruit,
the bitter produce of our late shoot,
when every blossom of the tree be dead,
enjoyment wither, and our wish flee:
thy still be in its spring, on every bough
fair plenty bloom, and youthful odour blow;
season of joy, too early to be wise,
the time to covet pleasure, not despise:
you be a age when trifle ought to please,
too soon for reason to attack thy ease.
though soon the hour shall come, when thou shall know
it be vain fruition will, and empty show.
but late examine, late inspect mankind,
if see pain, it be prudence to be blind.
let not their vice yet employ thy thought,
laugh at their folly, ere you weep their fault:
and when (as sure you must) at length you find
what thing man be, resolve to arm your mind.
too nice never their demerit scan,
and of their virtue make the most you can.
silent avert the mischief they intend,
and cross, but seem not to discern, their end:
if they prevail, submit, for prudence lie
in suffer well. — it be equal unwise,
to see the injury we will resent,
and mourn the evil which we can prevent.

Eugenio.

you counsel well to bid i arm my mind.
will the receipt be easy, as it be kind;
but hard it be for misery to reach
that fortitude prosperity can teach.
can i forbid what have be to have be,
or lodge a doubt on truth myself have see;
can i divest remembrance of her store,
and say, collect these image no more;
can i dislodge sensation from my breast,
and charm her wakeful faculty to rest;
can i my nature and myself subdue,
i may the method you prescribe pursue.
but if unfeigned affliction we endure,
if reason our disease, and not our cure,
then seem ease be all we can obtain;
as one, who long familiarise to pain,
still feel the smart, but cease to complain.
though young in life, yet long inure to care,
thus i submissive every evil bear:
if unexpected ill alone be hard,
i shall be light, who be for all prepare:
no disappointment can my peace annoy,
disuse have wean i from all hope of joy:
the vain pursuit for ever i give over,
repulse i strive, betray i trust no more:
mankind i know, their nature, and their art,
their vice their own, their virtue but a part;
ill play so oft, that all the cheat can tell,
and dangerous only where it be act well.
in different class range, a different name
attend their practice, but the heart be the same.
their hate be interest, interest too their love,
on the same spring these different engine move:
that sharpen malice, and direct her sting,
and thence the honeyed stream of flattery spring.

long i suspect what at last i know:
i think man worthless, now i have prove they so;
reluctant prove it, by too sure a rule,
i learn my science in a painful school.
he buy even wisdom at too dear a price,
who pay my sad experience to be wise.
why do i hope, by sanguine view possess,
that virtue harbour in a human breast?
why do i trust to flattery specious wile,
the April sunshine of her transient smile?
why disbelieve the lesson of the wise,
that teach i young to pierce her thin disguise?
i think their rancour, not their prudence, speak,
that age perverse in false invective break;
i think their comment on this gaudy scene
the effect of phlegm, and dictate by spleen;
that jealous of the joy themselves be past,
their envy try to pall their child taste:
like the deaf adder to the charmer tongue,
i give no credit to the truth they sing;
but, happy in a visionary scheme,
still seek companion worthy my esteem:
the tongue, the heart interpreter i deem,
and judge of what man be by what they seem;
i think each warm professor mean i fair,
each supple sycophant a friend sincere.
the solemn hypocrite, who close design
mirth never interrupt, nor love, nor wine,
who talk on any secret but his own,
collect all, communicate none;
who still attentive to what other say,
observe to wound, or question to betray;
of he as guardian of my private thought,
in morning counsel cool resolve i seek;
to he still open, cautious consign
the inmost treasure of my secret mind;
my joy, and grief delight to impart,
in sacred confidence unmixed with art;
that dangerous pleasure of the honest heart!
whenever i purpose to unbend my soul
in social banquet, where the circle bowl
to gladness lift all sorrow but despair,
and give a transient Lethe to our care;
i choose the man who talent entertain
and season converse with a lively strain;
who thoughtless still, by hope, nor fear perplex,
enjoy the present hour, and risque the next.
these not the luxury of slothful ease,
soft downy bed, nor balmy slumber please;
while wakeful king on purple couch own
the secret sorrow of their envy crown,
and wait revolve light, with short rest
than even those wretch by their power oppress:
this jocund train, devote to delight,
in cheerful vigil still protract the night,
nor dread the care approach with the day;
through each vicissitude for ever gay.
with such i commune, please that i can find
recess so grateful to the active mind:
and while the youth in sprightly contest try,
with humorous tale, or apposite reply,
or amorous song, or inoffensive jest,
(the test of wit) to glad the lengthen feast;
my soul, say i, depend upon their truth,
for fraud inhabit not the breast of youth;
indulge thy genius here, be free, be safe,
mirth be their aim, they covet but to laugh;
pure from deceit, as ignorant of care,
their friendship, and their joy be both sincere.
i judge their nature, like their humour good;
as if the soul depend on the blood;
and that the seed of honesty must grow
wherever health reside, or spirit flow.
i see my error: but i see too late:
it be vain inspection to look back on fate. —
what be the man who most esteem we find,
but such who vice be the most refine?
blind preference! for vice like poison show,
the sure death be in the subtle dose. —
to such reflection when i turn my mind,
i loath my being, and abhor mankind.
what joy for truth, what commerce for the just,
if all our safety found on distrust;
if all our wisdom be a mean deceit,
and he who prosper but the able cheat!

Atticus.

o early wise! how well have thou define
the worth, the joy, the friendship of mankind!

Eugenio.

bless be the power, i know their abject state.

Atticus.

yet bear with this, and hope a better fate.
thrice happy they, who view with stable eye
the shift scene, who temperate, firm, and wise,
can bear its sorrow, and its joy despise;
who look on disappointment, shock, and strife,
and all the consequential ill of life,
not as severity the god impose,
but easy term indulgent heaven allow
to man, by short probation to obtain
immortal recompense for transient pain.
the intent of heaven thus right understand,
from every evil we extract a good:
this truth divine implant in the heart,
support each drudge mortal through his part;
give a delightful prospect to the blind;
the friendless thence a constant succour find:
the wretch by fraud betray, by power oppress,
with this restorative still soothe his breast;
this suffer virtue cheer, this pain beguile,
and deck calamity herself in smile.
when Mead and friend have ransack every rule,
teach in hippocrates and galen school,
to quiet ill that mock the leech art,
which opiate fail to deaden in the heart,
this cordial still the incurable sustain:
he triumph in the sharp instructive pain,
nor like a roman hero, false great,
with impious hand anticipate his fate;
but wait resign the slow approach of death;
till that great power who give, demand his breath.
such be thy solid comfort, love divine,
such solid comfort, o my friend, be thy.
on this firm basis thy foundation lay,
of happiness unsubject to decay.
on man no more, that frail support, depend,
the kind patron, or the warm friend;
the warm friend may one day prove untrue,
and interest change the kind patron view.
hear not, my friend, the fondness they profess,
nor on the trial grieve to find it less:
with patience each capricious change endure;
careful to merit where reward be sure.
to providence implicit resign,
let this grand precept poise thy waver mind:
with partial eye we view our own weak cause,
and rash scan her upright equal law:
for undeserved she never inflict a woe,
nor be her recompense unsure, though slow.
unpunished none transgress, deceive none trust,
her rule be fix, and all her way be just.
