aminta and Delia.

a pastoral.

aminta.

thou, gentle maid, may every muse inspire,
 and Phoebus bless thou with poetic fire;
 may thy soft number every bosom warm,
 melt into love, and into softness charm,
 around our peaceful plain thy praise be spread,
 and wreath of laurel crown thy youthful head. 

Delia.

may every grace and bloom charm be thy,
 and the dear joy of peace and friendship i:
 aminta still my grateful heart shall share,
 though love philander image triumph there. 

aminta.

i gentle Damon love, nor love in vain,
 with joy i hear the charm youth complain;
 he! only he, to tenderness can move,
 melt my soft soul, and charm i into love:
 in vain i will my secret pain disguise,
 he read my passion in my artless eye. 

Delia.

from fair to fair the gay Philander rove,
 sigh without cause, and for a moment love;
 the charm wanderer no more i fear,
 for i he feel the tender flame sincere. 

aminta.

soft as the breeze which fan the silent grove,
 be damon accent when he talk of love;
 too well my fond consent look reveal
 the tender passion i will fain conceal:
 whenever i hear the lovely youth complain,
 my sigh and blush speak a equal flame. 

Delia.

with skilful hand, when my Philander play,
 and sing alternate in melt lay;
 the wood to the soft harmony resound,
 and my soul dwell on the enchant sound. 

aminta.

when my love Damon sing, how sweet the strain;
 echo, repeat they to the distant plain;
 not Philomela, through the whisper tree,
 like that dear shepherd tuneful voice can please. 

Delia.

no art i use to vex my faithful Swain,
 nor feign a passion, nor affect disdain:
 when the dear youth in plaintive sound will move
 my yield soul to tenderness and love;
 he see too well the struggle passion rise,
 glow in my cheek, and languish in my eye,
 know the soft mean of each look, and steal
 the tender thought, which be in vain conceal. 

aminta.

when damon absent from my longing eye,
 a thousand anxious fear and sorrow rise;
 while to the murmur of you fall stream
 i sing, and Damon be the charm theme. 

Delia.

the lovely object of my soft desire,
 Philander only can my song inspire;
 for he my number flow, my shepherd praise
 adorn each line, and smooth my artless lay. 
