to her royal highness the princess of Wales, with the tragedy of Cato. Nov. 1714. 

the muse that oft, with sacred rapture fire,
 have generous thought of liberty inspire,
 and, bold rise for britannia law,
 engage great Cato in her country be cause,
 on you submissive wait, with hope assure,
 by who the mighty bless stand secure,
 and all the glory, that our age adorn,
 be promise to a people yet unborn. 

no long shall the widow land bemoan
 a break lineage, and a doubtful throne;
 but boast her royal progeny increase,
 and count the pledge of her future peace. 
o bear to strengthen and to grace our isle! 
while you, fair princess, in your offspring smile
 supply charm to the succeed age,
 each heavenly daughter triumph we presage;
 already see the illustrious youth complain,
 and pity monarch doom to sigh in vain. 

thou too, the darling of our fond desire,
 who Albion, open wide her arm, require,
 with manly valour and attractive air
 shall quell the fierce, and captivate the fair,
 o England young hope! in who conspire
 the mother sweetness, and the father fire! 
for thou perhaps, even now, of kingly race
 some dawn beauty bloom in every grace,
 some Carolina, to heaven dictate true,
 who, while the sceptre rival vain sue,
 thy inborn worth with conscious eye shall see,
 and slight the imperial diadem for thou. 

please with the prospect of successive reign,
 the tuneful tribe no more in dare strain
 shall vindicate, with pious fear oppress,
 endanger right, and liberty distress:
 to mild sound each muse shall tune the lyre,
 and gratitude, and faith to king inspire,
 and filial love; bid impious discord cease,
 and sooth the mad faction into peace;
 or rise ambitious in more lofty lay,
 and teach the nation their new monarch praise,
 describe his awful look, and godlike mind,
 and caesar power with Cato vertue join. 

meanwhile, bright princess, who, with graceful ease
 and native majesty, be form to please,
 behold those art with a propitious eye,
 that suppliant to their great protectress fly! 
then shall they triumph, and the british stage
 improve her manner, and refine her rage,
 more noble character expose to view,
 and draw her finish heroine from you. 

nor you the kind indulgence will refuse,
 skill in the labour of the deathless muse:
 the deathless muse with undiminished ray
 through distant time the lovely dame convey. 
to Gloriana Waller harp be string;
 the queen still shine, because the poet sing. 
even all those grace, in your frame combine,
 the common fate of mortal charm may find;
 (content our short-lived praise to engage,
 the joy and wonder of a single age,)
 unless some poet in a last song
 to late posterity their fame prolong,
 instruct our son the radiant form to prize,
 and see your beauty with their father eye. 
