[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night iv. the christian triumph.

contain our only cure for the fear of death, and proper sentiment of heart on that inestimable blessing.

humble inscribe to the honourable mr. Yorke.

a much-indebted muse, o Yorke! intrude. 
amid the smile of fortune, and of youth,
 thy ear be patient of a serious song. 
how deep implant in the breast of man
 the dread of death! i sing its sovereign cure. 

why start at death? where be he? death arrive
 be past; not come, or go, he be never here. 
ere hope, sensation fail; black-boding man
 receive, not suffer, death tremendous blow. 
the knell, the shroud, the mattock, and the grave;
 the deep, damp vault, the darkness, and the worm: —
 these be the bugbear of a winter eve,
 the terror of the living, not the dead. 
imagination fool, and error wretch,
 man make a death which nature never make;
 then on the point of his own fancy fall,
 and feel a thousand death in fear one. 

but be death frightful, what have age to fear? 
if prudent, age shall meet the friendly foe,
 and shelter in his hospitable gloom. 
i scarce can meet a monument but hold
 my young: every date cry, "come away."
and what recall i? look the world around
 and tell i what: the wise can tell. 
shall any bear of woman give his thought
 full range on just dislike unbounded field; —
 of thing, the vanity; of man, the flaw;
 flaw in the best; the many, flaw all over;
 as leopard, spot; or as ethiops, dark;
 vivacious ill; good die immature;
 (how immature, narcissa marble tell!) 
and at its death bequethe endless pain; —
 his heart, though bold, will sicken at the sight,
 and spend itself in sigh for future scene. 

but grant to life (and just it be to grant
 to lucky life) some perquisite of joy;
 a time there be, when, like a thrice-told tale,
 long-rifled life of sweet can yield no more,
 but from our comment on the comedy,
 please reflection on part well-sustained,
 or purpose emendation where we fail,
 or hope of plaudit from our candid judge,
 when, on their exit, soul be bid unrobe,
 toss fortune back her tinsel, and her plume,
 and drop this mask of flesh behind the scene. 

with i, that time be come! my world be dead;
 a new world rise, and new manner reign:
 foreign comedian, a spruce band, arrive,
 to push i from the scene, or hiss i there. 
what a pert race start up! the stranger gaze,
 and i at they: my neighbour be unknown;
 nor that the worst: ah i! the dire effect
 of loiter here, of death defraud long! 
of old so gracious, (and let that suffice,)
 my very master know i not. —

shall i dare say, peculiar be the fate? 
I have be so long remember, i be forget. 
a object ever press dim the sight,
 and hide behind its ardour to be see. 
when in his courtiers ear i pour my plaint,
 they drink it as the nectar of the great;
 and squeeze my hand, and beg i come tomorrow! 
refusal! can thou wear a smooth form? 

indulge i, nor conceive i drop my theme:
 who cheapen life, abate the fear of death. 
twice-told the period spend on stubborn Troy,
 court-favour, yet untaken, i besiege;
 ambition ill judge effort to be rich. 
alas! ambition make my little less;
 embitter the possess. why wish for more? 
wish of all employment be the worst;
 philosophy reverse, and health decay:
 be i as plump as stall theology,
 wish will waste i to this shade again. 
be i as wealthy as a South-Sea dream,
 wish be a expedient to be poor. 
wish, that constant hectic of a fool,
 catch at a court; purge off by pure air,
 and simple diet; gift of rural life! 

bless be the hand divine, which gentle kid
 my heart at rest, beneath this humble shed. 
the world be a stately bark, on dangerous sea,
 with pleasure see, but board at our peril. 
here, on a single plank, throw safe ashore,
 i hear the tumult of the distant throng,
 as that of sea remote, or die storm;
 and meditate on scene more silent still;
 pursue my theme, and fight the fear of death. 
here, like a shepherd gaze from his hut,
 touch his reed, or lean on his staff,
 eager ambition fiery chase i see;
 i see the circle hunt, of noisy man,
 burst law enclosure, leap the mound of right,
 pursue, and pursue, each other prey;
 as wolf, for rapine; as the fox, for wile;
 till death, that mighty hunter, earth they all. 

why all this toil for triumph of a hour? 
what, though we wade in wealth, or soar in fame? 
earth high station end in, "here he lie:"
 and "dust to dust"conclude her noble song. 
if this song live, posterity shall know
 one, though in Britain bear, with courtier breed,
 who think even gold may come a day too late;
 nor on his subtle death-bed plan his scheme
 for future vacancy in church or state;
 some avocation deem it — to die;
 unbit by rage canine of die rich;
 guilt blunder, and the loud laugh of hell! 

o my coëval! remnant of yourself! 
poor human ruin, totter over the grave! 
shall we, shall age man, like age tree,
 strike deep their vile root, and close cling,
 still more enamour of this wretched soil? 
shall our pale, wither hand be still stretch out,
 tremble at once with eagerness and age,
 with avarice and convulsion grasp hard? 
grasp at air! for what have earth beside? 
man want but little; nor that little long:
 how soon must he resign his very dust,
 which frugal nature lend he for a hour! 
year unexperienced rush on numerous ill;
 and soon as man, expert from time, have find
 the key of life, it open the gate of death. 

when in this vale of year i backward look,
 and miss such number, number too of such,
 firm in health, and green in their age,
 and stricter on their guard, and fit far
 to play life subtle game, i scarce believe
 i still survive. and be i fond of life,
 who scarce can think it possible i live? 
alive by miracle; or, what be next,
 alive by Mead! if i be still alive,
 who long have bury what give life to live, —
 firmness of nerve, and energy of thought. 
life lee be not more shallow than impure
 and vapid: sense and reason show the door,
 call for my bier, and point i to the dust. 

o thou great arbiter of life and death! 
nature immortal, immaterial sun! 
who all-prolific beam late call i forth
 from darkness, teem darkness, where i lie
 the worm inferior, and, in rank, beneath
 the dust i tread on; high to bear my brow,
 to drink the spirit of the golden day,
 and triumph in existence; and can know
 no motive but my bliss; and have ordain
 a rise in blessing! — with the patriarch joy,
 thy call i follow to the land unknown;
 i trust in thou, and know in who i trust:
 or life, or death, be equal; neither weigh;
 all weight in this — o let i live to thou! 
though nature terror thus may be repress,
 still frown grim death; guilt point the tyrant spear. 
and whence all human guilt? from death forget. 
ah i! too long i set at nought the swarm
 of friendly warn which around i fly;
 and smile unsmitten. small my cause to smile! 
death admonition, like shaft upward shoot,
 more dreadful by delay, — the long ere
 they strike our heart, the deep be their wound. 
o think how deep, Lorenzo! here it sting:
 who can appease its anguish? how it burn! 
what hand the barb, envenom thought can draw? 
what heal hand can pour the balm of peace,
 and turn my sight undaunted on the tomb? 

with joy, — with grief, that heal hand i see;
 ah! too conspicuous! it be fix on high. 
on high? — what mean my frenzy? i blaspheme! 
alas! how low! how far beneath the sky! 
the sky it form; and now it bleed for i —
 but bleed the balm i want, — yet still it bleed;
 draw the dire steel — ah no! — the dreadful blessing
 what heart or can sustain, or dare forgo? 
there hang all human hope; that nail support
 the fall universe: that go, we drop;
 horror receive we, and the dismal wish
 creation have be smother in her birth —
 darkness he curtain, and his bed the dust;
 when star and sun be dust beneath his throne! 
in heaven itself can such indulgence dwell? 
o what a groan be there! a groan not he. 
he seize our dreadful right; the load sustain;
 and heave the mountain from a guilty world. 
a thousand world, so buy, be buy too dear:
 sensation new in angel bosom rise,
 suspend their song, and make a pause in bliss. 
o for their song, to reach my lofty theme! 
inspire i, night! with all thy tuneful sphere;
 while i with seraph share seraphic theme,
 and show to man the dignity of man;
 lest i blaspheme my subject with my song. 
shall pagan page glow celestial flame,
 and christian languish? on our heart, not head,
 fall the foul infamy. my heart, awake! 
what can awake thou, unawake by this,
 "expend deity on human weal?"
feel the great truth, which burst the tenfold night
 of heathen error, with a golden flood
 of endless day. to feel, be to be fire;
 and to believe, Lorenzo, be to feel. 

thou most indulgent, most tremendous power! 
still more tremendous, for thy wondrous love,
 that arm, with awe more awful, thy command;
 and foul transgression dip in sevenfold guilt:
 how our heart tremble at thy love immense! 
in love immense, inviolable just! 
thou, rather than thy justice shall be stain,
 do stain the cross; and work of wonder far
 the great, that thy dear far may bleed. 

bold thought! shall i dare speak it, or repress? 
shall man more execrate or boast the guilt
 which rouse such vengeance, which such love inflame? 
over guilt (how mountainous!) with outstretch arm,
 stern justice, and soft-smiling love, embrace,
 support, in full majesty, thy throne,
 when seem its majesty to need support,
 or that, or man, inevitable lose:
 what but the fathomless of thought divine
 can labour such expedient from despair,
 and rescue both? both rescue! both exalt! 
o how be both exalt by the deed! 
the wondrous deed! or shall i call it more? 
a wonder in omnipotence itself! 
a mystery no less to god than man! 

not thus our infidel they eternal draw, —
 a god all over, consummate, absolute,
 full-orbed, in his whole round of ray complete:
 they set at odds heaven jar attribute,
 and with one excellence another wound;
 maim heaven perfection, break its equal beam,
 bid mercy triumph over — god himself,
 undeify by their opprobrious praise:
 a god all mercy, be a god unjust. 

you brainless wit, you baptize infidel! 
you worse for mend, wash to fouler stain! 
the ransom be pay down; the fund of heaven,
 heaven inexhaustible, exhaust fund,
 amaze and amaze, pour forth the price,
 all price beyond: though, curious to compute,
 archangel fail to cast the mighty sum:
 its value vast, ungrasped by mind create,
 for ever hide and glow in the supreme. 

and be the ransom pay? it be: and pay
 (what can exalt the bounty more?) for you. 
the sun behold it — no, the shock scene
 drive back his chariot: midnight veil his face;
 not such as this, not such as nature make;
 a midnight nature shudder to behold;
 a midnight new! a dread eclipse, (without
 oppose sphere,) from her creator frown! 
sun! do thou fly thy maker pain? or start
 at that enormous load of human guilt
 which bow his bless head, overwhelm his cross,
 make groan the centre, burst earth marble womb
 with pang, strange pang! deliver of her dead? 
hell howl; and heaven that hour let fall a tear;
 heaven weep, that man may smile! heaven bleed, that man
 may never die! —

and be devotion virtue? it be compel:
 what heart of stone but glow at thought like these? 
such contemplation mount we, and shall mount
 the mind still high; nor ever glance on man
 unrapture, uninflamed. — where roll my thought
 to rest from wonder? other wonder rise;
 and strike wherever they roll: my soul be catch;
 heaven sovereign blessing, cluster from the cross,
 rush on she in a throng, and close she round,
 the prisoner of amaze! in his bless life
 i see the path, and in his death the price,
 and in his great ascent the proof supreme,
 of immortality. — and do he rise? 
hear, o you nation! hear it, o you dead! 
he rise! he rise! he burst the bar of death. 
lift up your head, you everlasting gate,
 and give the king of glory to come in! 
who be the king of glory? he who leave
 his throne of glory for the pang of death. 
lift up your head, you everlasting gate,
 and give the king of glory to come in! 
who be the king of glory? he who slay
 the ravenous foe that gorge all human race! 
the king of glory, he who glory fill
 heaven with amazement at his love to man;
 and with divine complacency behold
 power most illumine wilder in the theme! 

the theme, the joy, how then shall man sustain? 
o the burst gate, crush sting, demolish throne,
 last gasp, of vanquish death! shout, earth and heaven,
 this sum of good to man! who nature then
 take wing, and mount with he from the tomb. 
then, then i rise; then first humanity
 triumphant pass the crystal port of light,
 (stupendous guest!) and seize eternal youth,
 seize in our name. ever since, it be blasphemous
 to call man mortal. man mortality
 be then transfer to death; and heaven duration
 unalienable seal to this frail frame,
 this child of dust. — man, all immortal, hail! 
hail, heaven, all lavish of strange gift to man! 
thy all the glory; man be the boundless bliss. 

where be i rapt by this triumphant theme,
 on christian joy exult wing, above
 the aonian mount? — alas, small cause for joy! 
what, if to pain immortal? if extent
 of being, to preclude a close of woe? 
where, then, my boast of immortality? 
i boast it still, though cover over with guilt:
 for guilt, not innocence, his life he pour;
 it be guilt alone can justify his death;
 nor that, unless his death can justify
 relent guilt in heaven indulgent sight. 
if, sick of folly, i relent, he write
 my name in heaven with that invert spear
 (a spear deep dip in blood!) which pierce his side,
 and open there a font for all mankind
 who strive, who combat crime, to drink and live
 this, only this, subdue the fear of death. 

and what be this? — survey the wondrous cure:
 and at each step let high wonder rise! 
 "pardon for infinite offence; and pardon
 through mean that speak its value infinite! 
a pardon buy with blood; with blood divine! 
with blood divine of he i make my foe! 
persist to provoke! though woo and awe,
 bless and chastise, a flagrant rebel still! 
a rebel, amid the thunder of his throne! 
nor i alone; a rebel universe! 
my species up in arm; not one exempt! 
yet for the foul of the foul he die:
 most joy, for the redeem from deep guilt! 
as if our race be hold of high rank;
 and godhead dear, as more kind to man!"

bind, every heart! and every bosom, burn! 
o what a scale of miracle be here! 
its low round high-planted on the sky:
 its tower summit lose beyond the thought
 of man or angel! o that i can climb
 the wonderful ascent, with equal praise! 
praise! flow for ever, (if astonishment
 will give thou leave,) my praise! for ever flow;
 praise ardent, cordial, constant, to high heaven
 more fragrant than Arabia sacrifice,
 and all her spicy mountain in a flame. 

so dear, so due to heaven, shall praise descend,
 with her soft plume (from plausive angel wing
 first pluck by man) to tickle mortal ear,
 thus dive in the pocket of the great? 
be praise the perquisite of every paw,
 though black as hell, that grapple well for gold? 
o love of gold! thou mean of amour! 
shall praise her odour waste on virtue dead,
 embalm the base, perfume the stench of guilt,
 earn dirty bread by wash ethiops fair,
 remove filth, or sink it from sight,
 a scavenger in scene where vacant post,
 like gibbet yet untenanted, expect
 their future ornament? from court and throne
 return, apostate praise! thou vagabond! 
thou prostitute! to thy flast love return;
 thy first, thy great, once unrivaled theme. 

there flow redundant; like meander, flow
 back to thy fountain; to that parent power
 who give the tongue to sound, the thought to soar,
 the soul to be. man homage pay to man;
 thoughtless beneath who dreadful eye they bow
 in mutual awe profound, of clay to clay,
 of guilt to guilt; and turn their back on thou,
 great sire! who throne celestial ceaseless sing;
 to prostrate angel a amaze scene! 
o the presumption of man awe for man! —
 man author, end, restorer, law, and judge! 
thy, all; day thy, and thy this gloom of night,
 with all her wealth, with all her radiant world. 
what night eternal, but a frown from thou? 
what heaven meridian glory, but thy smile? 
and shall not praise be thy? not human praise,
 while heaven high host on hallelujah live? 

o may i breathe no long than i breathe
 my soul in praise to he who give my soul,
 and all her infinite of prospect fair,
 cut through the shade of hell, great love, by thou,
 o most adorable, most unador! 
where shall that praise begin which never shall end? 
wherever i turn, what claim on all applause! 
how be night sable mantle labour over! 
how rich wrought with attribute divine! 
what wisdom shine, what love! this midnight pomp,
 this gorgeous arch with golden world inlay! 
build with divine ambition! nought to thou;
 for other this profusion. thou, apart,
 above, beyond! o tell i, mighty mind,
 where be thou? shall i dive into the deep? 
call to the sun, or ask the roar wind,
 for their creator? shall i question loud
 the thunder, if in that they almighty dwell? 
or hold he furious storm in straighten reins,
 and bid fierce whirlwind wheel his rapid car? 

what mean these question? — tremble i retract;
 my prostrate soul adore the present god. 
praise i a distant deity? he tune
 my voice (if tune); the nerve that write, sustain:
 wrap in his being, i resound his praise:
 but though past all diffuse, without a shore,
 his essence; local be his throne (as meet)
 to gather the disperse (as standard call
 the list from afar); to fix a point,
 a central point, collective of his son,
 since finite every nature but his own. 

the nameless he, who nod be nature birth;
 and nature shield, the shadow of his hand;
 her dissolution, his suspend smile! 
the great first-last! pavilioned high he sit
 in darkness, from excessive splendour bear,
 by god unseen, unless through lustre lose. 
his glory, to create glory, bright
 as that to central horror; he look down
 on all that soar, and span immensity. 

though night unnumbered world unfold to view,
 boundless creation! what be thou? a beam,
 a mere effluvium of his majesty. 
and shall a atom of this atom-world
 mutter, in dust and sin, the theme of heaven? 
down to the centre shall i send my thought
 through bed of glitter over, and glow gem,
 their beggare blaze want lustre for my lay;
 go out in darkness. if, on tower wing,
 i send it through the boundless vault of star;
 the star, though rich, what dross their gold to thou,
 great, good, wise, wonderful, eternal king! 
if to those conscious star thy throne around,
 praise ever pour, and imbibe bliss,
 and ask their strain; they want it, more they want,
 poor their abundance, humble their sublime,
 languid their energy, their ardour cold:
 indebt still, their high rapture burn,
 short of its mark, defective, though divine. 

still more, — this theme be man, and man alone;
 their vast appointment reach it not: they see
 on earth a bounty not indulge on high,
 and downward look for heaven superior praise! 
firstborn of ether, high in field of light,
 view man, to see the glory of your god!
 can angel envy, they have envy here;
 and some do envy: and the rest, though god,
 yet still god unredeemed, (there triumph man,
 tempt to weigh the dust against the sky,)
 they less will feel, though more adorn, my theme. 
they sing creation (for in that they share);
 how rose in melody that child of love! 
creation great superior, man! be thy;
 thy be redemption. they just give the key;
 it be thy to raise and eternise the song,
 though human, yet divine; for shall not this
 raise man over man, and kindle seraph here? 
redemption! it be creation more sublime;
 redemption! it be the labour of the sky;
 far more than labour, — it be death in heaven. 
a truth so strange, it be bold to think it true,
 if not far bold still to disbelieve. 

here pause, and ponder. be there death in heaven? 
what then on earth? on earth, which strike the blow? 
who strike it? who? — o how be man enlarge,
 see through this medium! how the pigmy tower! 
how counterpoise his origin from dust! 
how counterpoise to dust his sad return! 
how void his vast distance from the sky! 
how near he press on the seraph wing! 
which be the seraph? which the bear of clay? 
how this demonstrate, through the thick cloud
 of guilt and clay condense, the son of heaven;
 the double son; the make, and the remake! 
and shall heaven double property be lose? 
man double madness only can destroy. 
to man the bleed cross have promise all;
 the bleed cross have swear eternal grace;
 who give his life, what grace shall he deny? 
o you, who from this rock of age leap,
 disdainful, plunge headlong in the deep! 
what cordial joy, what consolation strong,
 whatever wind arise, or billow roll,
 our interest in the master of the storm! 
cling there, and in wreck nature ruin smile,
 while vile apostate tremble in a calm. 

 "man, know thyself!"all wisdom centre there;
 to none man seem ignoble but to man. 
angel that grandeur man overlook admire;
 how long shall human nature be their book,
 degenerate mortal, and unread by thou? 
the beam dim reason shed show wonder there;
 what high content, illustrious faculty! 
but the grand comment, which display at full
 our human height, scarce sever from divine,
 by heaven compose, be publish on the cross. 

who look on that, and see not in himself
 a awful stranger, a terrestrial god? 
a glorious partner with the deity
 in that high attribute, immortal life? 
if a god bleed, he bleed not for a worm:
 i gaze, and, as i gaze, my mount soul
 catch strange fire, eternity! at thou;
 and drop the world, — or rather, more enjoy. 
how change the face of nature! how improve! 
what seem a chaos, shine a glorious world;
 or what a world, a Eden; heighten all! 
it be another scene, another self;
 and still another, as time roll along;
 and that a self far more illustrious still. 
beyond long age, yet roll up in shade
 unpierced by bold conjecture keen ray,
 what evolution of surprise fate! 
how nature open, and receive my soul
 in boundless walk of rapture thought! where god
 encounter and embrace i! what new birth
 of strange adventure, foreign to the sun;
 where what now charm, perhaps whatever exist,
 old time and fair creation, be forget! 
be this extravagant? of man we form
 extravagant conception, to be just:
 conception unconfined want wing to reach he:
 beyond its reach the godhead only more. 
he, the great father, kindle at one flame
 the world of rational; one spirit pour
 from spirit awful fountain; pour himself
 through all their soul; but not in equal stream;
 profuse or frugal of they inspire god,
 as his wise plan demand; and, when past
 their various trial in their various sphere,
 if they continue rational, as make,
 resorb they all into himself again;

his throne their centre, and his smile their crown. 
why doubt we, then, the glorious truth to sing,
 though yet unsung, as deem, perhaps, too bold? 
angel be man of a superior kind;
 angel be man in light habit clad,
 high over celestial mountain winge in flight;
 and man be angel load for a hour,
 who wade this miry vale, and climb, with pain
 and slippery step, the bottom of the steep. 
angel their fail, mortal have their praise;
 while here, of corps ethereal, such enrol,
 and summon to the glorious standard soon,
 which flame eternal crimson through the sky. 
nor be our brother thoughtless of their kin,
 yet absent; but not absent from their love. 
Michael have fight our battle; Raphael sing
 our triumph; Gabriel on our errand fly,
 send by the sovereign: and be these, o man,
 thy friend, thy warm ally? and thou (shame burn
 the cheek to cinder!) rival to the brute? 

religion all. descend from the sky
 to wretched man, the goddess in her left
 hold out this world, and in her right the next. 
religion! the sole voucher man be man;
 supporter sole of man above himself;
 even in this night of frailty, change, and death,
 she give the soul a soul that act a god. 
religion! providence! a afterstate! 
here be firm foot; here be solid rock;
 this can support we: all be sea beside;
 sink under we; bestorm, and then devour. 
his hand the good man fasten on the sky,
 and bid earth roll, nor feel her idle whirl. 

as when a wretch, from thick, pollute air,
 darkness, and stench, and suffocate damp,
 and dungeon-horror, by kind fate discharge,
 climb some fair eminence, where ether pure
 surround he, and elysian prospect rise,
 his heart exult, his spirit cast their load;
 as if new-born, he triumph in the change;
 so joy the soul, when, from inglorious aim,
 and sordid sweet, from faeculence and froth
 of tie terrestrial, set at large, she mount
 to reason region, her own element,
 breathe hope immortal, and affect the sky. 

religion! thou the soul of happiness,
 and, groan Calvary, of thou! there shine
 the noble truth; there strong motive sting;
 there sacred violence assault the soul;
 there nothing but compulsion be forbear. 
can love allure we, or can terror awe? 
he weep! — the fall drop put out the sun;
 he sigh! — the sigh earth deep foundation shake. 
if in his love so terrible, what then
 his wrath inflame, his tenderness on fire? 
like soft, smooth oil, outblazing other fire! 
can prayer, can praise avert it? — thou, my all! 
my theme, my inspiration, and my crown! 
my strength in age, my rise in low estate! 
my soul ambition, pleasure, wealth, my world! 
my light in darkness, and my life in death! 
my boast through time, bliss through eternity! 
eternity, too short to speak thy praise,
 or fathom thy profound of love to man! 
to man of man the mean, even to i;
 my sacrifice, my god! — what thing be these? 

what then be thou? by what name shall i call thou? 
know i the name devout archangel use,
 devout archangel shall the name enjoy,
 by i unrivaled: thousand more sublime,
 none half so dear as that which, though unspoken,
 still glow at heart. o how omnipotence
 be lose in love! thou great philanthropist! 
father of angel, but the friend of man! 
like Jacob, fond of the young bear! 
thou, who do save he, snatch the smoke brand
 from out the flame, and quench it in thy blood! 
how be thou please, by bounty to distress,
 to make we groan beneath our gratitude,
 too big for birth! to favour, and confound! 
to challenge and to distance all return! 
of lavish love stupendous height to soar,
 and leave praise pant in the distant vale! 
thy right too great defraud thou of thy due;
 and sacrilegious our sublime song. 
but since the naked will obtain thy smile,
 beneath this monument of praise unpaid,
 and future life symphonious to my strain,
 (that noble hymn to heaven,) for ever lie
 entomb my fear of death! and every fear,
 the dread of every evil, but thy frown. 

who see i yonder so demure smile? 
laughter a labour, and may break their rest. 
you quietist, in homage to the sky! 
serene, of soft address! who mild make
 a unobtrusive tender of your heart,
 abhor violence! who halt indeed;
 but for the blessing wrestle not with heaven! 
think you my song too turbulent, too warm? 
be passion, then, the pagan of the soul? 
reason alone baptize? alone ordain
 to touch thing sacred? o for warm still! 
guilt chill my zeal, and age benumb my power:
 o for a humble heart, and proud song! 
thou, my much-injured theme! with that soft eye
 which melt over doom Salem, deign to look
 compassion to the coldness of my breast,
 and pardon to the winter in my strain. 

o you coldhearted, freeze formalist! 
on such a theme, it be impious to be calm;
 passion be reason, transport temper, here. 
shall heaven, which give we ardour, and have show
 her own for man so strong, not disdain
 what smooth emollient in theology
 recumbent virtue downy doctor preach,
 that prose of piety, a lukewarm praise? 
rise odour sweet from incense uninflamed? 
devotion, when lukewarm, be undevout;
 but when it glow, its heat be strike to heaven;
 to human heart her golden harp be string;
 high heaven orchestra chant amen to man. 

hear i, or dream i hear, their distant strain,
 sweet to the soul, and taste strong of heaven,
 soft-wafted on celestial pity plume,
 through the vast space of the universe,
 to cheer i in this melancholy gloom? 
o when will death, (now stingless,) like a friend,
 admit i of their choir? o when will death
 this moulder, old partition-wall throw down? 
give being, one in nature, one abode? 
o death divine! that give we to the sky! 
great future! glorious patron of the past
 and present! when shall i thy shrine adore? 
from nature continent, immense wide,
 immense bless, this little isle of life,
 this dark, incarcerate colony,
 divide we. happy day that break our chain! 
that manumit; that call from exile home;
 that lead to nature great metropolis,
 and re-admits we, through the guardian hand
 of elder brother, to our father throne,
 who hear our advocate, and, through his wound
 behold man, allow that tender name. 
it be this make christian triumph a command;
 it be this make joy a duty to the wise:
 it be impious in a good man to be sad. 

see thou, Lorenzo, where hang all our hope? 
touch by the cross, we live, or more than die;
 that touch which touch not angel; more divine
 than that which touch confusion into form,
 and darkness into glory: partial touch! 
ineffable pre-eminent regard! 
sacred to man, and sovereign through the whole
 long golden chain of miracle, which hang
 from heaven through all duration, and support,
 in one illustrious and amaze plan,
 thy welfare, nature, and thy God renown;
 that touch, with charm celestial, heal the soul
 disease, drive pain from guilt, light life in death,
 turn earth to heaven, to heavenly throne transform
 the ghastly ruin of the moulder tomb. 

do ask i when? when he who die return! 
return, how change! where then the man of woe? 
in glory terror all the godhead burn;
 and all his court, exhaust by the tide
 of deity triumphant in his train,
 leave a stupendous solitude in heaven;
 replenish soon, replenish with increase
 of pomp and multitude; a radiant band
 of angel new, of angel from the tomb. 

be this by fancy throw remote? and rise
 dark doubt between the promise and event? 
i send thou not to volume for thy cure;
 read nature; nature be a friend to truth;
 nature be christian; preach to mankind,
 and bid dead matter aid we in our creed. 
have thou never see the comet flame flight? 
the illustrious stranger, pass, terror shed
 on gaze nation, from his fiery train
 of length enormous; take his ample round
 through depth of ether; coast unnumbered world
 of more than solar glory; double wide
 heaven mighty cape; and then revisit earth,
 from the long travel of a thousand year. 
thus, at the destine period, shall return
 he, once on earth, who bid the comet blaze;
 and, with he, all our triumph over the tomb. 

nature be dumb on this important point,
 or hope precarious in low whisper breathe:
 faith speak aloud, distinct; even adder hear,
 but turn, and dart into the dark again. 
faith build a bridge across the gulf of death,
 to break the shock blind nature can shun,
 and land think smooth on the farther shore. 
death terror be the mountain faith remove,
 that mountain-barrier between man and peace. 
it be faith disarm destruction, and absolve
 from every clamorous charge the guiltless tomb. 

why disbelieve, Lorenzo? — "reason bid,
 all-sacred reason. "— hold her sacred still;
 nor shall thou want a rival in thy flame. 
all-sacred reason! source and soul of all
 demand praise, on earth, or earth above! 
my heart be thy: deep in its inmost fold
 live thou with life; live dear of the two. 
wear i the bless cross, by fortune stamp
 on passive nature before thought be bear? 
my birth blind bigot! fire with local zeal! 
no; reason rebaptize i when adult,
 weigh true and false in her impartial scale;
 my heart become the convert of my head,
 and make that choice which once be but my fate. 
 "on argument alone my faith be build:"
 reason pursue be faith; and, unpursued,
 where proof invite, it be reason then no more;
 and such our proof, that or our faith be right,
 or reason lie, and heaven design it wrong. 
absolve we this? what then be blasphemy? 

fond as we be, and just fond, of faith,
 reason, we grant, demand our first regard;
 the mother honour, as the daughter dear. 
reason the root, fair faith be but the flower:
 the fade flower shall die, but reason live
 immortal as her father in the sky. 
when faith be virtue, reason make it so. 
wrong not the christian: think not reason you;
 it be reason our great master hold so dear;
 it be reason injure right his wrath resent;
 it be reason voice obey his glory crown:
 to give lose reason life, he pour his own. 
believe, and show the reason of a man;
 believe, and taste the pleasure of a god;
 believe, and look with triumph on the tomb. 
through reason wound alone thy faith can die;
 which, die, tenfold terror give to death,
 and dip in venom his twice-mortal sting. 

learn hence what honour, what loud paean, due
 to those who push our antidote aside;
 those boast friend to reason and to man,
 who fatal love stab every joy, and leave
 death terror heighten, gnaw on his heart. 
these pompous son of reason idolize,
 and vilify at once; of reason dead,
 then deify, as monarch be of old;
 what conduct plant proud laurel on their brow? 
while love of truth through all their camp resound,
 they draw pride curtain over the noontide ray,
 spike up their inch of reason on the point
 of philosophic wit, call argument,
 and then, exult in their taper, cry,
 "behold the sun!"and, indian-like, adore. 

talk they of moral? o thou bleed love! 
thou maker of new moral to mankind! 
the grand morality be love of thou. 
as wise as Socrates, if such they be,
 (nor will they abate of that sublime renown,)
 "as wise as Socrates,"may just stand
 the definition of a modern fool. 
a christian be the high style of man. 
and be there who the bless cross wipe off,
 as a foul blot, from his dishonour brow? 
if angel tremble, it be at such a sight;
 the wretch they quit, despond of their charge, —
 more strike with grief or wonder who can tell? 

you sell to sense! you citizen of earth! 
(for such alone the christian banner fly,)
 know you how wise your choice, how great your gain? 
behold the picture of earth happy man:
 "he call his wish, it come; he send it back,
 and say he call another; that arrive,
 meet the same welcome; yet he still call on;
 till one call he, who vary not his call,
 but hold he fast in chain of darkness bind,
 till nature die, and judgement set he free;
 a freedom far less welcome than his chain."

but grant man happy; grant he happy long;
 add to life high prize her late hour;
 that hour, so late, be nimble in approach,
 that, like a post, come on in full career. 
how swift the shuttle fly that weave thy shroud! 
where be the fable of thy former year? 
throw down the gulf of time; as far from thou
 as they have never be thy; the day in hand,
 like a bird struggle to get loose, be go;
 scarce now possess, so sudden it be go;
 and each swift moment, flee, be death advance
 by stride as swift. eternity be all;
 and who eternity? who triumph there? 
bathe for ever in the font of bliss! 
for ever bask in the deity! 
Lorenzo, who? — thy conscience shall reply. 

o give it leave to speak; it will speak ere long,
 thy leave unasked: Lorenzo, hear it now,
 while useful its advice, its accent mild. 
by the great edict, the divine decree,
 truth be deposit with man last hour;
 a honest hour, and faithful to her trust. 
truth, old daughter of the deity! 
truth, of his council when he make the world;
 nor less, when he shall judge the world he make! 
though silent long, and sleep never so sound,
 smother with error, and oppress with toy,
 that heaven-commissioned hour no soon call
 but from her cavern in the soul abyss,
 like he they fable under Aetna whelm,
 the goddess burst in thunder and in flame,
 loud convince, and severe pain. 
dark demon i discharge, and hydra-stings:
 the keen vibration of bright truth — be hell:
 just definition! though by school untaught. 
you deaf to truth, peruse this parsoned page,
 and trust, for once, a prophet and a priest:
 "man may live fool, but fool they can die."
