on dream that she see her heart at her foot.

when nature tire with thought be sink to rest. 
and all my sense be by sleep possess,
 sweet sleep, that soft and balmy comfort bring
 alike to beggar and despotic king,
 i dream of peace i never feel before,
 i dream my heart be lie on the floor. 
observe it, strange to tell! with joyful eye. 
and stranger still without the least surprise. 
elate with the sight, i smile sit
 exult over the victim at my foot;
 but soon with word of anguish thus address
 this painful, sweet disturber of my breast: –

 "say busy, lively, tremble, hop thing,
" what new disaster have thou now to bring,
 "to torture with thy fear my tender frame,
" who must for all her ill thou only blame? 
 "speak now, and tell i why, ungrateful guest
" for ten year past have thou deny i rest? 
 "that in my bosom thou be nurse it be true,
" and with my life and with my stature grow. 
 "at first so small be all thy want, that i
" vain imagine i can never deny
 "whatever thy fancy ask — alas! but now
" i find thy want my every sense outgrow;
 "and ever have, ever want more,
" a power to please, to give, or to adore. 
 "say, why like other heart do thou not bear
" with callous apathy each worldly care? 
 "why do thou shriek at envy horrid cry? 
" in thou compassion, hatred place supply,
 "why not with malice treat malicious man? 
" why ever pity when thou shall condemn? 
 "why, at the hear of a dismal tale,
" do thou with sorrow turn my beauty pale? 
 "why, when distress in any shape appear,
" do thou dissolve my very soul in tear? 
 "why in thy secret fold be friendship breed? 
" in other heart its very name be dead. 
 "why, if keen wit and learned sense draw nigh
" do thou with emulation beat so high? 
 "and while approve, wish to be approve? 
" and when you love, wish more to be belove? 
 "why not, in cold indifference ever clad,
" alike, unmoved, regard the good and bad? 
 "why do thou waste my youthful bloom with care,
" and sacrifice myself, that i may share
 "distress in other? why will thou adorn
" their day with rose and leave i a thorn? " 

but here i see it heave a heavy sigh
 and thus in sweet sound it do reply:
 "ah! cease, Eliza! cease thy speech unjust. 
" thy heart have ever fulfil its sacred trust;
 "and ever will its tender mansion serve,
" nor can it from thou this reproach deserve
 "against my dictate murmur have i find
" which thus have lay i bleed on the ground,
 "compare thyself in this same hour deprive
" of this soft heart, from whence all be derive
 "the same bewitch grace which adorn,
" and make thy face appear like beauteous morn:
 "with i its brilliant ornament be flee,
" and all thy feature, like thy soul, be dead. 
 "it be i that make thou other' pleasure share,
" and in a sister joy forget thy care. 
 "it be by my dictate thou be teach to find,"
 "a godlike pleasure in a godlike mind;
" that make thou oft relieve a stranger woe,
 "and often fix those friend, that will be foe,
" it be i that tremble have teach thy ear
 "to cherish music; and it be i appear
" in all its soft dress, when to the heart,
 "of all beholder my dear voice impart
" harmonic strain; it be not because it be fine,
 "for every note that be feel be sure i. 
" in smoothe number all that i indite,
 "for it be i teach thy fearful hand to write,
" my genius have with watchful care supply. 
 "what education to thy sex deny;
" make sentiment and nature all combine,
 "to melt the reader in each flow line,
" till they in word this feeling truth impart,
 "she need no more who will consult the heart;
" and own in read what be write by thou,
 "no study ever can improve like i. 
" and when thy bloom be go, thy beauty fly,
 "and laugh youth to wrinkle age be grow,
" thy action, write, friendship, which i give,
 "still shall remain a age beyond the grave. 
" then do not thus displace let i remain
 "but take i to thy tender breast again." 

[ "yes, soft persuader, (i return), i will,
" and if i be deceive, deceive i still.  "] 
seduce i be in haste, then stoop low,
 soon reinstate my sweet, please foe;
 and wake, find it have nor less nor more
 than all the joy, the pang it have before! 
