Hoyle lake,

a poem, write on that coast, and address to its proprietor, sir JOHN Stanley.

thou, Stanley, thou, our gladden spirit hail,
 since life first good for we thy effort gain,
 who, habitant of albion inland vale,
 reside far distant from her circle main. 

these lightsome wall, beneath thy generous care
 arise, the lawny scene convivial boast,
 while at thy voice clear-cheeked hygeia rear
 her aqueous altar on this tepid coast. 

this coast, the near to our central home,
 that green britannia watery zone display,
 now give the droop frame a cheerful dome,
 who Lares smile, and promise lengthen day. 

when gather fog the pale horizon steep,
 fall in heavy, deep, continual rain,
 if, ere the sun sink shroud in the deep,
 his crystal ray pervade the vapory train,

dry be the turfy down, diffusive spread
 over the light surface of the sandy mound,
 where even the languid form may safe tread,
 drink the pure gale, and eye the blue profound. 

dear scene! — that stretch between the silver arm
 of Deva, and of Mersey, meet the main,
 and when the sun-gilt day illume its charm,
 boast of peculiar grace, nor boast in vain. 

though near the beach, dark helbrie lonely isle,
 repose sullen in the watery way,
 hear round her rock the tide, return, boil,
 and over her dusky sandal dash their spray. 

Mark, to the left, romantic cambria coast,
 her curtained mountain rise over the flood;
 while sea on orm beak promontory burst,
 blue Deva swell her mirror to the wood. 

high over that vary ridge of alpine form,
 vast moel-y-fammau tower upon the sight,
 lift her maternal bosom to the storm,
 and screen her filial mountain from their blight. 

far on the right, the dim lancastrian plain,
 in pallid distance, glimmer through the sky,
 though, hide by jut rock, thy splendid fane,
 commercial Liverpool, elude the eye. 

wide in the front the confluent ocean roll,
 amid who restless billow guardian Hoyle,
 to screen her azure lake when tempest howl,
 spread the firm texture of her amber isle. 

and though the surge tide resistless wave
 roll, day, and night, its level surface over,
 though the sky darken, and the whirlwind rave,
 they froth, — but rush innoxious to the shore. 

when fear-struck seaman, amid the rage flood,
 hear thunder shipwreck yell her dire decree,
 see she pale arm rend every sail, and shroud,
 and over the high mast lift her whelm sea,

if to thy quiet harbour, gentle Hoyle,
 the shatter navy through the tempest fly,
 each joyous mariner forget his toil,
 and carol to the vain angry sky. 

what though they vex the lake cerulean stream,
 and curl its billow on the shelly floor,
 yet, in despite of fancy timid dream,
 age, and infirmity, may plunge secure. 

how gay the scene when spring fair morning break,
 or summer-noons illume the grassy mound,
 when anchor navy crowd the people lake,
 or deck the distant ocean skiey bind. 

like leafless forest, on its verge extreme
 rise the tall mast; — or spread wide their sail,
 silver, and shine in the solar beam,
 stand on that last blue line, and court the gale. 

the people lake, of song, and lively cheer,
 and boatswain whistle bear the jovial sound;
 while rosy pennant, float on the air,
 tinge the soft sea of glass, that sleep around. 

it be on these down the belgian hero spread
 his ardent legion in auspicious hour,
 ere to ierne hostile shore he lead
 to deathless glory their embattle power. 

when, like the conqueror of the eastern world,
 that stem with dauntless breast the granic flood,
 his victor-sword immortal WILLIAM whirl,
 and boyne pale water dye with rebel blood. 

since now, to health devote, this calm shore
 breathe renovation in its foamy wave,
 for the kind donor shall each heart implore,
 the good his energy to other give. 

that long on he clear-cheeked hygeia smile,
 and long on all he love, serene may shine,
 who from thy sparkle coast, benignant Hoyle,
 diffuse the blessing of her crystal shrine. 
