write at West-Aston.

June, 1808. 

yes, i remember the dear suffering saint,
 who hand, with fond, commemorative care,
 plant that myrtle on my natal day. 
it be a day of joy to he she love
 best upon earth; — and still her gentle heart,
 that never feel one passion eager throb,
 nor aught but quiet joy, and patient woe,
 be prompt to sympathize with all; and most
 with that belove brother. — she have hope
 perchance, that, fond on his arm recline
 in placid happiness, her feeble step
 may here have wander through these friendly shade,
 this hospitable seat of kindred worth:
 and that the plant, thus rear, in future year
 may win his smile benignant, when her hand
 shall point where, in its bower of loveliness,
 bright spread to the sun its fragrant leaf,
 his Mary myrtle bloom. — ah i! it be sad
 when sweet affection thus design in vain,
 and see the fragile web it smile spin
 in playful love, crush by the sudden storm,
 and sweep to dark oblivion, amid the wreck
 of great hope! — even while she think of bliss,
 already over that darling brother head
 the death-commissioned angel noiseless wave
 his black and heavy wing: and though she mourn
 that stroke, in pious sorrow, many a year,
 yet, even then, the life-consuming shaft
 in her chaste breast she uncomplaining bear. 
now, both at rest, in bless peacefulness,
 with no impatient hope, regret, or doubt,
 await that full completion of the bliss
 which their more perfect spirit shall receive. 
fair blossom her young tree, effuse sweet
 its aromatic breath; for other eye
 blush the soft fold bud, and other hand
 prune its luxuriant branch: friendship still
 preserve the fond memorial; nay, even yet
 will fain preserve with careful tenderness
 the blight relic of what once it love. 
hard be the wintery hour feel even here
 amid these green protect wall, and late
 the timid spring, oft chill and rude check,
 at last unveil her tender charm, and smile
 with radiant blush on her amorous train:
 but no revive gale, no fruitful dew,
 visit the brown parch leaf, or from the stem,
 the wither stem, elicit the young shoot
 with hope of life and beauty; yet thy care
 perhaps, dear Sydney, thy assiduous care
 may save it still. what can resist the care
 of fond, assiduous love? oh! it can raise
 the shudder soul, though sink beneath the black,
 suspend pall of death! believe this lip,
 believe this grateful heart, which best can feel
 the life-restoring power of watchful love. 
