elegy iii. to the right honourable George Simon Harcourt, Visc. Newnham. write at Rome, 1756. 

yes, noble youth, it be true; the soft art,
the sweetly-sounding string, and pencil power,
have warm to rapture even heroic heart,
and teach the rude to wonder, and adore.

for beauty charm we, whether she appear
in blend colour; or to soothe sound
attune her voice; or fair proportion wear
in yonder swell dome harmonious round.

all, all she charm; but not alike to all
it be give to revel in her blissful bower;
coercive tie, and reason powerful call
bid some but taste the sweet, which some devour.

when nature govern, and when man be young,
perhaps at will the untutored savage rove,
where water murmur, and where cluster hang
he feed, and sleep beneath the shade he love.

but since the sage more sagacious mind,
by heaven permission, or by heaven command,
to polish state have social law assign,
and general good on partial duty plan,

not for ourselves our vagrant step we bend
as heedless chance, or wanton choice ordain;
on various station various task attend,
and man be bear to trifle or to reign.

as chant the woodman while the dryad weep,
and fall forest fear the uplift blow,
as chant the shepherd, while he tend his sheep,
or weave to pliant form the osier bough,

to i it be give, who fortune love to lead
through humble toil to life sequester bower,
to i it be give to wake the amusive reed,
and sooth with song the solitary hour.

but thou superior sober toil demand,
severe path be thy of patriot fame;
thy birth, thy friend, thy king, thy native land,
have give thou honour, and have each their claim.

then nerve with fortitude thy feeling breast
each, wish to combat, and each pain to bear;
spurn with disdain the inglorious love of rest,
nor let the siren ease approach thy ear.

beneath yond cypress shade' eternal green
see prostrate Rome her wondrous story tell,
mark how she rise the world imperial queen,
and tremble at the prospect how she fall!

not that my rigid precept will require
a painful struggle with each adverse gale,
forbid thou listen to the enchant lyre,
or turn thy step from fancy flowery vale.

whatever of Greece in sculpture brass survive,
whatever of Rome in moulder arc remain,
whatever of genius on the canvas live,
or flow in polish verse, or airy strain,

be these thy leisure; to the choose few,
who dare excel, thy foster aid afford;
their art, their magic power with honour due
exalt; but be thyself what they record.
