on the death of my honour mother mrs. lee: a dialogue between Lucinda and Marissa.

Lucinda.

what, my Marissa, have Lucinda do,
that thus she once love company you shun?
why be it from she you thus unkind fly,
from she, who for your sake can free die?
who know no joy but what your sight do give,
and in your heart alone desire to live?
i beg you by that zeal i have show for you,
that tenderness which be to friendship due,
by those dear sacred bond our soul have tie,
those bond, which death it self shall never divide;
by what so ever you love, or i can name,
to let i know from whence this wondrous strangeness come
remember by your vow you be whole i,
and i to you do all my thought resign:
my joy be you, and you be all my grief,
in your love bosom still i seek relief:
when you be cheerful, i be true bless,
and now your sorrow deep wound my breast:
i view it through the thin disguise you wear,
and spite of all your caution, all your care,
hear every rise sigh, and view each fall tear.

Marissa.

permit i, dear Lucinda to complain,
that your unkindness do his augment my pain:
how can you think that one who love like i
will ever let you share her misery?
to see you mourn will bring i no relief,
no, that will rather double all my grief:
for love a passion of the noble kind,
and when it be seat in a generous mind,
it will be from mean design and interest free,
not interrupt a friend felicity.
have i be happy, with a smile face,
i long ever now have run to your embrace,
and in your arm be eager to relate
the welcome favour of propitious fate:
but since ill fortune do his i still pursue,
o let my grief remain unknown to you.
free from sad thought may you for ever live,
and all your hour to mirth and pleasure give:
may no concern for i your peace molest;
o let i live a stranger to your breast:
no more, no more my worthless name repeat,
abandon i to this obscure retreat;
make haste from hence, my sight will damp your joy,
and the bless calmness of your soul destroy.

Lucinda.

think not i will leave you to your grief a prey:
no! here with you i will for ever stay,
and weep with you my come hour away:
return each sigh, and every move groan,
and to repeat echo make my moan,
and tell they how unkind my love marissa groan.

Marissa.

to banish all suspicion from your mind,
and that you may not think i still unkind,
i will let you know the cause that make i mourn,
the cause that do my joy to sorrow turn:
but oh! a loss so vast, so vast great,
who can without a flood of tear repeat!
it much too strong for my resolve do prove,
and do my tender, soft passion move:
disturb the peace, the quiet of my mind,
and for some minute make i less resign:
i to my reason will will yield,
but struggle nature keep by force the field;
compel, i stoop to her imperious sway,
and thus each hour, methinks, i hear she say,
wretched Marissa! all thy comfort be flee,
and all thy joy with thy love mother dead:
a mother, who with every grace be bless,
with all the ornament of virtue dress;
with whatsoever religion recommend;
the best of wife, of mother, and of friend.
and shall not such a loss complaint inspire?
their apathy let stoic still admire,
and strict obedience to their rule require:
and on morose, ill-natured, thoughtless fool,
impose the rigid notion of their school:
insensibility be here a fault,
and it be a doctrine which i never teach:
tear be become, and a tribute due
to one so worthy, and so dear to you.
by she thus urge, i give my sorrow way,
and do the dictate of my grief obey:
in this recess, remote from human kind,
i think i shall not interruption find:
most mind themselves, the absent be forget;
and this have doubtless be marissa lot,
have not the kind lucinda tender care
seek out this close asylum of despair,
and bring she hither all my woe to share.

Lucinda.

such as have hear of good philinda name,
can with justice sad Marissa blame:
a mother loss, and such a mother too,
can, my dear friend, but be deplore by you.
all you can wish she be; as angel kind,
as nature liberal, of a god-like mind;
steady as fate, and constant in her love;
one who nor wrong, nor yet affront can move
to mean revenge, or a malicious thought:
she live those truth her holy faith have teach:
joy can not raise, nor grief depress her mind,
she still be calm, sedate, and still resign.

Marissa.

yes, she be more, much more than you can name,
cheerful, oblige, generous, still the same:
the good she praise, the absent do defend,
and be to the distress a constant friend:
full of compassion, and from censure free,
and of a most extensive charity:
with win sweetness she do still persuade,
and her reproof be prudent convey:
in soft language she will the vicious blame,
and none ever love with a more ardent flame:
her friend concern she kind make she own,
for they her great care, her chief regard be show:
at no misfortune she do ever repine,
but still submit to the will divine:
no discontent thought disturb her breast,
what ever happen, she still think be best:
when her last sickness come, that dire disease
which do on she with sudden fury seize,
with utmost rage the fort of life assail,
resolve by rack torture to prevail;
o with what patience do she bear her pain,
and all the attack of cruel death sustain!
the dreadful ill can not molest her mind,
there she do still a happy calmness find,
a well fix pleasure, a substantial joy,
serenity which nothing can destroy,
sweet antepast of what she find above,
where she be now bless with what she most do love;
that sovereign good which do her soul inflame,
and who fruition be her utmost aim;
and in who presence she do his now possess
a long desire, and endless happiness.

Lucinda.

since she from all the pain of life be free,
and in possession of felicity,
it be unbecoming such a grief to show,
as can from nothing but ungoverned passion flow.

Marissa.

it be, i confess, a fault; but who can part
from one she love, without a bleed heart?

Lucinda.

it be hard, i own, but yet it may be do;
such glorious victory be sometime win:
time will at length the great grief subdue,
and shall not reason do the same for you?
reason, which shall our action always guide,
and over our word, and over our thought preside:
passion shall never that ascendant gain,
they be for service make, and not to reign:
yet do not think i your past sorrow blame,
be the loss mine, sure, i shall do the same,
but have pay the debt to nature due,
no more the dictate of my grief pursue.
from that dark grave where her love body lie,
raise, my Marissa, your deject eye,
and view her soul ascend to the sky,
by angel guard, who in charm lay,
sing as they mount, their great creator praise;
and to celestial seat their charge convey,
to never end bliss, and never end day:
and be it not cruel, or at least unkind
to wish that she be still to earth confine,
still force to bend beneath her load of clay?
methinks i hear the glorious vision say,
what be it, Marissa, make you still complain,
be you concern that i be void of pain,
and will you have i wretched once again?
have i t'exchange this bliss for toil and fear,
and all these glory for a life of care?
or be it the effect of a too fond desire,
do his love, mistake love, these thought inspire?
be it my absence you so much deplore,
and do you grieve because i be you no more,
because with i you can no more converse,
no more repeat your wrong, or tell i your distress,
no more by my advice your action steer,
and never more my kind instruction hear?
if this do cause your grief, no more complain;
it will not be long ever we shall meet again;
shall meet all joy in these bright realm of love,
and never more there pain of absence prove:
till that bless time, with decent calmness wait,
and bear unmoved the pressure of your fate.

Marissa.

yes, my dear friend, i your advice will take,
dry up my tear, and these love shade forsake:
i can resist, when kindness lead the way;
i be whole you, and must your call obey:
with you to hate croud and noise i will go,
and the best proof of my affection show:
but where soever i be, my trouble mind
will still to my Philinda be confine;
her image be upon my soul impress,
she live within, and govern in my breast:
i will strive to live those virtue she have teach,
they shall employ my pen, my tongue, my thought:
where ever i go, her name my theme shall prove,
and what soever i say, shall loud speak my love.
