HYMN.

FATHER and Lord! Almighty and all-wise! 
How ardently devout affections rise,
 When rushing thoughts, unsought for, swift and free,
 Crowd on th' expanding heart, and speak of thee! 
All mingling, soaring, brightening, how they shine
 In truth's strong light, and say that we are thine! 

This world a temple is, where man descries
 Signs visible, where'er he turns his eyes,
 That thou art good as wise and mighty; love
 The active power that doth through all things move. 

A vasty temple, paved with sea and land,
 Adorned with forests, hills and mountains grand,
 And coped aloft with beauty, ever changing
 As white clouds o'er cerulean blue are ranging,
 As rosy splendour glows, line after line,
 At day's glad waking, or at day's decline;
 As full or crescent moons shine softly bright
 Through the air-floated awnings of the night;
 As stars from deepen'd darkness, fiercely burning
 Keep round their northern guide, for ever turning! 

Such thoughts do visit us like friends indeed,
 Who help and comfort in the hour of need;
 And sacred lore repeat, even that bless'd line,
 "Living and dying we are thine." 

The dying soldier stretched on battle ground,
 While swells amain the deep and ghastly wound,
 Amidst his fallen comrades laid,
 The maim'd, the dying, and the dead;
 Thinks of his home, the distant and the dear,
 Then in his heart repeats these words of cheer. 

She, too, whose little flock of love are led
 To stand once more around her dying bed,
 Blesses them one by one, and when the last
 Hath from her fondly lingering vision past,
 Raises her eyes, to worship and adore,
 And feels the bitterness of death is o'er;
 Casting behind her mortal love and fear,
 She feels that she is Thine, and thou art near. 

The man who in this mingled world of woe,
 Dire warfare holds with many a galling foe;
 With poverty, disgrace, disease, and pain,
 And bravely fronting all, can still maintain,
 Like gallant liegeman, his appointed post,
 Hath succour still at hand when wanted most. —
 "Let all these foes to work my woe combine,
 Living and dying, Father, I am thine." 

But oh! to trace what forms of mortal ill
 This thought hath conquer'd, baffles human skill
 Yes, we are thine, Almighty Lord and Sire,
 With souls endowed to reason and aspire. 
Reason, thy gifted spark of heavenly flame,
 The noblest inmate of the human frame;
 By which, in all thy works, thyself we see,
 And love, obey, adore, and worship Thee. 
