hymn.

father and lord! almighty and alwise! 
how ardent devout affection rise,
 when rush thought, unsought for, swift and free,
 crowd on the expand heart, and speak of thou! 
all mingle, soar, brighten, how they shine
 in truth strong light, and say that we be thy! 

this world a temple be, where man descry
 sign visible, wherever he turn his eye,
 that thou be good as wise and mighty; love
 the active power that do through all thing move. 

a vasty temple, pave with sea and land,
 adorn with forest, hill and mountain grand,
 and cope aloft with beauty, ever change
 as white cloud over cerulean blue be range,
 as rosy splendour glow, line after line,
 at day glad wake, or at day decline;
 as full or crescent moon shine soft bright
 through the air-floated awn of the night;
 as star from deepen darkness, fierce burn
 keep round their northern guide, for ever turn! 

such thought do visit we like friend indeed,
 who help and comfort in the hour of need;
 and sacred lore repeat, even that bless line,
 "live and die we be thy." 

the die soldier stretch on battle ground,
 while swell amain the deep and ghastly wound,
 amid his fall comrade lay,
 the maim, the die, and the dead;
 think of his home, the distant and the dear,
 then in his heart repeat these word of cheer. 

she, too, who little flock of love be lead
 to stand once more around her die bed,
 bless they one by one, and when the last
 have from she fond linger vision past,
 raise her eye, to worship and adore,
 and feel the bitterness of death be over;
 cast behind her mortal love and fear,
 she feel that she be thy, and thou be near. 

the man who in this mingle world of woe,
 dire warfare hold with many a gall foe;
 with poverty, disgrace, disease, and pain,
 and brave front all, can still maintain,
 like gallant liegeman, his appoint post,
 have succour still at hand when want most. —
 "let all these foe to work my woe combine,
 live and die, father, i be thy." 

but oh! to trace what form of mortal ill.
 this thought have conquer, baffle human skill
 yes, we be thy, almighty lord and sire,
 with soul endow to reason and aspire. 
reason, thy gifted spark of heavenly flame,
 the noble inmate of the human frame;
 by which, in all thy work, thyself we see,
 and love, obey, adore, and worship thou. 
