ode to the right honourable FRANCIS earl of Huntingdon.

mdccxlvii.

by the same.

i 1. 

the wife and great of every clime,
through all thy spacious walk of time,
wherever the muse she power display,
with joy have listen and obey.
for, teach of heaven, the sacred nine
persuasive number, form divine,
to mortal sense impart:
they best the soul with glory fire;
they noble counsel, bold deed inspire;
and high over Fortune rage enthrone the fix heart.

i 2. 

nor less prevail be their charm
the vengeful bosom to disarm;
to melt the proud with human woe,
and prompt unwilling tear to flow.
can wealth a power like this afford?
can Cromwell art, or Marlborough sword,
a equal empire claim?
no, Hastings. thou my word will own:
thy breast the gift of every muse have know;
nor shall the giver love disgrace thy noble name.

i 3. 

the muse awful art,
and the fair function of the poet tongue,
never shall thou blush to honour; to assert
from all that scorn vice or slavish fear have sing.
nor shall the blandishment of Tuscan string
warble at will in pleasure myrtle bower;
nor shall the base note to celtic king
by lie minstrel pay in evil hour,
move thou to spurn the heavenly muse reign.
a different strain,
and other theme
from her prophetic shade and hallow stream
(thou well can witness) meet the purge ear:
such, as when Greece to her immortal shell
rejoice listen, godlike sound to hear;
to hear the sweet instructress tell
(while man and hero throng around)
how life its noble use may find,
how best for freedom be resign;
and how, by glory, virtue shall be crown.

ii. 1. 

such be the chian father strain
to many a kind domestic train,
who pious hearth and genial bowl
have cheere the reverend pilgrim soul:
when, every hospitable rite
with equal bounty to requite,
he strike his magic string;
and pour spontaneous number forth,
and seize their ear with tale of ancient worth,
and fill their muse heart with vast heroic thing.

ii. 2. 

now oft, where happy spirit dwell,
where yet he tune his charm shell,
oft near he, with applaud hand,
the genius of his country stand.
to listen god he make he know,
that man divine, by who be sow
the seed of graecian fame:
who first the race with freedom fire;
from who Lycurgus sparta son inspire;
from who plataean palm and cyprian trophy come.

ii. 3. 

o noble, happy age!
when Aristides rule, and Cimon fight;
when all the generous fruit of Homer page
exult Pindar see to full perfection bring.
o Pindar, oft shall thou be hail of i:
not that Apollo feed thou from his shrine;
not that thy lip drink sweetness from the bee;
nor yet that, studious of thy note divine,
Pan dance their measure with the sylvan throng;
but that thy song
be proud to unfold
what thy base ruler tremble to behold;
amid corrupt Thebes be proud to tell
the deed of Athens and the persian shame:
hence on thy head their impious vengeance fall.
but thou, o faithful to thy fame,
the muse law do right know;
that who will animate his lay,
and other mind to virtue raise,
must feel his own with all her spirit glow.

iii. 1. 

be there, approve of late time,
who verse adorn a tyrant crime?
who see majestic Rome betray,
and lend the imperial ruffian aid?
alas! not one pollute bard,
no, not the strain that Mincius hear,
or tibur hill reply,
dare to the muse ear aspire;
save that, instruct by the graecian lyre,
with freedom ancient note their shameful task they hide.

iii. 2. 

Mark, how the dread Pantheon stand,
amid the dome of modern hand:
amid the toy of idle state,
how simple, how severe great!
then turn, and, while each western clime
present her tuneful son to time,
so mark thou Milton name;
and add, "thus differ from the throng
"the spirit which inform thy awful song,
"which bid thy potent voice protect thy country fame."

iii. 3. 

yet hence barbaric zeal
his memory with unholy rage pursue;
while from these arduous care of public weal
she bid each bard begone, and rest he with his muse.
o fool! to think the man, who ample mind
must grasp at all that yonder star survey;
must join the noble form of every kind,
the world be most perfect image to display,
can ever his country majesty behold,
unmoved or cold!
o fool! to deem
that he, who thought must visit every theme,
who heart must every strong emotion know
by nature plant, or by fortune teach;
that he, if haply some presumptuous foe,
with false ignoble science fraught,
shall spurn at freedom faithful band;
that he, their dear defence will shun,
or hide their glory from the sun,
or deal their vengeance with a woman hand!

iv. 1. 

i care not that in arno plain,
or on the sportive bank of Seine,
from public theme the muse choir
content with polish ease retire.
where priest the studious head command,
where tyrant bow the warlike hand
to vile ambition aim,
say, what can public theme afford,
save venal honour to a hateful lord,
reserve for angry heaven and scorn of honest fame?

iv. 2. 

but here, where freedom equal throne
to all her valiant son be know;
where all be conscious of her care,
and each the power, that rule he, share;
here let the bard, who daftard tongue
leave public argument unsung,
bid public praise farewell:
let he to fit clime remove,
far from the hero and the patriot love,
and lull mysterious monk to slumber in their cell.

iv. 3. 

o Hastings, not to all
can rule heaven the same endowment lend:
yet still do nature to her offspring call,
that to one general weal their different power they bend,
unenvious. thus alone, though strain divine
inform the bosom of the muse son;
though with new honour the patrician line
advance from age to age; yet thus alone
they win the suffrage of impartial fame,
the poet name
he best shall prove,
who lay the soul with noble passion move.
but thou, o progeny of hero old,
thou to severe toil thy fate require:
the fate which form thou in a choose mould,
the grateful country of thy sire,
thou to sublime path demand;
sublime than thy sire can trace,
or thy own EDWARD teach his race,
though gaul proud genius sink beneath his hand.

v. 1. 

from rich domain and subject farm,
they lead the rustic youth to arm;
and king their stern achievement fear;
while private strife their banner rear.
but lofty scene to thou be show,
where empire wide-established throne
no private master fill:
where, long foretell, the people reign:
where each a vassal humble heart disdain;
and judge what he see; and, as he judge, will.

v. 2. 

here be it thy to calm and guide
the swell democratic tide;
to watch the state uncertain frame,
and baffle faction partial aim:
but chief, with determine zeal,
to quell that servile band, who kneel
to freedom banish foe;
that monster, which be daily find
expert and bold thy country peace to wound;
yet dread to handle arm, nor manly counsel know.

v. 3. 

it be high heaven command,
that guilty aim shall sordid path pursue;
that what ensnare the heart shall curb the hand,
and virtue worthless foe be false to glory too.
but look on freedom. see, through every age,
what labour, peril, grief, have she disdain!
what arm, what regal pride, what priestly rage,
have she dread offspring conquer or sustain!
for Albion well have conquer. let the strain
of happy swain,
which now resound
where scarsdale cliff the swell pasture bind,
bear witness. there, oft let the farmer hail
the sacred orchard which embower his gate,
and show to stranger pass down the vale,
where candish, Booth, and osborne fate;
when burst from their country chain,
even in the midst of deadly harm,
of papal snare and lawless arm,
they plan for freedom this her awful reign.

vi. 1. 

this reign, these law, this public care,
which Nassau give we all to share,
have never adorn the english name,
can fear have silence freedom claim.
but fear in vain attempt to bind
those lofty effort of the mind
which social good inspire;
where man, for this, assault a throne,
each add the common welfare to his own;
and each unconquered heart the strength of all acquire.

vi. 2. 

say, be it thus, when late we view
our field in civil blood imbrue?
when fortune crown the barbarous host,
and half the astonish isle be lose?
do one of all that vaunt train,
who dare affront a peaceful reign,
dare one in arm appear?
dare one in counsel pledge his life?
stake his luxurious fortune in the strife?
or lend his boast name his vagrant friend to cheer?

vi. 3. 

yet, Hastings, these be they,
who challenge to themselves thy country love:
the true; the constant: who alone can weigh,
what glory shall demand, or liberty approve!
but let their work declare they. thy free power,
the generous power of thy prevail mind,
not for the task of their confederate hour,
lewd brawl and lurk slander, be design.
be thou thy own approver. honest praise
oft noble sway
ingenuous youth:
but, seek from coward and the lie mouth,
praise be reproach. eternal god alone
for mortal fix that sublime award.
he, from the faithful record of his throne,
bid the historian and the bard
dispose of honour and of scorn;
discern the patriot from the slave;
and write the good, the wise, the brave,
for lesson to the multitude unborn.
