to the countess of Loudoun. 

will gentle Loudoun deign to lend a ear,
 when nature speak, and sorrow drop a tear? 
within your wall my happiness i find
 luxuriant flourish, like the plant around:
 blithe as the bird that perch on yonder spray,
 in joyous note, i pour the will lay. 
beneath your roof there humble line have birth,
 who honour patron now lie low in earth;
 or bear by fate far from their native shore,
 with smile auspicious glad my heart no more. 

here youth and beauty, innocence and love,
 i joy to see, to serve, and to approve:
 here honour age to all around do show,
 that virtue path alone can bliss bestow:
 here moral lesson speak from every part,
 and peace and kindness write they on my heart. 
hoary inhabitant around the place,
 who faithful service obtain that grace,
 'amid every comfort rural life afford,
 shower prayer and blessing, on its former lord. 

to you the young be teach to lift the eye,
 mild morning sun of their unclouded sky. 
bless in a lot leave nothing to desire,
 those happy scene do future hope inspire,
 that thus my life in careless ease may run,
 my age support by my master son;
 in he, that goodness, and those virtue find,
 which grateful number meet in you combine. 

ah! like a changeful vision of the night,
 those scene be flee, and death appal my sight! 
wherever i turn, lament tomb appear,
 or part sail extort the bitter tear! 
to distant realm the darling child too go;
 o guard he heaven, and let i weep alone! 
for every tear, let countless blessing fall
 on thy sad mother in thy grandsire hall! 

forgive, fair nymph, the dictate of despair;
 grief fly, for comfort, to the tender fair. 
the good and great, we fond think have power,
 can charm to ease our sad and anxious hour:
 else why to you shall i at fate repine? 
the friend i mourn, alas! be double thy! 
for their dear sake, bid line they prize still live,
 and grant that shelter they no more can give. 
yet, the sad verse how shall you patronize
 that wake up anguish in a heart at ease! 
for their dear sake my prayer be ever thy,
 nor can i more be your protection mine. 
