the bag-wig and the tobacco-pipe.

a fable.

a bag-wig of a janty air,
 trick up with all a barber care,
 load with powder and perfume,
 hang in a spendthrift dressing-room;
 close by its side, by chance convey,
 a black tobacco-pipe be lay;
 and with its vapour far and near,
 outstunk the essence of monsieur;
 at which its rage, the thing of hair,
 thus, bristle up, begin declare. 

 "bake dirt! that with intrusion rude
" break in upon my solitude,
 "and with thy fetid breath defile
" the air for forty thousand mile —
 "avaunt — pollution in thy touch —
" o barbarous english! horrid dutch! 
 "i can bear it — here, Sue, nan,
" go call the maid to call the man,
 "and bid he come without delay,
" to take this odious pipe away. 
 "hideous! sure some one smoke thou, friend,
" reverse, at his tother end. 
 "oh! what mix odour! what a throng
" of salt and sour, of stale and strong! 
 "a most unnatural combination,
" enough to mar all perspiration —
 "monstrous! again — it will vex a saint! 
" Susan, the drop — or else i faint! " 
the pipe (for it be a pipe of soul)
 raise himself upon his bole,
 in smoke, like oracle of old,
 do thus his sentiment unfold. 

 "why, what be the matter, goodman swagger,
" thou flaunt french, fantastic bragger? 
 "who whole fine speech be (with a pox)
" ridiculous and heterodox. 
 "it be better for the english nation
" before such scoundrel come in fashion,
 "when none seek hair in realm unknown,
" but every blockhead bear his own. 
 "know, puppy, i be a english pipe,
" deem worthy of each briton gripe,
 "who, with my cloud-compelling aid
" help our plantation and our trade,
 "and be, when sober and when mellow,
" a upright, downright, honest fellow. 
 "though fool, like you, may think i rough,
" and scorn i, because i be in buff,
 "yet your contempt i glad receive,
" it be all the fame that you can give:
 "none finery or foppery prize;
" but they who have something to disguise;
 "for simple nature hate abuse,
" and plainness be the dress of use. " 
