The BAG-WIG and the TOBACCO-PIPE.

A FABLE.

A Bag-wig of a jauntee air,
 Trick'd up with all a barber's care,
 Loaded with powder and perfume,
 Hung in a spendthrift's dressing-room;
 Close by its side, by chance convey'd,
 A black Tobacco-pipe was laid;
 And with its vapours far and near,
 Outstunk the essence of Monsieur;
 At which its rage, the thing of hair,
 Thus, bristling up, began declare. 

 "Bak'd dirt! that with intrusion rude
" Breaks in upon my solitude,
 "And with thy fetid breath defiles
" The air for forty thousand miles —
 "Avaunt — pollution's in thy touch —
" O barb'rous English! horrid Dutch! 
 "I cannot bear it — Here, Sue, Nan,
" Go call the maid to call the man,
 "And bid him come without delay,
" To take this odious pipe away. 
 "Hideous! sure some one smoak'd thee, Friend,
" Reversely, at his t'other end. 
 "Oh! what mix'd odours! what a throng
" Of salt and sour, of stale and strong! 
 "A most unnatural combination,
" Enough to mar all perspiration —
 "Monstrous! again — 'twou'd vex a saint! 
" Susan, the drops — or else I faint! " 
The pipe (for 'twas a pipe of soul)
 Raising himself upon his bole,
 In smoke, like oracle of old,
 Did thus his sentiments unfold. 

 "Why, what's the matter, Goodman Swagger,
" Thou flaunting French, fantastic bragger? 
 "Whose whole fine speech is (with a pox)
" Ridiculous and heterodox. 
 "'Twas better for the English nation
" Before such scoundrels came in fashion,
 "When none sought hair in realms unknown,
" But every blockhead bore his own. 
 "Know, puppy, I'm an English pipe,
" Deem'd worthy of each Briton's gripe,
 "Who, with my cloud-compelling aid
" Help our plantations and our trade,
 "And am, when sober and when mellow,
" An upright, downright, honest fellow. 
 "Tho' fools, like you, may think me rough,
" And scorn me, 'cause I am in buff,
 "Yet your contempt I glad receive,
" 'Tis all the fame that you can give:
 "None finery or fopp'ry prize;
" But they who've something to disguise;
 "For simple nature hates abuse,
" And Plainness is the dress of Use. " 
