[Tasso, aminta:] amintor, be ask by thirsis who be the object of his love? speak as follow.

amint.

thirsis! to thou i mean that name to show,
 which, only yet our groves, and fountain know:
 that, when my death shall through the plain be tell,
 thou with the wretched cause may that unfold
 to everyone, who shall my story find
 carve by thy hand, in some fair beech rind;
 beneath who shade the bleed body lie:
 that, when by chance she shall be lead that way,
 over my sad grave the haughty nymph may go. 
and the proud triumph of her beauty show
 to all the swain, to stranger as they pass;
 and yet at length she may (but oh! alas! 
i fear, too high my flatter hope do soar)
 yet she at length may my sad fate deplore;
 may weep i dead, may over my tomb recline
 and sigh, wish be he alive and i! 
but mark i to the end —

their.

go on; for well i do thy speech attend,
 perhaps to better end, than yet thou know. 

amint.

be now a child, or but a youth at most,
 when scarce to reach the blush fruit i know
 which on the low bend branch grow;
 still with the dear, sweet, kind maid
 young as myself, at childish sport i play. 
the fair, sure, of all that lovely kind,
 who spread their golden tress to the wind;
 cydippe daughter, and montano heir,
 who flock and herd so numerous do appear;
 the beauteous Sylvia; she, it be she i love,
 warmth of all heart, and pride of every grove. 
with she i live, no turtle ever so fond. 
our house meet, but more our soul be join. 
together net for fish, and fowl we lay;
 together through the spacious forest stray;
 pursue with equal speed the fly deer,
 and of the spoil there no division be. 
but while i from the beast their freedom win,
 alas! i know not how, my own be go. 
by unperceived degree the fire increase,
 which fill, at last, each corner of my breast;
 as from a root, though scarce discern so small,
 a plant may rise, that grow amaze tall. 
from sylvia presence now i can not move,
 and from her eye take in full draught of love,
 which sweet through my ravish mind distil;
 yet in the end such bitterness will yield,
 that oft i sigh, ere yet i know the cause,
 and be a lover, ere i dream i be. 
but oh! at last, too well my state i know;
 and now, will show thou how this passion grow. 
then listen, while the please tale i tell. 
