Euterpe: the lyric muse, on the death of John dryden, ESQ;

a ode.

i 

i soft Euterpe, sweet of the nine,
 the most inspire, and the most divine,
 by my own lyre raise to ecstatic joy
 full of kind influence expect sit,
 when tuneful Dryden will my aid implore,
 who with gay transport do my gift employ,
 and mean thought above my note do soar
 but strait a dismal, and unwelcome sound,
 fill all the æthereal court around,
 great Dryden be no more. 
but like the common thing in mortal state,
 lose in the impartial gulf of a inevitable fate,
 at the dread news grief all my lustre veil,
 i break my harmonious harp and lute,
 throw by my soften ever-charming flute,
 not the least glimpse of joy appear,
 no radiant nymph about my palace wait,
 nor drink i any nectar but my tear. 

ii.

i with profound cause, and sorrow mourn,
 over my dryden sacred urn:
 he be my great glory, only boast,
 through he i let ungrateful mankind know,
 what mighty wonder i can do,
 but now, like he, to the inferior world i be lose. 
i teach he all the soft air of love,
 and anthem so divine; he will find the same above. 
with a auspicious pride i do dispense
 my mighty favour, when he do implore,
 from my pregnant unexhausted store,
 of tuneful fancy, and harmonious sense. 
when i with gentle fire have warm the breast,
 the soul with please rapture bless,
 the sacred flame in every part do shine. 
the product, like the source, be all divine,
 poetry not the effect of art, or wine, or love,
 though they sometime the gift improve,
 nor be the warmth that poet breast inspire,
 vinum doemonum, but celestial fire. 
a god-like ray enlighten from above;
 as decent measure, regular motion be
 through all the tuneful universe,
 and speak in all a glorious harmony,
 even so the mystic number of melodious verse,
 be of the intellectual world the sacred symmetry. 

iii.

Dryden i choose of all the tuneful throng,
 his soul with ardour fill fit for immortal song;
 learnt he all lyric art of poetry,
 such as may with celestial note agree;
 which his industry do improve,
 in celebration, elegy and love,
 and every theme which his command pen will try
 with strength of judgement, and profound sense,
 with sparkle wit, gay fancy, eloquence,
 his verse do all abound:
 in he alone be find
 the much desire, aim at excellence. 
in every line magnificent or sweet,
 like Ovid soft, or else like Virgil great. 
Orpheus magnetic harp less power can boast,
 all rage, unless in love when ever he sing be lose. 
above they all he raise his matchless lay,
 glory of Britain, and wit empire too,
 which though the subject be but few,
 do just wreath he with deserve bay:
 the verdant diadem which laureate crown,
 never look so fresh as when he put it on,
 then like his line with godlike-lustre shine. 

iv.

with a superior and victorious grace
 the sacred place,
 he do almost unenvied assume,
 i, please to see the branch spread
 over his triumphant head,
 from the Helicon spring
 do water bring,
 sprinkle they oft that they may ever bloom. 
but, oh! they can not stand the rage,
 of a ill-natured and lethargic age,
 who spite of wit will stupid be wise,
 all noble rapture, ecstasy despise,
 and only plodder after sense will prize. 
they from his meritorious brow
 the exalt laurel tear,
 which none but he can just wear,
 and he must suffer abdication too. 

v. 

with he they do suppress all lofty flight of poetry. 
all melt air, and rapture harmony,
 but this revenge, let mankind take from i. 
if any dare on dryden death to write,
 not to express their grief, but show their wit,
 i the ambitious purpose will reverse,
 deny my aid,
 and so shall each inspire maid. 
resolve ungrateful man that can contemn
 such noble excellence in he. 
shall never more the bless know,
 we will never again our influence bestow. 
though it be pretend to adorn his Herse. 
(unless the generous Montague implore,
 then in he shall all our glory shine as heretofore.) 
but to express our own immortal love,
 we will solemnise great dryden obsequy above,
 our grief such emphasis shall bear,
 as no corporeal organ can declare,
 and one eternal sigh spread through the extend air. 
