to a gentleman with a manuscript play.

as some grave matron breed on rural down,
 who at the mention of a top-knot frown,
 and the proud minx of the market-town;
 who humble sense be not much refine,
 but use to labour with a cheerful mind;
 clad in plain coif and gown of russet hue,
 with home-spun apron of a decent blue;
 from the white curd extract the green whey,
 nor dream of fashion, poetry, or play;
 from wicked verse she turn her cautious eye,
 and wonder people can delight in lie:
 at length her landlord, the right noble squire,
 take her young daughter at her own desire;
 prefer the damsel to attend his spouse,
 and she with joy resign her brindle cow:
 for London now prepare the smile dame,
 while her sad mother tremble at the name:
 but o! what grief attend the part leave,
 no muse can paint they, nor no heart conceive:
 in vain her spouse or friendly neighbour try,
 to quell the sorrow in she stream eye:
 Rossell she fear will slight she Jersey gown,
 and wear white apron in the sinful town;
 on the pure ghost of win'fred then she call,
 to guard her child within its guilty wall. 

so this rude babe i to your mercy yield,
 rough as the soil of some untillaged field:
 can nature please? — not until she be well refine,
 reform art shall follow close behind;
 but that proud dame with i disdain to dwell,
 and far she fly — ah far from mira cell. 
what then remain? what hope for i or i,
 but the kind silence of forgetful time? 
to save we from the sly buffoon leer,
 the spiteful grimace, and the scornful sneer;
 the threaten critic with his dreadful rule,
 the wit keen satire and the burst of fool. 
the wretched villain pinion up on high,
 two hour pendent betwixt the earth and sky,
 with egg and turnip whirl round his pate,
 be but a emblem of a author fate. 
a dread example to the rhyme fry,
 so poet tell i, but i hope they lie:
 the world be good-natured, if it be not cross,
 but wit be often saucy to their cost. 

though unassured, yet not in deep despair,
 i trust this infant to its patron care:
 ah let your roof the simple vagrant shield,
 i ask no more than charity may yield,
 some little corner in the friendly dome,
 (lest the loose varlet be induce to roam)
 where the cold storm may hover round in vain,
 the chill snow or penetrate rain;
 where the fierce rat (all dreadful) never climb,
 nor the sleek mouse sad foe to mira rhyme. 

but i have do — for who implore a friend
 with long petition, just may offend:
 to no strait bound good-nature be confine;
 and who shall dictate to a generous mind? 
which not content in narrow space to roll,
 like the broad ocean spread from pole to pole:
 while the glad nation bless the ample tide,
 and waft treasure over its surface glide:
 that still wave on, regardless of their praise,
 as you perhaps of mira idle lay. 
