a epistle to a lady.

by the same.

CLarinda, dear love, attend
the counsel of a faithful friend;
who with the warm wish fraught,
feel all, at least, that friendship ought.
but since by rule heaven design,
another fate shall influence thy;
o! may these line for he prepare
a bliss, which i will die to share!

man may for wealth or glory roam,
but woman must be bless at home;
to this shall all her study tend,
this her great object and her end.
distaste unmingled pleasure bring,
and use can blunt affliction sting;
hence perfect bliss not mortal know,
and few be plunge in utter woe;
while nature arm against despair,
give power to mend, or strength to bear;
and half the thought content may gain,
which spleen employ to purchase pain.

trace not the fair domestic plan,
from what you will, but what you can!
nor, peevish, spurn the scanty score,
because you think you merit more!
bliss ever differ in degree,
thy share alone be mean for thou;
and thou shall think, however small,
that share enough, for it be thy all:
vain scorn will aggravate distress,
and only make that little less.

admit whatever trifle come,
unit compose the large sum:
o! tell they over, and say how vain
be those which form ambition train:
which swell the monarch gorgeous state,
and bribe to ill the guilty great!
but thou more bless, more wise than these,
shall build up happiness on ease.

hail sweet content! where joy serene
gild the mild soul unruffled scene:
and with blithe fancy pencil wrought,
spread the white web of flow thought;
shine lovely in the cheerful face,
and clothes each charm with native grace;
effusion pure of bliss sincere,
a vestment for a god to wear.

far other ornament compose
the garb that shroud dissemble woe,
piece out with motley die and sort,
freak, whimsy, festival and sport;
the trouble mind fantastic dress,
which madness title happiness.
while the gay wretch to revel bear
the pale remains of sigh and tear;
and seek in crowd, like she undo,
what only can be find in one.

but, chief, my gentle friend! remove
far from thy couch seduce love!
o! shun the false magician art,
nor trust thy yet unguarded heart!
charm by his spell fair honour fly,
and thousand treacherous phantom rise
where guilt in beauty ray beguile,
and ruin lurk in friendship smile.
lo! where the enchant captive dream
of warble grove, and purl stream;
of paint mead, of flower that shed
their odour round her fragrant bed.
quick shift the scene, the charm be lose,
she wake upon a desert coast!
no friendly hand to lend its aid,
no guardian bower to spread its shade;
expose to every chill blast,
she tread the inhospitable waste;
and down the drear decline of life,
sink a forlorn, dishonour wife.

neglect not thou the voice of fame,
but clear from crime, be free from blame!
though all be innocence within,
it be guilt to wear the garb of sin.
virtue reject the foul disguise:
none merit praise who praise despise.

slight not, in supercilious strain,
long practise mode, as low or vain!
the world will vindicate their cause,
and claim blind faith in custom law.
safe with multitude to stray,
than tread alone a fair way;
to mingle with the err throng,
than bold speak ten million wrong.

beware of the relentless train
who form adore, who form maintain!
lest prude demure, or coxcomb loud,
accuse thou to the partial crowd;
foe who the law of honour slight,
a judge who measure guilt by spite.

behold the sage Aurelia stand,
disgrace and fame at her command!
as if heaven delegate design,
sole arbiter of all her kind.
whether she try some favour piece,
by rule devise in ancient Greece;
or whether modern in her flight,
she tell what Paris think polite.
for much her talent to advance,
she study Greece, and travel France.
there learn the happy art to please,
with all the charm of labour ease;
through look and nod with meaning fraught,
to teach what she be never teach.

by her each latent spring be see,
the work foul of secret spleen;
the guilt that skulk in fair pretence,
or folly veil in specious sense.
and much her righteous spirit grieve,
when worthlessness the world deceive;
whether the err crowd commend
some patriot sway by private end;
or husband trust a faithless wife,
secure in ignorance from strife.
averse she bring their deed to view,
but justice claim the rigurous due;
humane anxious to produce
at least some possible excuse.
o never may virtue dire disgrace
prepare a triumph for the base!

mere form the fool implicit sway,
which witling with contempt survey,
blind folly no defect can see,
half wisdom view but one degree;
the wise remot use reach,
which judgement and experience teach.

whoever will be please and please,
must do what other do with ease.
great precept undefined by rule,
and only learn in custom school;
to no peculiar form confine,
it spread through all the human kind;
beauty and wit and worth supply,
yet graceful in the good and wise.
rich with this gift and none beside,
in fashion stream how many glide?
secure from every mental woe,
from treacherous friend or open foe;
from social sympathy that share
the public loss or private care;
whether the barbarous foe invade,
or merit pine in fortune shade.

hence gentle Anna ever-gay,
the same tomorrow as today,
save where perchance, when other weep,
her cheek the decent sorrow steep;
save when perhaps a melt tale,
over every tender breast prevail.
the good, the bad, the great, the small,
she like, she love, she honour all.
and yet if slanderous malice blame,
patient she yield a sister fame.
alike if satire or if praise,
she say whatever the circle say;
implicit do whatever we do,
without one point or wish in view,
sure test of other, faithful glass
through which the various phantom pass.
wide blank, unfeeling when alone,
no care, no joy, no thought she own.

not thus succeed the peerless dame,
who look, and talk, and act for fame;
intent, so wide her care extend,
to make the universe her friend.
now with the gay in frolick shine,
now reason deep with deep divine.
with courtier now extol the great,
with patriot sigh over britain fate.
now breathe with zealot holy fire,
now melt in less refine desire.
doom to exceed in each degree,
too wise, too weak, too proud, too free,
too various for one single word,
the high sublime of deep absurd.
while every talent nature grant,
just serve to show how much she want.

although in — combine
the virtue of our sex and thy:
her hand restrain the widow tear,
her sense inform, and sooth and cheer;
yet like a angel in disguise,
she shine but to some favour eye;
nor be the distant herd allow
to view the radiance through the cloud.

but thy be every win art,
thy be the friendly honest heart:
and shall the generous spirit flow,
beyond where prudence fear to go;
such sally be of noble kind,
than virtue of a narrow mind.
