elegiac stanza.

write during sickness at bath.

when i lie muse on my bed alone,
and listen to the wintery waterfall;
and many moment that be past and go,
moment of sunshine and of joy, recall;

though the long night be dark and damp around,
and no still star hang out its friendly flame;
and the wind sweep the sash with sullen sound,
and freeze palsy creep over all my frame;

i catch console fantasy that spring
from the thick gloom, and as the night air beat,
they touch my heart, like wind-swift wire that ring
in mournful modulation, strange and sweet.

be it the voice of thou, my bury friend?
be it the whisper vow of faithful love?
do i in knoyle green shade thy step attend,
and hear the high pine murmur thus above? 

it be not thy voice, my bury friend! — oh, no:
it be not, o Knoyle! the murmur of thy tree;
but at the thought i feel my bosom glow,
and woo the dream who air-draw shadow please.

and i can think i see the grove again,
the larche that yond peaceful roof embower;
the airy down, the cattle-speckled plain,
and the slant sunshine on the village tower.

and i can think i hear its sabbath chime
come smooth soften down the woody vale;
or mark on yond lone eminence sublime,
fast whirl in the wind, the white mill be sail.

phantom, that by my bed do beckon glide,
spectre of death, to the damp charnel hie!
thy dim pale hand, thy fester visage hide;
thou come to say, i with thy worm shall lie!

thou come to say that my once vacant mind
amid those scene shall never more rejoice;
nor on the day of rest the hoary hind
bend over his staff, attentive to my voice.

have thou not visit that pleasant place
where in this hard world i have happy be?
and shall i tremble at thy lift mace
that have pierce all on which life seem to lean?

but hope may whisper: many a smile day
and many a cheerful eve may yet be i,
ere age autumn strew my lock with grey,
and weary to the dust my step decline. 

i argue not, but uncomplaining bow
to heaven high 'hest; secure, whatever my lot,
meek spirit of resign content, that thou
will smooth my pillow, and forsake i not!

thou to the turfy hut with pilgrim foot
wander, from hall of loud tumultuous joy;
or on the naked down, when the wind beat,
do sing to the forsake shepherd boy.

thou be the sick man nurse, the poor man friend,
and through each change of life thou have be mine;
in every ill thou can a comfort blend,
and bid the eye, though sad, in sadness shine.

thou i have meet on cherwell willowed side,
and when our destine road far onward lie,
thou i have find, whatever chance betide,
the kind companion of my devious way.

with thou unwearied have i love to roam,
by the smooth-flowing Scheldt, or rush Rhine;
and thou have gladden my sequester home,
and hang my peaceful porch with eglantine.

when care and cross my tire spirit try,
when to the dust my father i resign;
amid the quiet shade unseen i sigh,
and, bless with thou, forget a world unkind.

even now, while toil through the sleepless night,
a tearful look to distant scene i cast,
and the glad object that once charm my sight
remember, like soft view of "fairy" past;

i see thou come half-smiling to my bed,
with fortitude more awful severe,
who arm sustain hold my droop head,
who dry with her dark lock the tender tear.

o firm spirit! on some craggy height
who, when the tempest sail aloft, do stand,
and hear the ceaseless billow of the night
roll upon the solitary strand;

at this sad hour, when no harsh thought intrude
to mar the melancholy mind repose,
when i be leave to night and solitude,
and languid life seem verge to its close;

oh, let i thy pervade influence feel;
be every weak and wayward thought repress;
and hide thou, as with plate of cold steel,
the fade aspect and the throb breast!

silent the motley pageant may retreat,
and vain mortality brief scene remove;
yet let my bosom, while with life it beat,
breathe a last prayer for all on earth i love.

slow-creeping pain weigh down my heavy eye,
a chiller faintness steal upon my breast;
"o gentle Muse, with some sweet lullaby"
rock i in long forgetfulness to rest!
