the libyan hunter, a fable.

inscribe to the memory of a late admire author.

when merit rise like the prince of day,
 pale envy turn her ache eye away;
 then sallow cheek with rage be teach to glow,
 and narrow soul to bloat fury grow. 

old story tell we, on a earthly plain
 once Jove descend wrap in golden rain:
 now fate permit no such familiar power,
 but shoal of critic fall in leaden shower:
 these gaze at wit, as owl behold the sun,
 and curse the lustre which they fain will shun;
 these beast of prey no live worth endure,
 nor be the region of the dead secure;
 yet shall the worthy over their spite prevail;
 here lie the moral — follow next the tale. 

once on a time on libya thirsty land,
 where shower seldom wet the burn sand,
 live happy Sylvius as the morning gay,
 a wellknown favourite of the prince of day;
 who hand, unerring, to the Mark in view
 send the swift arrow from the twang yew:
 the tremble panther from his fury fly,
 when the keen javelin hiss along the sky;
 fierce be his eye, and dazzle as the sun;
 his raven look in mazy ringlet run,
 a well-stored quiver at his back be tie,
 a shine spear his better hand supply:
 thus rude charm, he be sure to please
 with graceful negligence and careless ease:
 he breathe soft music from his tuneful tongue,
 and the wild tiger listen to his song:
 the woodland nymph their dusky shade forgo,
 and the blue naiad leave the deep below:
 none guard the flock, nor hunt the fly prey,
 till he have finish the enchant lay:
 then sylvan dame with wreath of laurel bind,
 his cheerful temple and with rose crown. 
but grudge envy hear the just applause,
 and the pale phantom writhe her haggard jaw;
 now swell the bosom of repine swain,
 and hiss scandal fly across the plain. 

at length his fame the wonder sky invade,
 and reach the muse in their sacred shade;
 bright Thalia view he with a envious eye,
 and thus address her partner of the sky:
 'you tuneful maid, give over the labour song,
'small be the praise to our share belong;
 'look down and see on yonder sultry plain,
'our voice equal by a libyan Swain;
 'give over the lay, you too officious fair,
'lay down the lyre and fruitless hymn forbear,
 'nor hope to charm the partial prince of day,
'while heavenly accent breathe from mortal clay:
 'in vain we keep our radiant seat on high,
'if rural swain shall with our music vie: '
she say: and rage possess the beauteous ring,
 some curse the youth and some their partial king. 
the dame who see the infectious murmur run,
 roll her blue eye, and thus afresh begin:
'no more the bay shall to our share belong,
 'nor charm celestial shall attend our song:
'but all to Sylvius shall their offering pay;
 'to Sylvius favour by the prince of day,
'shall he exceed the muse sacred choir:
 'not while revenge shall injure bosom fire. 

 'but see, my sister: on the plain below
'swift cynthia hound pursue the fly Doe:
 'be i the task to bear a fraudful tale,
'to the swift hunter in the libyan vale:
 'as how her herd in vain from Sylvius fly;
'he dart pursue they, and the victim die:
 'so delia rage shall stop his tuneful tongue,
'and we no more shall dread the rival song. 
here cease the dame — the smile sister join:
 their loud applause to her sly design. 

now have the sun withdraw his pierce eye. 
and night assume the empire of the sky:
 lull in her lap repose nature lie,
 and swain forget the labour of the day:
 the wind be hush, the ocean cease to roar,
 and soft murmur by the sandy shore,
 when from Parnassus fly the envious maid,
 to seek the Huntress of the lonely shade:
 the fierce virago on a verdant plain,
 she find, encircle by her sleep train;
 where a cool river bless the fertile ground,
 its bank with tree and bend osier crown:
 beneath a shade the lovely Dian stand
 with down-cast eye, and view the roll flood;
 who wave be bright with the reflect beam
 of her own orb that sparkle on the stream. 

 'hail, Delia, hail, (begin the artful dame)
'live there a wretch who own not delia name? 
 'live there a slave who dare hand defy
'the awful empress of the nightly sky? 
 'yes, haughty Sylvius triumph over the plain,
'though thy choice herd be by his arrow slay;
 'the fright faun his wanton rage will fly,
'but the keen dart overtake they, and they die. 
 'he shine spear arrest the tremble Doe,
'and groan stag the deadly weapon know:
 'but if fair Delia to the libyan Swain
'resign the freedom of her sacred plain,
 'let none dispute the licence of her will,
'and i retire to our tuneful hill. '

with flush feature and disorder charm
 the angry goddess seize her deathful arm;
 'shall man with i dispute the plain (she cry,
 while kindle rage inflame her roll eye)
'this hand shall well revenge my slaughter deer:
 she say: and furious grasp the dreadful spear,
 and over her shoulder fling the shine bow,
 then breathe vengeance seek her guiltless foe. 
the youth beneath a dusky shade she find,
 thoughtless of ill and sleep on the ground;
 a deadly shaft delude Cynthia draw,
 and to his heart the feather vengeance fly;
 the reek blood come bubble through the wound,
 pour over his bosom and distain the ground;
 then the free spirit take her airy way,
 to field of pleasure and of endless day. 

the red-cheeked morning have now chase away
 night sable curtain — and the dawn day
 call forth abroad the trusty band — again
 to chase the tiger over the desert plain;
 to search the cave where kingly lion roar,
 and from thick shade dislodge the bristle boar:
 Sylvius they want, for he they search, they call,
 they search the shade where crystal Waters fall,
 his wonted haunt: then every voice they try:
 in vain they call, for none, alas! reply:
 hear, Sylvius, hear, they cry, and all around;
 hear, Sylvius, hear, the hollow rock resound. 
at length a crew, the base of the plain,
 approach, the covert of the slaughter Swain
 glad they behold he breathless on the ground,
 and gaze with rapture on the purple wound,
 when one begin — now bless the friendly hand,
 that sweep off Sylvius from the gaze land:
 behold the day so oft by we desire,
 here lie the Swain who late all admire. 

this Phoebus see, as from his blaze wheel,
 with his broad eye he view the glitter field
 behold the youth who he have teach to throw
 the feather arrow from the bound bow,
 behold his Sylvius, to who artful tongue
 he teach the number of enchant song. 
now cold and breathless on the dewy plain,
 and his worst foe insult over the slay:
 then rage the god that wear the silver bow,
 and his broad eye with sparkle fury glow,
 descend Phoebus in a burn ray,
 his beamy lock declare the prince of day,
 and flash glory round his temple play,

each on his face the tremble victim fall,
 their stammer tongue will fain for mercy call;
 but as all grovel on the dust they lie,
 his shaft dispatch they to the dark sky:
 learn hence (he cry) you impious man, to know,
 and dread the power that wear the mortal bow:
 for while i rule the blaze throne of day,
 none wrong my servant but shall find their pay;
 he say — and raise his favourite from the ground,
 then smile the feature: and the gape wound
 be see no more. the glow cheek revive,
 shake off the stamp of death, and seem alive;
 instead of cypress and a mournful shroud,
 Apollo wrap he in a golden cloud,
 and bear he thence: but where, there be none can say,
 unless to his own region of the day. 

and from the ground where Sylvius late be see,
 where the warm gore have stain the thirsty green;
 a please tree arise with slender stem,
 that breathe Ambrosia from its open gem:
 those open gem the virgin use to wear
 on their fair bosom, and their shine hair:
 now the gay shrub each happy climate know,
 by all admire, and it be call the rose. 
