Tirocinium.

it be not from his form in which we trace
 strength join with beauty, dignity with grace,
 that man, the master of this globe, derive
 his right of empire over all that life. 
that form indeed, the associate of a mind
 vast in its power, ethereal in its kind,
 that form, the labour of almighty skill,
 frame for the service of a free-born will,
 assert precedence, and bespeak controul,
 but borrow all its grandeur from the soul. 
she be the state, the splendour and the throne,
 a intellectual kingdom, all her own. 
for she, the memory fill her ample page
 with truth pour down from every distant age,
 for she amass a unbounded store,
 the wisdom of great nation, now no more,
 though load, not encumber with her spoil,
 laborious, yet unconscious of her toil,
 when copious supply, then most enlarge,
 still to be feed, and not to be surcharge. 
for she, the fancy rove unconfined,
 the present muse of every pensive mind,
 work magic wonder, add a bright hue
 to nature scene, than nature ever know,
 at her command, wind rise and water roar,
 again she lay they slumber on the shore,
 with flower and fruit the wilderness supply,
 or bid the rock in rude pomp arise. 
for she, the judgement, umpire in the strife,
 that grace and nature have to wage through life,
 quicksighted arbiter of good and ill,
 appoint sage preceptor to the will,
 condemn, approve, and with a faithful voice
 guide the decision of a doubtful choice. 

why do the fiat of a god give birth
 to yond fair sun and his attendant earth,
 and when descend he resign the sky,
 why take the gent'le moon her turn to rise,
 who ocean feel through all his countless wave,
 and own her power on every shore he lave? 
why do the season still enrich the year,
 fruitful and young as in their first career? 
spring hang her infant blossom on the tree,
 rock in the cradle of the western breeze,
 summer in haste the thrive charge receive
 beneath the shade of her expand leaf,
 until autumn fierce heat and plenteous dew
 die they at last in all their glow hue —
 it be wild profusion all, and bootless waste,
 power misemploy, munificence misplace,
 have not its author dignify the plan,
 and crown it with the majesty of man. 
thus form, thus place, intelligent, and teach
 look where he will, the wonder god have wrought
 the wild scorner of his maker law
 find in a sober moment time to pause,
 to press the important question on his heart,
 "why form at all, and wherefore as thou be?"
if man be what he seem, this hour a slave,
 the next mere dust and ash in the grave,
 endue with reason only to descry
 his crime and folly with a ache eye,
 with passion, just that he may prove with pain
 the force he spend against their fury, vain,
 and if soon after have burn by turn
 with every lust with which frail nature burn,
 his being end where death dissolve the bond,
 the tomb take all, and all be blank beyond,
 then he, of all that nature have bring forth
 stand self-impeached the creature of least worth,
 and useless while he live, and when he die,
 bring into doubt the wisdom of the sky. 

truth that the learn pursue with eager thought,
 be not important always as dear-bought,
 prove at last, though tell in pompous strain,
 a childish waste of philosophic pain;
 but truth on which depend our main concern,
 that it be our shame and misery not to learn,
 shine by the side of every path we tread
 with such a lustre, he that run may read. 
it be true, that if to trifle life away
 down to the sunset of their late day,
 then perish on futurity wide shore
 like fleet exhalation, find no more,
 be all that heaven require of human kind,
 and all the plan their destiny design,
 what none can reverence all may just blame,
 and man will breathe but for his maker shame. 
but reason hear, and nature well peruse,
 at once the dream mind be disabuse. 
if all we find possess earth, sea, air,
 reflect his attribute who place they there,
 fulfil the purpose, and appear design
 proof of the wisdom of the all-seeing mind,
 it be plain, the creature who he choose to invest
 with kingship and dominion over the rest,
 receive his noble nature, and be make
 fit for the power in which he stand array,
 that first or last, hereafter if not here,
 he too may make his author wisdom clear,
 praise he on earth, or obstinate dumb
 suffer his justice in a world to come. 
this once believe, it be logic misapply
 to prove a consequence by none deny,
 that we be bind to cast the mind of youth
 betimes into the mould of heavenly truth,
 that teach of god they may indeed be wise,
 nor ignorant wander miss the sky. 

in early day the conscience have in most
 a quickness, which in late life be lose,
 preserve from guilt by salutary fear,
 or, guilty, soon relent into tear. 
too careless often as our year proceed,
 what friend we sort with, or what book we read,
 our parent yet exert a prudent care
 to feed our infant mind with proper fare,
 and wise store the nursery by degree
 with wholesome learning, yet acquire with ease. 
neat secure from be soil or tear
 beneath a pane of thin translucent horn,
 a book (to please we at a tender age
 it be call a book, though but a single page)
 present the prayer the saviour deign to teach,
 which child use, and parson — when they preach. 
lisp our syllable, we scramble next,
 through moral narrative, or sacred text,
 and learn with wonder how this world begin,
 who make, who mar, and who have ransom man. 
Points, which unless the scripture make they plain,
 the wise head may agitate in vain. 
oh thou, who bear on fancy eager wing
 back to the season of life happy spring,
 i please remember, and while memory yet
 hold fast her office here, can never forget,
 ingenious dreamer, in who well told-tale
 sweet fiction and sweet truth alike prevail,
 who humorous vein, strong sense, and simple stile,
 may teach the gay, make the grave smile,
 witty, and well-employed, and like thy lord,
 speak in parable his slight word,
 i name thou not, lest so despise a name
 shall move a sneer at thy deserve fame,
 yet even in transitory life late day
 that mingle all my brown with sober grey,
 revere the man, who pilgrim mark the road
 and guide the progress of the soul to god. 
it be well with most, if book that can engage
 their childhood, please they at a riper age;
 the man approve what have charm the boy,
 will die at last in comfort, peace, and joy,
 and not with curse on his art who steal
 the gem of truth from his unguarded soul. 
the stamp of artless piety impress
 by kind tuition on his yield breast,
 the youth now beard, and yet pert and raw,
 regard with scorn, though once receive with awe,
 and warp into the labyrinth of lie
 that babbler, call philosopher, devise,
 blaspheme his creed as found on a plan
 replete with dream, unworthy of a man. 
touch but his nature in its ail part,
 assert the native evil of his heart,
 his pride resent the charge, although the proof
 rise in his forehead, and seem rank enough;
 point to the cure, describe a saviour cross
 as God expedient to retrieve his loss,
 the young apostate sicken at the view,
 and hate it with the malice of a Jew. 

how weak the barrier of mere nature prove
 oppose against the pleasure nature love! 
while self-betrayed, and wilful undo,
 she long to yield, no soon woo than win. 
try now the merit of this bless exchange
 of modest truth for wit eccentric range. 
 'time be, he close as he begin the day
 with decent duty, not ashamed to pray. 
the practice be a bond upon his heart,
 a pledge he give for a consistent part,
 nor can he dare prefumptuous displease
 a power confess so late on his knee. 
but now, farewell all legendary tale,
 the shadow fly, philosophy prevail,
 prayer to the wind and caution to the wave,
 religion make the free by nature slave,
 priest have invent, and the world admire
 what knavish priest promulgate as inspire,
 until reason, now no long overawe,
 resume her power, and spurn the clumsy fraud,
 and common-sense diffuse real day,
 the meteor of the gospel die away. 
such rhapsody our shrewd discern youth
 learn from expert enquirer after truth,
 who only care, may truth presume to speak,
 be not to find what they profess to seek. 
and thus well-tutored only while we share
 a mother lecture and a nurse care,
 and teach at school much mythologic stuff,
 but sound religion spare enough,
 our early notice of truth disgrace
 soon lose their credit, and be all efface. 

will you your son shall be a sot or dunce,
 lascivious, headstrong, or all these at once,
 that in good time, the stripling finish taste
 for loose expense and fashionable waste,
 shall prove your ruin, and his own at last,
 train he in public with a mob of boy,
 childish in mischief only and in noise,
 else of a mannish growth, and five in ten
 in infidelity and lewdness, man. 
there shall he learn here sixteen winter eld,
 that author be most useful, pawn or sell,
 that pedantry be all that school impart,
 but tavern teach the knowledge of the heart,
 there waiter Dick with bacchanalian lay
 shall win his heart and have his drunken praise,
 his counsellor and bosom-friend shall prove,
 and some street-pacing harlot his first love. 
school, unless discipline where double strong,
 detain their adolescent charge too long. 
the management of tiro of eighteen
 be difficult, their punishment obscene. 
the stout tall captain, who superior size
 the minor hero view with envious eye,
 become their pattern, upon who they fix
 their whole attention, and ape all his trick. 
his pride that scorn to obey or to submit,
 with they be courage, his effrontery wit. 
his wild excursion, window-breaking feat,
 robbery of garden, quarrel in the street,
 his hairbreadth escape, and all his dare scheme,
 transport they, and be make their favourite theme. 
in little bosom such achievement strike
 a kindred spark, they burn to do the like. 
thus half accomplish, here he yet begin
 to show the peep down upon his chin,
 and as maturity of year come on
 make just the adept that you design your son,
 the insure the perseverance of his course,
 and give your monstrous project all its force,
 send he to college. if he there be tame,
 or in one article of vice reclaim,
 where no regard of ordinance be show
 or look for now, the fault must be his own. 
some sneak virtue lurk in he no doubt,
 where neither strumpet charm nor drinking-bout,
 nor gamble practice can find it out. 
such youth of spirit, and that spirit too
 you nursery of our boy, we owe to you. 
though from ourselves the mischief more proceed,
 for public school it be public folly feed. 
the slave of custom and establish mode,
 with packhorse constancy we keep the road
 crooked or strait, through quag or thorny dell,
 true to the jingle of our leader bell. 
to follow foolish precedent, and wink
 with both our eye, be easy than to think,
 and such a age as we baulk no expense
 except of caution and of common-sense,
 else sure, notorious fact and proof so plain
 will turn our step into a wise train. 
i blame not those who with what care they can
 overwatch the numerous and unruly clan,
 or if i blame, it be only that they dare
 promise a work of which they must despair. 
have you, you sage intendant of the whole,
 a ubiquarian presence and controul,
 elisha eye, that when gehazi stray
 Went with he, and see all the game he play? 
yes — you be conscious; and on all the shelf
 your pupil strike upon, have strike yourself. 
or if by nature sober, you have then
 boy as you be, the gravity of man,
 you know at least, by constant proof address
 to ear and eye, the vice of the rest. 
but you connive at what you can cure,
 and evil not to be endure, endure,
 lest power exert, but without success,
 shall make the little you retain still less. 
you once be just fame for bring forth
 undoubted scholarship and genuine worth,
 and in the firmament of fame still shine
 a glory bright as that of all the sign
 of poet raise by you, and statesman and divine. 
peace to they all, those brilliant time be flee,
 and no such light be kindle in their stead. 
our stripling shine indeed, but with such ray
 as set the midnight riot in a blaze,
 and seem, if judge by their expressive look,
 deep in none than in their surgeon book. 

say muse (for education make the song,
 no muse can hesitate or linger long)
 what cause move we, know as we must
 that these menagery all fail their trust,
 to send our son to scout and scamper there,
 while colt and puppy cost we so much care? 

be it a weakness, it deserve some praise,
 we love the play-place of our early day. 
the scene be touch, and the heart be stone
 that feel not at that sight, and feel at none. 
the wall on which we try our grave skill,
 the very name we carve subsist still,
 the bench on which we sit while deep-employed
 though mangle, hack and hew, not yet destroy,
 the little one unbuttoned, glow hot,
 play our game, and on the very spot,
 as happy as we once, to kneel and draw
 the chalky ring, and knuckle down at taw,
 to pitch the ball into the ground hat,
 or drive it devious with a dex'trous pat,
 the please spectacle at once excite
 such recollection of our own delight,
 that view it, we seem almost to obtain
 our innocent sweet simple year again. 
this fond attachment to the wellknown place
 whence first we start into life long race,
 maintain its hold with such unfailing sway,
 we feel it even in age, and at our late day. 
hark! how the sire of chit who future share
 of classic food begin to be his care,
 with his own likeness place on either knee,
 indulge all a father heart-felt glee,
 and tell they as he stroke their silver lock,
 that they must soon learn latin and to box;
 then turn, he regales his listen wife
 with all the adventure of his early life,
 his skill in coachmanship or drive chaise,
 in bilk tavern bill and spout play,
 what shift he use detect in a scrape,
 how he be flog, or have the luck to escape,
 what sum he lose at play, and how he shall
 watch, seal, and all, until all his prank be tell. 
retrace thus his frolic (it be a name
 that palliate deed of folly and of shame)
 he give the local bias all its sway,
 resolve that where he play his son shall play,
 and destiny their bright genius to be show
 just in the scene where he display his own. 
the meek and bashful boy will soon be teach
 to be as bold and forward as he ought,
 the rude will scuffle through with ease enough,
 great school suit best the sturdy and the rough. 
ah happy designation, prudent choice,
 the event be sure, expect it and rejoice! 
soon see your wish fulfil in either child,
 the pert make perter, and the tame make wild. 

the great indeed, by title, riches, birth,
 excuse the encumbrance of more solid worth,
 be best dispose of, where with most success
 they may acquire that confident address,
 those habit of profuse and lewd expense,
 that scorn of all delight but those of sense,
 which though in plain plebeian we condemn,
 with so much reason all expect from they. 
but family of less illustrious fame,
 who chief distinction be their spotless name,
 who heir, their honour none, their income small,
 must shine by true desert, or not at all,
 what dream they of, that with so little care
 they risk their hope, their dear treasure there? 
they dream of little Charles or William grace
 with wig prolix, down-flowing to his waist,
 they see the attentive crowd his talent draw,
 they hear he speak — the oracle of law. 
the father who design his babe a priest,
 dream he episcopal such at least,
 and while the playful jockey scour the room
 brisk, astride upon the parlour broom,
 in fancy see he more superble ride
 in coach with purple line, and mitre on its side. 
event improbable and strange as these,
 which only a parental eye foresee,
 a public school shall bring to pass with ease. 
but how? reside such virtue in that air
 as must create a appetite for prayer? 
and will it breathe into he all the zeal
 that candidate for such a prize shall feel,
 to take the lead and be the foremost still
 in all true worth and literary skill? 
 "ah blind to bright futurity, untaught
"the knowledge of the world, and dull of thought! 
 "church-ladder be not always mount best
"by learned clerk and latinists profess. 
 "the exalt prize demand a upward look,
"not to be find by pore on a book. 
 "small skill in latin, and still less in greek,
"be more than adequate to all i seek,
 "let erudition grace he or not grace,
"i give the bauble but the second place,
 "his wealth, fame, honour, all that i intend,
"subsist and centre in one point — a friend. 
 "a friend, whatever he study or neglect,
"shall give he consequence, heal all defect,
 "his intercourse with peer, and son of peer —
"there dawn the splendour of his future year,
 "in that bright quarter his propitious sky
"shall blush betimes, and there his glory rise. 
 "your lordship and your grace, what school can teach
"a rhetoric equal to those part of speech? 
 "what need of Homer verse or tully prose,
"sweet interjection! if he learn but those? 
 "let reverend churl his ignorance rebuke,
"who starve upon a dogs-eared Pentateuch,
 "the parson know enough who know a duke. "—
 egregious purpose! worthy begin
 in barbarous prostitution of your son,
 press on his part by mean that will disgrace
 a scriv'ner clerk or footman out of place,
 and end, if at last its end be gain,
 in sacrilege, in God own house profane. 
it may succeed; and if his sin shall call
 for more than common punishment, it shall. 
the wretch shall rise, and be the thing on earth
 least qualify in honour, learning, worth,
 to occupy a sacred, awful post,
 in which the best and worthy tremble most. 
the royal letter, be a thing of course,
 a king that will, may recommend his horse,
 and Deans no doubt and chapter, with one voice
 as bind in duty, will confirm the choice. 
behold your bishop! well he play his part,
 christian in name, and infidel in heart,
 ghostly in office, earthly in his plan,
 a slave at court, elsewhere a lady man,
 dumb as a senator, and as a priest
 a piece of mere church-furniture at best;
 to live estrange from god his total scope,
 and his end sure, without one glimpse of hope. 
but fair although and feasible it seem,
 depend not much upon your golden dream;
 for providence that seem concern to exempt
 the hallow bench from absolute contempt,
 in spite of all the wriggler into place,
 still keep a seat or two for worth and grace,
 and therefore it be, that, though the sight be rare,
 we sometime see a Lowth or Bagot there. 
beside, school-friendship be not always find,
 though fair in promise, permanent and sound. 
the most disint'rest and virtuous mind
 in early year connect, time unbind. 
new situation give a different cast
 of habit, inclination, temper, taste,
 and he that seem our counterpart at first,
 soon show the strong similitude reverse. 
young head be giddy, and young heart be warm,
 and make mistake for manhood to reform. 
boy be at best but pretty bud unblown,
 who scent and hue be rather guess than know. 
each dream that each be just what he appear,
 but learn his error in maturer year,
 when disposition like a sail unfurled
 show all its rent and patch to the world. 
if therefore, even when honest in design,
 a boyish friendship may so soon decline,
 it be wise sure to inspire a little heart
 with just abhorrence of so mean a part,
 than set your son to work at a vile trade
 for wage so unlikely to be pay. 

our public hive of puerile resort
 that be of chief and most approve report,
 to such base hope in many a sordid soul
 owe their repute in part, but not the whole. 
a principle, who proud pretension pass
 unquestioned, though the jewel be but glass,
 that with a world not often overnice
 rank as a virtue, and be yet a vice,
 or rather a gross compound, just try,
 of envy, hatred, jealousy, and pride,
 contribute most perhaps to inhance their fame,
 and emulation be its specious name. 
boy once on fire with that contentious zeal
 feel all the rage that female rival feel,
 the prize of beauty in a woman eye
 not bright than in they the scholar prize. 
the spirit of that competition burn
 with all variety of ill by turn,
 each vain magnify his own success,
 resent his fellow, wish it be less,
 exult in his miscarriage if he fail,
 deem his reward too great if he prevail,
 and labor to surpass he day and night,
 less for improvement, than to tickle spite. 
the spur be powerful, and i grant its force,
 it prick the genius forward in its course,
 allow short time for play, and none for sloth,
 and feel alike by each, advance both,
 but judge where so much evil intervene,
 the end, though plausible, not worth the mean. 
weigh, for a moment, classical desert
 against a heart deprave and temper hurt,
 hurt too perhaps for life, for early wrong
 do to the noble part, affect it long,
 and you be staunch indeed in learning cause,
 if you can crown a discipline that draw
 such mischief after it, with much applause. 

connection form for interest, and endear
 by selfish view, thus censure and cashier,
 and emulation, as engender hate,
 doom to a no less ignominious fate,
 the prop of such proud seminary fall,
 the Jachin and the Boaz of they all. 
great school reject then, as those that swell
 beyond a size that can be manage well,
 shall royal institution miss the bay,
 and small academy win all the praise? 
force not my drift beyond its just intent,
 i praise a school as pope a government;
 so take my judgement in his language dress,
 "whatever be best administer, be best."
few boy be bear with talent that excel,
 but all be capable of live well. 
then ask not, whether limit or large,
 but, watch they strict, or neglect their charge? 
if anxious only that their boy may learn,
 while moral languish, a despise concern,
 the great and small deserve one common blame,
 different in size, but in effect the same. 
much zeal in virtue cause all teacher boast,
 though motive of mere lucre sway the most. 
therefore in town and city they abound,
 for there, the game they seek be easy find,
 though there, in spite of all that care can do,
 trap to catch youth be most abundant too. 
if shrewd, and of a well-constructed brain,
 keen in pursuit, and vigorous to retain,
 your son come forth a prodigy of skill,
 as wheresoever teach, so form, he will,
 the pedagogue, with self-complacent air,
 claim more than half the praise as his due share;
 but if with all his genius he betray,
 not more intelligent, than loose and gay,
 such vicious habit as disgrace his name,
 threaten his health, his fortune, and his fame,
 though want of due restraint alone have breed
 the symptom that you see with so much dread,
 unenvied there, he may sustain alone
 the whole reproach, the fault be all his own. 

oh it be a sight to be with joy peruse
 by all who sentiment have not abuse,
 newfangled sentiment, the boast grace
 of those who never feel in the right place,
 a sight surpass by none that we can show,
 though Vestris on one leg still shine below,
 a father bless with a ingenuous son,
 father and friend and tutor all in one. 
how? turn again to tale long since forget,
 aesop and Phaedrus and the rest? — why not? 
he will not blush that have a father heart,
 to take in childish play a childish part,
 but bend his sturdy back to any toy
 that youth take pleasure in, to please his boy;
 then why resign into a stranger hand
 a task as much within your own command,
 that god and nature and your interest too
 seem with one voice to delegate to you? 
why hire a lodging in a house unknown
 for one who tender thought all hover round your own? 
this second wean, needless as it be,
 how do it lacerate both your heart and he! 
the indent stick that lose day by day
 notch after notch, until all be smooth away,
 bear witness long here his dismission come,
 with what intense desire he want his home. 
but though the joy he hope beneath your roof
 bid fair enough to answer in the proof
 harmless and safe and natural as they be,
 a disappointment wait he even there:
 arrive, he feel a unexpected change,
 he blush, hang his head, be shy and strange,
 no long take, as once, with fearless ease
 his favourite stand between his father knee,
 but seek the corner of some distant seat,
 and eye the door, and watch a retreat,
 and least familiar where he shall be most,
 feel all his happy privilege lose. 
alas poor boy! — the natural effect
 of love by absence chill into respect. 
say, what accomplishment at school acquire
 bring he to sweeten fruit so undesired? 
thou well deserve a alienate son,
 unless thy conscious heart acknowledge — none. 
none that in thy domestic snug recess,
 he have not make his own with more address,
 though some perhaps that shock thy feeling mind,
 and better never learn, or leave behind. 
add too, that thus estrange thou can obtain
 by no kind art his confidence again,
 that here begin with most that long complaint
 of filial frankness lose, and love grow faint,
 which, oft neglect in life wane year,
 a parent pour into regardless ear. 

like caterpillar dangle under tree
 by slender thread, and swing in the breeze,
 which filthy bewray and sore disgrace
 the bough in which be breed the unseemly race,
 while every worm industrious weave
 and wind his web about the rivele leaf;
 so numerous be the folly that annoy
'the mind and heart of every sprightly boy,
 imagination noxious and perverse,
 which admonition can alone disperse. 
the encroach nuisance ask a faithful hand,
 patient, affectionate, of high command,
 to check the procreation of a breed
 sure to exhaust the plant on which they feed. 
it be not enough that greek or roman page
 at state hour his freakish thought engage,
 even in his pastime he require a friend
 to warn, and teach he safe to unbend,
 over all his pleasure gentle to preside,
 watch his emotion and control their tide,
 and levy thus, and with a easy sway,
 a tax of profit from his very play,
 the impress a value not to be erase
 on moment squander else, and run all to waste. 
and seem it nothing in a father eye
 that unimproved those many moment fly? 
and be he well content, his son shall find
 no nourishment to feed his grow mind
 but conjugate verb, and noun decline? 
for such be all the mental food purvey
 by public hackney in the school trade,
 who feed a pupil intellect with store
 of syntax true, but with little more,
 dismiss their care when they dismiss their flock,
 machine themselves, and govern by a clock. 
perhaps a father bless with any brain
 will deem it no abuse or waste of pain,
 the improve this diet at no great expense,
 with savoury truth and wholesome common sense. 
to lead his son for prospect of delight
 to some not steep, though philosophic height,
 thence to exhibit to his wonder eye
 yond circle world, their distance, and their size,
 the moon of Jove and Saturn belt ball,
 and the harmonious order of they all;
 to show he in a insect or a flower,
 such microscopic proof of skill and power,
 as hide from age pass, god now display
 to combat atheist with in modern day;
 to spread the earth before he, and commend
 with designation of the finger end
 its various part to his attentive note,
 thus bring home to he the most remote;
 to teach his heart to glow with generous flame
 catch from the deed of man of ancient fame,
 and more than all, with commendation due
 to set some live worthy in his view,
 who fair example may at once inspire
 a wish to copy what he must admire. 
such knowledge gain betimes, and which appear
 though solid, not too weighty for his year,
 sweet in itself, and not forbid sport,
 when health demand it, of athletic sort,
 will make he what some lovely boy have be,
 and more than one perhaps that i have see,
 a evidence and reprehension both
 of the mere schoolboy lean and tardy growth. 

be thou a man professional tie,
 with all thy faculty elsewhere apply,
 too busy to intend a mean care
 than how to enrich thyself, and next, thy heir;
 or be thou (as though rich, perhaps thou be)
 but poor in knowledge, have none to impart —
 behold that figure, neat, though plain clad,
 his sprightly mingle with a shade of sad,
 not of a nimble tongue, though now and then
 hear to articulate like other man,
 no jester, and yet lively in discourse,
 his phrase well choose, clear, and full of force,
 and his address, if not quite french in ease,
 not english stiff, but frank and form to please,
 low in the world because he scorn its art,
 a man of letter, manner, moral, part,
 unpatronised, and therefore little know,
 wise for himself and his few friend alone,
 in he, thy well appoint proxy see,
 arm for a work too difficult for thou,
 prepare by taste, by learning, and true worth,
 to form thy son, to strike his genius forth,
 beneath thy roof, beneath thy eye to prove
 the force of discipline when back by love,
 to double all thy pleasure in thy child,
 his mind inform, his moral undefiled. 
safe under such a wing, the boy shall show
 no spot contract among groom below,
 nor taint his speech with meanness design
 by footman Tom for witty and refine. 
there — in his commerce with the livery herd
 lurk the contagion chief to be fear. 
for since (so fashion dictate) all who claim
 a high than a mere plebeian fame,
 find it expedient, come what mischief may,
 to entertain a thief or two in pay,
 and they that can afford the expense of more,
 some half a dozen, and some half a score,
 great cause occur to save he from a band
 so sure to spoil he, and so near at hand,
 a point secure, if once he be supply
 with some such Mentor always at his side. 
be such man rare? perhaps they will abound
 be occupation easy to be find,
 be education, else so sure to fail,
 conduct on a manageable scale,
 and school that have outlive all just esteem,
 exchange for the secure domestie scheme. 
but have find he, be thou duke or earl,
 show thou have sense enough to prize the pearl,
 and as thou will the advancement of thy heir
 in all good faculty beneath his care,
 respect, as be but rational and just,
 a man deem worthy of so dear a trust. 
despise by thou, what more can he expect
 from youthful folly, than the same neglect? 
a flat and fatal negative obtain
 that instant, upon all his future pain;
 his lesson tire, his mild rebuke offend,
 and all the instruction of thy son best friend
 be a stream choke, or trickle to no end. 
doom he not then to solitary meal,
 but recollect that he have sense, and feel. 
and, that possessor of a soul refine,
 a upright heart and cultivate mind,
 his post not mean, his talent not unknown,
 he deem it hard to vegetate alone. 
and if admit at thy board he sit,
 account he not just mark for idle wit,
 offend not he who modesty restrain
 from repartee, with joke that he disdain,
 much less transfix his feeling with a oath,
 nor frown, unless he vanish with the cloth. —
 and trust i, his utility may reach
 to more than he be hire or bind to teach,
 much trash unuttered and some ill undo,
 through reverence of the censor of thy son. 

but if thy table be indeed unclean,
 foul with excess, and with discourse obscene,
 and thou a wretch, who, follow her old plan
 the world account a honourable man,
 because forsooth thy courage have be try
 and stand the test, perhaps on the wrong side,
 though thou have never grace enough to prove
 that any thing but vice can win thy love;
 or have thou a polite, card-playing wife,
 chain to the rout that she frequent, for life,
 who, just when industry begin to snore,
 fly, winge with joy, to some coach-crouded door,
 and thrice in every winter throng thy own
 with half the chariot and sedans in town,
 thyself meanwhile even shift as thou may,
 not very sober though, nor very chaste;
 or be thy house, though less superb thy rank,
 if not a scene of pleasure, a mere blank,
 and thou at best, and in thy sober mood,
 a trifler, vain, and empty of all good? 
though mercy for thyself thou can have none,
 hear nature plead, show mercy to thy son. 
save from his home, where every day bring forth
 some mischief fatal to his future worth,
 find he a better in a distant spot,
 within some pious pastor humble cot,
 where vile example (you i chief mean,
 the most seduce and the often see)
 may never more be stamp upon his breast
 not yet perhaps incurable impress. 
where early rest make early rise sure,
 disease or come not, or find easy cure,
 prevent much by diet neat and plain,
 or if it enter, soon starve out again. 
where all the attention of his faithful host
 discreet limit to two at most,
 may raise such fruit as shall reward his care,
 and not at last evaporate in air. 
where stillness aid study, and his mind
 serene, and to his duty much incline,
 not occupy in day-dream, as at home,
 of pleasure past or folly yet to come,
 his virtuous toil may terminate at last
 in settle habit and decide taste. 
but who do i advise? the fashion-led,
 the incorrigible wrong, the deaf, the dead,
 who care and cool deliberation suit
 not better much, than spectacle a brute,
 who if their son some slight tuition share,
 deem it of no great moment, who, or where,
 too proud to adopt the thought of one unknown,
 and much too gay to have any of their own. 
but courage man! methinks the muse reply,
 mankind be various, and the world be wide;
 the ostrich, silly of the feather kind,
 and form of god without a parent mind,
 commit her egg, incautious, to the dust,
 forgetful that the foot may crush the trust;
 and while on public nursery they rely,
 not know, and too oft not care why,
 irrational in what they thus prefer,
 no few, that will seem wise, resemble she. 
but all be not alike. thy warn voice
 may here and there prevent erroneous choice,
 and some perhaps, who, busy as they be,
 yet make their progeny their dear care,
 who heart will ache once tell what ill may reach
 their offspring leave upon so wild a beach,
 will need no stress of argument to enforce
 the expedience of a less adventurous course. 
the rest will slight thy counsel, or condemn,
 but they have human feeling. turn to they. 

to you then, tenant of life middle state,
 secure place between the small and great,
 who character, yet undebauched, retain
 two third of all the virtue that remain,
 who wise yourself, desire your son shall learn
 your wisdom and your way — to you i turn. 
look round you on a world perverse blind,
 see what contempt be fall on human kind,
 see wealth abuse, and dignity misplace,
 great title, office, and trust disgrace,
 long line of ancestry renowned of old,
 their noble quality all quench and cold,
 see bedlam closet and hand-cuffed charge
 surpass in frenzy by the mad at large,
 see great commander make war a trade,
 great lawyer, lawyer without study make,
 churchman, in who esteem their bless employ
 be odious, and their wage all their joy,
 who far enough from furnish their shelf
 with gospel lore, turn infidel themselves,
 see womanhood despise, and manhood shame
 with infamy too nauseous to be name,
 fop at all corner ladylike in mien,
 civet fellow, smell here they be see,
 else coarse and rude in manner, and their tongue
 on fire with curse and with nonsense hang,
 now flush with drunkenness, now with whoredom pale,
 their breath a sample of last night regale,
 see volunteer in all the vile art
 man well endow, of honourable part,
 design by nature wise, but self-made fool;
 all these, and more like these, be breed at school. 
and if it chance, as sometime chance it will,
 that though school-bred, the boy be virtuous still,
 such rare exception shine in the dark,
 prove rather than impeach the just remark,
 as here and there a twinkle star descry
 serve but to show how black be all beside. 
now look on he who very voice in tone
 just echos thy, who feature be thy own,
 and stroke his polish cheek of pure red,
 and lay thy hand upon his flaxen head,
 and say, my boy, the unwelcome hour be come,
 when thou, transplant from thy genial home
 must find a cold soil and bleak air,
 and trust for safety to a stranger care;
 what character, what turn thou will assume
 from constant converse with i know not who,
 who there will court thy friendship, with what view,
 and, artless as thou be, who thou will choose,
 though much depend on what thy choice shall be,
 be all chance-medley and unknown to i. 
can thou, the tear just tremble on thy lid,
 and while the dreadful risque foresee, forbid,
 free too, and under no constrain force,
 unless the sway of custom warp thy course,
 lay such a stake upon the lose side,
 mere to gratify so blind a guide? 
thou can not: nature pull at thy heart
 condemn the unfatherly, the imprudent part. 
thou will not, deaf to nature tender plea,
 turn he adrift upon a roll sea,
 nor say, go thither, conscious that there lie
 a brood of asp, or quicksand in his way,
 then only govern by the self-same rule
 of natural pity, send he not to school. 
no — guard he better; be he not thy own,
 thyself in miniature, thy flesh, thy bone? 
and hope thou not (it be every father hope)
 that since thy strength must with thy year elope;
 and thou will need some comfort to assuage
 health last farewell, a staff of thy old age,
 that then, in recompense of all thy care,
 thy child shall show respect to thy grey hair,
 befriend thou of all other friend bereave,
 and give thy life its only cordial leave? 
aware then how much danger intervene,
 to compass that good end, forecast the mean. 
his heart, now passive, yield to thy command;
 secure it thy. its key be in thy hand. 
if thou desert thy charge and throw it wide,
 nor heed what guest there enter and abide,
 complain not if attachment lewd and base
 supplant thou in it, and usurp thy place. 
but if thou guard its sacred chamber sure
 from vicious inmate and delight impure,
 either his gratitude shall hold he fast,
 and keep he warm and filial to the last,
 or if he prove unkind, (as who can say
 but be man, and therefore frail, he may)
 one comfort yet shall cheer thy age heart,
 however he slight thou, thou have do thy part. 

oh barbarous! will thou with a gothic hand
 pull down the school — what! — all the school in the land? 
or throw they up to liv'ry-nag and groom,
 or turn they into shop and auction-room? 
a captious question, sir, and you be one,
 deserve a answer similar, or none. 
will thou, possessor of a flock, employ
 (apprize that he be such) a careless boy,
 and feed he well and give he handsome pay,
 mere to sleep, and let they run astray? 
survey our school and college, and see
 a sight not much unlike my simile. 
from education, as the lead cause,
 the public character its colour draw,
 thence the prevail manner take their cast,
 extravagant or sober, loose or chaste. 
and though i will not advertise they yet,
 nor write on each — this building to be let,
 unless the world be all prepare to embrace
 a plan well-worthy to supply their place,
 yet backward as they be, and long have be,
 to cultivate and keep the moral clean,
 (forgive the crime) i wish they, i confess,
 or better manage, or encourage less. 
