letter to a friend on leave town.

glad i leave the town, and all its care,
for sweet retirement, and fresh wholesome air,
leave opera, park, the masquerade, and play,
in solitary grove to pass the day.
adieu, gay throng, luxurious vain parade,
sweet peace invite i to the rural shade,
no more the Mall, can captivate my heart,
no more can Ranelagh, one joy impart.
without regret i leave the splendid ball,
and the enchant shade of gay Vauxhall,
far from the giddy circle now i fly,
such joy no more, can please my sicken eye.
the town be allure scene no more can charm,
nor dissipation my fond breast alarm;
where vice and folly have each bosom fire,
and what be most absurd, — be most admire.
alas! what difference betwixt the town breed fair,
and the blithe maid who breathe the pure air.
who life be innocent, who thought be clear,
who soul be gentle, and who heart sincere.
bless with her swain, she want no great joy,
nor fear inconstancy, her bliss can cloy,
no anxious fear invade her tranquil breast,
the peaceful mansion of content and rest.
but rich in every virtue, void of art,
she feel those joy, truth only can impart.

view the gay courtly dame, and mark her face,
where be supply fair nature noble place,
luxurious pleasure, all her day divide,
and fashion taint, bright beauty great pride.
each action have its fix and settle rule,
eye, limb, and feature, be all put to school.
beaux without number, daily round her swarm,
and each with fulsome flattery try to charm.
till, like the rose, which bloom but for a hour,
her face grow common, lose all its power.
each idle coxcomb leave the wretched fair,
alone to languish, and alone despair,
to card, and dice, the slight maiden fly,
and every fashionable vice apply,
scandal and coffee, pass the morn away,
at night a rout, a opera, or a play;
thus glide their life, partly through inclination,
yet more, because it be the reign fashion.
thus giddy pleasure they alone pursue,
mere because, they have nothing else to do;
whatever can afford their heart delight,
no matter if the thing be wrong, or right;
they will pursue it, though they be undo,
they see their ruin, — still they venture on.
prudence they hate, grave wisdom they despise,
and laugh at those who teach they to be wise.
please they embark upon the dangerous tide,
and with the fashionable current glide;
till fate have every wish and purpose cross,
their health, their beauty, and their fortune loss:
no art their want youth can then repair,
abandon to remorse, and keen despair,
repentant sigh, their wretched bosom wound,
and happiness, alas! no more be find.
in some sequester shade alone they stray,
and pensive waste, the solitary day.
till fate relieve the wretched maid from grief,
and death afford, a long and last relief.

these be the folly that engage the mind,
and taint the principle, of half mankind,
then wonder not my friend, that i can leave,
those transcient pleasure, only bear to grieve.
those short-lived shadow of a fleet day,
those idle custom of the rich and gay.
henceforth, retirement, be my choose seat,
far from the insolent, the vain, the great.
sweet solitude, ah! welcome to my breast,
and with thou welcome, sweet content, and rest;
farewell ambition, source of every pain,
farewell pale malice, and thy hateful train:
farewell black calumny, no more thy dart,
shall force one sigh, or wound my placid heart.
my future day, shall with sweet peace abound,
by friendship, virtue, and experience crown.
