the hirlas, 

translate from the ancient british of Owen cyfeliog, prince of powys. 

ere the sun be see on the brow of the mountain, the clang shield be hear in the valley: our enemy be appal at the sound. the red armour of our warrior glitter till the noon of day. the foe flee from the border; they fall in the chace like stone of hail; they pant like hunt wolf.

let the hirlas of rhys overflow like the water of the great river.

where the golden banner declare the valour of rhys, have the horn of hospitality long be use: it relieve the warrior, who faint in the chace, and the traveller who habitation be beyond the white mountain.

bring here, o cup-bearer, the carve hirlas of mirth, which glow with livid gold: let the sparkle mead flow around it.

gwgwyn, prince of my table, son of mighty man, thy be the first honour of the hirlas; small be the gift of gratitude; great be thy service. when thy ancestor stand in the fight, victory stand with they; loud be their voice in the battle, as the hygra of their charge.

fill the golden hirlas of mirth; attend to the merit of the warrior, lest they revenge on thou the disgrace of their honour.

see gryffydh, with his uplift crimson spear, expect it; he be the bulwark of the border: spring from cynfyll and the dragon of the hill; his name shall ever live in the song of the bard. as refresh with the drink of mirth, his attendant fight, furious as the battle of the champion of the valley. while the tomb of Pendragon shall stand on the hill, his same shall remain in the song.

fill up the hirlas to eadnyfed, who sit like a god upon his break armour: like a tempest he fall upon the shield of his foe: near gyrthyn he slay a host.

the distant nation hear the noise of the battle of maelor; the sound of the shield be hear in the mountain. dreadful be the conflict as that of Bangor, when the warrior be tread to the ground. the prince flee: morach beat the earth with his foot: morvran flee over the mountain.

fill up the golden hirlas. let the mead be bear to sylliw, defender of our coast; to the lion of war, the son of Madoc; fierce as a wolf in the fight; soft as the mossy bed in peace.

to the son of essyner, bear it next: strong as two rock they rage in the fight; the brave champion fall before they; like storm they pierce the target of the foe, sweep down the multitude as the loud billow sweep the sand.

fill up the badge of honour. to Tudor bear the golden hirlas. now to moreiddeg, who, with his brother, assist our cause: valour set upon their brow; like wolf they seek for blood. these be my chief.

let the golden hirlas go round to the seat of Morgan, who name shall be hear in the song of our child: the sight of his useless sword blast my soul.

fill up the badge of honour, the golden hirlas. to gronwys bear it; astonish i see he stand like a rock on the spread plain of giveshun; he sustain the assault of a army. upon the sandy bank of the sea his attendant do wonder. the chief of the foe be burn in the fire of his rage, and the glean of the sword be lose in the stream.

in the heat of the battle, the son of gryffydh burst his chain; Menrig again rage in the war. when the sun sit on the hill, we sing the song of victory.

fill the hirlas of mirth to all the chief of oweyn, who be the wolf of the mountain. Madoc and meyler be in soul one; they be our castle. the warrior of the hill stand round their chief, strong as the spear of other, swift in pursuit as the vapour of the night.

fill the hirlas with mead. let we drink to the honour of the warrior, who fall in the war.

bear it to Daniel, beauteous as the verdure of the forest, savage as the prowl wolf.

o cup-bearer! great be thy service, in display the merit of the warrior; if thou have not hear his fame, his spear fly to thy breast, and his follower drink thy blood.

while the lamp of joy be burn, let the hirlas go round to the warrior who fight at llydcomb; they fight with the rage of lion; the mead be their due: they defend cwrys.

let the hirlas go round. may the ruler of all send we liberty and life.

