love and friendship: a pastoral.

by mrs. Elizabeth singer. 

Amaryllis.

while from the sky the ruddy sun descend;
 and rise night the evening shade extend:
 while pearly dew overspread the fruitful field;
 and close flower revive odour yield;
 let we, beneath these spread tree, recite
 what from our heart our muse may indite. 
nor need we, in this close retirement, fear,
 lest any Swain our amorous secret hear. 

Silvia.

to every shepherd i will my proclaim;
 since fair aminta be my soft theme:
 a stranger to the loose delight of love,
 my thought the noble warmth of friendship prove:
 and while it be pure and sacred fire i sing;
 chaste goddess of the groves, thy succour bring. 

Amaryllis.

propitious god of love, my breast inspire
 with all thy charm, with all thy please fire:
 propitious god of love, thy succour bring;
 while i thy darling, thy Alexis sing;
 Alexis, as the ope'n blossom fair,
 lovely as light, and soft as yield air. 
for he each virgin sigh; and on the plain
 the happy youth above each rival reign. 
nor to the echo groves, and whisper spring,
 in sweet strain do artful Conon sing;
 when loud applause fill the crowd groves;
 and Phoebus the superior song approve. 

Silvia.

beauteous aminta be as early light,
 break the melancholy shade of night. 
when she be near, all anxious trouble fly;
 and our revive heart confess her eye. 
young love, and bloom joy, and gay desire,
 in every breast the beauteous nymph inspire:
 and on the plain when she no more appear;
 the plain a dark and gloomy prospect wear. 
in vain the stream roll on: the eastern breeze
 dance in vain among the tremble tree. 
in vain the bird begin their evening song,
 and to the silent night their note prolong:
 nor groves, nor crystal stream, nor verdant field
 do wonted pleasure in her absence yield. 

Amaryllis.

and in his absence, all the pensive day,
 in some obscure retreat i lonely stray;
 all day to the repeat cave complain,
 in mournful accent, and a die strain. 
dear lovely youth! i cry to all around:
 dear lovely youth! the flatter vale resound. 

Silvia.

on flowery bank, by every murmur stream,
 aminta be my muse soft theme:
 it be she that do my artful note refine:
 with fair aminta name my noble verse shall shine. 

Amaryllis.

i will twine fresh garland for alexis brow,
 and consecrate to he eternal vow:
 the charm youth shall my Apollo prove:
 he shall adorn my song, and tune my voice to love. 
