Abelard to eloisa.

by mr. Cawthorne, master of tunbridge-school.

ah, why this bode start? this sudden pain,
 that wing my pulse, and shoot from vein to vein? 
what mean, regardless of yond midnight bell,
 these earth-born vision sadden over my cell? 
what strange disorder prompt these thought to glow? 
these sigh to murmur, and these tear to flow? 
it be she, it be eloisa form restore,
 once a pure saint, and more than saint adore:
 she come in all her kill charm confess,
 glare through the gloom, and pour upon my breast,
 bid heaven bright guard from Paraclete remove,
 and drag i back to misery and love. 

enjoy thy triumph, dear illusion! see
 this sad apostate from his god to thou;
 see, at thy call, my guilty warmth return,
 flame through my blood, and steal i from my urn. 
yet, yet, frail Abelard! one effort try,
 ere the last linger spark of virtue die;
 the deadly charm sorceress controul,
 and spite of nature tear she from thy soul. 

long have that soul in these unsocial wood,
 where anguish muse, and where horror brood,
 from love wild visionary wish stray,
 and seek to lose thy beauty in the shade,
 faith drop a smile, devotion lend her fire,
 wake the keen pang, and sanctify desire;
 lead i enrapture to the bless abode,
 and teach my heart to glow with all its god. 
but oh, how weak fair faith and virtue prove! 
when eloisa melt away in love! 
when her fond soul impassion, rapt, unveiled,
 no joy forget, and no wish conceal,
 flow through her pen as infant softness free,
 and fierce spring in ecstasy to i. 
you heaven! as walk in yond sacred fane
 with every seraph warm in every vein,
 just as remorse have rouse a ache sigh,
 and my tear soul hang tremble in my eye,
 in that kind hour thy fatal letter come,
 i see, i gaze, i shiver at the name;
 the conscious lamp at once forget to shine,
 prophetic tremor shake the hallow shrine;
 priest, censor, altar from thy genius flee,
 and heaven itself shut on i while i read. 

dear smile mischief! be thou still the same,
 the still pale victim of too soft a flame? 
warm, as when first with more than mortal shine
 each melt eye-ball mix thy soul with i? 
have not thy tear for ever teach to flow,
 the gloom of absence, and the pang of woe,
 the pomp of sacrifice, the whisper tale,
 the dreadful vow yet hover over thy veil,
 drive this bewitch fondness from thy breast? 
curb the loose wish, and form each pulse to rest? 
and can thou still, still bend the suppliant knee
 to love dread shrine, and weep and sigh for i? 
then take i, take i, lock i in thy arm,
 spring to my lip, and give i all thy charm:
 no, fly i, fly i, spread the impatient sail,
 steal the lark wing, and mount the swift gale;
 skim the last ocean, freeze beneath the pole;
 renounce i, curse i, root i from thy soul;
 fly, fly, for justice bare the arm of god,
 and the grasp vengeance only wait his nod. 

be these my wish? can they thus aspire? 
do frenzy form they, or do grace inspire? 
can Abelard, in hurricane of zeal,
 betray his heart, and teach thou not to feel? 
teach thy enamour spirit to disown
 each human warmth, and chill thou into stone? 
ah, rather let my tender accent move
 the last wild tumult of unholy love! 
on that dear bosom tremble let i lie,
 pour out my soul, and in fierce rapture die,
 rouse all my passion, act my joy anew,
 farewell, you cell! you martyr saint! adieu:
 sleep, conscience, sleep! each awful thought be drown,
 and seven-fold darkness veil the scene around. 
what mean this pause, this agonize start? 
this glimpse of heaven quick-rushing through my heart? 
methinks i see a radiant cross display,
 a wound saviour bl ed along the shade;
 around the expire god bright angel fly,
 swell the loud hymn, and open all the sky:
 o save i, save i, ere the thunder roll,
 and hell black cavern swallow up my soul. 

return, you hour! when guiltless of a stain,
 my strong-plumed genius throb in every vein,
 when warm with all the egyptian fane inspire,
 all Athens boast, and all Rome admire;
 my merit in its full meridian shine,
 each rival blush, and each heart my own. 
return, you scene! ah no, from fancy fly,
 on time stretch wing, till each idea die,
 eternal fly, since all that learning give
 too weak to conquer, and too fond to save,
 to love soft empire every wish betray,
 and leave my laurel wither in the shade. 
let i forget, that while deceitful fame
 grasp her shrill trump, and fill it with my name,
 thy strong charm, impower by heaven to move
 each saint, each bless insensible to love,
 at once my soul from bright ambition win,
 i hug the dart, i wish to be undo;
 no more pale science dare my thought engage,
 insipid dullness hang on every page;
 the midnight lamp no more enjoy its blaze,
 no more my spirit fly from maze to maze:
 thy glance bid philosophy resign
 her throne to thou, and every sense be thy. 

but what can all the frost of wisdom do,
 oppose to beauty, when it melt in you? 
since these dark, cheerless, solitary cave,
 death-breathing wood, and daily-opening grave,
 mis-shapen rock, wild image of woe,
 for ever howl to the deep below;
 ungenial desert, where no vernal shower
 wake the green herb, or paint the unfold flower;
 the embrown gloom these holy mansion shed,
 the night-born horror brood over my bed,
 the dismal scene black melancholy pour
 over the sad vision of enanguish hour;
 lean abstinence, wan grief, low-thoughted care,
 distract guilt, and hell worst fiend, despair,
 conspire, in vain, with all the aid of art,
 to blot thy dear idea from my heart. 

delusive, sightless god of warm desire! 
why will thou wish to set a wretch on fire? 
why live thy soft divinity where woe
 heave the pale sigh, and anguish love to glow? 
fly to the mead, the daisy-painted vale,
 breathe in its sweet, and melt along the gale;
 fly where gay scene luxurious youth employ,
 where every moment steal the wing of joy;
 there may thou see, low prostrate at thy throne,
 devote slave and victim all thy own:
 each village-swain the turf-built shrine shall raise,
 and king command whole hecatomb to blaze. 

o memory! ingenious to revive
 each fleet hour, and teach the past to live,
 witness what conflict this frail bosom tear! 
what grief i suffer! and what pang i bear! 
how long i struggle, labour, strive to save
 a heart that pant to be still a slave! 
when youth, warmth, rapture, spirit, love, and flame,
 seize every sense, and burn through all my frame;
 from youth, warmth, rapture, to these wild i flee,
 my food the herbage, and the rock my bed. 
there, while these venerable cloister rise
 over the bleak surge, and gain upon the sky,
 my wound soul indulge the tear to flow
 over all her sad vicissitude of woe;
 profuse of life, and yet afraid to die,
 guilt in my heart, and horror in my eye,
 with ceaseless prayer, the whole artillery give
 to win the mercy of offend heaven,
 each hill, make vocal, echo all around,
 while my tear breast knock bleed on the ground. 
yet, yet, alas! though all my moment fly
 stain by a tear, and darken in a sigh;
 though meager fast have on my cheek display
 the dusk of death, and sink i to a shade,
 spite of myself the still-impoisoning dart
 shoot through my blood, and drink up all my heart;
 my vow and wish wild disagree,
 and grace itself mistake my god for thou. 

athwart the gloom, that wrap the midnight sky,
 my eloisa steal upon my eye;
 for ever rise in the solar ray,
 a phantom bright than the blaze of day:
 whereve i go, the visionary guest
 pant on my lip, or sink upon my breast;
 unfold her sweet, and, throb to destroy,
 wind round my heart in luxury of joy;
 while loud hosanna shake the shrine around,
 i hear she soft accent in the sound;
 her idol-beauty on each altar glare,
 and heaven much-injured have but half my prayer:
 no tear can drive she hence, no pang control,
 for every object bring she to my soul. 

last night, recline on yond airy steep,
 my busy eye hang brood over the deep;
 the breathless whirlwind sleep in every cave,
 and the soft moonbeam dance from wave to wave;
 each former bliss in this bright mirror see,
 with all my glory, dawn upon the scene,
 recall the dear auspicious hour anew,
 when my fond soul to eloisa fly:
 when, with keen speechless ecstasy oppress,
 thy frantic lover snatch thou to his breast,
 gaze on thy blush arm with every grace,
 and see the goddess beam in thy face;
 see thy wild, tremble, ardent wish move
 each pulse to rapture, and each glance to love. 
but lo! the wind descend, the billow roar,
 foam to the cloud, and burst upon the shore,
 vast peal of thunder over the ocean roll,
 the flame-winged lightning gleam from pole to pole. 
at once the please image withdraw,
 and more than horror crowd on my view;
 thy uncle form, in all his ire array,
 serene dreadful stalk along the shade,
 pierce by his sword, i sink upon the ground,
 the spectre ghastly smile upon the wound;
 a group of black infernal round i hang,
 and toss my infamy from tongue to tongue. 

detest wretch! how impotent thy age! 
how weak'thy malice! and how kind thy rage! 
spite of thyself, inhuman as thou be,
 thy murder hand have leave i all my heart;
 leave i each tender, fond affection, warm,
 a nerve to tremble, and a eye to charm. 
no, cruel, cruel, exquisite in ill,
 thou think it dull barbarity to kill;
 my death have rob lose vengeance of her toil,
 and scarce warm a scythian to a smile:
 sublime fury teach thy soul to glow
 with all their savage mystery of woe;
 teach thy unfeeling poniard to destroy
 the power of nature, and the source of joy;
 to stretch i on the rack of vain desire,
 each passion throb, and each wish on fire;
 mad to enjoy, unable to be bless,
 fiend in my vein, and hell within my breast. 

aid i, fair faith! assist i, grace divine! 
you martyr! bless i, and you saint! refine,
 you sacred grove! you heaven-devoted wall! 
where folly sicken, and where virtue call;
 you vow! you altar! from this bosom tear
 voluptuous love, and leave no anguish there:
 oblivion! be thy black plume display
 over all my grief, and hide i in the shade;
 and thou, too fond idolise! attend,
 while awful reason whisper in the friend;
 friend, do i say? immortal! what a name? 
can dull, cold friendship, own so wild a flame? 
no; let thy lover, who enkindle eye
 shoot all his soul between thou and the sky,
 who warmth bewitch thou, who unhallowed song
 call thy rapt ear to die upon his tongue,
 now strong rouse, while heaven his zeal inspire
 divine transport, and more holy fire;
 calm all thy passion, all thy peace restore,
 and teach that snowy breast to heave no more. 

tear from the world, within dark cell immure,
 by angel guard, and by vow secure,
 to all that once awake thy fondness dead,
 and hope, pale sorrow last sad refuge, flee;
 why will thou weep, and sigh, and melt in vain,
 brood over false joy, and hug the ideal chain? 
say, can thou wish, that, mad wild to fly
 from yond bright portal open in the sky,
 thy Abelard shall bid his god adieu,
 pant at thy foot, and taste thy charm anew? 
you heaven! if to this tender bosom woo,
 thy mere idea harrow up my blood;
 if one faint glimpse of Eloise can move
 the fierce, wild agony of love;
 what shall i be, when, dazzle as the light,
 thy whole effulgence flow upon my sight? 
look on thyself, consider who thou be,
 and learn to be a abbess in thy heart;
 see, while devotion ever-melting strain
 pour the loud organ through the tremble fane,
 yond pious maid each earthly wish disown,
 kiss the dread cross, and crowd upon the throne:
 o let thy soul the sacred charge attend,
 their warmth inspirit, and their virtue mend;
 teach every breast from every hymn to steal
 the seraph meekness, and the seraph zeal;
 to rise to rapture, to dissolve away
 in dream of heaven, and lead thyself the way,
 till all the glory of the bless abode
 blaze on the scene, and every thought be god!
 while thus thy exemplary care prevail,
 and make each vestal spotless as her veil,
 the eternal spirit over thy cell shall move
 in the soft image of the mystic dove;
 the long-lost gleam of heavenly comfort bring
 peace in his smile, and heal on his wing;
 at once remove affliction from thy breast,
 melt over thy soul, and hush her pang to rest. 

o that my soul, from love curse bondage free,
 can catch the transport that i urge to thou! 
o that some angel more than magic art
 will kind tear the hermit from his heart! 
extinguish every guilty sense, and leave
 no pulse to riot, and no sigh to heave. 
vain fruitless wish! still, still, the vigorous flame
 burst, like a earthquake, through my shatter frame;
 spite of the joy that truth and virtue prove,
 i feel but thou, and breathe not but to love;
 repent in vain, scarce wish to be forgive;
 thy form my idol, and thy charm my heaven. 

yet, yet, my fair! thy noble effort try,
 lift i from earth, and give i to the sky;
 let my lose soul thy bright virtue feel,
 warm with thy hope, and winge with all thy zeal. 
and when, low bend at the hallow shrine,
 thy contrite heart shall Abelard resign;
 when pity heaven, impatient to forgive,
 unbar the gate of light, and bid thou live;
 seize on th'auspicious moment ere it flee,
 and ask the same immortal boon for i. 

then when these black terrific scene be over,
 and rebel nature chill the soul no more;
 when on thy cheek the expire rose fade,
 and thy last lustre darken in the shade;
 when arm with quick variety of pain,
 or creep dull slow from vein to vein,
 pale death shall set my kindred spirit free,
 and these dead orb forget to dote on thou;
 some pious friend, who wild affection glow
 like we, in sad similitude of woe,
 shall drop one tender, sympathize tear,
 prepare the garland, and adorn the bier;
 our lifeless relique in one tomb enshrine,
 and teach thy genial dust to mix with i. 

mean while, divine purge from every stain,
 our active soul shall climb the etherial plain,
 to each bright cherub purity aspire,
 catch ali he zeal, and pant with all his fire;
 there, where no face the gloom of anguish wear,
 no uncle murder, and no passion tear,
 enjoy with heaven eternity of rest,
 for ever blessing, and for ever bless. 
