the day of judgement:

a poetical essay.

by dr. Glynn.

thy justice, heavenly king! and that great day,
 when virtue, long abandon and forlorn,
 shall raise her pensive head; and vice, that erst
 range unreproved and free, shall sink appal,
 i sing adventurous. — but what eye can pierce
 the vast immeasurable realm of space
 over which Messiah drive his flame car
 to that bright region, where enthrone he sit
 firstborn of heaven, to judge assemble world,
 clothe in celestial radiance! can the muse,
 her feeble wing all damp with earthly dew,
 soar to that bright empyreal, where around,
 myriad of angel, God perpetual choir,
 hymn hallelujah; and in concert loud
 chaunt song of triumph to their maker praise? —
 yet will i strive to sing, albeit unused
 to tread poetic soil. what though the wile
 of fancy i enchant never can lure
 to rove over fairy land; to swim the stream
 that through her valley weave their mazy way;
 or climb her mountain top; yet will i raise
 my feeble voice to tell what harmony
 (sweet as the music of the roll sphere)
 attune the moral world: that virtue still
 may hope her promise crown; that vice may dread
 vengeance, though late; that reason pride may own
 just though unsearchable the way of heaven. 

sceptic! whoever thou be, who say the soul,
 that divine particle, which God own breath
 inspire into the mortal mass, shall rest
 annihilate, until duration have unrolled
 her never-ending line; tell, if thou know,
 why every nation, every clime, though all
 in law, in rite, in manner disagree,
 with one consent expect another world,
 where wickedness shall weep? why paynim bard,
 fable elysian plain, tartarean lake,
 Styx and Cocytus? tell, why hali son
 have feign a paradise of mirth and love,
 banquet, and bloom nymph? or rather tell,
 why, on the brink of orellana stream,
 where never science rear her sacred torch,
 the untutored indian dream of happy world
 behind the cloud-top hill? why in each breast
 be place a friendly monitor, that prompt,
 inform, direct, encourage, forbid? 
tell, why on unknown evil grief attend,
 or joy on secret good? why conscience act
 with tenfold force, when sickness, age, or pain,
 stand totter on the precipice of death? 
or why such horror gnaw the guilty soul
 of die sinner; while the good man sleep
 peaceful and calm, and with a smile expire? 

look round the world, with what a partial hand
 the scale of bliss and misery be sustain! 
beneath the shade of cold obscurity
 pale virtue lie! no arm support her head,
 no friendly voice speak comfort to her soul,
 nor soft-eyed pity drop a melt tear;
 but, in their stead, contempt and rude disdain
 insult the banish wanderer: on she go
 neglect and forlorn: disease, and cold,
 and famine, worst of ill, her step attend:
 yet patient, and to heaven just will resign,
 she never be see to weep, or hear to sigh. 

now turn your eye to yond sweet-smelling bower,
 where flush with all the insolence of wealth
 sit pamper vice! for he the arabian gale
 breathe forth delicious odour! gallia hill
 for he pour nectar from the purple vine;
 nor think for these he pay the tribute due
 to heaven: of heaven he never name the name,
 save when with imprecation dark and dire
 he point his jest obscene. yet buxom health
 sit on his rosy cheek; yet honour gild
 his high exploit; and downy pinion sleep
 shed a soft epiate over his peaceful couch. 

see thou this, righteous father! see thou this,
 and will thou never repay? shall good and ill
 be carry undistinguished to the land
 where all thing be forget? — ah! no; the day
 will come, when virtue from the cloud shall burst
 that long obscure her beam; when sin shall fly
 back to her native hell; there sink eclipse
 in penal darkness; where nor star shall rise,
 nor ever sunshine pierce the impervious gloom. 

on that great day the solemn trump shall sound,
 (that trump which once in heaven on man revolt
 convoke the astonish seraph) at who voice
 the unpeopled grave shall pour forth all their dead. 
then shall the assemble nation of the earth
 from every quarter, at the judgment-seat
 unite; egyptian, babylonian, greek,
 parthian, and they who dwell on tiber bank,
 name fame of old: or who of late age,
 Chinese and russian, mexican and Turk,
 tenant the wide terrene; and they who pitch
 their tent on Niger bank; or where the sun
 pour on golconda spire his early light,
 drink ganges sacred stream. at once shall rise,
 who distant age to each other sight
 have long deny; before the throne shall kneel
 some great progenitor, while at his side
 stand his descendant through a thousand line. 
whatever their nation, and whatever their rank,
 hero and patriarch, slave and sceptre king,
 with equal eye the god of all shall see;
 and judge with equal love. what though the great
 with costly pomp and aromatic sweet
 embalm his poor remains; or through the dome
 a thousand taper shed their gloomy light,
 while solemn organ to his part soul
 chant slow orison? say, by what mark
 do thou discern he from that lowly swain
 who moulder bone beneath the thorn bind turf
 long lie neglect? — all at once shall rise;
 but not to equal glory: for, alas! 
with howlings dire and execration loud
 some wail their fatal birth. — first among these
 behold the mighty murderer of mankind;
 they who in sport whole kingdom slay; or they
 who to the totter pinnacle of power
 wade through sea of blood! how will they curse
 the madness of ambition; how lament
 their dear-bought laurel; when the widow wife
 and childless mother at the judgment-seat
 plead trumpet-tongued against they! — here be they
 who sink a age father to the grave:
 or with unkindness hard and cold disdain
 slight a brother suffering: — here be they
 who fraud and skilful treachery long secure;
 who from the infant virgin tear her dower,
 and eat the orphan bread: — who spend their store
 in selfish luxury; or over their gold
 prostrate and pale adore the useless heap. —
 here too who stain the chaste connubial bed; —
 who mix the poisonous bowl; — or break the tie
 of hospitable friendship: — and the wretch
 who listless soul sick with the care of life
 unsummoned to the presence of his god
 rush in with insult rude. how will they joy
 once more to visit earth; and, though oppress
 with all that pain and famine can inflict,
 pant up the hill of life? vain wish! the judge
 pronounce doom eternal on their head,
 perpetual punishment. seek not to know
 what punishment! for that the almighty will
 have hide from mortal eye: and shall vain man
 with curious search refine presume to pry
 into thy secret, father! no: let he
 with humble patience all thy work adore,
 and walk in all thy path: so shall his meed
 be great in heaven, so haply shall he escape
 the immortal worm and never-ceasing fire. 

but who be they, who bind in tenfold chain
 stand horrible aghast? this be the crew
 who strive to pull Jehovah from his throne,
 and in the place of heaven eternal king
 set up the phantom chance. for they in vain
 alternate season cheere the roll year;
 in vain the sun over herb, tree, fruit, and flower
 shed genial influence, mild; and the pale moon
 repair her wane orb. — next these be place
 the vile blasphemer, he, who impious wit
 profane the sacred mystery of faith,
 and against the impenetrable wall of heaven
 plant his feeble battery. by these stand
 the arch apostate: he with many a wile
 exhort they still to foul revolt. alas! 
no hope have they from black despair, no ray
 shine through the gloom to cheer their sink soul:
 in agony of grief they curse the hour
 when first they leave religion onward way. 

these on the left be range: but on the right
 a choose band appear, who fight beneath
 the banner of Jehovah, and defy
 Satan unite legion. some, unmoved
 at the grim tyrant frown, over barbarous clime
 diffuse the gospel light; some, long immure
 (sad servitude!) in chain and dungeon pine;
 or rack with all the agony of pain
 breathe out their faithful life. thrice happy they
 who heaven elect to that glorious strife! —
 here be they place, who kind munificence
 make heaven-born science raise her droop head;
 and on the labour of a future race
 entail their just reward. thou among these
 good Seaton! who well-judged benevolence
 foster fair genius bad the poet hand
 bring annual offering to his maker shrine,
 shall find the generous care be not in vain. —
 here be that favourite band, who mercy mild,
 God best love attribute, adorn; who gate
 stand ever open to the stranger call;
 who feed the hungry, to the thirsty lip
 reach out the friendly cup; who care benign
 from the rude blast secure the pilgrim side;
 who hear the widow tender tale; and shake
 the gall shackle from the prisoner foot;
 who each endear tie, each office know
 of meek-eyed heaven-descended charity. —
 o charity, thou nymph divine fair! 
sweet than those who ancient poet bind
 in amity indissoluble chain,
 the grace! how shall i essay to paint
 thy charm, celestial maid; and in rude verse
 blazon those deed thyself do never reveal? 
for thou nor rankle envy can insect,
 nor rage transport, nor high overween pride
 puff up with vain conceit; never do thou smile
 to see the sinner as a verdant tree
 spread his luxuriant branch over the stream;
 while like some blast trunk the righteous fall,
 prostrate, forlorn. when prophecy shall fail,
 when tongue shall cease, when knowledge be no more,
 and this great day be come; thou by the throne
 shall sit triumphant. thither, lovely maid,
 bear i, o bear i on thy soar wing,
 and through the adamantine gate of heaven
 conduct my step, safe from the fiery gulph
 and dark abyss where sin and Satan reign! 

but, can the muse, her number all too weak,
 tell how that restless element of fire
 shall wage with sea and earth intestine war,
 and deluge all creation? whether (so
 some think) the comet, as through field of air
 lawless he wander, shall rush headlong on
 thwart the ecliptic where the unconscious earth
 roll in her wonted course; whether the sun
 with force centripetal into his orb
 attract her long reluctant; or the cave,
 those dread vulcanos where engender lie
 sulphureous mineral, from their dark abyss
 pour stream of liquid fire; while from above,
 as erst on Sodom, heaven avenge hand
 rain fierce combustion. — where be now the work
 of art, the toil of age? where be now
 the imperial city, sepulchre and dome,
 trophy and pillar? — where be egypt boast,
 those lofty pyramid, which high in air
 rear their aspire head, to distant time
 of memphian pride a last monument? —
 tell i where Athens raise her tower? — where Thebes
 open she hundred portal? — tell i where
 stand sea-girt Albion? — where imperial Rome
 prop by seven hill sit like a sceptre queen,
 and awe the tributary world to peace? —
 show i the rampart, which over many a hill,
 through many a valley stretch its wide extent,
 raise by that mighty monarch, to repel
 the rove Tartar, when with insult rude
 against pekin tower he bend unerring bow. 

but what be mimic art? even nature work,
 sea, meadow, pasture, the meander stream,
 and everlasting hill shall be no more. 
no more shall teneriff cloud-piercing height
 overhang the atlantic surge. — nor that fame cliff,
 through which the persian steer with many a sail,
 throw to the lemnian isle its evening shade
 over half the wide aegean. — where be now
 the Alps that confine with unnumbered realm,
 and from the black sea to the ocean stream
 stretch their extend arm? — where be Ararat,
 that hill on which the faithful patriarch ark
 which seven long month have voyage over its top
 first rest, when the earth with all her son,
 as now by stream cataract of fire,
 be whelm by mighty water? — all at once
 be vanish and dissolve; no trace remain,
 no mark of vain distinction: heaven itself
 that azure vault with all those radiant orb
 sink in the universal ruin lose. —
 no more shall planet round their central sun
 move in harmonious dance; no more the moon
 hang out her silver lamp; and those fix star
 spangle the golden canopy of night,
 which oft the Tuscan with his optic glass
 call from their wondrous height, to read their name
 and magnitude, some wing minister
 shall quench; and (sure sign that all on earth
 be lose) shall rend from heaven the mystic bow. 

such be that awful, that tremendous day,
 who come who shall tell? for as a thief
 unheard, unseen, it steal with silent pace
 through night dark gloom. — perhaps as here i sit
 and rude carol these incondite lay,
 soon shall the hand be check, and dumb the mouth
 that lisp the faulter strain. — o! may it never
 intrude unwelcome on a ill-spent hour;
 but find i wrap in meditation high,
 hymn my great creator! 
 "power supreme! 
" o everlasting king! to thou i kneel,
 "to thou i lift my voice. with fervent heat
" melt all you element? and thou, high heaven,
 "shrink, like a shrivel scroll? but think, o lord,
" think on the best, the noble of thy work;
 "think on thy own bright image! think on he,
" who die to save we from thy righteous wrath;
 "and amid the wreck of world remember man!" 
