the cure of Saul.

a sacred ode.

by dr. brown.

 "vengeance, arise from thy infernal bed;
" and pour thy tempest on his guilty head! " 
thus heaven decree, in thunder sound,
 shake the dark abyss profound. —
 the unchain fury come! 
pale melancholy stalk from hell:
 the abortive offspring of her womb,
 despair and anguish, round her yell. 
by sleepless terror Saul possess,
 deep feel the fiend within his torture breast. 
midnight spectre round he howl:
 before his eye
 in troop they rise;
 and sea of horror overwhelm his soul. 

haste! to jesse son repair:
 he best can sweep the lyre,
 wake the solemn-sounding air,
 and lead the vocal choir:
 on every string soft-breathing rapture dwell,
 to sooth the throb of the trouble breast;
 who magic voice can bid the tide of passion swell,
 or lull the rage storm to rest. 

sink on his couch, and loathe day,
 the heaven-forsaken monarch lie:
 to the sad couch the shepherd now draw near;
 and, while the obedient choir stand round,
 prepare to catch the soul-commanding sound,
 he drop a generous tear. —
 thy pity aid, o god, impart! 
for lo, thy poison arrow drink his heart! 

the mighty song from chaos rise. —
 around his throne the formless atom sleep,
 and drowsy darkness brood upon the deep. —
 confusion, wake! 
bid the realm of chaos shake! 
Rouse he from his dread repose! 
hark! loud discord break her chain:
 the hostile atom clash with deafen roar:
 her hoarse voice thunder through the drear domain;
 and kindle every element to war. —
 "tumult cease! 
" sink to peace! 
 "let there be light!" — the almighty say:
 and lo, the radiant sun,
 flame from his orient bed,
 his endless course begin. 
see, the twinkle pleiad rise:
 thy star, Orion, redden in the sky:
 while slow around the northern plain,
 Arcturus wheel his nightly wane. 

thy glory, too, refulgent moon, he sing;
 thy mystic maze, and thy changeful ray:
 o fair of the starry throng! 
thy solemn orb of light
 guide the triumphant carr of night
 over silver cloud, and shed a soft day! 

you planet, and each circle constellation,
 in song harmonious tell your generation! 
oh, while yond radiant seraph turn the sphere,
 and on the steadfast polestar stand sublime;
 wheel your round
 to heavenly sound;
 and sooth his song-enchanted ear
 with your celestial chime. 

in dumb surprise the listen monarch lie;
 (his woe suspend by sweet music sway;)
 and awe strike, with uplift eye
 muse on the new-born wonder of the sky. 

lead the soothe verse along:
 he feel, he feel the power of song —
 ocean hasten to his bed:
 the labour mountain rear his rock-encumbered head:
 down his steep and shaggy side
 the torrent roll his thunder tide;
 then smooth and clear, along the fertile plain
 wind his majestic water to the distant main. 
flock and herd the hill adorn:
 the lark, high-soaring, hail the morn. 
and while along yond crimson-clouded steep
 the slow sun steal into the golden deep,
 hark! the solemn nightingale
 warble to the woodland dale. 
see, descend angel shower
 heaven own bliss on eden bower:
 peace on nature lap repose;
 pleasure strew her guiltless rose:
 joy divine in circle move,
 link with innocence and love. 
hail, happy love, with innocence combine! 
all hail, you sinless parent of mankind! 

they pause: — the monarch, prostrate on his bed,
 submissive, bow his head;
 adore the work of boundless power divine:
 then, anguish-struck, he cry (and smite his breast),
 why, why be peace the welcome guest
 of every heart but i! 

now let the solemn number flow,
 until he feel that guilt be woe. 
heavenly harp, in mournful strain
 over yond weep bower complain:
 what sound of bitter pang i hear! 
what lamentation wound my ear! 
in vain, devote pair, these tear you shed:
 peace with innocence be flee. 
the messenger of grace depart:
 death glare, and shake the dreadful dart! 
ah, whither fly you, by yourself abhor,
 to shun that frown cherub fiery sword? —
 lo! 
hapless, hapless pair,
 goad by despair,
 forlorn, through desert clime they go! 
wake, my lyre! can pity sleep,
 when heaven be move, and angel weep! 
flow, you melt number, flow;
 till he feel, that guilt be woe. —

the king, with pride, and shame, and anguish tear,
 shoot fury from his eye, and scorn. 
the glow youth,
 bold in truth,
 (so still shall virtue guilty power engage)
 with brow undaunted meet his rage. 
see, his cheek kindle into generous fire:
 stern, he bend he over his lyre;
 and, while the doom of guilt he sing,
 shake horror from the torture string. 
what sound of terror and distress
 rend yond howl wilderness! 
the dreadful thunder sound;
 the fork lightning flash along the ground. 
why yawn that deepen gulph below? —
 it be for heaven rebellious foe: —
 fly, you son of Israel, fly,
 who dwell in korah guilty tent must die! —
 they sink! — have mercy, lord! — their cry
 in dreadful tumult rise! 
hark, from the deep their loud lament i hear! 
they lessen now, and lessen on the ear! 
now, destruction strife be over! 
the countless host
 for ever lose! 
the gulph be close! — their cry be hear no more! —

but oh, my lyre, what accent can relate
 sinful man appoint sit! 
he come, he come! the avenge god!
 cloud and darkness round he roll:
 tremble, earth! you mountain, nod! 
he bow the sky, and shake the pole. 
the gloomy banner of his wrath unfurled,
 he call the flood, to drown a guilty world:
 "ruin, lift thy baleful head;
" rouse the guilty world from sleep:
 "lead up thy billow from their cavern bed,
" and burst the rock that chain thou in the deep. —
 now, the impetuous torrent rise;
 the hoarse-ascending deluge roar:
 down rush the cataract from the sky;
 the swell wave overwhelm the shore. 
just, o god, be thy decree! 
shall guilty man contend with thou! 
lo, hate and envy, sea-entombed,
 and rage with lust in ruin sleep;
 and scoff luxury be doom
 to glut the vast and ravenous deep! —
 in vain from fate the astonish remnant fly: —
 "shrink, you rock! you ocean, rise!" —
 the totter cliff no more the flood control;
 sea follow sea ingulf the ball:
 over the sink hill the watery mountain roll,
 and wide destruction swallow all:
 now fierce let the impassion number glow:
 swell the song, you mighty choir! 
wing your dreadful dart with fire! 
hear i, monarch! — guilt be woe! —

thus while the frown shepherd pour along
 the deep impetuous torrent of his song;
 Saul, sting by dire despair,
 gnash his tooth, and tear his hair:
 from his blood, by horror chill,
 a cold and agonize sweat distil:
 then, foam with unutterable smart. 
he aim a dagger at his heart. 
his watchful train prevent the blow;
 and call each lenient balm to sooth his frantic woe:
 but please, the shepherd now behold
 his pride by heaven own terror quell:
 then bid his potent lyre control
 the mighty storm that rend his soul. 

cease your care: the body pain
 a sweet relief may find:
 but gum and lenient balm be vain,
 to heal the wound mind. 
come, fair repentance, from the sky,
 o saint maid, with upcast eye! 
descend, in thy celestial shroud,
 vest in a weep cloud! 
holy guide, descend, and bring
 mercy from the eternal king! 
to his soul your beam impart,
 and whisper comfort to his heart! —

they come: o king, thy ear incline! 
listen to their voice divine:
 their voice shall every pang compose,
 to gentle sorrow sooth thy woe;
 till each pure wish to heaven shall soar,
 and peace return, to part no more! 

behold, obedient to their great command,
 the lift dagger quit his tremble hand:
 smooth be his brow, where sullen care
 and furrow horror couch with fell despair:
 no more his eye with fury glow;
 but heavenly grief succeed to hellborn woe. —
 see, the sign of grace appear:
 see the soft relent tear,
 trickle at sweet mercy call! 
catch it, angel, ere it fall! 
and let the heart-sent offer rise,
 heaven best-accepted sacrifice! —

yet, yet again? — ah see, the pang return! 
again with inward fire his heave bosom burn! 
now, shepherd, wake a mighty strain;
 search the deep, heartrending pain;
 till the large flood of sorrow roll,
 and quench the torture of his soul. 
almighty lord, accept his pang sincere! 
let heavenly hope dispel each dark temptation! 
and, while he pour the penitential tear,
 o visit he with thy salvation! —

stoop from heaven, you rapture throng! 
sink, you swell tide of song! 
for lo! dissolve by music melt power,
 celestial sorrow roll her plenteous shower,
 over his wan cheek the colour rise;
 and beam of comfort brighten in his eye. 
happy king, thy woe be over! 
thy god shall wound thy soul no more:
 the pity father of mankind
 meet the pure-returning mind. 
no more shall black despair afflict his soul:
 each gentle sound, you shepherd, now combine:
 sweet let the number roll:
 sooth he into hope divine. 
now lowly let the rustic measure glide,
 to quell the dark remains of self-consuming pride;
 till nature home-sprung blessing he confess,
 and own that calm content be happiness. —
 you wood and lake, you cliff and mountain! 
haunt grot, and live fountain! 
listen to your shepherd lay,
 who artless carol close the day. 
bound kid around he throng;
 the steep rock echo back his song:
 while all unseen to mortal eye,
 slide down the evening sky,
 holy peace, though bear above,
 daughter of innocence and love,
 quit her throne and mansion bright,
 her crown of star, and robe of light,
 serene, in gentle smile array,
 to dwell beneath his palmtree shade. 
hail, meek angel! awful guest! 
still pour thy radiance over my breast! 
pride and hate in court may shine:
 the shepherd calm and blameless tent be thy! —

soft, soft breathe your number;
 and wrap his weary soul in slumber! 
gentle sleep, becalm his breast,
 and close his eye in heal rest! 
descend, celestial vision, you who wait,
 God minister power, at heaven eternal gate! 
you, who nightly vigil keep,
 and rule the silent realm of sleep,
 exalt the just to joy refine,
 and plunge in woe the guilty mind;
 descend! — oh, waft he to the sky,
 and open all heaven glory to his eye! 
beyond yond starry roof, by seraph tread,
 where light be unclouded fountain blaze;
 where choirs immortal hymn their god,
 entrance in ecstasy of ceaseless praise. 
angel, heal his anguish! 
your harp and voice join! 
his grief to bliss shall languish,
 when soothe by sound divine. 

behold, with dawn joy each feature glow! 
see, the blissful tear overflow! —
 the fiend be flee! — let music rapture rise:
 now harmony, thy every nerve employ:
 shake the dome, and pierce the sky:
 wake he, wake he into joy. —

what power can every passion throne controul? 
what power can boast the charm divine,
 to still the tempest of the soul? 
celestial harmony, that mighty charm be thy! 
she, heavenly-born, come down to visit earth,
 when from God eternal throne
 the beam of all-creative wisdom shine,
 and speak fair order into birth. 
at wisdom call she robe yond glitter sky,
 attune the sphere, and teach consent orb to rise. 
angel wrap in wonder stand,
 and see that all be fair, and all be good. 
it be then, you son of god, in bright array
 you shout over creation day:
 then kindle into joy,
 the morning star together sing:
 and through the vast ethereal sky
 seraphic hymn and loud hosannah ring. 
