Lucina:

a elegy.

direful indeed be thy effect, o love! 
when reason voice desert thy frantic shrine;
 platonic lesson no asylum prove;
 his dictate must obsequious yield to thy. 

religion, in majestic form array,
 attempt to soothe the wild, disorder breast,
 alas! too often fail the promise aid,
 nor can procure one tranquil moment rest. 

the wise, subdue by thy tyrannic sway,
 thy cruel and malignant influence feel;
 compel to act by thy delusive ray,
 as humble votary at thy altar kneel. 

the prince, the peasant, drag a equal chain,
 nor high, nor low, thy subtle dart can brave. 
Lucina feel the agonize pain,
 then hopeless sink amid the rapid wave. 

she be of annon lovely nymph the grace,
 of charm superior to the crowd possess:
 her shape be faultless, matchless fair her face,
 her virtue bright, by envy self confess. 

of all the sprightly youth that seek to gain
 the envy conquest of her virgin heart,
 Philander prove the dear distinguish swain,
 arm with the cruel, unrelenting dart. 

he in soft accent urge his ardent flame,
 and when Lucina will his suit deny,
 her beat bosom will assert his claim –
 her modest blush, and more expressive eye. 

at last her tongue, the purpose of her heart
 unto the youth convey, in tender strain:
 then mutual joy each whisper do impart,
 so great the transport neither dream of pain. 

but ah! their joy be soon for ever lose,
 her sire, enrage, forbid the nuptial tie,
 because Philander no rich store can boast:
 charm most attractive to a parent eye. 

the injure youth be by resentment sway;
 to this his soft passion soon give way:
 too rash, alas! he seek another maid,
 and leave Lucina to despair a prey. 

from every hope, from all her wish tear,
 deprive of what alone can give relief,
 the lovely fair, deject and forlorn,
 some time in heavy sigh do vent her grief. 

the nymph assemble use their utmost art,
 the sad lucina sorrow to beguile:
 vain be the attempt to ease her bleed heart,
 or from her eye extort a cheerful smile. 

at late hour, when each auspicious light
 seem hide in chaos – cynthia silver beam
 withdraw its lustre on that fatal night,
 nor bless the shade nor wanton in the stream. 

her auburn lock the mournful maiden tear,
 her downy pillow can afford no rest;
 she wander where the swell surge roar,
 in wild despair she beat her snowy breast! 

from annon cliff, she view the break wave;
 Philander be her last, her darling theme;
 no hand be near the frantic maid to save,
 and, sappho-like, love victim she become! 

you rigid parent, with attentive ear,
 instruction learn from this sad tale of woe:
 you heedless maid, in time the danger fear,
 that wrought lucina fatal overthrow. 
