a ode. to the people of GREAT Britain.

in imitation of the sixth ode of the third book of Horace. write in 1746. 

i 

briton! the thunder of the wrath divine,
due to thy father crime, and long withhold from thy,
shall burst with tenfold rage on thy devote head;
unless with conscious terror awe,
by meek, heartstruck repentance lead,
suppliant thou fall before the offend god:
if haply yet thou may avert his ire;
and stay his arm outstretched to lance the avenge fire.

ii.

do not high god of old ordain,
when to thy grasp he give the sceptre of the main,
that empire in this favour land,
fix on religion solid base shall stand?
when from thy struggle neck he break
the inglorious, gall, papal yoke,
humble the pride of haughty Spain,
and free thou by a woman-hero hand;
he then confirm the strong degree:
"briton, be virtuous and be free;
"be truth, be sanctity thy guide:
"be humble: fear thy god; and fear thou none beside."

iii.

oft have the offend power his rise anger show:
lead on by his avenge hand
rebellion triumph in the land:
twice have her barbarous son our war-trained host overthrow.
they fall a cheap inglorious prey;
the ambitious victor boast be half suppress,
while heaven-bred fear, and wild dismay,
unmanned the warrior heart, and reign in every breast.

iv.

her arm to foreign land Britannia bear;
her arm, auspicious now no more!
with frequent conquest where the fire be crown;
the son ill-fated fall, and bite the hostile ground:
the tame, war-trading belgian flee,
while in his cause the briton bleed:
the Gaul stand wonder at his own success;
oft do his hardy band their wonted fear confess,
strike with dismay, and meditate flight;
while the brave foe still urge the unequal fight,
while WILLIAM, with his father ardour fire,
through all the undaunted host the generous flame inspire!

v. 

but heavy far the weight of shame
that sink britannia naval fame:
in vain she spread her once-victorious sail;
or fear, or rashness; in her chief prevail;
and wild these prevent, those base shun the fight;
content with humble praise, the foe
avoid the long impend blow;
improve the kind escape, and triumph in his flight.

vi.

the monstrous age, which still increase year debase,
which teem with unknown crime, and gender new disgrace,
first, unrestrained by honour, faith; or shame,
confound every sacred name,
the hallow nuptial bed with lawless lust profane:
derive from this pollute source
the dire corruption hold its course
through the whole canker race, and taint all the land.

vii.

the ripen maid be verse in every dangerous art,
that ill adorn the form while it corrupt the heart:
practise to dress, to dance, to play,
in wanton mask to lead the way,
to move the pliant limb, to roll the lure eye;
with folly gay partizan to vie
in empty noise and vain expense;
to celebrate with flaunt air
the midnight revel of the fair;
studious of every praise, but virtue, truth, and sense.

viii.

thus lesson in intrigue her early thought improve,
nor meditate in vain forbid love:
soon the gay nymph in cyprus train shall rove
free and at large amid the idalian grove;
or haply jealous of the voice of fame,
mask in the matron sober name,
with many a well-dissembled wile
the kind, convenient husband care beguile:
more deep verse in venus mystic lore,
yet for such mean art too lofty and sublime,
the proud, highborn, patrician whore,
bear unabashed her front; and glory in her crime.

ix.

hither from city and from court
the votary of love resort;
the rich, the great, the gay, and the severe;
the pension architect of law;
the patriot, loud in virtue cause;
proud of impute worth, the peer:
regardless of his faith, his country, or his name,
he pawn his honour and estate;
nor reckon at how dear a rate
he purchase disease, and servitude, and shame.

x. 

not from such dastard fire, to every virtue lose,
spring the brave youth which Britain once can boast:
who curb the gaul usurp sway,
who sweep the unnumbered host away,
in Agincourt, and cressy glorious plain;
who die the sea with spanish blood,
their vainly-vaunted fleet subdue,
and spread the mighty wreck over all the vanquish main.

xi.

no; — it be a generous race, by worth transmissive know:
in their bold breast their father spirit glow:
in their pure vein their mother virtue flow:
they make hereditary praise their own.
the sire his emulous offspring lead
the rough path of fame to tread;
the matron train their spotless youth
in honour, sanctity, and truth;
form by the unite parent care,
the son, though bold, be wise; the daughter chaste, though fair.

xii.

how time, all-wasting, even the worst impair,
and each foul age to dregs still fouler run!
our sire, more vicious even than they,
leave we, still more degenerate heir,
to spawn a base brood of monster-breeding son.
