the duty of employ one self.

a epistle.

few people know it, yet, dear sir, it be true,
man shall have somewhat evermore to do.
hard labour tedious, every one must own;
but sure better such by far, than none;
the perfect drone, the quite impertinent,
who life at nothing aim, but — to be spend;
such heaven visit for some mighty ill:
it be sure the hard labour, to sit still.
hence that unhappy tribe who nought pursue:
who sin, for want of something else to do.

sir John be bless with riches, honour, love
and to be bless indeed, needs only move.
for want of this, with pain he live away,
a lump of hardly-animated clay:
dull till his double bottle do he right:
he be easy just at twelve o'clock at night.
thus for one sparkle hour alone he be bless;
while spleen and headache seize on all the rest.

what number, sloth with gloomy humour fill!
rack their brain with visionary ill.
hence what loud outcry, and well-meaning rage,
what endless quarrel at the present age!
how many blame! how often may we hear,
"such vice! — well, sure, the last day must be near!"
the avoid such wild, imaginary pain,
the sad creation of distemper brain,
dispatch, dear friend! move, labour, sweat, run, fly!
do aught — but think the day of judgement nigh.

there be, who have lose all relish for delight:
with they no earthly thing be ever right.
the expect to alter to their taste, be vain;
for who can mend so fast, as they complain?
whatever you do, shall be a crime with such;
one while you have lose your tongue, then talk too much:
thus shall you meet their waspish censure still;
as hedgehog prick you, go which side you will.
oh! pity these whenever you see they swell!
folk call they cross — poor man! they be not well.
how many such, in indolence grow old,
with vigour never do any thing, but scold?
who spirit only from ill-humour get;
like wine that die, unless upon the fret.

weary of flounce to himself alone,
acerbus keep a man to fret upon.
the fellow be nothing in the earth to do,
but to sit quit and be scold to.
pishes and oath, whenever the master be sour,
all large on the scape-goat slave be pour.
this drain his rage; and though to John so rough,
abroad you will think he complaisant enough.

as for myself, who poverty prevent
from be angry at so great expense;
who, shall i ever be incline to rage,
for want of slave, be with myself must wage;
must rail, and hear; chastise, be chastise:
be both the tyrant, and the tyrannise;
i choose to labour, rather than to fret:
what be rage in some, in i go off in sweat.
if time be ill, and thing seem never worse;
man, manner to reclaim, — i take my horse.
one mile reform they, or if aught remain
unpurged, — it be but to ride as far again.
thus on myself in toil i spend my rage:
i pay the fine; and that absolve the age.

sometime, still more to interrupt my ease,
i take my pen, and write — such thing as these:
which though all other merit be deny,
show my devotion still to be employ.
add too, though write by itself a curse,
yet some distemper be a curse for worse:
and since amid indolence, spleen will prevail,
since who do nothing else, be sure to rail;
man shall be suffer thus to play the fool,
to keep from hurt, as child go to school.

you shall not rhyme in spite of nature? — true;
yet sure it be great trouble, if you do;
and if it be labour only, man profess,
who write the hard, write with most success.

thus for myself, and friend, i do my part;
promote double the painstaking art:
first to myself, it be labour to compose;
to read such line, be drudgery to those.
