ode to a friend wound in a duel.

how long shall tyrant custom bind
in slavish chain the human mind?
how long shall false fantastic honour draw
the vengeful sword, with fury fall,
and rancorous malice dark as hell,
in spite of reason rule, and nature old law?

too many gallant youth have bleed;
too much of british blood be shed
by britons sword, and that foul monster law:
youth that may else have noble dare;
more glorious wound and danger share
for britain just defence, and virtue injure cause.

so when the fierce cadmean youth
spring from the dragon venom tooth,
each chief arise in shine armour dress:
with rage inspire, the furious band
soon find a ready foe at hand,
and plunge the point steel each in a brother breast.

have Britain then no other foe,
that thus her son their life expose
to private war, and feud, and civil fray?
do Spain insult her flag no more?
do Lewis yet his thought give over
of universal rule, and arbitrary sway?

it be britons to support the law;
it be they ambitious king to awe,
and equal right of empire to maintain.
for this our father, brave and stout,
at Agincourt and Cressy fight,
and heap fame blenheim field with mountain of the slay.

how will the Gallic monarch smile,
to see the son of albion isle
their country blood with ruthless weapon drain!
themselves avenge the glorious day
when marlb'rough sweep whole host away,
and send the fright Danube purple to the main!

o say, in this inglorious strife
thy arm have rob thy friend of life,
what pang, what anguish have thy bosom prove?
how have thou curse the cruel deed,
that cause the gallant youth to bleed,
pierce by thy guilty sword, and slay by he he love?

how do the fair Maria blame
thy high-bred spirit eager flame,
that court danger slight her soft love?
far other wreath for thou she twine;
far other care for thou design;
and for the laurel crown, the myrtle chaplet weave.

if not for she, for britain sake,
forbear thy precious life to stake;
nor taint thy honour with so foul a deed.
one day thy country may require
thy gallant arm and martial fire:
then may thou brave conquer, or as brave bleed.
