to the duke on his return.

write by NAT. lee.

come then at last, while anxious nation weep,
three kingdom stake! too precious for the deep. 
too precious sure, for when the trump of fame
do with a direful sound your wrack proclaim,
your danger and your doubtful safety show,
it dampt the genius, and it shake the throne. 
your helm may now the sea-born goddess take,
and soft Favonius safe your passage make. 
strong, and auspicious, bee the star that reign,
the day you launch, and Nereus sweep the main. 
Neptune aloft, scowr all the storm before,
and follow Triton, wind you to the shore;
while on the beach, like billow of the land,
in bend crowd the loyal english stand:
come then, though late, your right receive at last;
which heaven preserve, in spite of fortune blast,
accept those heart, that offer on the strand;
the better half of this divide land. 
vent their honest soul in tear of joy,
they rave, and beg you will their life employ,
shout your sacred name, they drive the air,
and fill your canvas wing with gale of prayer. 
come then i hear three nation shout again,
and, next our Charles, in every bosom reign;
heaven darling charge, the care of regal star,
pledge of our peace, and triumph of our war. 
heaven echo come, but come not sir alone,
bring the bright pregnant bless of the throne. 
and if in poet charm be force or skill,
we charge you, o you wave, and wind be still,
soft as a sail goddess bring she home,
with the expect prince that load her womb;
joy of this age and heir of that to come. 
next she the virgin princess shine from far,
Aurora that, and this the morning star. 
hail then, all hail, they land in charle Armes,
while his large breast, the nation angel warm. 
tear from his cheek with manly mildness roll,
then dear grasp the treasure of his soul:
hang on his neck, and feed upon his form,
call he his calm, after a tedious storm. 
o brother! he can say no more, and then,
with heave passion clasp he close again. 
how oft he cry have i thy absence mourn,
but it be enough thou be at last return:
say i return! o never more to part,
nor draw the vital warmth from Charles his heart. 
once more, o heaven, i shall his vertue prove,
his council, conduct, and unshaken love. 
my people too at last their error see,
and make their sovereign bless in love thou. 
not but there be a stiff-neck'd-hardened crew
that give not Caesar, no nor god his due. 
reprobate traitor, tyrant of their own,
yet grudge to see their monarch in his throne. 
their stubborn soul with brass rebellion bar,
desert the law, and crime with treason guard. 
who i — but there he stop, and cry it be past,
pity no more, this warn by their last;
then sigh say, my soul dear purchase rest,
welcome, oh welcome, to my longing Brest:
why shall i waste a tear while thou be by,
to all extreme of friendship let we fly,
disdain the factious crowd that will rebel
and mourn the man that dare in death excel,
their fate be glorious since for thou they fell. 
and as a prince have right his arm to weiled,
when stubborn rebel force he to the field:
so for the loyal, who their live lie down,
he dare to hazard both his life and crown. 
