to mr. fox, write at FLORENCE.

in imitation of Horace, ode 4.  book 2. 

by the late lord H—Y.

thou dear youth, who teach i first to know
what pleasure from a real friendship flow,
where neither interest nor design have part,
but all the warmth be native of the heart;
thou know to comfort, sooth, or entertain,
joy of my health, and cordial of my pain.
when life seem fail on her late stage,
and fall disease anticipate age,
when waste sickness and afflict pain,
by esculapius son oppose in vain;
force i reluctant, desperate, to explore
a warm sun, and seek a mild shore;
thy steady love with unexampled truth,
forsake each gay companion of thy youth,
whatever the prosperous or the great employ,
business and interest, and love soft joy,
the weary step of misery to attend,
to share distress, and make a wretch thy friend,
if over the mountain snowy height we stray,
where Carthage first explore the venturous way;
or through the taint air of Rome parch plain,
where want reside, and superstition reign;
cheerful and unrepining, still you bear
each dangerous rigour of the various year;
and kind anxious for thy friend alone,
lament his suffering and forget thy own.
oh! will kind heaven, these tedious suffering past,
permit i ickworth, rest, and health at last,
in that love shade, my youth delightful seat,
my early pleasure, and my late retreat,
where lavish nature favourite blessing flow,
and all the season all their sweet bestow;
there may i trifle careless away
the mild evening of life cloud day,
from business and the world intrusion free,
with book, with love, with beauty, and with thou;
no farther want, no wish yet unpossessed
can ever disturb this unambitious breast.
let those who Fortune shine gift implore,
who sue for glory, splendour, wealth, or power,
view this unactive state, with scornful eye,
and pleasure they can never taste, despise;
let they still court that goddess falser joy,
who, while she grant their prayer, their peace destroy.
i envy not the foremost of the great,
not Walpole self, direct europe fate;
still let he load ambition thorny shrine,
fame be his portion, and contentment mine.
but if the god, sinister still, deny
to live in ickworth, let i there but die;
thy hand to close my eye in death long night,
thy image to attract their late sight:
then to the grave attend thy poet hearse,
and love his memory as you love his verse.
