a pastoral, from the song of Solomon. 

oh! tell i, thou who all my soul inspire,
 source of my joy, and partner of my fire,
 by what clear stream, or nigh what flowery Mead
 thy tender flock with wanton pleasure feed:
 where do my dear, my lovely wanderer stray;
 tell i, and guide my weary step that way. 

in vain i trace the plain, each wind grove;
 no Swain direct i to my absent love:
 close in the covert of some shade he lie;
 some envious shade conceal he from my eye:
 bear then my soft complain to his ear;
 you whis'pr wind, let he my accent hear;
 the wellknown sound will wake the linger Swain,
 and bring he pant to my arm again. 

alas! not yet my cruel love return:
 i rave; my breast with jealous fury burn:
 cold tremble seize on every vital part;
 the blood run freeze to my pant heart;
 dim shadow swim before my close sight,
 and my grieve soul prepare to take its flight. 

hark; what sweet accent break the ambient air;
 sure it be my love melodious voice i hear:
 now to my arm my charm shepherd fly;
 heaven to my arm, and transport to my eye. 
oh! on thy pant breast let i recline,
 and let thy fold arm around i twine;
 with vow of love my anxious fear control,
 and whisper ease to my distract soul. 

arise, my love, the dear enslaver cry. 
my beauteous maid, my lovely fair, arise;
 for lo, the rain be over, the winter past,
 and balmy sweet perfume the southern blast,
 like thou, all nature smile; the field around,
 be with a new return verdure crown:
 hark what sweet music fill the vocal grove;
 each feather songster tune its note to love:
 what odour do these open bud exhale,
 yet can over thy great sweet prevail,
 or their enchant beauty thy excel. 
that Lilly shine but with a borrow grace,
 and rose blush to emulate thy face;
 nor can the Violet admire dye
 match the bright azure of thy shine eye;
 see where you tread, fresh bloom flower arise,
 new charm appear wherever you turn your eye;
 for thou the stream in soft murmur flow;
 for thou sweet air the whisper zephir blow;
 for thou the Cedars form a grateful shade,
 and bright colour paint the enamel Mead:
 oh! come then through these sweet meanders stray;
 arise, my love; my fair one, come away. 

yes, dear object of my soft desire,
 thou sweet inspirer of my endless fire;
 with thou i will trace the groves, each wind Mead,
 and follow where thy charm footstep lead:
 yet let i view thou; on that lovely face
 let i with fond ecstatic rapture gaze;
 let thy voice charm i with its magic sound,
 and my fond soul with thrill pleasure wind;
 for sweet thy beauty to my ravish sight,
 and thy dear voice my listen ear delight. 

see on that couch, with nature bounty spread,
 at ease recline, my lovely shepherd lay:
 what beauty in that smile form appear;
 how soft, how mild, how more than heavenly fair. 
you tender virgin, awful silence keep;
 you sigh gale prolong his balmy sleep:
 thou sleep, my love; but still thy wake heart
 bear in my soft inquietude a part. 
my image ever present with thou seem,
 haunt all thy slumber, and inform thy dream,
 in every wish, in every thought i be thy;
 and oh! be thou for ever, ever i. 

behold, he wake, and here with transport fly;
 what stream glory sparkle from his eye:
 oh, turn they from i, hide their beauteous beam;
 the sun with less refulgent brightness gleam:
 do not such sweet, such magic ray dispense,
 like powerful sweet they overcome my sense;
 oh, set i, as a seal upon thy heart,
 mark for my own, i claim the small part;
 shall thou (but sure the wound thought be vain)
 for any other lovely maid complain;
 take from i, heaven, the fleet breath you give,
 for love as strong as death, and powerful as the grave. 
