on the marriage of king GEORGE the third and queen Charlotte.

by the same.

to the queen.

when first the kingdom to thy virtue due
 rose from the billowy deep in distant view;
 when albion isle, old ocean peerless pride,
 tower in imperial state above the tide;
 what bright idea of the new domain
 form the fair prospect of thy promise reign! 

and well with conscious joy thy breast may beat,
 that Albion be ordain thy regal seat:
 lo! this the land where freedom sacred rage
 have glow untamed, through many a martial age. 
here patriot Alfred, stain with danish blood,
 rear on one base the king, the people good:
 here Henry archer frame the stubborn bow
 that lay alanzon haughty helmet low;
 here wake the flame that still superior brave
 the proud threat of gaul ambitious slave:
 here chivalry, stern school of valour old,
 her noble feat of knightly fame enrol;
 heroic champion hear the clarion call,
 and throng the board in Edward banner hall;
 while chief, like George, approve in worth alone,
 unlock chaste beauty adamantine zone. 
lo! the fame isle, which hail thy choose sway,
 what fertile field her temperate sun display;
 where property secure the conscious swain,
 and guard, while plenty give, the golden grain:
 hence ripe with store her village abound,
 her airy down with scatter sheep resound;
 fresh be her pasture with unceasing rill,
 and future navy crown her darksome hill. 
to bear her formidable glory far,
 behold her opulence of hoard war! 
see, from her port a thousand banner stream,
 on every coast her vengeful lightning gleam! 
meantime, remote from ruin arm hand,
 in peaceful majesty her city stand;
 who splendid dome, and tradeful street declare,
 their firm fort, a king parental care. 

and o! bless queen, if ever the magic power
 of warble truth have win thy muse hour;
 here poesy, from awful day of yore,
 have pour her genuine gift of rapture lore. 
 amid oaken bower, with holy verdure wreathe,
 in druid-song her solemn spirit breathe:
 while cunning bard, at ancient banquet, sing
 of paynim foe defy, and trophy hang:
 here Spenser tune his mystic minstrelsy,
 and dress in fairy robe a queen like thou. 
here, bold mark with every live hue,
 nature unbounded portrait Shakespear draw:
 but chief, the mournful group of human woe
 the dare artist tragic pencil choose;
 explore the pang that rend the royal breast,
 those wound that lurk beneath the tissue vest! 
lo! this the land, whence Milton muse of fire
 high soar to steal from heaven a seraph lyre;
 and tell the golden tie of wed love
 in sacred eden amaranthine grove. 

thy too, majestic bride! the favour clime,
 where science sit enshrine in roof sublime —
 o mark how green her wood of ancient bay
 over Isis marge in many a chaplet stray! 
thither, if haply some distinguish flower
 of these mix bloom, from that ambrosial bower,
 may catch thy glance, and, rich in nature hue,
 entwine thy diadem with honour due;
 if seemly gift the train of Phoebus pay,
 to deck imperial Hymen festive day;
 thither thyself shall haste, and mild deign
 to tread with nymphlike step the conscious plain:
 please in the muse nook, with decent pride,
 to throw the sceptre pall of state aside,
 nor from the shade shall George be long away,
 which claim charlotta love, and court she stay. —

these be britannia praise. deign to trace,
 with rapt reflection freedom favourite race! 
but though the generous isle, in art and arm,
 thus stand supreme, in nature choice charm;
 though George and conquest guard her sea-girt throne,
 one happy blessing still she call her own;
 and, proud a fresh increase of fame to view,
 crown all her glory by possess you. 
