[fragment] xii.

ryno.

the wind and the rain be over: calm be the noon of day. the cloud be divide in heaven. over the green hill fly the inconstant sun. red through the stony vale come down the stream of the hill. sweet be thy murmur, o stream! but more sweet be the voice i hear. it be the voice of Alpin the son of the song, mourn for the dead. bent be his head of age, and red his tearful, eye. Alpin, thou son of the song, why alone on the silent hill? why complain thou, as a blast in the wood; as a wave on the lonely shore?


Alpin.

my tear, o ryno! be for the dead; my voice, for the inhabitant of the grave. tall thou be on the hill; fair among the son of the plain. but thou shall fall like morar; and the mourner shall sit on thy tomb. the hill shall know thou no more; thy bow shall lie in the hall, unstring.

thou be swift, o Morar! as a roe on the hill; terrible as a meteor of fire. thy wrath be as the storm of December. thy sword in battle, as lightning in the field. thy voice be like a stream after rain; like thunder on distant hill. many fall by thy arm; they be consume in the flame of thy wrath.

but when thou return from war, how peaceful be thy brow! thy face be like the sun after rain; like the moon in the silence of night; calm as the breast of the lake when the loud wind be lay.

narrow be thy dwelling now; dark the place of thy abode. with three step i compass thy grave, o thou who waste so great before! four stone with their head of moss be the only memorial of thou. a tree with scarce a leaf, long grass which whistle in the wind, mark to the hunter eye the grave of the mighty morar. Morar! thou be low indeed. thou have no mother to mourn thou; no maid with her tear of love. dead be she that bring thou forth. fall be the daughter of morglan.

who on his staff be this? who be this, who head be white with age, who eye be red with tear, who quake at every step? — it be thy father, o Morar! the father of none but thou. he hear of thy fame in battle; he hear of foe disperse. he hear of morar fame; why do he not hear of his wound? weep, thou father of morar! weep; but thy son hear thou not. deep be the sleep of the dead; low their pillow of dust. no more shall he hear thy voice; no more shall he awake at thy call. when shall it be morn in the grave, to bid the slumberer awake?

farewell, thou brave of man! thou conqueror in the field! but the field shall see thou no more; nor the dark wood be lighten with the splendour of thy steel. thou have leave no son. but the song shall preserve thy name. future time shall hear of thou; they shall hear of the fall morar.

