the genius of Britain.

a iambic ode.

write in mdcclvi.

as late over britain chalky coast
 the genius of the island fly,
 the venal swarm of foreign host
 inglorious bask in his view,
 deep in his breast he feel the new disgrace,
 and honest blush warm his godlike face. 

quick flash the lightning of his spear,
 which blast France on cressy field,
 he wheel the blaze sword in air,
 and on his shoulder spread the shield,
 as when, over agincourt blood-purpled land,
 pale terror stalk through all the Gallic band. 

soon as he cast his eye below,
 deep heave the sympathetic sigh,
 sudden the tear of anguish flow,
 for sore he feel the indignity;
 discordant passion shake his heavenly frame,
 now horror damp, now indignation flame. 

ah! what avail, he cry, the blood
 shed by each patriot band of yore,
 when freedom unpaid legion stand
 protector of this sea-girt shore,
 when ancient wisdom deem each british sword
 from hostile power can guard its valiant lord. 

what though the danish raven spread
 awhile his wing over english ground,
 the bird of prey funereal flee
 when Alfred call his peer around,
 who fleet triumphant ride on the flood,
 deep stain each chalky cliff with denmark blood. 

Alfred on native can depend,
 and scorn a foreign force to employ,
 he think, who dare not to defend
 be never worthy to enjoy;
 the realm and monarch interest deem but one,
 and arm his subject to maintain their own. 

what though weak John divide reign
 the Gallic legion tempt over,
 when Henry baron join again,
 those feather warrior leave the shore;
 learn, briton, hence you want no foreign friend,
 the lion safety on himself depend. 

reflect on Edward glorious name;
 on my five Henry martial deed;
 think on those peer of deathless fame,
 who meet their king on thames mead,
 when sovereign might acknowledge reason plea,
 that heaven create man for liberty. 

though Rome fell star malignant shine,
 when good Eliza rule this state,
 on english heart she place her throne,
 and in their happiness her fate,
 while black than the tempest of the north,
 the papal tyrant send his curse forth. 

lo! where my thames water glide
 at great augusta regal foot,
 bear on each return tide
 from distant realm a golden fleet,
 which homeward waft the fruit of every zone,
 and make the wealth of all the world your own. 

shall on his silver wave be bear
 of arm slave a venal crew? 
lo! the old god denote his scorn,
 and shudder at the unusual view,
 down to his deep cave retire to mourn,
 and tear indignant bathe his crystal urn. 

o! how can vassal bear to bear
 the gall weight of slavery chain,
 a patriot noble ardor share,
 or freedom sacred cause maintain? 
briton, exert your own unconquered might,
 a freeman best defend a freeman right. 

look back on every deathless deed
 for which your sire record stand;
 to battle, let your noble lead
 the son of toil, and hardy band;
 the sword on each rough peasant thigh be wear,
 and war green wreath the shepherd front adorn. 

but see! upon his utmost shore
 america sad genius lie,
 each waste province he deplore,
 and cast on i his languid eye,
 bless with heaven favourite ordinance i fly
 to raise the oppress, and humble tyranny. 

this say, the vision westward flee,
 his wrinkle brow denounce war;
 the way fire-mantled vengeance lead,
 and justice drive his airy car;
 behind firm-footed peace her olive bear,
 and plenty horn pour blessing on the shore. 
