a reverie.

beside a spread elm, from who high bough
 like knot tuft the crow light dwelling show,
 screen from the northern blast and winter-proof,
 snug stand the parson barn with thatch roof. 
at chaff-strewed door where in the morning ray
 the gild mots in mazy circle play,
 and sleepy comrade in the sun be lay,
 more grateful to the cur than neighbour shade:
 in snowy shirt, unbrace, brown robin stand,
 and lean upon his flail in thoughtful mood. 
his ruddy cheek that wear their deep hue,
 his forehead brown that glisten drop bedew,
 his neck-band loose and hosen rumple low,
 a careful lad, nor slack at labour, show. 
nor scrape chicken chirp in the straw,
 nor croak rook overhead, nor chatter daw,
 loud-breathing cow among the juicy weed,
 nor grunt sow that in the furrow feed,
 nor sudden breeze that stir the quake leaf
 and make disturbance among the scatter sheaf,
 nor float straw that skim athwart his nose
 the deep muse youth may discompose. 
for Nelly fair, and blyth village maid,
 who tuneful voice beneath the hedgerow shade,
 at early milk over the meadow bear,
 ever cheer the ploughman toil at rise morn;
 the neat maid that ever in linen gown
 bear cream and butter to the market town;
 the tight lass that ever at wake or fair
 foot the ale-house floor with lightsome air,
 since easter last have robin heart possess,
 and many a time disturb his nightly rest. 
full oft return from the loosen plough,
 he slack his pace, and knit his careful brow;
 and oft, ere half his thresher task be over,
 will muse with arm across at cool door. 
his mind thus bend, with downcast eye he stand,
 and lean upon his flail in thoughtful mood. 
his soul over many a soft remembrance run
 and mutter to himself the youth begin. 

 "ah! happy be the man who early lot
 have make he master of a furnish cot;
 who train the vine that round his window grow,
 and after set sun his garden hoe;
 who wattle pale his own enclosure shield,
 who toil not daily in another field. 
wherever he go, to church or market town,
 with more respect he and his dog be know,
 with brisk face at pedlar booth he stand,
 and take each tempt gewgaw in his hand,
 and buy at will or ribbon, glove, or bead,
 and will partner to the green he lead:
 and oh! secure from toil that cumber life,
 he make the maid he love a easy wife. 
ah! Nelly! can thou with content mind
 become the helpmate of a labour hind,
 and share his lot, whatever the chance be,
 who have no dower but love to fix on thou? 
yes; gay maid may meek matron prove,
 and thing of little note betoken love. 
when from the church thou come at even-tide,
 and i and red-haired Susan by thy side,
 i pull the blossom from the bend tree,
 and some to Susan give and some to thou;
 thy be the fair, and thy smile eye
 the difference mark, and guess the reason why. 
when on that holiday we ramble stray,
 and pass old hodge cottage in the glade;
 neat be the garden dress, sweet hum the bee,
 i wish the cot and Nelly make for i;
 and well, methinks, thy very eye reveal,
 the self-same wish within thy breast conceal. 
when, artful, once i seek my love to tell,
 and speak to thou of one who love thou well,
 you see the cheat, and jeer homeward hie,
 yet secret pleasure in thy look i spy. 
ay, gay maid may meek matron prove,
 and small sign than these betoken love." 

now at a distance on the neighbour plain,
 with creak wheel slow come the harvest wain,
 high on its shake load a maid appear,
 and Nelly voice sound shrill in robin ear. 
quick from his hand he throw the cumbrous flail,
 and leap with lightsome limb the enclose pale. 
over field and fence he scour, and furrow wide,
 with waken comrade bark by his side;
 while track of tread grain and tangle hay,
 and break hedge-flower sweet, mark his impetuous way. 
