the linnet and the cat.

when fade autumn late hour
 strip the brown wood, and chill the flower, —
 when evening, wintery, short, and pale,
 expire in many a hollow gale, —
 and only morn herself look gay,
 when first she throw her quiver ray
 where the light frost congeal the dew,
 flushing the turf with purple hue;
 gay bloom, who transient glow can shed
 a charm like summer when it be flee! —
 a linnet among leafless tree
 sing, in the pause of the breeze,
 his farewell note, to fancy dear,
 that end the music of the year. 
the shorten day, the sadden sky,
 with frost and famine lower nigh;
 the summer dirge he seem to sing,
 and droop his elegiac wing. 
poor bird! he read amiss his fate,
 nor see the horror of his state:
 a prowl cat, with jetty skin, —
 dark emblem of the mind within, —
 who feel no sympathetic pain,
 who hear unmoved the sweet strain, —
 fit but "for stratagem and spoil,"
 mischief his pleasure and his toil,
 draw near — and shake the wither leaf; —
 the linnet flutter bosom heave —
 alarm he hear the rustle sound;
 he start — he pause — look around;
 too late — more near the savage draw,
 and grasp the victim in his jaw! 
the linnet muse, a timorous maid,
 see, and to Molly scream for aid;
 a tear then fill her earnest eye,
 useless as dew on desert lie;
 but Molly pity fall like shower
 that feed the plant, and wake the flower;
 heroic Molly dauntless fly,
 and, scorn all his claw can do,
 snatch from grimalkin tooth his prey,
 and bear he in her breast away. 
his beat heart and wing declare
 how small his hope of safety there;
 still the dire foe he seem to see,
 and scarce can fancy he be free. 
awhile he coward on Molly breast,
 then upward spring, and seek his nest. 
dear Molly! for thy tender speed,
 thy fearless pity gentle deed,

a ribbon-garland, "rosy red,"
 my votive gift, shall deck thy head;
 that garland at the village fair
 shall thou, dear maid, in triumph wear;
 and may the bloom wreath obtain
 the youth thy heart desire to gain. 
and thou, sweet bird, who rapture fill,
 who feel not sense of future ill, —
 that sense which human peace destroy,
 and murder all our present joy, —
 still soothe with song the autumnal hour;
 and when the wintery tempest lower,
 when snow thy shiver plume shall fill,
 and icicle shall load thy bill,
 come fearless to my friendly shed,
 this careful hand the crumb shall spread,
 then peck secure, these watchful eye
 shall guard my linnet from surprise. 
