lathmon: a poem.

Selma, thy hall be silent. there be no sound in the wood of Morven. the wave tumble alone on the coast. the silent beam of the sun be on the field. the daughter of Morven come forth, like the bow of the shower; they look towards green Ullin for the white sail of the king. he have promise to return, but the wind of the north arise.

who pour from the eastern hill, like a stream of darkness? it be the host of lathmon. he have hear of the absence of Fingal. he trust in the wind of the north. his soul brighten with joy. why do thou come, lathmon? the mighty be not in Selma. why come thou with thy forward spear? will the daughter of Morven fight? but stop, o mighty stream, in thy course! do not lathmon behold these sail? why do thou vanish, lathmon, like the mist of the lake? but the squally storm be behind thou; Fingal pursue thy step!

the king of Morven start from sleep, as we roll on the dark-blue wave. he stretch his hand to his spear, and his hero rise around. we know that he have see his father, for they often descend to his dream, when the sword of the foe rise over the land; and the battle darken before we.

whither have thou flee, o wind, say the king of Morven? do thou rustle in the chamber of the south, and pursue the shower in other land? why do thou not come to my sail? to the blue face of my sea? the foe be in the land of Morven, and the king be absent. but let each bind on his mail, and each assume his shield. stretch every spear over the wave; let every sword be unsheathe. lathmon be before we with his host: he that flee from Fingal on the plain of lona. but he return, like a collect stream, and his roar be between our hill.

such be the word of Fingal. we rush into carmona bay. Ossian ascend the hill; and thrice strike his bossy shield. the rock of Morven reply; and the bound roe come forth. the foe be trouble in my presence: and collect their darken host; for i stand, like a cloud on the hill, rejoice in the arma of my youth.

morni sit beneath a tree, at the roar water of strumon: his lock of age be grey: he lean forward on his staff; young Gaul be near the hero, hear the battle of his youth. often do he rise, in the fire of his soul, at the mighty deed of morni.

the age hear the sound of ossian shield: he know the sign of battle. he start at once from his place. his grey hair part on his back. he remember the action of other year. my son, he say to fair haired Gaul, i hear the sound of battle. the king of Morven be return, the sign of war be hear. go to the hall of strumon, and bring his arm to morni. bring the arm which my father wear in his age, for my arm begin to fail. take thou thy armour, o Gaul; and rush to the first of thy battle. let thy arm reach to the renown of thy father. be thy course in the field, like the eagle wing. why shall thou fear death, my son! the valiant fall with fame; their shield turn the dark stream of danger away, and renown dwell on their grey hair. do thou not see, o Gaul, how the step of my age be honour? morni move forth, and the young meet he, with reverence, and turn their eye, with silent joy, on his course. but i never flee from danger, my son! my sword lighten through the darkness of battle. the stranger melt before i; the mighty be blast in my presence.

Gaul bring the arm to morni: the age warrior cover himself with steel. he take the spear in his hand, which be often stain with the blood of the valiant. he come towards Fingal, his son attend his step. the son of Comhal rejoice over the warrior, when he come in the lock of his age.

king of the roar strumon! say the rise joy of Fingal; do i behold thou in arm, after thy strength have fail? often have morni shine in battle, like the beam of the rise sun; when he disperse the storm of the hill, and bring peace to the glitter field. but why do thou not rest in thy age? thy renown be in the song. the people behold thou, and bless the departure of mighty morni. why do thou not rest in thy age? for the foe will vanish before Fingal.

son of Comhal, reply the chief, the strength of morni arm have fail. i attempt to draw the sword of my youth, but it remain in its place. i throw the spear, but it fall short of the mark; and i feel the weight of my shield. we decay, like the grass of the mountain, and our strength return no more. i have a son, o Fingal, his soul have delight in the action of morni youth; but his sword have not be lift against the foe, neither have his fame begin. i come with he to battle; to direct his arm. his renown will be a sun to my soul, in the dark hour of my departure. o that the name of morni be forget among the people! that the hero will only say, "behold the father of Gaul!"

king of strumon, Fingal reply, Gaul shall lift the sword in battle. but he shall lift it before Fingal; my arm shall defend his youth. but rest thou in the hall of Selma; and hear of our renown. bid the harp be string; and the voice of the bard arise, that those who fall may rejoice in their fame; and the soul of morni brighten with gladness. — Ossian! thou have seek in battle: the blood of stranger be on thy spear: let thy course be with Gaul in the strife; but depart not from the side of Fingal; lest the foe find you alone, and your fame fail at once.

i see Gaul in his arm, and my soul be mix with his: for the fire of the battle be in his eye! he look to the foe with joy. we speak the word of friendship in secret; and the lightning of our sword pour together; for we draw they behind the wood, and try the strength of our arm on the empty air.

night come down on Morven. Fingal sit at the beam of the oak. morni sit by his side with all his grey wave lock. their discourse be of other time, and the action of their father. three bard, at time, touch the harp; and Ullin be near with his song. he sing of the mighty Comhal; but darkness gather on morni brow. he roll his red eye on Ullin; and the song of the bard cease. Fingal observe the age hero, and he mild speak.

chief of strumon, why that darkness? let the day of other year be forget. our father contend in battle; but we meet together, at the feast. our sword be turn on the foe, and they melt before we on the field. let the day of our father be forget, king of mossy strumon.

king of Morven, reply the chief, i remember thy father with joy. he be terrible in battle; the rage of the chief be deadly. my eye be full of tear, when the king of hero sell. the valiant fall, o Fingal, and the feeble remain on the hill. how many hero have pass away, in the day of morni! and i do not shun the battle; neither do i fly from the strife of the valiant.

now let the friend of Fingal rest; for the night be around; that they may rise, with strength, to battle against carborne lathmon. i hear the sound of his host, like thunder hear on a distant heath. Ossian! and fair-haired Gaul! you be swift in the race. observe the foe of Fingal from that woody hill. but approach they not, your father be not near to shield you. let not your fame fall at once. the valour of youth may fail.

we hear the word of the chief with joy, and move in the clang of our arm. our step be on the woody hill. heaven burn with all its star. the meteor of death fly over the field. the distant noise of the foe reach our ear. it be then Gaul speak, in his valour; his hand half-unsheathed the sword.

son of Fingal, he say, why burn the soul of Gaul? my heart beat high. my step be disorder; and my hand tremble on my sword. when i look towards the foe, my soul lighten before i, and i see their sleep host. tremble thus the soul of the valiant in battle of the spear? — how will the soul of morni rise if we shall rush on the foe! our renown will grow in the song; and our step be stately in the eye of the brave.

son of morni, i reply, my soul delight in battle. i delight to shine in battle alone, and to give my name to the bard. but what if the foe shall prevail; shall i behold the eye of the king? they be terrible in his displeasure, and like the flame of death. — but i will not behold they in his wrath. Ossian shall prevail or fall. but shall the fame of the vanquish rise? — they pass away like a shadow. but the fame of Ossian shall rise. his deed shall be like his father. let we rush in our arm; son of morni, let we rush to battle. Gaul! if thou shall return, go to selma lofty wall. tell to evirallin that i fall with fame; carry this sword to branno daughter. let she give it to Oscar, when the year of his youth shall arise.

son of Fingal, Gaul reply with a sigh; will i return after Ossian be low! — what will my father say, and Fingal king of man? the feeble will turn their eye and say, "behold the mighty Gaul who leave his friend in his blood!"you shall not behold i, you feeble, but in the midst of my renown. Ossian! i have hear from my father the mighty deed of hero; their mighty deed when alone; for the soul increase in danger.

son of morni, i reply and stride before he on the heath, our father shall praise our valour, when they mourn our fall. a beam of gladness shall rise on their soul, when their eye be full of tear. they will say, "our son have not fall like the grass of the field, for they spread death around they."— but why shall we think of the narrow house? the sword defend the valiant. but death pursue the flight of the feeble; and their renown be not hear.

we rush forward through night; and come to the roar of a stream which bend its blue course round the foe, through tree that echo to its noise; we come to the bank of the stream, and see the sleep host. their fire be decay on the plain; and the lonely step of their scout be distant far. i stretch my spear before i to support my step over the stream. but Gaul take my hand, and speak the word of the valiant.

shall the son of Fingal rush on a sleep foe? shall he come like a blast by night when it overturn the young tree in secret? Fingal do not thus receive his fame, nor dwell renown on the grey hair of morni, for action like these. strike, Ossian, strike the shield of battle, and let their thousand rise. let they meet Gaul in his first battle, that he may try the strength of his arm.

my soul rejoice over the warrior, and my burst tear descend. and the foe shall meet Gaul, i say: the fame of morni son shall arise. but rush not too far, my hero: let the gleam of thy steel be near to Ossian. let our hand join in slaughter. — Gaul! do thou not behold that rock? its grey side dim gleam to the star. if the foe shall prevail, let our back be towards the rock. then shall they fear to approach our spear; for death be in our hand.

i strike thrice my echo shield. the start foe arise. we rush on in the sound of our arm. their crowd step fly over the heath; for they think that the mighty Fingal come; and the strength of their arm wither away. the sound of their flight be like that of flame, when it rush through the blast grove.

it be then the spear of Gaul fly in its strength; it be then his sword arise. cremor fall; and mighty Leth. dunthormo struggle in his blood. the steel rush through crotho side, as bend, he rise on his spear; the black stream pour from the wound, and hiss on the half-extinguished oak. cathmin see the step of the hero behind he, and ascend a blast tree; but the spear pierce he from behind. shriek, pant, he fall; moss and wither branch pursue his fall, and strew the blue arm of Gaul.

such be thy deed, son of morni, in the first of thy battle. nor sleep the sword by thy side, thou last of fingal race! Ossian rush forward in his strength, and the people fall before he; as the grass by the staff of the boy, when he whistle along the field, and the grey beard of the thistle fall. but careless the youth move on; his step be towards the desert.

grey morning rise around we, the wind stream be bright along the heath. the foe gather on a hill; and the rage of lathmon rise. he bend the red eye of his wrath: he be silent in his rise grief. he often strike his bossy shield; and his step be unequal on the heath. i see the distant darkness of the hero, and i speak to morni son.

carborne chief of strumon, do thou behold the foe? they gather on the hill in their wrath. let our step be towards the king. he shall rise in his strength, and the host of lathmon vanish. our fame be around we, warrior, the eye of the age will rejoice. but let we fly, son of morni, lathmon descend the hill.

then let our step be slow, reply the fair — haired Gaul; lest the foe say, with a smile, "behold the warrior of night, they be, like ghost, terrible in darkness, but they melt away before the beam of the east."Ossian, take the shield of gormar who fall beneath thy spear, that the age hero may rejoice, when they shall behold the action of their son.

such be our word on the plain, when sulmath come to carborne lathmon: sulmath chief of dutha at the dark-rolling stream of duvranna. why do thou not rush, son of Nuäth, with a thousand of thy hero? why do thou not descend with thy host, before the warrior fly? their blue arm be beam to the rise light, and their step be before we on the heath.

son of the feeble hand, say lathmon, shall my host descend! they be but two, son of dutha, and shall a thousand lift their steel! Nuäth will mourn, in his hall, for the departure of his fame. his eye will turn from lathmon, when the tread of his foot approach.

go thou to the hero, chief of dutha, for i behold the stately step of Ossian. his fame be worthy of my steel; let he fight with lathmon.

the noble sulmath come. i rejoice in the word of the king. i raise the shield on my arm; and Gaul place in my hand the sword of morni. we return to the murmur stream; lathmon come in his strength. his dark host roll, like the cloud, behind he: but the son of Nuäth be bright in his steel.

son of Fingal, say the hero, thy fame have grow on our fall. how many lie there of my people by thy hand, thou king of man! lift now thy spear against lathmon; and lay the son of Nuäth low. lay he low among his people, or thou thyself must fall. it shall never be tell in my hall that my warrior fall in my presence; that they fall in the presence of lathmon when his sword rest by his side: the blue eye of cutha will roll in tear, and her step be lonely in the vale of dunlathmon.

neither shall it be tell, i reply, that the son of Fingal flee. be his step cover with darkness, yet will not Ossian fly; his soul will meet he and say, "do the bard of Selma fear the foe?"no: he do not fear the foe. his joy be in the midst of battle.

lathmon come on with his spear, and pierce the shield of Ossian. i feel the cold steel at my side; and draw the swored of morni; i cut the spear in twain; the bright point fall glitter on the ground. the son of Nuäth burn in his wrath, and lift high his sound shield. his dark eye roll above it, as bend forward, it shine like a gate of brass. but ossian spear pierce the brightness of its boss, and sink in a tree that rise behind. the shield hang on the quiver lance! but lathmon still advance. Gaul foresee the fall of the chief, and stretch his buckler before my sword; when it descend, in a stream of light over the king of dunlathmon.

lathmon behold the son of morni, and the tear start from his eye. he throw the sword of his father on the ground, and speak the word of the valiant. why shall lathmon fight against the first of mortal man? your soul be beam from heaven; your sword the flame of death. who can equal the renown of the hero, who action be so great in youth! o that you be in the hall of Nuäth, in the green dwelling of lathmon! then will my father say, that his son do not yield to the feeble. — but who come, a mighty stream, along the echo heath? the little hill be trouble before he, and a thousand ghost be on the beam of his steel; the ghost of those who be to fall by the arm of the king of resound Morven. — happy be thou, o Fingal, thy son shall fight thy battle; they go forth before thou; and they return with the step of their renown.

Fingal come, in his mildness, rejoice in secret over the action of his son. morni face brighten with gladness, and his age eye look faint through the tear of joy. we come to the hall of Selma, and sit round the feast of shell. the maid of the song come into our presence, and the mild blush evirallin. her dark hair spread on her neck of snow, her eye roll in secret on Ossian; she touch the harp of music, and we bless the daughter of branno.

Fingal rise in his place, and speak to dunlathmon battle king. the sword of trenmor tremble by his side, as he lift up his mighty arm. son of Nuäth, he say, why do thou search for fame in Morven? we be not of the race of the feeble; nor do our sword gleam over the weak. when do we come to dunlathmon, with the sound of war? Fingal do not delight in battle, though his arm be strong. my renown grow on the fall of the haughty. the lightning of my steel pour on the proud in arm. the battle come; and the tomb of the valiant rise; the tomb of my people rise, o my father! and i at last must remain alone. but i will remain renown, and the departure of my soul shall be one stream of light. lathmon! retire to thy place. turn thy battle to other land. the race of Morven be renown, and their foe be the son of the unhappy.

