to the honourable ***

by the same.

o CHARLES, in absence hear a friend complain,
who know thou love he wheresoever he go,
yet feel uneasy start of idle pain,
and often will be tell the thing he know.
why then, thou loiterer, fleet the silent year,
how dare thou give a friend unnecessary fear?

we be not now beside that osiered stream,
where erst we wander, thoughtless of the way:
we do not now of distant age dream,
and cheat in converse half the linger day;
no fancy hero rise at our command,
and no Timoleon weep, and bleed no theban band.

yet why complain? thou feel no want like these,
from i, it be true, but i alone debar,
thou still in granta shade enjoy at ease
the book we reverence, and the friend we share;
nor see without such aid the day decline,
nor think how much their loss have add weight to thy.

truth be genuine voice, the freely-opening mind,
be thy, be friendship, and retirement lot;
to conversation be the world confine,
friend of a hour, who please and be forget;
and interest stain, and vanity control
the pure unsullied thought, and sally of our soul.

o i remember, and with pride repeat
the rapid progress which our friendship know!
even at the first with will mind we meet,
and ere the root be fix the branch grow,
in vain have fortune place her weak barrier,
clear be thy breast from pride, and i from servile fear.

i see thou generous, and with joy can say,
my education rise above my birth,
thanks to those parent shade, on who cold clay
fall fast my tear, and light lie the earth!
to they i owe whatever i dare pretend,
thou see with partial eye, and bid i call thou friend.

let other mean heap the treasure store,
and awkward fondness care on care employ
to leave a race more exquisite poor,
possess of riches which they never enjoy:
he be only kind who take the noble way
unbind the spring of thought and give they power to play.

his heir shall bless he, and look down with scorn
on vulgar pride from vaunt hero spring;
lord of themselves, thank heaven that they be bear
above the sordid miser glitter dung,
above the servile grandeur of a throne,
for they be nature heir, and all her work their own.
