on the death of his highness the duke of Glocester.

1. 

i will take my leave of business, noise and care,
and trust this stormy sea no more:
condemn to toil, and feed with air,
i have often sigh look towards the shore:
and when the boisterous wind do cease,
and all be still, and all be peace,
afraid of calm, and flatter sky,
on the deceitful wave i fix my eye,
and on a sudden see the threaten billow rise:
then tremble beg the power divine,
some little safe retreat may be for ever mine:
o give, i cry, where ever you please,
those gift which mortal prize,
grow fond of privacy and ease,
i now the gaudy pomp of life despise.
still let the greedy strive with pain,
augment their shine heap of clay;
and punish with the thirst of gain,
their honour lose, their conscience stain:
let ambitious throne desire
and still with guilty have aspire;
through blood and danger force their way,
and over the world extend their sway,
while i my time to noble use give,
and to my book, and thought entire live;
those dear delight, in which i still shall find
ten thousand joy to feast my mind,
joy, great as sense can bear, from all its dross refine.

2. 

the muse well please, my choice approve,
and lead i to the shade she love:
to shade, like those first fame abode
of happy man, and rural god;
where, in the world bless infant state,
when all in friendship be combine
and all be just, and all be kind;
before glitter shower, disperse by Jove,
and gold be make the price of love,
the nymph and swain do bless their fate,
and all their mutual joy relate,
dance and sing, and void of strife.
enjoy all harmless sweet of life;
while on their tuneful reed their poet play,
and their chaste love to future time convey.

3. 

cool be the place, and quiet as my mind,
the sun can there no entrance find:
no ruffle wind the bough do move:
the water gentle creep along,
as with their flowery bank in love:
the bird with soft harmonious strain,
do entertain my ear;
sad Philomela sing her pain,
express she wrong, and her despair;
i listen to her mournful song,
the charm warbler please,
and i, i think, with new delight be seize:
her voice with tendere passion fill my breast,
and i feel rapture not to be express;
rapture, till that soft hour unknown,
my soul seem from my body fly:
vain world, say i, take, take my last adieu,
i will to my self, and to my muse be true,
and never more fantastic form pursue:
such glorious nothing let the great adore,
let they their airy Juno court,
i will be deceive no more,
nor to the mart of fame resort:
from this dear solitude no more remove,
but here confine my joy, my hope, my love.

4. 

thus be my hour in ecstasy employ,
and i the secret sweet of life enjoy:
serene, and calm, from every pressure free,
enslave alone by flatter poesy:
but oh! how please do her fetter prove!
how much do i, the endear charmer love!
no former care dare once my soul molest,
no past unkindness discompose my breast;
all be forget, as if in lethe stream
i will quench my thirst, the past be all a dream:
but as i please my self with this unenvied state,
behold! a wondrous turn of fate!
a hollow melancholy sound
disperse a awful horror round,
and hideous groan through all the grove resound
nature the dismal noise do hear,
nature her self do seem to fear:
the bleat flock lay tremble on the plain;
the brook run murmur by,
and echo to their murmur make reply:
the lofty tree their verdant honour shake;
the fright bird with have their bough forsake,
and for secure seat to distant groves repair.
the much wrong philomel dare now no more
her former injury deplore;
forget be all her move strain,
forget each sweet melodious air;
the weak passion, grief, surrender to her fear.

5. 

a sudden gloom its dusky empire spread,
and i be seize with a unusual dread:
where ever i look, each object bring affright:
and i can only mournful accent hear,
which from the adjacent hill do wound my ear;
the adjacent hill the general horror share:
amaze i sit, deprive of all delight,
the muse be flee, flee every please thought,
and in their room be black idea bring,
by busy fear, and active fancy wrought.
at length the doleful sound draw near,
and lo, the british genius do appear!
solemn his pace,
deject be his eye,
and from his breast thick throng sigh arise:
the tear run down his venerable face,
and he with lamentation loud fill all the sacred place.

6. 

he be dead he cry! the young, the much belove!
from we too soon, ah! much too soon remove!
snatch hence in his first dawn, his infant bloom!
so fall Marcellus by a rigorous doom.
the good, the great, the joy, the pride of Rome!
but oh! he want like he a Maro to rehearse
his early worth in never die verse:
to sing those rise wonder which in he be see,
that morning light which do it self display,
presage earnest of a glorious day;
his face be charm, and his make divine,
as if in he assemble do combine
the numerous grace of his royal line:
such be Ascanius, when from flame Troy
pious Æneas lead the lovely boy,
and such the god when to the Tyrian queen
a welcome guest he come;
and in his shape caress the illustrious dame
and kindle in her breast the inauspicious flame.

7. 

but this, alas! be but the exterior part;
for the chief beauty be within:
there nature show her great art,
and do a masterpiece begin:
but ah! the stroke be much too fine,
too delicate to last:
sweet be his temper, generous his mind,
and much beyond his year, to martial art incline:
averse to softness, and for one so young,
his sense be manly, and his reason strong:
what ever be teach he he will learn so fast
as if it be his design
when he to full maturity be grow,
the applaud world amaze shall find
what ever be worthy to be know,
he with the noble toil have early make his own.

8. 

such, such be he, who loss i now lament;
o heaven! why be this matchless bless send!
why but just show, and then, our grief to raise,
cut off in the beginning of his day!
have you behold the afflict royal pair
stand by that bed, where the dear sufferer lie
to his disease a helpless prey,
and see they gaze on the sad doubtful strife,
between contend death, and struggle life,
observe those passion which their soul do move,
those kind effect of tendere love;
see how their joy a while do strive
to keep their fainty hope alive,
but soon alas! be force to yield
to grief and dire despair,
the short contest field:
and they in that curse moment view,
when by prevail death subdue,
breathless and pale, the beauteous victim lie,
when his unwilling soul be force away
from that love body which it late bless,
that mansion worthy so divine a guest,
you must have own, no age can ever show
a sad sight, a scene of vaster woe.

9. 

sorrow like they, what language can express!
their all be lose, their only happiness!
the good Ægeus can not more be grieve
when he the sable flag perceive,
than be the prince; but we this difference find,
the last be calm, more resign,
and have the strong, more majestic mind:
he know complaint can give he no relief,
and therefore cast a veil upon his sullen grief:
the afflict princess can not thus control
the tender motion of her trouble soul:
unable to resist, she give her sorrow way,
and do the dictate of her grief obey:
maternal kindness still do preference claim,
and always burn with a more ardent flame:
but sure no heart be ever thus oppress,
the load be much too great to bear;
in sad complaint be all her minute spend,
and she live only to lament:
all soft delight be stranger to her breast:
his unexpected fate do all her thought ingross,
and she speak nothing but her mighty loss.
so mourn Andromache when she behold
Astyanax expose to lawless power,
precipitate from a lofty tower:
deprive of life the royal youth remain,
and with the rich trojan blood the pavement stain:
speechless she gaze, and by her grief impel,
fearless amid the græcian troop she run,
and to her pant bosom clasp her mangle Son.  

10. 

as thus he speak Britannia do appear,
attend by a sylvan throng,
and with she bring the river nymph along:
he be dead! he be dead! the genius loud cry,
on who dear life you do so much depend,
he be dead, he be dead, she mournful reply:
heaven will not long the mighty bless lend:
some envious power, who do my greatness fear,
foresee if he shall to manhood live,
he will glorious proof of wondrous valour give:
to distant land extend his sway,
and teach remote nation to obey:
resolve no powerful art his life shall save,
nor i shall long my love Gloucester have.
no more they say, but to their sigh give way,
the nymph and swain all grieve no less than they.
he be dead! he be dead! they weep say;
in his cold tomb the lovely youth be lay,
and have too soon, alas! too soon the law of fate obey.
no more, no more shall he these groves adorn,
no more by he shall flowery wreath be wear:
no more, no more we now on he shall gaze,
no more divert he with our rural lay,
nor see he with a godlike smile receive our humble praise.
their loud lament the nereid hear,
and full of grief, and full of fear,
their watery bed in haste forsake;
and from their lock the pearly moisture shake:
all with one voice the much love youth lament,
and in pathetic strain their boundless sorrow vent.

11. 

upon the ground i pensive lay;
complain and weep as much as they:
my country be loss become my own,
and i be void of comfort grow.
he be dead! he be dead! with they i cry,
and to each sigh, each groan reply.
the thracian bard be not more move,
when he have lose the fair he love;
when look back to please his sight
with all that can his soul delight,
he see she sink into everlasting night.
the sorrow of the princess pierce my heart,
and i, i think, feel all her smart:
i wish i can allay her pain,
or part of her affliction share;
but oh! such wish be in vain,
she must alone the ponderous burden bear.
o fate unjust! i then do cry,
why must the young, the virtuous die!
why in their prime be snatch away,
like beauteous flower which soon decay,
while weed enjoy the warmth of each succeed day?

12. 

while thus i mourn, a sudden light the place over spread
back to their genuine night the fright shadow flee:
dilate sky disclose a bright day,
and for a glorious form make way;
for the fame guardian of our isle:
the wondrous vision do with pomp descend,
with awful state his kind approach make,
and thus with a oblige smile
to the much grieve Britannia say,
no more, my much love charge, no more
your time in useless sorrow spend;
he be bless who loss you thus deplore:
above he live a life divine,
and do with dazzle splendour shine:
i meet he on the æthereal shore,
with joy i do the illustrious youth embrace,
and lead he to his god-like race,
who sit enthrone in wondrous state,
above the reach of death or fate:
the caledonian chief be there,
who through the world have spread their fame,
and just might immortal trophy claim:
a long descent of glorious king,
who do, and suffer mighty thing:
with they the danish hero be,
who long have ancient kingdom sway,
and be by warlike state obey:
with they they do their honour share,
with they refulgent crown do wear,
from all their toil at length they cease,
bless with the sweet of everlasting peace.

13. 

among the rest, that beauteous suffering queen
who will all the turn of adverse fortune see;
rob of a crown, and force to mourn in chain,
and on a scaffold end her numerous pain,
receive he with a cheerful look,
and to her arm her dear offspring take:
next come the martyr prince, who live to know
the last extremity of woe:
expose unjust to his people hate,
he feel the rigor of remorseless fate.
virtue and spotless innocence,
alas! be not defence:
they rather to the rage expose
of bloody and relentless foe:
too fierce they shine, too glare bright,
the vicious can bear their light.
next come his son, who long your sceptre sway,
and who his subject joyful obey;
then last of all the fair Maria come,
who late grace the british throne;
and there with a revive splendour shine,
but make a short, a transient stay,
by death from all her glory snatch away:
how vain be beauty, wealth, or fame,
how few the trophy of a boast name!
death can be bribe, be win by none:
to slave and king a fate a like, a like regard be show.

14. 

all these the lovely youth care,
and welcome he to their eternal rest:
welcome, they say, to this our blissful shore,
to never end joy, and seat divine,
to realm where clear unclouded glory shine,
here you may safe stand and hear the billow roar,
but shall be toss on that tempestuous sea no more:
no more shall grieve, no more complain,
but free from care, and free from pain,
with we for ever shall remain.
while thus they speak, celestial music play,
and welcome! welcome! every angel say:
with eager have their royal guest they crown,
while welcome! welcome! echo all around,
and fill the æthereal court with the loud cheerful sound.

15. 

he say; and to superior joy return;
Britannia now no long mourn:
no more the nymph, no more the swain,
with lamentation fill the plain:
the muse come back, and with she bring
each sprightly, each delightful thought:
kind she raise i from the ground,
and smile wipe my tear away:
while joy, she say, be spread around,
and do through all the groves resound,
will you to grief a tribute pay,
and mourn for one who be far more bless,
than those that be of crown possess?
no more, no more you must complain,
but with Britannia now rejoice:
Britannia to the choir above
will add her charm voice:
not one of all her beauteous train
but will obsequious prove;
and each will try who best can sing,
who can the high praise bring;
who best describe his happy state,
and best his present joy relate.
hark! hark! the bird be come again,
and each renew his sweet melodious strain.
clear be the sky, and bright the day,
among the bough sweet zephyr play,
and all be please, and all be gay.
and dare you still your grief express,
as if you wish his honour less,
and with a envious eye behold his happiness?

16. 

ah! cruel Muse, with sigh i say,
why do you thus your slave upbraid?
i neither at his bliss repine;
nor be it my choice to disobey:
your will, you know, have still be mine;
and i will now my ready deference pay:
but oh! in vain i strive, in vain i try,
while my love princess grieve, i can comply:
her tear forbid i to rejoice,
and when my soul be on the wing,
and i will with Britannia sing,
her sigh arrest my voice.
but if once more you will have i cheerful prove,
and with your shade again in love,
strive by your charm to calm her trouble mind;
let she the force of powerful number find:
and by the magic of your verse restore
her former peace, then add delight unknown before
let she be bless, my joy will soon return,
but while she grieve, i never can cease to mourn.
