i will have a new coatie.

i will have a new coatie when Willie come home,
 i will have a new plaidie and all of the same;
 and i will have some pearling to make myself fine,
 for it be all to delight this dear laddie of i. 
Bessy bell be admire by all sort of man,
 i will mind all her fashion and how she come ben;
 i will mind she at kirk and i will mind she at fair,
 and never once try to look like myself more. 

for i will ay be canty when Willie come home,
 to like such a laddie why shall i think shame! 
though the laird flyte my mither, and cry, "do you see,
 that lassie care nought for my silver or i!" 
the laird he have money, the laird he have land,
 but my Willie have nought but the sword in his hand;
 yet i will live upon Chelsea, or even will have beg,
 shall my soldier return with a poor wooden leg! 

for i must be happy when Willie come home,
 to lo'e the dear laddie i will never think shame! 
i will speak up to Maggie, who often will jeer,
 and cry, "she be no canty, because willie not here." 
i own, when i think i shall see he no more,
 my een they grow red and my heart it grow sore;
 to sing or to dance be no pleasure to i,
 though often i dance with the tear in my thou. 

but i will get to sing and dance again,
 and i will get the laddie and all of my own;
 we have all thing but silver, then why shall i fret? 
if there be riches in love we will have gear enough yet;
 for i ken well that riches can make themselves wing,
 that heart-ache hide under braw diamond and ring;
 and though love can happiness always ensure,
 it will help we with patience our lot to endure. 

sae i will ay be canty when Willie come home,
 to lo'e such a laddie why shall i think shame! 
though the laird flyte my mither, and cry, "do you see,
 the lassie care nought for my silver or i!" 
the laird he have money, the laird he have land,
 but Willie have nought but the sword in his hand;
 yet i will live upon Chelsea, or even will have beg,
 shall my soldier return with a poor wooden leg! 
