at pictura poesis.

by mr. Nourse, late of all soul college oxon, 1741. 

as once the muse, recline on her lyre,
observe her favourite bard, a numerous choir;
the conscious pleasure swell her silent breast,
her secret pride exult smile confess.

when thus her sister speak, who care preside
over the mix palate, and the pencil guide,
just, goddess, be thy joy, thy train, we own,
approach near to apollo throne.
foremost in learning rank they sit sublime,
honour and love through every age of time:
yet let i say, some favourite son of i
have more than follow every son of thy.
thy Homer need not grieve to hear his fame
exceed not raphael wide honour name:
Raphael like he amid age wrap in night,
rise father of his science to the light;
with matchless grace, and majesty divine,
bid painting breathe, and live the bold design;
to the clay-man the heavenly fire apply,
and give it charm to nature self deny.

with judgement, genius, industry and art,
do Virgil captivate his reader heart?
with rival talent my caracci bless
fire with like transport the spectator breast.
the youthful Lucan, who with rapid force
urge by pharsalia field the muse horse,
a equal fire, a equal strength of mind,
in angelo congenial soul will find:
who wild imagination can display
fierce giant whirl from heaven — the world last day.

with more success do tender Ovid move
the melt soul to softness and to love;
than wanton Titian, who warm colour show
that god themselves the amorous riot know?
thy grandeur, Paulo, and thy happy stroke,
i proud own my emulation speak,
for i bestow they, that the world may see,
a Horace too of i arise in thou.

lo! where Poussin his magic colour spread,
rise tower town, rough rock, and flowery mead:
what league between those azure mountain lie,
(who lessen top invade the purple sky)
and this old oak, that shade this hollow way,
amid who wind sheep and ox stray!
it be thus Theocritus his landskip give,
it be thus the speak picture move and live.

alike in Terence and in Guido air,
our praise the height of art and nature share.
in broad mirth if Plautus tread the stage,
with equal humour hemskirk boor engage.

she speak, with friendly emulation stir,
and Phoebus from his throne with pleasure hear.
