to mrs. Stephens.

thou, sodbury house, my love, my sweet retreat,
 and all the beauty that surround the seat;
 where nature smile in all her fertile pride;
 demand my song, and truth shall be my guide. 
scarce eden garden more divine fair;
 alike in fragrance be thy balmy air. 
when bow by sickness nigh the gloomy grave,
 thy air revive, and heaven vouchsafe to save. 

reverend by hoary age, and old in fame,
 unknown its founder family and name. 
the fabric stand a venerable seat;
 just in the centre of a fair estate:
 that wide its hospitable door extend,
 capacious to receive a thousand friend. 
the owner soul, like goodness, unconfined,
 diffuse wide her favour on her kind. 
her generous breast scarce other pleasure know,
 than what reflect from those that she bestow. 
she know with strict prudence how to spend;
 still frugal to herself, and noble to her friend. 
fair verdant avenue the house adorn;
 and double court the bold intruder warn. 
for great beneficence be oft oppress;
 and those that can deny, can seldom rest. 
wide arch portal grace the solemn hall;
 where wait the poor, as their distress call:
 nor call in vain; but of assistance sure;
 if hungry, feed; if sick, they find a cure. 
but view the parlour; here description faint:
 its beauty languish in my lifeless paint. 
its wide dimension, well-proportioned height,
 with please awe command and charm the sight. 
here Oliver, in britain annal fame,
 frown awful, yet intrepid and untamed. 
this piece a son of Spain can scarce survive;
 the canvas speak, it be Oliver alive. 
from the broad window see the scene extend;
 till on the distant hill the sky descend. 
within, around exotic floweret bloom;
 fair india spice shed a rich perfume. 
nor less, you lovely native of our isle,
 your scene delight i, or your blossom smile. 
the fragrant jessamin, and blush rose,
 the various woodbine, pink, and lily show
 yet lively beauty in their native soil;
 shed sweet fragrance, and require less toil. 

here hang garden rich with fruit appear;
 the golden apple, and the mellow pear,
 and nice plant, their spread arm extend;
 to tempt the gather hand of every friend. 
on the smooth terras, set with evergreen,
 i walk, delight with the lovely scene:
 where groop of tree around be artful spread,
 and meet in verdant arch over the head. 
amid the awful shade, from grove to grove,
 in noonday heat secure and cool, i rove. 
whence cloud of bird pursue their airy way,
 when dawn beam proclaim the rise day;
 rouse from their leafy bed they hail the light. 
i gaze, delight with the sound and sight! 
and wait their wish return with rise night. 
here rise on the plain a spread town;
 part the sun gild, and part the shade embrown. 
see gentle gradual yonder hill arise;
 till blue the last, and hide among the sky. 
along the side a ancient city spread,
 church and gothic spire erect their head. 
here seat unnumbered intersperse appear;
 with vocal wood, and corn with golden ear. 
gay plenty, with she ever smile face,
 and graceful beauty, dress all the space. 
the load vessel there secure ride
 on Severn, proud roll back her tide;
 carry our plenty to each distant shore,
 exchange for foreign wine, and golden oar. 
the distant river court the wander eye,
 till the wide view in ancient cambria dies. 
cambria; who hardy son be true and bold,
 scorn to be slave, their freedom never sell;
 but choose to live on barren cliff their own,
 disdain more fertile field for roman master sow. 
here view the wide extend concave bind
 the haughty hill, that guard the valley round. 
what grateful thought those awful camp inspire! 
once a dread scene of war, and blood, and fire:
 when conquer roman sit in triumph there,
 and death fly hiss through the fright air. 
the slaughter native spread the valley wide,
 and drench the meadow with a crimson tide. 
now peace her downy wing spread over the scene,
 the camp lie harmless on the level green,
 the noise of war be hush, and all a sweet serene. 
not cowper hill a more delightful theme,
 that smile in denham song for ever green;
 nor Windsor forest ever fair and gay,
 immortalise by pope harmonious lay;
 nor fancy scene in fable story tell,
 by modern bard, or the enchant old,
 have great charm than sodbury, dear retreat! 
serene bless, here can i fix my seat. 
but i must wander with unwilling foot. 
thus Adam take his last, his farewell round,
 and mourning leave fair eden happy ground. 
happy and long may here the owner live,
 to taste those pleasure which she love to give! 
long by her wise and fair example show,
 how peace and joy from silent order flow! 
with cheerful health and friendship ever crown,
 and deal out blessing to the country round! 
