by dr. Akenside.

hymn to the naiad.

over yonder eastern hill the twilight throw
her dusky mantle; and the god of day,
with bright Astraea seat by his side,
wait yet to leave the ocean. tarry, nymph,
you nymph, you blue-eyed progeny of Thames,
who now the maze of this rugged heath
trace with your fleet step; who all night long
repeat, amid the cool and tranquil air,
your lonely murmur, tarry: and receive
my offer lay. to pay you homage due,
i leave the gate of sleep; nor shall my lyre
too far into the splendid hour of morn
engage your audience: my observant hand
shall close the strain ere any sultry beam
approach you. to your subterranean haunt
you then may timely steal; to pace with care
the humid sand; to loosen from the soil
the bubble source; to direct the rill
to meet in wide channel; or beneath
some grotto drip arch, at height of noon
to slumber, shelter from the burn heaven.

where shall my song begin, you nymph? or end?
wide be your praise and copious — first of thing,
first of the lonely power, ere time arise,
be love and chaos. love, the fire of fate;
elder than chaos. bear of fate be time,
who many son and many comely birth
devour, relentless father: till the child
of Rhea drive he from the upper sky,
and quell his deadly might. then social reign
the kindred power, Tethys, and reverend Ops,
and spotless Vesta; while supreme of sway
remain the cloud-compeller. from the couch
of Tethys spring the sedgy-crowned race,
who from a thousand urn, over every clime,
send tribute to their parent; and from they
be you, o naiad: Arethusa fair,
and tuneful Aganippe; that sweet name,
bandusia; that soft family which dwell
with syrian Daphne; and the honour tribe
belove of Paeon. listen to my strain,
daughter of Tethys: listen to your praise.

you, nymph, the wing offspring, which of old
Aurora to divine Astraeus bear,
own; and your aid beseech. when the might
of Hyperion, from his noontide throne,
unbend their languid pinion, aid from you
they ask: Favonius and the mild southwest
from you relief implore. your sally stream
fresh vigour to their weary wing impart.
again they fly, disport; from the mead
half-ripened and the tender blade of corn,
to sweep the noxious mildew; or dispel
contagious steam, which oft the parch earth
breathe on her faint son. from noon to eve,
along the river and the pave brook,
ascend the cheerful breeze: hail of bard
who, fast by learned cam, the mantuan lyre
solicit; nor unwelcome to the youth
who on the highth of tybur, all incline
over rush Anio, with a pious hand
the reverend scene delineate, break fane,
or tomb, or pillared aqueduct, the pomp
of ancient time; and haply, while he scan
the ruin, with a silent tear revolve
the fame and fortune of imperious Rome.

you too, o nymph, and your unenvious aid
the rural power confess; and still prepare
for you their grateful treasure. Pan command,
oft as the delian king with Sirius hold
the central heaven, the father of the grove
command his dryad over your abode
to spread their deep umbrage. well the god
remember how indulgent you supply
your genial dew to nurse they in their prime.

pale, the pasture queen, wherever you stray,
pursue your step, delight; and the path
with live verdure clothes. around your haunt
the laugh Chloris, with profuse hand,
throw wide she bloom, her odour. still with you
Pomona seek to dwell: and over the lawn,
and over the vale of Richmond, where with Thames
you love to wander, Amalthea pour
well-pleased the wealth of that ammonian horn,
her dower; unmindful of the fragrant isle
nysaean or atlantic. nor can thou,
(albeit oft, ungrateful, thou do mock
the beverage of the sober naiad urn,
o Bromius, o lenaean) nor can thou
disown the power who bounty, ill repay,
with nectar feed thy tendril. yet from i,
yet, blameless nymph, from my delight lyre,
accept the rite your bounty well may claim;
nor heed the scoff of the edonian band.

for better praise await you. Thames, your sire,
as down the verdant slope your duteous rill
descend, the tribute stately Thames receive,
delight; and your piety applaud;
and bid his copious tide roll on secure,
for faithful be his daughter; and with word
auspicious gratulate the bark which, now
his bank forsake, her adventurous wing
yield to the breeze, with albion happy gift
extreme isle to bless. and oft at morn,
when Hermes, from Olympus bend over earth
to bear the word of Jove, on yonder hill
stoop lightly-sailing; oft intent your spring
he view: and wave over some new-born stream
his bless pacific wand, "and yet," he cry,
"yet," cry the son of Maia, "though recluse
"and silent be your store, from you, fair nymph,
"flow wealth and kind society to man.
"by you my function and my honour name
"do i possess; while over the boetic vale,
"or through the tower of Memphis, or the palm
"by sacred Ganges water, i conduct
"the english merchant: with the buxom fleece
"of fertile Ariconium while i clothe
"sarmatian king; or to the household god
"of Syria, from the bleak cornubian shore,
"dispense the mineral treasure which of old
"sidonian pilot seek, when this fair land
"be yet unconscious of those generous art
"which wise phoenicia from their native clime
"transplant to a more indulgent heaven. "

such be the word of Hermes: such the praise,
o naiad, which from tongue celestial wait
your bounteous deed. from bounty issue power:
and those who, sedulous in prudent work,
relieve the want of nature, Jove repay
with generous wealth and his own seat on earth,
fit judgment to pronounce, and curb the might
of wicked man. your kind unfailing urn
not vain to the hospitable art
of Hermes yield their store. for, o you nymph,
have he not win the unconquerable queen
of arm to court your friendship? you she own
the fair associate who extend she sway
wide over the mighty deep; and grateful thing
of you she utter, oft as from the shore
of Thames, or medway vale, or the green bank
of Vecta, she she thunder navy lead
to calpe foam channel, or the rough
cantabrian coast; her auspices divine
impart to the senate and the prince
of Albion, to dismay barbaric king,
the iberian, or the Celt. the pride of king
be ever scorn by Pallas: and of old
rejoice the virgin, from the brazen prow
of Athens over aegina gloomy surge,
to drive her cloud and storm; overwhelm all
the persian promise glory, when the realm
of Indus and the soft ionian clime,
when lybia torrid champain and the rock
of cold imaüs join their servile band,
to sweep the son of liberty from earth.
in vain: Minerva on the brazen prow
of Athens stand, and with the thunder voice
denounce her terror on their impious head,
and shake her burn aegis. Xerxes see:
from heracleum, on the mountain highth
throned in his golden car, he know the sign
celestial; feel unrighteous hope forsake
his falter heart, and turn his face with shame.

hail, you who share the stern minerva power;
who arm the hand of liberty for war:
and give, in secret, the britannic name
to awe contend monarch: yet benign,
yet mild of nature: to the work of peace
more prone, and lenient of the many ill
which wait on human life. your gentle aid
hygeia well can witness; she who save,
from poisonous cate and cup of please bane,
the wretch devote to the entangle snare
of Bacchus and of Comus. he she lead
to cynthia lonely haunt. to spread the toil,
to beat the covert, with the jovial horn
at dawn of day to summon the loud hound,
she call the linger sluggard from his dream:
and where his breast may drink the mountain-breeze,
and where the fervour of the sunny vale
may beat upon his brow, through devious path
beckon his rapid courser. nor when ease,
cool ease and welcome slumber have becalm
his eager bosom, do the queen of health
her please care withhold. his decent board
she guard, preside; and the frugal power
with joy sedate lead in: and while the brown
ennaean dame with Pan present her store;
while change still, and comely in the change,
Vertumnus and the hour before he spread
the garden banquet; you to crown his feast,
to crown his feast, o naiad, you the fair
hygeia call: and from your shelve seat,
and grove of poplar, plenteous cup you bring,
to slake his vein: till soon a pure tide
flow down those load channel; wash off
the dregs of luxury, the lurk seed
of crude disease; and through the abode of life
send vigour, send repose. hail, naiad: hail,
who give, to labour, health; to stoop age,
the joy which youth have squander. oft your urn
will i invoke; and, frequent in your praise,
abash the frantic Thyrsus with my song.

for not estrange from your benignant art
be he, the god, to who mysterious shrine
my youth be sacred, and my votive care
be due; the learned Paeon. oft when all
his cordial treasure he have search in vain;
when herb, and potent tree, and drop of balm
rich with the genial influence of the sun,
(to rouse dark fancy from her plaintive dream,
to brace the nerveless arm, with food to win
sick appetite, or hush the unquiet breast
which pine with silent passion) he in vain
have prove; to your deep mansion he descend.
your gate of humid rock, your dim arcade,
he enter; where empurple vein of over
gleam on the roof; where through the rigid mine
your trickle rill insinuate. there the god
from your indulgent hand the stream bowl
waft to his pale-eyed suppliant; waft the seed
metallic and the elemental salt
wash from the pregnant glebe. they drink: and soon
fly pain; fly inauspicious care: and soon
the social haunt or unfrequented shade
hear io, io Paean; as of old,
when Python fall. and, o propitious nymph,
oft as for hapless mortal i implore
your salutary spring, through every urn
o shed select atom, and with all
your heal power inform the recent wave.

my lyre shall pay your bounty. nor disdain
that humble tribute. though a mortal hand
excite the string to utterance, yet for theme
not unregarded of celestial power,
i frame their language; and the muse deign
to guide the pious tenor of my lay.
the muse (sacred by their gift divine)
in early day do to my wonder sense
their secret oft reveal: oft my raise ear
in slumber feel their music: oft at noon
or hour of sunset, by some lonely stream,
in field or shady grove, they teach i word
of power from death and envy to preserve
the good man name. whence yet with grateful mind,
and offering unprofaned by rude eye,
my vow i send, my homage, to the seat
of rocky Cirrha, where with you they dwell:
where you their chaste companion they admit
through all the hallow scene: where oft intent,
and lean over castalia mossy verge,
they mark the cadence of your confluent urn,
how tuneful, yield grateful repose
to their consort measure: till again,
with emulation all the sound choir,
and bright Apollo, leader of the song,
their voice through the liquid air exalt,
and sweep their lofty string: those awful string,
that charm the mind of god: that fill the court
of wide Olympus with oblivion sweet
of evil, with immortal rest from care;
assuage the terror of the throne of Jove;
and quench the formidable thunderbolt
of unrelenting fire. with slacken wing,
while now the solemn concert breathe around,
incumbent over the sceptre of his lord
sleep the stern eagle; by the number note,
possess; and satiate with the melt tone:
sovereign of bird. the furious god of war,
his dart forget and the rapid wheel
that bear he vengeful over the embattle plain,
relent, and sooth his own fierce heart to ease,
unwonted ease. the sire of god and man,
in that great moment of divine delight,
look down on all that live; and whatsoever
he love not, over the people earth and over
the interminate ocean, he behold
curse with abhorrence by his doom severe,
and trouble at the sound. you, naiad, you
with ravish ear the melody attend
worthy of sacred silence. but the slave
of Bacchus with tempestuous clamour strive
to drown the heavenly strain; of high Jove,
irreverent; and by mad presumption fire
their own discordant rapture to advance
with hostile emulation. down they rush
from nysa vine-impurpled cliff, the dame
of Thrace, the satyr, and the unruly faun,
with old Silenus, through the midnight gloom
toss the torch impure, and high in air
the brandish Thyrsus, to the phrygian pipe
shrill voice, and to the clash cymbal, mix
with shriek and frantic uproar. may the god
from every unpolluted ear avert
their orgy! if within the seat of man,
within the seat of man, the wall, the gate
which Pallas rule, if haply there be find
who love to mingle with the revel-band
and harken to their accent; who aspire
from such instructer to inform his breast
with verse; let he, fit votarist, implore
their inspiration. he perchance the gift
of young Lyaeus, and the dread exploit,
may sing in aptest number: he the fate
of sober Pentheus, he the paphian rite,
and naked Mars with cytheraea chain,
and strong alcides in the spinster robe,
may celebrate, applaud. but with you,
o naiad, far from that unhallowed rout,
must dwell the man whoever to praise theme
invoke the immortal muse. the immortal muse
to your calm habitation, to the cave
corycian or the Delphic mount, will guide
his footstep; and with your unsullied stream
his lip will bathe: whether the eternal lore
of Themis, or the majesty of Jove,
to mortal he reveal; or teach his lyre
the unenvied guerdon of the patriot toil,
in those unfading island of the bless,
where sacred bard abide. hail, honour nymph;
thrice hail, for you the cyrenaïc shell,
behold, i touch, revere. to my song
be present you with favourable foot,
and all profane audience far remove.
