to —. occasion by a ode write by mrs. Philips.

by the same.

narcissa! still through every vary name,
 my constant care and bright enliven theme,
 in what soft language shall the muse declare
 the fond extravagance of love sincere? 
how all those please sentiment convey,
 that charm my fancy, when i think on thou? 
a theme like this orinda thought inspire,
 nor less by friendship, than by genius fire. 
then let she happy, more persuasive art
 explain the agree dictate of my heart:
 sweet may her fame to late remembrance bloom,
 and everlasting laurel shade her tomb,
 who spotless verse with genuine force express
 the bright passion of the human breast. 

in what bless clime, beneath what favour sky,
 do thy fair form, propitious friendship, rise? 
with mystic sense, the poet tuneful tongue
 urania birth in glitter fiction sing. 
that paphos first her smile presence own,
 which wide diffuse its happy influence round. 
with hand unite, and with look serene,
 the attend grace hail their new-born queen;
 the zephyr round her wave their purple wing,
 and shed the fragrance of the breathe spring:
 the rosy hour, advance in silent slight,
 lead sparkle youth, and ever new delight. 
soft sigh the wind, the water gentle roll,
 a pure azure vest the lucid pole,
 all nature welcome in the beauteous train,
 and heaven and earth smile conscious of the scene. 

but long ere paphos rise, or poet sing,
 in heavenly breast the sacred passion spring:
 the same bright flame in rapture seraph glow,
 as warm consent temper here below:
 while one attraction mortal, angel, bind,
 virtue, which form the unison of mind:
 friendship her soft harmonious touch afford,
 and gentle strike the sympathetic chord,
 the agree note in social measure roll,
 and the sweet concert flow from soul to soul. 

by heaven enthusiastic impulse teach,
 what shine vision rise on Plato thought! 
while by the muse gentle wind flood,
 his s arch fancy trace the sovereign good! 
the laureled sister touch the vocal lyre,
 and wisdom goddess lead their tuneful choir. 
beneath the genial plantane spread shade,
 how sweet the philosophic music play! 
through all the grove, along the flowery shore,
 the charm sound responsive echo bear. 
here, from the care of vulgar life refine,
 immortal pleasure open on his mind:
 in gay succession to his ravish eye
 the animate power of beauty rise;
 on every object round, above, below,
 quick to the sight her vivid colour glow:
 yet, not to matter shadowy form confine,
 the fair and good he seek remain behind:
 till gradual rise through the boundless whole,
 he view the bloom grace of the soul;
 where, to the beam of intellectual day,
 the genuine charm of moral beauty play:
 with please force the strong attraction move
 each fine sense, and tune it into love. 
