Holt water.

a tale. extract from the natural history of berkshire. 

two nymph of chaste diana train,
 both fair, and tolerable vain,
 one morning early leave their bed,
 and say their prayer, and dress their head. 
the coach be order, in they step,
 not well awake, nor quite asleep:
 of well-dressed beau a brace they choose,
 at once for ornament, and use. 

their conversation need i tell? 
or who speak most, or which speak well? 
or how it run of various thing,
 of queen and grotto, war and king,
 of fortune-teller, or the fashion,
 of marriage, or predestination —? 
in short, they settle all the nation. 

not many mile the nymph be come,
 ere cloe wish she will stay at home. 
her lively colour come and go,
 the lily struggle, and the rose. 
 "i wish!" — wish on, thou gentle maid;
 of wish need one be afraid? 
 "why then" — and whisper something low;
 but what, or when, or where, or how,
 none but the muse shall ever know. 
yet trust i, prude, it be no more,
 than you or i have wish before:
 bright Emily, of royal race,
 may wish the same in such a case. 

in short, — the lady — but no matter:
 i will never tell one earthly creature. 
for why shall i, in lay forbid,
 unveil what custom will have hide? 
but lest the beau, for beau might blame,
 shall hear, and after hurt her fame,
 on each she cast a languid look,
 and thus the hero twain bespeak. 

 "what vast variety of woe
 do Jove let fall on folk below! 
poor Kitty, who but yesterday
 be all so giggle, and so gay,
 be pour now the frantic tear,
 and bare her breast, and beat the air:
 all comfort from her bosom flee,
 for ah! her parroquet be dead. 

 "now it be but civil, as i guess,
 to visit people in distress;
 if not for love, in spite, or joke,
 to see how horrid they look:
 for grief the fair cheek will stain,
 and make folk look extreme plain. 

 "then wonder not, if i alight,
 to do what be decent, and what be right;
 to visit first the hapless maid,
 then pay the rite to polly shade:
 who grave i will sprinkle — with my tear,
 and mix my friendly drop with she. 
excuse i then — i can no more —
 here, Thomas, stop; undo the door." 

Tom stop, and cloe soon alight,
 look please, but full of fear and fright. 
sir fopling he must needs attend she,
 and, with a speech, his hand will lend she. 
 "o no, sir fopling! — you will excuse it;
 time be precious, and we must not lose it." 

away she fly, as swift as wind,
 and leave the lover far behind. 
at length a little farm she see,
 surround by a clump of tree;
 no yelp cur be hear from far,
 the door have neither bolt nor bar:
 so in she go, and look around,
 but no expedient to be find. 
what shall she do? her want be press,
 and speedy require redress. 
in haste she trip it to the dairy,
 in hope to find or nan or marry;
 but not a live soul be there,
 nor cat to squall, nor mouse to stir. 
in short, the business must be do;
 time to consider there be none. 

the cream-pot first she fill with liquour,
 fit for the thorax of the vicar. 
nay Jove himself, the sky protector,
 will call such liquour heavenly nectar. 
so, in a grot, i have see enthrone
 some river goddess, osier-crowned,
 pour all her copious urn around. 
hence plenteous crop our harvest yield,
 and Ceres laugh through all the field. 
a pan of milk, unskim its cream,
 do next receive the bounteous stream;
 the bounteous stream in bubble break,
 and many a curious eddy make. 
o stop, dear nymph; alack! forbear;
 spoil not our cheese! our butter spare! 
what will poor gooddy Baucis say,
 to see her milk all turn to whey? 
the nymph be deaf, the noise be loud,
 and who here less than those that shall? 
so in a aqueduct i have stand,
 and hear aghast the headlong flood:
 what though with stentor lung you call,
 i hear you not, i be deafness all. 

the rite perform, herself much ease,
 and polly gentle shade appease,
 back to her company she fly,
 quite unobserved by vulgar eye. 
the muse indeed behind she stand. 
and hear the noise, and see the flood. 

but when poor Baucis from the field. 
return, and see her vessel fill;
 how do she lift her hand, and stare! 
and cry — "what fairy have be here? 
i leave this milk-pan yet to skim,
 and see no bubble on the brim! 
my cream-pot too be hardly full,
 but now it overflow the bowl! 
yet no disorder i can view,
 no sixpence leave in kattern shoe:
 my pewter on the shelf have sleep,
 the house too's neither brush nor sweep. 
well; guard we all, i say, from evil! 
for mighty watchful be the devil." 

a large brown jug stand there apart,
 the reservoir of near a quart;
 the liquour pure, as amber fine,
 but stock with particle saline. 
now Baucis, who come hot from work,
 be very dry, her dinner pork;
 one draught, cry she, of good sound beer! 
i be thirsty, and no creature near —
 let we see what heaven have send we here. 

she smell it, and no full-blown rose
 send half the fragrance to her nose. 
it look, think she, like cowslip wine,
 and if not sweet, i be sure it be fine:
 however, it be a sin to waste it,
 i will even take heart o'grace, and taste it —
 she drink, and down the liquour go;
 "a little, and therewith content,
 we learn, say she, from good saint Paul:
 and sure content be all in all! 
our beer be dead, but no great matter,
 it be better still than common water. 
we poor folk must make shift, it be true;
 however, to give the devil his due,
 even let he bake, but never brew." 
