the hasty-pudding: a poem.

Canto i 

you Alps audacious, through the heaven that rise,
to cramp the day and hide i from the sky;
you Gallic flag, that over their height unfurled,
bear death to king, and freedom to the world,
i sing not you. a soft theme i choose,
a virgin theme, unconscious of the muse,
but fruitful, rich, well suit to inspire
the pure frenzy of poetic fire.

despise it not, you bard to terror steel,
who hurl your thunder round the epic field;
nor you who strain your midnight throat to sing
joy that the vineyard and the stillhouse bring;
or on some distant fair your note employ,
and speak of rapture that you never enjoy.
i sing the sweet i know, the charm i feel,
my morning incense, and my evening meal,
the sweet of hasty-pudding. come, dear bowl,
glide over my palate, and inspire my soul.
the milk beside thou, smoke from the kine,
its substance mingle, marry in with thy,
shall cool and temper thy superior heat,
and save the pain of blow while i eat.

oh! can the smooth, the emblematic song
flow like thy genial juice over my tongue,
can those mild morsel in my number chime,
and, as they roll in substance, roll in rhyme,
no more thy awkward unpoetic name
shall shun the muse, or prejudice thy fame;
but rise grateful to the accustom ear,
all bard shall catch it, and all realm revere!

Assist i first with pious toil to trace
through wreck of time thy lineage and thy race;
declare what lovely squaw, in day of yore,
(ere great Columbus seek thy native shore)
first give thou to the world; her work of fame
have live indeed, but live without a name.
some tawny Ceres, goddess of her day,
first learn with stone to crack the well-dried maize,
through the rough seive to shake the golden shower,
in boil water stir the yellow flour:
the yellow flour, bestrew and stir with haste,
swell in the flood and thicken to a paste,
then puff and wallop, rise to the brim,
drink the dry knob that on the surface swim;
the knob at last the busy ladle break,
and the whole mass its true consistence take.

can but her sacred name, unknown so long,
rise like her labor, to the son of song,
to she, to they, i will consecrate my lay,
and blow her pudding with the breath of praise.
if it be oella, who i sing before,
i here ascribe she one great virtue more.
not through the rich Peruvian realm alone
the fame of Sol sweet daughter shall be know,
but over the world wide clime shall live secure,
far as his ray extend, as long as they endure.

dear hasty-pudding, what unpromised joy
expand my heart, to meet thou in Savoy!
doom over the world through devious path to roam,
each clime my country, and each house my home,
my soul be soothe, my care have find a end,
i greet my long-lost, unforgotten friend.

for thou through Paris, that corrupt town,
how long in vain i wander up and down,
where shameless Bacchus, with his drench hoard,
cold from his cave usurp the morning board.
London be lose in smoke and steep in tea;
no yankey there can lisp the name of thou;
the uncouth word, a libel on the town,
will call a proclamation from the crown. 
for clime oblique, that fear the sun full ray,
chill in their fog, exclude the generous maize;
a grain who rich luxuriant growth require
short gentle shower, and bright etherial fire.

but here, though distant from our native shore,
with mutual glee we meet and laugh once more.
the same! i know thou by that yellow face,
that strong complexion of true indian race,
which time can never change, nor soil impair,
nor alpine snow, nor turkey morbid air;
for endless year, through every mild domain,
where grow the maize, there thou be sure to reign.

but man, more fickle, the bold licence claim,
in different realm to give thou different name.
thou the soft nation round the warm Levant
Polanta call, the french of course polante;
even in thy native region, how i blush
to hear the pennsylvanians call thou much! 
on hudson bank, while man of belgic spawn
insult and eat thou by the name suppawn. 
all spurious appellation, void of truth;
i have better know thou from my early youth,
thy name be hasty-pudding! thus our sire
be wont to greet thou fume from their fire;
and while they argue in thy just defence
with logic clear, they thus explain the sense: —
"in haste the boil cauldron, over the blaze,
"receive and cook the ready-powdered maize;
"in haste it be serve, and then in equal haste,
"with cool milk, we make the sweet repast.
"no carve to be do, no knife to grate
"the tender ear, and wind the stony plate;
"but the smooth spoon, just fit to the lip,
"and teach with art the yield mass to dip,
"by frequent journey to the bowl well store,
"perform the hasty honour of the board. "
such be thy name, significant and clear,
a name, a sound to every yankey dear,
but most to i, who heart and palate chaste
preserve my pure hereditary taste.

there be who strive to stamp with disrepute
the luscious food, because it feed the brute;
in trope of high-strained wit, while gaudy prig
compare thy nursling man to pamper pig;
with sovereign scorn i treat the vulgar jest,
nor fear to share thy bounty with the beast.
what though the generous cow give i to quaff
the milk nutritious; be i then a calf?
or can the genius of the noisy swine,
though nurse on pudding, thence lie claim to i?
sure the sweet song, i fashion to thy praise,
run more melodious than the note they raise.

my song resound in its grateful glee,
no merit claim; i praise myself in thou.
my father love thou through his length of day;
for thou his field be shade over with maize;
from thou what health, what vigor he possess,
ten sturdy freeman spring from he attest;
thy constellation rule my natal morn,
and all my bone be make of indian corn.
delicious grain! whatever form it take,
to roast or boil, to smother or to bake,
in every dish it be welcome still to i,
but most, my hasty-pudding, most in thou,

let the green succatash with thou contend,
let bean and corn their sweet juice blend,
let butter drench they in its yellow tide,
and a long slice of bacon grace their side;
not all the plate, how fame soever it be,
can please my palate like a bowl of thou.

some talk of hoe-cake, fair Virginia pride,
rich johnny-cake this mouth have often try;
both please i well, their virtue much the same;
alike their fabric, as ally their fame,
except in dear New-England, where the last
receive a dash of pumpkin in the paste,
to give it sweetness and improve the taste.
but place they all before i, smoke hot,
the big round dumplin roll from the pot;
the pudding of the bag, who quiver breast,
with suet line lead on the yankey feast;
the Charlotte brown, within who crusty side
a belly soft the pulpy apple hide;
the yellow bread, who face like amber glow;
and all of indian that the bake-pan know —
you tempt i not — my favourite greet my eye,
to that love bowl my spoon by instinct fly.

Canto ii.

to mix the food by vicious rule of art,
to kill the stomach and to sink the heart,
to make mankind, to social virtue sour,
cram over each dish, and be what they devour;
for this the kitchen Muse first frame her book,
command sweat to stream from every cook;
child no more their antic gambol try,
and friend to physic wonder why they die.

not so the yankey — his abundant feast,
with simples furnish, and with plainness dress,
a numerous offspring gather round the board,
and cheer alike the servant and the lord;
who well-bought hunger prompt the joyous taste,
and health attend they from the short repast.

while the full pail reward the milk-maid toil,
the mother see the morning cauldron boil;
to stir the pudding next demand their care,
to spread the table and the bowl prepare;
to feed the child, as their portion cool,
and comb their head, and send they off to school.

yet may the simple dish some rule impart,
for nature scorn not all the aid of art.
even hasty-pudding, pure of all food,
may still be bad, indifferent, or good,
as sage experience the short process guide,
or want of skill, or want of care preside.
whoever will form it on the sure plan,
to rear the child and long sustain the man;
to shield the moral while it mend the size,
and all the power of every food supply,
attend the lesson that the muse shall bring,
suspend your spoon, and listen while i sing.

but since, o man! thy life and health demand
not food alone, but labour from thy hand,
first in the field, beneath the sun strong ray,
ask of thy mother earth the needful maize;
she love the race that court her yield soil,
and give her bounty to the son of toil.

when now the ox, obedient to thy call,
repay the loan that fill the winter stall,
pursue his trace over the furrow plain,
and plant in measure hill the golden grain.
but when the tender germ begin to shoot,
and the green spire declare the sprout root,
then guard your nursling from each greedy foe,
the insidious worm, the all-devouring crow.
a little ash, sprinkle round the spire,
soon steep in rain, will bid the worm retire;
the feather robber with his hungry maw
swift fly the field before your man of straw,
a frightful image, such as school-boy bring
when meet to burn the pope, or hang the king.

thrice in the season, through each verdant row
wield the strong ploughshare and the faithful hoe;
the faithful hoe, a double task that take,
to till the summer corn, and roast the winter cake.

slow spring the blade, while check by chill rain,
ere yet the sun the seat of cancer gain;
but when his fierce fire emblaze the land,
then start the juice, then the root expand;
then, like a column of corinthian mould,
the stalk strut upward, and the leaf unfold;
the bushy branch all the ridge fill,
entwine their arm, and kiss from hill to hill.
here cease to vex they, all your care be do;
leave the last labor to the parent sun;
beneath his genial smile the well-dress field,
when autumn call, a plenteous crop shall yield.

now the strong foliage bear the standard high,
and shoot the tall top-gallant to the sky;
the suckle ear their silky fringe bend,
and pregnant grow, their swell coat distend;
the load stalk, while still the burden grow,
overhang the space that run between the row;
high as a hop-field wave the silent grove,
a safe retreat for little theft of love,
when the pledge roasting-ear invite the maid,
to meet her swain beneath the new-formed shade;
his generous hand unload the cumbrous hill,
and the green spoil her ready basket fill;
small compensation for the twofold bliss,
the promise wedding and the present kiss.

slight depredation these; but now the moon
call from his hollow tree the sly raccoon;
and while by night he bear his prize away,
the bold squirrel labour through the day.
both thief alike, but provident of time,
a virtue rare, that almost hide their crime.
then let they steal the little store they can,
and fill their grain'ry from the toil of man;
we have one advantage where they take no part, —
with all their wile they never have find the art
to boil the hasty-pudding; here we shine
superior far to tenant of the pine;
this envy boon to man shall still belong,
unshared by they in substance or in song.

at last the close season brown the plain,
and ripe October gather in the grain;
deep load cart the spacious cornhouse fill,
the sack distend march to the mill;
the labour mill beneath the burden groan,
and shower the future pudding from the stone;
till the glad housewife greet the powder gold,
and the new crop exterminate the old.

Canto iii.

the day grow short; but though the fall fun
to the glad swain proclaim his day work do,
night please shade his various task prolong,
and yield new subject to my various song.
for now, the cornhouse fill, the harvest home,
the invite neighbour to the husk come;
a frolic scene, where work, and mirth, and play,
unite their charm, to chace the hour away.

where the huge heap lie centre in the hall,
the lamp suspend from the cheerful wall,
brown corn-fed nymph, and strong hard-handed beaux,
alternate range, extend in circle row,
assume their seat, the solid mass attack;
the dry husk rustle, and the corn-cob crack;
the song, the laugh, alternate note resound,
and the sweet cider trip in silence round.

the law of husk every wight can tell;
and sure no law he ever keep so well:
for each red ear a general kiss he gain,
with each smut ear she smut the luckless swain;
but when to some sweet maid a prize be cast,
red as her lip, and taper as her waist,
she walk the round, and cull one favour beau,
who leap, the luscious tribute to bestow.
various the sport, as be the wit and brain
of well please lass and contend swain;
till the vast mound of corn be sweep away,
and he that get the last ear, win the day.

meanwhile the housewife urge all her care,
the well-earned feast to hasten and prepare.
the sift meal already wait her hand,
the milk be strain, the bowl in order stand,
the fire flame high; and, as a pool (that take
the headlong stream that over the mill-dam break)
foam, roar and rage with incessant toil,
so the vex cauldren rage, roar and boil.

first with clean salt she season well the food,
then strew the flour, and thicken all the flood.
long over the simmer fire she let it stand:
to stir it well demand a strong hand;
the husband take his turn; and round and round
the ladle fly; at last the toil be crown;
when to the board the throng husker pour,
and take their seat as at the corn before.

i leave they to their feast. there still belong
more copious matter to my faithful song.
for rule there be, though never unfold yet,
nice rule and wise, how pudding shall be eat.

some with molasses line the luscious treat,
and mix, like bard, the useful with the sweet.
a wholesome dish, and well deserve praise,
a great resource in those bleak wintery day,
when the chill earth lie bury deep in snow,
and rage Boreas drive the shiver cow.

bless cow! thy praise shall still my note employ,
great source of health, the only source of joy;
how oft thy teat these pious hand have press!
how oft thy bounty prove my only feast!
how oft i have feed thou with my favourite grain!
and roar, like thou, to find thy child slay!

you swain who know her various worth to prize,
ah! house she well from winter angry sky.
potato, pumpkin, shall her sadness cheer,
corn from your crib, and mash from your beer;
when spring return she will well acquit the loan,
and nurse at once your infant and her own.

milk then with pudding i shall always choose;
to this in future i confine my muse,
till she in haste some farther hint unfold,
well for the young, nor useless to the old.
first in your bowl the milk abundant take,
then drop with care along the silver lake
your flake of pudding; these at first will hide
their little bulk beneath the swell tide;
but when their grow mass no more can sink,
when the soft island loom above the brink,
then check your hand; you have get the portion due,
so teach our sire, and what they teach be true.

there be a choice in spoon. though small appear
the nice distinction, yet to i it be clear.
the deep bowl Gallic spoon, contrive to scoop
in ample draught the thin dilute soup,
perform not well in those substantial thing,
who mass adhesive to the metal cling;
where the strong labial muscle must embrace,
the gentle curve, and sweep the hollow space.
with ease to enter and discharge the freight,
a bowl less concave but still more dilate,
become the pudding best. the shape, the size,
a secret rest unknown to vulgar eye.
experience feeder can alone impart
a rule so much above the lore of art.
these tuneful lip, that thousand spoon have try,
with just precision can the point decide,
though not in song; the muse but poor shine
in cone, and cube, and geometric line.
yet the true form, as near as she can tell,
be that small section of a goose-egg-shell,
which in two equal portion shall divide
the distance from the centre to the side.

fear not to slaver; it be no deadly sin.
like the free frenchman, from your joyous chin
suspend the ready napkin; or, like i,
poise with one hand your bowl upon your knee;
just in the zen your wise head project,
your full spoon, rise in a line direct,
bold as a bucket, heed no drop that fall,
the wide mouth bowl will sure catch they all.
