[pastoral 06] the sixth pastoral.

Geron.

how still the sea! behold; how calm the sky! 
and how, in sportive chase, the swallow fly! 
my goat, secure from harm, small tendance need,
 while high on yonder hang rock they feed:
 and here below, the banky shore along,
 your heifer graze: and i to hear your song
 dispose. as old, hobbinol, begin;
 and lanquet under-song by turn come in. 

hobbinol.

let other mean stake upon their skill,
 or kid, or lamb, or goat, or what they will;
 for praise we sing, nor wager ought beside:
 and, who the praise, let geron lip decide. 

lanquet.

to Geron i my voice and skill commend:
 unbiased he, to both be equal friend. 

Geron.

begin then, boy, and vary well your song;
 nor fear, from geron upright sentence, wrong. 
a boxen hautboy, loud, and sweet of sound,
 all varnish, and with brazen ringlet bind,
 i to the victor give: no small reward,
 if with our usual country pipe compare. 

hobbinol.

the snow be melt, and the kindly rain
 descend on every herb, and every grain;
 soft balmy breeze breathe along the sky;
 the bloomy season of the year be nigh. 

lanquet.

the cuckoo call aloud his wander love;
 the turtle voice be hear in every grove;
 the pasture change; the warble linnet sing:
 prepare to welcome in the gawdy spring. 

hobbinol.

when locust in the ferny bush cry,
 when raven pant, and snake in cavern lie;
 then graze in wood, and quit the burn plain,
 else shall you press the spongy Teat in vain. 

lanquet.

when green to yellow vary, and you see
 the ground bestrew with fruit off every tree,
 and stormy wind be hear, think winter near,
 nor trust too far to the decline year. 

hobbinol.

full fain, o bless Eliza! will i praise
 thy maiden rule, and albion golden day:
 then gentle Sidney live, the shepherd friend:
 eternal blessing on his shade attend! 

lanquet.

thrice happy shepherd now: for Dorset love
 the Country-Muse, and our delightful groves;
 while ANNA reign. o ever may she reign! 
and bring on earth a golden age again. 

hobbinol.

i love in secret all a beauteous maid,
 and have my love in secret all repay. 
this come night she do reserve for i. 
divine her name; and thou the victor be. 

lanquet.

mild as the lamb, unharmful as the dove,
 true as the turtle, be the maid i love. 
how we in secret love, i shall not say. 
divine her name, and i give up the day. 

hobbinol.

soft on a cowslip bank, my love and i
 together lie: a brook run murmur by. 
a thousand tender thing to i she say;
 and i a thousand tender thing repay. 

lanquet.

in summer shade, beneath the cock hay,
 what soft, endear word do she not say? 
her lap, with apron deck, she fond spread,
 and stroke my cheek, and lull my lean head. 

hobbinol.

breathe soft you wind, you water gentle flow;
 shield she, you tree; you flower around she grow;
 you swain, i beg you, pass in silence by;
 my love, in yonder vale asleep do lie. 

lanquet.

once Delia sleep, on easy moss recline;
 her lovely limb half bare, and rude the wind:
 i smooth her coat, and steal a silent kiss. 
condemn i, shepherd, if i do amiss. 

hobbinol.

as Marian bathe, by chance i pass by;
 she blush, and at i glance a sidelong eye:
 then swift beneath the crystal wave she try
 her tempt form, but all in vain, to hide. 

lanquet.

as i, to cool i, bathe one sultry day,
 fond Lydia, lurk in the sedge lay. 
the wanton laugh, and seem in haste to fly;
 yet often stop, and often turn her eye. 

hobbinol.

when first i see, will i have never see,
 young liset lead the dance on yonder green;
 intent upon her beauty as she move,
 poor, heedless wretch, at unaware i love. 

lanquet.

when Lucy deck with flower her swell breast,
 and on her elbow lean, dissemble rest;
 unable to refrain my mad mind,
 nor sheep nor pasture worth my care i find. 

hobbinol.

come Rosalind, o come! for, without thou,
 what pleasure can the country have for i? 
come Rosalind, o, come! my brind kine,
 my snowy sheep, my farm, and all be thy. 

lanquet.

come Rosalind, o come! here shady bower,
 here be cool fountain, and here spring flower. 
come Rosalind: here ever let we stay,
 and sweet waste our live-long time away. 

hobbinol.

in vain the season of the moon i know,
 the force of heal herb, and where they grow;
 there be no herb, no season, may remove
 from my fond heart the rack pain of love. 

lanquet.

what profit i, that i in charm have skill,
 and ghost and goblin order as i will;
 yet have, with all my charm, no power to lay
 the sprite, that break my quiet night and day. 

hobbinol.

o that, like Colin, i have skill in rhyme:
 to purchase credit with succeed time! 
sweet Colin clout! who never yet have peer,
 who sing through all the season of the year. 

lanquet.

let i like Wrenock sing; his voice have power
 to free the clipse moon at midnight hour:
 and, as he sing, the fairy, with their queen,
 in mantle blue come trip over the green. 

Geron.

here end your please strife. both victor be;
 and both with Colin may in rhyme compare. 
a boxen haut-boy, loud, and sweet of sound,
 all varnish, and with brazen ringlet bind,
 to both i give. a mizle mist descend
 down that steepy rock: and this way tend
 yond distant rain. shoreward the vessel strive;
 and, see, the boy their flock to shelter drive. 
