the power of beauty.

by —.

come, fair dorinda, and, while beauty glow
 warm on thy lovely cheek, auspicious come,
 and animate my song! o may i gaze
 on every charm, and from each shine grace
 catch inspiration! let thy genius aid
 my lay unpractised, pour into my verse
 the flow harmonious, while the enchant muse
 relate the charm, which over the yield heart
 perpetual reign, and hold resistless sway. 

diffusive nature, who with liberal hand
 scatter her bounty round, and deck the spring
 in all its gay attire, the virgin cheek
 flush with beauty, and adorn her brow
 with charm attractive; shape her faultless form
 with skill unerring, on her breast bestow
 the snowy hue, while over her shine neck
 in wanton ringlet flow her ebon hair
 dishevel, graceful, and her sparkle eye
 dart kindle flame: majestic on she move,
 conscious of native worth, and smile love
 allure. hither, you! who harden heart
 never feel a lover pang, ah! hither come,
 to feel the force of beauty: here survey,
 in radiant lustre, the bewitch grace,
 which from the dawn of time over nature hold
 her soft domain. since first the vital spark
 awake the human breast, and man arise
 to conscious being, the fair female form
 dazzle his eye, and through his pant breast
 shoot beauty ray. when in primaeval spring
 life uncorrupted roll its golden hour,
 free from the attack of vice, as yet unsoured
 with pain corrode; nor disease have rear
 her snaky crest to blast their bloom day:
 then beauty reign, and form the sacred tie
 connubial. oft, amid the green retreat,
 where fan zephrys play, the joyous hour
 flee on the wing of love: here innocence,
 and balmy peace, and friendship, heaven-born power,
 by beauty heighten, over the human pair
 their choice influence shed. nor beauty less,
 through long succeed age, over the heart
 her conquest hold; devote man attest
 the please truth, while at the siren voice
 of music, thrill the enchant note,
 he prostrate fall, the fond distract prey
 of passion rage through the enfever heart. 

so nature will; and while increase strength
 brace the nerve, and through the swell vein
 the blood fierce-boiling flow, subdue love
 still reign in man, to polish and refine
 his barbarous mind: nor, till the soothe flame
 have seize his heart, and thaw his freeze soul,
 ever can he relish the sublime delight
 of social transport, nor consent feel
 the sympathetic bliss, nor taste the sweet
 of hallow friendship, nor affect hear
 the voice of woe, as oft she vent her moan
 in wail loud. the soft relent heart,
 kind pity tear, the all-profusive hand
 of charity, the generous flow of soul,
 these be not he, who never yet have feel
 the pang of love, over who the enchant power
 of beauty never reign, who sullen breast
 never glow with transport, and the anxious throb
 which pant lover know; but all his soul
 be solitary gloom, untaught to pour
 the friendly fervor, and, with heart enlarge,
 to breathe the warm benevolence of love. 

come you, who now your gay moment pass,
 and graceful flourish amid the shine throng,
 while life fly joyous, and your youthful year
 roll placid on, before the radiant throne
 of beauty kneel. whatever warm the breast
 with noble purpose, what inform the heart
 to melt, and mould you into social man,
 be beauty power. from her poetic heat
 derive new fire, and teach by she oft paint
 the visionary scene, and touch all
 the spring of passion: she each win grace,
 and comely gesture she: enfrozen age,
 bend to earth beneath the weight of year,
 with wrinkle front, and venerable hair,
 melt at her fair approach; he feel warm blood
 run through his wither vein, erect he lift
 his hoary head, and on his age brow
 unusual gladness smile, while his cold heart
 warm into fervor glow: her kindle voice
 all rural nature hear, and start amaze
 to polish life. thus when the rustic swain
 see sleep beauty, on the grassy bank,
 recline at ease, and careless beam round
 her charm attractive, while upon her face
 play all the laugh love; surprise he gaze,
 and feel a thousand transport shoot along
 his shiver nerve: now his unfeeling heart,
 unused to pant, with soft emotion heave;
 he tremble view, and all his soul be love. 

and you, fair offspring of the bounteous hand
 of nature, you array in all the charm
 of vernal youth, flush on your comely cheek
 by beauty balmy breath, while yield man
 to you resign his heart, and eager sigh
 low at your foot, and tell the move tale
 of plaintive love: how, sleepless, on his couch
 he count the tedious hour, or slumber start
 from flatter vision, which delusive swim
 before his eye; how busy fancy paint
 your beauteous figure, in resplendent robe
 luxuriant float, as you graceful move
 in all the air of love; and while he grasp
 the imagine form, how lose in empty air
 the fair illusion fly: how taste forget
 the poignant relish, and the spicy gale
 to he no odour waft: cheerless and sad
 he wander pensive to the lonely shade,
 to blend his moan with the whisper breeze,
 while sympathetic glide the weep rill
 in many current by, and there to thought
 devote the gloomy hour, complain oft,
 in tender strain, how fair Amanda scorn
 his melt heart, how slight the mournful tale
 of fond, despair love; nor here can long
 indulge his woe, but restless with the crowd
 impatient mingle, solace there to find,
 amid the tumult of a madden world:
 still haunt the phantom, still his bosom burn
 with unremitted pain, and love resume
 his tyrant empire: how his alter look,
 meager and pale, speak the distract fiend
 which on his vital prey; how strength forsake
 his quiver limb; how wrap in awful gloom
 frail sicken nature pine away in woe. —
 o gentle then, you lovely conqueror! use
 your unresisted sway; forth stretch your arm,
 to raise from abject plight the faint slave,
 and on his torture soul, propitious, pour
 the balm of hope; and now delight taste
 love fond delight, while passion eager pant
 in every vein, and warm your glow breast
 with fairy prospect of transport joy. 

nor, gay Amanda, though, with sigh, to you
 the plaintive Damon kneel, and vent his soul
 in soft swell strain: yet let not these
 dilate your heart; nor look with scornful air
 on the gay rival, who with you contest
 fair beauty prize, and vie, supreme, to shine
 'midst the soft circle, where indulgent flow
 the soothe hour; where music gentle wake,
 symphonious, every passion, and attune
 the soul to rapture, while diffusive joy
 spread through the melt throng. for beauty still
 by taste be prove, by her capricious law
 it bloom or withereth. you! who long have hold
 the will Strephon, over the obdurate heart
 of Damon never reign; while he, subdue
 by bright Amanda, sigh his soul away
 in unavailing moan. far from your breast
 be banish pride; the high assume air
 ill suit the brow where tenderness and love
 shall dwell distinguish: nor can reason judge
 who charm superior shine; some dazzle grace,
 still nameless, flash on the admire eye. 

beyond description, fair than her sex,
 to i, dorinda seem: how dart her eye
 its soul-dissolving fire! how, over neck,
 graceful careless, fall her auburn hair! 
her mien how soft! can the pure mountain snow,
 with her warm bosom, rise to the throb
 of undissembled love, compare its white? 
the rose its red with she? nor Strephon less
 adore his bloom bride; she fair, she
 be beauty self, and as she gentle move
 her limb, proportion with unerring skill,
 a thousand radiant grace in her train
 allure dance. each nameless charm be she;
 and love, and joy, and virtue, sit enthrone
 in every look and smile. not vary more
 the human face, with different feature stamp
 by nature form hand, than taste which view,
 in object different, various beauty glow. 

o while you glory in your youthful prime,
 and yield attention to the siren voice
 of praise; in that soft season, when the breast
 a strange enchantment feel; when pleasure pant
 in every vein; and sparkle in the eye
 superfluous health; then guard your rebel heart
 against seduce love. suspend, you fair! 
these soft care, and listen, while the muse
 rise superior to the fade glare
 of mortal charm, and now essay to touch
 the heart, and open to the enrapture soul
 more last beauty, moral and divine,
 which grow in age, nor at the pale approach
 of death decay; but with unblasted grace
 for ever blossom. hail! bright virtue, hail! 
propitious come, inspire my glow breast
 to sing of thou! without thou, what be all
 life gay trappings, what the fleet show
 of youth, or charm, which for a moment spread
 their visionary bloom, but wither die,
 nor leave remembrance of their fancy worth! 

see, how adorn in heaven ail-glorious pomp
 fair virtue come, and in her radiant train
 ten thousand beauty wait: behold she come,
 to fill the soul with never-ceasing joy! 
attend her voice, sweet as the solemn sound
 of cherub, when they strike their golden harp
 in sacred concert, while the sky resound
 symphonious. hence, you fond delusive dream
 of fleet pleasure! she the heart distend
 with more endure bliss: kindle by she,
 the generous bosom breathe the social sire,
 and beat responsive to the woe of man. 

now native peace, and harmony divine,
 dwell in the soul: to reason powerful law
 each passion yield; and her resistless sway
 struggle corruption own, nor dare assault
 a heart confirm by she: and now the fame
 of nature conquer by the inform voice
 of reason, through celestial mansion fly
 on wing angelic: through the wind path
 of life, fair prudence guide, and point the road
 to happiness and peace; while in the breast
 untainted innocence and freedom reign. 

these be the charm of virtue, these will bloom
 when time shall cease: even beauty self by these
 more lovely seem, she look with add grace,
 and smile seraphic: nor shall hoary age
 their blossom wither, but perpetual spring
 here shed her influence; while a showy world,
 its varnish lose, shall deceive no more,
 and nature, sicken at approach fate,
 shall sink beneath its doom. whatever adorn
 the female breast, whatever can move the soul
 with fervent rapture, every win grace,
 and mild endearment, tenderness and love
 in fair Aspasia shine; it be she to charm
 with elocution sweet, and all the flow
 of soft persuasion, while the sensual heart
 refine, and feel fair virtue dawn there. 

nor you, gay glitter tribe! who ofttimes drink
 of Circe poison cup, and down the stream
 of soothe pleasure all resistless flow
 enervate, deem unworthy of your wish
 the charm of virtue. while you restless seek
 the phantom pleasure, where indulgence play
 her midnight gambol, over unstable path
 you heedless wander: as she point the way
 through her enchant maze, the illusive form
 conceal destruction. while, with eager hope,
 and mad impatience, in a fond embrace
 you grasp she pant, lo! the sorceress dart
 her latent venom through your torture nerve. 
then wake remorse; and, see! on yonder throne,
 with woe surround, fall disease display
 her snaky crest, and over your guilty head
 shake all her horror: anguish, downcast shame,
 succeed, and on the discontent brow
 satiety sit pale. the feeble knee,
 each nerve unbrace, beneath the fabric bend! 
the totter fabric fall! the shade of death
 now quench those orb, that beam impure desire! 
and, deep yet, the gloom of black despair —
 a darkness to be feel! — involve the soul! 
o, dread this complicate curse! and turn,
 with holy horror, from the path of vice! 

nor think, you fair! the pensive muse forbid
 the joy of youth; she with complacent smile
 view you light flutter; she the social band
 join cheerful, and benevolent implore
 diffusive nature on your head to shed
 her gay profusion, lawish all her grace,
 and in your bosom pour the soul of love. 
lo! rosy youth hold forth her picture scene,
 with garland crown; and tower fancy now
 her gay creation paint: high swell the breast
 with emulation, and joy-teeming life
 its gay allurement show. forth by your side,
 in glitter grandeur, walk the enrapture swain:
 with graceful ease, attemp'r conscious pride,
 he spread his glory to the admire eye. 
awake by love, and by the subtle flame
 of beauty kindle, with assiduous care,
 and fond submission, to the cheerful haunt
 of mirth he lead you, and while wander over
 enchant ground, oft tell the please tale
 persuasive: gentle flow the smile hour
 in social converse, innocent gay. 

come, nature, best informer! kind lead
 along the flowery walk, tread by the foot
 of youthful pleasure; guide our heedless step,
 and safe conduct we to the bower of bliss! 
supreme directress! she the breast instruct
 to breathe love be pure flame, graceful improve
 each vary motion, beam the expressive eye,
 and give to beauty all her power to charm. 
o! let she influence fill the different scene
 of joy and love — whether we careless stray
 along the paint mead, where fragrance blend
 she thousand sweet; or tread the lengthen walk,
 while music cheer the soul, and vistas green
 rise to the view, and pour their fresh delight
 on the bewilder eye; or if we move
 along the hall refulgent with the blaze
 of india store, and every measure trace
 or slow or sprightly, while the lover feel
 unusual transport rush upon his soul
 in admiration lose. ah! here, you fair,
 your gay moment pass: as to the touch
 you yield your hand, with palpitation quick
 the snowy bosom heave, and unreserved
 breathe the warm wish of kind consent love. 

far from the bosom of the tender fair,
 where love alone shall dwell, fly base deceit,
 nor stain with perfidy the sacred shrine. 
who be she that look with high imperious mien,
 in yonder walk, amid her rival, deck
 in yellow robe resplendent? how she move
 with practise air, and dart her meaning glance
 amid the throng! throw prostrate at her foot
 the lover plead, nor she the lover hear;
 but swell with pride of conquest scornful smile. 
yet if arouse, and conscious of his wrong,
 he bid the last adieu, she yet in store
 have thousand win wile: the blood forsake
 her bloom cheek, and on her coral lip
 steal paleness; while, adorn in all the charm
 of weep beauty, she resistless hold
 the lover still her own. with stream eye
 again he view she, and his yield heart
 melt with return love. — inconstant still,
 she, nor by pity move, nor gratitude,
 nor awful virtue, to the sigh slave
 resign her heart — there vanity still dwell,
 amid her fantastic joy enthrone, and plan
 unnumbered conquest over admire man. 
love be not she, she never taste the sweet
 of mutual rapture, mutual fond esteem,
 nor know the charm of truth; her bosom beat
 with other throb. anxiety and fear,
 ambition train! vex her aspire soul,
 and disappointment leave its baleful sting. 
be this her portion! let she still possess
 the dear deceit! — awake, delusive thought,
 self-adulation come, and in her breast
 your soft enchantment pour! life glory raise
 the splendid scene, and deck the exult fair
 in all your fancy pomp! — nor envy she,
 you faithful few, who the celestial grace
 of truth inspire! for, while she eager grasp
 the flatter form, they faithless all elude
 her fond embrace, and fleet in empty air. 

the fair Amanda know no practise guile
 to captivate the soul: sweet innocence
 and truth be she, and beauty unadorned,
 save when diffusive steal the glow blush,
 and show her bright in every virgin charm. 
her eye no conquest seek, nor beat her breast
 with anxious throb; she affectation wile
 nor practise nor know: stranger to these,
 she, only conscious of her virgin worth,
 heave nature sigh, and, dress in nature grace,
 all lovely seem, and move attractive on
 amid admire swain: at her approach
 each bosom flutter, while the lovely maid
 nor scornful look, nor with consent smile
 bid admiration all its incense pour
 to her bewitch charm: yet on her brow
 modest reserve oft sit, forbid all
 love wanton hope. the fair Amanda thus
 resistless empire hold; while awe we gaze
 on every charm, and at a distance sigh. 

yet while the season of your bloom youth
 glide gentle on, and liberal nature shower
 her gay blessing, peaceful, on your head;
 o! then let science on your easy hour
 serene steal: oft when the busy scene
 of meddle care, and fond officious love
 shut on your eye, and solitude invite
 to meditation, let she mild infuse
 her sweet instruction: she the soul exalt
 to dignity; for when, with knowledge bless,
 fair beauty smile upon the blush brow,
 her soft persuasion win the yield heart
 resistless, each with glow ardour hear
 her eloquence divine, the tuneful flow
 of sweet period, warble from the lip
 where rapture hang: the captivate soul,
 while beauty triumph, own her boundless sway. 

oft let i wander through the green retreat,
 where meditation dwell, and rose shed
 their mild perfume, wake by the genial breath
 of may, while gentle by the purling stream
 its crystal water roll: to crown my bliss
 let sweet ardelia come, on she attend
 each mild engage grace, each nameless charm
 allure; nature, bounteous, on her brow
 beam all its beauty, and the soul by she
 be charm to rapture; she the mind inform
 with knowledge, which from her persuasive tongue
 allure stream; while music lend its voice
 melodious, and the sapphic Muse await
 soft in her train, to breathe into her breast
 the inspire genius; she in melt lay,
 sweet as herself, in the warm bosom wake
 the fond delight of love. here let we join
 to sing of nature, as we please survey
 the beauteous landscape round, or frequent turn
 the move page, where glow poetic flame
 and harmony; with nature Shakespear rove
 through all the fairy region, or oft fly
 with Milton, boundless, through ethereal world. 
let rapture fancy feel the circle year
 roll over our head, and mark the change scene
 of nature, dress in his immortal lay
 who sing the season. thus may gentle hour
 in sweet improvement pass, and still return
 auspicious; for with thou, the beat heart
 feel fond emotion, and the soul dissolve
 in speechless transport of increase joy. 

you lovely fair, while flowery chaplet bind
 your youthful brow, and over the verdant path
 of gentle glide life, you graceful sweep,
 array in purple pride; as on your breast
 the diamond shine, and in your float train
 the ruby glow, and emerald around
 beset the fly robe; while dazzle thus
 in orient pomp, forgive if yet the muse
 in moralize strain essay to draw
 the evening veil over all the glitter show. 

vain be their blaze, which, like the noontide day,
 dazzle the eye: so flaunt the gaudy flower
 in vernal glory, wide diffuse round
 their odoriferous sweet, and shoot profuse
 their blossom forth, and flourish in their may,
 in nature livery clad; but when the sun
 beam in his pride, they droop their blush head,
 their blossom wither, and their vary tint
 fade with his sultry ray. behold, you fair,
 your gay delusion, read in nature book
 their transitory life, how quick fleet
 the dream of pleasure, at the pale approach
 of death grim blast all your picture hope. 
so fall amynta in her bloom of day. 
joy flush her brow, and expectation swell
 her beat bosom; love its tribute pay
 to her bewitch charm, about to taste
 connubial transport, and in damon arm
 to share the licence bliss: while virtue self
 behold complacent the indulge pair. 

elate thus, the fair amynta feel
 the pang of love; her wish winge their flight
 to future period; in idea all
 life soft blessing reveal in her heart. 
oft do the lover court the lonely shade,
 recluse happy, there to mingle sigh
 in nature warmth: throw on the flowery lap
 of the fresh earth, where rose blush around,
 they breathe their mutual vow, and taste all
 the endear sweet of uncorrupted love. 
dear hapless fair, amid her warm hope,
 when fancy figure all the tender scene
 of mutual rapture, she devote fall
 the mournful victim of the conquer hand
 of unrelenting death: he dread approach,
 and nature tremble at his ghastly mien. 
her Damon now, in move strain, lament,
 and sad pensive to her sacred tomb
 he oft repair, there drop a lover tear,
 while fond remembrance open all the scene
 of past delight, call forth his beauteous bride
 in visionary bloom once more to blaze
 in all-attractive charm, till lose again
 the phantom glide in air: all nature wear
 to he a face of woe; the valley round
 re-echo doleful to his move moan. 

so beauty fade, so fleet its showy life,
 as droop the lily, clad in all its pride
 of rich array. yet while the pensive muse
 touch the spring of grief, may no dark gloom
 overwhelm your soul, for innocence survive
 to bloom eternal: and while life invite
 to view its gay scene, amid the pomp
 of radiant court, still cheerful move along
 its flowery walk, and lead with jovial heart
 the laugh moment on; for beauty shine
 first in the gaudy circle, and command
 fond admiration. as britannia son
 excel in every virtue, manly brave
 amid the alarm of fate, generous, sincere,
 by glory kindle, may her virgin too,
 supreme fair, amid beauty bright blaze,
 in soft perfection shine; may HYMEN wave
 his purple wing, and over the sacred couch
 his azure mantle spread, as down you sink
 in wedlock chaste embrace, and oft renew
 the hallow rapture: thus may peaceful life
 flow undisturbed, nor jar feud invade
 your happy hour. and you, gay circle, now
 forgive the muse, which dare thus have sing
 of beauty triumph, though unequal far
 to the delightful theme; yet beauty charm
 my soul, and pour into my glow breast
 her fascination, lead i through the maze
 of love: nor unambitious of applause
 she court your smile, you be her please song. 
to you she warble, and devote pay
 her fond oblation to your radiant charm. 
but chief indulgent, amid the shine throng,
 will fair dorinda smile; she first inspire
 my heart with love, to she my early muse
 her infant rapture pour; happy if now
 sweet flow my number on she judge ear,
 and steal persuasive to her virgin breast. 
