Job curse, and his appeal.

take out of job, chap. i, and xxxi.

let not that day in circle moment run,
 when first these eye behold the odious sun:
 let his gay beam forsake the mourn field,
 and start backward roll his flame wheel;
 let sulphurous hail descend in baneful shower,
 and horrid darkness mix the jumble hour;
 let tremble mortal gaze in vain for light,
 curse be the day and double curse the night:
 thou my great judge these imprecation hear,
 and rend her minute from the roll year;
 to the sad sky be every star deny;
 while scorch plague on quiver meteor ride,
 let the black air no melt music know,
 but ring with horror and complaint of woe:
 through the grim shade let grisly terror run,
 and weep sorrow that abhor the sun:
 let pale-eyed spectre burst their yawn tomb,
 and dreadful echos shake the hideous gloom;
 the lower east pour down a lash storm;
 nor through her gate admit the struggle morn:
 let the dark hour no lively break see,
 because they give these ceaseless tear to i. 

as other have, alas! why can not i
 yield my short be, and a infant die? 
why be a mother care indulge to i? 
and why support on her friendly knee? 
why do i in her tender bosom grow,
 a foster subject of impend woe? 
do friendly death my marble limb enchain,
 this bleed heart will know no smart pain;
 then last sleep will seal my shade eye,
 where freeze pride and conquer vengeance lie;
 there weary slave forget rest may find,
 and injure orphan leave their tear behind;
 tyrannic rage must in the grave subside,
 where starve wretch find their want supply,
 thrice happy rest, o why to i deny! 
life still will hover round despair slave,
 who slight her favour, and will court their grave;
 death glide by we, show his grizzly charm;
 but the coy phantom mock our reach arm:
 he fly the dungeon of entreat woe,
 and strike the prosperous with unwelcome blow:
 to bloom youth his partial arrow fly,
 over wither mendicant, that vain try
 to meet the fatal shaft, and only wish to die. 

when darkness sit as regent of the sky,
 and round my bed redouble horror rise,
 till night grow hideous with my constant cry:
 my torture limb with ceaseless pang be tear,
 but yet i live to see return morn:
 the pierce sun thrust in a spiteful ray,
 to wound my eyelid with unwelcome day. 

tyrannic death, who tremble mortal flee,
 the prince of ill to every wretch but i,
 play with the torment of my struggle heart,
 and over my bosom shake his linger dart. 
o! sacred judge, when will thy wrath be do? 
why do i live to scare the wonder sun? 
let not thy mercy spare my wound clay,
 but strike and sweep i from offensive day. 
my heart be vex with consume fear,
 and nourish only with continual tear;
 close at my heel pursue a meager train
 of pine sickness and distort pain,
 pale-eyed confusion with dishivele hair,
 and wild impatience lead on despair. 

do i with crime profane my day of rest? 
do ever presumption swell my rise breast? 
do guilty flame my taint soul surprise? 
or snare of beauty catch my wander eye? 
if ever injustice swell my spread land,
 if ever oppression stain my guiltless hand;
 then let my god his flame vengeance throw,
 renew my plague, and double every woe. 
do ever my servant of their lord complain? 
do humble rhetoric ever plead in vain? 
in vain to i do helpless widow cry? 
or at my gate neglect orphan lie? 
no; their glad eye my plenteous table know,
 and with my own the foster infant grow. 
be ever my portal bar against the poor? 
do not the stranger bless my friendly door? 
though cold and hungry in my court he mourn,
 joyful and full the smile wretch return. 

when every good obey my lordly will,
 do i by fraud my glitter coffer fill? 
do i by fraud increase the tempt store? 
or dote too fond on the shine over? 
do restless envy in my bosom roll? 
or lurk malice blot my taint soul? 
no — this fond heart have bleed for distant woe,
 and learn compassion for a sink foe. 
do ever my soul from its creator run
 to paint idol, or the beam sun? 
or to the moon my waver sense yield,
 when her pale ray adorn the glister field? 

yet stay, presumptuous wretch, nor urge too far
 thy doubtful sentence at the dreadful bar:
 what melt rhetoric, or what potent friend,
 at heaven tribunal shall thy cause defend? 
where smother evil, hide from mortal eye,
 mature and open to omniscience lie. 
