ill latte:

a elegy.

by the same.

you fair, for who the hand of HYMEN weave
 the nuptial wreath to deck your virgin brow,
 while please pain the conscious bosom heave,
 and on the kindle cheek the blush glow:

who spotless soul contain the better dower,
 who life unstained full many virtue vouch,
 for who now Venus frame the fragrant bower,
 and scatter rose over the expect couch:

to you i sing. — ah! ere the rapture youth
 with tremble hand remove the jealous veil,
 where, long regardless of the vow of truth,
 unsocial coyness stamp the ungrateful soul,

a low the poet round your flow hair,
 cull from a humble vale, a wreath to twine,
 to beauty altar with the love repair,
 and wake the lute beside that live shrine:

that sacred shrine! where female virtue glow,
 where even the grace all their treasure bring,
 and where the lily, tempere with the rose,
 harmonious contrast! breathe a Eden spring:

that shrine! where nature with presage aim,
 what time her friendly aid Lucina bring,
 the snowy nectar pour, delightful stream! 
where flutter cupid dip their purple wing:

for you who bear a mother sacred name,
 who cradle offspring, in lament strain,
 with artless eloquence assert his claim,
 the boon of nature, but assert in vain. 

say why, illustrious daughter of the great,
 live not the nursling at your tender breast? 
by you protect in his frail estate? 
by you attend, and by you caress? 

to foreign hand, alas! can you resign
 the parent task, the mother please care? 
to foreign hand the smile babe consign? 
while nature start, and HYMEN shed a tear. 

when, amid the polish circle you rejoice,
 or rove join fantastic pleasure train,
 unheard perchance the nursling lift his voice,
 his tear unnoticed, and unsoothed his pain:

ah! what avail the coral crown with gold? 
in heedless infancy the title vain? 
the colour gay the purfle scarf unfold? 
the splendid nursery, and the attendant train? 

far better have thou first behold the light,
 beneath the rafter of some roof obscure! 
there in a mother eye to read delight,
 and in her cradle arm repose secure. —

no wonder, shall hygeia, blissful queen! 
her wonted salutary gift recall,
 while haggard pain apply his dagger keen,
 and over the cradle death unfold his pall. 

the floweret ravish from its native air,
 and bid to flourish in a foreign vale,
 do it not oft elude the planter care,
 and breathe its die odour on the gale? 

for you, you plight fair, when HYMEN crown
 with tender offspring your unshaken love,
 behold they not with rigour chill frown,
 nor from your sight unfeeling remove. 

unsway by fashion dull unseemly jest,
 still to the bosom let your infant cling,
 there banquet oft, a ever-welcome guest,
 unblamed inebriate at that healthful spring. 

with fond solicitude each pain assuage,
 explain the look, awake the ready smile,
 unfeigned attachment so shall you engage,
 to crown with gratitude maternal toil:

so shall your daughter in affliction day,
 when over your form the gloom of age shall spread,
 with lenient converse chase the hour away,
 and soothe with duty hand the widow bed:

approach, compassionate, the voice of grief,
 and whisper patience to the close ear;
 from comfort chalice minister relief,
 and in the potion drop a filial tear. 

so shall your son, when beauty be no more,
 when fade the languid lustre in your eye,
 when flattery shun her dulcet note to pour,
 the want of beauty, and of praise, supply. 

even from the wreathe that deck the warrior brow,
 some choose leaf your peaceful walk shall strew. 
and even the flower on classic ground that blow,
 shall all unfold their choice sweet for you. 

when to the embattle host the trumpet blow,
 while at the call fair albion gallant train
 dare to the field their triple-numbered foe,
 and chase they speed over the frighten plain:

the mother kindle at the glorious thought,
 and to her son renown adjoin her name;
 for, at the nurturing breast, the hero catch
 the love of virtue, and the love of fame. 

or in the senate when britannia cause
 with generous theme inspire the glow mind,
 while listen freedom grateful look applause,
 pale slavery drop her chain, and skulk behind:

with conscious joy the tender parent fraught,
 still to her son renown adjoin her name;
 for, at the nurturing breast, the patriot catch
 the love of virtue, and the love of same. 
