the battle of lora: a poem.

son of the distant land, who dwell in the secret cell! do i hear the sound of thy grove? or be it thy voice of song? — the torrent be loud in my ear, but i hear a tuneful voice; do thou praise the chief of thy land; or the spirit of the wind? — but, lonely dweller of the rock! look over that heathy plain: thou see green tomb, with their rank, whistle grass; with their stone of mossy head: thou see they, son of the rock, but ossian eye have fail.

a mountain-stream come roar down and send its water round a green hill: four mossy stone, in the midst of wither grass, rear their head on the top: two tree, which the storm have bend, spread their whistle branch around. — this be thy dwelling, erragon; this thy narrow house: the sound of thy shell have be long forget in Sora: and thy shield be become dark in thy hall. — erragon, king of ship! chief of distant Sora! how have thou fall on our mountain! how be the mighty low!

son of the secret cell! do thou delight in song? hear the battle of lora; the sound of its steel be long since past. so thunder on the darken hill roar and be no more. the sun return with his silent beam: the glitter rock, and green head of the mountain smile.

the bay of cona receive our ship, from ullin roll wave: our white sheet hang loose to the mast: and the boisterous wind roar behind the grove of Morven. — the horn of the king be sound, and the deer start from their rock. our arrow fly in the wood; the feast of the hill be spread. our joy be great on our rock, for the fall of the terrible swaran.

two hero be forget at our feast; and the rage of their bosom burn. they roll their red eye in secret: the sigh burst from their breast. they be see to talk together, and to throw their spear on earth. they be two dark cloud, in the midst of our joy; like pillar of mist on the settle sea: it glitter to the sun, but the mariner fear a storm.

raise my white sail, say maronnan, raise they to the wind of the west; let we rush, o aldo, through the foam of the northern wave. we be forget at the feast: but our arm have be red in blood. let we leave the hill of Fingal, and serve the king of Sora. — his countenance be fierce, and the war darken round his spear. let we be renown, o aldo, in the battle of echo Sora.

they take their sword and shield of thong; and rush to lumar sound bay. they come to sora haughty king, the chief of bound steed. — erragon have return from the chace: his spear be red in blood. he bend his dark face to the ground: and whistle as he go. — he take the stranger to his feast: they fight and conquer in his war.

aldo return with his fame towards sora lofty wall. — from her tower look the spouse of erragon, the humid, roll eye of lormar. — her dark-brown hair fly on the wind of ocean: her white breast heave, like snow on heath; when the gentle wind arise, and slow move it in the light. she see young aldo, like the beam of sora set sun. her soft heart sigh: tear fill her eye; and her white arm support her head.

three day she sit within the hall, and cover grief with joy. — on the four she flee with the hero, along the roll sea. — they come to cona mossy tower, to Fingal king of spear.

aldo of the heart of pride! say the rise king of Morven, shall i defend thou from the wrath of sora injure king? who will now receive my people into their hall, or give the feast of stranger, since aldo, of the little soul, have carry away the fair of Sora? go to thy hill, thou feeble hand, and hide thou in thy cave; mournful be the battle we must fight, with sora gloomy king. — spirit of the noble trenmor! when will Fingal cease to fight? i be bear in the midst of battle, and my step must move in blood to my tomb. but my hand do not injure the weak, my steel do not touch the feeble in arm. — i behold thy tempest, o Morven, which will overtrun my hall; when my child be dead in battle, and none remain to dwell in Selma. then will the feeble come, but they will not know my tomb: my renown be in the song: and my action shall be as a dream to future time.

his people gather around erragon, as the storm round the ghost of night; when he call they from the top of Morven, and prepare to pour they on the land of the stranger. — he come to the shore of cona, and send his bard to the king; to demand the combat of thousand; or the land of many hill.

Fingal sit in his hall with the companion of his youth around he. the young hero be at the chace, and far distant in the desert. the gray-haired chief talk of other time, and of the action of their youth; when the age narthmor come, the king of streamy lora.

this be no time, begin the chief, to hear the song of other year: erragon frown on the coast, and lift ten thousand sword. gloomy be the king among his chief! he be like the darken moon, amid the meteor of night.

come, say Fingal, from thy hall, thou daughter of my love; come from thy hall, bosmina, maid of streamy Morven! narthmor, take the steed of the stranger, and attend the daughter of Fingal: let she bid the king of Sora to our feast, to selma shade wall. — offer he, o bosmina, the peace of hero, and the wealth of generous aldo: our youth be far distant, and age be on our tremble hand.

she come to the host of erragon, like a beam of light to a cloud. — in her right hand shine a arrow of gold: and in she leave a sparkle shell, the sign of morven peace.

erragon brighten in her presence as a rock, before the sudden beam of the sun; when they issue from a break cloud, divide by the roar wind.

son of the distant Sora, begin the mild blush maid, come to the feast of morven king, to selma shade wall. take the peace of hero, o warrior, and let the dark sword rest by thy side. — and if thou choose the wealth of king, hear the word of the generous aldo. — he give to erragon a hundred steed, the child of the rein; a hundred maid from distant land; a hundred hawk with flutter wing, that fly across the sky. a hundred girdle shall also be thy, to bind high-bosomed woman; the friend of the birth of hero, and the cure of the son of toil. — ten shell stud with gem shall shine in sora tower: the blue water tremble on their star, and seem to be sparkle wine. — they gladden once the king of the world, in the midst of their echo hall. these, o hero, shall be thy; or thy white-bosomed spouse. — lorma shall roll her bright eye in thy hall; though Fingal love the generous aldo: — Fingal! — who never injure a hero, though his arm be strong.

soft voice of cona! reply the king, tell he, that he spread his feast in vain. — let Fingal pour his spoil around i; and bend beneath my power. let he give i the sword of his father, and the shield of other time; that my child may behold they in my hall, and say, "these be the arm of Fingal."

never shall they behold they in thy hall, say the rise pride of the maid; they be in the mighty hand of hero who never yield in war. — king of the echo Sora! the storm be gather on our hill. do thou not foresee the fall of thy people, son of the distant land?

she come to selma silent hall; the king behold her down-cast eye. he rise from his place, in his strength, and shake his age lock. — he take the sound mail of trenmor, and the dark-brown shield of his father. darkness fill selma hall, when he stretch his hand to his spear: — the ghost of thousand be near, and foresee the death of the people. terrible joy rise in the face of the age hero: they rush to meet the foe; their thought be on the action of other year: and on the fame of the tomb.

now the dog of the chace appear at Trathal tomb: Fingal know that his young hero follow they, and he stop in the midst of his course. — Oscar appear the first; — then morni son, and nemi race: — fercuth show his gloomy form: Dermid spread his dark hair on the wind. Ossian come the last, o son of the rock, i hum the song of other time: my spear support my step over the little stream, and my thought be of mighty man. Fingal strike his bossy shield; and give the dismal sign of war; a thousand sword, at once unsheathe, gleam on the wave heath. three gray-haired son of the song raise the tunesul, mournful voice. — deep and dark with sound step, we rush, a gloomy ridge, along: like the shower of a storm when it pour on the narrow vale.

the king of Morven sit on his hill: the sun-beam of battle fly on the wind: the companion of his youth be near, with all their wave lock of age. — joy rise in the hero eye when he behold his son in war; when he see they amid the lightning of sword, and mindful of the deed of their father. — erragon come on, in his strength, like the roar of a winter stream: the battle fall in his course, and death be at his side.

who come, say Fingal, like the bound roe, like the hart of echo cona? his shield glitter on his side; and the clang of his armour be mournful. — he meet with erragon in the strife! — behold the battle of the chief! — it be like the contend of ghost in a gloomy storm. — but fall thou, son of the hill, and be thy white bosom stain with blood? weep, unhappy lorma, aldo be no more.

the king take the spear of his strength; for he be sad for the fall of aldo: he bend his deathful eye on the foe; but Gaul meet the king of Sora. — who can relate the fight of the chief? — the mighty stranger fall.

son of cona! Fingal cry aloud, stop the hand of death. — mighty be he that be now so low! and much be he mourn in Sora! the stranger will come towards his hall, and wonder why it be silent. the king be fall, o stranger, and the joy of his house be cease. — listen to the sound of his wood: perhaps his ghost be there; but he be far distant, on Morven, beneath the sword of a foreign foe.

such be the word of Fingal, when the bard raise the song of peace; we stop our uplift sword, and spare the feeble foe. we lay erragon in that tomb; and i raise the voice of grief: the cloud of night come roll down, and the ghost of erragon appear to some. — his face be cloudy and dark; and a halfsormed sigh be in his breast. — bless be thy soul, o king of Sora! thy arm be terrible in war!

lorma sit, in aldo hall, at the light of a flame oak: the night come, but he do not return; and the soul of lorma be sad. — what detain thou, hunter of cona? for thou do promise to return. — have the deer be distant far; and do the dark wind sigh, round thou, on the heath? i be in the land of stranger, where be my friend, but aldo? come from thy echo hill, o my best belove!

her eye be turn towards the gate, and she listen to the rustle blast. she think it be aldo tread, and joy rise in her face: — but sorrow return again, like a thin cloud on the moon. — and thou will not return, my love? let i behold the face of the hill. the moon be in the east. calm and bright be the breast of the lake! when shall i behold his dog return from the chace? when shall i hear his voice, loud and distant on the wind? come from thy echo hill, hunter of woody cona!

his thin ghost appear, on a rock, like the watery beam of the moon, when it rush from between two cloud, and the midnight shower be on the field. — she follow the empty form over the heath, for she know that her hero fall. — i hear her approach cry on the wind, like the mournsul voice of the breeze, when it sigh on the grass of the cave.

she come, she find her hero: her voice be hear no more: silent she roll her sad eye; she be pale as a watery cloud, that rise from the lake, to the beam of the moon.

few be her day on cona: she sink into the tomb: Fingal command his bard; and they sing over the death of lorma. the daughter of Morven mourn she for one day in the year, when the dark wind of autumn return.

son of the distant land, thou dwell in the field of fame: o let thy song rise, at time, in the praise of those that fall: that their thin ghost may rejoice around thou; and the soul of lorma come on a moonbeam, when thou lie down to rest, and the moon look into thy cave. then shall thou see she lovely; but the tear be still on her cheek.

