the art of coquettry. 

you lovely maid, who yet unpractised heart
 never feel the force of love resistless dart;
 who just set a value on your charm,
 power all your wish, but beauty all your arm:
 who over mankind will fain exert your sway,
 and teach the lordly tyrant to obey. 
attend my rule to you alone address,
 deep let they sink in every female breast. 
the queen of love herself my bosom fire,
 assist my number, and my thought inspire. 
i she instruct in each secret art,
 how to enslave, and keep the vanquish heart;
 when the steal sigh to heave, or drop the tear,
 the melt languish, the oblige fear;
 half-stifled wish, break, kind reply,
 and all the various motion of the eye. 
to teach the fair by different way to move
 the soften soul, and bend the heart to love. 
proud of her charm, and conscious of her face,
 the haughty beauty call forth every grace;
 with fierce defiance throw the kill dart,
 by force she win, by force she keep the heart. 
the witty fair one noble game pursue,
 aim at the head, but the rapt soul subdue. 
the languid nymph enslave with soft art,
 with sweet neglect she steal into the heart;
 slow she move her swim eye around,
 conceal her shaft, but meditate the wound:
 her gentle languishment the gazer move,
 her voice be music, and she look be love. 
though not to all heaven do these gift impart,
 what be they by nature may be you by art.
 but let your air be suit to your face,
 nor to a languish tack a sprightly grace. 
the short round face, brisk eye, and auburn hair,
 must smile joy in every motion wear;
 her quick unsettled glance deal around,
 hide her design, and seem by chance to wound. 
dark roll eye a languish may assume,
 and tender look and melt air become:
 the pensive head upon the hand recline,
 as if some sweet disorder fill the mind. 
let the heave breast a struggle sigh restrain,
 and seem to stop the fall tear with pain. 
the youth, who all the soft distress believe,
 soon want the kind compassion which he give. 
but beauty, wit, and youth may sometime fail,
 nor always over the stubborn soul prevail. 
then let the fair one have recourse to art,
 and, if not vanquish, undermine the heart. 
first form your artful look with studious care,
 from mild to grave, from tender to severe. 
oft on the careless youth your glance dart,
 a tender mean let each look impart. 
whenever he meet your look with modest pride,
 and soft confusion turn your eye aside,
 let a soft sigh steal out, as if by chance,
 then cautious turn, and steal another glance. 
catch by these art, with pride and hope elate,
 the destine victim rush on his fate:
 please, his imagine victory pursue,
 and the kind maid with soften glance view;
 contemplate now her shape, her air, her face,
 and think each feature wear a add grace;
 until gratitude, which first his bosom prove,
 by slow degree be ripen into love. 
it be hard still to fix than gain a heart;
 what be win by beauty, must be keep by art.
 too kind a treatment the bless lover cloy,
 and oft despair the grow flame destroy:
 sometime with smile receive he, sometime tear,
 and wise balance both his hope and fear. 
perhaps he mourn his ill-requited pain,
 condemn your sway, and strive to break his chain;
 behave as if he now your scorn defy,
 and think at least he shall alarm your pride:
 but with indifference view the seem change,
 and let your eye after new conquest range;
 while his tear breast with jealous fury burn,
 he hope, despair, hate, and adore by turn;
 with anguish now repent the weak deceit,
 and powerful passion bear he to your foot. 
strive not the jealous lover to perplex,
 ill suit suspicion with that haughty sex;
 rash they judge, and always think the worst,
 and love be often banish by distrust. 
to these a open free behaviour wear,
 avoid disguise, and seem at least sincere. 
whenever you meet affect a glad surprise,
 and give melt softness to your eye:
 by some unguarded word your love reveal,
 and anxious the rise blush conceal. 
by art like these the jealous you deceive,
 then most delude when they most believe. 
but while in all you seek to raise desire,
 beware the fatal passion you inspire:
 each soft intrude wish in time reprove,
 and guard against the sweet envader love. 
not for the tender be these rule design,
 who in their face show their yield mind:
 eye that a native languishment can wear,
 who smile be artless, and who blush sincere;
 but the gay nymph who liberty can prize. 
and vindicate the triumph of her eye:
 who over mankind a haughty rule maintain,
 who wit can manage what her beauty gain:
 such by these art their empire may improve,
 and what they lose by nature gain by love. 
