the splendid shilling,

by mr. John Phillips.

happy the man, who void of care and strife,
 in silken or in leathern purse retain
 a splendid shilling: he nor hear with pain
 new oyster cry, nor sigh for cheerful ale;
 but with his friend, when mighty mist arise,
 to juniper, magpie, or town hall repair:
 where mindful of the nymph, who wanton eye
 transfix his soul, and kindle amorous flame,
 Chloe or Phillis; he each circle glass
 wish her health, and joy, and equal love. 
mean while, he smoke and laugh at merry tale,
 or pun ambiguous, or conundrum quaint. 
but i, who gripe penury surround,
 and hunger, sure attendant upon want,
 with scanty offal, and small acid Tiff
 (wretched repast!) my meager corpse sustain:
 then solitary walk, or doze at home
 in garret vile, and with a warm puff
 regale chill finger; or from tube as black
 as winter chimney, or well-polished jet,
 exhale mundungus, ill-perfuming scent:
 not black tube, nor of a short size
 smoke Cambro-Britain (verse in pedigree,
 spring from Cadwalader and Arthur, king
 full famous in romantic tale) when he
 over many a craggy hill and barren cliff,
 upon a cargo of fame cestrian cheese,
 high overshadow ride, with a design
 to vend his ware, or at the arvonian mart,
 or Maridunum, or the ancient town
 ecleap brechinia, or where vaga stream
 encircle Ariconium, fruitful soil,
 whence flow nectareous wine, that well may vie
 with massic, setin, or renowned falern. 

thus, while my joyless minute tedious flow,
 with look demure, and silent pace, a Dunn,
 horrible monster! hate by god and man,
 to my aerial citadel ascend;
 with vocal heel thrice thunder at my gate,
 with hideous accent thrice he call; i know
 the voice ill-boding, and the solemn sound. 
what shall i do? or whither turn? amaze,
 confound, to the dark recess i fly
 of woodhole; strait my bristle hair erect
 through sudden fear; a chilly sweat bedew
 my shudder limb, and (wonderful to tell!) 
my tongue forget her faculty of speech;
 so horrible he seem! his fade brow
 entrench with many a frown, and conic beard
 and spread band, admire by modern saint,
 disastrous act forebode; in his right hand
 long scroll of paper solemn he wave,
 with character and figure dire inscribe,
 grievous to mortal eye; (the god, avert
 such plague from righteous man!) behind he stalk
 another monster, not unlike himself,
 sullen of aspect, by the vulgar call
 a catchpole, who pollute hand the god
 with force incredible, and magic charm
 erst have endue: if he be ample palm
 shall haply on ill-fated shoulder lie
 of debtor, strait his body, to the touch
 obsequious (as whilom knight be wont)
 to some enchant castle be convey,
 where gate impregnable, and coercive chain
 in durance strict detain he, till in form
 of money, Pallas set the captive free. 

beware, you debtor, when you walk beware,
 be circumspect; oft with insidious ken
 this caitiff eye your step aloof, and oft
 lie perdue in a nook or gloomy cave,
 prompt to enchant some inadvertent wretch
 with his unhallowed touch. so (poet sing)
 Grimalkin to domestic vermin swear
 a everlasting foe, with watchful eye
 lie nightly brood over a chinky gap,
 protend her fell claw, to thoughtless mouse
 sure ruin. so she disembowele web
 Arachne in a hall, or kitchen spread,
 obvious to vagrant fly: she secret stand
 within she weave cell; the hum prey,
 regardless of their fate, rush on the toil
 inextricable, nor will aught avail
 their art, nor arm, nor shape of lovely hue;
 the wasp insidious, and the buzz drone,
 and butterfly proud of expand wing
 distinct with gold, entangle in her snare,
 useless resistance make: with eager stride,
 she tower fly to her expect spoil;
 then with envenom jaw the vital blood
 drink of reluctant foe, and to her cave
 their bulky carcass triumphant drag. 

so pass my day. but when nocturnal shade
 this world invelop, and the inclement air
 persuade man to repel benumb frost
 with pleasant wine, and crackle blaze of wood;
 i lonely sit, nor the glimmer light
 of make-weight candle, nor the joyous talk
 of love friend delight; distress, forlorn,
 amid the horror of the tedious night,
 darkling i sigh, and feed with dismal thought
 my anxious mind; or sometime mournful verse
 indite, and sing of groves and myrtle shade,
 or desperate lady near a purling stream,
 or lover pendent on a willow-tree:
 mean while, i labour with eternal drought,
 and restless wish and rave my parch throat
 find no relief, nor heavy eye repose:
 but if a slumber haply do invade
 my weary limb, my fancy still awake,
 thoughtful of drink, and eager, in a dream,
 tipple imaginary pot of ale:
 in vain; awake i find the settle thirst
 still gnaw, and the pleasant phantom curse. 

thus do i live from pleasure quite debar,
 nor taste the fruit that the sun genial ray
 mature, john-apple, nor the downy peach,
 nor walnut in rough-furrowed coat secure,
 nor Medlar, fruit delicious in decay:
 affliction great! yet great still remain:
 my galligaskins that have long withstand
 the winter fury, and encroach frost,
 by time subdue (what will not time subdue!) 
a horrid chasm disclose, with orifice
 wide, discontinous; at which the wind
 eurus and Auster, and the dreadful force
 of Boreas, that congeal the cronian wave,
 tumultuous enter with dire chill blast,
 portend ague. thus a well-fraught ship
 long sail secure, or through the Ægean deep,
 or the ionian, till cruise near
 the lilybean shore, with hideous crush
 on Scylla, or Charybdis (dangerous rock)
 she strike rebound, whence the shatter oak,
 so fierce a shock unable to withstand,
 admit the sea; in at the gape side
 the crowd wave gush with impetuous rage,
 resistless, overwhelm; horror seize
 the mariner, death in their eye appear,
 they stare, they lave, they pump, they swear, they pray;
 (vain effort!) still the batter wave rush in
 implacable, till deluge by the foam,
 the ship sink founder in the vast abyss. 
