to the right honourable the earl of Warwick, etc.  on the death of mr. ADDISON.

by the same.

if, dumb too long, the droop muse have stay,
and leave her debt to ADDISON unpaid;
blame not her silence, Warwick, but bemoan,
and judge, oh judge, my bosom by your own,
what mourner ever feel poetic fire!
slow come the verse, that real woe inspire:
grief unaffected suit but ill with art,
or flow number with a bleed heart.

can i forget the dismal night, that give
my soul best part forever to the grave!
how silent do his old companion tread,
by midnight lamp, the mansion of the dead,
through breathe statue, then unheeded thing,
through row of warrior, and through walk of king!
what awe do the slow solemn knell inspire;
the peal organ, and the pause choir;
the duty by the lawn-robed prelate pay;
and the last word, that dust to dust convey!
while speechless over thy close grave we bend,
accept these tear, thou dear depart friend,
oh go for ever, take this long adieu;
and sleep in peace, next thy love Montagu!

to strew fresh laurel let the task be i,
a frequent pilgrim at thy sacred shrine;
i with true sigh thy absence to bemoan,
and grave with faithful epitaph thy stone.
if ever from i thy love memorial part,
may shame afflict this alienate heart;
of thou forgetful if i form a song,
my lyre be break, and untuned my tongue,
my grief be double, from thy image free,
and mirth a torment, unchastised by thou.

oft let i range the gloomy isle alone,
(sad luxury! to vulgar mind unknown)
along the wall where speak marble show
what worthy form the hallow mould below:
proud name, who once the reins of empire hold;
in arm who triumph; or in art excel;
chief, grace with scar, and prodigal of blood;
stern patriot, who for sacred freedom stand;
just man, by who impartial law be give;
and saint, who teach, and lead the way to heaven.
never to these chamber, where the mighty rest,
since their foundation, come a noble guest;
nor ever be to the bower of bliss convey
a fair spirit, or more welcome shade.

in what new region, to the just assign,
what new employment please the unbodied mind?
a wing virtue, through the etherial sky,
from world to world unwearied do he fly,
or curious trace the long laborious maze
of heaven decree, where wonder angel gaze?
do he delight to hear hold seraph tell
how Michael battle, and the dragon fall?
or, mix with mild cherubim, to glow
in hymn of love, not ill essay below?
or do thou warn poor mortal leave behind,
a task well suit to thy gentle mind?
oh, if sometime thy spotless form descend,
to i thy aid, thou guardian genius, lend!
when age misguide i, or when fear alarm,
when pain distress, or when pleasure charm,
in silent whisper pure thought impart,
and turn from ill a frail and feeble heart;
lead through the path thy virtue tread before,
until bliss shall join, nor death can part we more.
that awful form (which, so the heaven decree,
must still be love, and still deplore by i)
in nightly vision seldom fail to rise,
or rouse by fancy, meet my wake eye.
if business call, or crowd court invite,
the unblemished statesman seem to strike my sight;
if in the stage i seek to sooth my care,
i meet his soul which breathe in Cato there;
if pensive to the rural shade i rove,
his shape overtake i in the lonely grove:
it be there of just and good he reason strong,
clear some great truth, or raise some serious song;
there patient show we the wise course to steer,
a candid censor and a friend sincere;
there teach we how to live; and (oh! too high
the price for knowledge) teach we how to die.

thou hill, who brow the antique structure grace,
rear by bold chief of warwick noble race,
why, once so love, whenever thy bower appear,
over my dim eye-ball glance the sudden tear!
how sweet be once thy prospect fresh and fair,
thy slope walk and unpolluted air!
how sweet the gloom beneath thy age tree,
thy noontide shadow, and the evening breeze!
his image thy forsake bower restore;
thy walk and airy prospect charm no more;
no more the summer in thy gloom allay,
thy evening breeze, and thy noonday shade.

from other ill, however fortune frown,
some refuge in the muse art i find;
reluctant now i touch the tremble string,
bereave of he, who teach i how to sing;
and these sad accent, murmur over his urn,
betray that absence they attempt to mourn.
oh! must i then (now fresh my bosom bleed,
and Cragg in death to ADDISON succeed)
the verse, begin to one lose friend prolong,
and weep a second in the unfinished song!

these word divine, which, on his death-bed lay,
to thou, o Cragg, the expire sage convey,
great, but ill-omened monument of fame,
nor he survive to give, nor thou to claim.
swift after he thy social spirit fly,
and close to he, how soon! thy coffin lie.
bless pair! who union future bard shall tell
in future tongue: each other boast! farewell.
farewell! who join in fame, in friendship try,
no chance can sever, nor the grave divide.
