a letter from mr. Congreve, etc. 

sincere critic of my prose, or rhime,
tell how thy please STOWE employ thy time,
say, Cobham, what amuse thy retreat?
or stratagem of war, or scheme of state?
do thou recall to mind with joy, or grief,
great malbro action? that immortal chief,
who slight trophy raise in each campaign,
more than suffice to signalise a reign?
do thy remembrance rise warm thy heart,
with glory past, where thou thy self have part,
or do thou grieve indignant, now to see,
the fruitless end of all thy victory?
to see the audacious foe, so late subdue,
dispute those term for which so long they sue,
as if Britannia now be sink so low,
to beg that peace she wonted to bestow,
be far that guilt! be never know that shame!
that ENGLAND shall retract her rightful claim,
or cease to be dread and adore,
stain with her pen the lustre of her sword,
or do thou give the wind a far to blow.
each vex thought, and heart-devouring woe,
and fix thy mind alone on rural scene,
to turn the level lawn to liquid plain,
to raise the creep rill from humble bed,
and force the latent spring to lift their head,
on watery column, capital to rear,
that mix their flow curl with upper air.
or do thou, weary grow, these work neglect,
no temple statue, obblisque erect,
but catch the morning breeze from fragrant mead,
or shun the noontide ray in wholesome shade,
or slow walk along the mazy wood,
to mediate on all that be wise and good,
for nature bountiful in thou have join,
a person please with a worthy mind,
not give the form alone, but mean, and art,
to draw the eye, or to allure the heart,
poor be the praise in fortune to excel,
yet want the way to use that fortune well.
while thus adorn, while thus with virtue crown,
at home in peace, abroad in arm renowned,
graceful in form, and win in address
while well you think, what apt you express,
with health, with honour, with a fair estate,
a table free, and eloquent neat.
what can be add more to mortal bliss?
what can he want who stand possess of this?
what can the fond wish mother more
of heaven attentive for her son implore?
and yet a happiness remain unknown,
or to philosophy reveal alone;
a precept, which unpractised render vain,
thy flow hope, and pleasure turn to pain.
shall hope, and fear thy heart alternate tear,
or love, or hate, or rage, or anxious care,
whatever passion may thy mind infest,
(where be that mind which passion never molest?)
amid the pang of such intestine strife,
still think the present day, the last of life;
defer not till to morrow to be wise,
to morrow sun to thou may never rise.
or shall to morrow chance to cheer thy sight,
with her enliven and unlooked-for light,
how grateful will appear her dawn ray!
as favour unexpected double please.
who thus can think and who such thought pursue,
content may keep his life, or calm lose;
all proof of this thou may thy self receive,
when leisure from affair will give thou leave,
come, see thy friend, retire without regret,
forget care, or strive to forget;
in easy contemplation soothe time
with moral much, and now and then with rhime,
not so robust in body, as in mind,
and always undejected, though decline;
not wonder at the world new wicked way,
compare with those of our forefather day,
for virtue now be neither more or less,
and vice be only vary in the dress;
believe it, man have ever be the same,
and all the golden age, be but a dream.
