Psyche: or the great metamorphosis.

a poem, write in imitation of SPENSER,

i. 

where early Phoebus shed his mild beam,
the happy garden of Adonis lie:
there time, well please to win, a youth beseem.
ne yet his wing be fledge, ne lock be grey;
round he in sweet accord the season play
with fruit and blossom meint, in goodly gree;
and dance hand in hand rejoice the lea.
sick garden now no mortal wight can see,
ne mote they in my simple verse descrive be.

ii.

the tempere clime full many a tree afford;
those many tree blush forth with ripen fruit;
the blush fruit to feast invite the bird;
the bird with plenteous feast their strength recruit;
and warble song more sweet than shepherd flute.
the gentle stream that roll the stone among,
charm with the place, almost forget its suite;
but listen and respond to the song,
loiter, and wind often, murmur elong.

iii.

here panacea, here Nepenthe grow,
here polygon, and each ambrosial weed;
who virtue can decay health renew,
and, answer exhaust nature need,
mote eath a mortal to immortal feed.
here live Adonis in unfading youth;
celestial Venus grant he that rich meed,
and he successive evermore renew,
in recompense for all his faithful love and truth,

iv.

not she, i ween, the wanton queen of love,
all buxom as the wave from whence she rise,
with her twin son, who idle round she rove,
one Eros hight, the other Anteros;
albeit brother, different as foe:
this sate, sullen, apt for bickerment;
that hungry, eager, fit for derring-doe.
that fly before, with scorch flame brent;
this follow doubt those flame with peevish discontent.

v. 

celestial Venus do such ribald shun,
ne dare they in she purlue to be see;
but Cupid torch, fair mother fair son,
shine with a steady unconsume sheen;
not fierce, yet bright, coldness and rage between.
the back of lyon felone he stride;
and lyon tame do themselves amene;
on nature wild full sovereign he rod;
wild nature, change, confess the mild puissant god.

vi.

a beauteous Fay, or heaven-descended spright,
spring from her sire, without female aid,
(as erst Minerva do) and Psyche hight,
in that enclosure happy sojourn make.
no art some heel uncomelyness betray,
but nature wrought her many-coloured stole;
ne tarnish like a aethiopian maid,
scorch with the sun that over her beauty roll;
ne fade like the dame who bleach beneath the pole.

vii.

nor shame, nor pride of borrow substance wrought
her gay embroidery and ornament:
but she who give the gild insect coat
spin the soft silk, and spread the various taint:
the gild insect colour yet be feint
to those which nature for this fairy weave.
our grannum thus with different die besprent,
adorn in naked majesty the grove,
charm our great sire, and warm our freeze clime to love,

viii.

on either side, and all down her back,
with many a ring at equal distance place,
contrary to the rest, be ebony black,
with shade of green, quick change as she pass,
all be on groundwork of bright gold orecast.
the black give livelihood to the greenish hue,
the green still deep the ebony over it palace;
the gold, that peep atween and then withdraw,
give lustre to they both, and charm the wonder view.

ix.

it seem like arras, wrought with cunning skill,
where kind meddle colour, light, and shade;
here flow the flood; there rise wood or hill
break off its course; gay verdure die the mead.
the stream, depeinten by the glitterand braid,
among the hill now wind seem to hide;
now shine unlooked for through the open glade,
now in full torrent pour its golden tie;
hill, wood, and mead refresh, rejoice by its side.

x. 

her Cupid love, who Psyche love again.
he, like her parent and her belamour,
seek how she mote in sickerness remain,
from all malengine safe, and evil stour.
"go tender cosset, say he, foray over
"these walk and land; thy all these busket be;
"thy every shrub, thy every fruit and flower:
"but oh! i charge thou, love, the rose forbear;
'for prickle sharp do arm the dangerous rosiere.

xi.

"prickle will pain, and pain will banish love:
"i charge thou, Psyche, then the rose forbear.
"when faint and sick, thy languor to remove,
"to yond ambrosial shrub and plant repair;
"thou weet not what medicine in they be:
"what wonder follow their repeat use
"no'te thy weak sense conceive, shall i declare;
"their labour balm, and well-concocted juice,
"new life, new form, new thew, new joy, new world produce.

xii.

"thy term of trial pass with constancy,
"that wimple slough shall fall like filth away;
"on pinion broad, uplift to the sky,
"thou shall, astert, thy stranger self survey.
"together, Psyche, will we climb and play;
"together wander through the field of air,
"beyond where sun and moon meet night and day,
"i charge thou, o my love, the rose forbear,
"if thou will scathe avoid. Psyche, forewarn, beware!"

xiii.

"how sweet thy word to my enchant ear!
(with grateful, modest confidence she say)
"if Cupid speak, i can for ever hear:
"trust i, my love, thou shall be well obey.
"what rich purveyance for i have thou make,
"the prickly rose alone deny! the rest
"in full indulgence give! it be to upbraid
"to doubt compliance with this one request:
"how small, and yet how kind, Cupid, be thy behest!

xiv.

"and be that kindness make a argument
"to raise i still to high scene of bliss?
"be the acceptance of thy goodness mean
"merit in i for farther happiness?
"no merit and no argument, i wiss,
"be there beside in i unworthy maid:
"thy gift the very love i bear thou be.
"trust i, my love, thou shall be well obey;
"to doubt compliance here, Cupid, be to upbraid."

XV. 

without counterfeasance thus she speak;
unweeting of her frailty. light uprise
Cupid on easy wing: yet tender look,
and oft revert eye on she bestow;
fearful, but not distrustful of her vow.
and mild regard she back reflect on he:
with ache eye pursue he as he go;
with ache heart mark each diminish limb;
till indistinct, diffuse, and lose in air he seem.

xvi.

he go to set the watch of the east,
that none mote rush in with the tie of wind:
he go to Venus to make fond request
from fleshly sermon to loosen psyche mind,
and she eftsoon transmew. she forelore pine;
and move for solace to the glassy lake,
to view the charm that have his heart entwine.
she see, and blush and smile; then inly speak:
'these charm i can choose but love, for Cupid sake. "

xvii.

but sea-born Venus begin with envy stir
at bruit of their great happiness; and seek
how she may wreak she spite: then call to she
her son, and open what rankle in she think;
ask who will venture over the mound to vau't
to breed they scathe unwares; to damp the joy
of blissful Venus, or to bring to nought
the lief purpose of her darling boy,
or urge they both their minion Psyche to destroy.

xviii.

Eros recul'd, and noul the work achieve.
"behold be the attempt, say he, averse from love:
"if love inspire i can derreign to reave
"his spear from Mars, his levin-brond from Jove."
he Anteros, snebe surly.  "galless dove!
"than love, spight mighty prowess understand:
"if spite inspire i dare all danger prove:
"and if successful, stand the levin-brond,
"when hurlen angry forth from Jove avenge hound."

xix.

he say, and deff toward the garden fly;
horrible smile at his foul emprise.
when, near still and near as he draw,
unsufferable brightness wound his eye
forth beam from the crystal wall; he try
arrear to move, avert from the blaze.
but now no long the pure aether buoy.
his gross body disproportioned pease;
down drop, plumb from his tower path, the treachor base.

xx.

so over Avernus, or the lucrine lake,
the wistless bird pursue his purpose flight:
whether by vapour noy that thenceforth break,
or else desert by a air too light,
down tumble the fowl headlong from his height.
so Anteros astonish fell to ground,
provoke, but not accoid at his strange plight.
he rise, and wend coast it round and round
to find unguarded pass, hopeless to leap the mound.

xxi.

as on the margin of a stream he stand,
slow roll from that paradise within,
a snake out-case untenanted he view:
seize the spoil, albeit it worthless be,
he dart himself into the vacant skin.
in borrow gear, the exult losel glide,
who fade hue with joy flush bright again;
triumphant over the buoyant flood he ride;
and shoot the important gulph, bear on the gentle tide.

xxii.

so shine the brazen gate of Babylon;
army in vain her muniment assail:
so strong, no engine can they batter down:
so high, no ladder can the rampart scale;
so flank with tower, besieger no'te avail;
so wide, sufficient harvest they enclose:
but where might yield, there stratagem prevail.
faithless Euphrates through the city flow,
and through his channel pour the unexpected foe.

xxiii.

he sail along in many a wanton spire;
now float at length, now proud rear his crest:
his sparkle eye and scale, instinct with fire,
with splendour as he move, the wave over cast:
and the wave gleam beneath his flame breast.
as through the battle, set in full array,
when the sun walk in radiant brightness dress;
his beam that on the burnish helmet play,
the burnish helm reflect, and spread unusual day.

xxiv.

so on he fare, and stately wreath about,
in semblance like a seraph glow bright;
but without terror flash his lightning out,
more to be wonder at, than to affright.
the backward stream soon lead the masker right
to the broad lake, where hang over the flood
(Narcissus like, enamour with the sight
of his own beauty) the fond Psyche stand,
to mitigate the pain of lonely widowhood.

xxv.

unkenn'd of she, he reach the embroider bank;
and through the tangle flouret west aside
to where a rosiere by the river dank,
luxuriant grow in all its blow pride,
not far from Psyche; arm with scaly hide
he clamb the thorn, which no impression make;
his glitter length, with all its fold untie,
play float over the bush: then silence break,
and thus the nymph, astonish at his speech, bespeak.

xxvi.

"o fair, and most excellent complete
"in all perfection, sovereign queen of nature!
"the whole creation bow at thy foot
"submissive pay thou homage! wondrous creature,
"if aught create thou! for every feature
"speak thou a goddess issue from the sky;
"oh! let not i offend, unbidden waiter,
"at awful distance gaze thus! but why
"shall gaze thus offend? or how unbidden i?

xxvii,

"the sun that wake those flouret from their bed,
"or open these bud by his soft influence,
"be not offend that they peep their head,
"and show they feel his power by their quick sense,
"offer at his command, their sweet incense;
"thus i, draw here, by thy enliven ray,
"(call not intrusion my obedience!)
"perforce, yet will thrall, be come to gaze,
"to pay my homage meet, and bask in beauty blaze."

xxviii.

amaze she stand, nor can recover soon:
from contemplation sudden abray:
start at speech unusual: yet the tune
strike soot on her ear, and concert make
with her own thought. nor with less pleasure stray
her eye delight over his glossy skin;
yet fright at the thorn on which he play:
pleasure with horror mix! she hang between
suspend; yield, recoil, uncertain where to lin.

xxix.

at length she speak: "reptile, no charm i know
"such as you mention: yet whatever they be,
"(and will i lessen what the god bestow)
"their be the gift, and be the tribute their!
"for they these beauty i improve with care,
"intent to they alone from eve to morn.
"but reed i, reptile, whence this wonder rare,
"that thou have speech, as if to reason bear?
"and how, unhurt you sport on that forbid thorn?"

xxx.

"say, why forbid thorn? the foe reply:
"to every reptile, every insect free,
"have malice harsh to thou alone deny
"the fragrance of the rose enjoy by i? "
"— it be love, not malice, form the kind decree,
half-wroth, she cry:) "thy all these busket be,
"thy fruit and flower, be Cupid word to i:
"but oh? i charge thou, love, the rose forbear;
"for prickle sharp do arm the dangerous rosiere.

xxxi.

"prickle will pain, and pain will banish love:
"i charge thou, Psyche, then the rose forbear.
"when faint and sick, thy languor to remove,
"to yond ambrosial shrub, and plant repair;
"thou weet not what medicine in they be.
"what wonder follow their repeat use
"no'te thy weak sense conceive, shall i declare:
"their labour balm, and well-concocted juice,
"new life, new form, new thew, new joy, new world" produce.

xxxii.

"thy term of trial pass with constancy,
"thy wimple slough shall fall like filth away;
"on pinion broad up-lifted to the sky,
"thou shall, astert, thy stranger self survey.
"together, Psyche, will we climb and play;
"together wander through the field of air,
"beyond where sun and moon meet night and day.
"i charge thou, o my love, the rose forbear,
"if thou will scathe avoid, Psyche, forewarn, beware!"

xxxiii.

out burst the frannion into open laugh:
she blush, and frown at his uncivil mirth.
then, soften to a smile, as hide half
what mote offend if bold utter forth,
he seem to assay to give his answer birth:
but stop; and change his smile to look of ruth,
"be this (quoth he) fit guerdon for thy worth?
"do Cupid thus impose upon thy youth?
"dwell then in heaven such envy, void of love and truth?

xxxiv.

"be this the instance of his tenderness,
"to envy Psyche what to worm be give?
"to cut she off from present happiness
"with feign reversion of a promise heaven?
"by threaten false from true enjoyment drive!
"how innocent the thorn to touch, he know:
"where be my wound? or where the avenge levin?
"how soft blush these colour of the rose?
"how sweet (and dive into the flower) its fragrance flow?

XXXV. 

"disadvantageous be thy term of trial;
"no long Psyche then the rose forbear.
"what be to recompense the harsh denial,
"but dream of wander through the field of air.
"and joy, i know not what, i know not where!
"as eath, on leafy pinion bear the tree
"mote rush into the sky, and flutter there,
"as thou soar yond, and quit thy due degree:
"thou for this world be make: this world be make for thou.

xxxvi 

"in vain you will fly to yonder shrub and plant;
"bitter their taste, and worthless their effect:
"here be the polychrest for all thy want;
"no panacea, like the rose, expect.
"mute as my fellow-brute, as they abject
"and reasonless be i, till haply wake
"by taste of the rose, (o weak neglect
"in thou the while!) the dawn of sapience break
"on my admire soul, i reason, and i speak.

xxxvii.

"nor this the only change; for soon i find
"the brisk spirit flow in full tie;
"and more than usual lustre spread around;
"such virtue have the rose, in i well try.
"but wise, i ween, thy lover have deny
"its use to thou; i join he too: beware
"the dangerous rose. — for such thy beauty pride
"it be death to gaze on, if improve! — forbear
"to sharp that wit, too keen! — touch not the rosiere."

xxxviii.

unchecked, indulge, her grow passion rise:
wonder, to see he safe, and hear his tell;
ambition vain, to be more fair and wise;
and rage, at Cupid misconceive false deal:
various the gust, but, all one way impel,
she plunge into the bosom of the tree,
and snatch the rose, no dread pain or quell.
off drop the snake, nor farther stay to see;
but rush into the flood, and vanish present.

xxxix.

full many a thorn her tender body rent;
full many a thorn within the wound remain,
and throb cause continual dreariment:
while gory drop her dainty form distain.
she wish her lose innocence again,
and her lose peace, lose charm, lose love to find;
but shame upbraid she with a wish so vain:
despair succeed, and aversion blind;
pain fill her torture sense, and horror cloud her mind.

XL. 

her bleed, faint, disorder, woe-begone,
stretch on the bank beside the fatal thorn,
Venus who come to seek she with her son,
behold. she stop: and albe heavenly bear,
ruthful of other woe, begin to mourn.
the loss of venus smile sick nature find:
as frost-nipped drop the bloom, the bird forlorn
sit hush, the fade sun spread dimness round;
the clatter thunder crash, and earthquake rock the ground.

xli 

then arm with a kill frown her brow;
"die, poor unhappy" — Cupid suppliant break
the unfinished sentence; and with dueful bow
beg she to doff the keenness of her look,
which nature feel to her centre shake.
"then how shall Psyche bear it? spare the maid;
"it be plain that Anteros his spite have wreak;
"shall vengeance due to he, on she be lay?
"oh! let i run, and reach the ambrosial balm, "he say.

xlii 

"ah what will Cupid ask?" the queen reply;
"can all those balm restore her peace again?
"will thou a wretched life immortalize;
"will thou protract by potent herb, her pain?
"love bid she die: thy cruel wish restrain —
"why then (quoth he) in loom of fate be weave
"the life of those, in long successive train,
"from her to spring, through yond bright tract to rove?
"due to the sky, and mean to shine in field above?

xliii.

"say, will thy goodness envy they the light
"appoint for they, or the good prevent
"foresee from they to flow? erace quite
"the whole creation through avengement?
"one only species from its order rent,
"the whole creation shrivel to a shade. —
"— better all vanish, say she, than be meint
"in wild confusion; through free will mislead,
"and tempt to go wrong from punishment delay."

xliv 

"let i that exemplary vengeance bear,
(benign return her amiable son:)
"justice on she will lose its aim; severe
"in vain, productive of no good; for none
"can by that desolate blow be win.
"so fall each generous purpose of the will
"correct, extinguish by abortion:
"whence justice will its own intendment spill;
"and cut off virtue, by the stroke mean vice to kill.

XLV. 

"yet lest impunity shall forehead give
"to vice, in i let guilt adopt find
"a victim; here awhile vouchsafe i live
"thy proof of justice, mix with mercy kind! "
"— oh! strange request (quoth she) of pity blind!
"how shall thou suffer, who do never offend?
"how can thou bear to be from i disloin?
"to wander here, where nature begin to wend
"to waste and wilderness, and pleasure have a end? "

xlvi 

"you, Venus, suffer, (say she) when you strike
"not for your own, but other foul offence:
"why not permit i to do the like,
"when great good, i see, will coul from thence?
"that great good overpay all punishment;
"and make my suffering, pleasure: if they prove
"a mean to conquer Anteros, dispense
"heal to psyche wound, regain her love,
"and lead she, with her happy son, to realm above."

xlvii 

"to thy entreaty psyche life i give,
(reply the indulgent mother to her son;)
"but yet deform, and minish let she live;
"until thou shall grant a better change foredo;
"nor shall that change, but through death gate be win.
"this meed be thy, over she and she to reign!
"already nature put her horror on:
"away! — i to my bower of bliss again!
"thou to thy task of love, and voluntary pain. "

xlviii.

she go; and like a shift stage, the scene
vanish at once; the ambrosial plant be lose;
the jar season bring on various teen;
each seek, each seek, each by other cross.
young spring to summer fly from winter frost;
while sweltry summer thirst for autumn bowl,
which autumn hold to winter; winter tost
with scorn away, young spring inflame his soul:
still crave, never please, thus round and round they roll.

xlix 

the inclement air bind up the sluggish soil;
the sluggish soil the toilsome hand require;
yet thankless pay with sour harsh fruit the toil;
ne willing yield, but ragged thorn and brier.
bird, bird pursue; as hunger rage inspire:
their sweet song be now but song of woe.
here from the encroach shore the wave retire:
there hoarse flood roar; impetuous torrent flow;
invade the land, and the scarce harvest overthrow.

l. 

stretch on the bank eftsoon the invite form
of Psyche fade; brace up lank and slim,
her dwindle body shrink into a worm:
her make new mould, change in every limb;
her colour only leave, all pale and dim:
doom in her caterpillar shape to lout.
her passion ill such worthless thing beseem;
pride, rage, and vanity to banish out,
she creep crawl, and drag a loathsome length about.

li.

how Cupid wash her noisome filth away;
what art he try to win her love again;
by what wile guileful ant'ros do assay,
by lease, still her recreant to maintain,
and render Cupid kindly labour vain:
their combat, Cupid conquest, psyche crown,
(my day be set task here end) must remain
unsung; far noble verse mote they renown:
unyoke the toil steer, the weary sun go down.
