marriage alamode. or the two sparrow.

a fable. from Mons. de la Motte, book iv. fable 21. 

a grove there be, by nature make,
of tree that form a please shade;
where warble, ever free from care,
the winge musician of the air.
here tune the nightingale her throat;
the thrush there thril her pierce note;
the Finch, lark, linnet, all agree
to join the sylvan harmony.

two amorous sparrow choose this place;
the soft of the feather race:
the Mars and Venus of the grove;
less fame for sing than for love.
the songster warble sweet; while they
as sweet bill their time away.
so close seat be the two,
together you will think they grow:
the twig be tender where they sit,
and bend beneath their little weight;
but scarce in their life be know
to bear the one, when one be fly.
when hunger call, they leave the wood,
together seek the field for food;
when thirsty, in the shallow rill
together dip their little bill.
when Phoebus sit in the west,
and thicken shade invite to rest,
they homeward bend their mutual flight:
thus pass their day, thus pass their night.
the castle, where these lover lie;
be in a hollow oak, they say:
there, side by side, all night they keep;
together walk, together sleep:
and mix amorous disport,
they make their winter-evening short.
though free, it be leave to other mind,
to choose a mate from all their kind,
she only love the love he;
he only love the lovely she.

pure joy, poor mortal seldom find;
her footman, sorrow, wait behind:
and fate impartial deal to all
the honeyed potion mix with gall.
this pair, on a unhappy day,
too far together chance to stray;
benight, and with snare beset,
our Mars and Venus in a net,
alas! be catch. — o change of state!
a little cage be now their fate.
no more they seek the spacious grove:
no more they burn with mutual love:
their passion change with their life;
and soon they fall from love to strife.
their little soul with grow rage
high swell; they flutter round the cage:
forget the slender twig, where late
close side by side in love they sit;
one perch be now too small to hold
the fiery mate and chirp scold:
they peck each other over their food;
and thirst to drink each other blood.
two cage must the pair divide;
or death the quarrel will decide.

a picture this of human life!
the modern husband, and the wife.
who ever in courtship see a pair,
so kind as he, as she so fair?
the kiss that they give each other,
you will think have seal their lip together;
each vow to each a mutual flame;
and dream, it will always last the same;
but fix they once in Hymen chain,
and each alternate complain.
the honey-moon be scarce decline,
but all the honey of their mind
be go; and leave the sting behind.
the scene of love be vanish quite:
they pout, grow peevish, scold, and fight.
two table feed each part guest;
two bed receive the pair to rest:
and law alone can end the strife,
with separate-maintenance for life.
