for the better.

imitate from sir Roger l'estrange. 

a quack, to no true skill in Physick breed,
 with frequent visit curse his patient bed;
 inquire, how he do his broth digest,
 how chime his pulse, and how he take his rest:
 if shudder cold by burn be pursue,
 and at what time the aguish fit renew. 
the wain wretch, each day become more faint,
 in like proportion double his complaint;
 now swoon sweat he beg he to allay,
 now give his lung more liberty to play,
 and take from empty vein these scorch heat away:
 or if he see the danger do increase,
 to warn he fair, and let he part in peace. 
my life for you, no hazard in your case
 the quack reply; your voice, your pulse, your face,
 good sign afford, and what you seem to feel
 proceed from vapour, which we will help with steel. 
with kindle rage, more than distemper, burn
 the suffering man, who thus in haste return:
 no more of vapour, your belove disease,
 your ignorance skreen, your what-you-please,
 with which you cheat poor female of their live,
 while man dispute not, so it ride their wife. 
for i, i will speak free as i have pay my fee;
 my flesh consume, i perish by degree:
 and as through weary night i count my pain,
 no rest be leave i, and no strength remain. 
all for the better, sir, the quack rejoin:
 exceed promise be all these sign. 
falling-away, your nurse can confirm,
 be never in sickness think a mark of harm. 
the want of strength be for the better still;
 since man of vigour fever soon kill. 
even with this gust of passion i be please;
 for they be most patient who the most be seize. 
but let i see! here be that which all repel:
 then shake, as he some formal story tell,
 the treacle-water, mix with powder shell. 
my stomach go (what do you infer from thence?) 
nor will with the least sustenance dispense. 
the better; for, where appetite endure,
 meat intermingle, and no medicine cure. 
the stomach, you must know, sir, be a part —
 but, sure, i feel death pang about my heart. 

nay then farewell! i need no more attend
 the quack reply. a sad approach friend
 question the sick, why he retire so fast;
 who say, because of fee i have pay the last,
 and, while all symptom towards my cure agree,
 be, for the better, die as you see. 
