one of lucian dialogue of the dead paraphrase. 

Diogenes.

o Pollux, when thou next revisit light,
Menippus to these nether realm invite;
tell he, if he be not tire with fool above,
where all that be say, and do, his mirth do move,
he will here fit subject for his laughter find,
new scene of madness to divert his mind:
for though blind mortal not idea have
of any thing beyond the silent grave,
but vain fancy, as their toil and care,
so too their soul find equal period there,
and all the dislodge atom mingle with the air.
yet here be no such impious sceptic find,
each place do with complain ghost abound:
he sure with i will full of wonder gaze
on mighty man who glorious act amaze,
who conquer kingdom, and who throne do grace,
and leave their sceptre to their god-like race,
here, undistinguished from the mean shade,
deprive of grandeur, and by none obey:
they by no other mark can now be know,
but sigh, and groan, and sad complaint alone:
but bid he with he some provision bring,
a crust be here a present for a king:
he will here find nothing nature to sustain,
throughout the vast extent of this dark empty plain.

Pollux.

i will ready perform what you desire;
but tell i where i shall for he inquire;
describe his person, humour, and attire.

Diogenes.

he be old and jolly, and to Bacchus kind,
to fool averse, to satire still incline:
a cloak he wear the poor wretch will scorn,
and which ten thousand patch wretched adorn:
at Athens, or at Corinth he you will find,
lampoon the whole race of human kind:
he strike at all, both the ugly and the fair,
nor young, nor old, nor yet the great do spare,
but on philosopher be most severe:
their vain pretence, and their tower flight,
their mystic term, and all those little slight,
by which they strive their ignorance to hide,
those cobweb cover for their nauseous pride,
be still the subject which his laughter move
the chief diversion that he find above.

Pollux.

by this description he will with ease be know:
but be your message send to he alone?
can you not think of something that be fit
to be deliver to those man of wit,
those high pretender to gigantic sense,
to boundless knowledge, matchless eloquence?

Diogenes.

bid they lay all their vain dispute aside,
no long truth from their disciple hide:
no more through nature puzzle labyrinth stray,
no more of her mysterious motion say:
no more with a affect haughty air,
their thought of thing beyond their reach declare,
thing far remote from the most pierce sight,
beyond the ken of intellectual light.

Pollux.

such a discourse as this will not be bear,
''twould both expose i to their hate, and scorn:
they will grave tell i, i my ignorance show,
and rail at what i want the sense to know.

Diogenes.

tell they from i the important message come;
it be i their pride and ignorance proclaim:
i bid they with remorse past folly view,
and their repentance by their blush show.

Pollux.

i with exact care your order will obey,
without be move at what the noisy boaster say.

Diogenes.

when this be do, then to the great repair,
and speak to they with a command air:
say, what the mad man, make you thus in vain,
to heap up honour, and increase your train,
as if you here for ever shall remain?
riches and grandeur do but load the mind,
and they be trifle you must leave behind:
naked and poor, you to the shade must go,
only despair will stay with you below:
the more you have now, the more you will lament,
when you from all your pomp, and all your joy be send.
next to the effeminate Megilbus go,
and let the brawny Damoxenus know
that none below be handsome, strong, or brave;
all be mere phantom when they be past the grave:
none here their youth and boast charm retain,
none here the fame olympick prize gain:
no kill eye bewitch glance dart,
no flow tress win a amorous heart:
no blush cheek, not one entice smile,
can here be see the unwary to beguile:
nothing be lovely, nothing please here,
nothing but dust and ash do appear.

Pollux.

this i with speed, and with delight will do,
since it be a message worthy metaphor, and you.

Diogenes.

inform the poor, of who vast croud you will see,
that here they will find a just equality;
tell they, they will here unhappy partner find,
affliction be not to one state confine:
million of sufferer throng the Stygian shore,
and there for ever will their fate deplore,
then bid they to complain and weep no more;
since none will here their former pomp retain,
but on a humble level all remain:
none here will rich, great, happy live,
no flatter title to each other give:
no room be leave for avarice, or for pride,
where poverty and death, and dreadful night reside.
and then from i, degenerate Sparta blame,
tell they they have tarnish their once glorious fame;
they now no long breath that martial heat,
which make they once so formidable great.

Pollux.

such word as these, Diogenes, forbear,
i can with patience such reproach hear:
my country be honour, as my own, i prize,
and can for it my share of life despise.
all your command, but this, without delay
i will ever to morrow night with care obey.

Diogenes.

it be kind say; i will no more desire:
may Hermes his persuasive skill inspire,
and may your voice be sweet as the orphean lyre.
that listen mortal, by your precept teach,
may to the knowledge of their fault be bring,
reclaim from ill, and make themselves to know:
a lesson they too late will learn below!
