coomb-ellen. 

call the strange spirit that abide unseen
in wild, and waste, and shaggy solitude,
and bid his dim hand lead thou through these scene
that burst immense around! by mountain, glen,
and solitary cataract that dash
through dark ravine; and tree, who wreathe root
overhang the torrent channel course; and stream,
that far below, along the narrow vale,
upon their rocky way wind musical.

stranger! if nature charm thou, if thou love
to trace her awful step, in glade or glen,
or under covert of the rock wood,
that sway its murmur and mossy bough
above thy head; now, when the wind at time
stir its deep silence round thou, and the shower
fall on the sigh foliage, hail she here
in these her haunt; and, rapt in muse high,
think that thou hold converse with some power
invisible and strange; such as of yore
Greece, in the shade of piney Mænalaus,
the abode of Pan, or ida hoary cave,
worship; and our old Druids, 'amid the gloom
of rock and wood like these, with mutter spell
invoke, and the loud ring of choral harp.

have thou oft mourn the chide of the world,
the sound of her disquiet, that ascend
for ever, mock the high throne of god!
have thou in youth know sorrow! have thou droop,
heart-stricken, over youth and beauty grave,
and ever after thought on the sad sound
the cold earth make, which, cast into the vault,
consign thy heart best treasure — dust to dust!
here, lap into a sweet forgetfulness,
hang over the wreathe waterfall, and think
thou be alone in this dark world and wide!

here melancholy, on the pale crag lay,
may muse herself to sleep; or fancy come,
witch the mind with tender cozenage,
and shape thing that be not; here all day
may meditation listen to the lapse
of the white water, flash through the cleave,
and, gaze on the many shadow tree,
mingle a pensive moral as she gaze.

high over thy head, amid the shiver slate,
behold, a sapling yet, the wild ash bend,
its dark red berry cluster, as it wish
in the clear liquid mirror, ere it fall,
to trace its beauty; over the prone cascade,
airy, and light, and elegant, the birch
display its glossy stem, amid the gloom
of alder and jagged fern, and evermore
wave her light pensile foliage, as she woo
the pass gale to whisper flattery.
upon the adverse bank, wither, and strip
of all its pleasant leaf, a scathe oak
hang desolate, once sovereign of the scene,
perhaps, proud of its beauty and its strength,
and branch its broad arm along the glen:
oh, speak it no remonstrance to the heart!
it seem to say: so shall the spoiler come,
the season that shall shatter your fair leaf,
gay child of the summer! yet enjoy
your pleasant prime, and lift your green head high,
exult; but the storm will come at last,
that shall lay low your strength, and give your pride
to the swift-hurrying stream of age, like i.

and so severe experience oft reprove
the gay and careless child of the world;
they hear the cold rebuke, and then again
turn to their sport, as like they, and dance on!
and let they dance; so all their bloom prime
they give not up to vanity, but learn
that wisdom and that virtue which shall best
avail they, when the evil day draw nigh,
and the brief blossom of their springtime fade.

now wind we up the glen, and hear below
the dash torrent, in deep wood conceal,
and now again white-flashing on the view,
over the huge craggy fragment. ancient stream,
that murmure through the mountain solitude,
the time have be when no eye mark thy course,
save his who make the world! fancy may dream
she see thou thus bind on from age to age
unseen of man, while awful nature sit
on the rend rock, and say: these haunt be mine.
now taste have mark thy feature; here and there
touch with tender hand, but injure not,
thy beauty; while along thy woody verge
ascend the wind pathway, and the eye
catch at interval thy vary fall.

but lofty scene invite we; pass the hill,
and through the woody hang, at who foot
the tinkle Ellen wind, pursue thy way.
yond bleak and weather-whitened rock, immense,
upshoot amid the scene, craggy and steep,
and like some high-embattled citadel,
that awe the low plain shadow. halfway up
the purple heath be see, but bear its brow,
and deep-intrenched, and all beneath it spread
with massy fragment rive from its top.

amid the crag, and scarce discern so high,
hang here and there a sheep, by its faint bleat
discover, while the astonish eye look up,
and mark it on the precipice brink
pick its scant food secure: — and fare it not
even so with you, poor orphan, you who climb
the rugged path of life without a friend;
and over break crag bear hardly on,
with pale implore look, that seem to say,
my mother! she be bury, and at rest,
lay in her graveclothe; and the heart be still,
the only heart that throughout all the world
beat anxious for you! oh, yet bear on;
he who sustain the bleat lamb shall feed
and comfort you: meantime the heaven pure beam,
that break above the sable mountain brow,
light, one after one, the sunless crag,
awake the blissful confidence, that here,
or in a world where sorrow never come,
all shall be well.
now through the whisper wood
we steal, and mark the old and mossy oak
imboss the mountain slope; or the wild ash,
with rich red cluster mantl; or the birch,
in lonely glen light-wavering; till behold!
the rapid river shoot through the gloom
its lucid line along; and on its side
the border pasture green, where the swink ox
lie dream, heedless of the numerous fly
that, in the transitory sunshine, hum
round his broad breast; and further up the cot,
with blue, light smoke ascend; image
of peace and comfort! the wild rock around
endear your smile the more, and the full mind,
slide from scene of dread magnificence,
sink on your charm repose; such repose
the sage may feel, when, fill and half-oppressed
with vast conception, smile he return
to life console sympathy, and hear,
with heartfelt tenderness, the bell ring out;
or pipe upon the mountain; or the low
of herd slow wind down the cottage vale,
where day last sunshine linger. such repose
he feel, who, follow where his Shakspeare lead,
as in a dream, through a enchant land,
here, with Macbeth, in the dread cavern hail
the weird sister, and the dismal deed
without a name; there see the charm isle,
the lone domain of Prospero; and, hark!
wild music, such as earth scarce seem to own,
and Ariel over the slow-subsiding surge
sing she smooth air quaint! such repose
steal over her spirit, when, through storm at sea,
fancy have follow some nigh-foundered bark
full many a league, in ocean solitude
toss far beyond the cape of utmost horn,
that stem the roar deep; her dreary track
still fancy follow, and at dead of night
hear, with strange thunder, the huge fragment fall
crash, from mountain of high-drifting ice
that over her bow gleam fearful; till at last
she hail the gallant ship in some still bay
safe moor; or of delightful tinian;
smile, like fairy isle, amid the waste;
or of new Zealand, where from shelter rock
the clear cascade gush beautiful, and high
the woodland scenery tower above the mast,
who long and wavy ensign stream beneath.
far inland, clad in snow, the mountain lift
their spiry summit, and endear the more
the sylvan scene around; the heal air
breathe over green myrtle, and the poe-bird flit,
amid the shade of aromatic shrub,
with silver neck and blue enamel wing.

now cross the stream, and up the narrow track,
that wind along the mountain edge, behold
the peasant girl ascend: cheerful her look,
beneath the umbrage of her broad black hat,
and loose her dark-brown hair; the plod pad
that bear she pant climb, and with sure step
avoid the jut fragment; she, meantime,
sit unconcerned, till, lessen from the view,
she gain the summit and be see no more.

all day, along that mountain heathy waste,
boot and strap, and in rough coat succinct,
his small shrill whistle pendent at his breast,
with dog and gun, untired the sportsman roam;
nor quit his wildly-devious range, till eve,
upon the wood, the rock, and mazy rill
descend, warn he home: then he rejoin
the social circle, just as the clear moon,
emerge over the sable mountain, sail
silent, and calm, and beautiful, and shed
its solemn grandeur on the shadowy scene.
to music then; and let some choose strain
of Handel gentle recreate the sense,
and give the silent heart to tender joy. 

pass on to the hoar cataract, that foam
through the dark fissure of the rive rock;
prone-rushing it descend, and with white whirl,
save where some silent shady pool receive
its dash; thence burst, with collect sweep,
and hollow sound, it hurry, till it fall
foam in the wild stream that wind below.
dark tree, that to the mountain height ascend,
overshade with pendent bough its mossy course,
and, look up, the eye behold it flash
beneath the incumbent gloom, from ledge to ledge
shoot its silvery foam, and far within
wreath its curve fantastic. if the harp
of deep poetic inspiration, strike
at time by the pale minstrel, while a strange
and beauteous light fill his uplift eye,
have ever sound into mortal ear,
here i may think i hear its tone, and see,
sublime amid the solitary scene,
with dimly-gleaming harp, and snowy stole,
and cheek in momentary frenzy flush,
the great musician stand. hush, every wind
that shake the murmur branch! and thou stream,
descend still with hollow-sounding sweep,
hush! it be the bard strike the loud string: arise,
son of the magic song, arise!
and bid the deep-toned lyre
pour forth its manly melody.
with eye on fire,
 Caradoc rush upon the foe;
he rear his arm — he lay the mighty low!
over the plain see he urge his gore-bathed steed! 
they bleed, the roman bleed!
he lift his lance on high,
they fly! the fierce invader fly!
fear not now the horse or spear,
fear not now the foeman might;
victory the cry shall hear
of those who for their country fight;
over the slay
that strew the plain,
stern on her sable war-horse shall she ride,
and lift her red right hand, in their heart blood deep dye!

return, my muse! the fearful sound be past;
and now a little onward, where the way
ascend above the oak that far below
shade the rude steep, let contemplation lead
our footstep; from this shady eminence
it be pleasant and yet fearful to look down
upon the river roar, and far off
to see it stretch in peace, and mark the rock
one after one, in solemn majesty
unfold their wild reach; here with wood
mantle, beyond abrupt and bare, and each
as if it strive, with emulous disdain,
to tower in rude, dark amplitude.
pause, ere we enter the long craggy vale;
it seem the abode of solitude. so high
the rock bleak summit frown above our head,
look immediate down, we almost fear
lest some enormous fragment shall descend
with hideous sweep into the vale, and crush
the intrude visitant. no sound be here,
save of the stream that shrill, and now and then
a cry as of faint wail, when the kite
come sail over the crag, or straggle lamb
bleat for its mother. here, remote from man,
and life discordant roar, may piety
lift up her early orison to he
who make the world; who pile up, mighty rock,
your huge overshadow summit; who devolve
the mighty river on their mazy course;
who bid the season roll, and they roll on
in harmony; who fill the earth with joy,
and spread it in magnificence. o god!
thou also make the great water-flood,
the deep that utter thy voice; who wave
toss fearful at thy bid. thou do speak,
and lo! the great and glorious sun, from night
tenfold upspring, through the heaven' wide way
hold his untired career. these, in their course,
as with one shout of acclamation, praise
thou, lord! thou, father! thou, almighty king!
maker of earth and heaven! nor less the flower
that shake its purple head, and smile unseen
upon the mountain van; nor less the stream
that tinkle through the cliff-encircled bourn,
cheer with music the lone place, proclaim:
in wisdom, father, have thou make they all!

scene of retire sublimity, that fill
with fearful ecstasy and holy trance
the pause mind! we leave your awful gloom,
and lo! the footway plank, that lead across
the narrow torrent, foam through the chasm
below; the rugged stone be wash and wear
into a thousand shape, and hollow scoop
by long attrition of the ceaseless surge,
smooth, deep, and polish as the marble urn,
in their hard form. here let we sit, and watch
the struggle current burst its headlong way,
hear the noise it make, and muse much
on the strange change of this nether world.
how many age must have sweep to dust
the still succeed multitude, that "fret
their little hour" upon this restless scene,
or ere the sweep water can have cut
the solid rock so deep! as now its roar
come hollow from below, methinks we hear
the noise of generation, as they pass,
over the frail arch of earthly vanity,
to silence and oblivion. the loud coil
never cease; as the run river sound
from age to age, though each particular wave
that make its brief noise, as it hurry on,
even while we speak, be past, and hear no more;
so ever to the ear of heaven ascend
the long, loud murmur of the roll globe;
its strife, its toil, its sigh, its shout, the same!

but lo! upon the hilly croft, and scarce
distinguish from the crag, the peasant hut
forth peep; nor unwelcome be the sight.
it seem to say: though solitude be sweet,
and sweet be all the image that float
like summer-cloud before the eye, and charm
the pensive wanderer way, it be sweet yet
to think that in this world a brother live.
and lovely smile the scene, that, 'amid the wild
of rock and mountain, the bemuse thought
remember of humanity, and call
the wildly-roving fancy back to life.

here, then, i leave my harp, which i have touch
with careless hand, and here i bid farewell
to fancy fade picture, and farewell
the ideal spirit that abide unseen
'amid rock, and wood, and solitude. i hail
rather the step of culture, that ascend
the precipice side. she bid the wild
bloom, and adorn with beauty not its own
the ridge mountain tract; she speak, and lo!
the yellow harvest nod upon the slope;
and through the dark and mat moss upshoot
the burst clover, smile to the sun.
these be thy offspring, culture! the green herb
be thy, that deck with rich luxuriance
the pasture lawny range; the yellow corn,
that wave upon the upland ridge, be thy;
thy too the elegant abode, that smile
amid the rocky scene, and wake the thought,
the tender thought, of all life charity.
and senseless be my heart, can i look back
upon the vary way my foot have tread,
without a silent prayer that health and joy,
and love and happiness, may long abide
in the romantic vale where Ellen wind.
