solitude.

a ode.

by dr. Grainger.

i 

o solitude, romantic maid,
whether by nod tower you tread,
or haunt the desert trackless gloom,
or hover over the yawn tomb,
or climb the Andes clift side,
or by the nile coy source abide,
or start from your half-year sleep
from Hecla view the thaw deep,
or tadmor marble waste survey,
or in yond roofless cloister stray;
you, recluse, again i woo,
and again your step pursue.

ii.

plume conceit himself survey,
folly with her shadow play,
purse-proud, elbow insolence,
bloat empiric, puff pretence,
noise that through a trumpet speak,
laughter in loud peal that break,
intrusion with a fopling face,
(ignorant of time and place)
spark of fire dissension blow,
ductile, court-bred flattery, bow,
restraint' stiff neck, grimace leer,
squint-eyed censure artful sneer,
ambition buskin steep in blood,
fly thy presence, solitude.

iii.

sage reflection bend with year,
conscious virtue void of fear,
muffle silence, wood-nymph shy,
meditation pierce eye,
halcyon peace on moss recline,
retrospect that scan the mind,
rapt earth-gazing revery,
blush artless modesty,
health that snuff the morning air,
full-eyed truth with bosom bare,
inspiration, nature child,
seek the solitary wild.

iv.

you with the tragic muse retire
the wise Euripides inspire,
you teach the sadly-pleasing air
that Athens save from ruin bare.
you give the cean tear to flow,
and unlocked the spring of woe;
you pen what exile Naso think,
and pour the melancholy note.
with Petrarch over valcluse you stray,
when death snatch his long-loved maid;
you teach the rock her loss to mourn,
you strew with flower her virgin urn.
and late in Hagley you be see,
with bloodshed eye, and somber mien,
HYMEN his yellow vestment tear,
and dirge a wreath of cypress wear.
but chief your own the solemn lay
that weep narcissa young and gay,
darkness clape her sable wing,
while you touch the mournful string,
anguish leave the pathless wild,
grim-faced melancholy smile,
drowsy midnight cease to yawn,
the starry host put back the dawn,
aside their harp even seraph fling
to hear thy sweet complaint, o young.

v. 

when all nature hush asleep,
nor love nor guilt their vigil keep,
soft you leave your cavern den,
and wander over the work of man,
but when phosphor bring the dawn
by her dapple courser draw,
again you to the wild retreat
and the early huntsman meet,
where as you pensive pace along,
you catch the distant shepherd song,
or brush from herb the pearly dew,
or the rise primrose view.
devotion lend her heaven-plumed wing,
you mount, and nature with you sing.
but when midday fervour glow,
to upland airy shade you go,
where never sunburn woodman come,
nor sportsman chase the timid game;
and there beneath a oak recline,
with drowsy waterfall behind,
you sink to rest.
till the tuneful bird of night
from the neighbour poplar height
wake you with her solemn strain,
and teach please echo to complain.

vi.

with you rose bright bloom
sweet every sweet perfume,
pure every fountain flow
strong every wilding grow.

vii.

let those toil for gold who please,
or for fame renounce their ease.
what be fame? a empty bubble,
gold? a transient, shine trouble.
let they for their country bleed,
what be Sidney, raleigh meed?
man not worth a moment pain,
base, ungrateful, fickle, vain.
then let i, sequester fair,
to your sibyl grot repair,
on yond hang cliff it stand
scoop by nature salvage hand,
bosomed in the gloomy shade
of cypress not with age decay.
where the owl still-hooting sit,
where the bat incessant flit,
there in lofty strain i will sing
whence the change season spring,
tell how storm deform the sky,
whence the wave subside and rise,
trace the comet blaze tail,
weigh the planet in a scale;
bend, great god, before thy shrine,
the bournless macrocosm thy.

viii.

save i! what be yond shroud shade?
that wander in the dark-brown glade.
it beckon i! — vain fear adieu,
mysterious ghost, i follow you.
ah i! too well that gait i know,
my youth first friend, my manhood woe!
its breast it bare! what! stain with blood?
quick let i stanch the vital flood.
oh spirit, whither be thou fly?
why leave i comfortless alone?
o solitude, on i bestow
the heart-felt harmony of woe,
such, such, as on the ausonian shore,
sweet dorian Moschus trill of yore:
no time shall cancel thy desert,
more, more, than Bion be, thou be.

ix.

o goddess of the tearful eye,
the never-ceasing stream supply.
let we with retirement go
to charnel, and the house of woe,
over friendship hearse low-drooping mourn,
where the sickly taper burn,
where death and, nun-clad sorrow dwell,
and nightly ring the solemn knell.
the gloom dispel, the charnel smile,
light flash through the vault isle.
blow silky soft, thou western gale,
o goddess of the desert, hail!
she burst from yond cliff-riven cave,
insult by the wintery wave;
her brow a ivy garland bind,
her tress wanton with the wind,
a lion spoil, without a zone,
around her limb be careless throw;
her right hand wield a knot mace,
her eye roll wild, a stride her pace;
her left a magic mirror hold,
in which she oft herself behold.
o goddess of the desert, hail!
and soft blow, thou western gale!

since in each scheme of life i have fail,
and disappointment seem entail;
since all on earth i value most,
my guide, my stay, my friend be lose;
you, only you, can make i bless,
and hush the tempest in my breast.
then gentle deign to guide my foot
to your hermit-trodden seat,
where i may live at last my own,
where i at last may die unknown.
i speak, she twine her magic ray,
and thus she say, or seem to say.

youth, you be mistake, if you think to find
in shade a medicine for a trouble mind;
wan grief will haunt you wheresoever you go,
sigh in the breeze, and in the streamlet flow,
there pale inaction pine his life away,
and, satiate, curse the return of day:
there naked frenzy laugh wild with pain,
or bare the blade, or plunge in the main:
there superstition brood over all her fear,
and yell of daemon in the zephyr hear.
but if a hermit you be resolve to dwell,
and bid to social life a last farewell;
it be impious. —
god never make a independent man,
it will jarr the concord of his general plan:
see every part of that stupendous whole,
"who body nature be, and god the soul;"
to one great end, the general good, conspire,
from matter, brute, to man, to seraph, fire.
shall man through nature solitary roam,
his will his sovereign, every where his home,
what force will guard he from the lion jaw?
what swiftness wing he from the panther paw?
or shall fate lead he to some safe shore,
where panther never prowl, nor lion roar;
where liberal nature all her charm bestow,
sun shine, bird sing, flower bloom, and water flow,
fool, do thou think he will revel on the store,
absolve the care of heaven, nor ask for more?
though water flow, flower bloom, and Phoebus shine,
he will sigh, he will murmur that he be alone.
for know, the maker on the human breast
a sense of kindred, country, man, impress;
and social life to better, aid, adorn,
with proper faculty each mortal bear.

though nature work the rule mind declare,
and well deserve enquiry serious care,
the god (whatever misanthrophy may say)
shine, beam in man with most unclouded ray.
what boot it thou to fly from pole to pole?
hang over the sun, and with the planet roll?
what boot through space further bourn to roam?
if thou, o man, a strange art at home.
then know thyself, the human mind survey,
the use, the pleasure will the toil repay.
hence inspiration plan his manner lay,
hence Homer crown, and Shakespear hence thy bay,
hence he, the pride of Athens and the shame,
the best and wise of mankind become.
nor study only, practise what you know,
your life, your knowledge, to mankind you owe.
with Plato olive wreath the bay entwine:
those who in study, shall in practice shine.
say, do the learned lord of hagley shade,
charm man so much by mossy fountain lay,
as when arouse, he stem corruption course,
and shake the senate with a tully force?
when freedom gasp beneath a caesar foot,
then public virtue may to shade retreat;
but where she breathe, the least may useful be,
and freedom, Britain, still belong to thou.
though man ungrateful, or though fortune frown;
be the reward of worth a song, or crown?
nor yet unrecompensed be virtue pain,
good Allen live, and bounteous Brunswick reign.
on each condition disappointment wait,
enter the hut, and force the guard gate.
nor dare repine, though early friendship bleed,
from love, the world, and all its care he be free.
but know, adversity the child of god;
who heaven approve of most, most feel she rod.
when smooth old ocean and each storm asleep,
then ignorance may plough the watery deep;
but when the daemon of the tempest rave,
skill must conduct the vessel through the wave.
Sidney, what good man envy not thy blow?
who will not wish Anytus for a foe?
intrepid virtue triumph over fate,
the good can never be unfortunate.
and be this maxim grave in thy mind,
the height of virtue be to serve mankind.

but when old age have silvered over thy head,
when memory fail, and all thy vigour flee,
then may thou seek the stillness of retreat,
then hear aloof the human tempest beat,
then will i greet thou to my woodland cave,
allay the pang of age, and smooth thy grave.
