a epistle from Alexander to Hephaestion in his sickness.

with such a pulse, with such disorder vein,
 such labour breath, as thy disease constrain;
 with fail eye, that scarce the light endure,
 (so long unclosed, they have watch thy doubtful cure)
 to his Hephaestion Alexander write,
 to soothe thy day, and wing thy sleepless night. 
i send thou love: oh! that i can impart,
 as well my vital spirit to thy heart! 
that, when the fierce distemper thy will quell,
 they may renew the fight, and the cold foe repel. 

as on arbela plain we turn the day,
 when persian through our troop have mow their way,
 when the rough scythian on the plunder run,
 and barbarous shout proclaim the conquest win,
 until over my head (to stop the swift despair)
 the bird of Jove fan the support air,
 above my plume do his broad wing display,
 and follow wheresoever i force my way:
 while Aristander, in his robe of white,
 show to the waver host the auspicious sight;
 new courage it inspire in every breast,
 and win at once the empire of the east. 
can he, but now, some kind presage afford,
 that health may be again to thou restore;
 thou to my wish, to my fond embrace;
 thy look the same, the same majestic grace,
 that round thou shine, when we together go
 to cheer the royal captive in their tent,
 where sysigambis, prostrate on the floor,
 do Alexander in thy form adore;
 above great Aesculapius shall he stand,
 or make immortal by Apelles hand. 
but no revive hope his art allow,
 and such cold damp invade my anxious brow,
 as, when in Cydnus plunge, i dare the flood
 the overmatch the boil of my youthful blood. 
but Philip to my aid repair in haste;
 and while the proffer draught i bold taste,
 as bold he the dangerous paper view,
 which of hide treason do his fame accuse. 
more thy physician life on thy depend,
 and what he give, his own preserve, or end. 
if thou expir beneath his fruitless care,
 to Rhadamanthus shall the wretch repair,
 and give strict answer for his error there. 

near thy pavilion listen prince wait,
 seek from thy to learn their monarch state. 
submit king, that post from day to day,
 to keep those crown, which at my foot they lie,
 forget the ambitious subject of their speed,
 and here arrive, only thy danger heed. 
the beauty of the clime, now thou be away,
 droop, and retire, as if their god of day
 no more upon their early prayer will shine,
 or take their incense, at his late decline. 
thy parisatis who i fear to name,
 lest to thy heat it add redouble flame;
 thy lovely wife, thy parisatis weep,
 and in her grief a solemn silence keep. 
stretch in her tent, upon the floor she lie,
 so pale her look, so motionless her eye,
 as when they give thou leave at first to gaze
 upon the charm of her unguarded face;
 when the two beauteous sister lowly kneel,
 and sue to those, who more than pity feel. 
to cheer she now Statira vain prove,
 and at thy name alone she sigh, and move. 

but why these single grief shall i expose? 
the world no mirth, no war, no business know,
 but, hush with sorrow, stand, to favour thy repose. 
even i my boast title now resign,
 not ammon son, nor bear of race divine,
 but mortal all, oppress with restless fear,
 wild with my care, and womanish in tear. 
though tear, before, i for lose Clytus shed,
 and weep more drop, than the old hero bleed;
 even now, methinks, i see he on the ground,
 now my dire arm the wretched corpse surround,
 now the flee soul i woo, now rave upon the wound. 
yet he, for who this mighty grief do spring,
 not Alexander value, but the king. 
then think, how much that passion must transcend,
 which not a subject raise but a friend;
 a equal partner in the vanquish earth,
 a brother, not impose upon my birth,
 too weak a tie unequal thought to bind,
 but by the generous motion of the mind. 
my love to thou for empire be the test,
 since he, who from mankind can choose the best,
 the god think only fit for monarch over the rest. 
live then, my friend; but if that must not be,
 nor fate will with my boundless mind agree,
 afford, at one time, the world and thou;
 to the most worthy i will that sway resign,
 and in Elysium keep Hyphaestion i. 
