a elegy, sacred to the memory of that great divine, the reverend and learned dr. SAMUEL cooper, who depart this life December 29, 1783, aetatis 59. 

o thou who exit wrap in boundless woe,
for thou the tear of various nation flow:
for thou the flood of virtuous sorrow rise
from the full heart and burst from stream eye,
far from our view to heaven eternal height,
the seat of bliss divine, and glory bright;
far from the restless turbulence of life,
the war of faction, and impassion strife.
from every ill mortality endure,
safe in celestial salem wall secure.

ever yet from this terrestrial state retire,
the virtuous love thou, and the wife admire.
the gay approve thou, and the grave revere;
and all thy word with rapt attention hear!
the son of learning on thy lesson hang,
while soft persuasion move the illiterate throng.
who, draw a by rhetoric command law,
comply obedient, nor conceive the cause,
thy every sentence be with grace inspire,
and every period with devotion fire;
bright truth thy guide without a dark disguise,
and penetration all-discerning-eye.

thy country mourn the afflict hand divine
that now forbid thy radiant lamp to shine,
which, like the sun, resplendent source of light
diffuse its beam, and cheere our gloom of night.

what deep-felt sorrow in each kindred breast
with keen sensation rend the heart distress!
fraternal love sustain a tender part,
and mourn a brother with a brother heart. 

thy church lament her faithful pastor flee
to the cold mansion of the silent dead.
there hush forever, cease the heavenly strain,
that wake the soul, but here resound in vain.
still live thy merit, where thy name be know,
as the sweet rose, its bloom beauty go
retain its fragrance with a long perfume:
thus cooper! thus thy deathless name shall bloom
unfading, in thy church and country be love,
while winter frown, or spring renew the grove. 
the hapless muse, her loss in cooper mourn,
and as she fit, she write, and weep, by turn;
a friend sincere, who mild indulgent grace
encourage oft, and oft approve her lay.

with all their charm, terrestrial object strive,
but vain their pleasure to attract his love.
such cooper be — at heaven high call he fly;
his task well finish, to his native sky.
yet to his fate reluctant we resign,
though we to copy conduct such as thy:
such be thy wish, the observant muse survey
thy late breath. and this advice convey.
