to mr. Garrick,

on his erect a temple and statue to Shakespear.

by the same.

where yonder tree rise high in cheerful air,
where yonder bank eternal verdure wear,
and open flower diffuse sweet around
paint with their vivid hue the happy ground;
while Thames majestic roll the mead between,
and with his silver current crown the scene;
there Garrick, satiate of well-earned applause,
from crowd, and shout theatre withdraw:
there court the muse, turn over the instructive page,
and meditate new triumph for the stage.
thy, Shakespear, chief — for thou must ever shine
his pride, his boast, unequalled and divine.
there too thy votary to thy merit just,
have raise the dome, and place the honour bust,
bid the pile to future time proclaim
his veneration for thy mighty name.
a place more fit his zeal can never find
than this fair spot, a emblem of thy mind —
as hill and dale there charm the wonder eye,
such sweet variety thy scene supply —
like the tall tree sublime thy genius tower,
sprightly thy fancy, as the open flower,
while copious as the tide Thames pour along,
flow the sweet number of thy heavenly song,
serene pure, and yet divine strong —
look down, great shade, with pride this tribute see,
the hand that pay it make it worthy thou —
as fame Apelles be allow alone
to paint the form august of philip son,
none but a Garrick can, o bard divine!
lay a fit offer on thy hallow shrine.
to speak thy worth be his peculiar boast,
he best can tell it, for he feel it most.
bless bard! thy fame through every age shall grow,
till nature cease to charm, or Thames to flow.
thou too, with he, who fame thy talent raise,
shall share our wonder, and divide our praise;
blend with his thy merit rise to view,
and half thy shakespeare fame to thou be due:
unless the actor with the bard conspire,
how impotent his strength, how faint his fire!
one boast the mine, one bring the gold to light,
and the muse triumph in the actor might;
too weak to give she own conception birth,
till all-expressive action call they forth.
thus the sweet pipe, mute in itself, no sound
send forth, nor breathe its please note around;
but if some swain with happy skill endue,
inspire with animate breath the wood,
wake into voice, it pour its tuneful strain,
and harmony divine enchant the plain.
