the progress of error.

sing muse (if such a theme, so dark, so long,
 may find a muse to grace it with a song)
 by what unseen and unsuspected art
 the serpent error twine round human heart,
 tell where she lurk, beneath what flowery shade,
 that not a glimpse of genuine light pervade,
 the poisonous, black, insinuate worm,
 successful conceal her loathsome form. 
take, if you can, you careless and supine! 
counsel and caution from a voice like i;
 truth that the theorist can never reach,
 and observation teach i, i will teach. 
not all who eloquence the fancy fill,
 musical as the chime of tinkle rill,
 weak to perform, though mighty to pretend,
 can trace her mazy wind to their end,
 discern the fraud beneath the specious lure,
 prevent the danger, or prescribe the cure. 
the clear harangue, and cold as it be clear,
 fall soporific on the listless ear,
 like quicksilver, the rhetoric they display,
 shine as it run, but grasp at slip away. 
place for his trial on this bustle stage,
 from thoughtless youth to ruminate age,
 free in his will to choose or to refuse,
 man may improve the crisis, or abuse. 
else, on the fatalist unrighteous plan,
 say, to what bar amenable be man? 
with nought in charge, he can betray no trust,
 and if he fall, will fall because he must;
 if love reward he, or if vengeance strike,
 his recompense in both, unjust alike. 
divine authority within his breast
 bring every thought, word, action to the test,
 warn he or prompt, approve he or restrain,
 as reason, or as passion, take the reins. 
heaven from above, and conscience from within,
 cry in his startle ear, abstain from sin. 
the world around solicit his desire,
 and kindle in his soul a treacherous fire,
 while all his purpose and step to guard,
 peace follow virtue as its sure reward,
 and pleasure bring as sure in her train,
 remorse and sorrow and vindictive pain. 
man thus endue with a elective voice,
 must be supply with object of his choice. 
wherever he turn, enjoyment and delight,
 or present, or in prospect, meet his sight;
 these open on the spot their honeyed store,
 those call he loud to pursuit of more. 
his unexhausted mine, the sordid vice
 avarice show, and virtue be the price. 
here, various motive his ambition raise,
 power, pomp, and splendour, and the thirst of praise;
 there beauty woe he with expand arm,
 even bacchanalian madness have its charm,
 nor these alone, who pleasure less refine,
 may well alarm the most unguarded mind,
 seek to supplant his unexperienced youth,
 or lead he devious from the path of truth,
 hourly allurement on his passion press,
 safe in themselves, but dangerous in the excess. 
hark! how it float upon the dewy air,
 o what a die, die close be there! 
it be harmony from yond sequester bower,
 sweet harmony that sooth the midnight hour;
 long ever the charioteer of day have run
 his morning course, the enchantment be begin,
 and he shall gild yond mountain height again,
 ever yet the please toil become a pain. 
be this the rugged path, the steep ascent
 that virtue point to? can a life thus spend
 lead to the bliss she promise the wise,
 detach the soul from earth, and speed she to the sky? 
you devotee to your adore employ,
 enthusiast, drink with a unreal joy,
 love make the music of the bless above,
 heaven harmony be universal love;
 and earthly sound, though sweet and well combine,
 and lenient as soft opiate to the mind,
 leave vice and folly unsubdued behind. 
grey dawn appear, the sportsman and his train
 speckle the bosom of the distant plain,
 it be he, the Nimrod of the neighbour lair,
 save that his scent be less acute than they,
 for persevere chace, and headlong leap,
 true beagle as the staunch hound he keep. 
charge with the folly of his life mad scene,
 he take offence, and wonder what you mean;
 the joy, the danger and the toil overpay,
 it be exercise, and health and length of day,
 again impetuous to the field he fly,
 leap every fence but one, there fall and die;
 like a slay deer, the tumbrel bring he home,
 unmissed but by his dog and by his groom. 
you clergy, while your orbit be your place,
 light of the world, and star of human race —
 but if eccentric the forsake your sphere,
 prodigious, ominous, and view with fear. 
the comet baneful influence be a dream,
 you real, and pernicious in the extreme. 
what then — be appetite and lust lay down,
 with the same ease the man put on his gown? 
will avarice and concupiscence give place,
 charm by the sound, your reverence, or your grace? 
no. but his own engagement bind he fast,
 or if it do not, brand he to the last
 what atheist call he, a design knave,
 a mere church juggler, hypocrite and slave. 
oh laugh, or mourn with i, the rueful jest,
 a cassock huntsman, and a fiddle priest;
 he from italian songster take his cue,
 set Paul to music, he shall quote he too. 
he take the field, the master of the pack
 cry, well do saint — and clap he on the back. 
be this the path of sanctity? be this
 to stand a waymark in the road to bliss? 
himself a wanderer from the narrow way,
 his silly sheep, what wonder if they stray? 
go, cast your order at your bishop foot,
 send your dishonour gown to Monmouth street,
 the sacred function, in your hand be make,
 sad sacrilege! no function but a trade. 
occiduus be a pastor of renown,
 when he have pray and preach the sabbath down,
 with wire and catgut he conclude the day,
 quaver and semiquav'r care away. 
the full concerto swell upon your ear;
 all elbow shake. look in, and you will swear
 the babylonian tyrant with a nod
 have summon they to serve his golden god. 
so well that think the employment seem to suit,
 psaltery and sackbut, dulcimer, and flute. 
oh fie! it be evangelical and pure,
 observe each face, how sober and demure,
 ecstasy set her stamp on every mien,
 chin fall, and not a eye-ball to be see. 
still i insist, though music heretofore
 have charm i much, not even occiduus more,
 love, joy and peace make harmony, more meet
 for sabbath evening, and perhaps as sweet. 
will not the sickly sheep of every flock,
 resort to this example as a rock,
 there stand and justify the foul abuse
 of sabbath hour, with plausible excuse? 
if apostolic gravity be free
 to play the fool on Sunday, why not we? 
if he, the tinkle harpsichord regard
 as inoffensive, what offence in card? 
strike up the fiddle, let we all be gay,
 layman have leave to dance, if parson play. 
oh Italy! thy sabbath will be soon
 our sabbath, close with mummery and buffoon. 
preach and prank will share the motley scene,
 we parcel out, as thy have ever be,
 God worship and the mountebank between. 
what say the prophet? let that day be bless
 with holiness and consecrate rest. 
pastime and business both it shall exclude,
 and bar the door the moment they intrude,
 noble distinguish above all the six,
 by deed in which the world must never mix. 
hear he again. he call it a delight,
 a day of luxury, observe aright,
 when the glad soul be make heaven welcome guest,
 sit banquete, and god provide the feast. 
but trifler be engage and can come;
 their answer to the call be — not at home. 
oh the dear pleasure of the velvet plain,
 the paint tablet, deal and deal again. 
card with what rapture, and the polish die,
 the yawn chasm of indolence supply! 
then to the dance, and make the sober moon
 witness of joy that shun the sight of noon. 
blame cynic, if you can, quadrille or ball,
 the snug close party, or the splendid hall,
 where night down-stooping from her ebon throne,
 view constellation bright than her own. 
it be innocent, and harmless and refine,
 the balm of care, elysium of the mind. 
innocent! oh if venerable time
 slay at the foot of pleasure, be no crime,
 then with his silver beard and magic wand,
 let Comus rise archbishop of the land,
 let he your rubric and your feast prescribe,
 grand metropolitan of all the tribe. 
of manner rough, and coarse athletic cast,
 the rank debauch suit clodio filthy taste. 
Rufillus, exquisite form by rule,
 not of the moral, but the dance school,
 wonder at clodio folly, in a tone
 as tragical, as other at his own. 
he can drink five bottle, bilk the score,
 then kill a constable, and drink five more;
 but he can draw a pattern, make a tart,
 and have the lady etiquette by heart. 
go fool, and arm in arm with clodio, plead
 your cause, before a bar you little dread;
 but know, the law that bid the drunkard die,
 be far too just to pass the trifler by. 
both baby feature and of infant size,
 view from a distance, and with heedless eye,
 folly and innocence be so alike,
 the difference, though essential, fail to strike. 
yet folly ever have a vacant stare,
 a simper countenance, and a trifle air;
 but innocence, sedate, serene, erect,
 delight we, by engage our respect. 
man, nature guest by invitation sweet,
 receive from she, both appetite and treat,
 but if he play the glutton and exceed,
 his benefactress blush at the deed. 
for nature, nice, as liberal to dispense,
 make nothing but a brute the slave of sense. 
Daniel eat pulse by choice, example rare! 
heaven bless the youth, and make he fresh and fair. 
Gorgonius sit abdominous and wan,
 like a fatsquab upon a Chinese fan. 
he snuff far off the anticipate joy,
 turtle and venison all his thought employ,
 prepare for meal, as jockey take a sweat,
 oh nauseous! a emetic for a whet —
 will providence overlook the waste good? 
temperance be no virtue if he can. 
that pleasure, therefore, or what such we call,
 be hurtful, be a truth confess by all. 
and some that seem to threaten virtue less,
 still hurtful, in the abuse, or by the excess. 
be man then only for his torment place,
 the centre of delight he may not taste? 
like fable Tantalus condemn to hear
 the precious stream still purl in his ear,
 lip-deep in what he long for, and yet curse
 with prohibition and perpetual thirst? 
no, wrangler — destitute of shame and sense,
 the precept that enjoin he abstinence,
 forbid he none but the licentious joy,
 who fruit, though fair, tempt only to destroy. 
remorse, the fatal egg by pleasure lay
 in every bosom where her nest be make,
 hatch by the beam of truth deny he rest,
 and prove a rage scorpion in his breast. 
no pleasure? be domestic comfort dead? 
be all the nameless sweet of friendship flee? 
have time wear out, or fashion put to shame
 good sense, good health, good conscience, and good fame? 
all these belong to virtue, and all prove
 that virtue have a title to your love. 
have you no touch of pity, that the poor
 stand starve at your inhospitable door? 
or if yourself too scanty supply
 need help, let honest industry provide. 
earn, if you want, if you abound, impart,
 these both be pleasure to the feeling heart. 
no pleasure? have some sickly eastern waste
 send we a wind to parch we at a blast? 
can british paradise no scene afford
 to please her sate and indifferent lord? 
be sweet philosophy enjoyment run
 quite to the lees? and have religion none? 
brute capable, shall tell you it be a lie,
 and judge you from the kennel and the sty. 
delight like these, you sensual and profane,
 you be bid, beg, beseech to entertain;
 call to these crystal stream, do you turn off
 obscene, to swill and swallow at a trough? 
envy the beast then, on who heaven bestow
 your pleasure, with no curse in the close. 
pleasure admit in undue degree,
 enslave the will, nor leave the judgement free. 
it be not alone the grape entice juice,
 unnerve the moral power, and mar their use,
 ambition, avarice, and the lust of fame,
 and woman, lovely woman, do the same. 
the heart, surrender to the rule power
 of some ungoverned passion every hour,
 find by degree, the truth that once bear sway,
 and all their deep impression wear away. 
so coin grow smooth, in traffic current pass,
 until caesar image be efface at last. 
the breach, though small at first, soon open wide,
 in rush folly with a full moon tide. 
then welcome error of whatever size,
 to justify it by a thousand lie. 
as creep ivy cling to wood or stone,
 and hide the ruin that it feed upon,
 so sophistry, cleave close to, and protect
 sin rot trunk, conceal its defect. 
mortal who pleasure be their only care,
 first wish to be impose on, and then be. 
and lest the fulsome artifice shall fail,
 themselves will hide its coarseness with a veil. 
not more industrious be the just and true
 to give to virtue what be virtue due,
 the praise of wisdom, comeliness and worth,
 and call her charm to public notice forth,
 than vice mean and disingenuous race,
 to hide the shock feature of her face. 
her form with dress and lotion they repair,
 then kiss their idol and pronounce her fair. 
the sacred implement i now employ
 may prove a mischief or at best a toy,
 a trifle if it move but to amuse,
 but if to wrong the judgement and abuse,
 worse than a poignard in the base hand,
 it stab at once the moral of a land. 
you writer of what none with safety read,
 foot it in the dance that fancy lead,
 you novelist who mar what you will mend,
 snivel and drivel folly without end,
 who correspond miss fill the ream
 with sentimental frippery and dream,
 catch in a delicate soft silken net
 by some lewd earl, or rake-hell baronet;
 you pimp, who under virtue fair pretence,
 steal to the closet of young innocence,
 and teach her unexperienced yet and green,
 to scribble as you scribble at fifteen;
 who kindle a combustion of desire,
 with some cold moral think to quench the fire,
 though all your engineer prove in vain,
 the dribble stream never put it out again;
 oh that a verse have power, and can command
 far, far away, these flesh-fly of the land,
 who fasten without mercy on the fair,
 and suck, and leave a crave maggot there. 
however disguise the inflammatory tale,
 and cover with a finespun specious veil,
 such writer and such reader owe the gust
 and relish of their pleasure all to lust. 
but the muse eagle-pinioned have in view
 a quarry more important still than you,
 down down the wind she swim and sail away,
 now stoop upon it and now grasp the prey. 
Petronius! all the muse weep for thou,
 but every tear shall scald thy memory. 
the grace too, while virtue at their shrine
 lay bleed under that soft hand of thy,
 feel each a mortal stab in her own breast,
 abhor the sacrifice, and curse the priest. 
thou polish and high finish foe to truth,
 grey beard corruptor of our listen youth,
 to purge and skim away the filth of vice,
 that so refine it may the more entice,
 then pour it on the moral of thy son
 to taint his heart, be worthy of thy own. 
now while the poison all high life pervade,
 write if thou can one letter from the shade,
 one, and one only, charge with deep regret,
 that thy worst part, thy principle live yet;
 one sad epistle thence, may cure mankind,
 of the plague spread by bundle leave behind. 
it be grant, and no plain truth appear,
 our most important be our early year,
 the mind impressible and soft, with ease
 imbibe and copy what she hear and see,
 and through life labyrinth hold fast the clue
 that education give she, false or true. 
plant raise with tenderness be seldom strong,
 man coltish disposition ask the thong,
 and without discipline the favourite child,
 like a neglect forester run wild. 
but we, as if good quality will grow
 spontaneous, take but little pain to sow,
 we give some latin and a smatch of greek,
 teach he to fence and figure twice a week,
 and have do we think, the best we can,
 praise his proficiency and dub he man. 
from school to cam or Isis, and thence home,
 and thence with all convenient speed to Rome,
 with reverend tutor clad in habit lie,
 to teaze for cash and quarrel with all day,
 with memorandum-book for every town,
 and every post, and where the chaise break down:
 he stock, a few french phrase get by heart,
 with much to learn, but nothing to impart,
 the youth obedient to his sire command,
 set off a wanderer into foreign land:
 surprise at all they meet, the goslin pair
 with awkward gait, stretch neck, and silly stare,
 discover huge cathedral build with stone,
 and steeple tower high much like our own,
 but show peculiar light by many a grin
 at popish practice observe within. 
ever long some bow, smirk, smart abbé
 remark two literer that have lose their way,
 and be always prime with politesse
 for man of their appearance and andress,
 with much compassion undertake the task,
 to tell they more than they have wit to ask. 
Points to inscription wheresoever they tread,
 such as when legible be never read,
 but be canker now, and half wear out,
 craze antiquarian brain with endless doubt:
 some headless hero or some Caesar show,
 defective only in his roman nose;
 exhibit elevation, drawing, plan,
 model of herculanean pot and pan,
 and sell they medal, which if neither rare
 nor ancient, will be so, preserve with care. 
strange the recital! from whatever cause
 his great improvement and new light he draw,
 the esquire once bashful be shamefaced no more,
 but teem with power he never feel before:
 whether increase momentum, and the force
 with which from clime to clime he speed his course,
 as axle sometime kindle as they go,
 chase he and bring dull nature to a glow;
 or whether clear sky and soft air
 that make italian flower so sweet and fair,
 freshen his lazy spirit as he run,
 unfold genial and spread the man,
 return he proclaim by many a grace,
 by shrug and strange contortion of his face,
 how much a dunce that have be send to roam,
 excel a dunce that have be keep at home. 
accomplishment have take virtue place,
 and wisdom fall before exterior grace;
 we slight the precious kernel of the stone,
 and toil to polish its rough coat alone. 
a just deportment, manner grace with ease
 elegant phrase, and figure form to please,
 be quality that seem to comprehend
 whatever parent, guardian, school intend;
 hence a unfurnished and a listless mind,
 though busy, trifle; empty, though refine,
 hence all that interfere, and dare to clash
 with indolence and luxury, be trash;
 while learning, once the man exclusive pride,
 seem verge fast towards the female side. 
learning itself receive into a mind
 by nature weak, or vicious incline,
 serve but to lead philosopher astray
 where child will with ease discern the way. 
and of all art sagacious dupe invent
 to cheat themselves and gain the world assent
 the worst be scripture warp from it be intent. 
the carriage bowl along and all be please
 if Tom be sober, and the wheel well grease,
 but if the rogue have go a cup too far,
 leave out his linchpin or forget his tar,
 it suffer interruption and delay,
 and meet with hindrance in the smoothe way. 
when some hypothesis absurd and vain
 have fill with all its fume a critic brain,
 the text that sort not with his darling whim,
 though plain to other, be obscure to he. 
the will make subject to a lawless force,
 all be irregular, and out of course,
 and judgement drink, and bribe to lose his way,
 wink hard, and talk of darkness at noon day. 
a critic on the sacred book, shall be
 candid and learn, dispassionate and free;
 free from the wayward bias bigot feel,
 from fancy influence, and intemperate zeal. 
but above all (or let the wretch refrain,
 nor touch the page he can but profane)
 free from the domineer power of lust,
 a lewd interpreter be never just. 
how shall i speak thou, or thy power address,
 thou god of our idolatry, the press? 
by thou, religion, liberty and law
 exert their influence, and advance their cause,
 by thou, worse plague than Pharaoh land befall,
 diffuse, make earth the vestibule of hell:
 thou fountain, at which drink the good and wise,
 thou ever-bubbling spring of endless lie,
 like eden dread probationary tree,
 knowledge of good and evil be from thou. 
no wild enthusiast ever yet can rest,
 till half mankind be like himself possess. 
philosopher, who darken and put out
 eternal truth by everlasting doubt,
 church quack, with passion under no command,
 who fill the world with doctrine contraband,
 discov'rer of they know not what, confine
 within no bound, the blind that lead the blind,
 to stream of popular opinion draw,
 deposit in those shallows, all their spawn. 
the wriggle fry soon fill the creek around,
 poison the water where their swarm abound;
 scorn by the noble tenant of the flood,
 minnow and gudgeon gorge the unwholesome food. 
the propagate myriad spread so fast,
 even leuwenhoek himself will stand aghast,
 employ to calculate the enormous sum,
 and own his crab-computing power overcome. 
be this hyperbole? the world well know,
 your sober thought will hardly find it one. 
fresh confidence the speculatist take
 from every hare-brained proselyte he make,
 and therefore print. himself but half-deceived,
 until other have the soothe tale believe. 
hence comment after comment, spin as fine
 as bloat spider draw the flimsy line. 
hence the same word that bid our lust obey,
 be misapply to sanctify their sway. 
if stubborn greek refuse to be his friend,
 hebrew or Syriac shall be force to bend;
 if language and copy all cry, no —
 somebody prove it century ago. 
like trout pursue, the critic in despair
 dart to the mud and find his safety there. 
woman, who custom have forbid to fly
 the scholar pitch (the scholar best know why)
 with all the simple and unlettered poor,
 admire his learning, and almost adore. 
whoever err, the priest can never be wrong,
 with such fine word familiar to his tongue. 
you lady! (for, indifferent in your cause,
 i shall deserve to forfeit all applause)
 whatever shock, or give the least offence
 to virtue, delicacy, truth or sense,
 (try the criterion, it be a faithful guide)
 nor have, nor can have scripture on its side. 
none but a author know a author care,
 or fancy fondness for the child she bear. 
commit once into the public arm,
 the baby seem to smile with add charm. 
like something precious venture far from shore,
 it be value for the danger sake the more. 
he view it with complacency supreme,
 solicit kind attention to his dream,
 and daily more enamour of the cheat,
 kneel, and ask heaven to bless the dear deceit. 
so one, who story serve at least to show
 man love their own production long ago,
 woo a unfeeling statue for his wife,
 nor rest till the god have give it life. 
if some mere driveler suck the sugar fib,
 one that still need his lead string and bib,
 and praise his genius, he be soon repay
 in praise apply to the same part, his head. 
for it be a rule that hold for ever true,
 grant i discernment, and i grant it you. 
patient of contradiction as a child,
 affable, humble, diffident and mild,
 such be sir Isaac, and such Boyle and Locke,
 your blund'rer be as sturdy as a rock. 
the creature be so sure to kick and bite,
 a muleteer the man to set he right. 
first appetite enlist he truth be swear foe,
 then obstinate self-will confirm he so. 
tell he he wander, that his error lead
 to fatal ill, that though the path he tread
 be flowery, and he see no cause of fear,
 death and the pain of hell attend he there;
 in vain; the slave of arrogance and pride,
 he have no hear on the prudent side. 
his still refute quirk he still repeat,
 new raise objection with new quibble meet,
 until sink in the quicksand he defend,
 he die dispute, and the contest end;
 but not the mischief: they still leave behind,
 like thistle-seed be sow by every wind. 
thus man go wrong with a ingenious skill,
 bend the strait rule to their own crooked will,
 and with a clear and shine lamp supply,
 first put it out, then take it for a guide. 
halt on crutch of unequal size,
 one leg by truth support, one by lie,
 they sidle to the goal with awkward pace,
 secure of nothing, but to lose the race. 
fault in the life breed error in the brain,
 and these, reciprocal, those again. 
the mind and conduct mutual imprint
 and stamp their image in each other mint. 
each, sire and dam, of a infernal race,
 beget and conceive all that be base. 
none send his arrow to the mark in view,
 who hand be feeble, or his aim untrue. 
for though ever yet the shaft be on the wing,
 or when it first forsake the elastic string,
 it err but little from the intend line,
 it fall at last, far wide of his design. 
so he that seek a mansion in the sky,
 must watch his purpose with a steadfast eye,
 that prize belong to none but the sincere,
 the least obliquity be fatal here. 
with caution taste the sweet circaean cup,
 he that sip often, at last drink it up. 
habit be soon assume, but when we strive
 to strip they off, it be being flay alive. 
call to the temple of impure delight,
 he that abstain, and he alone do right. 
if a wish wander that way, call it home,
 he can long be safe, who wish roam. 
but if you pass the threshold, you be catch,
 die then, if power almighty save you not. 
there harden by degree, until double steel,
 take leave of nature god, and god reveal,
 then laugh at all you tremble at before,
 and join the freethinker brutal roar,
 swallow the two grand nostrum they dispense,
 that scripture lie, and blasphemy be sense:
 if clemency revolt by abuse
 be damnable, then, damn without excuse. 
some dream that they can silence when they will
 the storm of passion, and say, peace, be still;
 but "thus far and no farther, "when address
 to the wild wave, or wild human breast,
 imply authority that never can,
 that never ought to be the lot of man. 
but muse forbear, long flight forebode a fall,
 strike on the deep-toned chord the sum of all. 
hear the just law, the judgement of the sky! 
he that hate truth shall be the dupe of lie. 
and he that will be cheat to the last,
 delusion, strong as hell, shall bind he fast. 
but if the wanderer his mistake discern,
 judge his own way, and sigh for a return,
 bewilder once, must he bewail his loss
 for ever and for ever? no — the cross. 
there and there only (though the deist rave,
 and atheist, if earth bear so base a slave)
 there and there only, be the power to save. 
there no delusive hope invite despair,
 no mockery meet you, no deception there. 
the spell and charm that blind you before,
 all vanish there, and fascinate no more. 
i be no preacher, let this hint suffice,
 the cross once see, be death to every vice:
 else he that hang there, suffer all his pain,
 bleed, groan and agonise, and die in vain. 
