the tear of Amaryllis for Amyntas.

a pastoral.

it be at the time, when new return light,
with welcome ray begin to cheer the sight;
when grateful bird prepare their thanks to pay,
and warble hymn to hail the dawn day;
when woolly flock their bleat cry renew,
and from their fleecy side first shake the silver dew.

it be then that Amaryllis, heavenly fair,
wound with grief, and wild with her despair,
forsake her myrtle bower and rosy bed,
to tell the wind her woe, and mourn Amyntas dead.
who have a heart so hard, that hear her cry
and do not weep? who such relentless eye?
tiger and wolf their wonted rage forgo,
and dumb distress and new compassion show,
as teach by she to taste of human woe.
nature her self attentive silence keep,
and motion seem suspend while she weep;
the rise sun restrain his fiery course,
and rapid river listen at their source;
even echo fear to catch the fly sound,
lest repetition shall her accent drown;
the very morning wind withhold his breeze,
nor fan with fragrant wing the noiseless tree;
as if the gentle zephyr have be dead,
and in the grave with love Amyntas lay.
no voice, no whisper sigh, no murmur groan,
presume to mingle with a mother moan;
her cry alone her anguish can express,
all other mourning will have make it less.

hear i, she cry, you nymph and silvan god,
inhabitant of these once love abode;
hear my distress, and lend a pity ear,
hear my complaint — you will not hear my prayer;
the loss which you prevent not, deplore,
and mourn with i Amyntas now no more.

have i not cause, you cruel power, to mourn?
live there like i another wretch forlorn?
tell i, thou sun that round the world do shine,
have thou behold another loss like i?
you wind, who on your wing sad accent bear,
and catch the sound of sorrow and despair,
tell i if ever your tender pinion bear
such weight of woe, such deadly sigh before?
tell i, thou earth, on who wide-spreading base
the wretched load be lay of human race,
do thou not feel thy self with i oppress?
lie all the dead so heavy on thy breast?
when hoary winter on thy shrink head
his lcy, cold, depress hand have lay,
have thou not feel less chillness in thy vein?
do i not pierce thou with more freeze pain;
but why to thou do i relate my woe,
thou cruel earth, my most remorseless foe?
within who darksome womb the grave be make,
where all my joy be with Amyntas lay.
what be it to i, though on thy naked head
eternal winter shall his horror shed?
though all thy nerve be numb with endless frost,
and all thy hope of future spring be lose;
to i what comfort can the spring afford?
can my Amyntas be with spring restore?
can all the rain that fall from weep sky,
unlock the tomb where my Amyntas lie?
no, never! never! — say then, rigid earth,
what be to i thy everlasting dearth?
though never flower again its head shall rear,
though never tree again shall blossom bear;
though never grass shall cloth the naked ground,
nor ever heal plant or wholesome herb be find.
none, none be find when i bewail their want;
nor wholesome herb be find, nor heal plant,
to ease Amyntas of his cruel pain;
in vain i search the valley, hill and plain;
but wither leaf alone appear to view,
or poisonous weed distil deadly dew.
and if some naked stalk, not quite decay,
to yield a fresh and friendly bud essay,
soon as i reach to crop the tender shoot,
a shriek mandrake kill it at the root.
witness to this, you fawn of every wood,
who at the prodigy astonish stand.
well i remember what sad sign you make,
what shower of unavailing tear you shed;
how each run fearful to his mossy cave,
when the last gasp the dear Amyntas give.
for then the air be fill with dreadful cry,
and sudden night overspread the darken sky;
phantom, and fiend, and wander fire appear,
and scream of ill-presaging bird be hear.
the forest shake, and flinty rock be cleave,
and fright stream their wonted channel leave;
with frantic grief overflow fruitful ground,
where many a herd and harmless Swain be drown.
while i forlorn and desolate be leave,
of every help, of every hope bereave;
to every element expose i lie,
and to my grief a more defenceless prey.
for thou, Amyntas, all these pain be bear,
for thou these hand be wring, these hair be tear;
for thou my soul to sigh shall never leave,
these eye to weep, this throb heart to heave.
to mourn thy fall i will fly the hate light,
and hide my head in shade of endless night:
for thou be light, and life, and health to i;
the sun but thankless shine that show not thou.
be thou not lovely, graceful, good and young?
the joy of sight, the talk of every tongue?
do ever branch so sweet a blossom bear?
or ever early fruit appear so fair?
do ever youth so far his year transcend?
do ever life so immature end!
for thou the tuneful swain provide lay,
and every muse prepare thy future praise.
for thou the busy nymph strip every grove,
and myrtle wreath and flowery chaplet weave.
but now, ah dismal change! the tuneful throng
to loud lament turn the cheerful song.
their please task the weep virgin leave,
and with unfinished garland strew thy grave.
there let i fall, there, there lament lie,
there grieve grow to earth, despair, and die.

this say, her loud complaint of force she cease,
excess of grief her falter speech suppress.
along the ground she cold limb she lay,
where late the grave be for Amyntas make;
then from her swim eye begin to pour,
of soft fall rain a silver shower;
her loose flow hair, all radiant bright,
overspread the dewy grass like stream of light.
as if the sun have of his beam be shear,
and cast to earth the glory he have wear.
a sight so lovely sad, such deep distress
no tongue can tell, no pencil can express.

and now the wind, which have so long be still,
begin the swell air with sigh to fill;
the water-nymph, who motionless remain,
like image of ice, while she complain,
now loose their stream; as when descend rain
roll the steep torrent headlong over the plain.
the prone creation, who so long have gaze,
charm with her cry, and at her grief amaze,
begin to roar and howl with horrid yell,
dismal to hear, and terrible to tell;
nothing but groan and sigh be hear around,
and echo multiply each mournful sound.

when all at once a universal pause
of grief be make, as from some secret cause.
the balmy air with fragrant scent be fill,
as if each weep tree have gum distil.
such, if not sweet, be the rich perfume
which swift ascend from amyntas tomb;
as if the arabian bird her nest have fire,
and on the spicy pile be new expire.

and now the turf, which late be naked see,
be sudden spread with lively spring green;
and Amaryllis see, with wonder eye,
a flowery bed, where she have weep, arise;
thick as the pearly drop the fair have shed,
the blow bud advance their purple head;
from every tear that fall, a violet grow,
and thence their sweetness come, and thence their mournful Hew.

remember this, you nymph and gentle maid,
when solitude you seek in gloomy shade;
or walk on bank where silent water flow,
for there this lonely flower will love to grow.
think on Amyntas, oft as you shall stoop
to crop the stalk and take they soft up.
when in your snowy neck their sweet you wear,
give a soft sigh, and drop a tender tear:
to love Amyntas pay the tribute due,
and bless his peaceful grave, where first they grow.
