the spirit of discovery by sea:

a descriptive and historical poem.

analysis.

book the first.

book the second

book the third

book the four.

book the five.

the spirit of discovery by sea.

book the first.

awake a loud and a lofty strain!
belove harp, who tone have oft beguile
my solitary sorrow, when i leave
the scene of happy hour, and wander far,
a pale and droop stranger; i have sit
(while evening listen to the convent bell)
on the wild margin of the Rhine, and woo
thy sympathy, "aweary of the world,"
and i have find with thou sad fellowship,
yet always sweet, whenever my languid hand
pass careless over the responsive wire,
while unambitious of the laurel meed
that crown the gifted bard, i only ask
some steal melody, the heart may love,
and a brief sonnet to beguile my tear!

but i have hope that one day i may wake
thy string to lofty utterance; and now,
bid adieu to glen, and wood, and stream,
and turn where, magnificent and vast,
main ocean burst upon my sight, i strike, —
rapt in the theme on which i long have muse, —
strike the loud lyre, and as the blue wave rock,
swell to their solemn roar the deepen chord.

lift thy indignant billow high, proclaim
thy terror, spirit of the hoary sea!
i sing thy dread dominion, amid wreck,
and storm, and howl solitude, to man
submit: awful shade of camoens
bend from the cloud of heaven.
by the bold tone
of minstrelsy, that over the unknown surge
(where never dare sail before be spread)
echo, and startle from his long repose
the indignant phantom of the stormy cape;
oh, let i think that in the wind i hear
thy animate tone, while i pursue
with ardent hope, like thou, my venturous way,
and bid the sea resound my song! and thou,
father of albion stream, majestic Thames,
amid the glitter scene, who long-drawn wave
go noiseless, yet with conscious pride, beneath
the throng vessel' shadow; nor through scene
more fair, the yellow Tagus, or the Nile,
that ancient river, wind. thou to the strain
shall haply listen, that record the might
of ocean, like a giant at thy foot
vanquish, and yield to thy gentle state
the ancient sceptre of his dread domain!

all be one waste of wave, that bury deep
earth and its multitude: the ark alone,
high on the cloudy van of Ararat,
rest; for now the death-commissioned storm
sink silent, and the eye of day look out
dim through the haze; while short successive gleam
flit over the welter deluge as it shrink,
or the transparent rain-drop, fall few,
distinct and large glisten. so the ark
rest upon Ararat; but nought around
its inmate can behold, save over the expanse
of boundless water, the sun orient orb
stretch the hull long shadow, or the moon
in silence, through the silver-cinctured cloud,
sail as she herself be lose, and leave
in nature loneliness!
but oh, sweet hope,
thou bid a tear of holy ecstasy
start to their eye-lid, when at night the dove,
weary, return, and lo! a olive leaf
wet in her bill: again she be put forth,
when the seven morn shine on the hoar abyss: —
due evening come: her wing be hear no more!
the dawn awake, not cold and drip sad,
but cheer with lovely sunshine; far away
the dark-red mountain flow their naked peak
upheave above the waste; Imaus gleam;
fume the huge torrent on his desert side;
till at the awful voice of he who rule
the storm, the ancient father and his train
on the dry land descend.
here let we pause.
no noise in the vast circuit of the globe
be hear; no sound of human stir: none
of pasture herd, or wander flock; nor song
of bird that solace the forsake wood
from morn till eve; save in that spot that hold
the sacred ark: there the glad sound ascend,
and nature listen to the breath of life.
the fleet horse bound, high-neighing to the wind
that lift his stream mane; the heifer swallow;
loud sing the lark amid the rainbow hue;
the lion lift he mutter; man come forth —
he kneel upon the earth — he kiss it;
and to the god who stretch that radiant bow,
he lift his tremble transport.
from one spot
alone of earth such sound ascend. how change
the human prospect! when from realm to realm,
from shore to shore, from isle to further isle,
fling to the stormy main, man murmur race,
various and countless as the shell that strew
the ocean wind marge, be spread; from shore
sinensian, where the pass proa gleam
innumerous 'amid the float village:
to Acapulco west, where load deep
with gold and gem roll the superb galleon,
shadow the hoar pacific: from the north,
where on some snowy promontory height
the Lapland visard beat his drum, and call
the spirit of the wind, to the utmost south,
where savage fuego shoot its cold white peak,
dreary of land, and the poor pecherais
Shiver and moan along its waste of snow.
so stir the earth; and for the ark that pass
alone and darkling over the dread abyss,
ten thousand and ten thousand bark be see
fervent and glance on the frith and sound;
from the bermudian that, with mast incline,
shoot like a dart along; to the tall ship
that, like a stately swan, in conscious pride
breast beautiful the rise surge, and throw
the gather water back, and seem to move
a live thing, along her lucid way
stream in white-winged glory to the sun!
some waft the treasure of the east; some bear
their country dark artillery over the surge
frown; some in the southern solitude,
bind on discovery of new region, spread,
'amid rock of drive ice, that crash around,
their weatherbeaten main-sail; or explore
their perilous way from isle to isle, and wind
the tender social tie; connect man,
wherever scatter, with his fellow-man.

how many age roll away ere thus,
from nature general wreck, the world great scene
be tenant! see from their sad abode,
at heaven dread voice, hear from the solitude,
as in the day-spring of create thing,
the sad survivor of a bury world
come forth; on they, though desolate their seat,
the sky look down with smile; for the broad sun,
that to the west slope his untired career,
hang over the water brim. the age sire,
now rise from his evening sacrifice,
amid his offspring stand, and lift his eye,
moist with a tear, to the bright bow: the fire
yet on the altar burn, who trail fume
go slow up, and mark the lucid cope
of the soft sky, where distant cloud hang still
and beautiful. so placid evening steal
after the lurid storm, like a sweet form
of fairy follow a perturb shape
of giant terror, that in darkness stride.
slow sink the lord of day; the cluster cloud
more ardent burn; confusion of rich hue,
crimson, and gold, and purple, bright, inlay
their vary edge; till before the eye,
as their last lustre fade, small silver star
succeed; and twinkle each in its own sphere,
thick as the frost unnumbered spangle, strew
the slowly-paling heaven. tire nature seem
like one who, struggle long for life, have beat
the billow, and scarce gain a desert crag,
over-spent, to sink to rest: the tranquil air
whisper repose. now sink in sleep recline
the father of the world; then the sole moon
mount high in shadowy beauty; every cloud
retire, as in the blue space she move on
amid the fulgent orb supreme, and look
the queen of heaven and earth. still the stream
retire sound; midnight high hollow vault
faint echo; still sound the distant stream.

when, hark! a strange and mingle wail, and cry
as of ten thousand thousand perish!
a phantom, 'amid the shadow of the dead,
before the holy patriarch, as he sleep,
stand terrible: — dark as a storm it stand
of thunder and of wind, like hollow sea
remote; meantime a voice be hear: behold,
Noah, the foe of thy weak race! my name
destruction, who thy son in yonder plain
shall worship, and all grim, with mooned horn
paint fable: when the flood from off the earth
before it sweep the live multitude,
i ride amid the hurricane; i hear
the universal shriek of all that live.
in vain they climb the rocky height: i strike
the adamantine mountain, and like dust
they crumble in the billowy foam. my hall,
deep in the centre of the sea, receive
the victim as they sink! then, with dark joy,
i sit amid ten thousand carcase,
that welter at my foot! but thou and thy
have brave my utmost fury: what remain
but vengeance, vengeance on thy hate race; —
and be that shelter shrine the instrument!
thence, teach to stem the wild sea when it roar,
in aftertime to land remote, where roam
the naked man and his wan progeny,
they, more instruct in the fatal use
of art and arm, shall ply their way; and thou
will bid the great deep cover thou to see
the sorrow of thy miserable son:
but turn, and view in part the truth i speak.

he say, and vanish with a dismal sound
of lamentation from his grisly troop.

then see the just man in his dream what seem
a new and savage land: huge forest stretch
their world of wood, shade like night the bank
of torrent-foaming river, many a league
wander and lose in solitude; green isle
here shine, and scatter hut beneath the shade
of branch palm be see; while in the sun
a naked infant play, stretch his hand
to reach a speckle snake, that through the leaf
oft dart, or its shine volume roll
erratic.
from the wood a sable man
come, as from hunt; in his arm he take
the smile child, that with the feather play
which nod on his brow; the shelter hut
receive they, and the cheerful smoke go up
above the silent wood.
anon be hear
the sound as of strange thunder, from the mouth
of hollow engine, as, with white sail spread,
tall vessel, hull like the great ark, approach
the verdant shore: they, in a woody cove
safe-stationed, hang their pennant motionless
beneath the palm. meantime, with shout and song,
the boat row hurry to the land; nor long
ere the great sea for many a league be tinge,
while corpse on corpse, down the red torrent roll,
float, and the inmost forest murmur — blood.

now vast savannah meet the view, where high
above the arid grass the serpent lift
his tawny crest: — not far a vessel ride
upon the sunny main, and to the shore
black savage tribe a mournful captive urge,
who look to heaven with anguish. he they cast
bind in the rank hold of the prison-ship,
with many a sad associate in despair,
each pant chain to his allot space;
and moan, while their waste eye-ball roll.

another scene appear: the naked slave
writhe to the bloody lash; but more to view
nature forbid, for start from his dream
the just man wake. shudder he gaze around;
he see the early beam of morning shine
slant on the hill without; he hear the breath
of placid cow, but trouble thought and sad
arise. he wander forth; and now far on,
by heavy muse lead, reach a ravine
most mild amid the tempest-riven rock,
through who dark pass he see the flood remote
gray-spreading, while the mist of morn go up.
he pause; when on his lonely pathway flash
a light, and sound as of approach wing
instant be hear. a radiant form appear,
celestial, and with heavenly accent say:
Noah, i come commission from above,
where angel move before the eternal throne
of heaven great king in glory, to dispel
the mist of darkness from thy sight; for know,
not unpermitted of the eternal one
the shadow of thy melancholy dream
hang over thou slumber: i the task to show
futurity faint scene; — now follow i.

he say; and up to the unclouded height
of that great eastern mountain, that survey
dim Asia, they ascend. then his brow
the angel touch, and clear with whisper charm
the mortal mist before his eye. — at once
(as in the skiey mirage, when the seer
from lonely kilda western summit see
a wondrous scene in shadowy vision rise)
the nether world, with sea and shore, appear
submit to his view: but not as then,
a melancholy waste, deform and sad;
but fair as now the green earth spread, with wood,
champaign, and hill, and many wind stream
robe, the magnificent illusion rise.
he see in mazy longitude devolve
the mighty Brahma-Pooter; to the east
Thibet and china, and the shine sea
that sweep the inlet of Japan, and wind
amid the curile and aleutian isle,
pale to the north. siberia snowy scene
be spread; jenisca and the freeze of
appear, and many a forest shady track
far as the Baltic, and the utmost bound
of Scandinavia; thence the eye return:
and lo! great Lebanon — abrupt and dark
with pine, and airy Carmel, rise slow
above the midland main, where hang the cape
of Italy and Greece; swart Africa,
beneath the parch sun, her long domain
reveal, the mountain of the moon, the source
of Nile, the wild mysterious Niger, lose
amid the torrid sand; and to the south
her stormy cape. beyond the misty main
the weary eye scarce wander, when behold
Plata, through vaster territory pour;
and Andes, sweep the horizon tract,
mighty of mountain! who eternal snow
feel not the near sun; who umbrage chill
the murmur ocean; who volcanic fire
a thousand nation view, hang like the moon
high in the middle waste of heaven; thy range,
shade far off the southern hemisphere,
a dusky file titanic.
so spread
before our great forefather view the globe
appear; with sea, and shady continent,
and verdant isle, and mountain lift dark
their forest, and indent river, pour
in silvery maze. and, lo! the angel say,
these scene, o Noah, thy posterity
shall people; but remote and scatter wide,
they shall forget their god, and see no trace,
save dim, of their great original.
rude cave shall be their dwelling: till, with noise
of multitude, imperial city rise.
but the arch fiend, the foe of god and man,
shall fling his spell; and, 'amid illusion drear,
blear superstition shall arise, the earth
eclipse. — deep in cave, vault within vault
far wind; or in night of thick wood,
where no bird sing; or 'amid huge circle grey
of uncouth stone, her aspect wild, and pale
as the terrific flame that near she burn,
she her mysterious rite, 'amid hymn and cry,
shall wake, and to her shapeless idol, vast
and smear with blood, or shrine of lust, shall lead
her votary, madden as she wave her torch,
with visage more expand, to the groan
of human sacrifice.
nor think that love
and happiness shall dwell in vale remote:
the naked man shall see the glorious sun,
and think it but enlighten his poor isle,
hide in the watery waste; cold on his limb
the ocean-spray shall beat; his deity
shall be the star, the thunder, and the wind;
and if a stranger on his rugged shore
be cast, his offer blood shall stain the strand. 

o wretched man! who then shall raise thou up
from this thy dark estate, forlorn and lose?
the patriarch say.
the angel answer mild,
his god, who destine he to noble end!
but mutual intercourse shall stir at first
the sink and grovel spirit, and from sleep
the sullen energy of man rouse up,
as of a slumber giant. he shall walk
sublime amid the work of god: the earth
shall own his wide dominion; the great sea
shall toss in vain its roar wave; his eye
shall scan the bright orb as they roll above
glorious, and his expand heart shall burn,
as wide and wide in magnificence
the vast scene open; in the wind and cloud,
the sea, and circle planet, he shall see
the shadow of a dread almighty move.
then shall the day-spring rise, before who beam
the darkness of the world be past: — for, hark!
seraph and angel-choirs with symphony
acclaim of ten thousand golden harp,
amid the burst cloud of heaven reveal,
at once, in glory jubilant, they sing —
god the redeemer live! he who take
man nature on he, and in human shroud
veil his immortal glory! he be rise!
god the redeemer live! and behold!
the gate of life and immortality
open to all that breathe!
oh, may the strain
but win the world to love; meek charity
shall lift her look and smile; and with faint voice
the weary pilgrim of the earth exclaim,
as close his eye-lid — death, where be thy sting?
o grave, where be thy victory?
and you,
who ocean melancholy waste divide,
who slumber to the sullen surge, awake,
break forth into thanksgiving, for the bark
that roll upon the desert deep, shall bear
the tiding of great joy to all that live,
tiding of life and light.
oh, be those man,
(the patriarch raise his droop look, and say)
such in my dream i see, who to the isle
and peaceful sylvan scene over the wide sea
come tilt; then their murderous instrument
lift, that flash to the indignant sun,
while the poor native die: — oh, be those man
instruct in the law of holy love,
thou have display?
the angel meek reply —
call rather fiend of hell those who abuse
the mercy they receive: that such, indeed,
on who the light of clear knowledge beam,
shall wander forth, and for the tender voice
of charity shall scatter crime and woe,
and drench, wherever they pass, the earth with blood,
may make even angel weep:
but the poor tribe
that groan and die, deem not they innocent
as injure; more ensanguine rite and deed
of deep stain be they; and what if god,
so to approve his justice, and exact
most even retribution, blood for blood,
bid forth the angel of the storm of death!

thou see, indeed, the seem innocence
of man the savage; but thou see not all.
behold the scene more near! hear the shrill whoop
of murderous war! see tribe on neighbour tribe
rush howl, their red hatchet wield high,
and shout to their barbarous god! behold
the captive bound, yet vaunt dire hate,
and mock his tormentor, while they gash
his flesh unshrinking, tear his eyeball, burn
his beat breast! hear the dark temple ring
to groan and hymn of murderous sacrifice;
while the stern priest, the rite of horror do,
with hollow-echoing chaunt lift up the heart
of the last victim 'amid the yell throng,
quiver, and red, and reek to the sun! 

reclaim by gradual intercourse, his heart
warm with new sympathy, the forest-chief
shall cast the bleed hatchet to his god
of darkness, and one lord of all adore —
maker of heaven and earth.
let it suffice,
he have permit evil for a while
to mingle its deep hue and sable shade
amid life fair perspective, as thou see
of late the blacken cloud; but in the end
all these shall roll away, and evening still
come smile, while the great sun look down
on the illumine scene. so charity
shall smile on all the earth, and nature god
look down upon his work; and while far off
the shriek night-fiend fly, one voice shall rise
from shore to shore, from isle to further isle —
glory to god on high, and on earth peace,
peace and goodwill to man!
thou rest in hope,
and he with meekness and with trust adore!

he say, and spread bright his ampler wing,
fly to the heaven of heaven; the meek man bow
adore, and, with pensive thought resign,
bend from the ache height his lonely way.

book the second.

oh for a view, as from that cloudless height
where the great patriarch gaze upon the world,
his offspring future seat, back on the vale
of year depart! we may then behold
Thebes, from her sleep of age, awful rise,
like a imperial shadow, from the Nile,
to airy harp; and with lift torch
scatter the darkness through the labyrinth
of death, where rest her king, without a name,
and light the wind cave and pyramid
in the long night of year! we may behold
Edom, in towery strength, majestic rise,
and awe the Erithræan, to the plain
where Migdol frown, and baal-zephon stand,
before who naval shrine the memphian host
and Pharaoh pomp be shatter! as her fleet
from Ezion go seaward, to the sound
of shout and brazen trumpet, we may say,
how glorious, Edom, in thy ship be thou,
and mighty as the rush wind!
but night
be on the mournful scene: a voice be hear,
as of the dead, from hollow sepulchre,
and echo cavern of the Nile — so pass
the shade of mortal glory! one pure ray
from Sinai burst (where god of old reveal
his glory, through the darkness terrible
that sit on the dread mount), and we descry
thy son, o Noah! people wide the scene,
from shinar plain to Egypt.
let the song
reveal, who first "go down to the great sea
in ship," and brave the stormy element.

the son of Cush. still fearful of the flood,
they on the marble range and cloudy height
of that vast mountain barrier, — which uprise
high over the red sea coast, and stretch on
with the sea-line of afric southern bound
to sofala, — delve in the granite mass
their dark abode, spread from rock to rock
their subterranean city, while they hear,
secure, the rain of vex Orion rush.
embolden they descend, and now their fane
on egypt champaign darken, while the noise
of caravan be hear, and pyramid
in the pale distance gleam. imperial Thebes
start, like a giant, from the dust; as when
some dread enchanter wave his wand, and tower
and palace far in the sandy wild
spring up: and still, her sphinx, huge and high,
her marble wreck colossal, seem to speak
the work of some great arm invisible,
surpass human strength; while toil time,
that sway his desolate scythe so vast,
and weary havoc murmur at his side,
smite they in vain. hear you the mystic song
resound from her cavern as of yore?
sing to Osiris, for his ark
no more in night profound
of ocean, fathomless and dark,
Typhon have sink! aloud the sistrum ring —
Osiris! — to our god Osiris sing! —
and let the midnight shore to rite of joy resound!
thou, great restorer of the world, the song
dark describe, and that mysterious shrine
that bear thou over the desolate abyss,
when the earth sink with all its noise!
so teach,
the borderer of the Erithræan launch
their bark, and to the shore of Araby
first their brief voyage stretch, and thence return
with aromatic gum, or spicy wealth
of India. proud triumph yet await,
for lo! where ophir gold unburied shine
new to the sun; but perilous the way,
over ariana spectre wilderness,
where even the patient camel scarce endure
the long, long solitude of rock and sand,
parch, faint, and sink, in his midday course.

but see! upon the shore great Ammon stand —
be the deep open! at his voice the deep
be open; and the shade ship that ride
with stately mast and ampler hull the sea,
have pass the strait, and leave the rock and gate
 of death. where asia cape the autumnal surge
throw blacken back, beneath a hollow cove,
awhile the mariner their fearful course
ponder, ere yet they tempt the further deep;
then plunge into the sullen main, they cast
the youthful victim, to the dismal god
devote, while the smoke of sacrifice
slow ascend:
hear, king of ocean! hear,
dark phantom! whether in thy secret cave
thou sit, where the deep be fathomless,
nor hear the water hum, though all above
be uproar loud; or on the wide waste,
far from all land, move in the noontide sun,
with dread and lonely shadow; or on high
do ride upon the whirl spire, and fume
of that enormous volume, that ascend
black to the sky, and with the thunder roar
burst, while the wave far on be still: oh, hear,
dread power, and save! lest hide eddy whirl
the helpless vessel down, — down to the deep
of night, where thou, o father of the storm,
do sleep; or thy vast stature may appear
high over the flash wave, and (as thy beard
stream to the cloudy wind) pass over their track,
and they be see no more; or monster-bird
darken, with pennon lank, the morn, may bear
the victim to some desert rock, and leave
their scatter bone to whiten in the wind! 

the ocean-god, with sacrifice appease,
propitious smile; the thunder roar have cease,
smooth and in silence over the azure realm
the tall ship glide along; for the southwest
cheerly and steady blow, and the blue sea
beneath the shadow sparkle; on they speed,
the long coast vary as they pass from cove
to shelter cove, the long coast wind away;
till now embolden by the unvary gale,
still urge to the east, the sailor deem
some god invite swell their will sail,
or destiny fleet dragon through the surge
cut their mid-way, yoke to the beak prow
unseen!
night after night the heaven' still cope,
that glow with star, they watch, till morning bear
air of sweet fragrance over the yellow tide:
then Malabar her green declivity
hang beauteous, beam to the eye afar
like scene of picture bliss, the shadowy land
of soft enchantment. now salmala peak
shine high in air, and ceylon dark green wood
beneath be spread; while, as the stranger wind
along the curving shore, sound of delight
be hear; and bird of rich plumage, red
and yellow, glance along the shade; or fly
with morning twitter, circle over the mast,
as sing welcome to the weary crew.
here rest, till wester gale again invite.
then over the line of level sea glide on,
as the green deity of ocean guide,
till ophir distant hill spring from the main,
and their long labour cease. 
hence Asia flow
her length unwind; and Siam and Ceylon
through wide channel pour their gem and gold
to swell the pomp of egypt king, or deck
with new magnificence the rise dome
of palestine imperial lord.
his want
to satisfy; "with comely drapery"
to clothe his shiver form; to bid his arm
burst, like the patagonian, the vain cord
that bind his untried strength; to nurse the flame
of wide heart-ennobling sympathy; —
for this young commerce rouse the energy
of man; else roll back, stagnant and foul,
like the great element on which his ship
go forth, without the current, wind, and tide
that swell it, as with awful life, and keep
from rank putrescence the long-moving mass:
and he, the sovereign maker of the world,
so to excite man high activity,
bad various clime their various produce pour.
on asia plain mark where the cotton-tree
hang elegant its golden gem; the date
sit purple the soft lucid haze, that light
the still, pale, sultry landscape; breathe sweet
along old ocean billowy marge, the eve
bear spicy fragrance far; the bread-fruit shade
the southern isle; and gem, and rich over,
lurk in the caverned mountain of the west.
with ampler shade the northern oak uplift
his strength, itself a forest, and descend
proud to the world of wave, to bear afar
the wealth collect, on the swell tide,
to every land: — where nature seem to mourn
her rugged outcast rock, there enterprise
leap up; he gaze, like a god, around;
he see on other plain rich harvest wave;
he mark far off the diamond blaze; he burn
to reach the glitter prize; he look; he speak;
the pine of Lebanon fall at his voice;
he rear the tower mast: over the long main
he wander, and become, himself though poor,
the sovereign of the globe!
so Sidon rise;
and tyre, yet proud over the subject wave, —
when in his manly might the ammonian spread
beyond philistia to the syrian sand, —
crown on her rocky citadel, behold
the treasure of all land pour at her foot.
her dare prow the inland main disclose;
freedom and glory, eloquence, and art,
follow their track, upspring where they pass;
till, lo! another Thebes, a Athens spring,
from the Ægean shore, and air be hear,
as of no mortal melody, from isle
that strew the deep around! on to the strait
where tower the brazen pillar to the cloud,
her vessel ride. but what a shiver dread
quell their bold hope, when on their watch by night
the mariner first see the distant flame
of Ætna, and its red portentous glare
streak the midnight waste! it be not thy lamp,
Astarte, hang in the dun vault of night,
to guide the wanderer of the main! aghast
they eye the fiery cope, and wait the dawn. 
huge pitchy cloud upshoot, and burst fire
flash through the horrid volume as it mount;
voice be hear, and thunder mutter deep.
haste, snatch the oar, fly over the glimmer surge —
fly far — already loud thunder roll,
and more terrific flame arise! oh, spare,
dread power! for sure some deity abide
deep in the central earth, amid the reek
of sacrifice and blue sulphureous fume
involve. perhaps the live Moloch there
rule in his horrid empire, amid flame,
thunder, and blacken volume, that ascend
and wrap his burn throne!
so be their path,
to those who first the cheerless ocean roam,
darken with dread and peril. Scylla here,
and fall Charybdis, on their whirl gulph
sit, like the sister of despair, and howl,
as the devote ship, dash on the crag,
go down: and oft the neighbour shore be strew
with bone of stranger sacrifice, who bark
have founder nigh, where the red watch-tower glare
through darkness. hence mysterious dread, and tale
of Polyphemus and his monstrous rout;
and warble siren on the fatal shore
of soft Parthenope. yet oft the sound
of sea-conch through the night from some rude rock
be hear, to warn the wander passenger
of fiend that lurk for blood!
these danger past,
the sea put on new beauty: Italy,
beneath the blue soft sky beam afar,
open her azure bay; liguria gulph
be past; the bætic rock, and rampart high,
that close the world, appear. the dash bark
burst through the fearful frith: ah! all be now
one boundless billowy waste; the huge-heaved wave
beneath the keel turn more intense blue;
and vaster roll the surge, that sweep the shore
of Cerne, and the green Hesperides,
and long-renowned Atlantis, whether sink
now to the bottom of the "monstrous world;"
or be it but a shadow of the mind,
vapoury and baseless, like the distant cloud
that seem the promise of a unknown land
to the pale-eyed and waste mariner,
cold on the rock mast. the pilot ply,
now toss upon bayonna's mountain-surge,
high to the north his way; when, lo! the cliff
of Albion, over the sea-line rise calm
and white, and marazion woody mount
lift its dark romantic point between.

so do thy ship to earth wide bound proceed,
o tyre! and thou be rich and beautiful
in that thy day of glory. Carthage rise,
thy daughter, and the rival of thy fame,
upon the sand of lybia; prince be
thy merchant; on thy golden throne thy state
shine, like the orient sun. dark Lebanon
wave all his pine for thou; for thou the oak
of Bashan tower in strength: thy galley cut,
glitter, the sunny surge; thy mariner,
on ivory bench, furl the embroider sail,
that loom of Egypt weave, or to the oar,
that measure dip, their choral sea-song sing;
the multitude of isle do shout for thou,
and cast their emerald at thy foot, and say —
queen of the water, who be like to thou!

so be thou glorious on the sea, and say,
i be a god, and there be none like i.
but the dread voice prophetic be go forth: —
howl, for the whirlwind of the desert come!
howl you again, for tyre, her multitude
of sin and dark abomination cry
against she, say the lord; in the mid sea
her beauty shall be break; i will bring
her pride to ash; she shall be no more,
the distant isle shall tremble at the sound
when thou do fall; the prince of the sea
shall from their throne come down, and cast away
their gorgeous robe; for thou they shall take up
a bitter lamentation, and shall say —
how be thou fall, renown city! thou,
who be enthrone glorious on the sea,
to rise no more!
so visible, o god,
be thy dread hand in all the earth! where tyre
in gold and purple glitter over the scene,
now the poor fisher dry his net, nor think
how great, how rich, how glorious, once she rise!
meantime the further isle, cold and obscure,
who paint native roam their woody wild,
from all the world cut off, that wonder mark
her stately sail approach, now in her turn
rise a star of glory in the west —
Albion, the wonder of the illumine world!
see there a Newton wing the high heaven;
see there a herschell dare hand withdraw
the luminous pavilion, and the throne
of the bright sun reveal; there hear the voice
of holy truth amid her cloister fane,
as the clear anthem swell; see taste adorn
her palace; and painting fervid touch,
that bid the canvas breathe; hear angel-strain,
when Handel, or melodious Purcell, pour
his sweet harmony; see poesy
open her vale romantic, and the scene
where fancy, a enrapture votary, rove
at eve; and hark! it be Shakspeare voice! he sit
upon a high and charm rock alone,
and, like the genius of the mountain, give
the rapt song to the wind; while pity weep,
or terror shudder at the changeful tone,
as when his Ariel soothe the storm! then pause,
for the wild billow answer — Lycidas
be dead, young Lycidas, dead ere his prime,
whelm in the deep, beyond the Orcades,
or where the "vision of the guard mount,
 Belerus hold."
nor sky, nor earth, confine
the march of England glory; on she speed —
the unknown barrier of the utmost deep
her prow have burst, where the dread genius sleep
for age undisturbed, save when he walk
amid the darkness of the storm! her fleet
even now along the east ride terrible,
where early-rising commerce cheer the scene!
hear you the thunder of her vengeance roll,
as Nelson, through the battle dark-red haze
aloft upon the burn prow direct,
where the dread hurricane, with sulphureous flash,
shall burst unquenchable, while from the grave
Osiris ampler seem to rise? where thou,
o tyre! do awe the subject sea of yore,
acre even now, and ancient Carmel, hear
the cry of conquest.  'amid the fire and smoke
of the war-shaken citadel, with eye
of tempere flame, yet resolute command,
his brave sword beam, and his cheer voice
hear 'amid the onset cry, his dark-brown hair
spread on his fearless forehead, and his hand
point to gallia baffle chief, behold
the british hero stand! why beat my heart
with kindred animation? the warm tear
of patriot triumph fill my eye. i strike
a loud strain unconscious, while the harp
swell to the bold involuntary song.

i 

fly, son of terror, fly!
back over the burn desert he be flee!
in heap the gory dead
and livid in the trench lie!
his dazzle file no more
flash on the syrian sand,
as when from egypt ravage shore,
aloft their gleamy falchion swing,
aloud their victor pæan sing,
their onward way the Gallic legion take.
despair, dismay, be on his alter look,
yet hate indignant lower;
while high on acre granite tower
the shade of english Richard seem to stand;
and frown far, in dusky row,
a thousand archer draw their bow!
they join the triumph of the british band,
and the rend watch-tower echo to the cry,
hear over the roll surge — they fly, they fly!

ii.

now the hostile fire decline,
now through the smoke deep volume shine;
now above the bastion grey
the cloud of battle roll away;
where, with calm, yet glow mien,
britain victorious youth be see!
he lift his eye,
his country ensign wave through smoke on high,
while the long-mingled shout be hear — they fly, they fly!

iii.

hoary Carmel, witness thou,
and lift in conscious pride thy brow;
as when upon thy cloudy plain
 baal prophet cry in vain!
they gash their flesh, and leap, and cry,
from morn till linger even-tide.
then stern Elijah on his foe
strong in the might of heaven arise! —
on carmel top he stand,
and while the blacken cloud and rain
come sound from the western main,
raise his right hand that drop with impious blood.
ancient Kishon proud swell,
on who bank they bow, they fall,
the mighty one of yore, when, pale with dread,
inglorious Sisera flee!
so let they perish, holy lord,
who for oppression lift the sword;
but let all those who, arm for freedom, fight,
"be as the sun who go forth in his might."

book the third.

my heart have sigh in secret, when i think
that the dark tide of time may one day close,
England, over thou, as long since it have close
on Egypt and on tyre: that age hence,
from the pacific billowy loneliness,
who tract thy dare search reveal, some isle
may rise in green-haired beauty eminent,
and like a goddess, glitter from the deep,
hereafter sway the sceptre of domain
from pole to pole; and such as now thou be,
perhaps new-holland be. for who shall say
what the omnipotent eternal one,
that make the world, have purpose! thought like these,
though visionary, rise; and sometime move
a moment sadness, when i think of thou,
my country, of thy greatness, and thy name,
among the nation; and thy character, —
though some few spot be on thy flow robe, —
of lovely beauty: i have never pass
through thy green hamlet on a summer morn,
nor hear thy sweet bell ring, nor see the youth
and smile maiden of thy village,
gay in their Sunday tire, but i have say,
with pass tenderness — live, happy land,
where the poor peasant feel his shed, though small,
a independence and a pride, that fill
his honest heart with joy — joy such as they
who crowd the mart of man may never feel!
such, England, be thy boast. when i have hear
the roar of ocean burst 'round thy rock,
or see a thousand throng mast aspire,
far as the eye can reach, from every port
of every nation, stream with their flag
over the still mirror of the conscious Thames, —
yes, i have feel a proud emotion swell
that i be british-born; that i have live
a witness of thy glory, my most love
and honour country; and a silent prayer
will rise to heaven, that fame and peace, and love
and liberty, may walk thy vale, and sing
their holy hymn, while thy brave arm repel
hostility, even as thy guardian cliff
repel the dash of that dread element
which call i, linger on the bank of Thames,
on to my destine voyage, by the shore
of Asia, and the wreck of city old,
ere yet we burst into the wild deep
with Gama; or the huge atlantic waste
with bold Columbus stem; or view the bound
of field-ice, stretch to the southern pole,
with thou, benevolent, lament cook!
tyre be no more! say the almighty voice:
but thou too, monarch of the world, who arm
rend the proud bulwark of the golden queen
of city, throne upon her subject sea,
 be thou too fall?
the whole earth be at rest:
"they break forth into sing:" Lebanon
wave all his hoary pine, and seem to say,
no fellow now come here; hell from beneath
be move to meet thy come; it stir up
the dead for thou; the chief one of the earth,
tyre and the nation, they all speak and say —
be thou become like we! thy pomp bring down
even to the dust! the noise of viol cease,
the worm spread under thou, the crawl worm
to cover thou! how be thou fall from heaven,
son of the morning! in thy heart thou say,
i will ascend to heaven; i will exalt
my throne above the star of god! die — die,
blasphemer! as a carcase under foot,
defile and tread, so be thou cast out!
and she, the great, the guilty Babel — she
who smite the waste city, and the world
make as a wilderness — she, in her turn,
sink to the gulf oblivious at the voice
of he who sit in judgement on her crime!
who, over her palace and bury tower,
shall bid the owl hoot, and the bittern scream;
and on her pensile grove and pleasant shade
pour the deep water of forgetfulness.

on that same night, when with a cry she fall,
(like she own mighty idol dash to earth,)
there be a strange eclipse, and long lament
be hear, and mutter thunder over the tower
of the high palace where his wassail loud
Belshazzar keep, mock the god of heaven,
and flush with impious mirth; for bel have leave
with sullen shriek his golden shrine, and sit,
with many a gloomy apparition gird,
 Nisroch and Nebo chief, in the dim sphere
of mooned Astoreth, who orb now roll
in darkness: — they their earthly empire mourn;
meantime the host of Cyrus through the night
silent advance more nigh; and at that hour,
in the torch-blazing hall of revelry,
the finger of a shadowy hand distinct
come forth, and unknown figure mark the wall,
Searing the eye-ball of the start king:
tyre be avenge; Babel be fall, be fall!
bel and her god be shatter!
prince, to thou
call by the voice of god to execute
his will on earth, and raise to persia throne,
 Cyrus, all heart pay homage. touch with tint
most clear by the historian magic art,
thy feature wear a gentleness and grace
unlike the stern cold aspect and the frown
of the dark chief of yore, the gloomy clan
of hero, from humanity and love
remove: to thou a bright character
belong — high dignity, unbending truth —
yet nature; not that lordly apathy
which confidence and human sympathy
repress, but a soul that bid all heart
smile approach. we almost burn in thought
to kiss the hand that loose panthea chain,
and bless he with a parent, husband tear,
who stand a guardian angel in distress
to the unfriended, and the beautiful,
consign a helpless slave. thy portrait, touch
with tint of soft light, thus win all heart
to love thou; but severe policy,
Cyrus, pronounce otherwise: she hear
no stir of commerce on the sullen marge
of water that along thy empire verge
beat cheerless; no proud mole arise; no ship,
freight with indian wealth, glide over the main
from cape to cape. but on the desert sand
hurtle thy numerous host, seize, in thought
rapacious, the rich field of Hindostan,
as the poor savage fell the bloom tree
to gain its tempt fruit; but woe the while!
for in the wilderness the noise be lose
of all thy archer; — they have cease; — the wind
blow over they, and the voice of judgement cry:
so perish they who grasp with avarice
another bless portion, and disdain
that interchange of mutual good, that crown
the slow, sure toil of commerce.
it be thy,
immortal son of Macedon! to hang
in the high fane of maritime renown
the fair trophy of thy fame, and shine,
 then only like a god, when thy great mind
sway in its master council the deep tide
of thing, predestine the eventful roll
of commerce, and unite either world,
Europe and Asia, in thy vast design.

it be when the victor, in his proud career,
over ravage Hindostan, have now advance
beyond Hydaspes; on the flowery bank
of Hyphasis, with banner throng, his camp
be spread. on high he bid the altar rise,
the awful record to succeed year
of his long march of glory, and to point
the spot where, like the thunder roll away,
his army pause. now shady eve come down;
the trumpet sound to the set sun,
that look from his illume pavilion, calm
upon the scene of arm, as if, all still,
and lovely as his part light, the world
beneath he spread; nor clangour, nor deep groan,
be hear, nor victory shout, nor sigh, nor shriek,
be ever waft from a bleed land,
after the havoc of a conqueror sword.
so calm the sun decline; when from the wood,
that shine to his last beam, a brahmin old
come forth. his stream beard shine in the ray,
that slant over his feeble frame; his front
be furrow. to the sun last light he cast
a look of sorrow, then in silence bow
before the conqueror of the world. at once
all, as in death, be still. the victor chief
tremble, he know not why; the trumpet cease
its clangor, and the crimson streamer wave
no more in fold insult to the lord
of the repose world. the pallid front
of the meek man seem for a moment calm,
yet dark and throng thought appear to swell
his beat heart. he pause — and then abrupt:

victor, avaunt! he cry,
hence! and the banner of thy pride
bear to the deep! behold on high
yond range of mountain mingle with the sky!
it be the place
where the great father of the human race
rest, when all the world and all its sound
cease; and the ocean that surround
the earth, leap from its dark abode
beneath the mountain, and enormous flow,
the green earth deluge! list, soldier, list!
and dread his might no mortal may resist.

great Bramah rest, hush in sleep,
when Hayagraiva come,
with mooned horn and eye of flame,
and bear the holy Vedas to the deep.
far from the sun rejoice ray,
beneath the huge abyss, the bury treasure lay.
then foam the billowy desert wide,
and all that breathe — they die,
sink in the roll water: such the crime
and violence of earth. but he above,
great Vishnu, move with pity love,
preserve the pious king, who ark sublime
float, in safety bear:
for his stupendous horn,
blaze like gold, and many a rood
extend over the dismal flood,
the precious freight sustain, till on the crest
of Himakeel, yond mountain high,
that dark mingle with the sky,
where many a griffin roam, the hallow ark find rest.
and heaven decree that here
shall cease thy slaughter spear:
enough we bleed, enough we weep,
hence, victor, to the deep!
even now along the tide
i see thy ship triumphant ride:
i see the world of trade emerge
from ocean solitude! what fury fire
my breast! the flood, the flood retire,
and own its future sovereign! urge
thy destine way; what countless pennant stream!
(or be it but the shadow of a dream?) 

even now old Indus hail
thy dare prow in long array,
that over the lone sea glide,
around the sea-god ride,
speed to Euphrates' shore their destine way.
fill high the bowl of mirth!
from west to east the earth
proclaim thou lord; shall the blue main
confine thy reign?
but tremble, tyrant; hark in many a ring,
with language dread
above thy head,
the dark assoor thy death-song sing.
what mortal blow
have lay the king of nation low?
no hand: his own despair. —
but shout, for the canvas shall swell to the air,
thy ship explore
unknown persia wind shore,
while the great dragon roll his arm in vain.
and see, uprise from the level main,
a new and glorious city spring; —
hither speed thy weave wing,
that glance along the azure tide;
Asia and Europe own thy might; —
the will sea of either world unite:
thy name shall consecrate the sand,
and glitter to the sky the mart of nation stand.

he speak, and rush into the thick wood.
with flash eye the impatient monarch cry —
yes, by the lybian Ammon and the god
of Greece, thou bid i on, the self-same track
my spirit point; and, let death betide,
my name shall live in glory!
at his word
the pine descend; the throng mast aspire;
the novel sail swell beauteous over the curve
of Indus; to the moderator' song
the oar keep time, while bold Nearchus guide
aloft the galley. on the foremost prow
the monarch from his golden goblet pour
a full libation to the god, and call
by name the mighty river, through who course
he seek the sea. to lybian Ammon loud
the song ascend; the trumpet bray; aloft
the streamer fly, while on the evening wave
majestic to the main the fleet descend.

book the four.

stand on the gleam Pharos, and aloud
shout, commerce, to the kingdom of the earth;
shout, for thy golden portal be set wide,
and all thy streamer over the surge, aloft,
in pomp triumphant wave. the weary way
that pale Nearchus pass, from creek to creek
advance slow, no long bound the track
of the adventurous mariner, who steer
steady, with eye intent upon the star,
to elam echo port. meantime, more high
aspire, over the western main her tower
the imperial city lift, the central mart
of nation, and beneath the calm clear sky,
at distance from the palmy marge, display
her cluster column, whiten to the morn.

Damascus' fleece, golconda gem, be there.
murmur the haven with one ceaseless hum;
the hurry camel bell, the driver song,
along the sand resound. tyre, be thou fall?
a proud city crown the inland sea,
raise by his hand who smite thou; as if thus
his mighty mind be sway to recompense
the evil of his march through city storm,
and region wet with blood! and still have flow
the tide of commerce through the destine track,
trace by his mind sagacious, who survey
the world he conquer with a sage eye,
as with a soldier spirit; but a scene
more awful open: ancient world, adieu!
adieu, cloud-piercing pillar, erst its bound;
and thou, who age head once seem to prop
the heaven, huge Atlas, sink fast, adieu!
what though the sea with wild fury rave,
through their desert realm; though the dread cape,
sole-frowning over the war of wave below,
that bar the seaman search, horrid in air
appear with giant amplitude; his head
shroud in cloud, the tempest at his foot,
and stand thus terrific, seem to say,
incense — approach who dare! what though the fear
of superstition people the vex space
with spirit unblessed, that lamentation make
to the sad surge beyond — yet enterprise,
not now a darkling cyclop on the sand
stride, but lead by science, and advance
to a more awful height, on the wide scene
look down command.
do a shudder thought
of danger start, as the tumultuous sea
toss below! calm science, with a smile,
display the wondrous index, that still point,
with nice vibration tremulous, to the pole.
and such, she whisper, be the just man hope
in this tempestuous scene of human thing;
even as the constant needle to the north
still point; so piety and meek-eyed faith
direct, though tremble oft, their constant gaze
heavenward, as to their last home, nor fear
the night, fast close on their earthly way.

and guide by this index, thou shall pass
the world of sea secure. far from all land,
where not a sea-bird wander; where nor star,
nor moon appear, nor the bright noonday sun,
safe in the wilder storm, as when the breeze
of summer gentle blow; through day, through night,
where sink the wellknown star, and other rise
slow from the south, the victor bark shall ride.

Henry! thy ardent mind first pierce the gloom
of dark disastrous ignorance, that sit
upon the southern wave, like the deep cloud
that lower upon the woody skirt, and veil
from mortal search, with umbrage ominous,
madeira unknown isle. but look! the morn
be kindle on the shadowy offing; streak
of clear cold light on Sagres' battlement
be cast, where Henry watch, listen still
to the unwearied surge; and turn still
his anxious eye to the horizon bound.
a sail appear; it swell, it shine: more high
see through the dusk it loom; and now the hull
be black upon the surge, while she roll on
aloft — the weatherbeaten ship — and now
stream by the watch-tower!
Zarco, from the deep
what tiding?
the loud storm of night prevail,
and sweep our vessel from bojador rock
far out to sea; a sylvan isle receive
our sail; so will the almighty — he who speak,
and all the wave be still!
hail, Henry cry,
the omen: we have burst the sole barrier,
(prosper our wish, father of the world!)
we speed to Asia.
soon upon the deep
the brave ship speed again. bojador rock
arise at distance, frown over the surf,
that boil for many a league without. its course
the ship hold on; till lo! the beauteous isle,
that shield late the sufferer from the storm,
spring over the wave again. here they refresh
their waste strength, and lift their vow to heaven,
but heaven deny their further search; for ah!
what fearful apparition, pall in cloud,
for ever sit upon the western wave,
like night, and in its strange portentous gloom
wrap the lonely water, seem the bound
of nature? still it sit, day after day,
the same mysterious vision. holy saint!
be it the dread abyss where all thing cease?
or haply hide from mortal search, thy isle,
cipango, and that unapproached seat
of peace, where rest the christian who the hate
of moorish pride pursue? whatever it be,
Zarco, thy holy courage bid thou on
to burst the gloom, though dragon guard the shore,
or being more than mortal pace the sand.

the favour gale invite; the bowsprit bear
right onward to the fearful shade; more black
the cloudy spectre tower; already fear
shrink at the view aghast and breathless. hark!
it be more than the deep murmur of the surge
that strike the ear; while through the lurid gloom
gigantic phantom seem to lift in air
their misty arm; yet, yet — bear bold on —
the mist dissolve; — see through the part haze,
romantic rock, like the depicture cloud,
shine out; beneath a bloom wilderness
of vary wood be spread, that scent the air;
where fruit of "golden rind," thick intersperse
and pendent, through the mantling umbrage gleam
invite. Cypress here, and stately pine,
spire over the nether shade, as emulous
of sole distinction where all nature smile.
some tree, in sunny glade alone their head
and graceful stem uplift, mark below
the turf with shadow; while in rich festoon
the flowery liane braid their bough; meantime
choirs of innumerous bird of lively song
and bright plumage, flit through the shade,
with nimble glance be see; they, unalarmed,
now near in airy circle sing, then speed
their random flight back to their shelter bower,
who silence, break only by their song,
from the foundation of this busy world,
perhaps have never echo to the voice,
or hear the step, of man. what rapture fire
the stranger' bosom, as from glade to glade
they pass, admire all, and gaze still
with new delight! it be solitude around;
deep solitude, that on the gloom of wood
primæval fearful hang: a green recess
now open in the wilderness; gay flower
of unknown name purple the yield sward;
the ringdove murmur over their head, like one
attest tender joy; but mark the tree,
where, slant through the gloom, the sunshine rest!
beneath, a moss-grown monument appear,
over which the green banana gentle wave
its long leaf; and a age cypress near
lean, as if listen to the streamlet sound,
that gush from the adverse bank; but pause —
approach with reverence! maker of the world,
there be a christian cross! and on the stone
a name, yet legible amid its moss, —
Anna!
in that remote, sequester spot,
shut as it seem from all the world, and lose
in boundless sea, to trace a name, to mark
the emblem of their holy faith, from all
draw tear; while every voice faint pronounce,
Anna! but thou, love harp! who string have ring
to loud tone, oh! let my hand, awhile,
the wire more soft touch, while i rehearse
her name and fate, who in this desert deep,
far from the world, from friend, and kindred, find
her long and last abode; there where no eye
may shed a tear on her remains; no heart
sigh in remembrance of her fate: —
she leave
the severn side, and flee with he she love
over the wide main; for he have tell her tale
of happiness in distant land, where care
come not; and point to the golden cloud
that shine above the wave, when evening come,
whisper — oh, be there not sweet scene of peace,
far from the murmur of this cloudy mart, —
where gold alone bear sway, — scene of delight,
where love may lay his head upon the lap
of innocence, and smile at all the toil
of the low-thoughted throng, that place in wealth
their only bliss! yes, there be scene like these.
leave the vain chide of the world behind,
country, and hollow friend, and fly with i
where love and peace in distant vale invite.
what will thou here! oh, shall thy beauteous look
of maiden innocence, thy smile of youth, thy eye
of tenderness and soft subdue desire,
thy form, thy limb — oh, madness! — by the prey
of a decrepit spoiler, and for gold? —
perish his treasure with he. haste with i;
we shall find out some sylvan nook, and then,
if thou shall sometime think upon these hill,
when they be distant far, and drop a tear,
yes — i will kiss it from thy cheek, and clasp
thy angel beauty close to my breast;
and while the wind blow over we, and the sun
sink beautiful down, and thy soft cheek
recline on i, i will enfold thou thus,
and proud cry, my friend — my love — my wife!

so tempt he, and soon her heart approve,
nay woo, the blissful dream; and oft at eve,
when the moon shine upon the wander stream,
she pace the castle battlement, that throw
beneath their solemn shadow, and, resign
to fancy and to tear, think it most sweet
to wander over the world with he she love.
nor be his birth ignoble, for he shine
'amid England gallant youth in Edward reign:
with countenance erect, and honest eye
command (yet suffuse in tenderness
at time), and smile that like the lightning play
on his brown cheek, — so gentle stern he stand,
accomplish, generous, gentle, brave, sincere, —
ROBERT a Machin. but the sullen pride
of haughty d'arfet scorn all other claim
to his high heritage, save what the pomp
of ample wealth and lofty lineage give.
reckless of human tenderness, that seek
one love, one honour object, wealth alone
he worship; and for this he can consign
his only child, his age hope, to loathe
embrace, and a life of tear! nor here
his hard ambition end; for he seek,
by secret whisper of conspiracy,
his sovereign to abuse, bid he lift
his arm avenge, and upon a youth
of promise close the dark forget gate
of live sepulture, and in the gloom
inhume the slowly-wasting victim. 
so
he purpose, but in vain; the ardent youth
rescue she — her who more than life he love,
even when the horrid day of sacrifice
draw nigh. he point to the distant bark,
and while he kiss a steal tear that fall
on her pale cheek, as trust she recline
her head upon his breast, with ardour cry —
be i, be only mine! the hour invite;
be my, be only mine! so win, she cast
a look of last affection on the tower
where she have pass her infant day, that now
shine to the set sun. i follow thou,
her faint voice say; and lo! where in the air
a sail hang tremulous, and soon her foot
ascend the vessel side: the vessel glide
down the smooth current, as the twilight fade,
till soon the wood of Severn, and the spot
where d'arfet solitary turret rise,
be lose; a tear start to her eye, she think
of he who grey head to the earth shall bend,
when he speak nothing — but by all, like death,
forget. gentle blow the placid breeze,
and oh! that now some fairy pinnace light
may flit across the wave (by no see power
direct, save when love upon the prow
gather or spread with tender hand the sail),
that now some fairy pinnace, over the surge
silent, as in a summer dream, may waft
the passenger upon the conscious flood
to region bright of undisturbed joy!
but hark!
the wind be in the shroud; — the cordage sing
with fitful violence; — the blast now swell,
now sink. dread gloom invest the further wave,
who foam toss alone be see, beneath
the veer bowsprit.
oh, retire to rest,
maiden, who tender heart will beat, who cheek
turn pale to see another thus expose!
hark! the deep thunder loud peal — oh, save! —
the high mast crash; but the faithful arm
of love be over thou, and thy anxious eye,
soon as the grey of morning peep, shall view
green erin hill aspire!
the sad morn
come forth; but terror on the sunless wave
still, like a sea-fiend, sit, and dark smile
beneath the flash that through the struggle cloud
burst frequent, half reveal his scathe front,
above the rock of the waste that roll
boundless around.
no word through the long day
she speak; — another slow come; — no word
the beauteous droop mourner speak. the sun
twelve time have sink beneath the sullen surge,
and cheerless rose again: — ah, where be now
thy haven, France! but yet — resign not yet —
you lose seafarer — oh, resign not yet
all hope — the storm be pass; the drench sail
shine in the pass beam! look up, and say —
heaven, thou have hear our prayer!
and lo! scarce see,
a distant dusky spot appear; — they reach
a unknown shore, and green and flowery vale,
and azure hill, and silver-gushing stream,
shine forth; a paradise, which heaven alone,
who see the silent anguish of despair,
can raise in the waste wilderness of wave.
they gain the haven; through untrodden scene,
perhaps untrodden by the foot of man
since first the earth arise, they wind. the voice
of nature hail they here with music, sweet,
as wave wood retire, or fall stream,
can make; most soothe to the weary heart,
double to those who, struggle with their fate,
and weary long with watch and with grief,
seek but a place of safety. all thing here
whisper repose and peace; the very bird
that 'amid the golden fruitage glance their plume,
the songster of the lonely valley, sing —
welcome from scene of sorrow, live with we.

the wild wood open, and a shady glen
appear, embower with mantl laurel high,
that slope shade the flowery valley side;
a lucid stream, with gentle murmur, stray
beneath the umbrageous multitude of leaf,
till gain, with soft lapse, the nether plain,
it glance light along its yellow bed; —
the shaggy inmate of the forest lick
the foot of their new guest, and gaze stand.
a beauteous tree upshoot amid the glade
its tremble top; and there upon the bank
they rest they, while each heart overflow with joy.

now evening, breathe rich odour sweet,
come down: a soft sound the circle sea,
the ancient wood resound, while the dove,
her murmur interpose, tenderness
awake, yet more endear, in the heart
of those who, sever wide from human kind,
woman and man, by vow sincere betroth,
hear but the voice of nature. the still moon
arise — they see it not — cheek be to cheek
incline, and unaware a steal tear
witness how blissful be that hour, that seem
not of the hour that time can count. a kiss
steal on the listen silence; never till now
here hear; they tremble, even as if the power
that make the world, that plant the first pair
in paradise, amid the garden walk: —
this since the fair garden that the world
have witness, by the fable son of Greece
hesperian name, who feign the watchful guard
of the scale dragon, and the golden fruit.
such be this sylvan paradise; and here
the lovely pair, from a hard world remote,
upon each other neck recline; their breath
alone be hear, when the dove cease on high
her plaint; and tender their faithful arm
enfold each the other.
thou, dim cloud,
that from the search of man these beauteous vale
have close, oh, double veil they! but alas,
how short the dream of human transport! here,
in vain they build the leafy bower of love,
or cull the sweet flower and fair fruit.
the hour unheeded stole! but ah, not long —
again the hollow tempest of the night
sound through the leaf; the inmost wood resound;
slow come the dawn, but neither ship nor sail
along the rock of the windy waste
be see: the dash of the dark-heaving wave
alone be hear. start from your bed of bliss,
poor victim! never more shall you behold
your native vale again; and thou, sweet child!
who, listen to the voice of love, have leave
thy friend, thy country, — oh, may the wan hue
of pine memory, the sink cheek, the eye
where tenderness yet dwell, atone (if love
atonement need, by cruelty and wrong
beset), atone even now thy rash resolve!
ah, fruitless hope! day after day, thy bloom
fade, and the tender lustre of thy eye
be dim: thy form, amid creation, seem
the only droop thing.
thy look be soft,
and yet most animate, and thy step
light as the roe upon the mountain. now,
thou sit hopeless, pale, beneath the tree
that fan its joyous leaf above thy head,
where love have deck the bloom bower, and strew
the sweet of summer: death be on thy cheek,
and thy chill hand the pressure scarce return
of he, who, agonise and hopeless, hang
with tear and tremble over thou. spare the sight, —
she faint — she die! —
he lay she in the earth,
himself scarce live, and upon her tomb
beneath the beauteous tree where they recline,
place the last tribute of his earthly love.

inscription for the grave of ANNA d'arfet.

over my poor anna lowly grave
no dirge shall sound, no knell shall ring;
but angel, as the high pine wave,
their half-heard "miserere" sing.

no flower of transient bloom at eve
the maiden on the turf shall strew;
nor sigh, as the sad spot they leave,
sweet to the sweet! a long adieu!

but in this wilderness profound,
over she the dove shall build her nest;
and ocean swell with soft sound
a requiem to her dream of rest!

ah! when shall i as quiet be,
when not a friend, or human eye,
shall mark beneath the mossy tree
the spot where we forget lie!

to kiss her name on the cold stone,
be all that now on earth i crave;
for in this world i be alone —
oh, lay i with she in the grave!

he place the rude inscription on her stone,
which he with falter hand have grave, and soon
himself beside it sink — yet ere he die,
faint he speak: if ever you shall hear,
companion of my few and evil day,
again the convent vesper bell, oh! think
of i; and if in aftertime the search
of man shall reach this far remove spot,
let sad remembrance raise a humble shrine,
and virgin choirs chant due over our grave:
peace, peace! his arm upon the mournful stone
he drop; his eye, ere yet in death they close,
turn to the name, till he can see no more
 Anna. his pale survivor, earth to earth,
weep consign his poor remains, and place
beneath the sod where all he love be lay.
then shape a rude vessel from the wood,
they seek their country over the wave, and leave
those scene once more to deep solitude.
the beauteous ponciana hang its head
over the grey stone; but never human eye
have mark the spot, or gaze upon the grave
of the unfortunate, but for the voice
of enterprise, that speak, from sagre tower,
through ocean peril, storm, and unknown waste —
Speed we to Asia!
here, discovery, pause! —
then from the tomb of he who first be cast
upon this heaven-appointed isle, thy gaze
uplift, and far beyond the cape of storm
pursue de gama tract. Mark the rich shore
of Madagascar, till the purple east
shine in luxuriant beauty wide disclose.
but cease thy song, presumptuous Muse! — a bard,
in tone who patriot sound shall never die,
have strike his deep shell, and the glorious theme
record.
say, what lofty meed await
the triumph of his victor conch, that swell
its music on the yellow Tagus' side,
as when Arion, with his glitter harp
and golden hair, scarce sully from the main,
bid all the high rock listen to his voice
again! alas, i see a age form,
a old man wear by penury, his hair
blow white upon his haggard cheek, his hand
emaciate, yet the string with thrill touch
solicit; but the vain crowd pass by:
his very countryman, who fame his song
have raise to heaven, in stately apathy
wrap up, and nurse in pride fastidious lap,
regard not. as he play, a sable man
look up, but fear to speak, and when the song
have cease, kiss his master feeble hand.
be that cold waste hand, that haggard look,
thy, camoens? oh, shame upon the world!
and be there none, none to sustain thou find,
but he, himself unfriended, who so far
have follow, sever from his native isle,
to scene of gorgeous city, over the sea,
thou and thy break fortune!
god of world!
oh, while i hail the triumph and high boast
of social life, let i not wrong the sense
of kindness, plant in the human heart
by man great maker, therefore i record
antonio faithful, gentle, generous love
to his heartbroken master, that may teach,
high as it bear itself, a polish world
more charity.
discovery, turn thy eye!
Columbus' toil ship be on the deep,
stem the mid atlantic.
waste and wild
the view! on the same sunshine over the wave
the murmur mariner, with languid eye,
even till the heart be sick, gaze day by day!
at midnight in the wind sad voice sound!
when the slow morning over the offing dawn,
heartless they view the same drear welter waste
of sea: and when the sun again go down
silent, hope die within they, and they think
of part friendship last despair look!

see too, dread prodigy, the needle veer
her tremble point — will heaven forsake they too!
but lift thy sink eye, and thy bloodless look,
despondence! mild air at morning breathe: —
below the slowly-parting prow the sea
be dark with weed; and bird of land be see
to wing the desert tract, as haste on
to the green valley of their distant home.
yet morn succeed to morn — and nought around
be see, but dark weed float many a league,
the sun be sole orb, and the pale hollowness
of heaven high arch streak with the early cloud.
watchman, what from the giddy mast?
a shade
appear on the horizon hazy line.
land! land! aloud be echo; but the spot
fade as the shout crew delight gaze —
it fade, and there be nothing — nothing now
but the blue sky, the cloud, and surge sea!

as one who, in the desert, faint with thirst,
upon the trackless and forsake sand
sink die; he the burn haze deceive,
as mock his last torment, while it seem,
to his distemper vision, like the expanse
of lucid water cool: so false smile
the illusive land upon the water edge,
to the long-straining eye show what seem
its headland and its distant trend shore; —
but all be false, and like the pensive dream
of poor imagination, 'amid the wave
of trouble life, deck with unreal hue,
and end soon in emptiness and tear. 

it be midnight, and the thoughtful chief, retire
from the vex crowd, in his still cabin hear
the surge that roll below; he lift his eye,
and cast a silent anxious look without.

it be a light — great god — it be a light!
it move upon the shore! — land — there be land!

he speak in secret, and a tear of joy
steal down his cheek, when on his knee he fall.
thou, who have be his guardian in waste
of the hoar deep, accept his tear, his prayer;
while thus he fond hope the pure light
of thy great truth on the benight world
shall beam!
the linger night be past; — the sun
shine out, while now the red-cross streamer wave
high up the gently-surging bay. from all
shout, song, and rapturous thanksgiving loud,
burst forth: another world, entrance they cry,
another live world! — awe-struck and mute
the gaze native stand, and drop their spear,
in homage to the god!
so from the deep
they hail emerge; sight more awful far
than ever yet the wonder voyager
greet; — the prospect of a newfound world,
now from the night of dark uncertainty
at once reveal in live light!
how beat
the heart! what throng thought awake! whence spring
the roam nation? from that ancient race
that people Asia — Noah son? how, then,
pass they the long and lone expanse between
of stormy ocean, from the elder earth
cut off, and lose, for unknown age, lose
in the vast deep? but while the awful view
stand in thy sight reveal, spirit, awake
to proud energy! even now, in thought,
i see thou open bold magellan tract! 
the strait be pass! thou, as the sea expand,
pause a moment, when beneath thy eye
blue, vast, and rock, through its boundless rule,
the long pacific stretch. nor here cease
thy search, but with de quiros to the south
still urge thy way, if yet some continent
stretch to its dusky pole, with nation spread,
forest, and hill, and stream.
so be thy search
with ampler view reward, till, at length,
lo, the round world be compass! then return
back to the bosom of the tranquil Thames,
and hail britannia victor ship, that now
from many a storm restore, wind its slow way
silent up the current, and so find,
like to a time-worn pilgrim of the world,
rest, in that haven where all tempest cease.

book the five.

such be thy view, discovery! the great world
roll to thy eye reveal; to thou the deep
submit its awful empire; industry
awake, and commerce to the echo mart
from east to west unwearied pour her wealth.
man walk sublime; and humanity,
mature by social intercourse, more high,
more animate, lift her sovereign mien,
and wave her golden sceptre. yet the heart
ask tremble, be no evil find! oh, turn,
meek charity, and drop a human tear
for the sad fate of afric injure son,
and hide, for ever hide, the sight of chain,
anguish, and bondage! yes, the heart of man
be sick, and charity turn pale, to think
how soon, for pure religion holy beam,
dark crime, that sully the sweet day, pursue,
like vulture, the discoverer ocean tract,
scream for blood, to field of rich Peru,
or ravage Mexico, while gold more gold!
the caverned mountain echo, gold more gold!

then see the fell-eyed, prowl buccaneer,
grim as a libbard! he his jealous look
turn to the dagger at his belt, his hand
by instinct grasp a bloody scymitar,
and ghastly be his smile, as over the wood
he see the smoke of burn village
ascend, and think even now he count his spoil.

see thousand destine to the lurid mine,
never to see the sun again; all name
of husband, sire, all tender charity
of love, deep bury with they in that grave,
where life be as a thing long pass; and hope
no more its sickly ray, to cheer the gloom,
extend.
thou, too, dread ocean, toss thy arm,
exult, for the treasure and the gem
that thy dark oozy realm emblaze; and call
the pale procession of the dead, from cave
where late their body welter, to attend
thy kingly sceptre, and proclaim thy might!
lord of the hurricane! bid all thy wind
swell, and destruction ride upon the surge,
where, after the red lightning flash that show
the labour ship, all be at once deep night
and long suspense, till the slow dawn of day
gleam on the scatter corpse of the dead,
that strew the sound shore!
then think of he,
you who rejoice with those you love, at eve,
when wind of winter shake the window-frame,
and more endear your fire, oh, think of he,
who, save alone from the destroy storm,
be cast on some desert rock; who see
sun after sun descend, and hopeless hear;
at morn the long surge of the trouble main,
that beat without his wretched cave; meantime
he fear to wake the echo with his voice,
so dread the solitude!
let greenland snow
then shine, and mark the melancholy train
there leave to perish, while the cold pale day
decline along the further ice, that bind
the ship, and leave in night the sink scene. 
sad winter close on the deep; the smoke
of frost, that late amusive to the eye
rise over the coast, be pass, and all be now
one torpid blank; the freeze particle
blow blister, and the white bear seek her cave.
ill-fated outcast, when the morn again
shall streak with feeble beam the freeze waste,
your air-bleached and unburied carcase
shall press the ground, and, as the star fade off,
your stony eye glare 'amid the desert snow!

these triumph boast, fall demon of the deep!
though never more the universal shriek
of all that perish thou shall hear, as when
the deep foundation of the guilty earth
be shake at the voice of god, and man
cease in his habitation; yet the sea
thy might tempestuous still, and joyless rule,
confess. ah! what bloodless shadow throng
even now, slow rise from their oozy bed,
from meet, and those gate of burial
that guard the Erythræan; from the vast
unfathomed cavern of the western main
or stormy Orcades; while the sad shell
of poor Arion, to the hollow blast
slow seem to pour its melancholy tone,
and faint vibrate, as the dead pass by.

i see the chief, who fall in distant land,
the prey of murderous savage, when yell,
and shout, and conch, resound through the wood.
Magellan and de Solis seem to lead
the mournful train. shade of perouse! oh, say
where, in the tract of unknown sea, thy bone
the insult surge have sweep?
but who be he,
who look, though pale and bloody, wear the trace
of pure philanthropy? the pity sigh
forbid not; he be dear to briton, dear
to every beat heart, far as the world
extend; and my faint falter touch even now
die on the string, when i pronounce thy name,
oh, lose, lament, generous, hapless cook!

but cease the vain complaint; turn from the shore,
wet with his blood, remembrance: cast thy eye
upon the long sea, and the wide world,
display from his research. smile, glow health!
for now no more the waste seaman sink,
with haggard eye and feeble frame disease;
no more with torture long for the sight
of field and hillock green, mad he call
on nature, when before his swim eye
the liquid long expanse of cheerless sea
seem all one flowery plain. then frantic dream
arise; his eye distemper flash be see
from the sink socket, as a demon there
sit mock, till he plunge in the flood,
and the dark wave go over he.
nor will thou,
o science! fail to deck the cold morai
of he who wide over earth hemisphere
thy view extend. on, from deep to deep,
thou shall retrace the wind of his track;
from the high north to where the field-ice bind
the still antarctic. thence, from isle to isle,
thou shall pursue his progress; and explore
new-holland eastern shore, where now the son
of distant Britain, from her lap cast out,
water the ground with tear of penitence,
perhaps, hereafter, in their destine time,
themselves to rise pre-eminent. now speed,
by asia eastern bound, still to the north,
where the vast continent of either world
approach: beyond, it be silent boundless ice,
impenetrable barrier, where all thought
be lose; where never yet the eagle fly,
nor roam so far the white bear through the waste.

but thou, dread power! who voice from chaos call
the earth, who bid the lord of light go forth,
even as a giant, and the sound sea
roll at thy fiat: may the dark deep cloud,
that thy pavilion shroud from mortal sight,
so pass away, as now the mystery,
obscure through roll age, be disclose;
how man, from one great father spring, his race
spread to that sever continent! even so,
 father, in thy good time, shall all thing stand
reveal to knowledge.
as the mind revolve
the change of mighty empire, and the fate
of he who thou have make, back through the dusk
of age contemplation turn her view:
we mark, as from its infancy, the world
people again, from that mysterious shrine
that rest on the top of Ararat,
high of Asian mountain; spread on,
the cushites from their mountain cave descend;
then before god the son of Ammon stand
in their gigantic might, and first the sea
vanquish: but still from clime to clime the groan
of sacrifice, and superstition cry,
be hear; but when the day-spring rise of heaven,
greece hoar forest echo, the great Pan
be dead! from Egypt, and the rugged shore
of syrian tyre, the god of darkness fly;
bel be cast down, and Nebo, horrid king,
bow in imperial Babylon: but, ah!
too soon, the star of Bethlehem, who ray
the host of heaven hail jubilant, and sing,
glory to god on high, and on earth peace,
with long eclipse be veil.
red papacy
usurp the meek dominion of the lord
of love and charity: vast as a fiend
she rise, heaven light be darken with her frown,
and the earth murmur back her hymn of blood,
as the meek martyr at the burn stake
stand, his last look uplift to his god!
but she be now cast down, her empire rest.
they who in darkness walk, and in the shade
of death, have see a new and holy light,
as in the umbrageous forest, through who bough,
mossy and damp, for many a league, the morn
with languid beam scarce pierce, here and there
touch some solitary trunk, the rest
dark wave in the noxious atmosphere:
through the thick-matted leaf the serpent wind
his way, to find a spot of casual sun;
the gaunt hyæna through the thicket glide
at eve: then, too, the couch tiger eye
flame in the dusk, and oft the gnash jaw
of the fell crocodile be hear. at length,
by man superior energy and toil,
the sunless brake be clear; the joyous morn
shine through the open leaf; rich culture smile
around; and howl to their distant wild
the savage inmate of the wood retire.
such be the scene of human life, till want
bid man his strength put forth; then slow spread
the culture stream of mild humanity,
and gentle virtue, and more noble aim
employ the active mind, till beauty beam
around, and nature wear her rich robe,
adorn with lovely grace. then the charm
of woman, fair of the work of heaven,
who the cold savage, in his sullen pride,
scorn as unworthy of his equal love,
with more attractive influence win the heart
of her protector. then the name of sire,
of home, of brother, and of child, grow
more sacred, more endear; while the eye,
lift beyond this earthly scene, behold
a father who look down from heaven on all!

o Britain, my love country! do thou rise
most high among the nation! do thy fleet
ride over the surge of ocean, that subdue
roll in long sweep beneath they! do thou wear
thy garb of gentle moral graceful!
be wide science thy, and the fair train
of lovely art! while commerce throng thy port
with her ten thousand streamer, be the tract
of the undeviating ploughshare white
that rip the reek furrow, follow soon
by plenty, bid all the scene rejoice,
even like a culture garden! do the stream
that steal along thy peaceful vale, reflect
temple, and attic dome, and village tower! 
be beauty thy, fair of earthly thing,
woman; and do she gain that liberal love
and homage, which the meekness of her voice,
the rapture of her smile, command most
when she seem weak, must demand from he,
her master; who stern strength at once submit
in manly, but endear, confidence,
unlike his selfish tyranny who sit
the sultan of his harem!
oh, then, think
how great the blessing, and how high thy rank
amid the civilise and social world!

but have thou no deep fail, that may turn
thy thought within thyself! ask, for the sun
that shine in heaven have see it, have thy power
never scatter sorrow over distant land!
ask of the east, have never thy proud sail
bear plunder from dismember province,
leave the groan of miserable man
behind! and free thyself, and lift high
the charter of thy freedom, buy with blood,
have thou not stand, in patient apathy,
a witness of the torture and the chain
that afric injure son have know! stand up;
yes, thou have visit the cave, and cheer
the gloomy haunt of sorrow; thou have shed
a beam of comfort and of righteousness
on isle remote; have bid the bread-fruit shade
the hesperian region, and have soften much
with bland amelioration, and with charm
of social sweetness, the hard lot of man.
but weigh in truth firm balance, ask, if all
be even. do not crime of rank growth
batten amid thy city, who loud din,
from flash and contend car, ascend,
till morn! enchant, as if aught so sweet
never fade, do thy daughter wear the weed
of calm domestic peace and wed love;
or turn, with beautiful disdain, to dash
gay pleasure poison chalice from their lip
untasted! have not sullen atheism,
weave gay flower of poesy, so seek
to hide the darkness of his wither brow
with fade and fantastic gallantry
of rose, thus to win the thoughtless smile
of youthful ignorance! have thou with awe
look up to he who power be in the cloud,
who bid the storm rush, and it sweep to earth
the nation that offend, and they be go,
like tyre and Babylon! well weigh thyself:
then shall thou rise undaunted in the might
of thy protector, and the gather hate
of hostile band shall be but as the sand
blow on the everlasting pyramid.

Hasten, o love and charity! your work,
even now while it be day; far as the world
extend may your divine influence
be feel, and more than feel, to teach mankind
they all be brother, and to drown the cry
of superstition, anarchy, or blood!
not yet the hour be come: on Ganges' bank
still superstition hail the flame of death,
behold, gay dress, as in her bridal tire,
the self-devoted beauteous victim slow
ascend the pile where her dead husband lie:
she kiss his cold cheek, incline her breast
on he, and light herself the fatal pile
that shall consume they both!
on egypt shore,
where science rise, now sloth and ignorance
sleep like the huge behemoth in the sun!
the turbaned moor still stain with stranger' blood
the inmost sand of Afric. but all these
the light shall visit, and that vaster tract
from fuego to the further Labrador,
where roam the outcast Esquimaux, shall hear
the voice of social fellowship; the chief
who hatchet flash amid the forest gloom,
who to his infant bear the bleed scalp
of his fall foe, shall weep unwonted tear!

come, faith; come, hope; come, meek-eyed charity!
complete the lovely prospect: every land
shall lift up one hosannah; every tongue
proclaim thou father, infinite, and wise,
and good. the shore of palmy Senegal
(sad afric injure son no more enslave)
shall answer hallelujah, for the lord
of truth and mercy reign; — reign king of king; —
 hosannah — king of king — and lord of lord!

so may his kingdom come, when all the earth,
unite thus as in one hymn of praise,
shall wait the end of all thing. this great globe,
his awful plan accomplish, then shall sink
in flame, while through the cloud, that wrap the place
where it have roll, and the sun shine, the voice
of the archangel, and the trump of god,
amid heaven darkness roll fast away,
shall sound!
then shall the sea give up its dead; —
but man immortal mind, all trial past
that shake his feverish frame, amid the scene
of peril and distemper, shall ascend
exult to its destine seat of rest,
and "justify his way" from who it spring.
