caesar dream, before his invasion of Britain.

by mr. Langhorne.

when rough helvetia hardy son obey,
 and vanquish belgia bow to caesar sway;
 when, scarce-beheld, embattle nation fall,
 the fierce sicambrian, and the faithless Gaul;
 tire freedom lead her savage son no more,
 but fly, subdue, to albion utmost shore. 

it be then, while stillness grasp the sleep air,
 and dewy slumber seal the eye of care;
 divine ambition to her votary come:
 her left hand wave, bear the trump of fame;
 her right a regal sceptre seem to hold,
 with gem far-blazing from the burnish gold. 
and thus, "my son,"the queen of glory say;
 "immortal Caesar, raise thy languid head. 
"shall night dull chain the man of counsel bind? 
 "or Morpheus rule the monarch of mankind? 
"see world unvanquish yet await thy sword! 
 "barbaric land, that scorn a latian lord! 
"see yond proud isle, who mountain meet the sky,
 "thy foe encourage, and thy power defy! 
"what, though by nature firm bar secure,
 "by sea encircle, and with rock immure,
"shall Caesar shrink the great toil to brave,
 "scale the high rock, or beat the madden wave?"

she speak — her word the warrior breast inflame
 with rage indignant, and with conscious shame;
 already beat, the swell flood give way,
 and the fell genii of the rock obey. 
already shout of triumph rend the sky,
 and the thin rear of barbarous nation fly. 

quick round their chief his active legion stand,
 dwell on his eye, and wait the wave hand. 
the hero rise, majestical slow,
 and look attention to the crowd below. 

 'roman and friend! be there who seek for rest,
' by labour vanquish, and with wound oppress;
 'that respite Caesar shall with pleasure yield,
' due to the toil of many a well-fought field. 
 'be there who shrink at thought of danger past,
' the ragged mountain, or the pathless waste —
 'while savage host, or savage flood oppose,
' or shiver fancy pine in alpine snow? 
 'let he retire to latium peaceful shore;
' he once have toil, and Caesar ask no more. 
 'be there a roman, who unskaken breast
' no pain have conquer, and no fear depress? 
 'who, doom through death dread minister to go,
' dare to chastise the insult of a foe;
 'let he, his country glory and her stay,
' with reverence hear she, and with pride obey. 
 'a form divine, in heavenly splendour bright,
' who look throw radiance round the pall of night,
 'with calm severity approach and say,
 "wake thy dull ear, and lift thy languid head. 
"what! shall a roman sink in soft repose,
 "and tame see the briton aid his foe? 
"see they secure the rebel Gaul supply;
 "spurn his vain eagle, and his power defy? 
"go! burst their barrier, obstinate brave;
 "Scale the wild rock, and beat the madden wave."

here pause the chief, but wait no reply,
 the voice assent speak from every eye;
 nor, as the kindness that reproach with fear,
 be danger dreadful, or be toil severe. 
