Dryades: a poem.

forgive, you nereid, if i sing no more
 th'uncertain sea, but choose the safe shore,
 and leave the restless wave for constant hill,
 to sit on grassy plot, or dream by little rill. 

the wanton muse the mean thorn prefer
 to coral twig, and amber costly tear;
 again i may, when tire of leavy wood,
 haste to the sea, and court the roll flood. 
no love amusement here but soon will cloy,
 the dear bliss become a worthless toy,
 and we must shift our pleasure to enjoy. 

sick of the town, i leave the busy place,
 where deep concern brood on the thoughtful face;
 where factious cit with nod, and roguish leer,
 be whisper nothing in attentive ear;
 where knave strange lie invent, and fool retail,
 and home-made treason find in foreign mail:
 falsehood their credit gain, though ill-contrived,
 and scandal, oft disprove, be still revive;
 imagine ill in frightful shape appear,
 while present evil we with patience bear;
 phantom, and empty form be fear the most,
 as those who scorn the man, yet dread the ghost. 

no long plague with faction, spleen and noise,
 how be i bless, when first my ravish eye
 suck in the pure day, and see unclouded sky? 
how happy, when i view the calm retreat,
 and groves overlooked by winchcomb ancient seat? 
here the smooth Kennet take his doubtful way,
 in wanton round the linger water play,
 and by their circle stream prolong the grateful stay. 
here good old Chaucer whilom cheere the vale,
 and soote sing, and tell the jocund tale. 

bright be the moon, and her reflect beam
 spangle the dewy leaf with tremble gleam;
 while star, by conscious twinkle, seem to know
 what wake lover act here below. 
careless i walk, where prowl beast have make
 a path, that lead through a lone silent glade. 
the moon, with doubtful ray, deceive the sight,
 and wave bough give a uncertain light. 
when my chill spirit sink with sudden fear,
 and tremble horror bid the search forbear;
 my heedless step have touch the hallow ground,
 where airy dæmons dance the wanton round;
 where fairy elf, and midnight dryad meet,
 and to the smile moon the sylvan-song repeat. 
tall rift oak, and circle elm have make
 a central void amid surround shade,
 with hollow vault cell, and rise heap
 in which by day the weary badger sleep. 
thick thorny brake grow round the lonesome place,
 and twine bough enclose the middle space. 
here dryad in nocturnal revel join,
 while star through shake leaf obscure shine. 
and here i see (bless with a kind fate)
 when in a beauteous ring the nymph be sit. 
well-pleased the elfin smile, but she, who guard
 pomaceous fruit, and th'orchet-care reward,
 down pensive lean her head; no ruddy streak
 mix with the languid paleness of her cheek. 
cast on the ground her wither garland lie,
 who shrivel leaf seem conscious of decay. 
thyrsis, that much-loved youth, the goddess mourn,
 thyrsis, who once silurian plain adorn;
 the rural power confess their mean lay,
 when thyrsis sing, and own his juster praise;
 he ariconian swain industrious teach
 to strain rich must, and press the racy draught;
 since he be go, the tree be all decay,
 with moss bedight, and blossom ill-arrayed. 
the pensive owner mourn the tedious week,
 and want the generous bowl, that paint the flush cheek. 

man lead by sense, and partial to themselves,
 nor rove dæmon own, nor wander elf. 
but who can know intelligible race,
 or guess the power that fill the aerial space! 
oft the tire horse be force to scour the plain,
 when fairy ride fix in his twist mane. 
and i, you god, have wondrous circle see,
 where wanton sprite in midnight dance have be,
 and press their round step on every new-mowed green. 

you dæmon, who in lonely forest rove,
 and friendly power, that human art improve,
 you careful genii, that over man preside,
 direct their counsel, and their action guide;
 the grateful muse shall your assistance own,
 and tell of heavenly form, as yet unknown;
 (bless being, who no earthly fetter bind,
 nor to the press weight of clay confine! 
of unmixed æther form, their beauty fear
 no pale disease, nor change of come year.) 

be kind, you power, and tune my artless tongue,
 while i repeat the dryad please song. 

nape begin; a nymph with careless mien,
 clad like autumnal leaf in yellowish green. 
her round plump cheek a deep purple die,
 such as ripe fruit boast on their sunny side. 
a wreathe of plat moss be round her head,
 cheerful she smile, and thus the elfin say:

tall sycamore the noisy insect love,
 and buzz round the leaf incessant move;
 while the day last, the worthless creature play,
 and mourn the evening dusk, and wing their silent way. 

but Forrest nymph prefer the peaceful night,
 when solemn gloom, and dewy seat invite. 
while drowsy man in sleep unactive rest,
 not half so happy as the watchful beast,
 who silent leave their den, and secret home,
 and on the prey intent through all the Forrest roam. 
the rage sun with his too scorch beam,
 burns up the herb, and lessen all the stream;
 but the kind moon reflect a mild ray,
 and make a night more lovely than the day;
 nor dart fierce flame, but innocent bright
 leaf all the fire, and give the pure light;
 no noisome vapour, or dark cloud exhale,
 but gentle drop, fresh dew, and please gale. 
so woman be but rough man refine,
 have nought of he that be fierce, but all that be kind. 
now fall drop like shine pearl be see,
 and dewy spangle hang on every green. 
refresh moisture cool the thirsty Mead,
 extend the stalk, and swell the unfold seed;
 restore the verdure of the tarnish leaf,
 and every gladsome herb the ripen juice receive. 
day always be the same, but wanton night
 boast a more grateful change of harmless light. 
below the glow-worm wondrous orb be see,
 that stud with burnish gold the shade green. 
these little wander comet never shed
 or baneful ill, or dire contagion spread;
 their shine tail foretell no fall state,
 nor future dearth, nor sad disease create. 
bright lambent flame, and kindle vapour rise,
 sweep glare through the dusk, and strike the wonder eye. 
in oblique track the meteor blaze around,
 and skim the surface of the marshy ground,
 unseen by day, when tyrantlike the sun
 envious admit no splendour but his own. 
the liquid drop, that ooze from weep tree,
 and sparkle stone with starlike lustre please;
 even sapless wood improve by age grow bright,
 and what it want in moisture, gain in light. 

while ripen fruit, and mild season last,
 and only empty cloud the sky overcast,
 nymph in lone desert chant the rural lay,
 till the winge hour bring on return day. 
but when fierce wintery storm the Forrest rend,
 and rattle hail, or fleecy snow descend;
 when conscious bird, who know succeed time,
 haste from the cold, and seek for mild clime. 
the elfin power (who can at pleasure leave
 aerial body, and new form receive)
 cast off their vehicle, and free from sense,
 nor dread the storm, nor cold, when too intense. 
the earthy gnome, and fairy elf be see
 dig in low mine with busy man;
 there labour on the fruitless work intent,
 while deep snow the wonted dance prevent. 

but foolish swain the bloom spring prefer,
 and th'infant glory of the bud year;
 nature, as yet, be but imperfect see,
 and her weak product show a rawish green:
 the flower look gay, but lovely autumn treat
 with ripen beauty, and substantial sweet;
 nor want its flower, while poppy grace the corn,
 and azure cup the wave field adorn. 
fruit love by rustic taste, of please show,
 on the wild hedge, and scent briar grow. 
and yellow leaf, the fairy elfin bed,
 fly with the wind, and on the ground be spread. 
the frisk satyr squeeze the cluster grape,
 and the chaste dryad fear the come rape. 
ripe mellow heap from every tree be shake,
 and bend corn expect the sharpen hook;
 soon will the nod sheaf be bear away,
 and the draw net enclose th'unguarded prey. 

the friendly power, who labour peasant aid,
 nymph, and light fawn frequent the woody shade;
 but oft curse fiend quit their infernal home,
 and (hate guest) in gloomy forest roam,
 with glare eye affright the howl beast,
 and little bird shrink close in their nest. 
earth will be heaven, if we may here enjoy
 pleasure unmixed, and leave the base alloy. 
the great good have its attend ill,
 and doubtful bliss distract th'uncertain will. 
so teem autumn boast her luscious fruit,
 and plant of grateful taste, and heal root. 
but ripen with like care the grow seed
 of baneful aconite, and noxious weed. 
the deadly nightshade wanton youth deceive
 with shine berry, and with spread leaf;
 th'accurse fruit invite with please show
 fair as the damscen, or the sky-dyed sloe;
 but ah! not rash trust the tempt ill;
 too well you know, that beauty often kill:
 swift through the bone the spread venom fly,
 a deadly sleep hang on the close eye,
 and the lose wretch at length in rage frenzy die. 

now round its pole the spiral hop entwist,
 like thyrsi bear by Bacchus ancient priest. 
the husband elm support th'embracing vine,
 and round its oak the ivy close twine. 
to Bacchus sacred all, and prone to love,
 they show what fuel must the flame improve;
 love, blind himself, the Mark will hardly know,
 but Bacchus take the aim, and set the bow. 

autumnal day a constant medium boast,
 nor chap the ground with heat, nor dry with frost. 
nature on all her finish labour smile,
 and the glad peasant reap the grateful spoil;
 wind shake the ripen seed on parent earth,
 and thus impregnate for succeed birth. 
the tuft god with future harvest swell,
 while weighty seed fall from their native cell,
 and near their mother-stem: but small kind
 far from their home be bear by sweep wind;
 the atom fly, waft on every breeze,
 hence mossy thread enwrap the tall tree;
 herb of strange form on high rock be find,
 and spread fern run over the barren ground. 
but, goddess, you neglect your wonted care,
 (while blight orchat mourn, the nymph despair;)
 nor love (as once) to see the hand bowl,
 when tipple rustic cheer their droughty soul,
 and tread with falter step the unequal ground,
 while humble Cotts with wayward mirth resound. 

succeed bard in rural secret skill,
 shall teach the Swain enrich the barren field;
 the prophet inspiration never end,
 but with a double portion still descend. 
poet, like rightful king, can never die,
 heaven sacred ointment will the throne supply,
 and Tityrus, when he draw his late breath,
 will to some darling youth the value pipe bequeathe. 

so tuneful insect feed by morning dew,
 who in warm mead the daily song renew;
 (true poet they) laugh at approach want,
 and careless sing, and mock the labour ant;
 but soon bleak cold the wanton throng surprise,
 and the whole race (ah! too unpitied) die:
 and yet return heat, and sultry day,
 restore the species, and new songster raise. 

the goddess will not long forget her care,
 but th'orchat-loss with future crop repair. 
no more shall blast wind the harvest grieve
 or blight bud autumnal hope deceive. 
the youth well-pleased will daily thanks repeat,
 while load branch groan beneath their weight. 

as from salt wave be draw the sweet rain,
 and cheerful stream, that swell the fatten plain,
 so from our grief succeed pleasure flow;
 graft on crab the fair apple grow. 
bitter and sweet in the same cup be throw,
 and prickly'st thistle have the soft down. 

thus say the nymph, and psecas thus reply,
 psecas, who give the herb their various pride. 
she nature aid, and be the sylvan power,
 that shape the leaf, and paint the woody flower. 
she blanches lily to their lovely white,
 who skin-like beauty please human sight. 
hence the blue vervain grace the humble shade,
 and drowsy poppy be in scarlet clad:
 unerring form the grow plant receive,
 she round the stem, and point th'indented leaf. 

who (say the nymph) will sing of bleat flock,
 or hang goat that browze on craggy rock? 
when ancient bard have rifle all the store,
 and the drain subject can afford no more. 
nor Cuddy now, nor Colin will engage;
 eclogue but ill become a warlike age. 
in ancient time the shepherd song will please,
 when pious king enjoy the shepherd ease,
 and monarch sit beneath the shadow tree. 
when those first happy'r age be no more,
 but curse ambition still increase with power;
 when crowd town thin the desert plain,
 and crave passion a new life begin;
 the peaceful wood be not so soon forget,
 the uneasy soul her wonted pleasure seek:
 reason, when free, and undisturbed, approve
 the please pensiveness of thoughtful groves:
 hence twist bower, and cool grot be make
 to imitate, at least, the rural shade. 

but man by fury urge, and curse by fate,
 all that be calm, and inoffensive hate;
 guilt must prevail, and bloodshed never cease;
 nation be say to be undo by peace. 

too well you know, who oft unseen repair
 to whisper court enwrap in fine air;
 in closet sit, and unsuspected hear
 what the great vulgar feign, and little fear. 
by night while swain dream of successful love,
 the forest wanton in their groves,
 and over the plat heath the fairy-daemon rove. 
but, when grey dawn awake from please rest
 the yawn peasant, and disturb the beast,
 through street, and noisy crowd they range unknown,
 and mark the conduct of the factious town. 

britania son, like those of monstrous birth,
 when serpent tooth be sow in furrow earth;
 inflame with rage, and prone to mutual hate,
 with baneful strife distract endanger state. 
war now commence in itself a good;
 quack know no other cure but let blood,
 even when th'expiring wretch already faint,
 and not a lancet, but a cordial want. 
those who can wish all temple shut beside,
 never think the gate of Janus set too wide,
 for endless slaughter, as a bless pray,
 farewell the humble muse, and shepherd peaceful lay. 

she say, and all the nymph with sorrow hear,
 when clad in shine robe, a heavenly form appear. 
a leavy crown adorn her radiant head,
 majestic be her look, and thus the elfin say:

unbodied power be not confine to flood,
 to purl rivulet, or to shady wood. 
kind dæmons on ungrateful man attend,
 observe their step, and watch the hate fiend. 
the same good genii guard the harmless sheep,
 when weary Damon lie in thoughtless sleep;
 the same, who influence aid unsettled state,
 and glad hasten on the work of fate. 
Rome second king enjoy a fairy dame,
 to lonely wood the royal pupil come;
 to numa lesson, and the elfin-bride,
 Rome all her grandeur owe, and future pride. 
bless power, and being of the high rank,
 nor love the flow stream, nor flowery bank. 
clad in ætherial light, the pure mind
 scorn the base earth, and be for heaven design. 
Inferiour order have a mean home,
 and here in wild, and woody maze roam. 
to learned Magi we strange spell impart,
 mystery disclose, and tell the secret art.
 with sacred Miselto the Druids crown
 sing with the nymph, and dance the please round. 
but vulgar thought confound celestial form
 with envious fiend, who raise destructive storm;
 and harmless elf that scuttle over the plain,
 be rank with fury doom to endless pain. 
mortal to earth, and mean delight incline,
 no pleasure in abstract notion find. 
unused to high truth will not believe
 ought can exist, but what their eye perceive;
 though to good dæmon they their safety owe,
 few be the happy those, who their bless guardian know. 

but hear, you nymph; indulge no causeless fear,
 i know the last joy of come year. 
i, britain kind Egeria, will protect
 the loyal patriot, and his scheme direct. 
all do not hate the plain, nor fly the wood;
 field have their lover, and the groves their god. 
if Bolingbroke, and Oxford with a smile
 reward the song, nor scorn the mean style;
 each bleed tree shall tell the shepherd flame,
 and in its wound preserve the grow name. 
swain to transmit pipe shall long succeed,
 and sort with artful hand the unequal reed. 
the bird on every bough will listen throng,
 and noisy, strive to drown the envy song. 
echo to distant rock shall waft the tale,
 and reach with borrow sound the low vale;
 while the glad lamb pursue the circle round,
 frisk wanton, and over grassy ridge bind. 

will he again the better choice approve,
 who once of Henry sing, and Emma love;
 will he (a grateful guest) to wood repair,
 and private ease prefer to public care;
 the nymph will learn his song, their own forget,
 and little fawn the move tale repeat. 

peace from neglect pipe will wipe the dust,
 when useless arm be doom to eat rust. 
no dread sound shall scare the finny race,
 or fright the triton from his love embrace. 
the busy naiad cleanse pollute flood,
 and nymph frequent the long desert wood. 
the river-god hug the decline urn;
 all to their stream, or to their shade return. 

when civil war disturb the roman state,
 and Brutus hasten on his juster fate;
 while false-named liberty, and doubtful claim
 mad the world, and fan alecto flame;
 the Swain be injure, and his song forget,
 and Tityrus only by his flock be seek. 
but when Octavius have the nation free,
 and every realm its rightful lord obey;
 the god look down on the neglect groves,
 and deign to hear of peace, and soft love;
 field and their owner be with leisure bless,
 and mantua shepherd have his wrong redress. 

so first the mountain top be touch with light,
 and from the gloomy vale the Swain invite;
 while mist below, and intervene cloud
 cast a deep dusk on all the frown wood. 
the shade meadow view, with envy, round
 the distant splendour of the rise ground;
 but soon the spread ray expand move,
 and stream like a deluge from above,
 sweep over the gladsome field, and dart through every grove. 

by foreign war intestine faction thrive,
 the dam destroy, the imp not long survive;
 tumultuous hurry a advantage give
 both to the little, and the great thief. 
a guilty act be in confusion hide,
 when busy time a nice search forbid;
 so crafty fish be of clear stream afraid,
 and hide in eddy, which themselves have make. 
touch with the rose the jetty beetle die,
 and from the spicy hill the Vultur fly;
 so base soul abhor the sweet of peace,
 who private gain by public loss increase. 
when noisy storm pour on the drop leaf,
 the pensive lark retire, and silent grieve;
 but chatter bird joy at the expect flood,
 and with mix clamour watch the teem cloud;
 for then (a grateful prey) the horn snail,
 and worm over moisten clod their fold body trail. 
design man the public welfare hate,
 who can rise but on a ruin state. 
base soul will always keep their native stain,
 and root passion will th'ascendant gain. 
the worm, when once become a spot fly,
 and bear on gawdy wing it mount on high,
 unchanged admire the ordure, whence it spring,
 and feed with pleasure on its native dung. 

but steady patriot will just scheme pursue,
 nor fear the rage of a discard few. 
who prone to causeless change unwearied strive,
 old crime repeat, and baffle plot revive. 
eternal infamy reward their pain,
 and though the flame put out, the stench remain. 
what specious colour fraud, or secret snare
 can saint John prudence scape, or oxford care? 
disease oft prove fatal, when conceal,
 but ripen sore, if lance, be soon heal. 
slow Lentulus, and rash Cethegus join,
 and with ambitious Catalin combine;
 wretch, who only in destruction skill,
 try to pull down, what they can never rebuild;
 but when intent to spring the sudden i,
 one Cicero can blast the great design. 

so when black storm cast up the boil deep,
 and envious wind disturb the triton sleep;
 the shepherd, who the watery conflict hear
 shudder at distance, for his pasture fear;
 think with himself, when will the tumult cease,
 or what kind power can war flood appease? 
but th'ocean-god, rouse from their oozy bed,
 the trident grasp, and nod their reedy head;
 the wave rebuke, fear to approach the shore,
 and all be hush, and wind be hear no more. 

peace guide her step, as saint John lead the way,
 and all her little love around he play:
 when he arrive, France (the first time) confess
 her court eclipse by a politer guest;
 unwilling own Britannia have her charm,
 and be as strong in eloquence, as arm.
 when saint John speak, who will refuse to hear? 
Mars smooth his brow, and Pallas drop her spear. 
a thousand grace on his lip be hang,
 and Suada sip her nectar from his tongue. 
when wild suspicion cause distract hate,
 and party-clamour sway in a debate;
 such eloquence the tumult overrule,
 like fall drop it soften, and it cool;
 it calm th'enraged, and draw the stubborn mind,
 and to unwilling breast a passage find;
 nervous, yet smooth, the heart it gentle steal,
 like wine it sparkle, but like oil it heal. 
he with his country share one common fate,
 all saint John love, but who Britannia hate. 

Kennet of late neglect his break urn,
 and saint John absence all the dryad mourn. 
not Gallus once in wood be so belove,
 who luckless flame the nymph to pity move. 

heaven have its choose favourite, and on those
 with partial hand its double gift bestow:
 while common soul, like coarse stuff lay by,
 be not prepare to take the bright dye. 
the kingly oak engross the honeyed dew,
 who viscous sweet the mean shrub refuse;
 and every neighbour tree neglect grieve,
 but will spread in vain its tasteless leaf. 

saint John the wood, and breezy Forrest love,
 where nature pride presume art reprove. 
new beauty show themselves to near view,
 and theme untouched expect the skilful muse;
 the vegetable world neglect lie,
 and flower ungathered fall, and nameless dye. 
thousand escape hide in the press throng,
 unknown to macer, or to Cowley song. 
you, psecas, know, in seedy labour skill,
 what various herbage fatten pasture yield,
 and what unnumbered kind adorn the field,
 who fade beauty pass without regard,
 while every droop herb upbraid ungrateful bard. 

what learned song will nature care impart,
 by what kind instinct, and unstudied art,
 the numerous native of the shelter wood
 avoid their danger, or procure their food? 

what verse have tell, how small rival wage
 unequal war, and with the toad engage? 
they argus-like be set around with eye,
 and hang on silken thread, the foe surprise;
 spit on the poisonous wretch more deadly bane,
 who deep wound, feel the rage pain. 
swift up she pendant web Arachne climb,
 while he scarce trail along his torture limb;
 but careful will the heal plantain find,
 (plantain to undeserving creature kind)
 who sovereign herb the venom juice expel,
 and now the bloat wretch with innate poyson swell. 

or how the speckle snake their prey surprise,
 and with hot Fennel rub their weak eye;
 they, when the bloom of warm spring begin,
 cast off, as wear out clothes, their sloughy skin;
 with yearly youth, return vigour bless,
 brandish the tongue, and raise the azure crest. 

ant prudent bite the end of hoard wheat,
 lest grow seed their future hope defeat;
 and when they conscious scent the gather rain,
 draw down their windy egg, and pilfer grains;
 with summer toil, and ready viand fill
 the deep cavern of their puny hill;
 there lie secure, and hug their treasure good,
 and safe in labour cell they mock the come flood. 

a thousand kind unknown in forest breed,
 and bite the leaf, and notch the grow weed;
 have each their several law, and settle state,
 and constant sympathy, and constant hate;
 their change form no artful verse describe,
 or how fierce war destroy the wander tribe. 
how prudent nature feed her various young,
 have be (if not untold) at least unsung. 
to th'insect race the muse she pain deny,
 while proud man the little ant despise. 
but though the bulky kind be easy know,
 yet nature skill be most in little show;
 beside that man by some kind Dæmon teach
 have secret find, that be of old unsought. 
laborious wight have wondrous optic make,
 who borrow sight the curious searcher aid,
 and show, what heaven to common view deny
 strange puny shape, unknown to vulgar eye. 

so shadowy form, and sportive dæmon fly
 waft on wind, and not perceive when nigh;
 unseen they sweep along the grassy plain,
 and unregarded scud before the whistle swain. 
but to those seer in northern isle confine,
 inure to cold, and harden by the wind,
 the indulgent power have give a second sight,
 that ken the airy silph, and wander sprite. 
no flit elf the subtle eye escape,
 when wanton genii sport in antic shape. 

man nature in her secret work behold,
 untwist her fibre, and her coat unfold;
 with pleasure trace the thread of stringy root,
 the various texture of the ripen fruit;
 and animal, that careless live at ease,
 to who the leaf be world, the drop be sea. 
if to the finish whole so little go,
 how small the part, that must that whole compose! 
matter be infinite, and still descend:
 man can know where lessen nature end. 
the azure dye, which plum in autumn boast,
 that handle fade, and at a touch be lose,
 (of fair show) be all a live heap;
 and round their little world the lovely monster creep. 
who will on colour dote, or please form,
 if beauty, when discover, be but worm? 
when the warm spring put forth the open bud,
 th'awakened insect find their ready food;
 but when the summer day dilate the gem,
 stretch out the leaf, and fix the grow stem,
 they die unknown, and numerous kind succeed,
 that bask in flower, or eat the rank weed;
 wanton in sultry heat, and keep their place,
 till autumn-fruit produce a different race. 

but though a thousand theme invite the muse,
 yet great subject will from mean excuse;
 they claim the grateful song, who prudent care
 have quench the waste flame of endless war. 
one civil rage alarm the tremble wood,
 and burst sulphur scar the sylvan-god. 
war fell the tree, and spread havoc make;
 the nymph can hardly find a shelter shade. 
now, with less frightful sound the field be bless;
 the swain have leisure, and the land have rest. 

faction (that Hydra) be not long fear,
 her head be lop, and all the wound be fear;
 when innovate scheme successful prove,
 they do but fasten, what they will remove. 

so restless wind will fly without restraint,
 sweep down the corn, and bend the grow plant;
 but tall tree withstand their giddy haste,
 and break the fury of the come blast;
 they angry tear the leaf, and blight the fruit,
 but strengthen while they shake, and fix the spread root. 

be still, you aspen bough, nor restless scare,
 with busy tremble leaf, the listen hare;
 and cease, you insect, who, to plant unkind,
 or gnaw the root, or bite the soft rind;
 silent attend, while i Britannia bless,
 and sing the future joy of last peace. 
Victoria long her fruitless labour mourn;
 without effect her annual work return. 
one blow to Cæsar give the destine throne;
 Philippi make the roman power his own. 
swift as a ray shoot from the rise sun,
 pella immortal youth his Persia win. 
but conquest now be stop by every fort;
 bloodshed be cheap, and war become a sport;
 in vain the captain fall, the hero bleed;
 fresh victim to the sacrifice succeed. 

so doubtful hill the weary pilgrim see,
 and flatter prospect give a fancy ease;
 delusive hope compel unwilling foot
 to climb th'ascent, and pass the steepy height:
 that summit gain, far distant mountain rise,
 who tower ridge meet the sorrow eye,
 and pain renew, the wished-for rest deny. 

ten year can Hector come fate retard,
 and from the insult greek his Ilium guard. 
yet wave heap (as ancient ballad tell)
 the doubtful ruin of old Troy conceal;
 now ten Campagnes, and battle yearly win,
 transfer no kingdom, and no king dethrone. 

but pity ANNA end the fruitless toil,
 blood shall no more enrich the flandrian soil. 
from she the injure state expect redress;
 she, who maintain the war, must make the peace. 
she give the power, whatever side prevail,
 wherever the balance be, she hold the scale. 
to she they all commit their common cause,
 she set their limit, and confirm their law;
 portion divide, and give to each his share,
 the right of birth, or the reward of war. 
all must the just impartial hand acquit,
 and those who causeless murmur — will submit. 

so when the almighty, with a awful nod,
 make the rude chaos own a great god;
 the blend element, that long have strive,
 will not so ready join in mutual love:
 but, first, the pure part their place take,
 and subtle fire the mean mass forsake. 
the war continue with the base kind,
 while sea be loath to be by shore confine,
 or earth to have the low place assign. 

ANNA have long enrich the power ally,
 their want of treasure, and of troop supply;
 yet they, as wrong, with awkward state complain,
 insatiate thirst! and will new empire gain. 

so wanton child sport in careless play,
 and slumber lie, or toy the hour away;
 heedless they live, nor sweat for daily bread,
 yet cry, and murmur, if they be not feed. 

the belgic state forget their former moan,
 but swell with bloat pride, and mighty grow,
 new conquest seek, and deem the world their own. 
nor ravish sea, nor india spicy plant
 content their wish, or suffice their want. 

so when fierce rain wash down the lessen hill,
 and redden flood increase the swell rill;
 the swift unite stream haste to the plain,
 and swampy mead the gather water drain:
 each neighbour hill, and every rise mound
 barrens itself enrich the low ground. 
no moisture can suffice th'insatiate weed,
 cress, and filmy rush, and flaggy reed. 
sink in their slime the marshy vale below
 scorn those, to who their herb such rankness owe;
 their subject state they confident deny,
 and low fen will call themselves the high;
 cease, you unthinking hill, and strive no more
 to swell ungrateful bog with a too lavish store. 

the foreign realm, who anna arm sustain,
 now boast of power, as they before complain. 
so he who base tempt the virtuous dame,
 in soft word conceal the guilty flame;
 the tremble suppliant her resentment fear,
 and add to move word more move tear. 
but if the fair refuse with juster pride
 and prudent scorn, what ought to be deny;
 the ravisher confess resume the sword,
 and rude threaten, who he once adore. 

but none will long the offer peace refuse,
 lest what be conquer, they as certain lose. 
in vain the hireling troop their courage boast,
 Victoria see not there her favourite host. 
the german chief retire, nor can pursue
 the well-laid scheme his warlike fancy draw. 

man can guess th'event of future time,
 ambition be the growth of every clime;
 none can there rise or fall of empire know,
 where power now ebb, it may as sudden flow. 
Gallia have oft, and oft have haughty Spain,
 indulge their hope of universal reign,
 and in revolve year may oft again. 
the god awhile seem to design no less,
 and smile, flatter prince with success. 
by wondrous turn the heavenly power be know,
 and baffle scheme superior guidance own. 
heaven have set bound to every rise state,
 and kingdom have their barrier fix by fate. 

a infant will the gallic prince succeed,
 the sword be sheathe; no more the nation bleed. 
that kingdom hardly can itself defend,
 where child reign, and factious lord contend. 
once gallia shore to albion cliff be join,
 till sea grow rough, and Nereus be unkind;
 though lengthen war may a distrust create,
 and sow the spread seed of vulgar hate;
 again they may a stricter union prove,
 and join in mutual aid, and mutual love. 

nor shall the british line insurance need,
 or belgic power determine, who succeed. 
for monarchy be heaven peculiar care,
 but foreign aid be worse than civil war. 
the promise succour be a handle make,
 and a pretend reason to invade;
 when crafty Hengist with his saxon come
 T'assist the isle, and fix the doubtful claim;
 the easy britain the false friend believe,
 and with fond joy the hostile troop receive. 
but Druids teach by nymph repine sit,
 and see the come ill, and know britannia fate. 

and now the british fleet in southern sea,
 with spread sail the wonder nereid please. 
in Havens erst unknown they proud ride,
 while the glad Triton force the lazy tide. 
toss with fresh gale the wanton streamer flow,
 nor dread the storm above, nor rock below. 
the power protect, who rule the restless sea,
 and wind themselves their steerage will obey. 

the nymph shall hide no more from human sight,
 but with their lovely form the bard invite. 
swift fawn in open view shall scour the plain,
 and be, as once, familiar with the swain. 
the harmless elf, in every meadow see,
 will dance at midday on the public green. 
Pan, and the shepherd-youth shall love sit
 beneath one tree, and sport in rustic wit;
 in the same shade alternate song repeat,
 while ægle help the maid to press the stream Teat. 

but now the huntsman take his usual round,
 while listen fox hear unwelcome sound;
 and early peasant, who prevent the day,
 may hither chance unweening guide their way;
 for see — the grayish edge of dawn appear,
 night her departure mourn in dewy tear. 
the goblin vanish, and the elfin queen
 forego the pleasure of the trample green. 
nature unwilling to be rouse so soon,
 and earth look pale on the decline moon;
 the nimble hour dress out the impatient sun,
 while rise fog, and whisper gale forerun. 
the bat (a doubtful kind) begin their sleep,
 and to their cell the darken glow-worm creep;
 the come day the conscious insect grieve,
 and with slow haste the grateful herbage leave,
 wreathe over the grass, and the moist path pursue,
 streak with viscous slime the shine dew;
 in some close shade a friendly covert find,
 and parent earth receive the reptile kind. 
guilt, and the day disturb the wily snake,
 and urchin hide their theft in thorny brake. 
all fly the sun, and seek a cool retreat,
 nor envy buzz swarm, who joy in scorch heat. 

she say, and sudden all the elfin fair
 vanish unseen, and mix with trackless air. 

but thou, o Wyndham, who do not disdain
 the shepherd gift, nor scorn the rural strain;
 (though to no pompous sound the ear incline,
 while the mean sense be prop by strong line)
 accept the sylvan song, —
 with please look the fearful bard receive;
 you bid he first the humble cottage leave;
 ready to praise, and will to excuse,
 you give assurance to the bashful muse. 
how will i now describe a generous mind
 improve by study, and by court refine? 
but you (ah! too resolve) will not allow
 the verse to tell, what man already know;
 envy itself their conduct must approve,
 who the prince honour, and the people love. 
though you (in this) unkind deny the bard
 the only subject can his pain reward,
 you can make the tuneful dryad cease,
 for goddess will sing of who they please;
 long will the grateful wood your name repeat,
 and Wyndham be the theme, when next the dryad meet. 
