to the reverend mr. mabell, of Cambridge, who have publish proposal for a translation of Longinus. 

by William ward, ESQ;

bath, Dec. 20. 1731. 

though great Longinus claim thy aid hand,
 and hope, through thou, instruct a barbarous land,
 where vile conceit the power of wit confound,
 and true sublimity be lose in sound;
 where folly, dress ten thousand various way,
 the bar, the playhouse, and the pulpit sway;
 yet to my verse thy kind attention lend;
 pardon the poet, and indulge the friend. 

from noise, and nonsense, and vain laughter free,
 i steal a thoughtful hour, and give to thou;
 to thou, conductor of my heedless youth,
 who teach i first to reverence sense, and truth;
 virtue to praise; and bold vice deride,
 with all the pomp of fashion on her side. 

behold the scene a motley tribe compose,
 wife, widow, maid, and intermingle beaux,
 all order, age, in one league unite,
 and to dear passage consecrate the night! 
now the dice rattle in the sound box;
 now groan the table with repeat knock;
 (delightful music to the gamester ear!) 
while every bosom beat with hope or fear. 
a pass resound — what wondrous transport rise
 in celia breast, and lighten in her eye! 
she sweep the board — the fop, with ardent gaze,
 admire the beauty that her arm display. 

but who, unmoved, can bear the piteous sight,
 while Cynthia fret and rave at Fortune spite? 
flee from her cheek be every love and grace,
 and all the fury threaten in her face:
 distract, lose, with grief and rage overcome,
 she quit the dice, and fly to storm at home. 
when i a curse implore, may courteous fate
 with such a consort curse the man i hate! 
but be there one among the many find,
 adorn with modesty, with reason crown;
 who tread the slippery path of youth with care,
 and uninfected breathe in taint air? 
if such there be, kind heaven, afford thy aid,
 and soften to my wish the virtuous maid! 

see the Belle flutter with the sprightly beau! 
they trip it on the light, fantastic toe:
 nor word, nor sigh, their amorous thought impart;
 they dance, and glitter at each other heart! 

with honest scorn survey yond various croud,
 of supple slave, or lord of title proud! 
stiff-nodding fool! a mob in masquerade! 
who honour brand, and dignity upbraid. 

yet some there be, with worth and wisdom bless. 
a noble few! who satirise the rest;
 who scorn to boast their great forefather ray,
 shine of themselves, and mingle blaze with blaze. 
and such be orrery; who generous mind,
 still prone to pity, feel for human kind. 
a zeal for piety inflame his breast,
 tempere with charity, in meekness dress:
 grandeur and ease his every action guide;
 he nor assume, nor condescend in pride:
 add sprightly wit, by prudent law confine,
 a judgement sober, and by book refine:
 add that the muse every charm dispense,
 to tune his voice, and beautify the sense. 

this to my friend: and, o! may this inspite
 love of fair fame, and fan the sacred fire! 
dare to have taste, and urge thy glorious toil,
 to teach the unknow, and to please a Boyle. 
