hymn.

the frith be cross, the previous warfare past,
 through swampy plain, dark wood and desert vast,
 over heath, and flowery slope and valley fair,
 and gloomy mountain pass steep and bare, —
 all disembark the pilgrim stand
 on the unknown and beauteous land,
 while hope, who need support no more,
 have drop her anchor by the shore,
 a strangely-mingled band! 

and lo, with many a lofty dome,
 before they stand that ample home,
 of many mansion, hall of rest,
 and heavenly converse for the bless,
 where charity and love abide;
 while through its precinct fair and wide,
 research, and knowledge, and devotion,
 together wend with onward motion, —
 a home to which, the entrance free,
 come from all tribe of each degree,
 and from all land, the lord and slave,
 the firm, the timid and the brave;
 the nursling from its mother arm,
 the maid in all her early charm,
 the stately dame, the weary drudge,
 the priest, the penitent, the pannel and the judge, —
 the learned philosopher, historian sage,
 and he who can not scan a letter page,
 who look with wonderment, yet look with love,
 on their companion, and most sweet prove
 the new-born fellowship of bless soul above. 
yea, there do enemy and rival meet,
 and with a strange goodwill each other greet,
 like urchin who in feign array
 of war, on school-tide holiday,
 have spar and jostle on the green,
 and for a moment angry be,
 yea, feel such presence have within they give,
 a quicken zest even to the joy of heaven. 
for over they charity like unseen air,
 diffuse balmy sweetness every where,
 shall soft brood; and mind of every hue,
 from rosy paleness to empurple blue,
 like the fair rainbow mingle harmony,
 give soften splendour to the mental eye. 
for wisdom as the generous saviour say,
 when peevish censure reckless charge make —
 wisdom, unshackled, work on every side,
 and be of all her child justify. 

the pilgrim crowd advance. but o, that sight
 before they open, beautiful and bright,
 as lessen distance give to view
 their father house, while they pursue
 their onward path, — no! nor by word or thought,
 to man imagination can be bring,
 that awful glory, cease, vain muser! cease! 
bless god in humble hope, and be at peace. 
