homer batrachomuomachia:

 or, the battle of the frog and mouse. 

name of the mouse.

name of the frog.

homer battle of the frog, etc.  

book i 

to fill my rise song with sacred fire,
 you tuneful nine, you sweet celestial choir! 
from helicon embower height repair,
 attend my labour, and reward my prayer. 
the dreadful toil of rage Mars i write,
 the spring of contest, and the field of fight;
 how threaten mouse advance with warlike grace,
 and wage dire combat with the croak race. 
not loud tumult shake olympus tower,
 when earth-born giant dare immortal power. 
these equal act a equal glory claim,
 and thus the muse record the tale of fame. 

once on a time, fatigue and out of breath,
 and just escape the stretch claw of death,
 a gentle mouse, who cat pursue in vain,
 flee swift-of-foot across the neighbour plain,
 hang over a brink, his eager thirst to cool. 
and dip his whisker in the stand pool;
 when near a courteous frog advance his head;
 and from the water, hoarse-resounding say,

what be thou, stranger? what the line you boast? 
what chance have cast thou pant on our coast? 
with strict truth let all thy word agree,
 nor let i find a faithless mouse in thou. 
if worthy friendship, proffer friendship take,
 and enter view the pleasureable lake:
 range over my palace, in my bounty share,
 and glad return from hospitable fare. 
this silver realm extend beneath my sway,
 and i, their monarch, all its frog obey. 
great physignathus i, from peleus race,
 beget in fair hydromede embrace,
 where by the nuptial bank that paint his side,
 the swift Eridanus delight to glide. 
thou too, thy form, thy strength, and port proclaim
 a sceptre king; a son of martial fame;
 then trace thy line, and aid my guess eye. 
thus cease the frog, and thus the mouse reply. 

know to the god, the man, the bird that fly
 through wild expanse of the midway sky,
 my name resound; and if unknown to thou,
 the soul of great psycarpax live in i. 
of brave Troxartas' line, who sleeky down
 in love compress lychomile the brown. 
my mother she, and princess of the plain
 whereve her father pternotroctas reign:
 bear where a cabin lift its airy shed,
 with Figs, with nut, with vary dainty feed. 
but since our nature nought in common know,
 from what foundation can a friendship grow? 
these curl water over thy palace roll;
 but man high food support my princely soul. 
in vain the circle loaf attempt to lie
 conceal in flasket from my curious eye,
 in vain the tripe that boast the white hue,
 in vain the gild Bacon shun my view,
 in vain the cheese, offspring of the pale,
 or honeyed cake, which god themselves regale,
 and as in art i shine, in arm i fight,
 mix with the brave, and unknown to flight. 
though large to i the humane form appear,
 not man himself can smite my soul with fear. 
sly to the bed with silent step i go,
 attempt his finger, or attack his toe,
 and fix indent wound with dexterous skill,
 sleep he feel, and only seem to feel. 
yet have we foe which direful danger cause,
 grim owl with talon arm, and cat with claw,
 and that false trap, the den of silent fate,
 where death his ambush plant around the bait:
 all-dreaded these, and dreadful over the rest
 the potent warrior of the tabby vest,
 if to the dark we fly, the dark they trace,
 and rend our hero of the nibble race. 
but i, nor stalk, nor waterish herb delight,
 nor can the crimson radish charm my sight,
 the lake-resounding frog select fare,
 which not a mouse of any taste can bear. 

as thus the downy prince his mind express,
 his answer thus the croak king address. 

thy word luxuriant on thy dainty rove,
 and, stranger, we can boast of bounteous Jove:
 we sport in water, or we dance on land,
 and bear amphibious, food from both command. 
but trust thy self where wonder ask thy view,
 and safe tempt those sea, i will bear thou through:
 ascend my shoulder, firm keep thy seat,
 and reach my marshy court, and feast in state. 

he say, and bend his back; with nimble bind
 leap the light mouse, and clasp his arm around,
 then wonder float, and see with glad survey
 the wind bank resemble port at sea. 
but when aloft the curl water ride,
 and wet with azure wave his downy side,
 his thought grow conscious of approach woe,
 his idle tear with vain repentance flow,
 his lock he rend, his tremble foot he rear,
 thick beat his heart with unaccustomed fear;
 he sigh, and chill with danger, long for shore:
 he tail extend form a fruitless oar,
 half-drenched in liquid death his prayer he speak,
 and thus bemoan he from the dreadful lake. 

so pass Europa through the rapid sea,
 tremble and faint all the venturous way;
 with oary foot the bull triumphant road,
 and safe in Crete depose his lovely load. 
ah safe at last! may thus the frog support
 my tremble limb to reach his ample court. 

as thus he sorrow, death ambiguous grow,
 lo! from the deep a water- rose;
 he roll his sanguined eye, his bosom heave,
 and dart with active rage along the wave. 
confuse, the monarch see his hiss foe,
 and dive to shun the sable fate below. 
forgetful frog! the friend thy shoulder bear,
 unskilled in swim, float remote from shore. 
he grasp with fruitless hand to find relief,
 supine fall, and grind his tooth with grief,
 plunge he sink, and struggle mount again,
 and sink, and strive, but strive with fate in vain. 
the weighty moisture clog his hairy vest,
 and thus the prince his die rage express. 

nor thou, that fling i flounder from thy back,
 as from hard rock rebound the shatter wrack,
 nor thou shalt'scape thy due, perfidious king! 
pursue by vengeance on the swift wing:
 at land thy strength can never equal i,
 at sea to conquer, and by craft, be thy. 
but heaven have god, and god have search eye:
 you mouse, you mouse, my great avenger rise! 

this say, he sigh gasp, 'and gasp die. 
his death the young lychopinax espy,
 as on the flowery brink he pass the day,
 bask in the beam, and loiter life away. 
loud shriek the mouse, his shriek the shore repeat;
 the nibble nation learn their hero fate:
 grief, dismal grief ensue; deep murmur sound,
 and shrill fury fill the deafen ground. 
from lodge to lodge the sacred herald run,
 to fix their council with the rise sun;
 where great troxartas crown in glory reign,
 and wind his lengthen court beneath the plain;
 psycarpax father, father now no more! 
for poor psycarpax lie remote from shore;
 supine he lie! the silent water stand,
 and no kind billow waft the dead to land! 

homer battle of the frog, etc.  

book ii.

when rosy-fingered morn have tinge the cloud,
 around their monarch-mouse the nation croud,
 slow rose the sovereign, heave his anxious breast,
 and thus, the council fill with rage, address. 

for lose psycarpax much my soul endure,
 it be mine the private grief, the public, you. 
three warlike son adorn my nuptial bed,
 three son, alas, before their father dead! 
our old perish by the raven cat,
 as near my court the prince unheedful sit. 
our next, a engine fraught with danger draw,
 the portal gape, the bait be hang in view,
 dire art assist the trap, the fate decoy,
 and man unpity kill my gallant boy! 
the last, his country be hope, his parent pride,
 plunge in the lake by physignathus, die. 
Rouse all the war, my friend! avenge the deed,
 and bleed that monarch, and his nation bleed. 

his word in every breast inspire alarm,
 and careful Mars supply their host with arm.
 in verdant hull despoil of all their bean,
 the buskin warrior stalk along the plain:
 quill apt bind, their brace corselet make,
 face with the plunder of a cat they flay:
 the lamp round Boss afford their ample shield;
 large shell of nut their cover helmet yield;
 and over the region, with reflect ray,
 tall groves of needle for their lance blaze. 
dreadful in arm the march mouse appear;
 the wonder frog perceive the tumult near,
 forsake the water, thicken form a ring,
 and ask, and harken, whence the noise spring. 
when near the croud, disclose to public view,
 the valiant chief embasichytros draw:
 the sacred herald sceptre grace his hand,
 and thus his word express his king command. 

you frog! the mic with vengeance fire, advance,
 and deck in armour shake the shine lance:
 their hapless prince by physignathus slay,
 extend incumbent on the watery plain. 
then arm your host, the doubtful battle try;
 lead forth those frog that have the soul to die. 

the chief retire, the crowd the challenge hear,
 and proudly-swelling yet perplex appear,
 much they resent, yet much their monarch blame,
 who rise, speak to clear his taint fame. 

o friend, i never force the mouse to death,
 nor see the gasp of his late breath. 
he, vain of youth, our art of swim try '
and venturous, in the lake the wanton die. 
to vengeance now by false appearance lead,
 they point their anger at my guiltless head. 
but wage the rise war by deep device,
 and turn its fury on the crafty mouse. 
your king direct the way; my thought elate
 with hope of conquest, form design of fate. 
where high the bank their verdant surface heave,
 and the steep side confine the sleep wave,
 there, near the margin, clad in armour bright,
 sustain the first impetuous shock of fight:
 then, where the dance feather join the crest,
 let each brave frog his obvious mouse arrest;
 each strong grasp, headlong plunge a foe,
 until countless circle whirl the lake below;
 down sink the mouse in yield water drown;
 loud flash the water; and the shore resound:
 the frog triumphant tread the conquer plain,
 and raise their glorious trophy of the slay. 

he speak no more, his prudent scheme impart
 redouble ardour to the bold heart. 
green be the suit his arm hero choose,
 around their leg the Greaves of mallow close,
 green be the beet about their shoulder lay,
 and green the colewort, which the target make. 
form of the vary shell the water yield,
 their glossy helmet glisten over the field:
 and taper sea-reed for the polish spear,
 with upright order pierce the ambient air. 
thus dress for war, they take the appoint height,
 poize the long arm, and urge the promise fight. 

but now, where Jove irradiate spire arise,
 with star surround in aethereal sky,
 (a solemn council call) the brazen gate
 unbar; the god assume their golden seat:
 the sire superior lean, and point to show
 what wondrous combat mortal wage below:
 how strong, how large, the numerous hero stride! 
what length of lance they shake with warlike pride! 
what eager fire, their rapid march reveal! 
so the fierce centaur ravage over the Dales;
 and so confirm, the dare titan rise,
 heap hill on hill, and bid the god be foe. 

this see, the power his sacred visage rear,
 he cast a pity smile on worldly care,
 and ask what heavenly guardian take the list,
 or who the mouse, or who the frog assist? 

then thus to Pallas. if my daughter mind
 have join the mouse, why stay she still behind;
 draw forth by savoury steam they wind their way,
 and sure attendance round thy altar pay,
 where while the victim gratify their taste,
 they sport to please the goddess of the feast. 

thus speak the ruler of the spacious sky,
 but thus, resolve, the blue-eyed maid reply. 
in vain, my father! all their danger plead,
 to such, thy Pallas never grant her aid. 
my flowery wreath they petulant spoil,
 and rob my crystal lamp of feed oil. 
(ill follow ill) but what afflict i more,
 my veil, that idle race profane tear. 
the web be curious, wrought with art divine;
 relentless wretch! all the work be mine! 
along the loom the purple warp i spread,
 cast the light shoot, and cross the silver thread;
 in this their tooth a thousand breach tear,
 the thousand breach skilful hand repair,
 for which vile earthly Dunns thy daughter grieve,
 (the god, that use no coin, have none to give. 
and learning goddess never less can owe,
 neglect learning gain no wealth below.) 
nor let the frog to win my succour sue,
 those clamorous fool have lose my favour too. 
for late, when all the conflict cease at night,
 when mystretched sinew work with eager fight,
 when spend with glorious toil, i leave the field,
 and sink for slumber on my swell shield;
 lo from the deep, repel sweet repose,
 with noisy croak half the nation rise:
 devoid of rest, with ache brow i lay,
 until cock proclaim the crimson dawn of day. 
let all, like i, from either host forbear,
 nor tempt the fly fury of the spear. 
let heavenly blood (or what for blood may flow)
 adorn the conquest of a mean foe,
 some dare mouse may meet the wondrous odds,
 though god oppose, and brave the wound god. 
over gild cloud recline, the danger view,
 and be the war of mortal scene for you. 

so move the blue-eyed queen; her word persuade,
 great Jove assent, and the rest obey. 

homer battle of the: frog, etc.  

book iii.

now front to front the march army shine,
 halt ever they meet, and form the lengthen line:
 the chief conspicuous see and hear afar,
 give the loud signal to the rush war;
 their dreadful trumpet deep mouth hornet sound,
 the sound charge remurmur over the ground,
 even Jove proclaim a field of horror nigh,
 and roll low thunder through the trouble sky. 

first to the fight the large hypsiboas fly,
 and brave lychenor with a javelin slay. 
the luckless warrior fill with generous flame,
 stand foremost glitter in the post of fame;
 when in his liver strike, the javelin hang;
 the mouse fall thunder, and the target ring;
 prone to the ground he sink his close eye,
 and soil in dust his lovely tress lie. 

a spear at pelion troglodyte cast,
 the missive spear within the bosom past;
 death sable shade the faint frog surround,
 and life red tide run ebb from the wound. 
embasichytros feel seutlaeus dart
 transfix, and quiver in his pant heart;
 but great artophagus avenge the slay,
 and big seutlaeus tumble load the plain,
 and polyphonus dies, a frog renowned,
 for boastful speech and turbulence of sound;
 deep through the belly pierce, supine he lie,
 and breathe his soul against the face of day. 

the strong lymnocharis, who view with ire,
 a victor triumph, and a friend expire;
 and fierce fling where troglodyte fight;
 with heave arm a rocky fragment catch,
 (a warrior verse in art, of sure retreat,
 but art in vain elude impend fate;)
 full on his sinewy neck the fragment fall,
 and over his eye-lid cloud eternal dwell. 
lychenor (second of the glorious name)
 stride advance, and take no wander aim;
 through all the frog the shine javelin fly,
 and near the vanquish mouse the victor die;

the dreadful stroke crambophagus affright,
 long breed to banquet, less inure to fight,
 heedless he run, and stumble over the steep,
 and wild flounder flash up the deep;
 lychenor follow with a downward blow,
 reach in the lake his unrecovered foe;
 gasp he roll, a purple stream of blood
 distain the surface of the silver flood;
 through the wide wound the rush entrails throng,
 and slow the breathless carcase float along. 

lymnisius good tyroglyphus assail,
 prince of the mouse that haunt the flowery vale,
 lose to the milky fare and rural seat,
 he come to perish on the bank of fate. 

the dread pternoglyphus demand the fight,
 which tender calaminthius shun by flight,
 drop the green target, spring quit the foe,
 glide through the lake, and safe dive below. 
but dire pternophagus divide his way
 through break rank, and lead the dreadful day. 
no nibble prince excel in fierceness more,
 his parent feed he on the savage boar;
 but where his lance the field with blood imbrue,
 swift as he move, hydrocharis pursue,
 until fall in death he lie, a shatter stone
 sound on the neck, and crush all the bone,
 his blood pollute the verdure of the plain,
 and from his nostril burst the gush brain. 

lycopinax with borbocaetes fight
 a blameless frog, who humble life delight;
 the fatal javelin unrelenting fly,
 and darkness seal the gentle croaker eye. 

incense prassophagus with spritely bind,
 bear cnissiodortes off the rise ground,
 thendragshim over the lake deprive of breath,
 and downward plunge, sink his soul to death. 
but now the great psycarpax shine afar,
 (scarce he so great who loss provoke the war)
 swift to revenge his fatal javelin flee,
 and through the liver strike pelusius dead;
 his freckle corpse before the victor fall,
 his soul indignant fight the shade of hell. 

this see pelobates, and from the flood
 heave with both hand a monstrous mass of mud,
 the cloud obscene over all the hero fly,
 dishonour his brown face, and blot his eye. 
enrage, and wild sputter, from the shore
 a stone immense of size the warrior bear,
 a load for labour earth, (who bulk to raise,
 ask ten degenerate mouse of modern day.) 
full on the leg arrive the crush wound;
 the frog supportless, writh upon the ground. 

thus flush, the victor war with matchless force,
 until loud craugaside arrest his course,
 hoarse-croaking threat precede! with fatal speed
 deep through the belly run the point reed,
 then strong tug, return imbrue with gore,
 and on the pile his reek entrails bear. 

the lame sitophagus oppress with pain,
 creep from the desperate danger of the plain;
 and where the ditch rise weed supply
 to spread their lowly shade beneath the sky,
 there lurk the silent mouse relieve from heat
 and safe embowred, avoid the chance of fate. 

but here troxartes, physignathus there,
 whirl the dire fury of the point spear:
 but where the foot around its ankle ply,
 troxartes wound, and physignathus fly,
 halt to the pool, a safe retreat to find,
 and trail a dangle length of leg behind. 
the mouse still urge, still the frog retire,
 and half in anguish of the flight expire:

then pious ardor young prassaeus bring,
 betwixt the fortune of contend king:
 lank, harmless frog! with force hardly grow,
 he dart the reed in combat not his own,
 which faint tinkle on troxartes shield,
 hang at the point, and drop upon the field. 

now noble tower over the rest appear
 a gallant prince that far transcend his year,
 pride of his sire, and glory of his house,
 and more a Mars in combat than a mouse:
 he action bold, robust his ample frame,
 and meridarpax his resound name. 
the warrior single from the fight crowd,
 boast the dire honour of his arm aloud;
 then strut near the lake, with look elate;
 to all its nation threat approach fate. 
and such his strength, the silver lake around
 may roll their water over unpeopled ground. 
but powerful Jove, who show no less his grace
 to frog that perish, than to human race,
 feel soft compassion rise in his soul,
 and shake his sacred head, that shake the pole. 
then thus to all the gaze power begin
 the sire of god, and frog, and mouse, and man,

what sea of blood i view! what world of slay! 
a Iliad rise from a day campaign! 
how fierce his javelin over the tremble lake
 the black-fured hero meridarpax shake! 
unless some favour deity descend,
 soon will the frog loquacious empire end. 
let dreadful Pallas winge with pity fly,
 and make her aegis blaze before his eye:
 while Mars refulgent on his rattle car,
 arrest his rage rival of the war. 

he cease, recline with attentive head,
 when thus the glorious god of combat say. 
nor Pallas, Jove! though Pallas take the field,
 with all the terror of her hiss shield,
 nor Mars himself, though Mars in armour bright
 ascend his car, and wheel amid the fight;
 not these can drive the des'prate mouse afar,
 or change the fortune of the bleed war. 
let all go forth, all heaven in arm arise,
 or launch thy own red thunder from the sky.] 
such ardent bolt as fly that wondrous day,
 when heap of titan mix with mountain lay,
 when all the giant-race enormous fall,
 and huge Enceladus be hurl to hell. 

it be thus the armipotent advise the god,
 when from his throne the cloud-compell nod,
 deep lengthen thunder run from pole to pole,
 Olympus tremble as the thunder roll. 
then swift he whirl the brandish bolt around,
 and headlong dart it at the distant ground,
 the bolt discharge enwrap with lightning fly,
 and rend its flame passage through the sky,
 then earth inhabitant, the nibler, shake,
 and frog, the dweller in the water, quake. 
yet still the mouse advance their dread design,
 and the last danger threat the croak line,
 until Jove that inly mourn the loss they bear,
 with strange assistant fill the fright shore. 

pour from the neighbour strand, deform to view,
 they march, a sudden unexpected crew! 
strong suit of armor round their body close,
 which, like thick anvil, blunt the force of blow;
 in wheel march turn oblique they go;
 with harpy claw their limb divide below;
 fell sheer the passage to their mouth command;
 from out the flesh their bone by nature stand;
 broad spread their back, their shine shoulder rise;
 unnumbered joint distort their lengthen thigh;
 with nervous cord their hand be firm brace;
 their round black eye-ball in their bosom place;
 on eight long foot the wondrous warrior tread;
 and either end alike supply a head. 
these, mortal wit to call the crab, agree,
 the god have other name for thing than we. 

now where the jointure from their loin depend,
 the hero tail with severe grasp they rend. 
here, short of foot, deprive the power to fly,
 there, without hand, upon the field they lie. 
wrench from their hold, and scatter all around,
 the bend lance heap the cumber ground. 
helpless amazement, fear pursue fear,
 and mad confusion through their host appear:
 over the wild waste with headlong flight they go,
 or creep conceal in vault hole below. 

but down Olympus to the western sea
 far-shooting Phoebus drive with faint ray;
 and a whole war (so Jove ordain) begin,
 be fight, and cease, in one revolve sun. 
