the actor.

address to Bonnell Thornton, ESQ

by the same.

act, dear Thornton, its perfection draw
 from no observance of mechanic law:
 no settle maxim of a favourite stage,
 no rule deliver down from age to age,
 let player nice mark they as they will,
 can ever entail hereditary skill. 
if, among the humble hearer of the pit,
 some curious veteran critic chance to sit,
 be he please more because it be act so
 by booth and cibber thirty year ago? 
the mind recall a object hold more dear,
 and hate the copy, that it come so near. 
why love we wilks air, booth nervous tone;
 in they it be natural, it be all their own. 
a Garrick genius must our wonder raise,
 but give his mimic no reflect praise. 
thrice happy genius, who unrivalled name
 shall live for ever in the voice of fame! 
it be thy to lead, with more than magic skill,
 the train of captive passion at thy will;
 to bid the burst tear spontaneous flow
 in the sweet sense of sympathetic woe:
 through every vein i feel a chillness creep,
 when horror such as thy have murder sleep;
 and at the old man look and frantic stare
 it be Lear alarm i, for i see he there. 
nor yet confine to tragic walk alone,
 the comic muse too claim thou for her own. 
with each delightful requisite to please,
 taste, spirit, judgement, elegance, and ease,
 familiar nature form thy only rule,
 from ranger rake to drugger vacant fool. 
with power so pliant, and so various bless,
 that what we see the last, we like the best. 
not idle please, at judgement dear expense,
 but burst outrageous with the laugh of sense:

perfection top, with weary toil and pain,
 it be genius only that can hope to gain. 
the play'r profession (though i hate the phrase,
 it be so mechanie in these modern day)
 lie not in trick, or attitude, or start,
 nature true knowledge be his only art. 
the strong-felt passion bolt into the face,
 the mind untouched, what be it but grimace? 
to this one standard make your just appeal,
 here lie the golden secret; learn to feel. 
or fool, or monarch, happy, or distress,
 no actor please that be not possess. 

once on the stage, in Rome decline day,
 when christian be the subject of their play,
 ever persecution drop her iron rod,
 and man still wage a impious war with god,
 a actor flourish of no vulgar fame,
 nature disciple, and Genest his name. 
a noble object for his skill he choose,
 a martyr die amid insult foe;
 resign with patience to religion law,
 yet brave monarch in his saviour cause. 
fill with the idea of the secret part,
 he feel a zeal beyond the reach of art,
 while look and voice, and gesture, all express
 a kindred ardour in the player breast;
 till as the flame through all his bosom run,
 he lose the actor, and commence the man:
 profess the faith, his pagan god deny,
 and what he act then, he after die. 

the player province they but vain try,
 who want these power, deportment, voice, and eye. 

the critic sight it be only grace can please,
 no figure charm we if it have not ease. 
there be, who think the stature all in all,
 nor like the hero, if he be not tall. 
the feeling sense all other want supply,
 i rate no actor merit from his size. 
superior height require superior grace,
 and what be a giant with a vacant face? 

theatric monarch, in their tragic gait,
 affect to mark the solemn pace of state. 
one foot put forward in position strong,
 the other, like its vassal, drag along. 
so grave each motion, so exact and slow,
 like wooden monarch at a puppet-show. 
the mien delight we that have native grace,
 but affectation ill supply its place. 

unskilful actor, like your mimic apes,
 will writhe their body in a thousand shape;
 however foreign from the poet art,
 no tragic hero but admire a start. 
what though unfeeling of the nervous line;
 who but allow his attitude be fine? 
while a whole minute equipoised he stand,
 till praise dismiss he with her echo hand! 
resolve, though nature hate the tedious pause,
 by perseverance to extort applause. 
when Romeo sorrow at his juliet doom,
 with eager madness burst the canvas tomb,
 the sudden whirl, stretch leg, and lift staff,
 which please the vulgar, make the critic laugh. 

to paint the passion force, and mark it well,
 the proper action nature self will tell:
 no please power distortion ever express,
 and nice judgement always loathe excess. 
in sock or buskin, who overleap the bound,
 disgust our reason, and the taste confound. 
of all the evil which the stage molest,
 i hate your fool who overact his jest:
 who murder what the poet fine write,
 and, like a bungler, haggle all his wit,
 with shrug, and grin, and gesture out of place,
 and write a foolish comment with his face. 
old Johnson once, though cibber perter vein
 but mean groups he with a numerous train,
 with steady face, and sober humorous mien,
 fill the strong outline of the comic scene. 
what be write down, with decent utterance speak,
 betray no symptom of the conscious joke;
 the very man in look, in voice, in air,
 and though upon the stage, appear no player. 

the word and action shall conjoint suit,
 but act word be labour too minute. 
grimace will ever lead the judgement wrong;
 while sober humour mark the impression strong. 
her proper trait the fix attention hit,
 and bring i close to the poet wit;
 with she delight over each scene i go,
 well-pleased, and not ashamed of be so. 

but let the generous actor still forbear
 to copy feature with a mimic care! 
it be a poor skill, which every fool can reach,
 a vile stage-custom, honour in the breach. 
worse as more close, the disingenuous art
 but show the wanton looseness of the heart. 
when i behold a wretch, of talent mean,
 drag private foible on the public scene,
 forsake nature fair and open road
 to mark some whim, some strange peculiar mode,
 fire with disgust, i loath his servile plan,
 despise the mimic, and abhor the man. 
go to the lame, to hospital repair,
 and hunt for humour in distortion there! 
fill up the measure of the motley whim
 with shrug, wink, snuffle, and convulsive limb;
 then shame at once, to please a trifle age,
 good sense, good manner, virtue, and the stage! 

it be not enough the voice be sound and clear,
 it be modulation that must charm the ear. 
when desperate heroine grieve with tedious moan,
 and whine their sorrow in a see-saw tone,
 the same soft sound of unimpassioned woe
 can only make the yawn hearer doze. 

the voice all mode of passion can express,
 that mark the proper word with proper stress. 
but none emphatic can that actor call,
 who lay a equal emphasis on all. 

some over the tongue the labour measure roll
 slow and deliberate as the part toll,
 point every stop, mark every pause so strong,
 their word, like stage-procession, stalk along. 
all affectation but create disgust,
 and even in speak we may seem too just. 

nor proper, Thornton, can those sound appear
 which bring not number to thy nice ear:
 in vain for they the please measure flow,
 who recitation run it all to prose;
 repeat what the poet set not down,
 the verb disjoint from its friendly noun,
 while pause, and break, and repetition join
 to make a discord in each tuneful line. 

some placid nature fill the allot scene
 with lifeless drone, insipid and serene;
 while other thunder every couplet over,
 and almost crack your ear with rant and roar. 

more nature oft and fine stroke be show,
 in the low whisper than tempestuous tone. 
and Hamlet hollow voice and fix amaze,
 more powerful terror to the mind convey,
 than he, who swell with big impetuous rage,
 Bullies the bulky phantom off the stage. 

he, who in earnest study over his part,
 will find true nature cling about his heart. 
the mode of grief be not include all
 in the white handkerchief and mournful drawl;
 a single look more mark the internal woe,
 than all the wind of the lengthen oh. 
up to the face the quick sensation fly,
 and dart its meaning from the speak eye! 
love, transport, madness, anger, scorn, despair,
 and all the passion, all the soul be there. 

in vain Ophelia give her flowret round,
 and with her straw fantastic strew the ground,
 in vain now sing, now heave the desperate sigh,
 if frenzy sit not in the trouble eye. 
in cibber look command sorrow speak,
 and call the tear fast trickle down my cheek. 

there be a fault which stir the critic rage;
 a want of due attention on the stage. 
i have see actor, and admire one too,
 who tongue wind up set forward from their cue;
 in their own speech who whine, or roar away,
 yet seem unmoved at what the rest may say;
 who eye and thought on different object roam,
 until the prompter voice recall they home. 

divest yourself of hearer, if you can,
 and strive to speak, and be the very man. 
why shall the wellbred actor wish to know
 who fit above tonight, or who below? 
so, amid the harmonious tone of grief or rage,
 italian squaller oft disgrace the stage;
 when, with a simper leer, and bow profound,
 the squeak Cyrus greet the box round;
 or proud Mandane, of imperial race,
 familiar drop a curtsy to her grace. 

to suit the dress demand the actor art,
 yet there be those who over-dress the part. 
to some prescriptive right give settle thing,
 black wig to murderer, feather hat to king:
 but Michael Cassio may be drink enough,
 though all his feature be not grime with snuff. 
why shall Pol peachum shine in satin clothes? 
why every devil dance in scarlet hose? 

but in stage-custom what offend i most
 be the slip-door, and slowly-rising ghost. 
tell i, nor count the question too severe,
 why need the dismal powder form appear? 

when chill horror shake the affright king,
 and guilt torment he with her scorpion sting;
 when keen feeling at his bosom pull,
 and fancy tell he that the seat be full;
 why need the ghost usurp the monarch place,
 to frighten child with his mealy face? 
the king alone shall form the phantom there,
 and talk and tremble at the vacant chair. 

if belvidera she love loss deplore,
 why for twin spectre burst the yawn floor? 
when with disorder start, and horrid cry,
 she paint the murder form before her eye,
 and still pursue they with a frantic stare,
 it be pregnant madness bring the vision there. 
more instant horror will enforce the scene,
 if all her shudder be at shape unseen. 

poet and actor thus, with blend skill,
 mould all our passion to their instant will;
 it be thus, when feeling Garrick tread the stage,
 (the speak comment of his shakespeare page)
 oft as i drink the word with greedy ear,
 i shake with horror, or dissolve with tear. 

o, never may folly seize the throne of taste,
 nor dullness lie the realm of genius waste! 
no bounce cracker ape the thunderer fire,
 no tumbler float upon the bend wire! 
more natural use to the stage belong,
 than tumbler, monster, pantomime, or song. 
for other purpose be that spot design:
 to purge the passion, and reform the mind,
 to give to nature all the force of art,
 and while it charm the ear to mend the heart. 

Thornton, to thou, i dare with truth commend,
 the decent stage as virtue natural friend. 
though oft debase with scene profane and loose,
 no reason weigh against it be proper use. 
though the lewd priest his sacred function shame,
 religion perfect law be still the same. 

shall they, who trace the passion from their rise,
 show scorn her feature, her own image vice? 
who teach the mind it be proper force to scan,
 and hold the faithful mirror up to man,
 shall their profession ever provoke disdain,
 who stand the foremost in the mortal train,
 who lend reflection all the grace of art,
 and strike the precept home upon the heart? 

yet, hapless artist! though thy skill can raise
 the burst peal of universal praise,
 though at thy beck applause delight stand,
 and lift, briareus like, her hundred hand,
 know, fame award thou but a partial breath! 
not all thy talent brave the stroke of death. 
poet to age yet unborn appeal,
 and late time the eternal nature feel. 
though blend here the praise of bard and player,
 while more than half become the actor share,
 relentless death untwist the mingle fame,
 and sink the player in the poet name. 
the pliant muscle of the various face,
 the mien that give each sentence strength and grace,
 the tuneful voice, the eye that speak the mind,
 be go, nor leave a single trace behind. 
