Felix and Constance.

a poem, take from boccace.

to the right honourable the countess of Pomfret.

blow on the roll surface of the deep,
 the mourn maid at length recline to sleep;
 while conscious vision labour in her breast,
 and airy spectre discompose her rest. 
sometime she seem upon her native shore,
 bless with the beauteous youth, as heretofore;
 hear he converse, while from his tuneful tongue
 melodious sense, in melt music, ring:
 sometime she find, or seem at least to find,
 his shatter vessel force before the wind,
 with foam wave, and furious tempest toss,
 the mast, and break sail, and sailor lose:
 sometime her dream, in frightful form, display
 a crowd of martyr, cruel love have make;
 lament thisbe shade before she stand,
 show her capacious wound, and purple hand;
 now lyric Sappho in the tide expire,
 now faithful Porcia eat the live fire. 
at length, awake from her dream, she hear
 a latian voice, which thus salute her ear:

unhappy christian maid! (for such, at least,
 you, by your decent habit, seem express)
 say whence you come, and hither how convey,
 expose to sea, without the seaman aid? 

soon as the nymph her native language hear,
 her fright soul be fill with doubt and fear:
 she think, the adverse wind, or refluent main,
 have force she back to Liparis again;
 till, start up, a spacious land she spy;
 barbarian cave and cot her sight surprise:
 she see a matron on the neighbour strand;
 nor know the matron, nor the neighbour land. 
o! whither, whither be i blow? she cry;
 what den and cave appear before my eye? 
and who inhabit they? or beast of prey,
 or man, less kind, and crueler than they? 

to who the matron: fly, nor dare to trust. 
the faithless people of this hate coast:
 here sailor oft their hapless fate deplore;
 who scape the sea, be wreck upon the shore:
 for, when the forceful wind, and foam deep,
 to this inhuman coast impel the ship;
 around the beach the rude barbarian stray,
 destroy the mariner, and seize their prey;
 by other death, they keep themselves alive,
 subsist by rapine, and by ruin thrive. 

unhappy fate! the mourn nymph reply;
 o! have i perish in the safe tide! 
for much i fear, the land i now survey,
 doom i to great evil, than the sea:
 and yet what great ill can fate provide,
 than thus to seek for death, and be deny? 
not so my Felix scape the rage wave;
 he Neptune sink, and i unkind save;
 save, only to increase my former woe;
 to fall, perhaps, by more ungenerous foe;
 or to indulge some lustful tyrant will:
 but, o you heaven! avert the fatal ill;
 protect my honour in this foreign coast,
 the only bless which i have not lose! 

the listen matron wonder with surprise;
 nor hear, unmoved, the weep damsel cry:
 but lead she to her neighbour cottage, where
 she cheer her faint soul with homely fare;
 condole her grief, and beg she to disclose
 her country, care, and cause of all her woe. 
excite by her word, the pensive maid
 prelude with sigh, and thus, reluctant, say:

o hospitable dame! why will you move
 a wretch to tell a tale of hapless love? 
which, in relate, must renew my grief;
 nor can i hope, nor you bestow, relief:
 yet, since you seem a partner of my care,
 it be just a partner know the weight i bear. 

not far from aetna flame mount i come,
 from Liparis, and Constance be my name:
 great honour and estate my sire possess,
 and, o! too much to make his daughter bless. 
i once with fame and fortune be supply,
 nor envy empress their pomp and pride;
 now, like a meteor, fall from its height,
 my glory vanish, and extinct my light —
 full twenty year in happiness i pass,
 and every year be happy than the last. 
young Felix then his love begin to show;
 (young Felix be the cause of all my woe)
 a beauteous youth, endow with manly grace;
 but far his noble soul excel his face:
 and, though his niggard fate have wealth deny,
 the want of wealth by virtue be supply. 
two year to win my doubtful heart he strive,
 two year my doubtful heart decline his love:
 yet still he press i with his amorous tale,
 nor find at length, it be fruitless to assail:
 for, by degree, insensible i come
 to first approve, and then indulge, his flame;
 nor can his suit, nor will his vow reprove;
 i hear with joy, nor think it sin to love;
 till in my breast imperious Cupid reign:
 alas! how easy love a conquest gain! 
and now my reason check my will no more;
 but feed the flame, it strive to quench before:
 yet dare not a immodest thought approve;
 love rule my heart, but honour rule my love:
 i scorn to stain my virtue with a king;
 as much my lover scorn so mean a thing. 
what can we do? what can love inspire? 
the youth reveal his passion to my sire;
 and in such melt accent make it know,
 as may have move all father, but my own:
 but proud he my lover suit repel;
 and, frown, thus our mutual ruin seal:

no more, presumptuous youth! thy passion name;
 suppress the spark, before they rise to flame. 
how dare thou, vulgar wretch, ignoble bear,
 my daughter scandal, and her father scorn! 
aspire to wed so far above thy fate? 
he stern say, and force he from his gate. 

o avarice! what evil do thou cause,
 break the band of love, and nature law? 
go, hungry god! and rule the narrow-souled;
 collect, and guard their curse, bewitch gold;
 fit province for thy reign! too mean to prove
 the charm of nuptial life, and joy of love! 
ah! what avail to gain a pompous name,
 with boast title of paternal fame,
 derive from ancestor of noble blood? 
thing common to the vicious, and the proud! 
refulgent equipage, and gaudy show,
 fictitious ornament of real woe! 
if love be absent, pomp and worldly gain
 but gild our care, and varnish over our pain. 
o! have my cruel father think like i,
 i never have prove the danger of the sea,
 nor ever wander here a banish maid;
 and, o dear Felix! thou have not be dead! —

so speak the tremble nymph; and, while she speak,
 the pearly torrent stream down her cheek;
 cold clammy sweat, and throb sigh arise,
 slow move the blood, and dizzy roll her eye;
 so much affect with her lover fate,
 she struggle, groan, and faint from her seat. 
her hostess straight a grateful cordial seek,
 and to her lip apply the cheerful draught,
 wash her temple with revive oil;
 the vital spirit answer to her toil;
 the purple tide begin to roll again,
 again diffuse life through every vein:
 and now she sigh, raise her droop head;
 and, be my death, she cry, again delay? 
why do you check i on the brink of fate? 
better the soul have flee her loathsome seat. 
death be the only good i wish to know,
 end of my pain, and period of my woe. 

to who reply the dame: unhappy fair! 
rely on heaven, nor let your soul despair:
 teach i to give your trouble heart relief;
 or teach i how, at least, to share your grief:
 your mournful story much affect my mind;
 yet something seem remain still behind. 

o! much, Constantia say, remain to come,
 the fatal part, that finish my doom:
 for, when my Felix, (Felix now no more!) 
be banish from my haughty father door,
 not able to obtain i for his bride,
 nor will to resign i, though deny;
 hope, from despair, his dare soul conceive;
 a bark he build, to plough the briny wave:
 then call a few domestic to his aid,
 embrace i in his arm, and sigh, say:

o thou, for ever dear, for ever bless,
 at once the joy, and trouble of my breast! 
since poverty expel i from thy arm,
 since wealth alone be worthy of thy charm;
 i swear by all the mighty power above,
 (sad fate, that drive i from the nymph i love!) 
to try my fortune on remot shore,
 and seek the gold, thy sire so much adore. 
perhaps the planet, unpropitious here,
 in other clime may kind aspect wear;
 may lead i where the rocky diamond lie,
 or where the golden mine may wealth supply;
 if not, the last sad pleasure be to die. 

such be the fatal vow he rash make;
 o fatal vow, and fatal obey! 
strike dumb, my tear the want of word supply;
 he, mix with i, increase the pearly tide:
 yet, lest i shall his resolution shake,
 he rush away, and mount on the deck:
 his hasty crew expand the swell sail,
 strong roll the sea before impulsive gale;
 the crooked keel the frothy flood divide,
 swift fly the ship, and rush through the tide. 

my lover long my gaze eye pursue;
 as long my lover keep i in his view:
 reluctant so, depart soul prepare
 to wing their doubtful flight, they know not where;
 reluctant so, expire body lie,
 nor will these to stay, nor those to fly. 

twice twenty day i spend in fruitless tear,
 before the fatal tiding reach my ear;
 how Felix, sail over the watery way,
 be wreck on rock, and perish in the sea. 
o! then what trouble, grief, and anxious care,
 confuse my soul, and bend it to despair! 
i curse the cause, that force he to expire;
 o heaven! forgive i, if i curse my sire:
 i flee his house, and seek the lonely grove,
 (the gloomy witness of my former love!) 
where, once resolve to seek the shade below,
 i draw the knife, to strike the mortal blow;
 till piety the cruel thought suppress,
 and check the roman courage of my breast:
 i tremble see two doubtful path; nor know,
 which path be best to shun, or which pursue;
 oppose passion in my bosom strive,
 and conscience now prevail, and now my love. 

as when the wind and tide a contest make,
 the sailer, tremble, see his vessel shake;
 this way, and that, and both, by turn recline,
 as swell the surge, or blow the furious wind:
 so be my soul with different notion sway,
 of this, of that, of both, and all, afraid. 
ah! why shall mortal of their reason boast,
 which most desert they, when they want it most? 
for, when the trouble mind confuse with pain,
 it be but a ignis-fatuus of the brain;
 which, if our wander soul from virtue stray,
 but lead we more and more from virtue way:
 so lead it i to stem the devious tide,
 and seek for death, where wretched Felix die. 

not distant far, a fish vessel stand,
 nor whole on the land, nor in the flood:
 arrive to this, i row it from the shore;
 and, bend on death, the tide i now explore;
 expect, soon, the friendly-furious wave
 will give my trouble and myself a grave. 
but, when i see the billow round i flow,
 the boundless sky above, and sea below;
 scar with the terror of the watery space,
 i wrap my mantle round my timorous face:
 then lay i down, to all the danger blind;
 chance be my compass, and my pilot, wind. 
blow here and there, i float on the deep,
 which rock my eye, but not my fear, asleep:
 for now my dream soul, in fancy maze,
 a thousand tragic airy ghost survey;
 which flutter round i, and reproach, say;
 die, coward! follow Felix to the shade:
 why will thou wish to live, now he be dead? 
but when, at length, your friendly voice i hear,
 my vision cease, the spectre disappear. 
thus have i tell, but can dispel my care;
 for who can conquer love, or cure despair? 

thus she; and thus capresa speak again:
 (so be she call, who wake she on the main)
 unhappy nymph! compose your trouble mind,
 nor doubt the gracious guide of human kind:
 that god, who save you from the foamy wave,
 will doubtless guard the life, he deign to save. 
vouchsafe to take the counsel i can lend:
 at Susa heaven have bless i with a friend,
 much fame for wealth, for pious action more;
 no husband, and no child, but the poor:
 let i conduct you to her friendly gate;
 (too small my cottage for a guest so great)
 she will protect you from barbarian foe,
 with prudent counsel mitigate your woe,
 and charm your ruffle soul to soft repose. 

bless partner of my grief! the damsel say,
 some angel sure send you to my aid;
 for now some dawn ray of hope appear,
 that chase away the cloud of dark despair. 
this pause of pain, and interval of grace,
 shall be employ in search of future peace. 
then guide, and guard i to your noble friend;
 so may you never want this aid you lend! 
and, as we travel, deign to let i know,
 to who so many thanks i just owe;
 what hapless fortune cast you on this land,
 what occupation here employ your hand. 
sweet conversation may suspend my care,
 dispel my grief, or make it less severe:
 so shall i easy reach the neighbour town;
 and, listen to your fate, forget my own. 

thus she; and thus the pensive dame reply:
 (with briny drop distil from her eye)
 fain will i, lovely nymph! suspend your care,
 dispel your grief, or make it less severe:
 but, be i all my fortune to explain,
 it will not alleviate, but increase your pain;
 for in your soul such spark of nature glow,
 as make you share your neighbour joy or woe. 
the christian faith i secret embrace,
 though doom to dwell among a pagan race:
 trepanum waste all my bloom of life,
 where long i live, a farmer happy wife:
 my careful, love husband till the soil,
 nor be the field ungrateful to his toil:
 for, every summer, Ceres crown the plain;
 each autumn, fill the barn with golden grain:
 so thick the verdant harvest yearly stand,
 the meadow seem to groan beneath their load. 
our fleecy flock be fruitful of their young,
 hail be our ox, and our horse strong;
 nor do our cow of milky produce fail,
 but with distend udder fill the pail. 
it be then, alas! how often have i cry,
 i will not wish to be a monarch bride! 
when all around my little infant come,
 hang on my knee, and lisp their mama name;
 or meet their father with the evening ray,
 embrace his neck, and kiss his care away. 
soon as their riper age can labour bear,
 we send they forth to feed the fleecy care;
 where often have we spend the summer day,
 charm to behold the wanton cattle play. 
what pleasure it be to see the skip lamb? 
what music, when they bleat for their dam? 
we think our joy can never be increase;
 love, peace, and plenty join to make we bless. 
but see how fortune hold her fickle reign! 
she raise up, to tumble down again:
 for now our thread of happiness be spin;
 the gain of twenty year be lose in one. 
it be in the season, when the verdant Mead
 begin to ask the mower crooked blade;
 before the wheat receive the yellow stain,
 or milky juice be harden into grain;
 a gale of poison baleful eurus cast;
 the vernal product sicken with the blast;
 our meadow straight a saffron scene disclose,
 our infant apple quit the blight bough;
 pease, wheat, and barley, wither in the field,
 and nature one abortive harvest yield:
 nor stop it here; the fly plague begin
 to spread the bane in beast, and thence to man:
 first die our sheep upon the russet plain,
 next swell our ox with a fatal Blain;
 here tumble, over her meat, the mope cow;
 there drop the pant horse before the plough:
 at length the dire contagion spread so wide,
 my virgin child make the tomb their bride. 
this nature bear — but when our landlord send
 his officer, to seize my lord for rent;
 and he, to shun the prison, fly the shore;
 list on the sea, to tug the labour oar;
 i weep, i rave, i curse the baleful air;
 and flee my native land, but not my care. 
thus, banish here, a widow, and a wife,
 condemn to suffer, not enjoy a life,
 i toil for those, who catch the finny prey;
 the toil be great, but very small the pay! 
their scaly fry to market oft i bear,
 oft in the ocean wash their thready snare;
 and then be wash, when, with great surprise,
 you, and your float vessel, meet my eye. 

now heaven defend we both! the nymph reply;
 and can such rage in christian mind reside? 
what, can the curse, inhuman tyrant wrest
 thy tender husband from thy love breast,
 when all thy wealth be lose, thy child dead? 
o virtue! virtue! whither be thou flee? 
why must such evil on the guiltless flow? 
you heaven! be innocence reward so? 

so speak the nymph; her friend no more reply;
 for now priscilla dome attract their eye:
 approach to her friendly gate, they find
 the generous lady deal alm around
 to needy soul, a hapless, helpless crowd,
 who daily bless her hand for daily food! 
when thus capresa: hail, for ever bless! 
it be godlike thus to succour the distress:
 yet none of these, who claim your christian aid,
 deserve it more than this unhappy maid;
 who once be bless with fame and riches too,
 though fickle fortune now be turn her foe;
 unlike the mendicant, who daily share
 your friendly bounty, and maternal care. 

to who the lady, with a gracious look,
 that seem to breathe compassion, while she speak:
 sure decency forbid, a guest so great
 shall, undistinguished, with the vulgar eat. 
no; deck my table with the choice fare;
 the nymph, with i, a kind repast shall share;
 for, by she look if truth may be divine,
 that lovely body clothes a lovely mind. 

she say, and Constance low obeisance make;
 then glad follow, where Priscilla lead. 
within the gate a spacious room she find,
 who wall be beautify with tapestry round;
 where pious tale appear, so lively wrought,
 the work seem vital, and the figure think:
 here, in the shade, the Jewish patriarch stand,
 feast the son of heaven with earthly food;
 while, there, the good Samaritan confess
 his kindness, and reproach the cruel priest;
 with many more, a charitable band,
 the skilful labour of priscilla hand. 

hither the dame convey a sweet repast;
 rich meat, and rosy wine the table grace:
 they eat, they drink, in please converse join;
 and cheere at once the body and the mind. 
the call of nature be soon suppress,
 thus speak the lady to her youthful guest:

say, lovely stranger! (for i long to know;
 so may propitious heaven remove thy woe!) 
whence thus reduce? by famine, sword, or fire? 
what sire thy beauty boast, what land thy sire? 
perhaps some princess, banish from she home,
 thus condescend to grace my rustic dome:
 if so, i great fear, my homely feast
 have be unworthy of my royal guest. 

she say, the nymph unfold her tale again;
 the prudent dame attempt to sooth her pain,
 and thus reply: though weighty be your woe,
 the weighty ill, with patience, light grow:
 then bear with patience all that heaven design,
 who way be just, though difficult to find,
 plan for the general good of human kind. 
God path in wind maze often lie,
 too intricate for feeble reason eye;
 most regular, when in confusion lose;
 most constant, when they seem to vary most. 
perhaps his mercy force you thus to roam,
 to shun a more unhappy fate at home;
 for with one evil he remove a worse,
 and bless oft with what we think a curse. 
then let your soul at fortune not repine;
 but trust in heaven protection, next, in i:
 in i you still shall find a faithful friend,
 with who, in time, your trouble all may end:
 but, since you now be harass out with woe,
 refresh your weary soul with sweet repose;
 and when you wake, at morning, may you find
 heaven balmy comfort heal your wound mind! 

thus cheere, the nymph obsequious withdraw,
 and bathe her care in sleep refresh dew;
 till Phoebus, rise from the shade of night,
 with rosy key unlocked the gate of light:
 bright as his beam, arise the beauteous maid;
 and, to her patroness return, say:

what thanks, propitious lady! shall i give
 for all the godlike bounty i receive? 
o! let my silence thank you; for i know,
 word can express the gratitude i owe. 

to who reply the venerable dame:
 no other thanks, but gratitude, i claim:
 the term of charity be never hard,
 love and compassion be their own reward:
 a soul, that succour virtue, when distress,
 can with reflection make a noble feast;
 which nourish the mind, and overpay
 a generous deed with self-approving praise. 

such be their converse, till domestic care
 invite Priscilla from the youthful fair;
 who sit in pensive solitude, and strive
 to soften, or suspend the pain of love. 
at length the linen on her knee she spread,
 and with her needle work the docile thread. 
young thisbe fate she first begin to frame;
 but soon commit her labour to the flame:
 next draw she hero sink in the main;
 then raze the finish image out again:
 both these displease she, though judicious art,
 and ray of nature shine in every part. 
at length her own unhappy tale she choose,
 and lively paint the scene of all her woe:
 her charm Felix first the linen grace;
 by who her father, frown stern, she place:
 her lover part next to these appear;
 (but, weep here, she soil her work with tear)
 next, on the sea, she draw her float ship;
 next, her own boat, slow-wandering over the deep:
 by these she fix capresa on the strand,
 who wake she first, and welcome she to land:
 the good Priscilla last employ her art,
 who aspect speak the bounty of her heart;
 her friendly roof, a refuge for the poor,
 the horn of plenty, pendent over the door,
 diffuse blessing still, and still increase more. 
all these confess such beauty, skill, and care,
 not Helen better weave the trojan war,
 while Hector, Paris, and their martial train,
 with grecian hero battle on the plain. 

here let we leave the lovely nymph awhile,
 to pass her tedious hour in please toil:
 her absent lover now my song pursue,
 who valiant deed require a noble muse. 

swift-pinioned fame, which often babble fly,
 to bear unwelcome truth, and often lie,
 have spread the ductile error far and wide,
 how wander Felix perish in the tide. 
but Felix safe reach the thunic port,
 and soon arrive to honour in the court:
 he wisdom there the wise peer excel;
 his valour more surpass they in the field. 
when first he to the royal palace come,
 a accident occur to raise his fame:
 a noble lord there be, of great renown,
 rebel against the king, and claim his crown:
 great preparation make he for the fight;
 nor less the monarch, to defend his right;
 but summon all, to meet the dare foe,
 who strength can wield a sword, or bend a bow;
 and promise to reward their martial care,
 with honour equal to their deed in war. 

now ring the region with the foe alarm,
 terrific shine the field with burnish arm;
 the martial trumpet, sound from afar,
 with dreadful note, proclaim approach war. 
the royal army valiant Felix join;
 intrepid courage animate his mind:
 fix in the front, the foe he brave dare,
 like Pallas prudent, and as bold as Mars. 
say, Muse, what goddess, that tremendous hour,
 aid the youth with such unusual power? 
bright Venus, conscious of the lover smart,
 sharpen his sword, and point every dart:
 fierce, as a lion, through the line he spring;
 and force his foe, like tremble stag, along. 

as when resistless wind rush over the deep,
 and from its anchor force the drive ship,
 or furious against the woodland roar;
 the leafy harvest, tumble, fly before:
 so rush the hero on the adverse band,
 so flee the legion from his powerful hand;
 till soon the rebel lord he prisoner make,
 and to the king his captive prize convey

now reap the youth the glory of his toil;
 to he the monarch give the martial spoil,
 reward his valour with a noble post,
 and make he first commander of his host. 
thus, quick Felix gain a deathless name;
 thus, be his labour crown with wealth and fame:
 but wealth and fame insipid thing appear;
 to give they taste, he want the lovely fair;
 the lovely fair, oppress with equal grief,
 to make her happy, want the glorious chief. 

his fame, which soon at Susa be reveal,
 (heroic action seldom lie conceal)
 with please wonder strike constantia's ear,
 and fill her doubtful soul with hope and fear:
 for, though the wise Priscilla often strive
 with prudent counsel to suppress her love;
 her love be only lessen, not suppress;
 but glow again, again distract her breast. 

as when, in rural cot, the flame aspire,
 and labour peasant quench the mount fire:
 if chance a latent spark remain behind,
 in heapy ash, fan with ambient wind;
 the fire again, with former fury, rise,
 flame through the roof, and flash into the sky:
 so in her bosom glow the amorous fire,
 and fill her tender soul with soft desire. 
and be my Felix yet alive? she say;
 and be he crown with wealth, and deathless praise? 
no, no; i fear the flatter tale deceive;
 methinks i see he plunge in the wave. 
ah! why, you heaven, be feeble mortal curse,
 in thing uncertain, to believe the worst? 
no; rather let i seek the thunic court;
 there, with my eye, confirm the bless report:
 hope fly before, and point the please way;
 love urge on, and love i must obey. 

so say, to Priscilla straight she come,
 and with her thought acquaint the pious dame;
 the pious dame, with tender pity sway,
 approve the passion of the love maid;
 and, with capresa, guard she to the place,
 resolve herself to view the hero face. 
the hero meet they at the regal gate,
 array in armour, formidable great;
 for on that morning, by the king command,
 the chief be to review the martial band:
 his stud chariot dart splendour round,
 his stately courser, neigh, paw the ground;
 the nod plume around his temple wave,
 with awful grace, and beautiful brave. 
he know the approach nymph; but, in surprise,
 the joyous stream descend from his eye:
 the nymph behold the weep chief; nor know,
 for what he weep, nor who she come to view:
 he martial dress, bespangle over with gold,
 the dreadful warrior, not the lover, tell:
 but, when he cast the helmet from his head,
 and through the gate the blush damsel lead;
 she know her lover, clasp he to her breast,
 while silent eloquence her joy confess:
 the conscious pain a absent lover bear,
 despair, fallacious hope, and anxious fear,
 for want of word, be paint with their tear. 
and when, at length, their crystal sluice cease,
 the joyful hero thus the nymph address:

you god! and have i then my charmer find? 
and be my labour thus complete crown! 
yes! let i clasp thou to my longing arm,
 drink in thy breath, and feed upon thy charm. 
as widow turtle, rove round the field,
 through all the fruitful store, which nature yield,
 curse in the midst of plenty, can eat;
 but starve, lament for their absent mate:
 thus have i be with fame and riches grace;
 yet want thou, to give my riches taste. 
but say, how come this wealth i want most? 
what bring my love to this barbarian coast? 

he say; and now the joyful damsel speak
 the danger which she suffer for his sake;
 show he the dame, who find she on the tide;
 Priscilla too, who all her want supply:
 then, prostrate, on her knee before he bend,
 and beg he to reward her faithful friend. 
the grateful chief, by native goodness sway,
 embrace they both, and soon the nymph obey;
 but first before his royal master come,
 and beg he may resign his post of fame:
 at which the monarch frown with awful eye,
 till Felix straight, who see his passion rise,
 fall on the ground, and to his master show
 the various scene of all his amorous woe. 
this hear, the king resume his former grace;
 love tune his soul, and smooth his ruffle face:
 he raise the hero, bid the nymph appear;
 the nymph approach he with a modest fear;
 before his awful throne, submiss, she fall,
 and to he straight unfold the amaze tale. 
mute, on the ground awhile he fix his eye;
 then, be the force of love so great? he cry:
 we false man the world commander call;
 thou, mighty monarch, love! command all:
 young ammon self can not thy power confine;
 the world his subject be, but he be thy. 

then, smile, thus he cheere the tremble fair:
 henceforward, lovely nymph, dismiss thy care;
 for, since thy love have conquer wind and sea,
 curse be the king, that be crueler than they! 
let HYMEN straight confirm the marriage tie;
 thou just have deserve the nuptial prize. 

thus say, he crown the hero martial care,
 with riches far superior to the fair:
 due thanks return, they to Priscilla come,
 bestow gift and honour on the dame:
 capresa next, with age and labour wear,
 in comely robe the grateful pair adorn;
 with ample wealth her former bliss restore,
 and from the sea redeem her nuptial lord;
 her nuptial lord again enjoy his wife,
 again delightful freedom crown his life;
 till nature call he to resign his breath,
 in honourable age, and peaceful death. 

this do, the love couple quit the shore,
 and joyful the destine port explore;
 while sportive nereid round their vessel play,
 and wanton cupid hail they on their way;
 rough thetis self assume a please smile,
 glad to return they to their native soil;
 where sacred HYMEN join their mutual hand,
 and heaven, indulgent, bless their nuptial band. 
