Holkham. 

a poem.

by mr. Potter.

the lofty beech, and their sacred shade
 over penshurst flower embroider vale display,
 have yet their glory: not that Sidney hand
 "marshale in even rank the obsequious band;"
 or his fresh garland in these bower entwine,
 while all Arcadia open on his mind:
 but here sweet Waller breathe his amorous flame,
 and teach the grove his sacharissa name;
 here meet the muse, "while gentle love be by,
" that tune his lute, and wind the string so high: "
still with the entrapture strain the valley ring,
 and the grove flourish in eternal spring. 

eternal spring smile in those green retreat,
 "no more the monarch, still the muse seat,"
 where crown with tower majestic Windsor stand,
 and the wide world beneath her foot command:
 not that her regal rampire boast the fame
 of each great Edward, each great Henry name;
 not that, in day of high-atchieved renown,
 there britain genius fix his awful throne,
 encircle with that glorious blaze that spring
 from conquer nation, and from captive king:
 when each proud trophy moulder from the wall,
 and even the imperial dome itself shall fall:
 when those great name, the warrior and the sage,
 lie cloud in the dark historic page;
 then shall the heaven-born muse (to who belong
 the more than mortal-making power of song)
 through time be deep shade her sacred light display,
 and pour the beam of fame eternal day. 

queen of sweet number and melodious strain,
 if yet thou deign to visit britain plain;
 if yet thy hallow haunt partake thy love,
 clear spring, enamel vale, or bowery grove;
 o come, and range with i the aspire glade,
 where Leicester spread the lawn and form the shade,
 on holkham plain bid graecian structure rise,
 and the tall column shoot into the sky:
 beneath who proud survey, extend wide,
 new scene, new beauty charm on every side:
 here, crown with wood, the shade hill ascend,
 in open light there the low vale extend;
 here in rich harvest wave the ripen grain,
 and there fresh verdure clothes the pasture plain,
 sweet intermix, and lovely to behold,
 as the green emerald enchase in gold. 

see where the limpid lake through pendant shade,
 the hill between, her liquid treasure lead;
 and to the bough, that fringe her crisp side,
 hold the clear mirror of her crystal tide:
 her crystal tide reflect the wave scene,
 their silvery surface darken into green;
 as on the steep bank, bend over the flood,
 grotesque and wild up spring the overshadow wood;
 or the slope margin, with a soft rise,
 shade above shade, and rank over rank supply;
 the verdant basis of yonder champain mound,
 its hallow head with God own temple crown:
 the homebound mariner from far descry,
 emerge from the wave the tall tower rise;
 with transport bid the solemn structure hail,
 and winge for Britain speed the fly sail. 

in near view, amid the lawn wide extent,
 that gentle swell with a unforced ascent,
 in just proportion rise on the sight,
 the stately mansion lift its towery height,
 and glitter over the grove. a oak beneath,
 that call the cool gale through its bough to breathe,
 where the sun dart his fervid ray in vain,
 like the great patriarch on mamre plain
 the princely Leicester sit: the pageant pride
 of cumbrous greatness banish from his side,
 in these bless bower he plan the great design;
 with heighten charm bid modest nature shine;
 show we magnificence ally to use;
 though rich, yet chaste; though splendid, not profuse;
 call forth each beauty that from order spring;
 from its love Greece each honour science bring;
 over art fair train extend his generous care;
 and bid each polish grace inhabit here. 

nor these alone: here virtue love to dwell,
 no cold recluse self-caverned in a cell;
 active and warm she breathe a noble part,
 glow in the breast, and open all the heart;
 to generous deed she fire the empassion mind,
 the substitute of heaven to bless mankind;
 she through despond misery cheerless gloom
 pour joy, and give neglect worth to bloom;
 she in each bosom still the rise sigh,
 and wipe off every tear from every eye;
 she to yonder almshouse, bosom in the grove,
 from toil and care bid age and want remove;
 there the tire eve of labour life to rest,
 feed by her hand, and by her bounty bless. 

these, these be ray that round true greatness shine,
 and thy, bright Clifford! the full blaze be thy. 
bring the green bay, the fragraut myrtle bring,
 the violet glow in the lap of spring;
 bid the sweet valley send each honeyed flower,
 each herb, each leaf of aromatic power;
 the muse hand shall their mix odour spread,
 and screw the ground where Clifford deign to tread. 

in distant prospect, sink from the eye,
 low in the tuft dale the hamlet lie;
 where virgin innocence, and meek-eyed peace,
 with calm content, the straw-roofed cottage bless:
 and strong-nerved industry in pure flow
 spread over the vermeil cheek health roseate glow. 

more distant yet the throng commercial town,
 that make the wealth of other world her own,
 lift her proud head, and see with every tide
 rich-freighted navy crowd her harbour side:
 or bid the part vessel spread the sail
 loose to the wind, and catch the rise gale:
 while the vast ocean, albion utmost bind,
 roll its broad wave, a world of water, round. 

in sweet astonishment the impatient mind
 bid her free power expatiate unconfined;
 from scene to scene in rapid progress fly,
 glance from earth to sea, from sea to sky;
 delight to feel the great idea roll,
 swell on the sense, and fill up all the soul. 

not such the scene, when over the uncultured wild
 no harvest rise, no cheerful verdure smile;
 on the bare hill no tree be see to spread
 the graceful foliage of its wave head;
 no breathe hedgerow form the broider bound,
 nor hawthorn blossom on the unsightly ground;
 joy be not here; no bird of fine note
 pour the thick warble of his dulcet throat;
 even hope be flee; and over the cheerless plain,
 a waste of sand, want hold her unblessed reign. 

lo, Leicester come! before his master hand
 fly the rude genius of the savage land;
 the russet lawn a sudden verdure wear;
 start from the wonder field the golden ear;
 up rise the wave wood, and haste to crown
 the hill bare brow, and shade the sultry down:
 the shelter traveller see, with glad surprise,
 over trackless wild the extend row arise;
 and, as their hospitable branch spread,
 bless the friendly hand that form the shade:
 joy bloom around, and cheer the peasant toil,
 as smile plenty deck the culture soil;
 the brighten scene a kind genius own,
 and nature finish what art begin. 

but can the verse, though Philomela deign
 to breathe the sweet note through the warble strain;
 though every muse and every grace shall smile,
 and rapture raise the honey-steeped style;
 can the verse paint like nature? can the power
 that wake to life free fancy image store,
 boast charm like she? or the creative hand
 in blend tint such beauteous scene command,
 though learned Poussin give each grace to flow,
 and bright lorrain ethereal colour glow? 
yet peerless be the power of sacred song,
 that burst in transport from the muse tongue:
 and hark! methinks her hallow voice i hear,
 in note mellifluous steal on the ear;
 now clear, and yet clear trill the strain,
 swell through the grove, and melt along the plain. 
 "you nymph, that love to range the lillied vale,
" where stream the silver fount of acidale;
 "you, that in pindus laureled grove abide,
" or haunt cyllene cypress-shaded side;
 "or braid your fine wreath in the pearly cave,
" where fame Ilissus roll his attic wave;
 "while the barbarian rude unlettered race
" profane your grotto, and your bower deface,
 "see Leicester court you to the icenian shore,
" studious your long-lost honour to restore! 
 "see, the fair rival of your native seat,
" aonian Holkham open all its sweet;
 "deign then, you sacred sister! deign to tread
" the rich embroidery of yond velvet mead,
 "as fresh, as lovely as your lilied vale,
" where stream the silver fount of acidale:
 "if old cyllene cypress-shaded bower,
" or pindus laureled mount delight you more;
 "go, sweet enthusiast! softly-silent rove
" the studious maze of the twilight grove;
 "or, at the foot of some hoar elm recline,
" wake the high thought that swell the rapture mind
 "or pensive listen to the solemn roar
" of whiten billow break on the shore:
 "if the majestic dome, who towery pride
" glitter over fame ilissus attic tide,
 "your step detain; yonder princely structure view,
" grace with each fine art your Athens know! 
 "each fine art to just perfection bring,
" all that Vitruvius and Palladio think;
 "the trophy arch; the porphyry-pillared hall;
" the sculpture form that breathe along the wall;
 "lycaean Pan; the faun arcadian race;
" the huntress-queen inimitable grace;
 "Athenian Pallas clad in radiant arm;
" heaven empress conscious of her slight charm;
 "your own Apollo, on who polish brow
" youth bloom, and grace, and candour brighten glow;
 "god, hero, sage, a illustrious train,
" court you to holkham consecrate plain. 
 "haste then, you sacred sister! haste, and bring
" the laurel steep in the castalian spring;
 "on the choice bough a pure fragrance breathe,
" and twine for Leicester brow the unfading wreath. " 
she cease the rapture strain; and dear to fame,
 flow the proud verse inscribe with Leicester name. 
