a monody to the memory of mrs. Margaret woffington.

by JOHN Hoole.

there flee the fair, that all beholder charm,
 who beauty fire we, and who spirit warm! 
in that sad sigh the unwilling breath retire;
 the grace, the glory of our scene expire! 
and shall she die, the muse rite unpaid,
 no grateful lay to deck her part shade? 
while on her bier the sister grace mourn,
 and weep tragedy bedew her urn? 
while comedy her cheerful vein forego,
 and learn to melt with unaccustomed woe? 

accept (o once admire) these artless lay;
 accept this mite of tributary praise. 
oh! can i paint thou with a master hand,
 and give thou all thy merit can demand;
 these line shall glow with true poetic flame,
 bright as thy eye, and faultless as thy frame! 

we mourn thy absence, from our scene retire,
 each long heart again thy charm desire. 
yet still, alas! we hope again to view
 our wish, our pleasure, every joy in you! 
again thy look may grace the tragic rage;
 again thy spirit fill the comic stage. 
but lo! disease hang hover over thy head;
 dire danger stalk around thy fright bed! 
those starry eye have lose each beamy ray,
 and ghastly sickness make the fair her prey! 
death shut the scene! — and all our hope be over! 
those beauty now must glad the sight no more! 

say you, who feature youthful lustre bloom,
 who lip exhale arabia soft perfume,
 must every gift in silent dust be lose,
 no more the wish of man, or female boast? 
ah i! with time must every grace be flee! 
she once the pride of all our stage, be dead! 
close be those eye that every bosom fire! 
pale be those charm that every heart inspire! 
where now the mien with majesty endue,
 which oft surprise a ravish audience view? 

what form too oft the tragic scene disgrace? 
what tasteless air the comic scene deface? 
though tuneful cibber still the muse sustain,
 by nature frame to pour the move strain,
 though from her eye each heart-felt passion break,
 and more than music warble when she speak:
 when shall we view again, like thy, conjoin,
 a form angelic, and a pierce mind? 
alike in every mimic scene to steer,
 the gay, the grave, the lively, and severe. 
thy judgement see, thy taste each beauty catch,
 no senseless parrot of the poet thought! 
thy bosom well can heave with fancy woe,
 and, from thy own, our tear be teach to flow. 
whenever we view the roman sully same,
 thy beauty justify the hero shame. 
what heart but then must Anthony approve,
 and own the world be noble lose for love? 
what ear can hear in vain thy cause implore,
 when soothe art appease thy angry lord? 
each tender breast the rough Ventidius blame,
 and Egypt gain the sigh Octavia claim,
 thy eloquence each hush attention draw,
 while love usurp the tear to virtue due. 

see! Phaedra rise majestic over the scene,
 what rage pang distract the hapless queen! 
how do thy sense the poet thought refine,
 beam through each word, and brighten every line! 
what nerve, what vigour glow in every part,
 while classic lay appear with classic art! 

who now can bid the proud Roxana rise,
 with love and anger sparkle in her eye? 
who now shall bid her breast in fury glow,
 with all the semblance of imperial woe? 
while the big passion, rage in her vein,
 will hold the master of the world in chain:
 but Alexander now forsake our coast: —
 and, ah! Roxana be for ever lose! 

nor less thy power when rigid virtue fire
 the chaster bard, and pure thought inspire:
 what kneel form appear with steadfast eye,
 her bosom heave with devotion sigh! 
it be she! in thou we own the mournful scene,
 the fair resemblance of a martyr queen! 
here Guido skill may mark thy speak frame,
 and catch from thou the painter magic flame! 

bless in each art! by nature form to please,
 with beauty, sense, with elegance and ease! 
who pierce genius study all mankind,
 all Shakespear open to thy vigorous mind. 
in every scene of comic humour know;
 in sprightly sally wit be all thy own. 
whether you seem the cit's more humble wife;
 or shine in townly high sphere of life;
 alike thy spirit know each turn of wit;
 and give new force to all the poet write. 

nor be thy worth to public scene confine,
 thou know the noble feeling of the mind. 
thy ear be ever open to distress;
 thy ready hand be ever stretch to bless. 
the breast humane for each unhappy feel;
 thy heart for other sorrow prone to melt. 
in vain do envy point her scorpion sting;
 in vain do malice shake her blast wing:
 each generous breast disdain the unplease tale,
 and cast over every fault oblivion veil:
 confess, through every cloud, thy deed to shine,
 and own the virtue of compassion thy! 
see mild benevolence her wand disclose,
 and touch thy heart at every sufferer woe:
 see meek-eyed charity thy step attend,
 and guide thy hand the wretched to befriend:
 go, ask the breast that teem with mournful sigh,
 who wipe the sorrow from affliction eye:
 go, ask the wretch, in want and sickness lay,
 who goodness brighten once misfortune shade. 

o! snatch i hence to lone sequester scene,
 to arch grotto and embower green! 
where scarce a ray can pierce the dusky shade,
 where scarce a footstep mark the dewy glade:
 where pale-hued grief her secret dwelling keep;
 where the chill blood with lazy horror creep:
 where awful silence spread her noiseless wing;
 and sorrow harp may tune the dismal string. —
 or rather lead my step to distant plain,
 where close earth enfold she last remains;
 what time the moon display her silver beam,
 and grove and flood reflect the mild gleam:
 when contemplation brood with thought profound,
 and fairy vision haunt the sylvan ground. 

lo! fancy now, on airy pinion spread,
 with scene ideal hover over my head. 
i see! i see! more please theme arise:
 what mystic shadow flit before my eye! 
imagination paint the sacred grove,
 the place devote to poesy and love. 
here grateful poet hail the actors name,
 and pay the rightful tribute to their fame:
 around their tomb in generous sorrow mourn,
 and twine the laurel over the favour urn. 

methinks i view the last sepulchral frame,
 that bear inscribe she much lament name,
 see! to my view the drama son display:
 what laureled phantom crowd the awful shade! 
first of the choir immortal Shakespear stand,
 who search eye all nature scene command:
 bright in his look celestial spirit bloom,
 and genius over he wave his eagle plume! 
next tender southern, skill the soul to move;
 and gentle Rowe, who tune the breast to love. 
the witty Congreve near with sprightly mien;
 and easy Farquhar with his light scene. 
a numerous train of bard the shrine surround,
 in tragic strain and comic lore renowned. 

see! on the tomb yond pensive form appear,
 heave the full sigh, and drop the frequent tear:
 the garment loose her throb bosom show;
 disperse in air her careless tress flow:
 round her pale brow a myrtle wreath be spread,
 a gloomy cypress nod above her head. 
see! while her hand a solemn lyre sustain,
 her tremble finger wake the languid strain:
 soft to the touch the vocal string reply,
 and tune the note to answer every sigh. 
she, (child of grief!) at human misery weep;
 at every death her dismal vigil keep. 
but chief she mourn, when fate relentless doom
 give wit and beauty victim to the tomb,
 her lay their merit and their loss proclaim,
 (a mournful task!) and elegy her name! 
now bend over the pile she vent her moan,
 and pour these sorrow over the senseless stone. 

ah! lose, for ever lose! the breath that warm,
 the wit that ravish, and the mien that charm! 
here sleep beneath, the fair of the fair,
 the graces darling, and the muses care! 
who once can fix a thousand gazer eye,
 now cold and lifeless unregarded lie! 
who once the soul in bond of love detain,
 now lie, alas! in strong bond restrain. 
pale death have rifle all her please store,
 and nature loathe a form so love before! 
be there a fair who feature point the dart,
 charm the fix eye, and fascinate the heart? 
behold what soon disarm the childish sting,
 and pluck the wanton plume from Cupid wing! 
then boast no long wit fallacious store;
 the sweet of sprightly converse boast no more:
 those lip so frame to each persuasive art,
 no more shall touch the ear, and win the heart! 
let beauty here her transient blessing weigh,
 let humble wit her pity tribute pay:
 let female grace vouchsafe the kindly tear:
 wit, grace, and beauty, once be centre here! 
you sacred bard, who tune the drama lay,
 here pay your incense of distinguish praise! 
she give your scene with every grace to shine:
 she give new feeling to the nervous line;
 her beauty well supply each tragic lore,
 and show those charm your muse but feign before! 
here round her shrine your votive wreath bestow,
 around her shrine eternal green shall grow. 
the listen grove shall learn her name to sing,
 and zephyr waste it on their downy wing;
 till every shade these doleful sound return,
 and every gale in sullen dirge mourn! 

the mourner end with sigh; her hand she rear,
 and with her vesture dry the gush tear. 
behold each bard the soft contagion feel;
 from every eye the trickle sorrow steal. 
see! nature son lament her hapless doom,
 see! Shakespear bend over his favourite tomb. 
each shadowy form decline his awful head,
 and scatter rose on the funeral bed. 
in slow procession round the shrine they move,
 and chant her praise through the tuneful grove. 

farewell the glory of a wonder age,
 the second Oldfield of a sink stage! 
farewell the boast and envy of thy kind,
 a female softness, and a manly mind! 
long as the muse can record thy praise,
 thy fame shall last to far succeed day:
 while wit survive, thy name shall ever bloom,
 and wreath unfading flourish round thy tomb! 

while, thus i tune the plaintive note in vain,
 for she, who worth demand a noble strain;
 lo! to my thought some warn genius cry:
 attempt not, swain, beyond thy flight to rise. 
shall thy weak skill attempt to raise our woe,
 or paint a loss that every bosom know? 
it be not thy lay can teach we tear to shed;
 what eye refrain! — for woffington be dead! 
