[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book v. 

the winter morning walk.

it be morning; and the sun with ruddy orb
 ascend fire the horizon. while the cloud
 that crowd away before the drive wind,
 more ardent as the disk emerge more,
 resemble most some city in a blaze,
 see through the leafless wood. his slant ray
 slide ineffectual down the snowy vale,
 and tinge all with his own rosy hue,
 from every herb and every spiry blade
 stretch a length of shadow over the field. 
i, spindle into longitude immense,
 in spite of gravity and sage remark
 that i myself be but a fleet shade,
 provoke i to a smile. with eye askance
 i view the muscular proportion limb
 transform to a lean shank. the shapeless pair
 as they design to mock i, at my side
 take step for step, and as i near approach
 the cottage, walk along the plaster wall
 preposterous sight! the leg without the man. 
the verdure of the plain lie bury deep
 beneath the dazzle deluge, and the bent
 and coarse grass upspear over the rest,
 of late unsightly and unseen, now shine
 conspicuous, and in bright apparel clad
 and fledge with icy feather, nod superb. 
the cattle mourn in corner where the fence
 screen they, and seem half petrify to sleep
 in unrecumbent sadness. there they wait
 their wonted fodder, not like hungr' man
 fretful if unsupplied, but silent, meek,
 and patient of the slow-paced swain delay. 
he from the stack carve out the accustom load,
 deep-plunging and again deep plunge oft
 his broad keen knife into the solid mass. 
smooth as a wall the upright remnant stand,
 with such undeviating and even force
 he sever it away. no needless care,
 lest storm shall overset the lean pile
 deciduous, or its own unbalanced weight. 
forth go the woodman leave unconcerned
 the cheerful haunt of man, to wield the axe
 and drive the wedge in yonder forest drear,
 from morn to eve his solitary task. 
shaggy and lean and shrewd, with point ear
 and tail crop short, half lurcher and half cur
 his dog attend he. close behind his heel
 now creep he slow, and now with many a frisk
 wide-scampering snatch up the drift snow
 with ivory tooth, or plough it with his snout;
 then shake his powder coat and bark for joy. 
heedless of all his prank the sturdy churl
 move right towards the mark. nor stop for aught. 
but now and then with pressure of his thumb
 the adjust the fragrant charge of a short tube
 that fume beneath his nose. the trail cloud
 stream far behind he, scent all the air. 
now from the roost or from the neighbour pale,
 where diligent to catch the first faint gleam
 of smile day, they gossip side by side,
 come troop at the housewife wellknown call
 the feather tribe domestic. half on wing
 and half on foot, they brush the fleecy flood
 conscious, and fearful of too deep a plunge. 
the sparrow peep, and quit the shelter eave
 to seize the fair occasion. well they eye
 the scatter grain, and thievish resolve
 the escape the impend famine, often scare
 as oft return, a pert voracious kind. 
clean riddance quick make, one only care
 remain to each, the search of sunny nook,
 or shed impervious to the blast. resign
 to sad necessity the cock forego
 his wonted strut, and wade at their head
 with well-considered step, seem to resent
 his alter gait and stateliness retrench. 
how find the myriad that in summer cheer
 the hill and valley with their ceaseless song
 due sustenance, or where subsist they now? 
earth yield they nought: the imprison worm be safe
 beneath the freeze clod; all seed of herb
 lie cover close, and berry-bearing thorn
 that feed the thrush (whatever some suppose)
 afford the small minstrel no supply. 
the long protract rigor of the year
 thin all their numerous flock. in chink and hole
 ten thousand seek a unmolested end
 as instinct prompt, self bury here they die. 
the very rook and daw forsake the field,
 where neither grub nor root nor earth-nut now
 repay their labour more; and perch aloft
 by the way-side, or stalk in the path,
 lean pensioner upon the traveller track,
 pick up their nauscous dole, though sweet to they,
 of void pulse or half digest grain. 
the stream be lose amid the splendid blank
 overwhelm all distinction. on the flood
 indurate and fix the snowy weight
 lie undissolved, while silent beneath
 and unperceived the current steal away. 
not so, where scornful of a check it leap
 the mill-dam, dash on the wrestless wheel,
 and wanton in the pebbly gulph below. 
no frost can bind it there. its utmost force
 can but arrest the light and smoky mist
 that in its fall the liquid sheet throw wide. 
and see where it have hang the embroider bank
 with form so various, that no power of art,
 the pencil or the pen, may trace the scene! 
here glitter turret rise, upbear high
 (fantastic misarrangement) on the roof
 large growth of what may seem the sparkle tree
 and shrub of fairy land. the crystal drop
 that trickle down the branch, fast congeal
 shoot into pillar of pellucid length,
 and prop the pile they but adorn before. 
here grotto within grotto safe defy
 the sun-beam. there imboss and fret wild
 the grow wonder take a thousand shape
 capricious, in which fancy seek in vain
 the likeness of some object see before. 
thus nature work as if to mock at art,
 and in defiance of her rival power;
 by these fortuitous and random stroke
 perform such inimitable feat
 as she with all her rule can never reach. 
less worthy of applause though more admire,
 because a novelty, the work of man,
 imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ! 
thy most magnificent and mighty freak,
 the wonder of the north. no forest fall
 when thou will build: no quarry send its store
 the enrich thy wall. but thou do hew the flood,
 and make thy marble of the glassy wave. 
in such a palace Aristaeus find
 Cyrene, when he bear the plaintive tale
 of his lose bee to her maternal ear. 
in such a palace poetry may place
 the armoury of winter, where his troop
 the gloomy cloud find weapon, arro'wy sleet
 skin-piercing volley, blossom-bruising hail,
 and snow that often blind the traveller course,
 and wrap he in a unexpected tomb. 
silent as a dream the fabric rise. 
no sound of hammer or of saw be there. 
ice upon ice, the well-adjusted part
 be soon conjoin, nor other cement ask
 than water interfuse to make they one. 
lamp graceful dispose and of all hue
 illumine every side. a watery light
 gleam through the clear transparency, that seem
 another moon new-risen, or meteor fall
 from heaven to earth, of lambent flame serene. 
so stand the brittle prodigy, though smooth
 and slippery the material, yet frostbound
 firm as a rock. nor want aught within
 that royal residence may well befit,
 for grandeur or for use. long wavy wreath
 of flower that fear no enemy but warmth,
 blush on the panel. mirror need none
 where all be vitreous, but in order due
 convivial table and commodious seat
 (what seem at least commodious seat) be there,
 sofa and couch and high-built throne august. 
the same lubricity be find in all,
 and all be moist to the warm touch, a scene
 of evanescent glory, once a stream,
 and soon to slide into a stream again. 
alas! it be but a mortify stroke
 of undesigned severity, that glance,
 (make by a monarch) on her own estate,
 on human grandeur and the court of king. 
it be transient in its nature, as in show
 it be durable. as worthless as it seem
 intrinsical precious. to the foot
 treacherous and false, it smile and it be cold. 

great prince have great plaything. some have play
 at hew mountain into man, and some
 at building human wonder mountain-high. 
some have amuse the dull sad year of life,
 life spend in indolence, and therefore sad,
 with scheme of monumental fame, and seek
 by pyramid and mausolaean pomp,
 short-lived themselves, to immortalize their bone. 
some seek diversion in the tent field,
 and make the sorrow of mankind their sport. 
but war be a game, which be their subject wise,
 king shall not play at. nation will do well
 the extort their truncheon from the puny hand
 of hero, who infirm and baby mind
 be gratify with mischief, and who spoil
 because man suffer it, their toy the world. 

when Babel be confound, and the great
 confederacy of projector wild and vain
 be split into diversity of tongue,
 then, as a shépherd separate his flock,
 these to the upland, to the valley those,
 god drive asunder and assign their lot
 to all the nation. ample be the boon
 he give they, in its distribution fair
 and equal, and he bid they dwell in peace. 
peace be awhile their care. they plough and sow
 and reap their plenty without grudge or strife. 
but violence can never long sleep
 than human passion please. in every heart
 be sow the spark that kindle fiery war,
 occasion need but fan they, and they blaze. 
Cain have already shed a brother blood;
 the deluge wash it out; but leave unquenched
 the seed of murder in the breast of man. 
soon, by a righteous judgement, in the line
 of his descend progeny be find
 the first artificer of death; the shrewd
 contriver who first sweat at the forge,
 and force the blunt and yet unblooded steel
 to a keen edge, and make it bright for war. 
he Tubal name, the Vulcan of old time,
 the sword and falchion their inventor claim,
 and the first smith be the first murder son. 
his art survive the water; and here long
 when man be multiply and spread abroad
 in tribe and clan, and have begin to call
 these meadow and that range of hill his own,
 the taste sweet of property beget
 desire of more; and industry in some
 to improve and cultivate their just demesne,
 make other covet what they see so fair. 
thus war begin on earth. these fight for spoil,
 and those in self-defence. savage at first
 the onset, and irregular. at length
 one eminent above the rest, for strength,
 for stratagem or courage, or for all,
 be choose leader. he they serve in war,
 and he in peace for sake of warlike deed
 reverence no less. who can with he compare? 
or who so worthy to control themselves
 as he who prowess have subdue their foe? 
thus war afford field for the display
 of virtue, make one chief, who time of peace,
 which have their exigency too, and call
 for skill in government, at length make king. 
king be a name too proud for man to wear
 with modesty and meekness, and the crown,
 so dazzle in their eye who set it on,
 be sure to intoxicate the brow it bind. 
it be the abject property of most,
 that be parcel of the common mass,
 and destitute of mean to raise themselves,
 they sink and settle low than they need. 
they know not what it be to feel within
 a comprehensive faculty that grasp
 great purpose with ease, that turn and wield
 almost without a effort, plan too vast
 for their conception, which they can move. 
conscious of impotence they soon grow drink
 with gaze, when they see a able man
 step forth to notice; and besot thus
 build he a pedestal and say, stand there,
 and be our admiration and our praise. 
they roll themselves before he in the dust,
 then most deserve in their own account
 when most extravagant in his applause,
 as if exalt he they raise themselves. 
thus by degree self-cheated of their find
 and sober judgement that he be but man,
 they demi-deify and fume he so
 that in due season he forget it too. 
inflate and astrut with self-conceit
 he gulp the windy diet, and here long
 adopt their mistake, profound think
 the world be make in vain if not for he. 
thenceforth they be his cattle. drudge bear
 to bear his burden, draw in his gear
 and sweat in his service. his caprice
 become the soul that animate they all. 
he deem a thousand or ten thousand life
 spend in the purchase of renown for he
 a easy reckon, and they think the same. 
thus king be first invent, and thus king
 be burnish into hero, and become
 the arbiter of this terraqueous swamp,
 stork among frog, that have but croak and die. 
strange that such folly as lift bloat man
 to eminence fit only for a god,
 shall ever drivel out of human lip
 even in the cradle weakness of the world! 
still stranger much, that when at length mankind
 have reach the sinewy firmness of their youth,
 and can discriminate and argue well
 on subject more mysterious, they be yet
 babe in the cause of freedom, and shall fear
 and quake before the god themselves have make. 
but above measure strange, that neither proof
 of sad experience, nor example set
 by some who patriot virtue have prevail,
 can even now, when they be grow matute
 in wisdom, and with philosophic deep
 familiar, serve to emancipate the rest! 
such dupe be man to custom, and so prone
 to reverence what be ancient and can plead
 a course of long observance for its use,
 that even servitude the worst of ill,
 because deliver down from sire to son,
 be keep and guard as a sacred thing. 
but be it fit, or can it bear the shock
 of rational discussion, that a man
 compound and make up like other man
 of element tumultuous, in who lust
 and folly in as ample measure meet
 as in the bosom of the slave he rule,
 shall be a despot absolute, and boast
 himself the only freeman of his land? 
shall when he please, and on who he will
 wage war, with any or with no pretence
 of provocation give or wrong sustain,
 and force the beggarly last doit, by mean
 that his own humour dictate, from the clutch
 of poverty, that thus he may procure
 his thousand weary of penurious life
 a splendid opportunity to die? 
say you, who (with less prudence than of old
 Jotham ascribe to his assemble tree
 in politic convention) put your trust
 i the shadow of a bramble, and recline
 in fancy peace beneath his dangerous branch,
 rejoice in he and celebrate his sway,
 where find you passive fortitude? whence spring
 your self-denying zeal that hold it good
 to stroke the prickly grievance, and to hang
 his thorn with streamer of continual praise? 
we too be friend to loyalty. we love
 the king who love the law; respect his bound
 and reign content within they. he we serve
 free and with delight, who leave we free. 
but recollect still that he be man,
 we trust he not too far. king, though he be,
 and king in England too, he may be weak
 and vain enough to be ambitious still,
 may exercise amiss his proper power,
 or covet more than freeman choose to grant:
 beyond that mark be treason. he be we,
 the administer, to guard, to adorn the state,
 but not to warp or change it. we be his,
 to serve he noble in the common cause
 true to the death, but not to be his slave. 
Mark now the difference, you that boast your love
 of king, between your loyalty and we. 
we love the man. the paltry pageant you. 
we the chief patron of the commonwealth;
 you the regardless author of its woe. 
we for the sake of liberty, a king;
 you chain and bondage for a tyrant sake. 
our love be principle, and have its root
 in reason, be judicious, manly, free. 
you, a blind instinct, crouch to the rod,
 and lick the foot that tread it in the dust. 
be kingship as true treasure as it seem,
 sterling, and worthy of a wise man wish,
 i will not be a king to be belove
 causeless, and daub with undiscern praise,
 where love be mere attachment to the throne,
 not to the man who fill it as he ought. 

who freedom be by sufferance, and at will
 of a superior, he be never free. 
who live and be not weary of a life. 
expose to manacle, deserve they well. 
the state that strive for liberty, though foil
 and force to abandon what she brave seek,
 deserve at least applause for her attempt,
 and pity for her loss. but that be a cause
 not often unsuccessful; power usurp
 be weakness when oppose; conscious of wrong
 it be pusillanimous and prone to flight. 
but slave that once conceive the glow thought
 of freedom, in that hope itself possess
 all that the contest call for; spirit, strength,
 the scorn of danger, and unite heart
 the sure presage of the good they seek. 

then shame to manhood, and opprobrious more
 to France, than all her loss and defeat
 old or of late date, by sea or land,
 her house of bondage worse than that of old
 which god avenge on Pharaoh — the bastile. 
you horrid tower, the abode of break heart,
 you dungeon and you cage of despair,
 that monarch have supply from age to age
 with music such as suit their sovereign ear,
 the sigh and groan of miserable man! 
there be not a english heart that will not leap
 to hear that you be fall at last, to know
 that even our enemy, so oft employ
 in forge chain for we, themselves be free. 
for he that value liberty, confine
 his zeal for her predominance within
 no narrow bound; her cause engage he
 wherever plead. it be the cause of man. 
there dwell the most forlorn of human kind
 immure though unaccused, condemn untried,
 cruel spare, and hopeless of escape. 
there like the visionary emblem see
 by he of Babylon, life stand a stump,
 and fillet about with hoop of brass,
 still live, though all its pleasant bough be go,
 to count the hour-bell and expect no change;
 and ever as the sullen sound be hear,
 still to reflect that though a joyless note
 to he who moment all have one dull pace,
 ten thousand rover in the world at large
 account it music; that it summons some
 to theatre or jocund feast or ball;
 the weary hireling find it a release
 from labour, and the lover that have chide
 its long delay, feel every welcome stroke
 upon his heart-string trembliug with delight —
 to fly for refuge from distract thought
 to such amusement as ingenious woe
 contrive, hard-shifting and without her tool —
 to read engrave on the mouldy wall
 in stagger type, his predecessor tale,
 a sad memorial, and subjoin his own —
 to turn purveyor to a overgorge
 and bloat spider, till the pamper pest
 be make familiar, watch his approach,
 come at his call and serve he for a friend —
 to wear out time in number to and fro
 the stud that thick emboss his iron door,
 then downward and then upward, then aflant
 and then alternate, with a sickly hope
 by dint of change to give his tasteless task
 some relish, till the sum exact find
 in all direction, he begin again —
 oh comfortless existence! hem around
 with woe, which who that suffer, will not kneel
 and beg for exile, or the pang of death? 
that man shall thus encroach on fellow man,
 abridge he of his just and native right,
 eradicate he, tear he from his hold
 upon the endearment of domestic life
 and social, nip his fruitfulness and use,
 and doom he for perhaps a heedless word
 to barrenness and solitude and tear,
 move indignation. make the name of king,
 (of king who such prerogative can please)
 as dreadful as the manichean god,
 adore through fear, strong only to destroy. 

it be liberty alone that give the flower
 of fleet life its lustre and perfume,
 and we be weed without it. all constraint,
 except what wisdom lay on evil man,
 be evil; hurt the faculty, impede
 their progress in the road of science; blind
 the eye sight of discovery, and beget
 in those that suffer it, a sordid mind
 bestial, a meager intellect, unfit
 to to be the tenant of man noble form. 
thou therefore still, blameworthy as thou be,
 with all thy lose of empire, and though squeeze
 by public exigence until annual food
 fail for the crave hunger of the state,
 thou i account still happy, and the chief
 among the nation, see thou be free! 
my native nook of earth! thy clime be rude,
 replete with vapour, and disposés much
 all heart to sadness, and none more than i;
 thy unadult'rate manner be less soft
 and plausible than social life require,
 and thou have need of discipline and art
 to give thou what politer France receive
 from nature bounty — that humane address
 and sweetness, without which no pleasure be
 in converse, either starve by cold reserve,
 or flush with fierce dispute, a senseless brawl;
 yet be free, i love thou. for the sake
 of that one feature, can be well content,
 disgrace as thou have be, poor as thou be,
 to seek no sublunary rest beside. 
but once enslave, farewell! i can endure
 chain not where patient, and chain at home
 where i be free by birthright, not at all. 
then what be leave of roughness in the grain
 of british nature, want its excuse
 that it belong to freeman, will disgust
 and shock i. i shall then with double pain
 feel all the rigor of thy fickle clime,
 and if i must bewail the blessing lose
 for which our hampden and our sidney bleed,
 i will at least bewail it under sky
 mild, among a people less austere,
 in scene which have never know i free
 will not reproach i with the loss i feel. 
do i forebode impossible event,
 and tremble at vain dream? heaven grant i may! 
but the age of virtuous politics be past,
 and we be deep in that of cold pretence. 
patriot be grow too shrewd to be sincere,
 and we too wise to trust they. he that take
 deep in his soft credulity the stamp
 design by loud declaimer on the part
 of liberty, themselves the slave of lust,
 incur derision for his easy faith
 and lack of knowledge, and with cause enough. 
for when be public virtue to be find
 where private be not? can he love the whole
 who love no part? he be a nation friend
 who be, in truth, the friend of no man there? 
can he be strenuous in his country cause,
 who slight the charity for who dear sake
 that country, if at all, must be belove? 
it be therefore, sober and good man be sad
 for England glory, see it wax pale
 and sickly, while her champion wear their heart
 so loose to private duty, that no brain
 healthful and undisturbed by factious fume,
 can dream they trusty to the general weal. 
such be not they of old, who tempere blade
 disperse the shackle of usurp controul,
 and hew they link from link. then albion son
 be son indeed. they feel a filial heart
 beat high within they at a mother wrong,
 and shine each in his domestic sphere,
 shine bright still once call to public view. 
it be therefore, many who sequester lot
 forbid their interference, look on
 anticipate perforce some dire event;
 and see the old castle of the state
 that promise once more firmness, so assail
 that all its tempest-beaten turret shake,
 stand motionless expectant of its fall. 
all have its date below. the fatal hour
 be register in heaven here time begin. 
we turn to dust, and all our mighty work
 die too. the deep foundation that we lay,
 time plough they up, and not a trace remain,
 we build with what we deem eternal rock,
 a distant age ask where the fabric stand,
 and in the dust sift and search in vain,
 the undiscoverable secret sleep. 

but there be yet a liberty unsung
 by poet, and by senator unpraised,
 which monarch can grant, nor all the power
 of earth and hell confederate take away. 
a liberty, which persecution, fraud,
 oppression, prison, have no power to bind,
 which whoso taste can be enslave no more. 
it be liberty of heart, derive from heaven,
 buy with his blood who give it to mankind,
 and seal with the same token. it be hold
 by charter, and that charter sanction sure
 by the unimpeachable and awful oath
 and promise of a god. his other gift
 all bear the royal stamp that speak they his,
 and be august, but this transcend they all,
 his other work, this visible display
 of all-creating energy and might,
 be grand no doubt, and worthy of the word
 that find a interminable space
 unoccupied, have fill the void so well,
 and make so sparkle what be dark before. 
but these be not his glory. man, it be true,
 smite with the beauty of so fair a scene,
 may well suppose the artificer divine
 mean it eternal, have he not himself
 pronounce it transient glorious as it be,
 and still design a more glorious far,
 doom it, as insufficient for his praise. 
these therefore be occasional and pass. 
form for the confutation of the fool
 who lie heart dispute against a god,
 that office serve, they must be sweep away. 
not so the labour of his love. they shine
 in other heaven than these that we behold,
 and fade not. there be paradise that fear
 no forfeiture, and of its fruit he send
 large prelibation oft to saint below. 
of these the first in order, and the pledge
 and confident assurance of the rest
 be liberty. a flight into his arm
before yet mortality fine thread give way,
 a clear escape from tyrannise lust,
 and full immunity from penal woe. 

chain be the portion of revolt man,
 stripe and a dungeon; and his body serve
 the triple purpose. in that sickly, foul,
 opprobrious residence, he find they all. 
propense his heart to idol, he be hold
 in silly dotage on create thing
 careless of their creator. and that low
 and sordid gravitation of his power
 to a vile clod, so draw he, with such force
 resistless from the centre he shall seek,
 that he at last forget it. all his hope
 tend downward, his ambition be to sink,
 to reach a depth profound still, and still
 profound, in the fathomless abyss
 of folly, plunge in pursuit of death. 
but here he gain the comfortless repose
 he seek, a acquiescence of his soul
 in heav'n-renouncing exile, he endure —
 what do he not? from lust oppose in vain,
 and self-reproaching conscience. he foresee
 the fatal issue to his health, fame, peace,
 fortune and dignity; the loss of all
 that can ennoble man, and make frail life
 short as it be, supportable. still worse,
 far worse than all the plague with which his sin
 insect his happy moment, he forebode
 age of hopeless misery. future death,
 and death still future. not a hasty stroke
 like that which send he to the dusty grave,
 but unrepealable endure death. 
scripture be still a trumpet to his fear;
 what none can prove a forg'ry, may be true,
 what none but bad man wish explode, must. 
that scruple check he. riot be not loud
 nor drink enough to drown it. in the midst
 of laughter his compunction be sincere,
 and he abhor the jest by which he shine. 
remorse beget reform. his master-lust
 fall first before his resolute rebuke,
 and seem dethrone and vanquish. peace ensue,
 but spurious and short-lived, the puny child
 of self-congratulating pride, beget
 on fancy innocence. again he fall,
 and fight again; but find his best essay
 a presage ominous, portend still
 its own dishonour by a worse relapse. 
till nature, unavailing nature foil
 so oft, and weary in the vain attempt,
 scoff at her own performance. reason now
 take part with appetite, and plead the cause,
 perverse, which of late she so condemn;
 with shallow shift and old device, wear
 and tatter in the service of debauch,
 cover his shame from his offend sight. 

 "have god indeed give appetite to man,
"and store the earth so plenteous with mean
 "to gratify the hunger of his wish,
"and do he reprobate and will he damn
 "the use of his own bounty? make first
"so frail a kind, and then enact law
 "so strict, that less than perfect must despair? 
"falsehood! which whoso but suspect of truth,
 "dishonour god, and make a slave of man. 
"do they themselves, who undertake for hire
 "the teacher office, and dispense at large
"their weekly dole of edify strain,
 "attend to their own music? have they faith
"in what with such solemnity of tone
 "and gesture they propound to our belief? 
"nay — conduct have the loud tongue. the voice
 "be but a instrument on which the priest
"may play what tune he please. in the deed,
 "the unequivocal authentic deed
"we find sound argument, we read the heart. 

such reason (if that name must needs belong
 the excuse in which reason have no part)
 serve to compose a spirit well incline
 to live on term of amity with vice,
 and sin without disturbance. often urge
 (as often as libidinous discourse
 exhaust, he resort to solemn theme
 of theological and grave import)
 they gain at last his unreserved assent. 
till harden his heart temper in the forge
 of lust, and on the anvil of despair,
 he slight the stroke of conscience. nothing move,
 or nothing much, his constancy in ill,
 vain tamper have but foster his disease,
 it be desperate, and he sleep the sleep of death. 
haste now, philosopher, and set he free. 
charm the deaf serpent wise. make he hear
 of rectitude and fitness; moral truth
 how lovely, and the moral-sense how sure
 consult and obey, to guide his step
 direct to the first and only fair. 
spare not in such a cause. spend all the power
 of rant and rhapsody in virtue praise,
 be most sublime good, verbose grand,
 and with poetic trappings grace thy prose
 till it out-mantle all the pride of verse. —
 ah, tinkle cymbal and high-sounding brass
 smite in vain! such music can charm
 the eclipse that intercept truth heavenly beam,
 and chill and darken a wide-wandering soul. 
the still small voice be want. he must speak
 who word leap forth at once to its effect,
 who call for thing that be not, and they come. 

grace make the slave a freeman. it be a change
 that turn to ridicule the turgid speech
 and stately tone of moralist, who boast,
 as if like he of fabulous renown
 they have indeed ability to smooth
 the shag of savage nature, and be each
 a Orpheus and omnipotent in song. 
but transformation of apostate man
 from fool to wise, from earthly to divine,
 be work for he that make he. he alone,
 and he by mean in philosophic eye
 trivial and worthy of disdain, achieve
 the wonder; humanize what be brute
 in the lose kind, extract from the lip
 of asp their venom, overpower strength
 by weakness, and hostility by love. 

patriot have toil, and in their country cause
 bleed noble, and their deed, as they deserve,
 receive proud recompense. we give in charge
 their name to the sweet lyre. the historic muse,
 proud of the treasure, march with it down
 to late time; and sculpture in her turn,
 give bond in stone and ever-during brass,
 to guard they, and to immortalize she trust. 
but fair wreath be due, though never pay,
 to those who post at the shrine of truth,
 have fall in her defence. a patriot blood
 well spend in such a strife may earn indeed
 and for a time insure to his love land
 the sweet of liberty and equal law;
 but martyr struggle for a bright prize,
 and win it with more pain. their blood be shed
 in confirmation of the noble claim,
 our claim to feed upon immortal truth,
 to walk with god, to be divine free,
 to soar, and to anticipate the sky. 
yet few remember they. they live unknown
 till persecution drag they into fame
 and chase they up to heaven. their ash fly
 — no marble tell we whither. with their name
 no bard embalm and sanctify his song,
 and history, so warm on mean theme,
 be cold on this. she execrate indeed
 the tyranny that doom they to the fire,
 but give the glorious sufferer little praise. 

he be the freeman who the truth make free,
 and all be slave beside. there be not a chain
 that hellish foe confederate for his harm
 can wind around he, but he cast it off
 with as much ease as Samson his green wyth. 
he look abroad into the vary field
 of nature, and though poor perhaps, compare
 with those who mansion glitter in his sight,
 call the delightful scenery all his own. 
he be the mountain, and the valley his,
 and the resplendent river. his top enjoy
 with a propriety that none can feel,
 but who with filial confidence inspire
 can lift to heaven a unpresumptuous eye,
 and smile say — my father make they all. 
be they not his by a peculiar right,
 and by a emphasis of interest his,
 who eye they fill with tear of holy joy,
 who heart with praise, and who exalt mind
 with worthy thought of that unwearied love
 that plan, and build, and still uphold a world
 so clothe with beauty, for rebellious man? 
yes — you may fill your garner, you that reap
 the load soil, and you may waste much good
 in senseless riot; but you will not find
 in feast or in the chace, in song or dance
 a liberty like he, who unimpeached
 of usurpation and to no man wrong,
 appropriate nature as his father work,
 and have a rich use of you, than you. 
he be indeed a freeman. free by birth
 of no mean city, plan or here the hill
 be build, the fountain open, or the sea,
 with all his roar multitude of wave. 
his freedom be the same in every state,
 and no condition of this changeful life
 so manifold in care, who every day
 bring its own evil with it, make it less. 
for he have wing that neither sickness, pain,
 nor penury, can cripple or confine. 
no nook so narrow but he spread they there
 with ease, and be at large. the oppressor hold
 his body bind, but know not what a range
 his spirit take unconscious of a chain,
 and that to bind he be a vain attempt
 who god delight in, and in who he dwell. 

acquaint thyself with god if thou will taste
 his work. admit once to his embrace,
 thou shall perceive that thou be blind before;
 thy eye shall be instruct, and thy heart
 make pure, shall relish with divine delight
 until then unfelt, what hand divine have wrought. 
brute graze the mountain-top with face prone
 and eye intent upon the scanty herb
 it yield they, or recumbent on its brow,
 ruminate heedless of the scene outspread
 beneath, beyond, and stretch far away
 from inland region to the distant main. 
man view it and admire, but rest content
 with what he view. the landscape have his praise,
 but not its author. unconcerned who form
 the paradise he see, he find it such,
 and such well-pleased to find it, ask no more. 
not so the mind that have be touch from heaven,
 and in the school of sacred wisdom teach
 to read his wonder, in who think the world,
 fair as it be, exist here it be. 
not for its own sake mere, but for his
 much more who fashion it, he give it praise;
 praise that from earth result as it ought
 to earth acknowledge sovereign, find at once
 its only just proprietor in he. 
the soul that see he, or receive sublime
 new faculty, or learn at least to employ
 more worthy the power she own before;
 discern in all thing, what with stupid gaze
 of ignorance till then she overlook,
 a ray of heavenly light gild all form
 terrestrial, in the vast and the minute
 the unambiguous footstep of the god
 who give its lustre to a insect wing,
 and wheel his throne upon the roll world. 
much conversant with heaven, she often hold
 with those fair minister of light to man
 that fill the sky nightly with silent pomp,
 sweet conference. enquire what strain be they
 with which heaven ring, when every star, in haste
 to gratulate the new-creat earth,
 send forth a voice, and all the son of god
 shout for joy. — "tell i, you shine host
"that navigate a sea that know no storm
 "beneath a vault unsullied with a cloud,
"if from your elevation, whence you view
 "distinct scene invisible to man,
"and system of who birth no tiding yet
 "have reach this nether world, you spy a race
"favour as we, transgressor from the womb
 "and haste to a grave, yet doom to rise,
"and to possef a bright heaven than you? 
 "as one who long detain on foreign shore
"pant to return, and when he see afar
 "he country be weather-bleached and batter rock
"from the green wave emerge, dart a eye
 "radiant with joy towards the happy land;
"so i with animate hope behold
 "and many a ache wish, your beamy fire,
"that show like beacon in the blue abyss
 "ordain to guide the embody spirit home
"from toilsome life to never-ending rest. 
 "love kindle as i gaze. i feel desire
"that give assurance of their own success,
 "and that infuse from heaven, must thither tend."

so read he nature who the lamp of truth
 illuminate. thy lamp, mysterious word! 
which whoso see, no long wander lose
 with intellect bemaze in endless doubt,
 but run the road of wisdom. thou have build
 with mean that be not till by thou employ,
 world that have never be have thou in strength
 be less, or less benevolent than strong. 
they be thy witness, who speak thy power
 and goodness infinite, but speak in ear
 that hear not, or receive not their report. 
in vain thy creature testify of thou
 until thou proclaim thyself. they be indeed
 a teach voice; but it be the praise of thy
 that who it teach it make prompt to learn,
 and with the boon give talent for its use. 
till thou be hear, imagination vain
 possess the heart, and fable false as hell
 yet deem oracular, lure down to death
 the uninformed and heedless soul of man. 
we give to chance, blind chance, ourselves as blind,
 the glory of thy work, which yet appear
 perfect and unimpeachable of blame,
 challenge human scrutiny, and prove
 then skilful most when most severe judge. 
but chance be not; or be not where thou reign:
 thy providence forbid that fickle power
 (if power she be that work but to confound)
 to mix her wild vagary with thy law. 
yet thus we dote, refuse while we can
 instruction, and invent to ourselves
 god such as guilt make welcome, god that sleep,
 or disregard our folly, or that sit
 amuse spectator of this bustle stage. 
thou we reject, unable to abide
 thy purity, until pure as thou be pure,
 make such by thou, we love thou for that cause
 for which we shun and hate thou before. 
then we be free. then liberty like day
 break on the soul, and by a flash from heaven
 fire all the faculty with glorious joy. 
a voice be hear that mortal ear hear not
 until thou have touch they; it be the voice of song,
 a loud hosanna send from all thy work,
 which he that hear it with a shout repeat,
 and add his rapture to the general praise. 
in that bless moment, nature throw wide
 her veil opaque, disclose with a smile
 the author of her beauty, who retire
 behind his own creation, work unseen
 by the impure, and hear his power deny. 
thou be the source and centre of all mind,
 their only point of rest, eternal word! 
from thou depart, they be lose and rove
 at random, without honour, hope, or peace. 
from thou be all that sooth the life of man,
 his high endeavour, and his glad success,
 his strength to suffer and his will to serve. 
but oh thou bounteous giver of all good,
 thou be of all thy gift thyself the crown! 
give what thou can, without thou we be poor,
 and with thou rich, take what thou will away. 
