a elegy on a pile of ruin.

by J. Cunningham.

in the full prospect yonder hill command
 over forest, field, and vernal-coated plain;
 the vestige of a ancient abbey stand,
 close by a ruin castle rude remains. 

half bury, there, lie many a break bust,
 and obelisk, and urn, overthrow by time;
 and many a cherub, here, descend in dust
 from the rent roof, and portico sublime. 

the rivulet, oft fright at the sound
 of fragment tumble from the tower on high,
 plunge to their source in secret cave profound,
 leave their bank and pebbly bottom dry. 

where reverend shrine in gothic grandeur stand,
 the nettle, or the noxious nightshade, spread;
 and ashling, waft from the neighbour wood,
 through the wear turret wave their tremble head. 

there contemplation, to the crowd unknown,
 her attitude compose, and aspect sweet! 
sit muse on a monumental stone,
 and point to the memento at her foot. 

soon as sage evening check day sunny pride,
 i leave the mantling shade, in moral mood;
 and, seat by the maid sequester side,
 thus sigh, the moulder ruin as i view. 

inexorable calm, with silent pace,
 here time have pass — what ruin mark his way! 
this pile, now crumble over its hallow base,
 turn not his step, nor can his course delay. 

religion raise her supplicate eye
 in vain; and melody, her song sublime:
 in vain, philosophy, with maxim wise,
 will touch the cold unfeeling heart of time. 

yet the hoar tyrant, though not move to spare,
 relent when he strike its finish pride;
 and, partly the rude ravage to repair,
 the totter tower with twist ivy tie. 

how solemn be the cell overgrow with moss,
 that terminate the view yond cloister way! 
in the crush wall a time-corroded cross,
 religion like, stand moulder in decay! 

where the mild sun, through saint-encyphered glass,
 illume with mellow light that brown-browed isle;
 many rapt hour may meditation pass,
 slow move betwixt the pillar of the pile! 

and piety, with mystic-meaning bead,
 bow to saint on every side inurn,
 tread oft the solitary path, that lead
 where now the sacred altar lie overturn! 

through the grey grove, betwixt those wither tree;
 among a rude group of monument, appear
 a marble-imaged matron on her knee,
 half waste, like a Niobe in tear:

low level in the dust she darling lay! 
death pity not the pride of youthful bloom;
 nor can maternal piety dissuade,
 or soften the fell tyrant of the tomb. 

the relic of a mitred saint may rest,
 where, moulder in the niche, his statue stand
 now nameless, as the crowd that kiss his vest,
 and crave the benediction of his hand. 

near the brown arch, redouble yonder gloom,
 the bone of a illustrious chieftain lie;
 as trace upon the time-unlettered tomb,
 the trophy of a break fame imply. 

ah! what avail, that over the vassal plain,
 his right and rich demesne extend wide! 
that honour, and her knight, compose his train,
 and chivalry stand marshale by his side! 

though to the cloud his castle seem to climb,
 and frown defiance on the desperate foe;
 though deem invincible, the conqueror, time,
 level the fabric, as the founder, low. 

where the light lyre give many a soften sound,
 raven and rook, the bird of discord dwell;
 and where society sit sweet crown,
 eternal solitude have fix her cell. 

the lizard, and the lazy lurk bat,
 inhabit now, perhaps, the paint room,
 where the sage matron and her maiden sit,
 sweet-sing at the silver-working loom. 

the traveller bewilder on a waste;
 and the rude wind incessant seem to roar,
 where, in his grove with arch arbour grace,
 young lover often sigh in day of yore. 

his aqueduct, that lead the limpid tide
 to pure canal, a crystal cool supply! 
in the deep dust their barren beauty hide:
 time be thirst, unquenchable, have drain they dry! 

though his rich hour in revelry be spend
 with Comus, and the laughter-loving crew;
 and the sweet brow of beauty, still unbent,
 brighten his fleecy moment as they fly:

fleet be the fleecy moment! fly they must;
 not to be stay by masque, or midnight roar! 
nor shall a pulse, among that moulder dust,
 beat wanton at the smile of beauty more! 

can the deep statesman, skill in great design,
 protract, but for a day, precarious breath;
 or the tune follower of the sacred nine,
 sooth, with his melody, insatiate death? 

no — though the palace bar her golden gate,
 or monarch plant ten thousand guard around;
 unerring, and unseen, the shaft of fate
 strike the devote victim to the ground! 

what then avail ambition wide-stretched wing,
 the schoolman page, or pride of beauty bloom! 
the crape-clad hermit, and the rich-robed king,
 level, lie mix promiscuous in the tomb. 

the macedonian monarch, wise and good,
 bid, when the morning rosy reign begin,
 courtier shall call, as round his couch they stand,
 "Philip! remember, thou be no more than man. 

 "though glory spread thy name from pole to pole;
" though thou be merciful, and brave, and just;
 "Philip, reflect, thou be post to the goal,
" where mortal mix in undistinguished dust! " 

so Saladin, for art and arm renowned,
 (aegypt and syria wide domain subdue)
 return with imperial triumph crown,
 sigh, when the perishable pomp he view:

and as he ride, high in his regal car,
 in all the purple pride of conquest dress;
 conspicuous, over the trophy gain in war,
 place, pendent on a spear, his burial vest:

while thus the herald cry — "this son of power,
" this Saladin, to who the nation bow;
 "may, in the space of one revolve hour,
" boast of no other spoil, but yonder shroud! " 

search where ambition rage, with rigour steel;
 where slaughter, like the rapid lightning, run;
 and say, while memory weep the blood-stained field,
 where lie the chief, and where the common man? 

vain be the pyramid, and mottoe stone,
 and monumental trophy raise on high! 
for time confound they with the crumble bone,
 that mix in hasty grave unnoticed lie. 

rest not, beneath the turf, the peasant head,
 soft as the lord, beneath the labour tomb? 
or sleep one cold, in his close clay bed,
 than other, in the wide vault dreary womb? 

hither let luxury lead her loose-robed train;
 here flutter pride, on purple paint wing:
 and, from the moral prospect, learn — how vain
 the wish, that sigh for sublunary thing. 
