amana.

act i 

scene, a fountain.

amana.

hail sacred fount! bless by our holy prophet
 who precept, pure as thy translucent stream,
 cleanse the foul man, diffuse health and virtue. 
frequent ablution purge our outward stain,
 and moral law preserve our inward pureness. 
but hark! a caravan approach near. 
quick from all eye let i conceal my own. 

call.

damsel, by heat and thirst impel, i come
 to seek refreshment from this hallow spring. 
say, will thou lend that goblet? 

amana.

call.

heaven! what a arm, a shape, a mien, a air! 
such be the houry promise we above,
 and why not taste our happiness below? 
she must unveil. 
withdraw that curtain, maid,
 to cure my passion, or confirm my wonder. 

amana.

call.

nouradin.

insolent slave, forgo thy brutal hold,
 or by the soul of my depart father,
this moment be thy last. say, beauteous maid,
 can you forgive this ruffian barbarous outrage,
 or shall his instant death make just atonement? 

amana.

Abdallah.

my love amana! my last grasp of life! 
what monster vile than the wild Arab,
 can dare insult thy unoffending youth,
 or force thou lave thy glow cheek with tear? 

nouradin.

the slave who dare offend the angelic maid,
 wait to receive his doom from her decree,
 and justice satisfy, too lovely fair,
 i hope that vassal crime will rest on he,
 absolve we from any purpose vile;
 nor may the innocent atone the guilty. 

amana.

injustice dwell not in a heart like i,
 nor can resentment there long hold a place. 
to you, my lord, my grateful thanks be due,
 who rescue i from brutal violence:
 that wretch rude assault i pardon, also. 
let he depart unharmed. 

nouradin.

excellent maid! 
thy mind and body sure be of a piece,
 bright emanation of the deity! 

Abdallah.

if you from insult have preserve amana,
 o! take a father prayer, who feel heart,
 for every wrong she suffer, must drop blood:
 my age darling! sole remain stay
 which hold my frame from sink to the grave. 
o! can i see that tender lily prop
 by fortune foster hand, or better far,
 support by the bridegroom rise, i then,
 with smile will close my weary eye in death. 

nouradin.

o! if the pure flame that ever warm
 a virgin heart, for such be i to love,
 unknowing of its pleasure or its pain,
 until i behold this lovely of her sex,
 and gaze my soul away. o! if a passion,
 which in a moment equal that of year,
 can make i worthy to possess such charm,
 accept that prop, that firm support in i,
 who circle arm shall screen she from each blast,
 cherish her bloom year, and nurse her age. 

Abdallah.

since heaven deprive i of its rich bounty,
 my lose Amestris, joy have never once
 pervade this dark mansion: the busy guest
 now fill each space, nor leave i room for utterance —
 generous young man! thy worth, thy wealth and power,
 to i be full know, with gratitude
 i will accept the proffer honour,
 if my amana heart feel no reluctance
 to aid her father wish, and make we bless. 
but shall all egypt monarch, from his throne
 descend, court she to the bridal bed,
 if her repugnant heart refuse his love,
 i will remit a father stern behest,
 nor force my child to splendid misery. 
what say amana? 

amana.

my father tenderness have be so great,
 that i have scarce feel the bond of duty,
 as inclination prompt every act
 which may appear obedience; and in this,
 the most important deed of all my life,
 my heart feel no reluctance to obey. 

nouradin.

ecstatic sound! thus prostrate at thy foot,
 let my full heart pour forth its grateful rapture;
 and by a life of love, and friendly care,
 repay the happiness i now receive. 

Abdallah.

arise, my son, and may our holy prophet
 with benign aspect smile upon your union:
 may long and prosperous day attend your life,
 and every hour increase your mutual flame. 

nouradin.

this day the mourning for my father end;
 from mecca shrine, to which in pilgrimage
 i go, i now return; some angel, sure,
 have lead my footstep near this sacred fount,
 and in reward for filial duty pay,
 have bless i with a husband happy rite. 
with she and your consent, tomorrow sun
 shall see we join in Hymen constant band. 
meantime, to Cairo instant we will repair,
 where choice ornament shall deck my fair. 
their ray inferior by thy eye be show,
 which shine in native modesty alone. 

call.

may swift destruction overtake you both,
 and if wrong caled mean can lend it aid,
 they shall be well supply. thou nouradin,
 have rob i of this maid; i meet she first,
 and have a prior claim. her childish coyness
 will soon have yield to my free-est wish,
 have thou not intervene; while she, right woman,
 prefer the fortune to the man. nor yet,
 be this the worst offence; do he not strike thou? 
and act the bravo part throughout? a blow! 
what though the chance of war have quite reverse
 my outward seem, still my pride remain
 as high, as when in Spain, my native country,
 i be salute by the stile of lord. 
and though the Turk have sell my limb to bondage,
 the inward man no shackle can control. 
my abject state restrain a noble dare;
 therefore i will seek amends by cautious mean,
 and may revenge quick animate my purpose! 
it be say that love have wing — but vengeance still
 outstrip its flight — the cyprian queen be draw
 by dove — the bird of jupiter a eagle. 
on eagle wing my vengeance now shall speed,
 and in my talon grasp these dove shall bleed. 

scene change to a palace.

osmin.

what be thou, pomp? a airy being sure,
 delusive shade! which fool alone admire,
 but wiseman never enjoy. even substance
 grow vain, and mock the eager grasp; the mind
 sate, not satisfy with bloom beauty,
 lo! dull disgust pursue the tire embrace. 
variety a cheat — instead of quicken,
 it only pall the taste; and sink our relish
 to depravity. the lowly cottager,
 who homely wife, make coarse by labour, rest
 within his arm, feel more of bliss than i,
 who can command a thousand various fair,
 to inspire new wish, and revive my ardor:
 but then it be submission, and not love,
 which prompt their yield — they choose not osmin,
 but obey the sultan; while in full gust
 of amorous dalliance, i but feel myself
 a happy brute, yet still a wretched man! 

osmin.

why Fatima, with ill-timed zeal and fondness,
 do thou obtrude upon my private leizure? 

Fatima.

blame not impatience of unchanging passion,
 which follow where attraction lead the way:
 though that, which once to i you urge, be dead,
 i, like the fragrant mittle, live in frost:
 thy chill coldness may destroy its blossom,
 but can kill the root. 

osmin.

these strong profession,
 of never-ceasing love, sound like upbraid
 to my tire ear — i like they not — nor thou. 

Fatima.

oh! do not wound i with such harsh expression;
 but since my once love image have forbear
 to mark its former trace in thy bosom,
 yet still, in pity to my sex weakness,
 restrain thy speech from scorn. o! spare the guilt
 to thy own breast, of stab mine with grief;
 yet leave i hope — the wretch only solace —
 and let the jealous doubt of slight love,
 and not thy stern decree, pronounce my doom. 
oh! suffer i to gaze sometime in rapture,
 upon my sovereign face; to hear that voice,
 which whilom use to inspire my soul with joy,
 and ease my heart with sigh on thy bosom. 

osmin.

away — away — dalliance without desire,
 be lifeless sport — beside, it may increase
 thy hapless flame; and i in generous pity,
 will quick cure thy simple sex folly. 
retire — i be use to dictate — not to argue. 

Fatima.

since you pronounce it, i will go for ever,
 a banish wretch, exile of joy or hope. 
but dread the anguish thou have make i feel,
 may be repay thou in the same degree:
 love be a vengeful power, and will, i hope,
 resent his votary cause: some beauteous maid
 shall yet avenge my wrong, and make thou know
 worse pang than i do now — if possible. 

osmin.

thy vain prediction, like fantastic dream,
 vanish in empty air. i dare deny
 that all the charm of thy whole sex conjoin,
 can raise, or pain or pleasure, in my breast —
 full well i know, therefore despise you all. 

Fatima.

then hear, almighty love, thy suppliant prayer —
 if thou do ever touch that stubborn heart,
 with bitter venom tinge the pierce dart;
 mix yellow jealousy, and fire-eyed rage,
 and may no heal balm his pang assuage;
 let he feel all love anguish, all its pain,
 and may his fond wish meet disdain. 

nardic.

may endless day of never fade bliss
 await my sovereign, may still ripen honour
 bloom round his brow, and each day add new trophy
 to adorn his fame. behold from gaza wall
 a messenger arrive, proclaim your arm
 victorious over the rebel slave, who now
 all own allegiance to thy rightful sway. 

osmin.

it be well. 
now let those lofty disaffect tower,
 that brave the heaven, and i, be raze to earth;
 and let all those who dare oppose my reign,
 now feel my vengeance. be the city sack? 

nardic.

osmin.

then let its name no long be remember. 
but see, o nardic! how the short-lived joy,
 inspire by this success, like the swift glare
 of lightning, be extinguish. discontent
 return, and render still thy prince unhappy. 

nardic.

where then may we seek bliss, if he who nod
 give life or death, while numerous nation wait
 attendant on his will, can yet be wretched! 
who every sense be gratify to fullness;
 while all of art, and all of nature join
 to soothe his wish, and court his appetite! 
our bounteous Nile yield all that can indulge
 the smell or taste, of fruit and flower luxuriant;
 our minstrel cunning in their harmony,
 draw forth such dulcet sound as may assist
 creation in her work, and animate
 the dust from whence we spring. but, o! the last,
 the best, the high pitch of mortal bliss,
 see the collect master work of nature,
 the lovely fair from various region seek,
 envy each other every partial smile. 

osmin.

avaunt, audacious slave! dare thou presume
 to expostulate with i? when i have say
 that i be most unhappy, think thou then,
 thy flatter tongue can gloss my wretchedness? 
but wherefore do i suffer thou to breathe,
 thou abject thing, except to administer
 delight to osmin? then hear my firm resolve —
 if in three day thou find not some new joy,
 some untried vanity, that may awake
 my soul, and rouse it to a sense of pleasure,
 thy head shall pay the forfeit — vanish straight,
 nor waste thy precious time in vain debate. 

osmin.

i have surround joy capricious maze,
 yet can find the clue — some demon sure
 withholds it — but i will seek it in the pit
 of Acheron, or miss, sink in the pursuit. 
nor rape, nor murder, shall obstruct my course,
 pleasure, like maid, must first be win by force;
 of they too, when we taste, we soon be cloy,
 and only sigh for those not yet enjoy. 

act ii.

scene, nardic apartment. 

nardic.

terror, solicitude, and wild despair,
 pursue my step! each moment seem my last! 
the tyrant seek my life, and he must have it —
 where can i turn to find new joy for one,
 who have in vain exhaust nature treasure,
 and plenteous as she be, have make her bankrupt? 
be he indeed a king, i may supply
 new object daily to relieve his languor,
 and yield he transport beyond mortal sense. 
to feed the poor, to comfort the distress,
 to usher bashful genius into life,
 become a parent to the orphan tear,
 "and cause the widow heart to sing for joy,"
 exalt a monarch to a angel rank:
 but virtue never have warm his earth-born soul,
 it be a sixth sense to osmin. science fair
 to he have spread her letter page, in vain —
 his mind never reach to contemplation height,
 nor feel the rapture of a moral sense:
 he pulse, his nerve form all his notice;
 his heart, his soul be aliens to his joy. 
i have send proclamation forth, that he,
 who in two day produce the fair virgin
 to fill the sultan arm, shall in degree,
 stand next to nardic, be the third within
 this spacious realm. no claimant yet appear. 

attendant.

this stranger, mighty lord, earnest desire
 to come into thy presence. i have now
 fulfil thy wish. 

nardic.

call.

let nardic smile from out the dust raise up
 the low slave that mingle with his fellow. 
here may my faithful service be accept,
 and osmin arm be bless with sovereign beauty. 

nardic.

call.

this day the merchant nouradin prepare
 to wed the fair maid circassia plain,
 or georgia vale have ever yet present
 to the seraglio of the south or east. 
the fable Venus fail of her description,
 and those angelic nymph which by our prophet
 be promise to the happy saint above,
 but equal her perfection. never sure,
 for vulgar use be charm like she ordain —
 our Caliph only may deserve such bliss. 

nardic.

if that thy tongue, unused to flatter speech,
 have but report true, quick expect
 the high reward proclaim — nay more, endow
 with all the active friendship of my life. 
haste then, and bring this most transcendent fair,
 to bless my longing sight. 

call.

my gracious lord,
 without thy aid our purpose wish be vain. 
lo! call be the slave of nouradin;
 and shall he dare to ravish from his arm
 the bride of his affection? thou must lend
 the sultan power, which only can accomplish
 his happiness and we: with that invest,
 instant i will force she to your rapture gaze,
 and prove that i want art to paint her charm. 

nardic.

the royal mandate quick shall be prepare,
 and if our holy prophet aid my prayer,
 she will answer to thy boast. come in with i. 

scene, a garden.

nouradin.

my beauteous bride, with pleasure i survey
 these dazzle gem diminish in their lustre
 by thy bright eye, like star before the sun. 
but o! that glorious planet move but slow,
 stop perhaps his course to gaze on thou. 
be Thetis such a bride as my amana,
 his chariot will outspeed the wind, and yet,
 not equal my impatience for the night. 

amana.

all that i hear, all that i see, be new;
 yet not the pride of sudden elevation
 swell my full heart, but gratitude to thou. 
these splendid ornament, and this gay scene,
 attract my wonder, but inspire not joy:
 it be he, the fond dispenser of they all,
 it be nouradin alone that give they value,
 and make they please to amana eye. 

nouradin.

o! be the flame mine where diamond grow,
 with all of wealth and grandeur, in my power,
 how poor shall i estimate the gift,
 compare to that which i receive from thou! 

amana.

too high do thou rate so slight a prize,
 for poor amana heart be all her treasure,
 there humble duty, join with tender love,
 and grateful sentiment, shall ever dwell,
 for thou, my lord, my lover, husband, friend. 

nouradin.

transport charmer, generous to excess! 
but word be feeble to express my sense. 
here then i make a solemn vow, that though  
our law admit plurality of wife,
 thy nouradin sincere and faithful heart
 shall never wander from amana charm,
 nor feel the power of beauty but from she,
 the pride, the pleasure of his future life,
 his whole of bliss below. who dare intrude? 

nouradin.

unmannered slave! what insolence to rush
 into my presence thus? 

call.

nouradin.

call.

can thou not read it? why do tremble so? 
arouse, and be a man — i do not strike thou —
 thou first bereave i of that precious beauty —
 i but repay thou justice for thy wrong. 

nouradin.

ten thousand dagger stick within my heart —
 monster, barbarian, oh!  

amana.

alas! he faint,
 quick let i fly to aid he. 

call.

lovely maid,
 thy tender care must henceforth be bestow
 on one more worthy of thy charm. the sultan
 in tedious languishment attend thy presence,
 and we must not delay. 

amana.

oh! never, never —
 this world have no exchange for nouradin. 

nouradin.

tear out my heart, pluck all my limb asunder,
 wreak thy full vengeance on this wretched body —
 but spare, oh! spare amana. 

amana.

nought but death
 shall ever wrest i from my love. my father! 
will thou not rescue i? 

call.

Abdallah.

nouradin.

since wealth can bribe thou to a act of baseness,
 let it, for once, inspire humanity. 
take all that i possess — except her —
 thou can not leave i poor —

call.

be all thy wealth
 treble a thousand fold, nay be it more
 than even think can number, for it all
 i will not forgo the joy i feel in vengeance. 
now thou be answer — quick prepare to part —
 i will indulge thou with a last embrace. 

amana.

they shall dismember i to loose this hold —
 oh! kill i, sir, and save i from dishonour. 

Abdallah.

oh! my unhappy child, thy father wish
 to see thou dead, but can give the blow. 

call.

come, madam, to delay your bliss be vain;
 if you consent not, force shall make you happy. 

nouradin.

oh! do not hurt her tender limb, and i
 will quit my hold of she, and life together. 
my love, my lose amana! 

Abdallah.

curse be this clime, and double curse its prophet! 
for who false faith i leave the only true;
 at once abandon heaven, and my country,
 renounce both world for my amestris' charm. 
o liberty! thou first, best gift, to man
 bestow in paradise — nature creation
 subject to he, himself without controul,
 except to heaven alone. thus, thus derive,
 we claim it as our birthright. yet, o shame! 
whole nation have resign this right divine,
 from heaven revolt, yet submit to man. 
Albion alone preserve the bless Palladium,
 where every power of do good be free,
 and peasant may defend their right from king. 
a second Eden in religion also,
 in faith and practice pure among man. 
yet i a renegade to each advantage,
 though bear a briton, breed a christian too,
 my creed, my country, for a woman love
 do forfeit. true indeed, my paradise
 i have enjoy below — but vengeance sure
 though slow, have now overtake, and my amana
 be mark a victim for her father crime. 
yet still, just heaven! if sin may be atone
by deep contrition, weigh my penitence,
 nor shed the parent guilt upon the child. 
oh! rather let i live while nature power
 admit existence, in that life be curse
 with pain, with penury, with every ill
 to vex the mind, or torture human sense:
 extend those evil to my late gasp,
 and purge my apostasy with wound and death! 

nouradin.

why do i part with she! why not sustain
the sultan cruelty, and caled vengeance! 
oh! have they hew i piecemeal, what can they
 have do, but kill i! and i now must suffer
 a thousand, thousand death! but fear for her
 unmanned my nature quite — for in the strife,
 they may have injure she. there, there i die —
 tear from my bleed heart where be she now? 
perhaps encircle in the caliph arm! 

Abdallah.

stay that ungenerous thought — though bear a slave,
 my daughter ever have be breed a briton;
 nor will she condescend to live on term
 which her chaste soul abhor — from early youth,
 she have be teach to know that life be dowerless. 
without virtue: strip of that rich portion,
 one lot alone remain — to die with honour. 
therefore believe amana still a virgin,
 or no more —

nouradin.

why do thou seek to aggravate my sorrow? 
i hope amana heart may be at peace,
 that wealth, that grandeur may have buy her smile,
 and leave i only, wretched — oh! it be false! 
vile treason against love! that heavenly maid,
 within this hour, declare she only live
 for nouradin — then let i instant fly,
 to save she from pollution: this good sword
 lodge deep in osmin breast — or in my own. 

Abdallah.

my son, attend. a thought have quick occur,
 which may perhaps, redeem we from despair. 
the captain of the guard, his name be Hamet,
 be once a well try friend of i: honest,
 sincere and brave; strict bind in gratitude,
 for service, no matter now to tell. 
and if the mode of court have not erase
 all generous feeling from his age breast,
 he will both pity, and assist our purpose. 
shall he but lend his aid, i yet have hope,
 of rescue amana from perdition. 
but, oh! he never feel a father anguish,
 nor do his heart ever bleed as i do now! 

nouradin.

o! lose not time in fruitless doubt or fear. 
but fly this moment, and strong urge your suit;
 use every argument that thought can frame,
 to bind he to our friendship: if my wealth
 can buy his service, let he take it all,
 and pay i with one sight of my amana. 

Abdallah.

thou need not seek to press a father haste
 to save a only child; for though no rapture
 now fire my blood like you, more generous passion,
 rage against oppression, with parental fondness,
 have make my heart as brave as his who dare
 the cannon roar in battle. but my son,
 know that the adventure be most hazardous;
 therefore with caution let we now proceed,
 intreat heaven to bless the pious deed —
 and if we fail, i be prepare to bleed. 

act iii.

scene, nardic apartment. 

nardic.

what strong impatience agitate my mind! 
will call be arrive. i long, yet dread
 to view this promise maid, upon who charm
 depend my life or death. oh! the mean slavery
 of proud dependence! how contemptuous seem
 all power, all greatness, which we poor borrow
 from another smile! or purchase base
 with office servile, or with treachery buy! 
strange state of man, to be or slave or tyrant! 
be there no mean condition, holy prophet? 
be all then bear for one? no way to blend
 prerogative with liberty? to poise
 in equal scale, the prince and people right,
 and make they mutual suspend each other? 

call.

now let thy servant truth be full prove. 
behold the fair amana. 

nardic.

her shape and stature vouch in part thy praise,
 her face i hope will certify the rest. 
transcendent charmer, dry those fall tear,
 and let thy lovely eye be deck in smile,
 to greet thy come greatness; happy,
 as fair of thy sex, i hail thou queen,
and here devote my future life, and service,
 to the command of our bright sultaness,
 the fair amana. 

amana.

o detest flattery! 
offspring of meanness and ambition, foster
 in court, luxuriant soil for every vice
 to thrive and flourish in. know i disdain
 the sultan and his greatness. if indeed,
 thou mean thy kind profession for my service,
 o! give i back to a fond father arm,
 to a despair husband bleed heart,
 or with thy poignard set my own at rest. 

nardic.

alas! bright maid, thy youth and inexperience
 have much deceive thou, and thou know not yet
 the joy superior which attend on greatness. 
soon in the caliph arm thou will renounce
 the mean plebeian who thou now lament,
 and thank our prophet for the bless exchange. 
the high transport to a female heart,
 shall too be thy; for thou will triumph over
 contend rival for the prize of beauty. 
a thousand fair one shall obey thy will,
 who while they pine in envy at thy bliss,
 must still acknowledge thy superior charm. 
i soon shall lead thou to true happiness,
 and lodge thou safe in osmin fond embrace. 

amana.

rather to instant death convey i straight! 
what will my fate do with i? oh, nouradin! 
why do my soul receive its first, its tender,
 its only feeling, from thy worth! why be
 thy generous love bestow on such a wretch,
 lose and abandon now to vile pollution! 
no — it shall never be — though void of mean
 to free myself by force, my dare soul
 shall seek some horrid way — i know not what —
 to rescue i from force, and prostitution. 

nardic.

there stand the lovely fair, who i describe —
 now let thy eye be judge. 

osmin.

retire a while. 
my beauteous maid, bend not thy eye thus mournful,
 upon the earth, but let they shine on osmin. 

amana.

o let the judge of nation hear my prayer! 
with eye of pity not desire, behold
 the unhappy of her sex; unworthy far,
 or of his greatness, or his love: for oh! 
her alien heart be whole win, ever she
 behold the mighty osmin, give away
 by sacred contract, to a lovely youth;
 and this day be to have solemnize our nuptial,
 but for the treachery of a barbarous slave. 
then let not he for who fond beauty sigh,
 retain the furtive prize of villainy;
 but quick restore she to the virtuous tie
 of filial duty, and of wed love. 

osmin.

arise — but be assure thou plead in vain —
 the tenderness of thy complaint have move i,
 but not to pity — since thou can feel love,
 why not sustain its please pain for i? 
thou be not form of coarse plebeian mould,
 too delicate to fill a vassal arm. 
i will preserve thy passion in its force,
 but thou must learn to change the happy object. 
the task be easy, from my own experience,
 for i have love before — and now love thou. 

amana.

as well may thou command sweet flower to grow
 on the tempestuous sea, as force true love
 to change its object. it be impossible! 
from one strong stem, root in both our heart,
 our passion bloom at once, reciprocal:
 thy breath may blast the fruit, but never thy hand
 reap the ripe harvest. then, o mighty sultan! 
if ever thou do hope to taste the joy
 of mutual love, o let my stream eye,
 and lift hand, procure my reconveyance. 
or if thou envy he this poor possession,
 quick let my death destroy his hope, with thy. 

osmin.

thou shall not die, nor will i part with thou —
 but know the slave for who thy fondness plead,
 shall bleed within thy sight, if in the space
 of two revolve sun thou yield not
 to gratify my wish with soft compliance. 
it be thy own fault if henceforth thou be unhappy —
 by gentle mean i choose to win thy love;
 my utmost power thou may command, at will,
 thy friend shall all be great; nay more, the slave,
 the very slave thou sigh for, will i serve:
 he life or death depend on thou — thou be,
 as well as i, his destiny — farewell. 

amana.

o! do not leave i! thy relent heart
 speak in thy eye, and give a dawn of hope. 
thou will not murder nouradin! thou will not —
 i know thou will not. say his life be safe,
 and bid i be at peace from wild distraction. 

osmin.

i have already tell thou my resolve,
 nor be i use to trifle in my speech. 
my word be firm decree; and since pronounce,
 that wretch fate now rest on thou — not i. 

amana.

then hear my resolution, fix as thy —
 though dear to my heart be nouradin,
 than sight be to the blind, health to the sick,
 to prisoner liberty — o far, far dear
 than life, and all its joy, to his amana —
 yet will i put with he, survey the mute
 fix the bow string round his neck, where i
 shall fold my grateful arm, to death devote he,
 rather than wound his image in my heart,
 or stain that mirror with a second object. 

osmin.

beware, and stop thy heedless tongue, lest i
 revoke the clemency my grace have proffer,
 and doom thy minion to a instant death. 

amana.

oh! i be silent, will not dare to speak,
 even to entreat thy pity — o nouradin! 
thou can not know what i endure for thou. 

osmin.

it be well — restrain thy impetuous grief, and let
 the tedious interval i have indulge thou,
 be well employ to brighten every charm,
 which now obscure, and deaden by thy sorrow,
 show like Aurora when her infant beam
 hold contest with the gloomy shade of night. 
and like the glorious ruler of the day,
 let genial warmth dispel the sullen mist;
 then in the full meridian of thy charm,
 with perfect beauty bless my longing arm. 

nardic.

joy to thou call! may still prosperous day
 attend thy life with full and long enjoyment. 
our sultan have accept thy fair gift,
 and own her equal to his fond wish. 
therefore with power in next degree to i,
 i here invest thou Aga of the guard. 
Hamet in thy new office will instruct thou —
 he have resign it to make way for call. 

call.

most mighty lord, call be bind to thou,
 thy future slave; for even those flatter honour
 with which thou load he, hold inferior rank,
 as second to the high debt he owe thou
 who slake his thirsty soul with sweet revenge. 
but much i long to know how do amana
 receive the overture of osmin flame? 
true woman, i suppose, for such the sex,
 one lover out of sight, with greedy ear
 she listen to the second soothe tale,
 forget her vow, and sink into his arm. 

nardic.

call, thou be much deceive — her stubborn will
 yet bend not — she be indeed a woman —
 perverse and obstinate — plead plight love
 to nouradin, intreat to be restore
 to his embrace, or beg that she may die. 

call.

how will her sigh delight my listen ear! 
but then i fear lest through her sullen coyness,
 the sultan take disgust, and cast she from he. 
perhaps restore she to her husband arm —
 the thought have dagger in it. 

nardic.

o fear not that —
 he be too much enamour of her charm,
 to quit the fond pursuit: the power of beauty
 have never such effect upon his heart,
 since first i mark the movement of his passion. 
beside, his restive pride will scorn to yield,
 and force be ready shall persuasion fail. 
he have allow a respite of two day,
 to abate her grief, and tune her soul to joy;
 while, as he know his own unbridled will,
 which like a whirlwind bear down all before it,
 he have withdraw himself from the serrail,
 to waste the tedious space in solitude,
 at sakara upon the bank of Nile;
 where i must now attend he, by command. 
thou call to thy charge repair, and know
 that any who attempt to pass thy watch,
 within the palace ward, must die. farewell. 

call.

Hamet.

oh! i be well repay for thirty year
 of brave and faithful service, displace
 for a vile pandar. true indeed, i never
 have ravish virgin from their bridegroom arm,
 to gratify his satyr lust — i war
 with man, not maid; and oft in heat of battle
 at peril of my own have save his life. 
but that be past — his kingdom be at peace,
 he do not want i now; and like his armour,
 i be leave to rust, too cumbrous to be wear. 

Hamet.

welcome, my ancient, and approve friend,
 thou come in proper time to lend i aid
 and comfort with thy philosophic counsel. 
thou be the man on earth i wish to see —
 thy friendly tongue have oft advise beware
 the dangerous shoal and rock which frequent lurk
 beneath the tide of royal favour — now,
 behold i stick aground, shipwreck indeed! 

Abdallah.

thy adverse fate sincere i lament,
 thy well-proved merit claim this tribute grief. 
but oh! my friend, a near, high sorrow
 now fill up all my thought — a father anguish
 for a only child! my lose amana! 

Hamet.

say, what of she? my dear, unhappy friend! 
have the destroy angel tear she from thou,
 and veil her beauty in the silent tomb? 

Abdallah.

have fate demand she, i be resign —
 but oh! she still survive, a sacrifice
 to brutal force, unless thy generous aid
 shall join to rescue she from vile pollution. 

Hamet.

by this good sword, which never yet have fail i,
 in hot battle, even by hamet life,
 or what be dear still, his unstained honour,
 i swear i will redeem the virtuous maid,
 or fail, perish in the attempt. 

Abdallah.

enough —
 but see the monster call nigh approach —
 let we retire, and plan the generous purpose. 

Hamet.

call.

amana father, in discourse with Hamet! 
i like not that — perhaps they plot my ruin. 
i stand on slippery ground. my elevation
 be too precipitate; and like the pine,
 who hasten growth outstrip its slender girth,
 each blast alarm i, and i shrink my head. 
old hamet well earn post, and long wear honour,
 he have resign with silence and submission,
 unlike a soldier conscious of his worth;
 therefore i doubt not deep within his heart
 he will retain the sense of injury,
 which like a inward wound will rankle there,
 until it break out and show the putrefaction. 
though free from bondage, yet a slave to fear,
 that worst of tyrant, i be wretched still. 
his step i must attend with cautious eye,
 quicken by malice — for who we have wrong,
 it be natural to fear, and thence, to hate. 

scene, nouradin apartment. 

nouradin.

this feverish grief, and torture expectation,
 drink up my blood, my bosom be on flame,
 my nerve shrink up, and i shall first expire
 before Abdallah come to tell i — what? 
what can he tell i! save that my amana
 be dead — or worse — a victim to dishonour! 
his frigid age feel not a lover pain,
 nor can the fondness of a thousand father,
 in nature or degree, compare with i. 

Abdallah.

nouradin.

thou do not mock i sure, oh! quick speak,
 say do she live, and free from brutal stain? 
have thy bless eye behold the unsullied maid? 
oh! say may she again be mine! my wife? 

Abdallah.

i have not see she, but i know she live,
 and dwell in innocence; and may, i hope,
 again be thy — the friend i tell thou of,
 have prove his worth, and with his utmost power,
 have promise to assist the bold adventure,
 therefore prepare to quit this curse land,
 where tyranny be law; and innocence
 can find no safety, but in hasty flight. 
if we succeed in rescue amana,
 my native country shall afford we refuge;
 but if successless in the brave attempt,
 our solace be that we shall die in virtue. 

nouradin.

oh! i be all impatience for the trial:
 to live with she be happiness indeed! 
but if my fate that blessing shall deny,
 death be its next best gift. now speak the mean. 

Abdallah.

know then, the tyrant, whether through compassion,
 or still in hope to soothe she to compliance,
 have grant she two day to wean her sorrow,
 to conquer nature, and submit to fate;
 during which interval he have retire
 to sakara, whence like a epicure,
 fast from beauty to increase appetite,
 he, like a hungry glatton, may return,
 and feast his quicken sense with full gust. 

nouradin.

o! may the grasp of death first seize his heart,
 and cast he forth a prey to raven vulture! 

Abdallah.

to disappoint his vicious purpose, know,
 my ancient friend, the kind, the generous Hamet,
 late captain of his guard, now subaltern
 to impious call, from a twofold reason,
 impel by friendship tie, and just disdain,
 on be thus disgrace to pay the hire
 of hellish deed, of rape and treachery,
 will introduce thou in the sultan robe,
 his yearly perquisite, at dusk of even,
 to the seraglio, to amana ward;
 from whence, by mean which Hamet shall direct,
 thou may descend into the garden, where
 i shall be station to receive my child,
 and through a private portal straight convey
 a treasure rich than the crown of Egypt. 
from thence to happy England let we repair,
 that land of liberty, and wealth, and valour. 

nouradin.

whether indeed thou rave of that bless clime,
 in mere eutopian dream, i can say,
 but this i dare pronounce, that with amana,
 a desert will supply that heaven on earth,
 my paradise below, be love and virtue. 

Abdallah.

within this hour Hamet will doubtless bring
 the safe disguise, by he thou must be lead. 
but oh! when thou behold thy amana,
 beware, my son, of dalliance, suffer not
 a lover fondness disappoint his wish:
 lose not the important moment, but remember
 each instant precious to thy life, and she. 

nouradin.

oh! that the hour be come! fear not, Abdallah. 
if nouradin fond arm once more enfold she,
 again behold that face, that form divine,
 no power on earth shall ever force she from i,
 and leave i life to plain, as i do now. 

Abdallah.

alas, my son, i doubt not of thy prowess,
 it be thy fondness which i fear; that weakness,
 which only brave man know; and while it sink
 their spirit as a vain presumptuous man,
 exalt it to the softness of a seraph. 

nouradin.

be but my life, my happiness, at stake,
 well may thou doubt the weakness of my virtue,
 against amana charm — but where her safety
 become the question, i can turn a stoic;
 scarce indulge my ravish eye to gaze,
 or rapture hand to feast upon her touch,
 until i restore she to her father arm,

Abdallah.

o! may the blessing of a mutual love,
 light on you both: let i but see you safe
 beyond the tyrant lust, or violence,
 and all the business of my life be over. 

scene, the seraglio.

amana.

unhappy fair! i pity thy sad fate,
 though quite unlike my own. i never think
 the chaste, the tender love that woman feel,
 can ever be win by outward form of man. 
beauty our own peculiar character,
 they, sense and learning, bravery and honour:
 desire and admiration be their role;
 esteem, submission, gratitude be we. 

Fatima.

sure in some northern climate thou be bear,
 where Cupid, as the poet represent he,
 be but a child indeed — a playful god —
 his dart unvenomed, and unnerved his arm. 
not so he take possession of my heart;
 but shot himself, with his whole train of ill,
 into my glow breast: thou happy fair,
 be form to inspire the passion in its rage,
 thy heart insensible to all its pang. 

amana.

alas! thou be deceive: amana heart
 feel all the fond solicitude of love:
 but then it be thy chaste, thy generous passion,
 unhappy nouradin! that light up
 the flame in my cold bosom, which with life
 alone shall be extinguish. 

Fatima.

hapless maid! 
here i return thy pity twenty fold —
 alas, thou be more wretched than myself —
 i have but one concern — with mutual warmth
 to inspire the sultan breast — while double vex,
 thou have a love debar, and one to shun. 
the caliph fate and my exact the same;
 pursue, flee from, meeting hate for love. 

amana.

curse be his passion, curse his vicious love,
 and double curse the hour he see amana! 
oh! that deformity will spread its veil
 over these few but ill-starred charm! to avoid
 his brutal passion i will even forgo
 the chaste, the tender love of nouradin;
 or trust to constancy to insure his faith. 
or that the sudden hand of death will seize
 my captive limb, and rescue my free soul
 from the more dread tyrant. some way yet,
 i will escape — despair point out the mean! 

Fatima.

if thou indeed hate osmin more than death;
 and be yet unprovided of the mean
 to shun his loathe embrace, i may, perhaps,
 assist thy frenzy; but, unhappy fair one,
 weigh well the desperate deed; for once begin,
 it be too late to save thou from thy folly. 
thou may indeed rob Fatima of life,
 but nought of mortal aid can rescue thy. 

amana.

o! do not judge so poor of amana,
 to think that she can ever be induce
 to wrong her kind deliverer — here i vow,
 no rack shall wrest the secret from my lip,
 which with their late breath shall bless thy service. 

Fatima.

my mother be well skill in nature lore;
 and this small vial die she bequeathe i,
 say, that shall this world of teem ill,
 ever load my life with woe too strong for sufferance,
 i need but quaff this draught, and ready death
 within a hour will swallow up my pain —
 accept it then, for wretched as i be,
 even lose to hope, i dare not wish to die. 

amana.

with gratitude sincere i thank thou for it —
 welcome thou anodyne of human care! 
i will place thou near my heart; for oh! it be thou,
 and thou alone, i fear, can give it rest. 
now, hate osmin, i defy thy vice,
 in spite of thou i shall escape dishonour. 
waft on air my unstained soul shall fly,
 and seek its native mansion in the sky;
 a bower of bliss for nouradin prepare,
 and deck it with the choice garland there;
 await his come for a little space,
 then live for ever in his chaste embrace. 

act iv.

scene, a gothic building, represent the palace of sakara.

osmin.

how poor be greatness, and how weak be power! 
when a fond girl shall dare resist my will,
 and yield that love which i in vain solicit,
 to a plebeian, to a abject slave,
 low as the grovel worm on which i tread,
 compare to osmin wealth, his rank, his birth. 
my word may render that mean wretch unhappy,
 but can make i bless — even in my arm
 the adverse fair will sigh for nouradin,
 and curse the tyrant for the unwilling joy. 

nardic.

and what avail her curse, while her charm
 shall gratify my sovereign fond desire,
 and feast his every sense? 

osmin.

away — away —
 i be surfeit of sense, want high gust,
 which love reciprocal alone can yield. 
oh! must i never taste the fond embrace
 of mutual love? the ardour never behold
 of unfeigned passion, modesty alone,
 that bright ornament of female beauty,
 restrain its excess? must i never see
 the half deny, half consent glance
 steal from amana eye? i may possess,
 but not enjoy her charm — dull feast! 
to gorge a clove-foot satyr appetite! 
o! that i can transform my outward semblance,
 and take the shape and garb of nouradin! 
then may i feel the true ecstatic joy
 of be press with transport to the heart
 of this too lovely, but capricious fair. 
the very thought inspire a half enjoyment. 

nardic.

then why not practise the deceit, my liege? 
i have see this nouradin, when late he come
 to sue a licence out for mecca shrine,
 whither his filial piety and duty
 incline he to perform a pilgrimage,
 in zeal and honour of his father shade. 
he seem a comely youth; in face and person
 resemble much my prince. the least disguise,
 in the dun shade of night, may gratify
 my sovereign present wish: thy fond embrace
 will fill her arm as well as nouradin. 
it will make her happy during the delusion,
 and save a world of virgin coyness: then,
 if she be woman, she will forgive the cheat,
 and bless the artifice that save her shame. 

osmin.

haste then — supply i with a merchant garb,
 this night i will play Amphytrion; absolve
 by god who smile at the fond fraud of love. 
i will enter the seraglio, steal into
 the sigh fair one ward, disguise my voice,
 and whisper in her ear, "it be nouradin,
" thy love, thy husband! quick let we enjoy
 "those transport which the sacred priest this morn,
" have sanctify by Hymen virtuous band. 
 "thus, thus, w'ell disappoint the tyrant hope." 
o the transcend joy i then shall feel,
 when full possess all she can bestow,
 i let she know it be osmin she have bless,
 and like another Jove confound her sense
 with my full blaze of glory. 

nardic.

i be charm
 at this fair scene which open to thy view,
 such happy theft exceed those dull enjoyment
 which will beauty yield. this key convey
 my royal master through the palace gate,
 unseen by all his guard. within a hour,
 i will provide a dress to suit the intent,
 exact the same that bridegroom wear, for such
 we must suppose be nouradin this morn,
 when habit in form to espouse the fair. 
and may success attend my sovereign will,
 equal to his and nardic mutual wish. 

osmin.

cold and inanimate thou talk of wish,
 who neither know the pride of king disdain,
 nor the indignance of a thwart passion —
 o! can i, like another phaeton,
 but guide the sun bright chariot, for a day,
 i will plunge the world in deep and sudden darkness,
 nor ask for light but from amana eye. 
like he too, once to obtain my soul ambition,
 i will hazard my, and this whole globe existence;
 for i in truth, can never yet believe
 our lie iman, or their flatter prophet:
 all that i know of bliss, i will enjoy,
 and leave the rest to chance, or destiny. 

scene, nouradin house.

Hamet.

my friend, i have risk my life to aid your cause,
 and much i fear, but more i hope the event;
 these robe of royalty sit easy on thou,
 and as thou bear a likeness to the sultan,
 the guard will never suspect the masquerade —
 but shall the least suspicion chance to arise
 in any of the watch, deep plunge this dagger
 in his heart, and speed thy course in silence. 

nouradin.

if there be such a deity as love,
 he will protect and guide i to amana;
 for sure a fond votary never bow
 before his altar in the cyprian isle. 
night too will be my friend; accustom still
 to smile on lover, she will not refuse
 her aid to nouradin. my beat heart
 bound with prophetic rapture! i shall yet
 retrieve the angelic maid from soul offence,
 and make her future life one scene of bliss. 

Abdallah.

i will not wish to damp thy virtuous hope,
 but much i dread there be a heavy cloud
 hang over our head, to shower down evil on we. 
my curse apostasy have bring this ruin
 on my ill-fated house, and my amana,
 with you my son, though innocent, may suffer
 for my impiety — so heaven decree! 

nouradin.

what mean Abdallah? 

Abdallah.

in the distract moment when my child
 be deem a sacrifice to brutal lust,
 and tear from thy despair arm, and i,
 i tell thou of my country and religion;
 and oh! i tell thou —

nouradin.

i do remember something like a dream;
 while on the ground in agony i lay,
 you talk methinks, in wild fantastic vision,
 of land of freedom, of a pure faith,
 and judgment visit for sin derive. 

Abdallah.

to thou, my son, i may appear to rave,
 bear as thou be beneath a tyrant yoke,
 and early teach to bend thy passive neck
 to arbitrary sway. the mountain goddess
 have never deign to mark her footstep here;
 nor yet have heaven its save grace extend
 to land of despotism, and gross imposture. 
but what i tremble for be, lest the charm
 of my Amestris, open in their prime
 in my amana, may perhaps induce
 the curse of disobedience to our law. 

Hamet.

let not thy timorous faith forebode such ill,
 nor sink the spirit of our bold emprise. 
for thou or i, the muddy dregs of life,
 be scarce worth the draught. a nauseous potion! 
therefore, without repine at the past,
 with calmness let we wait the pregnant future,
 and whether death or freedom be our lot,
 let we receive the alternative like man. 

Abdallah.

my friend, i fear not for myself, my life
 have fill its year; and like a full feed guest,
 i will glad quit the banquet, and depend
 on penitence sincere for future bliss. 
but oh! i dread lest those, much dear to i,
 than all the joy of earth combine, may starve,
 like dowerless child of a spendthrift father,
 for my extravagance and luxury. 

nouradin.

forbear these sad reflection — if high heaven,
 who justice with the tender mercy temper,
 preside over all its work, if it regard
 the way of man, its justice will pronounce
 amana mine, and in its goodness will
 restore she to my fond and faithful arm. 

Hamet.

prophetic be thy hope — this silver key,
 the last remain badge of hamet greatness,
 none but the mighty nardic have another,
 and he most lucky attend the sultan,
 will open every gate within the palace. 
beneath the garden wall we will wait for thou —
 if thou escape we shall be free, if not,
 this dagger shall release my bond — farewell. 

nouradin.

the fervent blessing of a grateful heart,
 raise from the depth of sorrow into joy,
 dwell ever round thou, and protect thy age. 
but why that heavy gloom upon thy brow,
 ill-boding to our hope, as lower cloud
 in day of harvest, to the rural swain? 

Abdallah.

from threescore year of tedious disappointment,
 i have be teach that hope be the true curse
 of Tantalus; and when the flatter draught
 seem just to touch our lip, some sullen sprite
 dash the stream aside, and make we feel
 our grief increase, by border on joy. 
therefore i bid thy inexperience fear. 

nouradin.

thy philosophic lore i will strive to learn,
 when my tumultuous passion be at peace;
 then only can it rule the human heart:
 the rudder useless in a storm, must yield
 to rage billow, and resistless wind,
 while the scare pilot stand in mute despair. 
but to our holy prophet here i kneel,
 to bless my little bark with prosperous gale —
 let but amana be the precious freight,
 no other treasure shall i wish on board,
 or care what course we steer — possess of she,
 all clime, all nation be the same to i. 
whereve she smile a paradise will bloom,
 and every wither herb breathe rich perfume;
 fruit will spontaneous grow beneath her eye,
 and flower to deck her bed will glad rise. 

scene, the garden of the seraglio.

amana.

my spirit be attune to peace and harmony,
 and now with tender pity i bemoan
 thy ill-placed love — sure i think there be
 a curse attend that passion in our sex,
 and she alone be bless who equal pulse
 beat undisturbed, in senseless apathy. 

Fatima.

o! say not so — it be the balm of life,
 and even its pain delightful — what must then,
 its pleasure be! but those, alas! i fear,
 i never again shall know. 

amana.

do not despair —
 when the first tumult of the caliph rage,
 for my escape, be past, then may thou hope. 
by art of soothe tenderness, once more
 to steal into his heart, and win his love. 
by soft indulgence to his present passion,
 thou may revive the former in his breast,
 and thus regain the empire thou have lose. 
she who will please proud man, must not disdain
 the low method to attain her purpose:
 humility the garb in which their sex
 the most delight to see we dress — by this,
 their vain superiority be show,
 and our dependent state upon their will. 

Fatima.

thy calm expression raise my utmost wonder! 
thou can not sure, mean to die ever long,
 yet talk with such reflection and composure! 

amana.

my soul be fix, and therefore be i calm. 
do hope or fear perplex this constant breast,
 the strong emotion can not be conceal. 
what can i hope, from lust and tyranny? 
or what have i to fear, who in that hour
 when i be force from my fond husband arm,
 lose the last glimpse of happiness below! 
for thou alone, my generous nouradin,
 and my unhappy father, do i feel. 
o! Fatima, this thought have rouse sensation,
 which i can wish have sleep — i be, alas! 
i feel it now, a weak, a very woman! 

Fatima.

unhappy fair! thou speak too modest —
 no greek or roman ever yet record,
 have show less fear, or more contempt of death. 
if in the hour of trial, thy firm soul
 support thou thus, thou be a prodigy! 

amana.

it will not then forsake i. i be arm
 with innocence; and none but guilty soul
 shall fear, or hesitate at death approach. 
my father will rejoice at my escape;
 and even thy grief, my faithful nouradin,
 will soften into tenderness and peace,
 by know i be happy — my love shade
 thou will invoke, thy guardian seraph then! 
while i with joy still hover over thy head,
 shall guide thy footstep in the path of bliss. 

Fatima.

amaze fortitude! sure angel prompt,
 and will reward thy virtue. but behold,
 the set sun have warn we to retire —
 soft rest, and please vision bless thy slumber. 

amana.

adieu, my friend, may every happiness
 thou pray for i, await thou in return;
 may osmin, since it be thy wish, restore
 that alien heart which thou have buy so dear. 
my sense be oppress — within this bower
 i will indulge their bent — spirit benign! 
who rule over dusk and dawn, watch and protect i
 from all the danger of the sullen night —
 and o! if virgin thought as pure as snow,
 may hope for favour from you, send a dream
 of nouradin, my lose, my hapless lord! 
let he be present to my sleep eye,
 who wake i shall never more behold,
 or in these faithful arm again enfold;
 in gentle whisper let he breathe his love,
 then sigh leave i like the widow dove. 

act v. 

scene before the palace.

osmin.

i have safe pass through all the several gate,
 and wind of these spacious court, and tread
 in path i never trace before — this door
 lead into the serrail, and bring i near
 the summit of my joy — why do i not
 anticipate my bliss, feel all over rapture? 
no — i despise myself for such mean art,
 to put on this disguise, and counterfeit
 a vassal semblance thus, to gain — a woman! 
curse on the vulgar passion that enslave we,
 which ever be at war with reason law,
 and so fortuitous, we scarce find
 two heart unite in one mutual flame,
 while adverse love still jostle one another. 
oh! it be the plague of man — and woman too. 
but what be they? the very sport of nature;
 form sole for our use, like the fair flower
 that bloom but to be crop, then cast away. 
now let i haste to rifle its perfume,
 then loath the wither stalk. 
ha! what be thou! 

call.

beyond my wish, beyond my utmost hope,
 this lucky incident have intervene —
 i thank thou, gracious alha! thou poor wretch,
 as thou have raise, be bend to fix my fortune. 
thy head shall shower down honour upon i. 
this instant i will convey it to the sultan,
 who high will reward i for the prize. 

osmin.

what mean the frantic slave? avaunt, and know
 thy sultan stand before thou — quick retire,
 or instant death shall quit thy insolence. 

call.

think thou thy rave can affect my brain? 
the shade of night be not so far advance,
 but i can spy the hero nouradin,
 who for a girl caprice, so brave strike
 his late dependant, his superior now. 
the conference betwixt Hamet and Abdallah,
 i guess may be for some such hopeful purpose,
 and therefore, quite beyond my line of duty,
 i have attend to this pass; and now
 shall make thy bridal robe thy funeral weed. 
resistance all be vain, therefore submit. 

osmin.

call.

thou have reach my heart, but well i think my sword
 have meet with thy — thou shall not triumph long,
 nor reap the fruit of thy rebellion — oh!  

osmin.

too sure his weapon have be busy here —
 my heart impatient of the least controul,
 full of indignant rage oppose its point,
 and now i bleed to death. oh! the disgrace,
 the shame that will attend my memory,
 when i be find disguise, and by a slave
 overpower, in mean attempt to win a vassal! 
this — this wound deep than the fatal steel. 
curse on the wayward sex — curse my tame folly —
 and oh! curse —

scene, a apartment in the seraglio.

nouradin.

to that bless providence which hitherto
 have lead my unerring step through all the turn
 and maze of this palace, i with awe
 and reverential gratitude, here bend. 
o! power benign! continue thy protection,
 and grant the arduous enterprise success. 
unless my speech betray i, the deep gloom,
 which now involve the world, will safe conceal
 the honest fraud. Hamet desire i strike
 thus on the floor, when i will be attend. 
go bring amana to my presence straight,
 and upon pain of death, let none else enter. 
to gain this mighty realm i will not endure,
 but for another day, the strong emotion
 of hope and fear, which agitate my mind. 
but it be a high prize than wealth or power,
 that stir up my ambition — it be amana,
 who love reward my hazard and my pain. 
i have forget that Hamet bid i enter
 the close pavilion at this gallery end;
 where osmin still employ his vacant hour,
 in amorous dalliance with the alternate fair;
 and whither none uncalled, dare come. it be here —
i can calm my spirit — my full heart
 beat at my breast, as if to force a passage
 to my belove, my betroth amana —
 a universal tremor shake my frame! 
sure it be the approach joy of see she,
 that make this tumult here. i must, i will
 indulge my flatter soul in the fond triumph
 of see her disdainful hate of osmin,
 quick change to tender love for nouradin. 
will this important hour be past —
 i will retire, and wait the wish event. 

scene draw, and discover amana in a bower, rise from a couch. the attendant wait.

amana.

why do you wake i from the sweet sleep
 i ever yet enjoy? my nouradin
 soft call amana, bid i rise and walk;
 straight i obey, and on he lead my step
 to the elysian field; or if there be
 a place more beautiful, it be there — while he
 with converse fond, but chaste, engage my ear,
 and sigh out vow of never cease love. 
he promise too, that we shall part no more,
 but smile at tyranny, and death defy. 
oh! it be a dear delusion! 

attendant.

it be no more —
 the sultan have this moment summon you
 to attend his pleasure in the close pavilion;
 else i have not disturb your happy slumber. 

amana.

the sultan, say you? what! be he return! 
do he not promise i a poor two day,
 and be this pittance now curtail to half? 
but what be a day, a week, a year, to i,
 who fate already fix, and soul resolve! 
then why shall i resent this breach of faith,
 or start at hasten from the grief i feel,
 and speed to the land of peace and rest? 
retire a while, i shall obey the sultan. 
now, now, amana, summon all thy courage —
 what mean this chill damp that cling around i! 
why do i tremble thus! my totter limb
 why shall they now refuse their wonted aid! 
a little long, and i shall not want it;
 but pale and cold stretch on my parent earth,
 no long be a burden to myself. 
can love of life have power over the unhappy! 
or shall a wretch who languish in prison,
 refuse to be set free? the instinctive voice
 perhaps of nature, plead too strong here,
 and silence the stiller plea of virtue. 
but can love inspire my timid sex? 
shall i be lead a will sacrifice
 to gratify a mean and gross desire! 
o never! death have lose its terror now. 
this cordial draught shall lead i to his arm,
 to peace and nouradin —
it be do, and now,
 fear, hope, and every passion of the soul,
 be all extinct, but love — that still remain,
 and in my late moment will prevail
 in prayer and blessing on my nouradin. 
what strengthen power have brace my sinew thus? 
it be love, it be hope, it be immortality! 
Lavinia come — attend i to the sultan. 

scene, the pavilion. the stage darken.

nouradin.

approach, my fair, nor long now delay
 thy suppliant monarch bliss, who fond impatience
 have urge he to infringe his royal word,
 and make a sacrifice to love, transcend far
 what he request from thou. reduce he not
 to win by force, what he will owe to favour —
 believe i the rich bounty of thy love,
 shall not be spend on my sole luxury,
 but treasure in my heart, to be repay
 with grateful use, to purchase joy for thou. 

amana.

banish those vicious hope, and know that i
 nor dread thy power, nor supplicate thy pity. 
thou see no more the weep, tremble maid,
 who late implore thy grace — but one who come
 to dare thy rage, and prove its impotence. 

nouradin.

amana.

she mean to pour out her whole soul before thou,
 its love, its hate, without disguise or fear;
 to curse thou tyrant from her wound heart,
 and breathe forth fervent wish for thy rival. 
may every joy of which thou have deprive he,
 be double tenfold by all gracious heaven;
 may long and happy day attend he here,
 and may we meet again in that bless place,
 where tyrant never can come, to part we more. 

nouradin.

thy prayer be prophecy, my virtuous bride! 
behold thy fond wish be fulfil,
 and underneath this hate garb thou see
 the happy nouradin! o! let i press
 thy constant heart close to his faithful breast. 

amana.

nouradin.

she faint! the strong surprise have overpower
 her delicate and agitate frame —
 awake, my love — my soul immortal joy
 revive, and bless i with a look, a word! 

amana.

nouradin.

come let i bear thou in these long arm,
 convey thou quick from out these curse wall,
 and give thou back to love and liberty. 

amana.

alas! my bound be set! i never shall quit
 this fatal spot, until soul and body part. 

nouradin.

do thou indeed refuse to go with i! 
have bondage then such charm, or have thy tongue
 belie thy heart in feign generous love,
 to enhance thy sacrifice to princely grandeur? 

amana.

o! cease to wound i by unkind suspicion! 
my heart be whole thy — the last sad drop
 it ever shall weep, will be fond tear for thou. 

nouradin.

why then, thou angel maid, will thou provoke
 our adverse fate, by this ill-timed delay? 

amana.

alas! i fear to tell what must be know,
 for now ten thousand fire rage in my bosom,
 oh nouradin! 

nouradin.

i be on the rack! what mean these strong convulsion! 
speak quick, my heart love — i be all distraction. 

amana.

that pang be past; and if my strength will hold,
 i will tell thou the sad tale of woe. 

nouradin.

o stay! 
while thou have ease let i convey thou hence. 

amana.

alas, my love! it be impossible. 
death riot in my vein. 

nouradin.

amana.

too sure he have possession of my heart,
 thy only rival there! o nouradin! 
he grasp i hard, will thou not struggle with he! 

nouradin.

i will contend with the unite world,
 to save my more than life. but say, o! say,
 how come thou thus! i press, yet dread to know. 

amana.

when tear from thou, and my unhappy father,
 and lead a captive to the foul serrail,
 i firm resolve to die ever flame impure
 shall blast this shrine, hallow to love, and thou. 
a rival sultaness approve my vow,
 and whether move by jealousy or pity,
 supply the deadly draught which late i drink,
 when summon to attend the tyrant will,
 in this lewd scene of infamy and vice. 
now, now, i feel its baneful influence
 too strong for mortal power —

nouradin.

o holy prophet! 
exchange my life for she! 

amana.

o nouradin! 
forgive this fatal rashness — have i stay
 a few short moment, we have now be bless;
 but wrest from the hand of providence
 the mean of my escape, we both be wretched. 
but love and virtue call, and here resign,
 i fall a sacrifice to heaven, and thou —
 oh!  

nouradin.

speak on, though every word thy lip may utter,
 be dagger here — yet o! speak on, and live! 
and be thou silent then! shall i never hear
 thy tender, tuneful voice once more! nay then,
 no other mournful tale shall ever vex
 my wound ear, or grieve my torture breast. 
thus, from all future anguish be i free! 
my life, my soul shall follow my amana. 

nardic.

the sultan slay — secure those hoary traitor —
 the rack shall force they to reveal their crime —
 what be here! another osmin dead! and by he
 the fair amana! 

Abdallah.

Hamet.

then all be at a end — now nardic, know
 i plot not the caliph death; but seek
 that maid release; and in those royal robe
 i gain admittance for that injure youth —
 how heaven have countermine our honest purpose,
 i can say; but this i know, that i
 be ready to resign a life, which both
 my year, and this world base ingratitude,
 have now make stale, and absynth to my sense. 

nardic.

convey he to the dungeon, and the wheel. 
do thou know aught of this sad tragedy? 

Fatima.

my strong remorse, alas! too plain show
 i be in part, a actor in this scene;
 though whole guiltless of the sultan death. 
how far concern in this catastrophé,
 when the fierce passion which now tear my soul,
 will give i leave, i shall with truth relate. 

Abdallah.

o! turn your vengeance on this guilty wretch! 
it be i be the curse source of all these sorrow —
 my darling child that now lie dead before you,
 be sacrifice by i — curse on this head,
 and these grey hair, which have involve you both,
 in guilt like i. 

nardic.

thy wretchedness, old man,
 have turn thy brain — how can thy feeble arm
 have power to bring these dread event to pass? 

Abdallah.

not i indeed, but heaven avenge hand
 have strike this heavy blow — the sultan vice
 have earn his fate — for tyranny shall bleed! 
but these unhappy innocent be doom
 for my foul crime, my vile apostasy;
 for quit heaven, and native liberty —
 let those who dwell in albion happy land,
 grateful acknowledge heaven most bounteous hand:
 its choice boon in freedom be bestow,
 and their best praise to its protector owe;
 who not in britain cause alone sustain
 the toil of council, and of hostile plain:
 the world be great champion, bear for all mankind,
 in who the oppress a certain refuge find:
 who sword, but like the lancet, wound to heal,
 where moral lenitive can nought avail;
 who olive bear laurel peace restore,
 and calm the discord of contend power. 
