peasant of the Alps. from the novel of Celestina.

where cliff arise by winter crown,
 and through dark grove of pine around,
 down the deep chasm, the snowfed torrent foam,
 within some hollow, shelter from the storm,
 the peasant of the Alps his cottage form,
 and build his humble, happy home. 

unenvied be the rich domain,
 that far beneath he on the plain,
 wave its wide harvest and its olive grove;
 more dear to he his hut, with plantain thatch,
 where long his unambitious heart attach,
 find all he wish, all he love. 

there dwell the mistress of his heart,
 and love who teach every art,
 have bid he dress the spot with fond care;
 when borrow from the vale its fertile soil,
 he climb the precipice with patient toil,
 to plant her favourite floweret there. 

with native shrub, a hardy race,
 there the green myrtle find a place,
 and rose there, the dewy leaf decline;
 while from the crags abrupt and tangle steep,
 with bloom and fruit the alpine berry peep,
 and, blush, mingle with the vine. 

his garden be simple produce store,
 prepare for he by hand adore,
 be all the little luxury he know:
 and by the same dear hand be soft spread,
 the chamois velvet spoil that form the bed,
 where in her arm he find repose. 

but absent from the calm abode,
 dark thunder gather round his road,
 wild rave the wind, the arrowy lightning flash,
 return quick the murmur rock among,
 his faint heart tremble as he wind along;
 alarm! — he listen to the crash

of rift ice! — oh, man of woe! 
over his dear cot — a mass of snow,
 by the storm sever from the cliff above,
 have fall — and bury in its marble breast,
 all that for he — lose wretch — the world possess,
 his home, his happiness, his love! 

aghast the heartstruck mourner stand! 
glaze be his eye — convulse his hand,
 overwhelm anguish check his labour breath,
 crush by despair intolerable weight,
 frantic he seek the mountain giddy height,
 and headlong seek relief in death. 

a fate too similar be i,
 but i — in linger pain repine,
 and still my lose felicity deplore;
 cold, cold to i be that dear breast become,
 where this poor heart have fond fix its home,
 and love and happiness be mine no more. 
