[nereid:] eclogue xiii.

mur. 

who know what heaven decree for man design,
 or what be the certain doom of human kind? 
who know his former, or his future state,
 and secret teem in the womb of fate? 
th'angelick order sure look down, and smile,
 while we still judge amiss, and still for nothing toil. 
he find his own defect, who think the most;
 that reason make we wretched, which we boast,
 and man be always prudent to their cost. 
the earth-born mortal, when he round he see
 the flowery pasture, and the bud tree,
 be fond proud, admire his fancy home,
 and think that all be make for he alone;
 that heaven to he (as lord) this world entrust,
 and give a sovereign sway; that all thing must
 obey his will, and gratify his lust. 
while he forget the ocean watery mass,
 who boundless depth the scanty earth surpass;
 where thousand different kind of live form
 lie hide in the abyss, and brave the distant storm. 

chro. 

and thousand more as beautiful as these
 (unknown to we) may sport in distant sea. 
who then will vain strive with curious pride
 to find what heaven have to our search deny,
 when ignorant of our home we can guess
 at half the store, and riches we possess? 
better will humble we our self contain
 within our reach, and not indulge our pain. 
when once the soul shall quit this earthly case,
 and fly unbodied in the endless space,
 the essence of thing shall all appear,
 and naked form (as in themselves they be)
 nature will then unlock her secret store:
 the Vail of sense shall hide her face no more. 
mean while enough we be allow to enjoy,
 to improve our reason, and our thought employ. 
loose not too much the reins to wild desire:
 shrimp may not grow to crab, nor ork to whale aspire. 
we see enough to please our labour mind,
 how nature sport her self in antic kind. 
a thousand different form we hourly view,
 and through moist path the fly shoal pursue. 

who can with all his painful search declare
 what curious art indent the branch star,
 or how in harden shell by shine stream
 it imitate the sun diffusive beam. 

the shark with point tooth be arm for prey;
 he break through all, and clear the liquid way;
 while the fond sucking-fish (a harmless breed)
 with fasten lip supply their daily need,
 and with a mouth unarmed they cling feed. 
no lovesick nymph, or wanton triton kiss
 be half so last, or so close as he. 

the urchin be by nature fence around;
 none dare approach; for with a touch they wind,
 wrap up within themselves they guard lie,
 and to their own embrace for safety fly. 

in vain the fisher for the Glanis wait;
 he leave the hook, and take the easy bait. 
so Ino, when by love i will have win
 seize my heart, but still secure her own. 

fish vain curious will each year retire
 to fresh stream, and novel flood admire,
 fool to exchange their wave, and native deep
 for noisy brook that over the pebble creep. 
they wise be content, who do esteem
 a tasteless river, or a shallow stream. 

when fisher sing the Puffens to their boat
 unweening press to hear the rude note;
 though proud they escape the invite bait,
 in soft word they find a sure fate. 
who then will dare approach the siren tongue,
 or who untouched can hear leucosia song? 
though chromis scape the fury of her eye,
 her voice overtake he, and in vain he fly. 

the sargus emblem of unbounded lust
 be always false; and to his bride unjust,
 and not content over all the sea to range,
 and thus pollute himself with daily change,
 pursue forbid love, and fond dote
 on earth-born kind, and court the feed goat. 
but the kind mullet be a constant pair;
 they (each) still fix to one, and seek no other fair. 

the beard prawn a lively instance make
 of mutual kindness, and of friendly aid. 
he the gay pearl attend with studious care,
 and in the common prey command a share. 
the pearl be dull, though gawdy in his shell,
 (for wit but seldom will with beauty dwell)
 but the sly prawn can secret sign convey,
 and with a touch forewarn to seize the prey,
 while the deceitful ray, and spangle sight
 to certain death th'admiring throng invite. 
(pleasure indulge repent be too late
 and they like we to beauty owe their fate). 

mur. 

i see a nymph, who in the liquid maze
 now sport dive, and with a dolphin play,
 on who i can unwearied ever gaze:
 when she appear, i need no other theme
 to make my daily care, or nightly dream. 
that fair one have enough t'engross the whole,
 to take up every thought, and fill the soul. 
ah! may these arm entwine that world of love,
 in vain research i will not long rove;
 thus please, i will be content to know no more,
 or to forget even what i know before. 
happy ignorant i will despise
 the curious learning of the vain wise. 
