on the death of king GEORGE the second, and accession of king GEORGE the third.

address to WILLIAM PITT, ESQ. be the conclude copy of OXFORD verse.

by the same.

so stream the sorrow that embalm the brave,
 the tear that science shed on glory grave! 
so pure the view which classic duty pay
 to bless another brunswick rise ray! —
 o Pitt! if choose strain have power to steal
 thy watchful breast awhile from britain weal;
 if votive verse, from sacred Isis send,
 may hope to charm thy manly mind, intent
 on patriot plan which ancient freedom draw,
 awhile with fond attention deign to view
 this ample wreath, which all the assemble nine
 with skill unite have conspire to twine. 

yes, guide and guardian of thy country cause! 
thy conscious heart shall hail with just applause
 the duteous muse, who haste officious bring
 her blameless offer to the shrine of king:
 thy tongue well tutor in historic lore,
 can speak her office and her use of yore:
 for such the tribute of ingenuous praise
 her harp dispense in graecia golden day;
 such be the palm, in isle of old renown,
 she cull to deck the guiltless monarch crown;
 when virtuous Pindar, tell with Tuscan gore
 how sceptre hiero stain sicilia shore,
 or to mild theron rapture eye disclose
 bright vale where spirit of the brave repose:
 yet still beneath the throne, unbribed she sit,
 the decent handmaid, not the slave of state;
 please in the radiance of the regal name
 to blend the lustre of her country fame:
 for, teach like we, she dare with prudent pride,
 obedience from dependence to divide:
 though prince claim her tributary lay,
 with truth severe she tempere partial praise;
 conscious she keep her native dignity,
 bold as her flight, and as her number free. 

and sure if ever the muse indulge her strain,
 with just regard, to grace heroic reign,
 where can her glance a theme of triumph own
 so dear to same as George trophy throne? 
at who firm base, thy steadfast soul aspire
 to wake a mighty nation ancient fire:
 aspire to baffle faction specious claim,
 rouse England rage, and give her thunder aim:
 once more the main her conquer banner sweep,
 again her commerce darken all the deep. 
thy fix resolve renew each fair decree,
 that make, that keep of yore, thy country free. 
call by thy voice, nor deaf to war alarm,
 its will youth the rural empire arm:
 again the lord of albion culture plain
 march the firm leader of their faithful swain;
 as erst stout archer from the farm or fold,
 flame in the van of many a baron bold. 
nor thy the pomp of indolent debate,
 the war of word, the sophistry of state;
 nor frigid caution check thy free design,
 nor stop thy stream of eloquence divine:
 for thy the privilege, on few bestow,
 to feel, to think, to speak for public good. 
in vain corruption call her venal tribe;
 one common cause, one common end prescribe;
 nor fear nor fraud, or spare or screen the foe,
 but spirit prompt, and valour strike the blow. 
o Pitt, while honour point thy liberal plan,
 and over the minister exalt the man,
 Isis congenial greet thy faithful sway,
 nor scorn to bid a statesman grace she lie;
 for science still be just fond to blend,
 with thy, her practice, principle, and end. 
it be not for she, by false connection draw,
 at splendid slavery sordid shrine to fawn;
 each native effort of the feeling breast
 to friend, to foe, in servile fear, suppress:
 it be not for she to purchase or pursue
 the phantom favour of the cringe crew;
 more useful toil her studious hour engage,
 and fair lesson fill her spotless page:
 beneath ambition, but above disgrace,
 with noble art she form the rise race:
 with happy task, and less refine pretence,
 in elder time she woo munificence
 to rear her arch roof in regal guise,
 and lift her temple near to the sky;
 prince and prelate stretch the social band,
 to form, diffuse, and fix her high command:
 from king she claim, yet scorn to seek the prize,
 from king, like George, benignant, just, and wise. 

lo, this her genuine lore. — nor thou refuse
 this humble present of no partial muse
 from that calm bower, which nurse thy thoughtful youth
 in the pure precept of athenian truth:
 where first the form of british liberty
 beam in full radiance on thy muse eye:
 that form, who mien sublime, with equal awe,
 in the same shade unblemished Somers see:
 where once (for well she love the friendly grove
 which every classic grace have learn to rove)
 her whisper wake sage Harrington to feign
 the blessing of her visionary reign;
 that reign, which now no more an empty theme,
 adorn philosophy ideal dream,
 but crown at last, beneath a George smile,
 in full reality this favour isle. 
