by the goddess of plain truth, a manifesto and proclamation

once i be fam’d, and all man call’d i fair,
and nymph and swain beseech i with a pray’r;
where e’er i come the maiden ceas’d her grief,
and doubt lover feel a sweet relief;
no treacherous tale beguil’d the list’ning ear,
no lie be tell, no scandal flourish’d there;
together go the friendly heart and tongue,
and all the dance circle laugh’d and sing.
one day, a monkey, pert from top to toe,
sometime a sloven, and sometime a beau,
sometime in red, sometime in blue, or green,
and half destroy with whore and the spleen,
his wit but little; his discretion less;
and never right but by a lucky guess;
a dunce in council, in the street a blab,
proud as the devil of his all, b, ab;
vain as a beggar mount on a ass,
and always pleas’d when at a look glass;
make up and feed with physic, drug and dregs,
and ev’ry month danc’d fair off his leg;
in short, a creature, so perverse cast,
that all who know he, know he can last.
this trifle imp, this prate motley thing,
with many a cringe, approach’d our cheerful ring;
and have cast his wand’ring eye about,
hold forth his useless hand to take i out;
madam, say he — dear madam — sweet and fair —
where all the lily and the rose be,
my heart, dear madam — oh, can i but tell!
lie like a oyster, tremble in its shell.
one common sense — the devil take the fellow!
(for that’s the thing that make i look so yellow)
have so bemaul’d, and will, as i can find,
bemaul we more unless we stop his wind,
for all the secret that we have heknow ’em
and will as sure, as god’s in heavenblow’em.
We’d lay the pretty scheme that you canthink of,
and giv’n the public such a dose todrink of,
that in little time, we must have get,
as rich as cresus, and perhaps as rot.
now my dear ma’am your name be so well know,
that be but half the fame you have, my own,
i think, (consid’ring i’ve a world of wit,
and never us’d a tittle of it yet)
i shall be able, with the help of trim,
to knock up common sense, both life and limb.
for you must know, this dog have such a note,
and such a way of warb’ling with his throat,
that all we little puppy of the cry,
when he begin to bark can scarce reply.
out come a crisis — people say ’tis clever,
but we may write, and write whole year together
before the public — curse upon their whim!
will give to we, the fame they give to he.
therefore we have determin’d to way lie he,
belie, belabour, hunt he down and slay he.
I’ve write some line — i’ll read ’em if i’veget ’em,
they’re nothing else but wit from top to bottom,
but then, dear madam, wit alone, you know,
without a little truth will never do,
and if your ladyship will be so kind —
i dare to say, you understand my mind —
just with the pen — i have it in my hand,  —
to clap your name — where mine you know shall stand.
with this, he press’d towards i with a bow,
i slapp’d the fellow chap, and bid he go;
yet not withstand this, he dar’d to steal
in word at length, my signature and seal.
by these, then, be it know, through’ ev’ry street,
i post the blockhead as you post a cheat.
