the charge of Cyrus the great.

by RICHARD only, m. a. 

what mean this awful sight? why round i shine
 those radiant glory, and that form divine? 
see! where commission with some dread command,
 how stern wave you visionary hand! 
near and more near it beckon, "Cyrus, rise;
" the god remand thou to thy native sky. " 

since thus the pleasure of imperial Jove,
 and solemn omen warn i from above;
 come then, you father, venerable grow,
 who steady counsel prop the persian throne! 
you friend, long wed to fair virtue cause,
 and you, my son, who filial duty awe! 
attentive hear, amid the assemble throng,
 the die accent of a monarch tongue. 

i cease to live! yet, ah! forbear to show
 the mad expression of unmanly woe. 
to die, be to be bless: this understand,
 it be needless mourning for the wise and good. 

what virtue charm we, or what art engage
 in childhood, youth, in manhood, or in age,
 in these i spend each well-distinguished day,
 and still pursue, where honour lead the way:
 my be each gift kind fortune can afford,
 the statesman counsel, or the hero sword. 
see, Asia, see thy once ignoble race,
 what glory heighten, and what worthy grace! 
see peace thy realm with smile train adorn,
 and plenty pour the treasure of her horn. 

yet, oft as fortune blow propitious gale,
 and mild zephyr fan my swell sail,
 still caution warn i, anxious for the realm,
 and reason fear to quit her much-loved helm:
 she calm stem ambition boisterous tide,
 and lower the project of gigantic pride:
 hence unimpaired be all my blessing now;
 hence fresh my laurel bloom over my brow:
 sage foresight only keep our conquest win;
 the too secure too sure be undo. 

no claimant prince shall hereafter jar,
 (the bloody source of intestine war)
 for thus i will — both you, my child, share
 alike my fondness, and alike my care! 
yet you, my old, to the crown succeed;
 it be what thy father, what the god decree. 
reflect, from whence that sacred power be give,
 its fount, the grand authority of heaven! 
reflect, that monarch only be design
 to guard their people, and to bless mankind! 
each royal mandate equity shall bound,
 and goodness cast a smile on all around. 

nor less, while, hover over the embattle field,
 her palm to thou fond victory shall yield,
 let mercy plead: no hero true brave
 without that god-like principle — to save:
 distress shall bid our generous pity flow;
 while nature soften at another woe. 
by i release, o! how the Jewish choir
 to sion song retune the sacred lyre,
 which by the stream of Babylon, unstring,
 in late sad silence on the willow hang! 
dismiss with present to their old abode,
 to build the temple of their much-loved god,
 each mouth be full of laughter long unknown;
 the joy, that fill their heart, overflow my own. 

thy breast, young prince, let all these virtue fire,
 and noble to the world confess thy sire. 
this happy state, that, from a heavenly plan,
 form every scheme of happiness to man,
 by justice establish, and by arm defend;
 no feud embroil, and no division rend! 
transmit entire, to bless the peaceful home
 of nation now unborn, and monarch yet to come. 

and thou, my son, thou young, shall command
 the narrow confine of some neighbour land. 
though large realm thy brother sway confess,
 thy peace be great, as thy kingdom less. 
ambition spur still pungent to the soul,
 when over his mind his father glory roll;
 pursue close up labour craggy steep,
 fame hard to gain, and hard yet to keep;
 foremost in care, as first in rule to shine;
 these, these be his — but pleasure all be thy. 

and weak, Cambyses, will thy kingdom prove,
 without the sceptre of thy people love. 
but yet it ask thy caution, all thy care,
 thy subject when to court, and when beware:
 not true by nature, man, whatever he boast,
 most faithful seem, may deceive the most. 
be thy the well-tried statesman, prudent, just,
 unsway by lucre, unenslaved by lust;
 who public good prefer to private end,
 who truth direct you, and who zeal defend. 
then no sad murmur can suspicion raise;
 admire anarchy itself obey;
 base treason dread infernal plot to lay,
 and calm rebellion look her rage away. 

this once, o Daniel, be thy god-like part,
 thy head as learn, as be sincere thy heart. 
though sullen jealousy oft curse thy name,
 and envy plan the ruin of thy fame,
 thy spotless honour can the mouth defy
 of deadly lion, or the deadly spy. 
chief, such as thou, best guard each prince cause,
 who conscience bind, and who religion awe. 

thy friend promote, thy brother first of these,
 advance most his honour, interest, ease;
 so shall his soul with kindred passion burn,
 and grateful friendship make the best return;
 faithful alike his counsel and his arm,
 when peace shall bless you, or when war alarm. 

but, o! if where respect her balm shall bring,
 pride rear her crest, and envy adder sting;
 if royal brother, when some fiend inspire,
 when anger prompt, or when ambition fire,
 divide themselves, and with imperious awe
 their people heart to different faction draw;
 then soon will peace, that guardian goddess, fail,
 and injure justice drop her equal scale;
 faith, heavenly guest, forsake she wonted stand,
 and truth indignant flee the guilty land;
 in concord temple wild contention reign,
 and madden fury clank her break chain;
 her right sequester freedom shall deplore,
 and mercy grand asylum be no more. 

o! then, my son, by that great god above! 
by filial duty! by paternal love! 
let sacred friendship with you ever grow,
 the best of blessing earth contain below. 

nor think, when this poor life away shall flee,
 your royal father never more must be. 
though in our breast the soul unseen, it be clear
 a soul immortal have existence there. 
or whence have action its energic spring? 
or whence, reflection, thy excursive wing? 
whence all the dreadful scene of horror spread
 around the tremble murderer guilty head? 
or why do thus, when mortal dare to sin,
 vindictive conscience ply the lash within? 
why over the grave those glare trophy blaze? 
why all the pomp of monumental praise? 
vain be the lofty muse epic strain,
 vain the sad dirge, the rise column vain,
 if human soul mortality must share,
 and at the last but vanish into air. 

our thirst for truth, which can here abate,
 point out some clear, some more perfect state;
 while long hope still bid we calm die,
 and take our fair possession of the sky. 

see innocence with various care distress,
 unfed, unclothe, unmansioned, and oppress! 
see modest worth, amid trouble undeserved! 
admire, repulse! just pity, praise, and starve! 
yet still rejoice the son of virtuous woe,
 though prosperous vice triumphant reign below;
 on honour mount though glare the perjure chief,
 they walk content through the vale of grief!
 — it must be so — what reasoner can believe,
 that soul, when free from body, cease to live? 
let age the weak corporeal frame destroy,
 the soul survive — this, this can never die:
 while that inactive moulder in the tomb,
 this still shall flourish in immortal bloom,
 purge from all earthly dross, for ever rove
 through all the unbounded tract of happiness above. 

when drowsy slumber over the spirit creep,
 reflect, what death be, from its image, sleep! 
in airy dream the soul then wing its way,
 free from the dull impediment of clay,
 hold converse sweet with every kindred power,
 in myrtle grove, or amaranthine bower;
 through world unknown quick dart the vital flame,
 and traverse all heaven, from whence it come. 

but yet if, with the body, rigid fate
 the soul existence shall annihilate,
 (how, when fond thought the please theme pursue,
 do anxious doubt thus terminate the view!) 
yet still to god let pure devotion rise,
 all-powerful, just, all-merciful and wise;
 who pierce eye each secret fraud detect;
 who wisdom govern, and who care direct;
 that time, nor fate have in confusion hurl
 the beauty, order, grandeur of the world. 

hence, where some mountain, awful to the sight,
 rear its rude summit to yond realm of light,
 let humble prayer, propitiate the sky,
 the body prostrate, or uplift the eye;
 there glad thanksgiving grateful altar raise! 
there choral paean swell the song of praise! 

let no corruption near thy palace spread,
 nor dire oppression rear her iron head. 
there heaven-born virtue shall attract the sight,
 peace, love, and charity, divine bright;
 there bounty, guide by discretion hand,
 shall deal her favour to a grateful land:
 there truth shall smile, in awful state enshrine,
 the fair resemblance of the eternal mind,
 there mercy shall vouchsafe her mild word;
 there justice brandish her impartial sword,
 shall right the injure, and the weak defend,
 each orphan guardian, and each widow friend. 

pursue, great prince, pursue the important plan;
 be fear, as monarch; but be love, as man. 

and when my soul, fair tenant, fly away
 from this frail mansion moulder to decay,
 no costly pile with funeral grandeur burn,
 nor cull my ash for the pompous urn;
 far other honour let these relic have,
 the low-delved chamber of some silent grave:
 where, when our gloomy long abode we fix,
 the human particle with earthly mix,
 while beyond fate, and fortune farther line,
 for ever live the particle divine. 

yet make my tomb to future age know,
 and with a modest verse inscribe the stone:
 the verse shall preach some moral truth to man —
 "that fortune various, or that life be a span;
" that vain the pomp and pageantry of state,
 "that weak the mighty, and that frail the great;
" grandeur a bubble! honour empty all! 
 "that hero perish, and that monarch fall." 

and now, my friend, receive the part view! 
press my chill hand, and bid the last adieu! 
call my dear persian round the solemn bier,
 and you, my fellow-soldier, you be there! 
with i who brave arabia pathless land,
 bleak scythia coast, and india burn sand;
 while strew on heap around the foam steed,
 or groan the assyrian, or expire the mede. 
brave troop! by who, as heaven protect lead,
 great Croesus fall, and proud Belshazzar bleed. 

but now, frail health, how wan thy rose seem! 
in flower current flow the purple stream:
 no more this breast with martial rage shall glow,
 nor rush all vengeance on the adverse foe;
 no more this arm the flame falchion wield,
 or gather laurel from the well-fought field;
 no more — for see the dire disease prevail,
 my nerve all tremble, all my spirit fail!
 — ah, why those cry? see lovely reason near
 to calm the soul, and wipe off every tear,
 o! rather all your wonted joy renew! 
if life i leave, i leave its trouble too:
 for, if my happy soul to god ascend,
 or in mere nothing if my being end,
 death soon shall waft i to some unknown shore,
 where labour end, and sorrow be no more:
 where patriot hero in the peaceful shade
 no faction threaten, and no foe invade;
 where long oblivion, end anxious strife,
 still the wild hurry of a noisy life;
 or where all joy with heart-felt ease abound,
 while youthful spring for ever bloom around. 

come then, dear pledge of connubial joy,
 come, give the fond embrace, and let i die;
 next, to your mother all this scene impart;
 how will it wound, sad tale! her tender heart! 
her heart by grief too delicate move,
 for ever love, and for ever love. 
ah! now what ease employ she soft hour,
 near murmur fountain, or in cool bower
 at susa royal court? what princely care
 far from her die lord detain my fair? 
where now that tongue, that never cease to charm? 
where the soft smile, that sickness can disarm? 
or where the hand my weary eye to close,
 the last kind office in my last repose? 
how oft i name she with my late breath,
 how bless her absent, in the midst of death,
 you conscious sky, you light celestial, tell! 
farewell, o lovely of thy sex, farewell! 
farewell, my chief! in my example see
 what monarch, general, patriot, friend, shall be. 
