the ruin of Rome. 

a poem. 

by the same.

enough of grongar, and the shady dale
of wind towy, merlin fable haunt,
i sing inglorious. now the love of art,
and what in metal or in stone remain
of proud antiquity, through various realm
and various language and age fame,
bear i remote, over gallia woody bound,
over the cloud-piercing Alps remote; beyond
the vale of Arno purple with the vine,
beyond the umbrian and etruscan hill,
to latium wide champain, forlorn and waste,
where yellow Tiber his neglect wave
mournful roll. yet once again, my muse,
yet once again, and soar a lofty flight;
lo the resistless theme, imperial Rome.

fall, fall, a silent heap; her hero all
sink in their urn; behold the pride of pomp,
the throne of nation fall; obscure in dust;
even yet majestical; the solemn scene
elate the soul, while now the rise sun
flame on the ruin in the pure air
tower aloft, upon the glitter plain,
like break rock, a vast circumference;
rent palace, crush column, rift mole,
fane roll on fane, and tomb on bury tomb.

deep lie in dust the theban obelisc,
immense along the waste; minute art,
gliconian form, or Phidian, subtle fair,
overwhelm; as the immense leviathan
the finny brood, when near ierne shore
outstretched, unwieldly, his island length appear
above the foamy flood. globose and huge,
grey-mouldering temple swell, and wide overcast
the solitary landskape, hill and wood,
and boundless wild; while the vine-mantled brow
the pendent goat unveil, regardless they
of hourly peril, though the cleft dome
tremble to every wind. the pilgrim oft
at dead of night, amid his oraison hear
aghast the voice of time, dispart tower,
tumble all precipitate down-dashed,
rattle around, loud thunder to the moon:
while murmur sooth each awful interval
of ever-falling water; shroud Nile,
Eridanus, and Tiber with his twin,
and palmy Euphrates; they with drop lock,
hang over their urn, and mournful among
the plaintive-echoing ruin pour their stream.

yet here adventurous in the sacred search
of ancient art, the delicate of mind,
curious and modest, from all clime resort,
grateful society! with these i raise
the toilsome step up the proud palatin,
through spiry cypress grove, and tower pine,
wave aloft over the big ruin brow,
on numerous arch rear: and frequent stop,
the sink ground startle i with dreadful chasm,
breathe forth darkness from the vast profound
of isle and hall, within the mountain womb.
nor these the nether work; all these beneath,
and all beneath the vale and hill around,
extend the cavern sewer, mercy, firm,
as the sibyline grot beside the dead
lake of Avernus; such the sewer huge,
whither the great tarquinian genius doom
each wave impure; and proud with add rain,
hark how the mighty billow lash their vault,
and thunder; how they heave their rock in vain!
though now incessant time have roll around
a thousand winter over the changeful world,
and yet a thousand since, the indignant flood
roar loud in their firm bound, and dash and swell,
in vain; convey to tiber low wave.

hence over airy plain, by crystal fount,
that weave their glitter wave with tuneful lapse,
among the sleeky pebble, agate clear,
cerulean ophite, and the flowery vein
of orient jasper, please i move along,
and vase boss, and huge inscriptive stone,
and intermingle vine; and figure nymph,
Flora and Chloe of delicious mould,
cheer the darkness; and deep empty tomb,
and dell, and moulder shrine, with old decay
rustic and green and wide-embowering shade,
shoot from the crooked cleft of nod tower;
a solemn wilderness! with error sweet,
i wind the linger step, wherever the path
mazy conduct i, which the vulgar foot
over sculpture maim have make; Anubis, Sphinx,
idol of antique guise, and horn Pan,
terrific, monstrous shape! propost'rous god,
of fear and ignorance, by the sculptor hand
hew into form, and worship; as even now
blind they worship at their breathless mouth
in vary appellation: man to these
(from depth to depth in darken error fall)
at length ascribe the inapplicable name.

how do it please and fill the memory
with deed of brave renown, while on each hand
Historick urn and breathe statue rise,
and speak bust! sweet Scipio, marius stern,
Pompey superb, the spirit-stirring form
of Caesar rapture with the charm of rule
and boundless fame; impatient for exploit,
his eager eye up-cast, he soar in thought
above all height: and his own Brutus see,
despond Brutus, dubious of the right,
in evil day, of faith, of public weal
solicitous and sad. thy next regard
be tully graceful attitude; upraise,
his outstretched arm he wave, in act to speak
before the silent master of the world,
and eloquence array he. there behold
prepare for combat in the front of war
the pious brother; jealous Alba stand
in fearful expectation of the strife,
and youthful Rome intent: the kindred foe
fall on each other neck in silent tear;
in sorrowful benevolence embrace —
however they soon unsheath the flash sword,
their country call to arm, now all in vain
the mother clasp the knee, and even the fair
now weep in vain; their country call to arm.
such virtue clelia, Cocles, Manlius, rouse;
such be the fabii, decii; so inspire
the scipio battle, and the Gracchi speak:
so rise the roman state. i now, of these
deep-musing, high ambitious thought inflame
great to serve my country, distant land,
and build i virtuous fame; nor shall the dust
of these fall pile with show of sad decay
avert the good resolve, mean argument,
the fate alone of matter. — now the brow
we gain enrapture; beauteous distinct
the numerous portico and dome upswell,
with obelisc and column interpose,
and pine, and fir, and oak: so fair a scene
see not the dervise from the spiral tomb
of ancient chammo, while his eye behold
proud memphis' relique over the egyptian plain:
nor hoary hermit from Hymettus' brow,
though graceful Athens, in the vale beneath.
along the wind of the muse stream,
lucid Ilyssus, weep her silent school,
and grove, unvisited by bard or sage.
amid the towery ruin, huge, supreme,
the enormous amphitheatre behold,
mountainous pile! over who capacious womb
pour the broad firmament its vary light;
while from the central floor the seat ascend
round above round, slow-widening to the verge,
a circuit vast and high; nor less have hold
imperial Rome, and her attendant realm,
when drink with rule she will the fierce delight,
and open the gloomy cavern, whence out-rushed
before the innumerable shout crowd
the fiery, mad, tyrant of the wild,
lion and tiger, wolf and elephant,
and desperate man, more fell. abhor intent!
by frequent converse with familiar death,
to kindle brutal dare apt for war;
to lock the breast, and steel the obdurate heart,
amid the pierce cry of sore distress
impenetrable. — but away thy eye;
behold yond steepy cliff; the modern pile
perchance may now delight, while that revere
in ancient day, the page alone declare,
or narrow coin through dim caerulean rust.
the fane be Jove, its spacious golden roof,
over thick-surrounding temple beam wide,
appear, as when above the morning hill
half the round sun ascend; and tower aloft,
sustain by column huge, innumerous
as cedar proud on Canaan verdant height
darken their idol, when Astarte lure
too prosperous Israel from his live strength.

and next regard yond venerable dome,
which virtuous Latium, with erroneous aim,
raise to her various deity, and name
Pantheon; plain and round; of this our world
majestic emblem; with peculiar grace,
before its ample orb, project stand
the many-pillared portal; noble work
of human skill, here, curious architect,
if thou assay, ambitious, to surpass
Palladius, Angelus, or british Jones,
on these fair wall extend the certain scale,
and turn the instructive compass: careful mark
how far in hide art, the noble plain
extend, and where the lovely form commence
of flow sculpture: nor neglect to note
how range the taper column, and what weight
their leafy brow sustain: fair Corinth first
boast their order which Callimachus
(recline studious on asopus bank
beneath a urn of some lament nymph)
haply compose; the urn with foliage curl
thin conceal, the chapter inform.

see the tall obelisc from Memphis old,
one stone enormous each, or Thebes convey;
like albion spire they rush into the sky.
and there the temple, where the summon state
in deep of night convene: even yet methinks
the vehement orator in rent attire
persuasion pour, ambition sink her crest;
and lo the villain, like a trouble sea,
that toss up her mire! ever disguise,
shall treason walk? shall proud oppression yoke
the neck of virtue? lo the wretch abash;
self-betrayed Catiline! o liberty,
parent of happiness, celestial bear;
when the first man become a live soul,
his sacred genius thou; by britain care;
with her secure, prolong thy love retreat;
thence bless mankind; while yet among her son,
even yet there be, to shield thy equal law,
who bosom kindle at the sacred name
of Cecil, Raleigh, Walsingham, and drake.
may other more delight in tuneful air;
in masque and dance excel; to sculpture stone
give with superior skill the live look;
more pompous pile erect, or pencil soft
with warm touch the visionary board:
be thou, thy noble briton teach to rule;
to check the ravage of tyrannic sway;
to quell the proud; to spread the joy of peace
and various blessing of ingenious trade.
be these our art; and ever may we guard,
ever defend thou with undaunted heart,
inestimable good! who give we truth,
who hand uplead to light, divine truth,
array in every charm: who hand benign
teach unwearied toil to cloth the field,
and on his various fruit inscribe the name
of property: o noble hail of old
by thy majestic daughter, Judah fair,
and Tyrus and Sidonia, lovely nymph,
and Libya bright, and all-enchanting Greece,
who numerous town and isle, and people sea,
rejoice around her lyre; the heroic note
(smite with sublime delight) Ausonia catch,
and plane imperial Rome. thy hand benign
rear up her towery battlement in strength;
bend her wide bridge over the swell stream
of Tuscan Tiber; thy those solemn dome
devote to the voice of humble prayer;
and thy those pile undecked, capacious, vast
in day of dearth, where tender charity
dispense her timely succour to the poor.
thy too those musically-falling fount
to slake the clammy lip; down they fall,
musical ever; while from yond blue hill
dim in the cloud, the radiant aqueduct
turn their innumerable arch over
the spacious desert, brighten in the sun,
proud and more proud, in their august approach:
high over irriguous vale and wood and town,
glide the soft whisper water in the wind,
and here unite pour their silver stream
among the figure rock, in murmur fall,
musical ever. these thy beauteous work:
and what beside felicity can tell
of human benefit: more late the rest;
at various time their turret chance to rise,
when impious tyranny vouchsafe to smile.

behold by tiber flood, where modern Rome
couch beneath the ruin: there of old
with arm and trophy gleam the field of Mars:
there to their daily sport the noble youth
rush emulous; to fling the point lance;
to vault the steed; or with the kindle wheel
in dusty whirlwind sweep the tremble goal;
or wrestle, cope with adverse swell breast,
strong, grapple arm, close head, and distant foot;
or clash the lift gauntlet: there they form
their ardent virtue: lo the bossy pile,
the proud triumphal arch; all their war,
their conquest, honour, in the sculpture live.
and see from every gate those ancient road,
with tomb high-verged, the solemn path of fame:
deserve they not regard? over who broad flint
such crowd have roll, so many storm of war;
such train of consul, tribune, sage, king;
so many pomp; so many wonder realm:
yet still through mountain pierce, over valley raise,
in even state, to distant sea around,
they stretch their pavement. lo the fane of peace,
build by that prince, who to the trust of power
be honest, the delight of human kind.
three nod isle remain; the rest a heap
of sand and weed; her shrine, her radiant roof
and column proud, that from her spacious floor,
as from a shine sea, majestic rose
a hundred foot aloft, like stately beech
around the brim of dion glassy lake,
charm the mimic painter: on the wall
hang salem sacred spoil; the golden board,
and golden trumpet, now conceal, entomb
by the sink roof. — over which in distant view
the etruscan mountain swell, with ruin crown
of ancient town; and blue Soracte spire,
wrap his side in tempest. eastward hence,
nigh where the cestian pyramid divide
the moulder wall, behold yond fabric huge,
who dust the solemn antiquarian turn,
and thence in break sculpture cast abroad,
like sybil leaf, collect the builder name
rejoice, and the green medal frequent find
doom Caracalla to perpetual fame:
the stately pine, that spread their branch wide
in the dun ruin of its ample hall,
appear but tuft; as may whatever be high
sink in comparison, minute and vile.

these, and unnumbered, yet their brow uplift,
rent of their grace; as britannia oak
on merlin mount, or snowden rugged side,
stand in the cloud, their branch scatter round,
after the tempest; mausoleum, cirque,
naumachios, forum; trajan column tall,
from who low base the sculpture wind aloft,
and lead through various toil, up the rough steep,
its hero to the sky: and his dark tower
who execrable hand the city fire,
and while the dreadful conflagration blaze,
play to the flame; and phoebus letter dome;
and the rough relique of carinae street,
where now the shepherd to his nibble sheep
sit pipe with his oaten reed; as erst
there pipe the shepherd to his nibble sheep,
when the humble roof anchises son explore
of good Evander, wealth-despising king,
amid the thicket: so revolve the scene;
so time ordain, who roll the thing of pride
from dust again to dust. behold that heap
of moulder urn (their ash blow away,
dust of the mighty) the same story tell;
and at its base, from whence the serpent glide
down the green desert street, yond hoary monk
lament the same, the vision as he view,
the solitary, silent, solemn scene,
where caesar, hero, peasant, hermit lie,
blend in dust together; where the slave
rest from his labour; where the insult proud
resign his power; the miser drop his hoard;
where human folly sleep. — there be a mood,
(i sing not to the vacant and the young)
there be a kindly mood of melancholy,
that wing the soul, and point she to the sky;
when tribulation clothes the child of man,
when age descend with sorrow to the grave,
it be sweetly-sothing sympathy to pain,
a gentle waken call to health and ease.
how musical! when all-devouring time,
here sit on his throne of ruin hoar,
while wind and tempest sweep his various lyre,
how sweet thy diapason, melancholy!
cool evening come; the set sun display
his visible great round between yond tower,
as through two shady cliff; away, my muse,
though yet the prospect please, ever new
in vast variety, and yet delight
the many-figured sculpture of the path
half beauteous, half efface; the traveller
such antique marble to his native land
oft hence convey; and every realm and state
with Rome august remains, hero and god,
deck their long gallery and wind grove;
yet miss we not the innumerable theft,
yet still profuse of grace teem the waste.

suffice it now the esquilian mount to reach
with weary wing, and seek the sacred rest
of maro humble tenement; a low
plain wall remain; a little sun-gilt heap,
grotesque and wild; the gourd and olive brown
weave the light roof; the gourd and olive fan
their amorous foliage, mingle with the vine,
who drop her purple cluster through the green.
here let i lie, with please fancy soothe:
here flow his fountain; here his laurel grow;
here oft the meek good man, the lofty bard
frame the celestial song, or social walk
with Horace and the ruler of the world;
happy Augustus! who so well inspire
can throw thy pomp and royalty aside,
attentive to the wise, the great of soul,
and dignify thy mind. thrice glorious day,
auspicious to the muse! then revere,
then hallow be the fount, or secret shade,
or open mountain, or whatever scene
the poet choose to tune the ennoble rhime
melodious; even the rugged son of war,
even the rude hind revere the poet name:
but now — another age, alas! be we —
yet will the muse a little long soar,
unless the cloud of care weigh down her wing,
since nature store be shut with cruel hand,
and each aggrieve his brother; since in vain
the thirsty pilgrim at the fountain ask
the overflow wave — enough — the plaint disdain. —

see thou yond fane? even now incessant time
sweep her low moulder marble to the dust;
and phoebus temple, nod with its wood
threaten huge ruin over the small rotund.
it be there beneath a figtree umbrage broad,
the astonish swain with reverend awe behold
thou, o Quirinus, and thy brother-twin,
press the teat within a monster grasp
sportive; while oft the gaunt and rugged wolf
turn her stretch neck and form your tender limb:
so teach of Jove, even the fell savage feed
your sacred infancy, your virtue, toil,
the conquest, glory, of the ausonian state,
wrap in their secret seed. each kindred soul,
robust and stout, you grapple to your heart,
and little Rome appear. her cot arise,
green twig of osier weave the slender wall,
green rush spread the roof; and here and there
open beneath the rock the gloomy cave.
elate with joy Etruscan Tiber view
her spread scene enamel his wave,
her hut and hollow dell, and flock and herd,
and gather swain; and roll his yellow car
to neptune court with more majestic train.

her speedy growth alarm the state around
jealous, yet soon by wondrous virtue win,
they sink into her bosom. from the plough
rise her dictator; fight, overcome, return,
yes, to the plough return, and hail their peer;
for then no private pomp, no household state,
the public only swell the generous breast.
who have not hear the Fabian hero sing?
dentatus scar, or mutius flame hand?
how Manlius save the Capitol? the choice
of steady Regulus? as yet they stand,
simple of life; as yet seduce wealth
be unexplored, and shame of poverty
yet unimagined — shine not all the field
with various fruitage? murmur not the brook
along the flowery valley? they, content,
feast at nature hand, indelicate,
blithe, in their easy taste; and only seek
to know their duty; that their only strife,
their generous strife, and great to perform.
they through all shape of peril and of pain,
intent on honour, dare in thick death
to snatch the glorious deed. nor Trebia quell,
nor thrasymene, nor cannae bloody field,
their dauntless courage; storm Hannibal
in vain the thunder of the battle roll,
the thunder of the battle they return
back on his punic shore; until Carthage fall,
and danger flee afar. the city gleam
with precious spoil: alas prosperity!
ah baneful state! yet ebb not all their strength
in soft luxurious pleasure; proud desire
of boundless sway, and feverish thirst of gold,
rouse they again to battle. beauteous Greece,
tear from her joy, in vain with languid arm
half raise her rusty shield; nor can avail
the sword of Dacia, nor the parthian dart;
nor yet the car of that fame british chief,
which seven brave year beneath the doubtful wing
of victory, dreadful roll its gride wheel
over the bloody war: the roman arm
triumph, until fame be silent of their foe.

and now the world unrivaled they enjoy
in proud security: the crest helm,
the plate grieve and corselet hang unbrace;
nor clank their arm, the spear and sound shield,
but on the glitter trophy to the wind.

dissolve in ease and soft delight they lie,
until every sun annoy, and every wind
have chill force, and every rain offend:
for now the frame no more be gird with strength
masculine, nor in lustiness of heart
laugh at the winter storm, and summer beam,
superior to their rage: enfeeble vice
withereth each nerve, and open every pore
to painful feeling: flowery bower they seek
(as aether prompt, as the sick sense approve)
or cool nymphean grot; or tepid bath
(teach by the soft ionian) they, along
the lawny vale, of every beauteous stone,
pile in the roseate air with fond expense:
through silver channel glide the vagrant wave,
and fall on silver bed crystalline down,
melodious murmur; while luxury
over their naked limb, with wanton hand,
shed rose, odour, shed unheeded bane.

swift be the flight of wealth; unnumbered want,
brood of voluptuousness, cry out aloud
necessity, and seek the splendid bribe.
the citron board, the bowl emboss with gem,
and tender foliage wild wreathe around
of seem ivy, by that artful hand,
Corinthian Thericles; whatever be know
of rare acquisition; Tyrian garb,
neptunian albion high testaceous food,
and flavour chian wine with incense fume
to shake patrician thirst: for these, their right
in the vile street they prostitute to sale;
their ancient right, their dignity, their law,
their native glorious freedom. be there none,
be there no villain, that will bind the neck
stretch to the yoke? they come; the market throng.
but who have most by fraud or force amass?
who most can charm corruption with his dole?
he be the monarch of the state; and lo!
Didius, vile usurer, through the crowd he mount,
beneath his foot the roman eagle cower,
and the red arrow fill his grasp uncouth.
o briton, o my countryman, beware,
Gird, gird your heart; the roman once be free,
be brave, be virtuous. — tyranny however
deign to walk forth awhile in pageant state,
and with licentious pleasure feed the rout,
the thoughtless many: to the wanton sound
of fife and drum they dance, or in the shade
sing Caesar, great and terrible in war,
immortal Caesar! lo, a god, a god,
he cleave the yield sky! Caesar mean while
gather the ocean pebble; or the gnat
enrage pursue; or at his lonely meal
starve a wide province; taste, dislike, and fling
to dog and sycophant: a god, a god!
the flowery shade and shrine obscene return.

but see along the north the tempest swell
over the rough Alps, and darken all their snow!
sudden the goth and vandal, dread name,
rush as the breach of water, whelm all
their dome, their villa; down the festive pile,
down fall their parian porch, gild bath,
and roll before the storm in cloud of dust.

vain end of human strength, of human skill,
conquest, and triumph, and domain, and pomp,
and ease and luxury! o luxury,
bane of elated life, of affluent state,
what dreary change, what ruin be not thy?
how do thy bowl intoxicate the mind!
to the soft entrance of thy rosy cave
how do thou lure the fortunate and great!
dreadful attraction! while behind thou gape
the unfathomable gulph where Ashur lie
overwhelm, forget; and high-boasting Cham;
and elam haughty pomp; and beauteous Greece;
and the great queen of earth, imperial Rome.
