to Clorissa.

1. 

to your love bosom please Marissa fly;
that place where sacred friendship give a right,
and where ten thousand charm invite.
let other power and awful greatness prize;
let they exchange their innocence and fame
for the dear purchase of a mighty name:
let greedy wretch hug their darling store,
the tempt product of their toil adore,
and still with anxious soul, desire and grasp at more:
while i disdain to have my bliss confine
to thing which fortune can bestow, or take,
to thing so foreign to the mind,
and which not part of solid pleasure make:
those joy of which i be possess,
be safe lodge within my breast,
where like deep water, undisturbed they flow,
and as they pass, a glassy smoothness show:
unmoved by storm, or by the attack of fate,
i envy none, nor wish a happy state.

2. 

when all alone in some belove retreat,
remote from noise, from business, and from strife,
those constant curse attendant of the great;
i free can with my own thought converse,
and cloth they in ignoble verse,
it be then i taste the most delicious feast of life:
there, uncontrolled i can my self survey,
and from observer free,
my intellectual power display,
and all the open scene of beauteous nature see:
form bright idea, and enrich my mind,
enlarge my knowledge, and each error find;
inspect each action, every word dissect,
and on the failure of my life reflect:
then from my self, to book, i turn my sight,
and there, with silent wonder and delight,
gaze on the instructive venerable dead,
those that in virtue school be early breed,
and since by rule of honour always lead;
who its strict law with nice care obey,
and be by calm unbiased reason sway:
their great example elevate my mind,
and i the force of all their precept find;
by they inspire, above dull earth i soar,
and scorn those trifle which i prize before.

3. 

next these delight love claim the chief part,
that gentle passion govern in my heart:
its sacred flame dilate themselves around,
and like pure æther no confinement know:
where ever true desert be find,
i pay my love and wonder too:
wit, when alone, have power to please,
and virtue charm resistless prove;
but when they both combine,
when both together shine,
who cold can behold a glory so divine?
since you, Clorissa, have a right to these,
and since you both possess,
you have, sure, a double title to my love,
and i my fate shall bless,
for give i a friend, in who i find
unite, all the grace of the female kind.

4. 

accept that heart your merit make your own,
and let the kindness for the gift atone:
love, constancy, and spotless truth i bring,
these give a value to the mean thing.
o! let our thought, our interest be but one,
our grief and joy, be to each other know:
in all concern we will have a equal share,
enlarge each pleasure, lessen every care:
thus, of a thousand sweet possess,
we will live in one another breast:
when present, talk the fly hour away,
when absent, thus, our tender thought convey:
and, when by the decree of fate
we be summon to a high state,
we will meet again in the bless realm of light,
and in each other there eternal delight.
