[verse to the memory of Garrick:

speak as a monody, at the theatre royal in Drury-lane]

if die excellence deserve a tear,
 if fond remembrance still be cherish here,
 can we persist to bid your sorrow flow.
for fable Suffe'rers, and delusive woe?
or with quaint smile dismiss the plaintive strain,
 point the quick jest — indulge the comic vein —
 ere yet to bury Roscius we assign —
 one kind regret — one tributary line!

his fame require we act a tender part: —
 his memory claim the tear you give his art!

the general voice, the meed of mournful verse,
 the splendid sorrow that adorn his hearse,
 the throng that mourn as their dead favourite pass,
 the grace respect that claim he to the last,
 while shakespeare image from its hallow base,
 seem to prescribe the grave, and point the place, —
 nor these, — nor all the sad regret that flow
 from fond fidelity domestic woe, —
 so much be Garrick praise — so much his due —
 as on this spot — one tear bestow by you.

amid the art which seek ingenuous fame,
 our toil attempt the most precarious claim!
to he, who mimic pencil win the prize,
 obedient fame immortal wreath supply:
 whatever of wonder Reynolds now may raise,
 Raphael still boast cotemporary praise:
 each dazzle light, and gaudy bloom subdue,
 with undiminished awe his work be view:
 even beauty portrait wear a soft prime,
 touch by the tender hand of mellow time.

the patient sculptor own a humble part,
 a rude toil, and more mechanic art;
 content with slow and timorous stroke to trace
 the linger line, and mould the tardy grace:
 but once achieve — though barbarous wreck overthrow
 the sacred Fane, and lie its glory low,
 yet shall the sculpture ruin rise to day,
 grace by defect, and worship in decay;
 the endure record bear the artist name,
 demand his honour, and assert his fame.

superior hope the poet bosom fire, —
 o proud distinction of the sacred lyre! —
 wide as they inspire Phoebus dart his ray,
 diffusive splendour gild his votary lay.
whether the song heroic woe rehearse,
 with epic grandeur, and the pomp of verse;
 or, fond gay, with unambitious guile
 attempt no prize but favour beauty smile;
 or bear deject to the lonely grove
 the soft despair of unprevailing love, —
 whatever the theme — through every age and clime
 congenial passion meet they according rhyme;
 the pride of glory — pity sigh sincere —
 youth early blush — and beauty virgin tear.

such be their meed — their honour thus secure,
 who art yield object, and who work endure.
the actor only, shrink from time award;
 feeble tradition be his memory guard;
 by who faint breath his merit must abide,
 unvouch by proof — to substance unallied!
even matchless Garrick art to heaven resign,
 no fix effect, no model leave behind!

the grace of action — the adapt mien
 faithful as nature to the vary scene;
 the expressive glance — who subtle comment draw
 entrance attention, and a mute applause;
 gesture that mark, with force and feel fraught,
 a sense in silence, and a will in thought;
 harmonious speech, who pure and liquid tone
 give verse a music, scarce confess its own;
 as light from gem, assume a bright ray
 and clothe with orient hue, transcend the day! —
 passion wild break — and frown that awe the sense,
 and every charm of gentle eloquence —
 all perishable! — like they electric fire
 but strike the frame — and as they strike expire;
 incense too pure a bodied flame to bear,
 it be fragrance charm the sense, and blend with air.

where then — while sink in cold decay he lie,
 and pale eclipse for ever veil those eye! —
 where be the bless memorial that ensure
 our Garrick fame? — who be the trust? — it be you.

and o! by every charm his art essay
 to sooth your care! — by every grief allay!
by the hush wonder which his accent draw!
by his last part tear, repay by you!
by all those thought, which many a distant night,
 shall mark his memory with a sad delight! —
 still in your heart dear record bear his name;
 cherish the keen regret that lift his fame;
 to you it be bequeath, assert the trust,
 and to his worth — it be all you can — be just.

what more be due from sanctify time,
 to cheerful wit, and many a favour rhyme,
 over his grace urn shall bloom, a deathless wreathe,
 who blossom sweet shall deck the mask beneath.
for these, — when sculpture votive toil shall rear
 the due memorial of a loss so dear! —
 o lovely mourner, gentle Muse! be thy
 the please woe to guard the laureled shrine.
as fancy, oft by superstition lead
 to roam the mansion of the saint dead,
 have view, by shadowy eve unfaithful gloom,
 a weep cherub on a martyr tomb —
 so thou, sweet Muse, hang over his sculpture bier,
 with patient woe, that love the linger tear;
 with thought that mourn — nor yet desire relief,
 with meek regret, and fond endure grief;
 with look that speak — he never shall return! —
 chill thy tender bosom clasp his urn;
 and with soft sigh disperse they irreverend dust,
 which time may strew upon his sacred bust.
