line to Agnes Baillie on her birthday.

dear Agnes, gleam with joy and dash with tear,
 over we have glide almost sixty year
 since we on bothwell bonny brae be see,
 by those who eye long close in death have be,
 two tiny imp, who scarce stoop to gather
 the slender hair-bell on the purple heather;
 no tall than the foxglove spiky stem,
 that dew of morning stud with silvery gem. 
then every butterfly that cross our view
 with joyful shout be greet as it fly,
 and moth and ladybird and beetle bright
 then as we paddle barefoot, side by side,
 among the sunny shallows of the Clyde
 minnow or spot paur with twinkle fin,
 swim in mazy ring the pool within,
 a thrill of gladness through our bosom send,
 see in the power of early wonderment. 

a long perspective to my mind appear,
 look behind i to that line of year,
 and yet through every stage i still can trace
 thy vision form, from childhood morning grace
 to woman early bloom, change how soon! 
to the expressive glow of woman noon;
 and now to what thou be, in comely age,
 active and ardent. let what will engage
 thy present moment, whether hopeful seed
 in garden-plate thou sow, or noxious weed
 from the fair flower remove, or ancient lore
 in chronicle or legend rare explore,
 or on the parlour hearth with kitten play,
 stroke its tabby side, or take thy way
 to gain with hasty step some cottage door,
 on helpful errand to the neighbour poor,
 active and ardent, to my fancy eye,
 thou still be young in spite of time go by. 
though oft of patience brief and temper keen,
 well may it please i, in life latter scene,
 to think what now thou be and long to i have be. 

it be thou who will i first to look
 upon the page of print book,
 that thing by i abhor, and with address
 do win i from my thoughtless idleness,
 when all too old become with bootless haste
 in fitful sport the precious time to waste. 
thy love of tale and story be the stroke
 at which my dormant fancy first awake,
 and ghost and witch in my busy brain
 arise in somber show, a motley train. 
this newfound path attempt, proud be i,
 lurk approval on thy face to spy,
 or hear thou say, as grow thy rouse attention,
 "what! be this story all thy own invention?" 

then, as advance through this mortal span,
 our intercourse with the mix world begin,
 thy fair face and sprightly courtesy,
 (a truth that from my youthful vanity
 lay not conceal) do for the sister twain,
 wherever we go, the great favour gain;
 while, but for thou, vex with its toss tide,
 i from the busy world have shrink aside. 
and now in late year, with better grace
 thou help i still to hold a welcome place
 with those who near neighbourhood have make
 the friendly cheerer of our evening shade. 

with thou my humour, whether grave or gay,
 or gracious or untoward, have their way. 
silent if dull — o precious privilege! 
i sit by thou; or if, cull from the page
 of some huge, ponderous tome which, but thyself,
 none ever have take from its dusty shelf,
 thou read i curious passage to speed
 the winter night, i take but little heed
 and thankless say "i can listen now,"
 it be no offence; albeit, much do i owe
 to these, thy nightly offering of affection,
 draw from thy ready talent for selection;
 for still it seem in thou a natural gift
 the letter grain from letter chaff to sift. 

by daily use and circumstance endear,
 thing be of value now that once appear
 of no account, and without notice past,
 which over dull life a simple cheer cast;
 to hear thy morning step the stair descend,
 thy voice with other sound domestic blend;
 after each state nightly absence, meet
 to see thou by the morning table set,
 pour from smoky spout the amber stream
 which send from saucered cup its fragrant steam;
 to see thou cheerly on the threshold stand,
 on summer morn, with trowel in thy hand
 for garden-work prepare; in winter gloom
 from thy cold noonday walk to see thou come,
 in furry garment leap, with spatter foot
 and by the fire resume thy wonted seat;
 aye even over thing like these, soothe age have throw
 a sober charm they do not always own. 
as winter-hoarfrost make minute spray
 of bush or hedge-weed sparkle to the day,
 in magnitude and beauty, which bereave
 of such investment, eye have never perceive. 

the change of good and evil to abide,
 as partner link, long have we side by side
 our earthly journey hold, and who can say
 how near the end of our unite way? 
by nature course not distant; sad and bereave
 will she remain, — the lonely pilgrim leave. 
if thou be take first, who can to i
 like sister, friend and home-companion be? 
or who, of wonted daily kindness shear,
 shall feel such loss, or mourn as i shall mourn? 
and if i shall be fate first to leave
 this earthly house, though gentle friend may grieve,
 and he above they all, so true prove
 a friend and brother, long and just love,
 there be no live wight, of woman bear,
 who then shall mourn for i as thou will mourn. 

thou ardent, liberal spirit! quick feeling
 the touch of sympathy and kind deal
 with sorrow or distress, for ever share
 the unhoarded mite, nor for to morrow care, —
 accept, dear Agnes, on thy natal day,
 a unadorned but not a careless lay. 
nor think this tribute to thy virtue pay
 from tardy love proceed, though long delay. 
word of affection, howsoever express,
 the late speak still be deem the best:
 few be the measure rhyme i now may write;
 these be, perhaps, the last i shall endite. 
