carric-thura: a poem.

have thou leave thy blue course in heaven, golden-haired son of the sky! the west have open its gate; the bed of thy repose be there. the wave come to behold thy beauty: they lift their tremble head: they see thou lovely in thy sleep; but they shrink away with fear. rest, in thy shadowy cave, o sun! and let thy return be in joy. — but let a thousand light arise to the sound of the harp of Selma: let the beam spread in the hall, the king of shell be return! the strife of crona be past, like sound that be no more: raise the song, o bard, the king be return, with his fame!

such be the song of Ullin, when Fingal return from battle: when he return in the fair blush of youth; with all his heavy lock. his blue arm be on the hero; like a grey cloud on the sun, when he move in his robe of mist, and show but half his beam. his hero follow the king: the feast of shell be spread. Fingal turn to his bard, and bid the song to rise.

voice of echo cona! he say, o bard of other time! you, on who soul the blue host of our father rise! strike the harp in my hall; and let Fingal hear the song. pleasant be the joy of grief! it be like the shower of spring, when it soften the branch of the oak, and the young leaf lift its green head. sing on, o bard, tomorrow we lift the sail. my blue course be through the ocean, to carric-thura wall; the mossy wall of sarno, where Comála dwell. there the noble cathulla, spread the feast of shell. the boar of his wood be many, and the sound of the chace shall arise.

cronnan, son of the song! say Ullin, minona, graceful at the harp! raise the song of shilric, to please the king of Morven. let vinvela come in her beauty, like the showery bow, when it show its lovely head on the lake, and the set sun be bright. and she come, o Fingal! her voice be soft but sad.


vinvela.

my love be a son of the hill. he pursue the fly deer. his grey dog be pant around he; his bowstring sound in the wind. do thou rest by the sount of the rock, or by the noise of the mountain-stream? the rush be nod with the wind, the mist be fly over the hill. i will approach my love unperceived, and see he from the rock. lovely i see thou first by the age oak of branno; thou be return tall from the chace; the fair among thy friend.


shilric.

what voice be that i hear? that voice like the summer-wind. — i sit not by the nod rush; i hear not the fount of the rock. afar, vinvela, afar i go to the war of Fingal. my dog attend i no more. no more i tread the hill. no more from on high i see thou, fair-moving by the stream of the plain; bright as the bow of heaven; as the moon on the western wave.


vinvela.

then thou be go, o shilric! and i be alone on the hill. the deer be see on the brow; void of fear they graze along. no more they dread the wind; no more the rustle tree. the hunter be far remove; he be in the field of grave. stranger! son of the wave! spare my lovely shilric.


shilric.

if fall i must in the field, raise high my grave, vinvela. grey stone and heaped-up earth, shall mark i to future time. when the hunter shall sit by the mound, and produce his food at noon, "some warrior rest here,"he will say; and my fame shall live in his praise. remember i, vinvela, when low on earth i lie!


vinvela.

yes! — i will remember thou — indeed my shilric will fall. what shall i do, my love! when thou be go for ever? through these hill i will go at noon: i will go through the silent heath. there i will see the place of thy rest, return from the chace. indeed, my shilric will fall; but i will remember he.

and i remember the chief, say the king of woody Morven; he consume the battle in his rage. but now my eye behold he not. i meet he, one day, on the hill; his cheek be pale; his brow be dark. the sigh be frequent in his breast: his step be towards the desert. but now he be not in the crowd of my chief, when the sound of my shield arise. dwell he in the narrow house, the chief of high carmora?

cronnan! say Ullin of other time, raise the song of shilric; when he return to his hill, and vinvela be no more. he lean on her grey mossy stone; he think vinvela live. he see her fair-moving on the plain: but the bright form last not: the sun-beam flee from the field, and she be see no more. hear the song of shilric, it be soft but sad.

i sit by the mossy fountain; on the top of the hill of wind. one tree be rustle above i. dark wave roll over the heath. the lake be trouble below. the deer descend from the hill. no hunter at a distance be see; no whistle cowherd be nigh. it be midday: but all be silent. sad be my thought alone. do thou but appear, o my love, a wanderer on the heath! thy hair float on the wind behind thou; thy bosom heave on the sight; thy eye full of tear for thy friend, who the mist of the hill have conceal! thou i will comfort, my love, and bring thou to thy father house.

but be it she that there appear, like a beam of light on the heath? bright as the moon in autumn, as the sun in a summerstorm, come thou, lovely maid, over rock, over mountain to i? — she speak: but how weak her voice! like the breeze in the reed of the pool.

return thou safe from the war? where be thy friend, my love? i hear of thy death on the hill; i hear and mourn thou, shilric!

yes, my fair, i return; but i alone of my race. thou shall see they no more: their grave i raise on the plain. but why be thou on the desert hill? why on the heath, alone?

alone i be, o shilric! alone in the winter-house. with grief for thou i expire. shilric, i be pale in the tomb.

she fleet, she sail away; as grey mist before the wind! — and, will thou not stay, my love? stay and behold my tear? fair thou appear, vinvela! fair thou be, when alive!

by the mossy fountain i will sit; on the top of the hill of wind. when midday be silent around, converse, o my love, with i! come on the wing of the gale! on the blast of the mountain, come! let i hear thy voice, as thou pass, when midday be silent around.

such be the song of cronnan, on the night of selma joy. but morning rise in the east; the blue water roll in light. Fingal bid his sail to rise, and the wind come rustle, from their hill. inistore rise to sight, and carric-thura mossy tower. but the sign of distress be on their top: the green flame edge with smoke. the king of Morven strike his breast: he assume, at once, his spear. his darken brow bend forward to the coast: he look back to the lag wind. his hair be disorder on his back. the silence of the king be terrible.

night come down on the sea; rotha bay receive the ship. a rock bend along the coast with all its echo wood. on the top be the circle of loda, and the mossy stone of power. a narrow plain spread beneath, cover with grass and age tree, which the midnight wind, in their wrath, have tear from the shaggy rock. the blue course of a stream be there; and the lonely blast of ocean pursue the thistle beard.

the flame of three oak arise: the feast be spread around: but the soul of the king be sad, for carric-thura battle chief. the wan, cold moon rise, in the east. sleep descend on the youth! their blue helmet glitter to the beam; the fade fire decay. but sleep do not rest on the king: he rise in the midst of his arm, and slow ascend the hill to behold the flame of sarno tower.

the flame be dim and distant; the moon hide her red face in the east. a blast come from the mountain, and bear, on its wing, the spirit of loda. he come to his place in his terror, and he shake his dusky spear. — his eye appear like flame in his dark face; and his voice be like distant thunder. Fingal advance with the spear of his strength, and raise his voice on high.

son of night, retire: call thy wind and fly! why do thou come to my presence, with thy shadowy arm? do i fear thy gloomy form, dismal spirit of loda? weak be thy shield of cloud: feeble be that meteor, thy sword. the blast roll they together; and thou thyself do vanish. fly from my presence son of night! call thy wind and fly!

do thou force i from my place, reply the hollow voice? the people bend before i. i turn the battle in the field of the valiant. i look on the nation and they vanish: my nostril pour the blast of death. i come abroad on the wind: the tempest be before my face. but my dwelling be calm, above the cloud, the field of my rest be pleasant.

dwell then in thy calm field, say Fingal, and let comhal son be forget. do my step ascend, from my hill, into thy peaceful plain? do i meet thou, with a spear, on thy cloud, spirit of dismal loda? why then do thou frown on Fingal? or shake thy airy spear? but thou frown in vain: i never flee from mighty man. and shall the son of the wind frighten the king of Morven? no: he know the weakness of their arm.

fly to thy land, reply the form: receive the wind and fly. the blast be in the hollow of my hand: the course of the storm be i. the king of Sora be my son, he bend at the stone of my power. his battle be around carric-thura; and he will prevail. fly to thy land, son of Comhal, or feel my flame wrath.

he lift high his shadowy spear; and bend forward his terrible height. but the king, advance, draw his sword; the blade of dark-brown luno. the gleam path of the steel wind through the gloomy ghost. the form fall shapeless into air, like a column of smoke, which the staff of the boy disturb, as it rise from the half-extinguished furnace.

the spirit of loda shriek, as, roll into himself, he rise on the wind. inistore shake at the sound. the wave hear it on the deep: they stop, in their course, with fear: the companion of Fingal start, at once; and take their heavy spear. they miss the king: they rise with rage; all their arm resound.

the moon come forth in the east. the king return in the gleam of his arm. the joy of his youth be great, their soul settle, as a sea from a storm. Ullin raise the song of gladness. the hill of inistore rejoice. the flame of the oak arise; and the tale of hero be tell.

but frothal, sora battle king, sit in sadness beneath a tree. the host spread around carric-thura. he look towards the wall with rage. he long for the blood of cathulla, who, once, overcome the king in war. — when annir reign in Sora, the father of carborne frothal, a blast rise on the sea, and carry frothal to inistore. three day he feast in sarno hall, and see the slow roll eye of Comála. he love she, in the rage of youth, and rush to seize the white-armed maid. cathulla meet the chief. the gloomy battle rise. frothal be bind in the hall: three day he pine alone. on the four, sarno send he to his ship, and he return to his land. but wrath darken in his soul against the noble cathulla. when annir stone of fame arise, frothal come in his strength. the battle burn round carric-thura, and sarno mossy wall.

morning rise on inistore. frothal strike his dark-brown shield. his chief start at the sound; they stand, but their eye be turn to the sea. they see Fingal come in his strength; and first the noble thubar speak.

who come like the stag of the mountain, with all his herd behind he? frothal, it be a foe; i see his forward spear. perhaps it be the king of Morven, Fingal the first of man. his action be well know on gormal; the blood of his foe be in starno hall. shall i ask the peace of king? he be like the thunder of heaven.

son of the feeble hand, say frothal, shall my day begin in darkness? shall i yield before i have conquer in battle, chief of streamy Tora? the people will say in Sora, frothal fly forth like a meteor; but the dark cloud meet it, and it be no more. no: thubar, i will never yield; my fame shall surround i like light. no: i will never yield, king of streamy Tora.

he go forth with the stream of his people, but they meet a rock: Fingal stand unmoved, break they roll back from his side. nor do they roll in safety; the spear of the king pursue their flight. the field be cover with hero. a rise hill preserve the fly host.

frothal see their flight. the rage of his bosom rise. he bend his eye to the ground, and call the noble thubar. — thubar! my people flee. my fame have cease to rise. i will fight the king; i feel my burn soul. send a bard to demand the combat. speak not against Frothal word. — but, thubar! i love a maid; she dwell by thano stream, the white-bosomed daughter of Herman, utha with the softly-rolling eye. she fear the daughter of inistore, and her soft sigh rise, at my departure. tell to utha that i be low; but that my soul delight in she.

such be his word, resolve to fight. but the soft sigh of utha be near. she have follow her hero over the sea, in the armour of a man. she roll her eye on the youth, in secret, from beneath a glitter helmet. but now she see the bard as he go, and the spear fall thrice from her hand. her loose hair fly on the wind. her white breast rise, with sigh. she lift up her eye to the king; she will speak, but thrice she fail.

Fingal hear the word of the bard; he come in the strength of steel. they mix their deathful spear, and raise the gleam of their sword. but the steel of Fingal descend and cut Frothal shield in twain. his fair side be expose; half bent he foresee his death.

darkness gather on utha soul. the tear roll down her cheek. she rush to cover the chief with her shield; but a fall oak meet her step. she fall on her arm of snow; her shield, her helmet fly wide. her white bosom heave to the sight; her dark-brown hair be spread on earth.

Fingal pity the white-armed maid: he stay the uplift sword. the tear be in the eye of the king, as, bend forward, he speak. king of streamy Sora! fear not the sword of Fingal. it be never stain with the blood of the vanquish; it never pierce a fall foe. let thy people rejoice along the blue water of Tora: let the maid of thy love be glad. why shall thou fall in thy youth, king of streamy Sora?

frothal hear the word of Fingal, and see the rise maid: they stand in silence, in their beauty: like two young tree of the plain, when the shower of spring be on their leaf, and the loud wind be lay.

daughter of Herman, say frothal, do thou come from tora stream; do thou come, in thy beauty, to behold thy warrior low? but he be low before the mighty, maid of the slow-rolling eye! the feeble do not overcome the son of carborne annir. terrible art thou, o king of Morven! in battle of the spear. but, in peace, thou be like the sun, when he look through a silent shower: the flower lift their fair head before he; and the gale shake their rustle wing. o that thou be in Sora! that my feast be spread! — the future king of Sora will see thy arm and rejoice. they will rejoice at the fame of their father, who behold the mighty Fingal.

son of annir, reply the king, the fame of sora race shall be hear. — when chief be strong in battle, then do the song arise! but if their sword be stretch over the feeble: if the blood of the weak have stain their arm; the bard shall forget they in the song, and their tomb shall not be know. the stranger shall come and build there, and remove the heaped-up earth. a half-worn sword shall rise before he; and bend above it, he will say, "these be the arm of chief of old, but their name be not in the song."— come thou, o frothal, to the feast of inistore; let the maid of thy love be there; and our face will brighten with joy.

Fingal take his spear, move in the step of his might. the gate of carric-thura be open. the feast of shell be spread. — the voice of music arise. gladness brighten in the hall. — the voice of Ullin be hear; the harp of Selma be string. — utha rejoice in his presence, and demand the song of grief; the big tear hang in her eye, when the soft crimora speak. crimora the daughter of rinval, who dwell at lotha mighty stream. the tale be long, but lovely; and please the blush maid of Tora.


crimora.

who come from the hill, like a cloud tinge with the beam of the west? who voice be that, loud as the wind, but pleasant as the harp of carril? it be my love in the light of steel; but sad be his darken brow. live the mighty race of Fingal? or what disturb my Connal?


Connal.

they live. i see they return from the chace, like a stream of light. the sun be on their shield. like a ridge of fire they descend the hill. loud be the voice of the youth; the war, my love, be near. tomorrow the terrible dargo come to try the force of our race. the race of Fingal he defy; the race of battle and wound.


crimora.

Connal, i see his sail like grey mist on the sable wave. they slow come to land. Connal, many be the warrior of dargo!


Connal.

bring i thy father shield; the bossy, iron shield of rinval; that shield like the full moon when it move darken through heaven.


crimora.

that shield i bring, o Connal; but it do not defend my father. by the spear of gormar he fall. thou may fall, o Connal!


Connal.

fall indeed i may: but raise my tomb, crimora. grey stone, a mound of earth, shall keep my memory. bend thy red eye over my tomb, and beat thy mournful heave breast. though fair thou be, my love, as the light; more pleasant than the gale of the hill; yet i will not stay. raise my tomb, crimora.


crimora.

then give i those arm of light; that sword, and that spear of steel. i shall meet dargo with thou, and aid my lovely Connal. farewell, you rock of ardven! you deer! and you stream of the hill! — we shall return no more. our tomb be distant far.

and do they return no more? say utha burst sigh. fell the mighty in battle, and do crimora live? — her step be lonely, and her soul be sad for Connal. be he not young and lovely; like the beam of the set sun? Ullin see the virgin tear, and take the softly-trembling harp: the song be lovely, but sad, and silence be in carric-thura.

autumn be dark on the mountain; grey mist rest on the hill. the whirlwind be hear on the heath. dark roll the river through the narrow plain. a tree stand alone on the hill, and mark the slumber Connal. the leaf whirl round with the wind, and strew the grave of the dead. at time be see here the ghost of the decease, when the muse hunter alone stalk slow over the heath.

who can reach the source of thy race, o Connal? and who recount thy father? thy family grow like a oak on the mountain, which meet the wind with its lofty head. but now it be tear from the earth. who shall supply the place of Connal?

here be the din of arm; and here the groan of the die. bloody be the war of Fingal! o Connal! it be here thou do fall. thy arm be like a storm; thy sword a beam of the sky; thy height, a rock on the plain; thy eye, a furnace of fire. loud than a storm be thy voice, in the battle of thy steel. warrior fall by thy sword, as the thistle by the staff of a boy.

dargo the mighty come on, like a cloud of thunder. his brow be contract and dark. his eye like two cave in a rock. bright rose their sword on each side; dire be the clang of their steel.

the daughter of rinval be near; crimora bright in the armour of man; her yellow hair be loose behind, her bow be in her hand. she follow the youth to the war, Connal her much-beloved. she draw the string on dargo; but err pierce she Connal. he fall like a oak on the plain; like a rock from the shaggy hill. what shall she do, hapless maid! — he bleed; her Connal die. all the night long she cry, and all the day, o Connal, my love, and my friend! with grief the sad mourner die.

earth here inclose the lovely pair on the hill. the grass grow between the stone of the tomb; i often sit in the mournful shade. the wind sigh through the grass; their memory rush on my mind. undisturbed you now sleep together; in the tomb of the mountain you rest alone.

and soft be your rest, say utha, child of streamy lotha. i will remember you with tear, and my secret song shall rise; when the wind be in the grove of Tora, and the stream be roar near. then shall you come on my soul, with all your lovely grief.

three day feast the king: on the four their white sail arise. the wind of the north carry the ship of Fingal to morven woody land. — but the spirit of loda sit, in his cloud, behind the ship of frothal. he hang forward with all his blast, and spread the white-bosomed sail. — the wound of his form be not forget; he still fear the hand of the king.

