Democritus and his neighbour.

imitate from Fontaine. 

in vulgar mind what error do arise! 
how differ be the notion, they possess,
 from they, who better sense do his bless,
 who just be enrol among the learnt and wise! 
Democritus, while he all science teach,
 be by his foolish neighbour think
 distract in his wit;
 who call his speculative flight,
 his solitary walk in starry night,
 but wild and frantic fit. 
bless i, each cry, from such a work brain! 
and to Hippocrates they send
 the sage long-acquainted friend,
 to put in tune his jar mind again,
 and pericranium mend. 
away the skilful doctor come
 of recipe and medicine full,
 to check the giddy whirl of nature fire,
 if so the unruly case require;
 or with his cobweb-cleansing broom
 to sweep and clear the over-crouded Scull,
 if settle spirit flag, and make the patient dull. 
but ask what the symptom be,
 that make they think he be so bad? 
the man indeed, they cry, be wondrous mad. 
you, at this distance, may behold he there
 beneath that tree in open air,
 surround with the engine of his fate,
 the gimcrack of a break pate. 
those hoop a sphere he call,
 that ball the earth;
 and when into his rave fit he fall,
 it will move at once your pity, and your mirth,
 to hear he, as you will do soon,
 declare, there be a kingdom in the moon;
 and that each star, for ought he know,
 may some inhabitant enclose:
 philosopher, he say, may there abound,
 such juggler as himself be in they find;
 which if there be, the world may well turn round;
 at least to those, who whimsy be so strange,
 that, while they be fix to one peculiar place,
 pretend to measure far extend space,
 and among the planet range. 
behold he now contemplate that head,
 from which long-since both flesh, and brain be flee;
 question, if that empty, hollow bowl
 do not ere while contain the human soul:
 then start a doubt, if it be not to the heart
 that nature rather do that gift impart. 
good sir, employ the utmost of your skill,
 to make he wise, though against his will;
 who think, that he already all exceed,
 and laugh at our most solemn word and deed:
 though once among we he will try a cause,
 and business of the town discuss,
 know, as well as one of we,
 the price of corn, and stand market-law;
 will bear a office in his turn,
 for which good purpose all man be bear;
 not to be make circle in the sand,
 and scale heaven, till they have sell their land. 
or, when unstocked below their pasture lie,
 to find out bull and ram, amid the sky. 
from these mistake his madness we conclude;
 and hear, you be with much skill endue,
 your aid we seek. Hippocrates amaze,
 now on the sage, now on the rabble gaze;
 and while he needless find his artful rule,
 pity a man of sense, judge by a croud of fool
 then how can we with their opinion join,
 who, to promote some interest, will define
 the Peoples voice to be the voice divine? 
