elegy,

write on the plain of Fontenoy.

Chill blow the blast, and twilight dewy hand
 draw in the west her dusky veil away;
 a deep shadow steal along the land,
 and nature muse at the death of day! 

near this bleak waste no friendly mansion rear
 its wall, where mirth, and social joy resound,
 but each sad object melt the soul to tear,
 while horror tread the scatter bone around. 

as thus, alone and comfortless i roam,
 wet with the drizzle shower, i sigh sincere;
 i cast a fond look towards my native home,
 and think what valiant briton perish here. 

yes, the time be, nor very far the date,
 when carnage here her crimson toil begin;
 when nations standard wave in threaten state,
 and man the murderer meet the murderer man. 

for war be murder, though the voice of king
 have style it justice, style it glory too! 
yet from worst motive, fierce ambition spring,
 and there, fix prejudice be all we view! 

but sure, it be heaven immutable decree,
 for thousand every age in fight to fall;
 some natural cause prevail, we can see,
 and that be fate, which we ambition call. 

o let the aspire warrior think with grief,
 that as produce by chemic art refine; —
 so glitter conquest, from the laurel leaf
 extract a general poison for mankind. 

here let he wander at the midnight hour,
 these morbid rain, these gelid gale to meet;
 and mourn, like i, the ravage of power! 
and feel, like i, that victory be defeat! 

nor deem, you vain! that ever i mean to swell
 my feeble verse with many a sound name;
 of such, the mercenary bard may tell,
 and call such dreary desolation, fame. 

the genuine muse remove the thin disguise
 that cheat the world, whenever she deign to sing;
 and full as meritorious to her eye
 seem the poor soldier, as the mighty king! 

alike i shun in labour strain to show,
 how Britain more than triumph, though she flee,
 where louis stand, where stalk the column slow;
 i turn from these, and dwell upon the dead. 

yet much my beat breast respect the brave;
 too well i love they, not to mourn their fate,
 why shall they seek for greatness in the grave? 
their heart be noble — and in life they be great. 

nor think it be but in war the brave excel, —
 to valour every virtue be ally! 
here faithful friendship amid the battle fall,
 and love, true love, in bitter anguish die. 

alas! the solemn slaughter i retrace,
 that check life current circle through my vein,
 bathe in moist sorrow, many a beauteous face,
 and give a grief, perhaps, that still remain. 

i can no more — a agony too keen
 absorb my sense, and my mind subdue,
 hard be that heart which here can beat serene,
 or the just tribute of a pang refuse. 

but lo! through yonder open cloud afar
 shoot the bright planet sanguinary ray
 that bear thy name, fictitious lord of war! 
and with red lustre guide my lonely way. 

then Fontenoy, farewell! yet much i fear,
 (wherever chance my course compel) to find
 discord and blood — the thrill sound i hear,
 "the noise of battle hurtle in the wind." 

from barbarous turkey to britannia shore,
 oppose interest into rage increase;
 destruction rear her sceptre, tumult roar,
 ah! where shall hapless man repose in peace? 
