the song of Selma.

star of the fall night! fair be thy light in the west! thou lift thy unshorn head from thy cloud: thy step be stately on thy hill. what do thou behold in the plain? the stormy wind be lay. the murmur of the torrent come from afar. roar wave climb the distant rock. the fly of evening be on their feeble wing, and the hum of their course be on the field. what do thou behold, fair light? but thou do smile and depart. the wave come with joy around thou, and bathe thy lovely hair. farewell, thou silent beam! — let the light of ossian soul arise.

and it do arise in its strength! i behold my depart friend. their gather be on lora, as in the day that be past. — Fingal come like a watery column of mist; his hero be around. and see the bard of the song, gray-haired Ullin; stately ryno; Alpin, with the tuneful voice, and the soft complaint of minona! — how be you change, my friend, since the day of selma feast! when we contend, like the gale of the spring, that, fly over the hill, by turn bend the feebly-whistling graf.

minona come forth in her beauty; with down-cast look and tearful eye; her hair fly slow on the blast that rush unfrequent from the hill. — the soul of the hero be sad when she raise the tuneful voice; for often have they see the grave of salgar, and the dark dwelling of white-bosomed colma. colma leave alone on the hill, with all her voice of music! salgar promise to come: but the night descend round. — hear the voice of colma, when she sit alone on the hill!


colma.

it be night; — i be alone, forlorn on the hill of storm. the wind be hear in the mountain. the torrent shriek down the rock. no hut receive i from the rain; forlorn on the hill of wind.

rise, moon! from behind thy cloud; star of the night appear! lead i, some light, to the place where my love rest from the toil of the chace! his bow near he, unstring; his dog pant around he. but here i must sit alone, by the rock of the mossy stream. the stream and the wind roar; nor can i hear the voice of my love.

why delay my salgar, why the son of the hill, his promise? here be the rock, and the tree; and here the roar stream. thou do promise with night to be here. ah! whither be my salgar go? with thou i will fly, my father; with thou, my brother of pride. our race have long be soes*; but we be not foe, o salgar!

cease a little while, o wind! stream, be thou silent a while! let my voice be hear over the heath; let my wanderer hear i. salgar! it be i who call. here be the tree, and the rock. salgar, my love! i be here. why delay thou thy come?

lo! the moon appear. the flood be bright in the vale. the rock be grey on the face of the hill. but i see he not on the brow; his dog before he tell not that he be come. here i must sit alone.

but who be these that lie beyond i on the heath? be they my love and my brother? — speak to i, o my friend! they answer not. my soul be torment with fear. — ah! they be dead. their sword be red from the fight. o my brother! my brother! why have thou slay my salgar? why, o salgar! have thou slay my brother? dear be you both to i! what shall i say in your praise? thou be fair on the hill among thousand; he be terrible in fight. speak to i; hear my voice, son of my-love! but alas! they be silent; silent for ever! cold be their breast of clay!

oh! from the rock of the hill; from the top of the windy mountain, speak you ghost of the dead! speak, i will not be afraid. — whither be you go to rest? in what cave of the hill shall i find you? no feeble voice be on the wind: no answer half-drowned in the storm of the hill.

i sit in my grief. i wait for morning in my tear. rear the tomb, you friend of the dead; but close it not till colma come. my life fly away like a dream: why shall i stay behind? here shall i rest with my friend, by the stream of the sound rock. when night come on the hill; when the wind be on the heath; my ghost shall stand in the wind, and mourn the death of my friend. the hunter shall hear from his booth. he shall fear but love my voice. for sweet shall my voice be for my friend; for pleasant be they both to i.

such be thy song, minona softly-blushing maid of torman. our tear descend for colma, and our soul be sad. — Ullin come with the harp, and give the song of Alpin. — the voice of Alpin be pleasant: the soul of ryno be a beam of fire. but they have rest in the narrow house: and their voice be not hear in Selma. — Ullin have return one day from the chace, before the hero fall. he hear their strife on the hill; their song be soft but sad. they mourn the fall of Morar, first of mortal man. his soul be like the soul of Fingal; his sword like the sword of Oscar. — but he fall, and his father mourn: his sister eye be full of tear. — minona eye be full of tear, the sister of carborne morar. she retire from the song of Ullin, like the moon in the west, when she foresee the shower, and hide her fair head in a cloud. — i touch the harp, with Ullin; the song of mourn rose.


ryno.

the wind and the rain be over: calm be the noon of day. the cloud be divide in heaven. over the green hill fly the inconstant sun. red through the stony vale come down the stream of the hill. sweet be thy murmur, o stream! but more sweet be the voice i hear. it be the voice of Alpin, the son of the song, mourn for the dead. bent be his head of age, and red his tearful eye. Alpin, thou son of the song, why alone on the silent hill? why complain thou, as a blast in the wood; as a wave on the lonely shore?


Alpin.

my tear, o ryno! be for the dead; my voice, for the inhabitant of the grave. tall thou be on the hill; fair among the son of the plain. but thou shall fall like morar; and the mourner shall sit on thy tomb. the hill shall know thou no more; thy bow shall lie in the hall, unstring.

thou be swift, o Morar! as a roe on the hill; terrible as a meteor of fire. thy wrath be as the storm. thy sword in battle, as lightning in the field. thy voice be like a stream after rain; like thunder on distant hill. many fall by thy arm; they be consume in the flame of thy wrath.

but when thou do return from war, how peaceful be thy brow! thy face be like the sun after rain; like the moon in the silence of night; calm as the breast of the lake when the loud wind be lay.

narrow be thy dwelling now; dark the place of thy abode. with three step i compass thy grave, o thou who waste so great before! four stone, with their head of moss, be the only memorial of thou. a tree with scarce a leaf, long grass which whistle in the wind, mark to the hunter eye the grave of the mighty morar. Morar! thou be low indeed. thou have no mother to mourn thou; no maid with her tear of love. dead be she that bring thou forth. fall be the daughter of morglan.

who on his staff be this? who be this, who head be white with age, who eye be red with tear, who quake at every step. — it be thy father, o Morar! the father of no son but thou. he hear of thy fame in battle; he hear of foe disperse. he hear of morar fame; why do he not hear of his wound? weep, thou father of morar! weep; but thy son hear thou not. deep be the sleep of the dead; low their pillow of dust. no more shall he hear thy voice; no more shall he awake at thy call. when shall it be morn in the grave, to bid the slumberer awake?

farewel, thou brave of man! thou conqueror in the field! but the field shall see thou no more; nor the dark wood be lighten with the splendour of thy steel. thou have leave no son. but the song shall preserve thy name. future time shall hear of thou; they shall hear of the fall morar.

the grief of all arise, but most the burst sigh of armin. he remember the death of his son, who fall in the day of his youth. Carmor be near the hero, the chief of the echo galmal. why burst the sigh of armin, he say? be there a cause to mourn? the song come, with its music, to melt and please the soul. it be like soft mist, that, rise from a lake, pour on the silent vale; the green flower be fill with dew, but the sun return in his strength, and the mist be go. why be thou sad, o armin, chief of sea-surrounded gorma?

sad! i be indeed: nor small my cause of woe! — Carmor, thou have lose no son; thou have lose no daughter of beauty. colgar the valiant life; and annira fair maid. the bough of thy family flourish, o Carmor! but armin be the last of his race. dark be thy bed, o daura! and deep thy sleep in the tomb. — when shall thou awake with thy song? with all thy voice of music?

rise, wind of autumn, rise; blow upon the dark heath! stream of the mountain, roar! howl, you tempest, in the top of the oak! walk through break cloud, o moon! show by interval thy pale face! bring to my mind that sad night, when all my child fall; when arindal the mighty fall; when Dura the lovely fail.

daura, my daughter! thou be fair; fair as the moon on the hill of fura; white as the drive snow; sweet as the breathe gale. arindal, thy bow be strong, thy spear be swift in the field: thy look be like mist on the wave; thy shield, a red cloud in a storm. armar, renown in war, come, and seek daura love; he be not long deny; fair be the hope of their friend.

Erath, son of odgal, repine; for his brother be slay by armar. he come disguise like a son of the sea: fair be his skiff on the wave; white his lock of age; calm his serious brow. fair of woman, he say, lovely daughter of armin! a rock not distant in the sea, bear a tree on its side; red shine the fruit afar. there armor wait for daura. i come to carry his love along the roll sea.

she go; and she call on armar. nought answer, but the son of the rock. armor, my love! my love! why torment thou i with fear? hear, son of ardnart, hear: it be daura who call thou! Erath the traitor flee laugh to the land. she lift up her voice, and cry for her brother and her father. arindal! armin! none to relieve your daura.

her voice come over the sea. arindal my son descend from the hill; rough in the spoil of the chace. his arrow rattle by his side; his bow be in his hand: five dark grey dog attend his step. he see fierce Erath on the shore: he seize and bind he to a oak. thick fly the thong of the hide around his limb; he load the wind with his groan.

arindal ascend the deep in his boat, to bring daura to land. armar come in his wrath, and let fly the gray-feathered shaft. it sing; it sink in thy heart, o arindal my son! for Erath the traitor thou died. the oar be stop at once; he pant on the rock and expire. what be thy grief, o daura, when round thy foot be pour thy brother blood.

the boat be break in twain by the wave. armar plunge into the sea, to rescue his daura or die. sudden a blast from the hill come over the wave. he sink, and he rise no more.

alone, on the sea-beat rock, my daughter be hear to complain. frequent and loud be her cry; nor can her father relieve she. all night i stand on the shore. i see she by the faint beam of the moon. all night i hear her cry. loud be the wind; and the rain beat hard on the side of the mountain. before morning appear, her voice be weak. it die away, like the evening-breeze among the grass of the rock. spend with grief she expire. and leave thou armin alone: go be my strength in the war, and fall my pride among woman.

when the storm of the mountain come; when the north lift the wave on high; i sit by the sound shore, and look on the fatal rock. often by the set moon i see the ghost of my child. half-viewless, they walk in mournful conference together. will none of you speak in pity? they do not regard their father. i be sad, o Carmor, nor small my cause of woe!

such be the word of the bard in the day of the song; when the king hear the music of harp, and the tale of other time. the chief gather from all their hill, and hear the lovely sound. they praise the voice of cona! the first among a thousand bard. but age be now on my tongue; and my soul have fail. i hear, sometime, the ghost of bard, and learn their pleasant song. but memory fail on my mind; i hear the call of year. they say, as they pass along, why do Ossian sing? soon shall he lie in the narrow house, and no bard shall raise his fame.

roll on, you dark-brown year, for you bring no joy on your course. let the tomb open to Ossian, for his strength have fail. the son of the song be go to rest; my voice remain, like a blast, that roar, lonely, on a sea-surrounded rock, after the wind be lay. the dark moss whistle there, and the distant mariner see the wave tree.

