the grave.

a poem.

while some affect the sun, and some the shade,
some flee the city, some the hermitage;
their aim as various, as the road they take
in journey through life; the task be mine
to paint the gloomy horror of the tomb;
appoint place of rendezvous, where all
these traveller meet. thy succour i implore,
eternal king! who potent arm sustain
the key of hell and death. the grave, dread thing!
man shiver, when thou be name: nature appal
shake off her wonted firmness. ah! how dark
thy long-extended realm, and rueful waste!
where nought but silence reign, and night, dark night,
dark as be chaos, here the infant sun
be roll together, or have try his beam
athwart the gloom profound! the sickly taper
by glimmer through thy low-browed misty vault,
(fur round with mouldy damp, and ropy slime,)
let fall a supernumerary horror,
and only serve to make thy night more irksome.
well do i know thou by thy trusty yew,
cheerless, unsocial plant! that love to dwell
'midst sculls and coffin, epitaph and worm:
where light-heeled ghost, and visionary shade,
beneath the wan cold moon (as fame report)
embody thick, perform their mystic round.
no other merriment, dull tree! be thy.

see yonder hallow Fane! the pious work
of name once fame, now dubious or forget,
and bury amid the wreck of thing which be:
there lie inter the more illustrious dead.
the wind be up: hark! how it howl! methinks
till now, i never hear a sound so dreary:
door creak, and window clap, and night foul bird
rooked in the spire scream loud: the gloomy isle
black-plastered, and hang round with shred of 'scutcheon
and tatter coat of arm, send back the sound
load with heavy air, from the low vault
the mansion of the dead. rouse from their slumber
in grim array the grizzly spectre rise,
grin horrible, and obstinate sullen
pass and repass, hush as the foot of night.
again! the screech-owl shriek: ungracious sound!
i will hear no more, it make one blood run chill.

quite round the pile, a row of reverend elm,
coæval near with that, all ragged show,
long lash by the rude wind: some rift half down
their branchless trunk: other so thin a top,
that scarce two crow can lodge in the same tree.
strange thing, the neighbour say, have happen here:
wild shriek have issue from the hollow tomb,
dead man have come again, and walk about,
and the great bell have toll, unrung, untouched.
(such tale their cheer, at wake or gossip,
when it draw near to witch time of night.)

oft, in the lone church-yard at night i have see
by glimpse of moonshine, chequer through the tree,
the school-boy with his satchel in his hand,
whistle aloud to bear his courage up,
and light trip over the long flat stone
(with nettle skirt, and with moss overgrow,)
that tell in homely phrase who lie below;
sudden! he start, and hear, or think he hear
the sound of something purr at his heel:
full fast he fly, and dare not look behind he,
until out of breath he overtake his fellow;
who gather round, and wonder at the tale
of horrid apparition, tall and ghastly,
that walk at dead of night, or take his stand
over some new-opened grave; and, strange to tell!
evanish at crow of the cock.

the new-made widow too, i have sometime spy,
sad sight! slow move over the prostrate dead:
listless, she crawl along in doleful black,
while burst of sorrow gush from either eye,
fast-falling down her new untasted cheek.
prone on the lowly grave of the dear man
she drop; while busy-meddling memory,
in barbarous succession, muster up
the past endearment of their soft hour,
tenacious of its theme. still, still she think
she see he, and indulge the fond thought,
cling yet more close to the senseless turf,
nor heed the passenger who look that way.

invidious grave! how do thou rend in sunder
who love have knit, and sympathy make one;
a tie more stubborn far than nature band!
friendship! mysterious cement of the soul!
sweetener of life! and solder of society!
i owe thou much. thou have deserve from i,
far, far beyond what i can ever pay.
oft have i prove the labour of thy love,
and the warm effort of the gentle heart
anxious to please. oh! when my friend and i
in some thick wood have wander heedless on,
hide from the vulgar eye; and sit we down
upon the slope cowslip-covered bank,
where the pure limpid stream have slide along
in grateful error through the underwood
sweet-murmuring: methinks! the shrill-tongued thrush
mend his song of love; the sooty blackbird
mellow his pipe, and soften every note:
the eglantine smell sweet, and the rose
assume a dye more deep; while every flower
vie with its fellow-plant in luxury
of dress. oh! then the long summer day
seem too, too much in haste: still the full heart
have not impart half: it be happiness
too exquisite to last. of joy depart
not to return, how painful the remembrance!

dull grave! thou spoil the dance of youthful blood,
strike out the dimple from the cheek of mirth,
and every smirk feature from the face;
brand our laughter with the name of madness.
where be the jester now? the man of health
complexional pleasant? where the droll?
who every look and gesture be a joke
to clap theatre and shout croud,
and make even thick-liped muse melancholy
to gather up her face into a smile
before she be aware? ah! sullen now,
and dumb, as the green turf that cover they!

where be the mighty thunderbolt of war?
the roman Cæsars, and the græcian chief,
the boast of story? where the hot-brained youth?
who the tiara at his pleasure tear
from king of all the then discover globe;
and cry forsooth, because his arm be hamper,
and have not room enough to do it be work?
alas! how slim, dishonourable slim!
and cram into a space we blush to name.
proud royalty! how alter in thy look?
how blank thy feature, and how wan thy hue?
son of the morning! whither be thou go?
where have thou hide thy many-spangled head,
and the majestic menace of thy eye
feel from afar? pliant and powerless now,
like new-born infant wind up in his swathe,
or victim tumble flat upon its back,
that throb beneath the sacrificer knife:
mute, must thou bear the strife of little tongue,
and coward insult of the baseborn crowd;
that grudge a privilege, thou never have,
but only hope for in the peaceful grave,
of be unmolested and alone.
arabia gum and odoriferous drug,
and honour by the herald due pay
in mode and form, even to a very scruple;
oh cruel irony! these come too late;
and only mock, who they be mean to honour.
sure! there be not a dungeon-slave, that be bury
in the highway, unshrouded and uncoffine,
but lie as soft, and sleep as sound as he.
sorry preeminence of high descent
above the vulgar-born, to rot in state!

but see! the well-plumed Herse come nod on,
stately and slow; and proper attend
by the whole sable tribe, that painful watch
the sick man door, and live upon the dead,
by let out their person by the hour
to mimic sorrow, when the heart be not sad.
how rich the trappings, now they be all unfurled,
and glitter in the sun! triumphant entry
of conqueror, and coronation pomp,
in glory scarce exceed. great glut of people
retard unwieldy show; while from the casement
and house top, rank behind rank close-wedged
hang belly over. but! tell we, why this waste?
why this ado in earthing up a carcase
that be fall into disgrace, and in the nostril
smell horrible? you undertaker! tell we,
amid all the gorgeous figure you exhibit,
why be the principal conceal, for which
you make this mighty stir? it be wise do:
what will offend the eye in a good picture
the painter cast discreet into shade.

proud lineage! now how little thou appear!
below the envy of the private man!
honour! that meddlesome officious ill,
pursue thou even to death; nor there stop short.
strange persecution! when the grave itself
be no protection from rude sufferance.

absurd! to think to overreach the grave,
and from the wreck of name to rescue we!
the best concert scheme man lay for fame
die fast away: only themselves die fast.
the far-famed sculptor, and the laurelled bard,
those bold insurancer of deathless fame,
supply their little feeble aid in vain.
the taper pyramid! theegyptian pride,
and wonder of the world! who spiky top
have wound the thick cloud, and long outlive
the angry shake of the winter storm;
yet spend at last by th'injury of heaven,
shatter with age, and furrow over with year,
the mystic cone, with hieroglyphic crust,
give way. oh! lamentable sight! at once
the labour of whole age lumber down;
a hideous and mishapen length of ruin.
sepulchral column wrestle but in vain
with all-subduing time: her canker hand
with calm deliberate malice waste they:
wear on the edge of day, the brass consume,
the busto moulder, and the deep-cut marble,
unsteady to the steel, give up its charge.
ambition! half convict of her folly,
hang down the head, and redden at the tale.

here! all the mighty troubler of the earth,
who swim to sovereign rule through sea of blood;
th'oppressive, sturdy, man-destroying villain!
who ravage kingdom, and lay empire waste;
and, in a cruel wantonness of power,
thin state of half their people, and give up
to want the rest: now like a storm that be spend,
lye hush, and mean sneak behind thy covert.
vain thought! to hide they from the general scorn,
that haunt and dog they like a injure ghost
implacable. here too the petty tyrant
of scant domain geographer never notice,
and well for neighbour ground, of arm as short;
who fix his iron talon on the poor,
and gripe they like some lordly beast of prey;
deaf to the forceful cry of gnaw hunger,
and piteous plaintive voice of misery:
(as if a slave be not a shred of nature,
of the same common nature with his lord:)
now! tame and humble, like a child that be whip,
shake hand with dust, and call the worm his kinsman;
nor plead his rank and birthright. under ground
precedency a jest; vassal and lord
gross familiar, side by side consume.

when self-esteem, or other adulation,
will cunning persuade we we be something
above the common level of our kind;
the grave gainsay the smooth-complexioned flattery,
and with blunt truth acquaint we what we be.

beauty! thou pretty plaything! dear deceit!
that steal so soft over the stripling heart,
and give it a new pulse, unknown before!
the grave discredit thou: thy charm expunge,
thy rose fade, and thy lily soil;
what have thou more to boast of? will thy lover
flock round thou now, to gaze and do thou homage?
methinks! i see thou with thy head low lay;
while, surfeit upon thy damask cheek,
the high-fed worm, in lazy volume roll,
riot unscared. for this, be all thy caution?
for this, thy painful labour at thy glass?
to improve those charm, and keep they in repair,
for which the spoiler thank thou not. foul-feeder!
coarse fare and carrion please thou full as well,
and leave as keen a relish on the sense.
look! how the fair one weep! the conscious tear
stand thick as dew-drop on the bell of flower:
honest effusion! the swell heart in vain
work hard to put a gloss on its distress.

strength too! thou surly, and less gentle boast
of those that laugh loud at the village-ring!
a fit of common sickness pull thou down
with great ease, than ever thou do the stripling
that rash dare thou to the unequal fight.
what groan be that i hear? deep groan indeed!
with anguish heavy-laden! let i trace it:
from yonder bed it come, where the strong man,
by strong arm belabour, gasp for breath
like a hard-hunted beast. how his great heart
beat thick! his roomy chest by far too scant
to give the lung full play! what now avail
the strong-built sinewy limb, and well-spread shoulder?
see! how he tug for life, and lay about he,
mad with his pain! eager he catch hold
of what come next to hand, and grasp it hard,
just like a creature drown! hideous sight!
oh! how his eye stand out, and stare full ghastly!
while the distemper rank and deadly venom
shoot like a burn arrow cross his bowel,
and drink his marrow up. hear you that groan?
it be his last. see how the great Goliah,
just like a child that brawl itself to rest,
lie still. what mean thou then, o mighty boaster!
to vaunt of nerve not thy? what mean the bull,
unconscious of his strength, to play the coward,
and flee before a feeble thing like man;
that know well the slackness of his arm,
trust only in the well-invented knife?

with study pale, and midnight vigil spend,
the star-surveying sage, close to his eye
apply the sight-invigorating tube;
and travel through the boundless length of space
mark well the course of the far-seen orb,
that roll with regular confusion there,
in ecstasy of thought. but ah! proud man!
great height be hazardous to the weak head:
soon, very soon, thy firm footing fail;
and down thou dropp into that darksome place,
where nor device, nor knowledge ever come.

here! the tongue-warrior lie, disable now,
disarm, dishonour, like a wretch that be gag,
and can tell his ail to passer by.
great man of language! whence this mighty change?
this dumb despair, and droop of the head?
though strong persuasion hang upon thy lip,
and sly insinuation soft art
in ambush lie about thy flow tongue;
alas! how chop-fallen now? thick mist and silence
rest, like a weary cloud, upon thy breast
unceasing. ah! where be the lift arm,
the strength of action, and the force of word,
the well-turned period, and the well-tuned voice,
with all the less ornament of phrase?
ah! flee for ever, as they never have be!
raze from the book of fame: or more provoke,
perchance some hackney hunger-bitten scribbler
insult thy memory, and blot thy tomb
with long flat narrative, or dull rhime
with heavy-halting pace that drawl along;
enough to rouse a dead man into rage,
and warm with red resentment the wan cheek.

here! the great master of the heal art,
these mighty mock-defrauders of the tomb!
spite of their julep and catholicon
resign to fate. proud æsculapius son!
where be thy boast implement of art,
and all thy well-crammed magazine of health?
nor hill, nor vale, as far as ship can go,
nor margin of the gravel-bottomed brook,
escape thy rifle hand: from stubborn shrub
thou wrung their shy retire virtue out,
and vex they in the fire: nor fly, nor insect,
nor writhy snake, escape thy deep research.
but why this apparatus? why this cost?
tell we, thou doughty keeper from the grave!
where be thy recipe and cordial now,
with the long list of voucher for thy cure?
alas! thou speak not. the bold impostor
look not more silly when the cheat find out.

here! the lank-sided miser, worst of felons!
who mean steal, discreditable shift!
from back and belly too, their proper cheer;
ease of a tax, it irk the wretch to pay
to his own carcase, now lie cheap lodge,
by clamorous appetite no long tease,
nor tedious bill of charge and repair.
but ah! where be his rent, his come in?
ay! now you have make the rich man poor indeed:
rob of his god, what have he leave behind!
oh! curse lust of gold! when for thy sake
the fool throw up his interest in both world,
first starve in this, then damn in that to come.

how shock must thy summons be, o death!
to he that be at ease in his possession;
who count on long year of pleasure here,
be quite unfurnished for that world to come!
in that dread moment, how the frantic soul
rave round the wall of her clay tenement,
run to each avenue, and shriek for help,
but shriek in vain! how wishful she look
on all she be leave, now no long she!
a little long, yet a little long,
oh! may she stay, to wash away her stain,
and fit she for her passage! mournful sight!
her very eye weep blood; and every groan
she heave be big with horror: but the foe,
like a stanch murderer steady to his purpose,
pursue she close through every lane of life,
nor miss once the track, but press on;
till force at last to the tremendous verge,
at once she sink to everlasting ruin.

sure! it be a serious thing to die! my soul!
what a strange moment must it be, when near
thy journey end, thou have the gulf in view!
that awful gulf, no mortal ever repass
to tell what be do on the other side!
nature run back, and shudder at the sight,
and every life-string bleed at thought of part!
for part they must: body and soul must part;
fond couple! link more close than wed pair.
this wing its way to its almighty source,
the witness of its action, now its judge:
that drop into the dark and noisome grave,
like a disable pitcher of no use.

if death be nothing, and nought, after death;
if when man die, at once they cease to be,
return to the barren womb of nothing
whence first they spring; then may the debauchee
untremble mouth the heaven: then may the drunkard
reel over his full bowl, and when it be drain,
fill up another to the brim, and laugh
at the poor bugbear death: then may the wretch
that be weary of the world, and tire of life,
at once give each inquietude the slip
by steal out of be, when he please,
and by what way; whether by hemp, or steel:
death thousand door stand open. who can force
the ill-pleased guest to sit out his full time,
or blame he if he go? sure! he do well
that help himself as timely as he can,
when able. but if there be a hereafter,
and that there be, conscience, uninfluenced
and suffer to speak out, tell every man;
then must it be a awful thing to die:
more horrid yet, to die by one own hand.
self-murther! name it not: our island shame!
that make she the reproach of neighbour state.
shall nature, swerve from her early dictate
self-preservation, fall by her own act?
forbid it heaven! let not upon disgust
the shameless hand be foul crimson over
with blood of its own lord. dreadful attempt!
just reek from self-slaughter, in a rage
to rush into the presence of our judge!
as if we challenge he to do his worst,
and matter not his wrath. unheard of torture
must be reserve for such: these herd together;
the common damn shun their society,
and look upon themselves as fiend less foul.
our time be fix, and all our day be number;
how long, how short, we know not: this we know,
duty require we calm wait the summons,
nor dare to stir until heaven shall give permission:
like centry that must keep their destine stand,
and wait appoint hour, until they be relieve.
those only be the brave, that keep their ground,
and keep it to the last. to run away
be but a coward trick: to run away
from this world ill, that at the very worst
will soon blow over, think to mend ourselves
by bold venture on a world unknown,
and plunge headlong in the dark; it be mad:
no frenzy half so desperate as this.

tell we! the dead! will none of you, in pity
to those you leave behind, disclose the secret?
oh! that some courteous ghost will blab it out!
what it be you be, and we must short be.
i have hear, that soul depart have sometime
forewarn man of their death: it be kind do
to knock, and give th'alarum. but what mean
this stint charity? it be but lame kindness
that do its work by half. why may you not
tell we what it be to die? do the strict law
of your society forbid your speak
upon a point so nice? i will ask no more;
sullen, like lamp in sepulchre, your shine
enlighten but yourself: well, — it be no matter;
a very little time will clear up all,
and make we learn as you be, and as close.

death shaft fly thick! here fall the village Swain,
and there his pamper lord! the cup go round;
and who so artful as to put it by?
it be long since death have the majority;
yet strange! the live lay it not to heart.
see! yonder maker of the dead man bed,
the sexton! hoaryheaded chronicle,
of hard unmeaning face, down which never steal
a gentle tear; with Mattock in his hand
dig through whole row of kindred and acquaintance,
by far his junior! scarce a scull cast up,
but well he know its owner, and can tell
some passage of his life. thus hand in hand
the sot have walk with death twice twenty year;
and yet never yonker on the green laugh loud,
or club a smutty tale: when drunkard meet
none sing a merry catch, or lend a hand
more will to his cup. poor wretch! he mind not,
that soon some trusty brother of the trade
shall do for he what he have do for thousand.

on this side, and on that, man see their friend
drop off, like leaf in autumn; yet launch out
into fantastic scheme, which the long liver,
in the world hale and undergenerate day,
can scarce have leisure for! fool that we be!
never to think of death, and of ourselves
at the same time! as if to learn to die
be no concern of we. oh! more than sottish!
for creature of a day, in gamesome mood
to frolick on eternity dread brink,
unapprehensive; when for ought we know
the very first swell surge shall sweep we in.
think we, or think we not, time hurry on
with a resistless unremitting stream,
yet tread more soft than ever do midnight thief,
that slide his hand under the miser pillow,
and carry off his prize. what be this world?
what? but a spacious burial-field unwalled,
strew with death spoil, the spoil of animal
savage and tame, and full of dead men bone?
the very turf on which we tread, once live;
and we that live must lend our carcase
to cover our own offspring: in their turn
they too must cover they. it be here all meet!
the shiver Icelander, and sun-burnt moor;
man of all clime, that never meet before;
and of all creed, the Jew, the Turk, and christian.
here the proud prince, and favourite yet proud,
his sovereign keeper, and the people scourge,
be huddle out of sight. here lie abash
the great negotiator of the earth,
and celebrate master of the Ballance,
deep read in stratagem, and wile of court:
now vain their treaty-skill! death scorn to treat.
here the overloaded slave fling down his burden
from his gall shoulder; and when the cruel tyrant
with all his guard and tool of power about he,
be meditate new unheard-of hardship,
mock his short arm, and quick as thought escape
where tyrant vex not, and the weary rest.
here the warm lover leave the cool shade,
the telltale echo, and the babble stream,
time out of mind the favourite seat of love,
fast by his gentle mistress lie he down
unblasted by foul tongue. here friend and foe
lie close; unmindful of their former feud.
the lawn-robed prelate, and plain presbyter,
ever while that stand aloof, as shy to meet,
familiar mingle here, like sister-stream
that some rude interpose rock have split.
here be the large-limbed peasant: here the child
of a span long, that never see the sun,
nor press the nipple, strangle in life porch.
here be the mother with her son and daughter;
the barren wife; and long demur maid,
who lonely unappropriated sweet
smile like yond knot of cowslip on the cliff,
not to be come at by the will hand.
here be the prude severe, and gay Coquet,
the sober widow, and the young green virgin,
crop like a rose, before it be full blow,
or half its worth disclose. strange medley here!
here garrulous old age wind up his tale;
and jovial youth of lightsome vacant heart,
who every day be make of melody,
hear not the voice of mirth: the shrill-tongued shrew,
meek as the turtledove, forget her chide.
here be the wise, the generous, and the brave;
the just, the good, the worthless, the profane,
the downright clown, and perfect wellbred;
the fool, the churl, the scoundrel, and the mean,
the supple statesman, and the patriot stern;
the wreck of nation, and the spoil of time,
with all the lumber of six thousand year.

poor man! how happy once in thy first state!
when yet but warm from thy great maker hand,
he stamp thou with his image, and well please
smile on his last fair work. then all be well.
sound be the body, and the soul serene;
like two sweet instrument never out of tune,
that play their several part. nor head, nor heart,
offer to ache: nor be there cause they shall;
for all be pure within: no fell remorse,
nor anxious Castings up of what may be,
alarm his peaceful bosom: summer sea
show not more smooth, when kiss by southern wind
just ready to expire. scarce importune
the generous soil with a luxuriant hand
offer the various produce of the year,
and every thing most perfect in its kind.
bless! thrice bless day! but ah, how short!
bless as the please dream of holy man;
but fugitive like those, and quick go.
oh! slippery state of thing! what sudden turn?
what strange vicissitude, in the first leaf
of man sad history? today most happy,
and here to morrow sun have set, most abject!
how scant the space between these vast extreme!
thus fare it with our sire: not long he enjoy
his paradise! scarce have the happy tenant
of the fair spot due time to prove its sweet,
or sum they up; when strait he must be go
never to return again. and must he go?
can nought compound for the first dire offence
of err man? like one that be condemn
fain will he trifle time with idle talk,
and parley with his fate. but it be in vain.
not all the lavish odour of the place
offer in incense can procure his pardon,
or mitigate his doom. a mighty angel
with flame sword forbid his long stay,
and drive the loiterer forth; nor must he take
one last and farewell round. at once he lose
his glory and his god. if mortal now,
and sore maim, no wonder! man have sin.
sick of his bliss, and bend on new adventure,
evil he will needs try: nor try in vain.
(dreadful experiment! destructive measure!
where the worst thing can happen, be success.)
alas! too well he speed: the good he scorn
retire reluctant, like a ill-used ghost,
not to return; or if it do, its visit
like those of angel short, and far between:
while the black Dæmon with his hell-escaped train,
admit once into its better room,
grow loud and mutinous, nor will be go;
lord it over the man, who now too late
see the rash error, which he can not mend:
a error fatal not to he alone,
but to his future son, his Fortune heir.
inglorious bondage! human nature groan
beneath a vassalage so vile and cruel,
and its vast body bleed through every vein.

what havoc have thou make? foul monster sin!
great and first of ill! the fruitful parent
of woe of all dimension! but for thou
sorrow have never be. all noxious thing!
of vile nature! other sort of evil
be kind circumscribe and have their bound.
the fierce volcano, from its burn entrails
that belch melt stone and globe of fire,
involve in pitchy cloud of smoke and stench,
Marrs the adjacent field for some league round,
and there it stop. the big-swollen inundation,
of mischief more diffusive, rave loud,
bury whole tract of country, threaten more;
but that too have its shore it can pass.
more dreadful far than these! sin have lay waste
not here and there a country, but a world:
dispatch at a wide extend blow
entire mankind; and for their sake deface
a whole creation beauty with rude hand;
blast the foodful grain, the load branch,
and mark all along its way with ruin.
accurse thing! oh, where shall fancy find
a proper name to call thou by, expressive
of all thy horror? pregnant womb of ill!
of temper so transcendent malign,
that toad and serpent of most deadly kind
compare to thou be harmless. sickness
of every size and symptom, rack pain,
and blue plague, be thy! see! how the fiend
profuse scatter the contagion round!
while deepmouthed slaughter bellow at her heel
wade deep in blood new-spilt; yet for tomorrow
shape out new work of great uncommon dare,
and inly pine until the dread blow be strike.

but hold! i have go too far; too much discover
my father nakedness, and nature shame.
here let i pause! and drop a honest tear,
one burst of filial duty, and condolence,
over all those ample desert death have spread,
this chaos of mankind. o great man-eater!
who every day be carnival, not sate yet!
unheard of epicure! without a fellow!
the very glutton do not always cram;
some interval of abstinence be seek
to edge the appetite: thou seek none.
methinks! the countless swarm thou have devour,
and thousand that each hour thou gobble up;
this, less than this, may gorge thou to the full!
but ah! rapacious still, thou gape for more:
like one, whole day defraud of his meal,
on who lank hunger lay her skinny hand,
and whet to keen eagerness his crave.
(as if disease, massacree, and poison,
famine, and war, be not thy caterer!)

but know! that thou must render up thy dead,
and with high interest too? they be not thy;
but only in thy keep for a season,
until the great promise day of restitution;
when loud diffusive sound from brazen trump
of strong-lunged cherub shall alarm thy captive,
and rouse the long, long sleeper into life,
day-light, and liberty. ——————
then must thy gate fly open, and reveal
the mine, that lie long form under ground,
in their dark cell immure; but now full ripe,
and pure as silver from the crucible,
that twice have stand the torture of the fire,
and inquisition of the forge. we know,
the illustrious deliverer of mankind,
the son of god, thou foil. he in thy power
thou can not hold: self-vigorous he rise,
and, shake off thy fetter, soon retake
those spoil, his voluntary yield lent.
(sure pledge of our releasement from thy thrall!)
twice twenty day he sojourn here on earth,
and show himself alive to choose witness
by proof so strong, that the most slow-assenting
have not a scruple leave. this have do,
he mount up to heaven. methinks! i see he
climb the aerial height, and glide along
athwart the sever cloud: but the faint eye
fling backward in the chace, soon drop its hold;
disable quite, and jade with pursue.
heaven portal wide expand to let he in;
nor be his friend shut out: as some great prince
not for himself alone procure admission,
but for his train: it be his royal will,
that where he be, there shall his follower be.
death only lie between! a gloomy path!
make yet more gloomy by our coward fear!
but nor untrod, nor tedious: the fatigue
will soon go off. beside, there be no by-road
to bliss. then why, like ill-conditioned child,
start we at transient hardship, in the way
that lead to pure air, and soft sky,
and a never set sun? fool that we be!
we wish to be, where sweet unwithering bloom;
but strait our wish revoke, and will not go.
so have i see upon a summer even,
fast by the riv'let's brink, a youngster play:
how wishful he look! to stem the tide
this moment resolute, next unresolved:
at last! he dip his foot; but as he dip,
his fear redouble, and he run away
from inoffensive stream, unmindful now
of all the flower, that paint the further bank,
and smile so sweet of late. thrice welcome death!
that after many a painful bleed step
conduct we to our home, and land we safe
on the long-wished for shore. prodigious change!
our bane turn to a bless! death disarm
lose her fullness quite: all thanks to he
who scourge the venom out. sure! the last end
of the good man be peace. how calm his exit!
night-dew fall not more gentle to the ground,
nor weary worn-out wind expire so soft.
behold he! in the evening-tide of life,
a life well-spent, who early care it be
his riper year shall not upbraid his green:
by unperceived degree he wear away;
yet like the sun seem large at his set!
high in his faith and hope, look! how he reach
after the prize in view! and, like a bird
that be hamper struggle hard to get away!
while the glad gate of sight be wide expand
to let new glory in, the first fair fruit
of the fast-coming harvest. then! oh then!
each earth-born joy grow vile, or disappear,
shrink to a thing of nought. oh! how he long
to have have passport sign, and be dismiss!
it be do; and now he be happy: the glad soul
have not a wish uncrowned. even the lag flesh
rest too in hope of meeting once again
its better half, never to sunder more.
nor shall it hope in vain: the time draw on
when not a single spot of burial-earth,
whether on land, or in the spacious sea,
but must give back its long-committed dust
inviolate: and faithful shall these
make up the full account; not the least atom
embezzle, or mislay, of the whole tale.
each soul shall have a body ready furnish;
and each shall have his own. hence you profane!
ask not, how this can be? sure the same power
that rear the piece at first, and take it down,
can reassemble the loose scatter part,
and put they as they be. almighty god
have do much more; nor be his arm impair
through length of day: and what he can, he will:
he faithfulness stand bind to see it do.
when the dread trumpet sound, the slumber dust,
not unattentive to the call, shall wake;
and every joint possess it be proper place,
with a new elegance of form, unknown
to its first state. nor shall the conscious soul
mistake its partner; but amid the croud
single its other half, into its arm
shall rush, with all th'impatience of a man
that be newcome home; who, have long be absent,
with haste run over every different room,
in pain to see the whole. thrice happy meet!
nor time, nor death, shall ever part they more.

it be but a night, a long and moonless night,
we make the grave our bed, and then be go.

thus at the shut of even, the weary bird
leave the wide air, and in some lonely brake
cower down, and doze until the dawn of day,
then clap his well-fledged wing, and bear away.
