love and friendship.

a pastoral.

two nymph to who the power of verse belong,
 alike ambitious to excel in song,
 with equal sweetness sing alternate strain,
 and courteous echo tell the listen plain;
 that of her lover sing, this of her friend;
 you rural nymph and village swain attend. 

Celia. 

o love, soft sovereign, ruler of the heart! 
deep be thy wound, and please be the smart;
 when Strephon smile the wintery field look gay,
 cold heart be warm, and hard one melt away. 

Sylvia. 

through every scene of temporal bliss be there
 a great blessing than a friend sincere? 
it be Corydon that bear that tender name,
 and sylvia breast return the generous flame. 

Celia. 

when happy i survey my strephon charm,
 his beauty hold i fast than his arm,
 my heart be in a flood of pleasure toss,
 i faint, i die, and be in rapture lose. 

Sylvia. 

and what be all these tumult of the heart,
 but certain omen of a future smart? 
in friendship we more solid comfort find,
 it cheer the heart, nor leave a sting behind. 

Celia. 

sure no lark in spring be ever so glad
 to see the morn, as i to see my lad;
 at his approach all anxious grief remove,
 and every other joy give place to love. 

Sylvia. 

o happy i! with such a friend to live! 
our joy unite double pleasure give;
 our inmost thought with freedom we unfold,
 and grief not long grief, when once it be tell. 

Celia. 

all that be lovely in my swain i find,
 but be to all his imperfection blind;
 what have i say? i sure do he wrong,
 no imperfection can to he belong. 

Sylvia. 

the faithful friend see with impartial eye,
 nor scorn reproof, but speak without disguise;
 blind to all fault, the eager lover sue,
 friend see aright, and every fault excuse. 

then Daphne from beneath a hawthorn spring,
 where she attentive sit to hear the song;
 her breast be conscious of the tender glow,
 that faithful friend, in mutual friendship know;
 her tender heart, by love impulse move,
 with ardour beat to sing the swain she love;
 with emulation fire, the conscious maid
 thus to the fair contend virgin say. 

Daphne. 

bless Celia, happy in a lover dear;
 bless Sylvia, happy in a friend sincere;
 but sure i be double bless to find,
 at once a friend sincere, and lover kind;
 my thirsis be my friend, my friend i say
 and who in love can bear a great sway
 Strephon must his superior power own,
 nor be he less sincere than Corydon. 
