[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book iv.

the winter evening.

hark! it be the twang horn! over yonder bridge
 that with its wearisome but needful length
 bestride the wintery flood, in which the moon
 see her unwrinkled face reflect bright,
 he come, the herald of a noisy world,
 with spatter boot, strap waist, and freeze lock,
 news from all nation lumber at his back. 
true to his charge the close-packed load behind,
 yet careless what he bring, his one concern
 be to conduct it to the destine inn,
 and have drop the expect bag — pass on. 
he whistle as he go, light-hearted wretch,
 cold and yet cheerful: messenger of grief
 perhaps to thousand, and of joy to some,
 to he indifferent whether grief or joy. 
house in ash, and the fall of stock,
 birth, death, and marriage, epistle wet
 with tear that trickle down the writer cheek
 fast as the period from his fluent quill,
 or charge with amorous sigh of absent swain
 or nymph responsive, equal affect
 his horse and he, unconscious of they all. 
but oh the important budget! usher in
 with such heart-shaking music, who can say
 what be its tiding? have our troop awake? 
or do they still, as if with opium drug,
 snore to the murmur of the atlantic wave? 
be India free? and do she wear her plume
 and jewel turban with a smile of peace,
 or do we grind she still? the grand debate,
 the popular harangue, the tart reply,
 the logic and the wisdom and the wit
 and the loud laugh — i long to know they all;
 i burn to set the imprison wrangler free,
 and give they voice and utterance once again. 

now stir the fire, and close the shutter fast,
 let fall the curtain, wheel the sofa round,
 and while the bubble and loud-hissing urn
 throw up a steamy column, and the cup
 that cheer but not inebriate, wait on each,
 so let we welcome peaceful evening in. 
not such his evening, who with shine face
 sweat in the crowd theatre, and squeeze
 and bore with elbow-point through both his side,
 out scold the rant actor on the stage. 
nor he, who patient stand until his foot throb
 and his head thump, to feed upon the breath
 of patriot burst with heroic rage,
 or placeman, all tranquillity and smile. 
 'this folio of four page, happy work! 
which not even critic criticise, that hold
 inquisitive attention while i read
 fast bind in chain of silence, which the fair,
 though eloquent themselves, yet fear to break,
 what be it but a map of busy life
 its fluctuation and its vast concern? 
here run the mountainous and craggy ridge
 that tempt ambition. on the summit, see,
 the seal of office glitter in his eye;
 he climb, he pant, he grasp they. at his heel,
 close at his heel a demagogue ascend,
 and with a dexterous jerk soon twist he down
 and win they, but to lose they in his turn. 
here rill of oily eloquence in soft
 maeander lubricate the course they take;
 the modest speaker be ashamed and grieve
 the engross a moment notice, and yet beg,
 beg a propitious ear for his poor thought,
 however trivial all that he conceive. 
sweet bashfulness! it claim, at least, this praise,
 the dearth of information and good sense
 that it foretell we, always come to pass. 
cataract of declamation thunder here,
 there forest of no-meaning spread the page
 in which all comprehension wander lose;
 while field of pleasantry amuse we there,
 with merry descant on a nation woe. 
the rest appear a wilderness of strange
 but gay confusion, rose for the cheek
 and lily for the brow of fade age,
 tooth for the toothless, ringlet for the bald,
 heaven, earth, and ocean plunder of their sweet,
 nectareous essence, olympian dew,
 sermon and city feast and favourite air,
 aetherial journey, submarine exploit,
 and katterfelto with his hair on end
 at his own wonder, wonder for his bread. 

it be pleasant through the loophole of retreat
 to peep at such a world. to see the stir
 of the great Babel and not feel the crowd. 
to hear the roar she send through all her gate
 at a safe distance, where the die sound
 fall a soft murmur on the uninjured ear. 
thus sit and survey thus at ease
 the globe and its concern, i seem advance
 to some secure and more than mortal height,
 that lib'rate and exempt i from they all. 
it turn submit to my view, turn round
 with all its generation; i behold
 the tumult and be still. the sound of war
 have lose its terror here it reach i,
 grieve but alarm i not. i mourn the pride
 and avarice that make man a wolf to man,
 hear the faint echo of those brazen throat
 by which he speak the language of his heart,
 and sigh, but never tremble at the sound. 
he travel and expatiate, as the bee
 from flower to flower, so he from land to land;
 the manner, custom, policy of all
 pay contribution to the store he glean,
 he suck intelligence in every clime,
 and spread the honey of his deep research
 at his return, a rich repast for i. 
he travel and i too. i tread his deck,
 ascend his top-mast, through his peer eye
 discover country, with a kindred heart
 suffer his woe and share in his escape,
 while fancy, like the finger of a clock,
 run the great circuit, and be still at home. 

oh winter! ruler of the invert year,
 thy scatter hair with sleet like ash fill,
 thy breath congeal upon thy lip, thy cheek
 fringe with a beard make white with other snow
 than those of age; thy forehead wrap in cloud,
 a leafless branch thy sceptre, and thy throne
 a slide car indebt to no wheel,
 but urge by storm along its slippery way;
 i love thou, all unlovely as thou seem,
 and dread as thou be. thou hold the sun
 a prisoner in the yet undawning east,
 shorten his journey between morn and noon,
 and hurry he impatient of his stay
 down to the rosy west. but kind still
 compensate his loss with add hour
 of social converse and instructive ease,
 and gather at short notice in one group
 the family disperse, and fix thought
 not less disperse by day light and its care. 
i crown thou king of intimate delight,
 fireside enjoyment, homeborn happiness,
 and all the comfort that the lowly roof
 of undisturbed retirement, and the hour
 of long uninterrupted evening know. 
no rattle wheel stop short before these gate. 
no powder pert proficient in the art
 of sound a alarm, assault these door
 till the street ring. no stationary steed
 cough their own knell, while heedless of the sound
 the silent circle fan themselves, and quake. 
but here the needle ply its busy task,
 the pattern grow, the well-depicted flower
 wrought patient into the snowy lawn
 unfold its bosom, bud and leaf and sprig
 and curl tendril, graceful dispose,
 follow the nimble finger of the fair,
 a wreath that can fade, of flower that blow
 with most success when all beside decay. 
the poet or historian page, by one
 make vocal for the amusement of the rest;
 the sprightly lyre, who treasure of sweet sound
 the touch from many a tremble chord shake out;
 and the clear voice symphonious, yet distinct,
 and in the charm strife triumphant still,
 beguile the night, and set a keen edge
 on female industry; the thread steel
 fly swift, and unfelt the task proceed,
 the volume close, the customary rite
 of the last meal commence. a roman meal. 
such as the mistress of the world once find
 delicious, when her patriot of high note,
 perhaps by moonlight, at their humble door,
 and under a old oak domestic shade
 enjoy, spare feast! a radish and a egg. 
discourse ensue, not trivial, yet not dull,
 nor such as with a frown forbid the play
 of fancy, or proscribe the sound of mirth. 
nor do we mad, like a impious world,
 who deem religion frenzy, and the god
 that make they a intruder on their joy,
 start at his awful name, or deem his praise
 a jar note. theme of a grave tone
 excite oft our gratitude and love,
 while we retrace with memory point wand
 that call the past to our exact review,
 the danger we have escape, the break snare,
 the disappoint foe, deliverance find
 unlooked for, life preserve and peace restore,
 fruit of omnipotent eternal love. 
oh evening worthy of the god! exclaim
 the Sabine bard. oh evening, i reply,
 more to be prize and covete than you,
 as more illumine and with noble truth,
 that i and mine and those we love, enjoy. 

be winter hideous in a garb like this? 
need he the tragic fur, the smoke of lamp,
 the pent-up breath of a unsavoury throng
 to thaw he into feeling, or the smart
 and snappish dialogue that flippant wit
 call comedy, to prompt he with a smile? 
the self-complacent actor when he view
 (steal a side long glance at a full house)
 the slope of face from the floor to the roof,
 (as if one master-spring control they all)
 relax into a universal grin,
 see not a countenance there that speak a joy
 half so refine or so sincere as we. 
card be superfluous here, with all the trick
 that idleness have ever yet contrive
 to fill the void of a unfurnished brain,
 to palliate dullness and give time a shove. 
time as he pass we, have a dove wing,
 unsoiled and swift and of a silken sound. 
but the world time, be time in masquerade. 
they, shall i paint he, have his pinion fledge
 with motley plume, and where the peacock show
 his azure eye, be tincture black and red
 with spot quadrangular of diamond form,
 ensanguine heart, club typical of strife,
 and spade, the emblem of untimely grave. 
what shall be, and what be a hourglass once
 become a dice-box, and a billiard mast
 well do the work of his destructive scythe. 
thus deck he charm a world who fashion blind
 to his true worth, most please when idle most,
 who only happy be their waste hour. 
even miss, at who age their mother wear
 the back-string and the bib, assume the dress
 of womanhood, sit pupil in the school
 of card-devoted time, and night by night
 place at some vacant corner of the board,
 learn every trick, and soon play all the game. 
but truce with censure. rove as i rove,
 where shall i find a end, or how proceed? 
as he that travel far, oft turn aside
 to view some rugged rock or moulder tower,
 which see delight he not; then come home,
 describe and print it, that the world may know
 how far he go for what be nothing worth;
 so i with brush in hand and pallet spread
 with colour mix for a far different use,
 paint card and doll, and every idle thing
 that fancy find in her excursive flight. 

come evening once again, season of peace,
 return sweet evening, and continue long! 
methinks i see thou in the streaky west,
 with matron-step slow-moving, while the night
 tread on thy sweep train; one hand employ
 in let fall the curtain of repose
 on bird and beast, the other charge for man
 with sweet oblivion of the care of day;
 not sumptuous adorn, nor need aid
 like homely feature night, of cluster gem,
 a star or two just twinkle on thy brow
 suffice thou; save that the moon be thy
 no less than she, not wear indeed on high
 with ostentatious pageantry, but set
 with modest grandeur in thy purple zone,
 resplendent less, but of a ampler round. 
come then, and thou shall find thy vot'try calm
 or make i so. composure be thy gift. 
and whether i devote thy gentle hour
 to book, to music, or the poet toil,
 to weave net for bird-alluring fruit;
 or twine silken thread round ivory reel
 when they command who man be bear to please,
 i slight thou not, but make thou welcome still. 
just when our drawing-room begin to blaze
 with light by clear reflection multiply
 from many a mirror, in which he of Gath
 Goliah, may have see his giant bulk
 whole without stoop, tower crest and all,
 my pleasure too begin. but i perhaps
 the glow hearth may satisfy awhile
 with faint illumination that uplift
 the shadow to the ceiling, there by fit
 dance uncouth to the quiver flame. 
not undelightful be a hour to i
 so spend in parlour twilight; such a gloom
 suit well the thoughtful or unthinking mind,
 the mind contemplative, with some new theme
 pregnant, or indispose alike to all. 
laugh you, who boast your more mercurial power
 that never feel a stupor, know no pause
 nor need one. i be conscious, and confess
 fearless, a soul that do not always think. 
i oft have fancy ludicrous and wild
 soothe with a wake dream of house, tower,
 tree, church, and strange visage express
 in the red cinder, while with pore eye
 i gaze, myself create what i see. 
nor less amuse have i quiescent watch
 the sooty film that play upon the bar
 pendulous, and foreboding in the view
 of superstition prophesy still
 though still deceive, some stranger near approach. 
it be thus the understanding take repose
 in indolent vacuity of thought,
 and sleep and be refresh. meanwhile the face
 conceal the mood lethargic with a mask
 of deep deliberation, as the man
 be task to his full strength, absorb and lose. 
thus oft recline at ease, i lose a hour
 at evening, till at length the freeze blast
 that sweep the bolt shutter, summons home
 the recollect power, and snap short
 the glassy thread with which the fancy weave
 her brittle toy, restore i to myself. 
how calm be my recess, and how the frost
 rage abroad, and the rough wind, endear
 the silence and the warmth enjoy within. 
i see the wood and field at close of day
 a variegate show; the meadow green
 though fade, and the land where late wave
 the golden harvest, of a mellow brown,
 upturned so late by the forceful share. 
i see far off the weedy fallows smile
 with verdure not unprofitable, graze
 by flock fast feed and select each
 his favourite herb; while all the leafless grove
 that skirt the horizon wear a sable hue,
 scarce notice in the kindred dusk of eve. 
tomorrow bring a change, a total change! 
which even now, though silent perform
 and slow, and by most unfelt, the face
 of universal nature undergo. 
fast fall a fleecy shower. the downy flake
 descend and with never-ceasing lapse
 soft alight upon all below,
 assimilate all object. earth receive
 glad the thicken mantle, and the green
 and tender blade that fear the chill blast,
 escape unhurt beneath so warm a veil. 

in such a world, so thorny, and where none
 find happiness unblighted, or if sound,
 without some thistly sorrow at its side,
 it seem the part of wisdom, and no sin
 against the law of love, to measure lot
 with less distinguish than ourselves, that thus
 we may with patience bear our moderate ill,
 and sympathize with other, suffer more. 
ill fare the traveler now, and he that stalk
 in ponderous boot beside his reek team. 
the wain go heavy, impede sore
 by congregate load adhere close
 to the clog wheel; and in its sluggish pace
 noiseless, appear a move hill of snow. 
the toil steed expand the nostril wide,
 while every breath by respiration strong
 force downward, be consolidate soon
 upon their jut chest. he, form to bear
 the pelt brunt of the tempestuous night,
 with half-shut eye and pucker cheek, and tooth
 present bare against the storm, plod on. 
one hand secure his hat, save when with both
 he brandish his pliant length of whip,
 resound oft, and never hear in vain. 
on happy! and in my account, deny
 that sensibility of pain with which
 refinement be endue, thrice happy thou. 
thy frame robust and hardy, feel indeed
 the pierce cold, but feel it unimpaired. 
the learned finger never need explore
 thy vigorous pulse, and the unhealthful east,
 that breathe the spleen, and search every bone
 of the infirm, be wholesome air to thou. 
thy day roll on exempt from household care,
 thy waggon be thy wife; and the poor beast
 that drag the dull companion to and fro,
 thy helpless charge, dependent on thy care. 
ah treat they kind! rude as thou appear
 yet show that thou have mercy, which the great
 with needless hurry whirl from place to place,
 humane as they will seem, not always show. 

poor, yet industrious, modest, quiet, neat,
 such claim compassion in a night like this,
 and have a friend in every feeling heart. 
warm, while it last, by labour, all day long
 they brave the season, and yet find at eve
 ill clad and feed but spare time to cool. 
the frugal housewife tremble when she light
 her scanty stock of brushwood, blaze clear
 but die soon, like all terrestrial joy. 
the few small ember leave she nurse well,
 and while her infant race with outspread hand
 and crowd knee sit cower over the spark,
 retire, content to quake, so they be warm. 
the man feel least, as more inure than she
 to winter, and the current in his vein
 more brisk move by his severe toil;
 yet he too find his own distress in they. 
the taper soon extinguish, which i see
 dangle along at the cold finger end
 just when the day decline, and the brown loaf
 lodge on the shelf half-eaten without sauce
 of savoury cheese, or butter costly still,
 sleep seem their only refuge. for alas! 
where penury be feel the thought be chain,
 and sweet colloquial pleasure be but few. 
with all this thrift they thrive not. all the care
 ingenious parsimony take, but just
 save the small inventory, bed and stool,
 skillet and old carve chest from public sale,
 they live, and live without extort alm
 from grudge hand, but other boast have none
 to sooth their honest pride that scorn to beg,
 nor comfort else, but in their mutual love. 
i praise you much, you meek and patient pair,
 for you be worthy; choose rather far
 a dry but independent crust, hard-earned
 and eat with a sigh, than to endure
 the rugged frown and insolent rebuff
 of knave in office, partial in the work
 of distribution; liberal of their aid
 to clamorous importunity in rag,
 but ofttimes deaf to suppliant who will blush
 to wear a tatter garb however coarse,
 who famine can reconcile to filth;
 these ask with painful shyness, and refuse
 because deserve, silent retire. 
but be you of good courage. time itself
 shall much befriend you. time shall give increase,
 and all your numerous progeny well train
 but helpless, in few year shall find their hand,
 and labour too. meanwhile you shall not want
 what conscious of your virtue we can spare,
 nor what a wealthy than ourselves may send. 
i mean the man, who when the distant poor
 need help, deny they nothing but his name. 

but poverty with most who whimper forth
 their long complaint, be self inflict woe,
 the effect of laziness or sottish waste. 
now go the nightly thief prowl abroad
 for plunder; much solicitous how best
 he may compensate for a day of sloth,
 by work of darkness and nocturnal wrong. 
woe to the gard'ner pale, the farmer hedge
 plash neat, and secure with drive stake
 deep in the loamy bank. uptorn by strength
 resistless in so bad a cause, but lame
 to better deed, he bundle up the spoil
 a ass burden, and when load most
 and heavy, light of foot steal fast away. 
nor do the board hovel better guard
 the well stack pile of rive log and root
 from his pernicious force. nor will he leave
 unwrench the door however well secure,
 where chanticleer amid his haram sleep
 in unsuspecting pomp. twitch from the perch
 he give the princely bird with all his wife
 to his voracious bag, struggle in vain,
 and loud wonder at the sudden change. 
nor this to feed his own. it be some excuse
 do pity of their suffering warp aside
 his principle, and tempt he into sin
 for their support, so destitute. but they
 neglect pine at home, themselves, as more
 expose than other, with less scruple make
 his victim, rob of their defenceless all. 
cruel be all he do. it be quenchless thirst
 of ruinous ebriety that prompt
 his every action and imbrute the man. 
oh for a law to noose the villain neck
 who starve his own. who persecute the blood
 he give they in his child vein, and hate
 and wrong the woman he have swear to love. 

pass where we may, through city or through town,
 village or hamlet of this merry land
 though lean and beggare, every twentieth pace
 conduct the unguarded nose to such a whiff
 of stale debauch forth-issuing from the sty
 that law have license, as make temperance reel. 
there sit involve and lose in curl cloud
 of indian fume, and guzzle deep, the boor,
 the lackey and the groom. the craftsman there
 take a lethaean leave of all his toil;
 smith, cobbler, joiner, he that ply the sheer,
 and he that knead the dough; all loud alike,
 all learned, and all drink. the fiddle scream
 plaintive and piteous, as it weep and wail
 its waste tone and harmony unheard:
 fierce the dispute whatever the theme. while she,
 fall discord, arbitress of such debate,
 perch on the signpost, hold with even hand
 her undecisive scale. in this she lay
 a weight of ignorance, in that, of pride,
 and smile delight with the eternal poise. 
dire be the frequent curse and its twin sound
 the cheek-distending oath, not to be praise
 as ornamental, musical, polite,
 like those which modern senator employ,
 who oath be rhetoric, and who swear for fame. 
behold the school in which plebeian mind,
 once simple, be initiate in art
 which some may practise with politer grace,
 but none with ready skill! it be here they learn
 the road that lead from competence and peace
 to indigence and rapine; till at last
 society grow weary of the load,
 shake her encumber lap, and cast they out. 
but censure profit little. vain the attempt
 to advertise in verse a public pest,
 that like the filth with which the peasant feed
 his hungry acre, stink and be of use. 
the excise be fatten with the rich result
 of all this riot. and ten thousand cask
 for ever dribble out their base content,
 touch by the Midas finger of the state,
 bleed gold for minister to sport away. 
drink and be mad then. it be your country bid. 
glorious drink obey the important call,
 her cause demand the assistance of your throat,
 you all can swallow, and she ask no more. 

will i have fall upon those happy day
 that poet celebrate. those golden time
 and those arcadian scene that Maro sing,
 and Sydney, warbler of poetic prose. 
nymph be dianas then, and swain have heart
 that feel their virtue. innocence it seem,
 from court dismiss, find shelter in the grove. 
the footstep of simplicity impress
 upon the yield herbage (so they sing)
 then be not all effaced. then, speech profane
 and manner profligate be rare find,
 observe as prodigy, and soon reclaim. 
vain wish! those day be never. airy dream
 sit for the picture. and the poet hand
 impart substance to a empty shade,
 impose a gay delirium for a truth. 
grant it. i still must envy they a age
 that favour such a dream, in day like these
 impossible, when virtue be so scarce
 that to suppose a scene where she preside,
 be tramontane, and stumble all belief. 
no. we be polish now. the rural lass
 who once her virgin modesty and grace,
 her artless manner and her neat attire
 so dignify, that she be hardly less
 than the fair shepherdess of old romance,
 be see no more. the character be lose. 
her head adorn with lappet pin aloft
 and ribbon stream gay, superble raise
 and magnify beyond all human size,
 indebt to some smart wig-weaver hand
 for more than half the tress it sustain;
 her elbow ruffle, and her totter form
 ill prop upon french heel; she may be deem
 (but that the basket dangle on her arm
 interpret she more true) of a rank
 too proud for dairy-work or sale of egg. 
expect she soon with footboy at her heel,
 no long blush for her awkward load,
 her train and her umbrella all her care. 

the town have tinge the country. and the stain
 appear a spot upon a vestal robe,
 the worse for what it soil. the fashion run
 down into scene still rural, but alas! 
scene rare grace with rural manner now. 
time be when in the pastoral retreat
 the unguarded door be safe. man do not watch
 the invade another right, or guard their own. 
then sleep be undisturbed by fear, unscared
 by drunken howlings; and the chill tale
 of midnight murder be a wonder hear
 with doubtful credit, tell to frighten babe. 
but farewell now to unsuspicious night
 and slumber unalarmed. now here you sleep
 see that your polish arm be prime with care,
 and drop the night-bolt. ruffian be abroad,
 and the first alarm of the cock shrill throat
 may prove a trumpet, summon your ear
 to horrid sound of hostile foot within. 
even day-light have its danger. and the walk
 through pathless waste and wood, unconscious once
 of other tenant than melodious bird
 or harmless flock, be hazardous and bold. 
lament change! to which full many a cause
 inveterate, hopeless of a cure, conspire. 
the course of human thing from good to ill,
 from ill to worse, be fatal, never fail. 
increase of power beget increase of wealth,
 wealth luxury, and luxury excess;
 excess, the scrofulous and itchy plague
 that seize first the opulent, descend
 to the next rank contagious, and in time
 taint downward all the graduate scale
 of order, from the chariot to the plough. 
the rich, and they that have a arm to check
 the license of the low in degree,
 desert their office; and themselves intent
 on pleasure, haunt the capital, and thus,
 to all the violence of lawless hand
 resign the scene their presence may protect. 
authority herself not seldom sleep,
 though resident, and witness of the wrong. 
the plump convivial parson often bear
 the magisterial sword in vain, and lay
 his reverence and his worship both to rest
 on the same cushion of habitual sloth. 
perhaps timidity restrain his arm,
 when he shall strike, he tremble, and set free,
 himself enslave by terror of the band,
 the audacious convict who he dare not bind. 
perhaps, though by profession ghostly pure,
 he too may have his vice, and sometime prove
 less dainty than become his grave outside,
 in lucrative concern. examine well
 his milkwhite hand. the palm be hardly clean —
 but here and there a ugly smutch appear. 
foh! it be a bribe that leave it. he have touch
 corruption. whoso seek a audit here
 propitious, pay his tribute, game or fish,
 wildfowl or venison, and his errand speed. 

but fast far and more than all the rest
 a noble cause, which none who bear a spark
 of public virtue, ever wish remove,
 work the deplore and mischievous effect. 
it be universal soldiership have stab
 the heart of merit in the mean class. 
arm through the vanity and brainless rage
 of those that bear they in whatever cause,
 seem most at variance with all moral good,
 and incompatible with serious thought. 
the clown, the child of nature, without guile,
 bless with a insant ignorance of all
 but his own simple pleasure, now and then
 a wrestle match, a foot-race, or a fair,
 be ballot, and tremble at the news. 
sheepish he doff his hat, and mumble swear
 a bible-oath to be whatever they please,
 to do he know not what. the task perform,
 that instant he become the serjeant care,
 his pupil, and his torment, and his jest. 
his awkward gait, his introvert toe,
 bend knee, round shoulder, and deject look,
 procure he many a curse. by slow degree,
 unapt to learn and form of stubborn stuff,
 he yet by slow degree put off himself,
 grow conscious of a change, and like it well. 
he stand erect, his slouch become a walk,
 he step right onward, martial in his air
 his form and movement; be as smart above
 as meal and lard lock can make he; wear
 his hat or his plume helmet with a grace,
 and his three year of heroship expire,
 return indignant to the slight plough. 
he hate the field in which no fife or drum
 attend he, drive his cattle to a march,
 and sigh for the smart comrade he have leave. 
it be well if his exterior change be all —
 but with his clumsy port the wretch have lose
 his ignorance and harmless manner too. 
to swear, to game, to drink, to show at home
 by lewdness, idleness, and sabbath-breach,
 the great proficiency he make abroad,
 the astonish and to grieve his gaze friend,
 to break some maiden and his mother heart,
 to be a pest where he be useful once,
 be his sole aim, and all his glory now. 

man in society be like a flower
 blow in its native bed. it be there alone
 his faculty expand in full bloom
 shine out, there only reach their proper use. 
but man associate and league with man
 by regal warrant, or self-joined by bond
 for interest-sake, or swarm into clan
 beneath one head for purpose of war,
 like flower select from the rest, and bind
 and bundle close to fill some crowd vase,
 fade rapid, and by compression mar
 contract defilement not to be endure. 
hence charter borough be such public plague,
 and burgher, man immaculate perhaps
 in all their private function, once combine
 become a loathsome body, only fit
 for dissolution, hurtful to the main. 
hence merchant, unimpeachable of sin
 against the charity of domestic life,
 incorporate, seem at once to iose
 their nature, and disclaim all regard
 for mercy and the common right of man,
 build factory with blood, conduct trade
 at the sword point, and die the white robe
 of innocent commercial justice red. 
hence too the field of glory, as the world
 misdeem it, dazzle by its bright array,
 with all the majesty of its thunder pomp,
 enchant music and immortal wreath,
 be but a school where thoughtlessness be teach
 on principle, where foppery atone
 for folly, gallantry for every vice. 

but slight as it be, and by the great
 abandon, and, which still i more regret,
 infect with the manner and the mode
 it know not once, the country win i still. 
i never frame a wish, or form a plan
 that flatter i with hope of earthly bliss,
 but there i lay the scene. there early stray
 my fancy, here yet liberty of choice
 have find i, or the hope of be free. 
my very dream be rural, rural too
 the firstborn effort of my youthful muse
 sportive, and jingle her poetic bell
before yet her ear be mistress of their power. 
no bard can please i but who lyre be tune
 to nature praise. hero and their feat
 fatigue i, never weary of the pipe
 of Tityrus, assemble as he sing
 the rustic throng beneath his favourite beech. 
then Milton have indeed a poet charm. 
new to my taste, his paradise surpass
 the struggle effort of my boyish tongue
 to speak its excellence; i dance for joy. 
i marvel much that at so ripe a age
 as twice seven year, his beauty have then first
 engage my wonder, and admire still
 and still admire, with regret suppose
 the joy half lose because not soon find. 
thou too enamour of the life i love,
 pathetic in its praise, in its pursuit
 determine, and possess it at last
 with transport such as favour lover feel,
 i study, prize, and wish that i have know
 ingenious Cowley! and though now, reclaim,
 by modern light from a erroneous taste,
 i can but lament thy splendid wit
 entangle in the cobweb of the school,
 i still revere thou, courtly though retire,
 though stretch at ease in chertsey silent bower
 not unemployed, and find rich amends
 for a lose world in solitude and verse. 
it be bear with all. the love of nature work
 be a ingredient in the compound, man,
 infuse at the creation of the kind. 
and though the almighty maker, have throughout
 discriminate each from each, by stroke
 and touch of his hand with so much art
 diversify, that two be never find
 twin at all point — yet this obtain in all,
 that all discern a beauty in his work
 and all can taste they. mind that have be form
 and tutor, with a relish more exact,
 but none without some relish, none unmoved. 
it be a flame that die not even there
 where nothing feed it. neither business, crowd,
 nor habit of luxurious city-life,
 whatever else they smother of true worth
 in human bosom, quench it or abate. 
the villa with which London stand begird
 like a swarth indian with his belt of bead,
 prove it. a breath of unadult'rate air,
 the glimpse of a green pasture, how they cheer
 the citizen, and brace his languid frame! 
even in the stifle bosom of the town,
 a garden in which nothing thrive, have charm
 that sooth the rich possessor; much console
 that here and there some sprig of mournful mint,
 of nightshade or valerian grace the well
 he cultivate. these serve he with a hint
 that nature live, that sight-refreshing green
 be still the livery she delight to wear,
 though sickly sample of the exuberant whole. 
what be the casement line with creep herb,
 the proud sash front with a range
 of orange, myrtle, or the fragrant weed
 the frenchman darling? be they not all proof
 that man immure in city, still retain
 his inborn inextinguishable thirst
 of rural scene, compensate his loss
 by supplemental shift, the best he may? 
the most unfurnished with the mean of life,
 and they that never pass their brickwall bound
 to range the field and treat their lung with air,
 yet feel the burn instinct: over-head
 suspend their crazy box plant thick
 and water due. there the pitcher stand
 a fragment, and the spoutless tea-pot there;
 sad witness how close-pent man regret
 the country, with what ardour he contrive
 a peep at nature, when he can no more. 

hail therefore patroness of health and ease
 and contemplation, heart-consoling joy
 and harmless pleasure in the throng abode
 of multitude unknown, hail rural life! 
address himself who will to the pursuit
 of honour or emolument or fame,
 i shall not add myself to such a chace,
 thwart his attempt, or envy his success. 
some must be great. great office will have
 great talent. and god give to every man
 the virtue, temper, understanding, taste,
 that lift he into life, and let he fall
 just in the niche he be ordain to fill. 
to the deliverer of a injure land
 he give a tongue to enlarge upon, a heart
 to feel, and courage to redress her wrong;
 to monarch dignity, to judge sense,
 to artist ingenuity and skill;
 to i a unambitious mind, content
 in the low vale of life, that early feel
 a wish for ease and leisure, and here long
 find here that leisure and that ease i wish. 
