THE HOP-GARDEN. A GEORGIC.

In Two BOOKS.

THE HOP-GARDEN. A GEORGIC. BOOK the FIRST.

THE land that answers best the farmer's care,
 And silvers to maturity the Hop:
 When to inhume the plants; to turn the glebe;
 And wed the tendrils to th' aspiring poles:
 Under what sign to pluck the crop, and how
 To cure, and in capacious sacks infold,
 I teach in verse Miltonian. Smile the muse,
 And meditate an honour to that land
 Where first I breath'd, and struggled into life
 Impatient, Cantium, to be call'd thy son. 

Oh! cou'd I emulate Dan Sydney's muse,
 Thy Sydney, Cantium — He from court retir'd
 In Penshurst's sweet elysium sung delight,
 Sung transport to the soft-responding streams
 Of Medway, and enliven'd all her groves:
 While ever near him, goddess of the green,
 Fair Pembroke sat, and smil'd immense applause. 
With vocal fascination charm'd the Hours
 Unguarded left Heav'ns adamantine gate,
 And to his lyre, swift as the winged sounds
 That skim the air, danc'd unperceiv'd away. 
Had I such pow'r, no peasants toil, no hops
 Shou'd e'er debase my lay: far nobler themes,
 The high atchievements of thy warrior kings
 Shou'd raise my thoughts, and dignify my song. 
But I, young rustic, dare not leave my cot,
 For so enlarg'd a sphere — ah! muse beware,
 Lest the loud larums of the braying trump,
 Lest the deep drum shou'd drown thy tender reed,
 And mar its puny joints: me, lowly swain,
 Every unshaven arboret, me the lawns,
 Me the voluminous Medway's silver wave,
 Content inglorious, and the hopland shades! 

Yeomen, and countrymen attend my song:
 Whether you shiver in the marshy Weald,
 Egregious shepherds of unnumber'd flocks,
 Whose fleeces, poison'd into purple, deck
 All Europe's kings: or in fair Madum's vale
 Imparadis'd, blest denizons, ye dwell;
 Or Dorovernia's awful tow'rs ye love:
 Or plough Tunbridgia's salutiferous hills
 Industrious, and with draughts chalybiate heal'd,
 Confess divine Hygeia's blissful seat;
 The muse demands your presence, ere she tune
 Her monitory voice; observe her well,
 And catch the wholesome dictates as they fall. 

 'Midst thy paternal acres, Farmer, say
 Has gracious heav'n bestow'd one field, that basks
 Its loamy bosom in the mid-day sun,
 Emerging gently from the abject vale,
 Nor yet obnoxious to the wind, secure
 There shall thou plant thy hop. This soil, perhaps,
 Thou'lt say, will fill my garners. Be it so. 
But Ceres, rural goddess, at the best
 Meanly supports her vot'ry', enough for her,
 If ill-persuading hunger she repell,
 And keep the soul from fainting: to enlarge,
 To glad the heart, to sublimate the mind,
 And wing the flagging spirits to the sky,
 Require th' united influence and aid
 Of Bacchus, God of hops, with Ceres join'd
 'Tis he shall gen'rate the buxom beer. 
Then on one pedestal, and hand in hand,
 Sculptur'd in Parian stone (so gratitude
 Indites) let the divine co-part'ners rise. 
Stands eastward in thy field a wood? 'tis well. 
Esteem it as a bulwark of thy wealth,
 And cherish all its branches; tho' we'll grant,
 Its leaves umbrageous may intercept
 The morning rays, and envy some small share
 Of Sol's beneficence to the infant germ. 
Yet grutch not that: when whistling Eurus comes,
 With all his worlds of insects in thy lands
 To hyemate, and monarchize o'er all
 Thy vegetable riches, then thy wood
 Shall ope it's arms expansive, and embrace
 The storm reluctant, and divert its rage. 
Armies of animalc'les urge their way
 In vain: the ventilating trees oppose
 Their airy march. They blacken distant plains. 

This site for thy young nursery obtain'd,
 Thou hast begun auspicious, if the soil
 (As sung before) be loamy; this the hop
 Loves above others, this is rich, is deep,
 Is viscous, and tenacious of the pole. 
Yet maugre all its native worth, it may
 Be meliorated with warm compost. See!
 Yon craggy mountain, whose fastidious head,
 Divides the star-set hemisphere above,
 And Cantium's plains beneath; the Appennine
 Of a free Italy, whose chalky sides
 With verdant shrubs dissimilarly gay,
 Still captivate the eye, while at his feet
 The silver Medway glides, and in her breast
 Views the reflected landskip, charm'd she views
 And murmurs louder ectasy below. 
Here let us rest awhile, pleas'd to behold
 Th' all-beautiful horizon's wide expanse,
 Far as the eagle's ken. Here tow'ring spires
 First catch the eye, and turn the thoughts to heav'n. 
The lofty elms in humble majesty
 Bend with the breeze to shade the solemn groves,
 And spread an holy darkness; Ceres there
 Shines in her golden vesture. Here the meads
 Enrich'd by Flora's daedal hand, with pride
 Expose their spotted verdure. Nor are you
 Pomona absent; you 'midst th' hoary leaves
 Swell the vermilion cherry; and on you trees
 Suspend the pippen's palatable gold. 
There old Sylvanus in that moss-grown grot
 Dwells with his wood-nymphs: they with chaplets green
 And russet mantles oft bedight, aloft
 From yon bent oaks, in Medway's bosom fair
 Wonder at silver bleak, and prickly pearch,
 That swiftly thro' their floating forests glide. 
Yet not even these — these ever-varied scenes
 Of wealth and pleasure can engage my eyes
 T' o'erlook the lowly hawthorn, if from thence
 The thrush, sweet warbler, chants th' unstudied lays
 Which Phoebus' self vaulting from yonder cloud
 Refulgent, with enliv'ning ray inspires. 
But neither tow'ring spires, nor lofty elms,
 Nor golden Ceres, nor the meadows green,
 Nor orchats, nor the russet-mantled nymphs,
 Which to the murmurs of the Medway dance,
 Nor sweetly warbling thrush, with half those charms
 Attract my eyes, as yonder hop-land close,
 Joint-work of art and nature, which reminds
 The muse, and to her theme the wand'rer calls. 

Here then with pond'rous vehicles and teams
 Thy rustics send, and from the caverns deep
 Command them bring the chalk: thence to the kiln
 Convey, and temper with Vulcanian fires. 
Soon as 'tis form'd, thy lime with bounteous hand
 O'er all thy lands disseminate; thy lands
 Which first have felt the soft'ning spade, and drank
 The strength'ning vapours from nutricious marl. 

This done, select the choicest hop, t' insert
 Fresh in the opening glebe. Say then, my muse,
 Its various kinds, and from th' effete and vile,
 The eligible separate with care. 
The noblest species is by Kentish wights
 The Master-hop yclep'd. Nature to him
 Has giv'n a stouter stalk, patient of cold,
 Or Phoebus ev'n in youth, his verdant blood
 In brisk saltation circulates and flows
 Indesinently vigorous: the next
 Is arid, fetid, infecund, and gross
 Significantly styl'd the Fryar: the last
 Is call'd the Savage, who in ev'ry wood,
 And ev'ry hedge unintroduc'd intrudes. 
When such the merit of the candidates,
 Easy is the election; but, my friend
 Would'st thou ne'er fail, to Kent direct thy way,
 Where no one shall be frustrated that seeks
 Ought that is great or good. Hail, Cantium, hail! 
Illustrious parent of the finest fruits,
 Illustrious parent of the best of men! 
For thee Antiquity's thrice sacred springs
 Placidly stagnant at their fountain head,
 I rashly dare to trouble (if from thence,
 If ought for thy util'ty I can drain)
 And in thy towns adopt th' Ascraean muse. 
Hail heroes, hail invaluable gems,
 Splendidly rough within your native mines,
 To luxury unrefined, better far
 To shake with unbought agues in your weald,
 Than dwell a slave to passion and to wealth,
 Politely paralytic in the town! 
Fav'rites of heav'n! to whom the general doom
 Is all remitted, who alone possess
 Of Adam's sons fair Eden — rest ye here,
 Nor seek an earthly good above the hop;
 A good! untasted by your ancient kings,
 And almost to your very sires unknown. 

In those blest days when great Eliza reign'd
 O'er the adoring nation, when fair peace
 Or spread an unstain'd olive round the land,
 Or laurell'd war did teach our winged fleets
 To lord it o'er the world, when our brave sires
 Drank valour from uncauponated beer;
 Then th' hop (before an interdicted plant,
 Shun'd like fell aconite) began to hang
 Its folded floscles from the golden vine,
 And bloom'd a shade to Cantium's sunny shores
 Delightsome, and in chearful goblets laught
 Potent, what time Aquarius' urn impends
 To kill the dulsome day — potent to quench
 The Syrian ardour, and autumnal ills
 To heal with mild potations; sweeter far
 Than those which erst the subtile Hengist mix'd
 T' inthral voluptuous Vortigern. He, with love
 Emasculate and wine, the toils of war,
 Neglected, and to dalliance vile and sloth
 Emancipated, saw th' incroaching Saxons
 With unaffected eyes; his hand which ought
 T' have shook the spear of justice, soft and smooth,
 Play'd ravishing divisions on the lyre:
 This Hengist mark'd, and (for curs'd insolence
 Soon fattens on impunity! and becomes
 Briareus from a dwarf) fair Thanet gain'd. 
Nor stopt he here; but to immense attempts
 Ambition sky-aspiring led him on
 Adventrous. He an only daughter rear'd,
 Roxena, matchless maid! nor rear'd in vain. 
Her eagle-ey'd callidity, grave deceit,
 And fairy fiction rais'd above her sex,
 And furnish'd her with thousand various wiles
 Preposterous, more than female; wondrous fair
 She was, and docile, which her pious nurse
 Observ'd, and early in each female fraud
 Her 'gan initiate: well she knew to smile,
 Whene'er vexation gall'd her; did she weep? 
'Twas not sincere, the fountains of her eyes
 Play'd artificial streams, yet so well forc'd
 They look'd like nature; for ev'n art to her
 Was natural, and contrarieties
 Seem'd in Roxena congruous and allied. 
Such was she, when brisk Vortigern beheld,
 Ill-fated prince! and lov'd her. She perceiv'd,
 Soon she perceiv'd her conquest; soon she told,
 With hasty joy transported, her old sire. 
The Saxon inly smil'd, and to his isle
 The willing prince invited, but first bad
 The nymph prepare the potions; such as fire
 The blood's meand'ring rivulets, and depress
 To love the soul. Lo! at the noon of night
 Thrice Hecate invok'd the maid — and thrice
 The goddess stoop'd assent; forth from a cloud
 She stoop'd, and gave the philters pow'r to charm. 
These in a splendid cup of burnish'd gold
 The lovely sorceress mix'd, and to the prince
 Health, peace, and joy propin'd, but to herself
 Mutter'd dire exorcisms, and wish'd effect
 To th' love-creating draught: lowly she bow'd
 Fawning insinuation bland, that might
 Deceive Laertes' son; her lucid orbs
 Shed copiously the oblique rays; her face
 Like modest Luna's shone, but not so pale,
 And with no borrow'd lustre; on her brow
 Smil'd Fallacy, while summoning each grace,
 Kneeling she gave the cup. The prince (for who! 
Who cou'd have spurn'd a suppliant so divine?) 
Drank eager, and in ecstasy devour'd
 Th' ambrosial perturbation; mad with love
 He clasp'd her, and in Hymeneal bands
 At once the nymph demanded and obtain'd. 
Now Hengist, all his ample wish fulfill'd,
 Exulted; and from Kent th' uxorious prince
 Exterminated, and usurp'd his seat. 
Long did he reign; but all-devouring time
 Has raz'd his palace walls — Perchance on them
 Grows the green hop, and o'er his crumbled bust
 In spiral twines ascends the scancile pole. —
 But now to plant, to dig, to dung, to weed;
 Tasks how indelicate? demand the muse. 

Come, fair magician, sportive Fancy come,
 With thy unbounded imagery; child of thought,
 From thy aeriel citadel descend,
 And (for thou canst) assist me. Bring with thee
 Thy all-creative Talisman; with thee
 The active spirits ideal, tow'ring flights,
 That hover o'er the muse-resounding groves,
 And all thy colourings, all thy shapes display. 
Thou too be here, Experience, so shall I
 My rules nor in low prose jejunely say,
 Nor in smooth numbers musically err;
 But vain is Fancy and Experience vain,
 If thou, O Hesiod! Virgil of our land,
 Or hear'st thou rather, Milton, bard divine,
 Whose greatness who shall imitate, save thee? 
If thou O Philips fav'ring dost not hear
 Me, inexpert of verse; with gentle hand
 Uprear the unpinion'd muse, high on the top
 Of that immeasurable mount, that far
 Exceeds thine own Plinlimmon, where thou tun'st
 With Phoebus' self thy lyre. Give me to turn
 Th' unwieldly subject with thy graceful ease,
 Extol its baseness with thy art; but chief
 Illumine, and invigorate with thy fire. 

When Phoebus looks thro' Aries on the spring,
 And vernal flow'rs promise the dulcet fruit,
 Autumnal pride! delay not then thy setts
 In Tellus' facile bosom to depose
 Timely: if thou art wise the bulkiest chuse:
 To every root three joints indulge, and form
 The Quincunx with well regulated hills. 
Soon from the dung-enriched earth, their heads
 Thy young plants will uplift, their virgin arms
 They'll stretch, and marriageable claim the pole. 
Nor frustrate thou their wishes, so thou may'st
 Expect an hopeful issue, jolly Mirth,
 Sister of taleful Jocus, tuneful Song,
 And fat Good-nature with her honest face. 
But yet in the novitiate of their love,
 And tenderness of youth suffice small shoots
 Cut from the widow'd willow, nor provide
 Poles insurmountable as yet. 'Tis then
 When twice bright Phoebus' vivifying ray,
 Twice the cold touch of winter's icy hand,
 They've felt; 'tis then we fell sublimer props. 
'Tis then the sturdy woodman's axe from far
 Resounds, resounds, and hark! with hollow groans
 Down tumble the big trees, and rushing roll
 O'er the crush'd crackling brake, while in his cave
 Forlorn, dejected, 'midst the weeping dryads
 Laments Sylvanus for his verdant care. 
The ash, or willow for thy use select,
 Or storm-enduring chesnut; but the oak
 Unfit for this employ, for nobler ends
 Reserve untouch'd; she when by time matur'd,
 Capacious, of some British demi-god,
 Vernon, or Warren, shall with rapid wing
 Infuriate, like Jove's armour-bearing bird,
 Fly on thy foes; They, like the parted waves,
 Which to the brazen beak murmuring give way
 Amaz'd, and roaring from the fight recede. —
 In that sweet month, when to the list'ning swains
 Fair Philomel fings love, and every cot
 With garlands blooms bedight, with bandage meet
 The tendrils bind, and to the tall pole tie,
 Else soon, too soon their meretricious arms
 Round each ignoble clod they'll fold, and leave
 Averse the lordly prop. Thus, have I heard
 Where there's no mutual tye, no strong connection
 Of love-conspiring hearts, oft the young bride
 Has prostituted to her slaves her charms,
 While the infatuated lord admires
 Fresh-budding sprouts, and issue not his own. 
Now turn the glebe: soon with correcting hand
 When smiling June in jocund dance leads on
 Long days and happy hours, from ev'ry vine
 Dock the redundant branches, and once more
 With the sharp spade thy numerous acres till. 
The shovel next must lend its aid, enlarge
 The little hillocks, and erase the weeds. 
This in that month its title which derives
 From great Augustus' ever sacred name! 
Sovereign of Science! master of the Muse! 
Neglected Genius' firm ally! Of worth
 Best judge, and best rewarder, whose applause
 To bards was fame and fortune! O! 'twas well,
 Well did you too in this, all glorious heroes! 
Ye Romans! — on Time's wing you've stamp'd his praise,
 And time shall bear it to eternity. 

Now are our labours crown'd with their reward,
 Now bloom the florid hops, and in the stream
 Shine in their floating silver, while above
 T'embow'ring branches culminate, and form
 A walk impervious to the sun; the poles
 In comely order stand; and while you cleave
 With the small skiff the Medway's lucid wave,
 In comely order still their ranks preserve,
 And seem to march along th' extensive plain. 
In neat arrangement thus the men of Kent,
 With native oak at once adorn'd and arm'd,
 Intrepid march'd; for well they knew the cries
 Of dying Liberty, and Astraea's voice,
 Who as she fled, to echoing woods complain'd.
 Of tyranny, and William; like a god,
 Refulgent stood the conqueror, on his troops
 He sent his looks enliv'ning as the sun's,
 But on his foes frown'd agony, frown'd death. 
On his left side in bright emblazonry
 His falchion burn'd; forth from his sevenfold shield
 A basilisk shot adamant; his brow
 Wore clouds of fury! — on that with plumage crown'd
 Of various hue sat a tremendous cone:
 Thus sits high-canopied above the clouds,
 Terrific beauty of nocturnal skies,
 Northern Aurora; she thro' th' azure air
 Shoots, shoots her trem'lous rays in painted streaks
 Continual, while waving to the wind
 O'er Night's dark veil her lucid tresses flow. 
The trav'ler views th' unseasonable day
 Astound, the proud bend lowly to the earth,
 The pious matrons tremble for the world. 
But what can daunt th' insuperable souls
 Of Cantium's matchless sons? On they proceed,
 All innocent of fear; each face express'd
 Contemptuous admiration, while they view'd
 The well-fed brigades of embroider'd slaves
 That drew the sword for gain. First of the van,
 With an enormous bough, a shepherd swain
 Whistled with rustic notes; but such as show'd
 A heart magnanimous: The men of Kent
 Follow the tuneful swain, while o'er their heads
 The green leaves whisper, and the big boughs bend. 
'Twas thus the Thracian, whose all-quick'ning lyre
 The floods inspir'd, and taught the rocks to feel,
 Play'd before dancing Haemus, to the tune,
 The lute's soft tune! The flutt'ring branches wave,
 The rocks enjoy it, and the rivulets hear,
 The hillocks skip, emerge the humble vales,
 And all the mighty mountain nods applause. 
The conqueror view'd them, and as one that sees
 The vast abrupt of Scylla, or as one
 That from th' oblivious Lethaean streams
 Has drank eternal apathy, he stood. 
His host an universal panic seiz'd
 Prodigious, inopine; their armour shook,
 And clatter'd to the trembling of their limbs;
 Some to the walking wilderness gan run
 Confus'd, and in th' inhospitable shade
 For shelter sought — Wretches! they shelter find,
 Eternal shelter in the arms of death! 
Thus when Aquarius pours out all his urn.
 Down on some lonesome heath, the traveller
 That wanders o'er the wint'ry waste, accepts
 The invitation of some spreading beech
 Joyous; but soon the treach'rous gloom betrays
 Th' unwary visitor, while on his head
 Th' inlarging drops in double show'rs descend. 

And now no longer in disguise the men
 Of Kent appear; down they all drop their boughs,
 And shine in brazen panoply divine. 
Enough — Great William (for full well he knew
 How vain would be the contest) to the sons
 Of glorious Cantium, gave their lives, and laws,
 And liberties secure, and to the prowess
 Of Kentish wights, like Caesar, deign'd to yield. 
Caesar and William! Hail immortal worthies,
 Illustrious vanquish'd! Cantium, if to them,
 Posterity with all her chiefs unborn,
 Ought similar, ought second has to boast,
 Once more (so prophecies the Muse) thy sons
 Shall triumph, emulous of their sires — till then
 With olive, and with hop-land garlands crown'd,
 O'er all thy land reign Plenty, reign fair Peace. 

THE HOP-GARDEN. A GEORGIC. BOOK the SECOND.

THE HOP-GARDEN. A GEORGIC. BOOK the SECOND.

AT length the Muse her destin'd task resumes
 With joy; agen o'er all her hop-land groves
 She longs t' expatiate free of wing. Long while
 For a much-loving, much-lov'd youth she wept,
 And sorrow'd silence o'er th' untimely urn. 
Hush then, effeminate sobs; and thou, my heart,
 Rebel to grief no more — And yet a while,
 A little while, indulge the friendly tears. 
O'er the wild world, like Noah's dove, in vain
 I seek the olive peace, around me wide
 See! see! the wat'ry waste — In vain, forlorn
 I call the Phoenix fair Sincerity;
 Alas! — extinguish'd to the skies she fled,
 And left no heir behind her. Where is now
 Th' eternal smile of goodness? Where is now
 That all-extensive charity of soul,
 So rich in sweetness, that the classic sounds
 In elegance Augustan cloath'd, the wit
 That flow'd perennial, hardly were observ'd,
 Or, if observ'd, set off a brighter gem. 
How oft, and yet how seldom did it seem! 
Have I enjoy'd his converse? — When we met,
 The hours how swift they sweetly fled, and till
 Agen I saw him, how they loiter'd. Oh!
 THEOPHILUS, thou dear departed soul,
 What flattering tales thou told'st me? How thou'dst hail
 My Muse, and took'st imaginary walks
 All in my hopland groves! Stay yet, oh stay! 
Thou dear deluder, thou hast seen but half —
 He's gone! and ought that's equal to his praise
 Fame has not for me, tho' she prove most kind. 
Howe'er this verse be sacred to thy name,
 These tears, the last sad duty of a friend. 
Oft i'll indulge the pleasurable pain
 Of recollection; oft on Medway's banks
 I'll muse on thee full pensive; while her streams
 Regardful ever of my grief, shall flow
 In sullen silence silverly along
 The weeping shores — or else accordant with
 My loud laments, shall ever and anon
 Make melancholy music to the shades,
 The hopland shades, that on her banks expose
 Serpentine vines and flowing locks of gold. 

Ye smiling nymphs, th' inseparable train
 Of saffron Ceres; ye, that gamesome dance,
 And sing to jolly Autumn, while he stands
 With his right hand poizing the scales of heav'n,
 And with his left grasps Amalthea's horn:
 Young chorus of fair bacchanals, descend,
 And leave a while the sickle; yonder hill,
 Where stand the loaded hop-poles, claims your care. 
There mighty Bacchus stradling cross the bin,
 Waits your attendance — There he glad reviews
 His paunch, approaching to immensity
 Still nearer, and with pride of heart surveys
 Obedient mortals, and the world his own. 
See! from the great metropolis they rush,
 Th' industrious vulgar. They, like prudent bees,
 In Kent's wide garden roam, expert to crop
 The flow'ry hop, and provident to work,
 Ere winter numb their sunburnt hands, and winds
 Engoal them, murmuring in their gloomy cells. 
From these, such as appear the rest t' excell
 In strength and young agility, select. 
These shall support with vigour and address
 The bin-man's weighty office; now extract
 From the sequacious earth the pole, and now
 Unmarry from the closely clinging vine. 
O'er twice three pickers, and no more, extend
 The bin-man's sway; unless thy ears can bear
 The crack of poles continual, and thine eyes
 Behold unmoved the hurrying peasant tear
 Thy wealth, and throw it on the thankless ground. 
But first the careful planter will consult
 His quantity of acres, and his crop,
 How many and how large his kilns; and then
 Proportion'd to his wants the hands provide. 
But yet, of greater consequence and cost,
 One thing remains unsung, a man of faith
 And long experience, in whose thund'ring voice
 Lives hoarse authority, potent to quell
 The frequent frays of the tumultuous crew. 
He shall preside o'er all thy hop-land store,
 Severe dictator! His unerring hand,
 And eye inquisitive, in heedful guise,
 Shall to the brink the measure fill, and fair
 On the twin registers the work record. 
And yet I've known them own a female reign,
 And gentle Marianne's soft Orphean voice
 Has hymn'd sweet lessons of humanity
 To the wild brutal crew. Oft her command
 Has sav'd the pillars of the hopland state,
 The lofty poles from ruin, and sustain'd,
 Like ANNA, or ELIZA, her domain,
 With more than manly dignity. Oft I've seen,
 Ev'n at her frown the boist'rous uproar cease,
 And the mad pickers, tam'd to diligence,
 Cull from the bin the sprawling sprigs, and leaves
 That stain the sample, and its worth debase. 
All things thus settled and prepared, what now
 Can let the planters purposes? Unless
 The Heavens frown dissent, and ominous winds
 Howl thro' the concave of the troubled sky. 
And oft, alas! the long experienc'd wights
 (Oh! could they too prevent them) storms foresee. 
For, as the storm rides on the rising clouds,
 Fly the fleet wild-geese far away, or else
 The heifer towards the zenith rears her head,
 And with expanded nostrils snuffs the air:
 The swallows too their airy circuits weave,
 And screaming skim the brook; and fen-bred frogs
 Forth from their hoarse throats their old grutch recite:
 Or from her earthly coverlets the ant
 Heaves her huge eggs along the narrow way:
 Or bends Thaumantia's variegated bow
 Athwart the cope of heav'n: or sable crows
 Obstreperous of wing, in crouds combine:
 Besides, unnumber'd troops of birds marine,
 And Asia's feather'd flocks, that in the muds
 Of flow'ry-edg'd Cayster wont to prey,
 Now in the shallows duck their speckled heads,
 And lust to lave in vain, their unctious plumes
 Repulsive baffle their efforts: Next hark
 How the curs'd raven, with her harmful voice,
 Invokes the rain, ahd croaking to herself,
 Struts on some spacious solitary shore. 
Nor want thy servants and thy wife at home
 Signs to presage the show'r; for in the hall
 Sheds Niobe her prescious tears, and warns
 Beneath thy leaden tubes to fix the vase,
 And catch the falling dew-drops, which supply
 Soft water and salubrious, far the best
 To soak thy hops, and brew thy generous beer. 
But tho' bright Phoebus smile, and in the skies
 The purple-rob'd serenity appear;
 Tho' every cloud be fled, yet if the rage
 Of Boreas, or the blasting East prevail,
 The planter has enough to check his hopes,
 And in due bounds confine his joy; for see
 The ruffian winds, in their abrupt career,
 Leave not a hop behind, or at the best
 Mangle the circling vine, and intercept
 The juice nutricious: Fatal means, alas! 
Their colour and condition to destroy. 
Haste then, ye peasants; pull the poles, the hops;
 Where are the bins? Run, run, ye nimble maids,
 Move ev'ry muscle, ev'ry nerve extend,
 To save our crop from ruin, and ourselves. 

Soon as bright Chanticleer explodes the night
 With flutt'ring wings, and hymns the new-born day,
 The bugle-horn inspire, whose clam'rous bray
 Shall rouse from sleep the rebel rout, and tune
 To temper for the labours of the day. 
Wisely the several stations of the bins
 By lot determine. Justice this, and this
 Fair Prudence does demand; for not without
 A certain method cou'dst thou rule the mob
 Irrational, nor every where alike
 Fair hangs the hop to tempt the picker's hand. 

Now see the crew mechanic might and main
 Labour with lively diligence, inspir'd
 By appetie of gain and lust of praise:
 What mind so petty, servile, and debas'd,
 As not to know ambition? Her great sway
 From Colin Clout to Emperors she exerts. 
To err is human, human to be vain. 
'Tis vanity, and mock desire of fame,
 That prompts the rustic, on the steeple top
 Sublime, to mark the outlines of his shoe,
 And in the area to engrave his name. 
With pride of heart the churchwarden surveys,
 High o'er the bellfry, girt with birds and flow'rs,
 His story wrote in capitals: "'Twas I
" That bought the font; and I repair'd the pews. " 
With pride like this the emulating mob
 Strive for the mastery — who first may fill
 The bellying bin, and cleanest cull the hops. 
Nor ought retards, unless invited out
 By Sol's declining, and the evening's calm,
 Leander leads Laetitia to the scene
 Of shade and fragrance — Then th' exulting band
 Of pickers male and female, seize the fair
 Reluctant, and with boist'rous force and brute,
 By cries unmov'd, they bury her in the bin. 
Nor does the youth escape — him too they seize,
 And in such posture place as best may serve
 To hide his charmer's blushes. Then with shouts
 They rend the echoing air, and from them both
 (So custom has ordain'd) a largess claim. 

Thus much be sung of picking — next succeeds
 Th' important care of curing — Quit the field,
 And at the kiln th' instructive muse attend. 

On your hair-cloth eight inches deep, nor more,
 Let the green hops lie lightly; next expand
 The smoothest surface with the toothy rake. 
Thus far is just above; but more it boots
 That charcoal flames burn equably below,
 The charcoal flames, which from thy corded wood,
 Or antiquated poles, with wond'rous skill,
 The sable priests of Vulcan shall prepare. 
Constant and moderate let the heat ascend;
 Which to effect, there are, who with success
 Place in the kiln the ventilating fan. 
Hail, learned, useful man! whose head and heart
 Conspire to make us happy, deign t' accept
 One honest verse; and if thy industry
 Has serv'd the hopland cause, the Muse forebodes
 This sole invention, both in use and fame,
 The mystic fan of Bacchus shall exceed. 

When the fourth hour expires, with careful hand
 The half-bak'd hops turn over. Soon as time
 Has well exhausted twice two glasses more,
 They'll leap and crackle with their bursting seeds,
 For use domestic, or for sale mature. 

There are, who in the choice of cloth t'enfold
 Their wealthy crop, the viler, coarser sort,
 With prodigal oeconomy prefer:
 All that is good is cheap, all dear that's base. 
Besides, the planter shou'd a bait prepare,
 T' intrap the chapman's notice, and divert
 Shrewd Observation from her busy pry. 

When in the bag thy hops the rustic treads,
 Let him wear heel-less sandals; nor presume
 Their fragrancy barefooted to defile:
 Such filthy ways for slaves in Malaga
 Leave we to practise — Whence I've often seen,
 When beautiful Dorinda's iv'ry hands
 Had built the pastry-fabric (food divine
 For Christmas gambols and the hour of mirth)
 As the dry'd foreign fruit, with piercing eye,
 She cull'd suspicious — lo! she starts, she frowns
 With indignation at a negro's nail. 

Should'st thou thy harvest for the mart design,
 Be thine own factor; nor employ those drones
 Who've stings, but make no honey, selfish slaves! 
That thrive and fatten on the planter's toil. 

What then remains unsung? unless the care
 To stack thy poles oblique in comely cones,
 Lest rot or rain destroy them — 'Tis a sight
 Most seemly to behold, and gives, O Winter! 
A landskip not unpleasing ev'n to thee. 

And now, ye rivals of the hopland state,
 Madum and Dorovernia rejoice,
 How great amidst such rivals to excel! 
Let Grenovicum boast (for boast she may) 
The birth of great Eliza. — Hail, my queen! 
And yet I'll call thee by a dearer name,
 My countrywoman, hail! Thy worth alone
 Gives fame to worlds, and makes whole ages glorious! 

Let Sevenoaks vaunt the hospitable seat
 Of Knoll most ancient: Awefully, my Muse,
 These social scenes of grandeur and delight,
 Of love and veneration, let me tread. 
How oft beneath you oak has amorous Prior
 Awaken'd Echo with sweet Chloe's name! 
While noble Sackville heard, hearing approv'd,
 Approving, greatly recompens'd. But he,
 Alas! has number'd with th' illustrious dead,
 And orphan merit has no guardian now! 

Next Shipbourne, tho' her precincts are confin'd
 To narrow limits, yet can shew a train
 Of village beauties, pastorally sweet,
 And rurally magnificent. Here Fairlawn
 Opes her delightful prospects: Dear Fairlawn
 There, where at once at variance and agreed,
 Nature and art hold dalliance. There where rills
 Kiss the green drooping herbage, there where trees,
 The tall trees-tremble at th' approach of heav'n,
 And bow their salutation to the sun,
 Who fosters all their foliage — These are thine,
 Yes, little Shipbourne, boast that these are thine —
 And if — But oh! — and if 'tis no disgrace,
 The birth of him who now records thy praise. 

Nor shalt thou, Mereworth, remain unsung,
 Where noble Westmoreland, his country's friend,
 Bids British greatness love the silent shade,
 Where piles superb, in classic elegance,
 Arise, and all is Roman, like his heart. 

Nor Chatham, tho' it is not thine to shew
 The lofty forest or the verdant lawns,
 Yet niggard silence shall not grutch thee praise. 
The lofty forests by thy sons prepar'd
 Becomes the warlike navy, braves the floods,
 And gives Sylvanus empire in the main. 
Oh that Britannia, in the day of war,
 Wou'd not alone Minerva's valour trust,
 But also hear her wisdom! Then her oaks
 Shap'd by her own mechanics, wou'd alone
 Her island fortify, and fix her fame;
 Nor wou'd she weep, like Rachael, for her sons,
 Whose glorious blood, in mad profusion,
 In foreign lands is shed — and shed in vain. 

Now on fair Dover's topmost cliff I'll stand,
 And look with scorn and triumph on proud France. 
Of yore an isthmus jutting from this coast,
 Join'd the Britannic to the Gallic shore;
 But Neptune on a day, with fury fir'd,
 Rear'd his tremendous trident, smote the earth,
 And broke th' unnatural union at a blow. —
 "'Twixt you and you, my servants and my sons,
" Be there (he cried) eternal discord — France
 "Shall bow the neck to Cantium's peerless offspring,
" And as the oak reigns lordly o'er the shrub,
 "So shall the hop have homage from the vine." 
