the hop-garden. a Georgic.

in two book.

the hop-garden. a Georgic. book the first.

the land that answer best the farmer care,
 and silver to maturity the hop:
 when to inhume the plant; to turn the glebe;
 and wed the tendril to the aspire pole:
 under what sign to pluck the crop, and how
 to cure, and in capacious sack enfold,
 i teach in verse miltonian. smile the muse,
 and meditate a honour to that land
 where first i breathe, and struggle into life
 impatient, Cantium, to be call thy son. 

oh! can i emulate than sydney muse,
 thy Sydney, Cantium — he from court retire
 in penshurst sweet elysium sing delight,
 sing transport to the soft-responding stream
 of Medway, and enliven all her grove:
 while ever near he, goddess of the green,
 fair Pembroke sit, and smile immense applause. 
with vocal fascination charm the hour
 unguarded leave heaven adamantine gate,
 and to his lyre, swift as the wing sound
 that skim the air, dance unperceived away. 
have i such power, no peasant toil, no hop
 shall ever debase my lay: far noble theme,
 the high achievement of thy warrior king
 shall raise my thought, and dignify my song. 
but i, young rustic, dare not leave my cot,
 for so enlarge a sphere — ah! muse beware,
 lest the loud larum of the bray trump,
 lest the deep drum shall drown thy tender reed,
 and mar its puny joint: i, lowly swain,
 every unshaven arboret, i the lawn,
 i the voluminous medway silver wave,
 content inglorious, and the hopland shade! 

yeoman, and countryman attend my song:
 whether you shiver in the marshy Weald,
 egregious shepherd of unnumbered flock,
 who fleece, poison into purple, deck
 all europe king: or in fair madum vale
 imparadise, bless denizen, you dwell;
 or dorovernia awful tower you love:
 or plough tunbridgia salutiferous hill
 industrious, and with draught chalybiate heal,
 confess divine hygeia blissful seat;
 the muse demand your presence, ere she tune
 her monitory voice; observe she well,
 and catch the wholesome dictate as they fall. 

 'midst thy paternal acre, farmer, say
 have gracious heaven bestow one field, that bask
 its loamy bosom in the midday sun,
 emerge gentle from the abject vale,
 nor yet obnoxious to the wind, secure
 there shall thou plant thy hop. this soil, perhaps,
 thou will say, will fill my garner. be it so. 
but Ceres, rural goddess, at the best
 mean support her vot'ry', enough for she,
 if ill-persuading hunger she repel,
 and keep the soul from faint: to enlarge,
 to glad the heart, to sublimate the mind,
 and wing the flag spirit to the sky,
 require the unite influence and aid
 of Bacchus, god of hop, with Ceres join
 it be he shall generate the buxom beer. 
then on one pedestal, and hand in hand,
 sculpture in parian stone (so gratitude
 indite) let the divine co-part'ner rise. 
stand eastward in thy field a wood? it be well. 
esteem it as a bulwark of thy wealth,
 and cherish all its branch; though we will grant,
 its leaf umbrageous may intercept
 the morning ray, and envy some small share
 of Sol beneficence to the infant germ. 
yet grutch not that: when whistle eurus come,
 with all his world of insect in thy land
 to hyemate, and monarchise over all
 thy vegetable riches, then thy wood
 shall open it be arm expansive, and embrace
 the storm reluctant, and divert its rage. 
army of animalc'le urge their way
 in vain: the ventilate tree oppose
 their airy march. they blacken distant plain. 

this site for thy young nursery obtain,
 thou have begin auspicious, if the soil
 (as sing before) be loamy; this the hop
 love above other, this be rich, be deep,
 be viscous, and tenacious of the pole. 
yet maugre all its native worth, it may
 be meliorate with warm compost. see!
 yond craggy mountain, who fastidious head,
 divide the star-set hemisphere above,
 and cantium plain beneath; the appennine
 of a free Italy, who chalky side
 with verdant shrub dissimilar gay,
 still captivate the eye, while at his foot
 the silver Medway glide, and in her breast
 view the reflect landskip, charm she view
 and murmur loud ecstasy below. 
here let we rest awhile, please to behold
 the all-beautiful horizon wide expanse,
 far as the eagle ken. here tower spire
 first catch the eye, and turn the thought to heaven. 
the lofty elm in humble majesty
 bend with the breeze to shade the solemn grove,
 and spread a holy darkness; Ceres there
 shine in her golden vesture. here the mead
 enrich by Flora daedal hand, with pride
 expose their spot verdure. nor be you
 Pomona absent; you amid the hoary leaf
 swell the vermilion cherry; and on you tree
 suspend the pippen palatable gold. 
there old Sylvanus in that moss-grown grot
 dwell with his wood-nymph: they with chaplet green
 and russet mantle oft bedight, aloft
 from yond bend oak, in medway bosom fair
 wonder at silver bleak, and prickly perch,
 that swift through their float forest glide. 
yet not even these — these ever-varied scene
 of wealth and pleasure can engage my eye
 the overlook the lowly hawthorn, if from thence
 the thrush, sweet warbler, chant the unstudied lay
 which phoebus self vault from yonder cloud
 refulgent, with enliven ray inspire. 
but neither tower spire, nor lofty elm,
 nor golden Ceres, nor the meadow green,
 nor orchat, nor the russet-mantled nymph,
 which to the murmur of the Medway dance,
 nor sweet warble thrush, with half those charm
 attract my eye, as yonder hopland close,
 joint-work of art and nature, which remind
 the muse, and to her theme the wanderer call. 

here then with ponderous vehicle and team
 thy rustic send, and from the cavern deep
 command they bring the chalk: thence to the kiln
 convey, and temper with vulcanian fire. 
soon as it be form, thy lime with bounteous hand
 over all thy land disseminate; thy land
 which first have feel the soften spade, and drink
 the strengthen vapour from nutritious marl. 

this do, select the choice hop, to insert
 fresh in the open glebe. say then, my muse,
 its various kind, and from the effete and vile,
 the eligible separate with care. 
the noble species be by kentish wight
 the master-hop clepe. nature to he
 have give a stout stalk, patient of cold,
 or Phoebus even in youth, his verdant blood
 in brisk saltation circulate and flow
 indesinent vigorous: the next
 be arid, fetid, infecund, and gross
 significant style the Fryar: the last
 be call the savage, who in every wood,
 and every hedge unintroduce intrude. 
when such the merit of the candidate,
 easy be the election; but, my friend
 will thou never fail, to Kent direct thy way,
 where no one shall be frustrate that seek
 ought that be great or good. hail, Cantium, hail! 
illustrious parent of the fine fruit,
 illustrious parent of the best of man! 
for thou antiquity thrice sacred spring
 placid stagnant at their fountain head,
 i rash dare to trouble (if from thence,
 if ought for thy util'ty i can drain)
 and in thy town adopt the ascraean muse. 
hail hero, hail invaluable gem,
 splendid rough within your native mine,
 to luxury unrefined, better far
 to shake with unbought ague in your weald,
 than dwell a slave to passion and to wealth,
 polite paralytic in the town! 
favourite of heaven! to who the general doom
 be all remit, who alone possess
 of Adam son fair Eden — rest you here,
 nor seek a earthly good above the hop;
 a good! untasted by your ancient king,
 and almost to your very sire unknown. 

in those bless day when great Eliza reign
 over the adore nation, when fair peace
 or spread a unstained olive round the land,
 or laureled war do teach our wing fleet
 to lord it over the world, when our brave sire
 drink valour from uncauponated beer;
 then the hop (before a interdict plant,
 shun like fall aconite) begin to hang
 its fold floscle from the golden vine,
 and bloom a shade to cantium sunny shore
 delightsome, and in cheerful goblet laugh
 potent, what time aquarius urn impend
 to kill the dulsome day — potent to quench
 the syrian ardour, and autumnal ill
 to heal with mild potation; sweet far
 than those which erst the subtle Hengist mix
 the enthral voluptuous Vortigern. he, with love
 emasculate and wine, the toil of war,
 neglect, and to dalliance vile and sloth
 emancipate, see the encroach saxon
 with unaffected eye; his hand which ought
 the have shake the spear of justice, soft and smooth,
 play ravish division on the lyre:
 this Hengist mark, and (for curse insolence
 soon fatten on impunity! and become
 Briareus from a dwarf) fair thanet gain. 
nor stop he here; but to immense attempt
 ambition sky-aspiring lead he on
 adventurous. he a only daughter rear,
 roxena, matchless maid! nor rear in vain. 
her eagle-eyed callidity, grave deceit,
 and fairy fiction raise above her sex,
 and furnish she with thousand various wile
 preposterous, more than female; wondrous fair
 she be, and docile, which her pious nurse
 observe, and early in each female fraud
 she begin initiate: well she know to smile,
 whenever vexation gall she; do she weep? 
it be not sincere, the fountain of her eye
 play artificial stream, yet so well force
 they look like nature; for even art to she
 be natural, and contrariety
 seem in roxena congruous and ally. 
such be she, when brisk Vortigern behold,
 ill-fated prince! and love she. she perceive,
 soon she perceive her conquest; soon she tell,
 with hasty joy transport, her old sire. 
the saxon inly smile, and to his isle
 the will prince invite, but first bad
 the nymph prepare the potion; such as fire
 the blood be meander rivulet, and depress
 to love the soul. lo! at the noon of night
 thrice Hecate invoke the maid — and thrice
 the goddess stoop assent; forth from a cloud
 she stoop, and give the philter power to charm. 
these in a splendid cup of burnish gold
 the lovely sorceress mix, and to the prince
 health, peace, and joy propine, but to herself
 mutter dire exorcism, and wish effect
 to the love-creating draught: lowly she bow
 fawn insinuation bland, that may
 deceive laertes son; her lucid orb
 shed copious the oblique ray; her face
 like modest luna shine, but not so pale,
 and with no borrow lustre; on her brow
 smile fallacy, while summon each grace,
 kneel she give the cup. the prince (for who! 
who can have spurn a suppliant so divine?) 
drink eager, and in ecstasy devour
 the ambrosial perturbation; mad with love
 he clasp she, and in hymeneal band
 at once the nymph demand and obtain. 
now Hengist, all his ample wish fulfil,
 exult; and from Kent the uxorious prince
 exterminate, and usurp his seat. 
long do he reign; but all-devouring time
 have raze his palace wall — perchance on they
 grow the green hop, and over his crumble bust
 in spiral twine ascend the scancile pole. —
 but now to plant, to dig, to dung, to weed;
 task how indelicate? demand the muse. 

come, fair magician, sportive fancy come,
 with thy unbounded imagery; child of thought,
 from thy aeriel citadel descend,
 and (for thou can) assist i. bring with thou
 thy all-creative talisman; with thou
 the active spirit ideal, tower flight,
 that hover over the muse-resounding grove,
 and all thy colour, all thy shape display. 
thou too be here, experience, so shall i
 my rule nor in low prose jejune say,
 nor in smooth number musical err;
 but vain be fancy and experience vain,
 if thou, o Hesiod! Virgil of our land,
 or hear thou rather, Milton, bard divine,
 who greatness who shall imitate, save thou? 
if thou o Philips favour do not hear
 i, inexpert of verse; with gentle hand
 uprear the unpinioned muse, high on the top
 of that immeasurable mount, that far
 exceed thy own Plinlimmon, where thou tune
 with phoebus self thy lyre. give i to turn
 the unwieldly subject with thy graceful ease,
 extol its baseness with thy art; but chief
 illumine, and invigorate with thy fire. 

when Phoebus look through Aries on the spring,
 and vernal flower promise the dulcet fruit,
 autumnal pride! delay not then thy set
 in tellus facile bosom to depose
 timely: if thou be wise the bulky choose:
 to every root three joint indulge, and form
 the quincunx with well regulate hill. 
soon from the dung-enriched earth, their head
 thy young plant will uplift, their virgin arm
 they will stretch, and marriageable claim the pole. 
nor frustrate thou their wish, so thou may
 expect a hopeful issue, jolly mirth,
 sister of taleful jocus, tuneful song,
 and fat good-nature with her honest face. 
but yet in the novitiate of their love,
 and tenderness of youth suffice small shoot
 cut from the widow willow, nor provide
 pole insurmountable as yet. it be then
 when twice bright phoebus vivify ray,
 twice the cold touch of winter icy hand,
 they have feel; it be then we fell sublime prop. 
it be then the sturdy woodman axe from far
 resound, resound, and hark! with hollow groan
 down tumble the big tree, and rush roll
 over the crush crackle brake, while in his cave
 forlorn, deject, amid the weep dryad
 lament Sylvanus for his verdant care. 
the ash, or willow for thy use select,
 or storm-enduring chesnut; but the oak
 unfit for this employ, for noble end
 reserve untouched; she when by time mature,
 capacious, of some british demi-god,
 Vernon, or warren, shall with rapid wing
 infuriate, like Jove armour-bearing bird,
 fly on thy foe; they, like the part wave,
 which to the brazen beak murmur give way
 amaze, and roar from the fight recede. —
 in that sweet month, when to the listen swain
 fair philomel sing love, and every cot
 with garland bloom bedight, with bandage meet
 the tendril bind, and to the tall pole tie,
 else soon, too soon their meretricious arm
 round each ignoble clod they will fold, and leave
 averse the lordly prop. thus, have i hear
 where there be no mutual tie, no strong connection
 of love-conspiring heart, oft the young bride
 have prostitute to her slave her charm,
 while the infatuate lord admire
 fresh-budding sprout, and issue not his own. 
now turn the glebe: soon with correct hand
 when smile June in jocund dance lead on
 long day and happy hour, from every vine
 Dock the redundant branch, and once more
 with the sharp spade thy numerous acre till. 
the shovel next must lend its aid, enlarge
 the little hillock, and erase the weed. 
this in that month its title which derive
 from great augustus ever sacred name! 
sovereign of science! master of the muse! 
neglect genius' firm ally! of worth
 best judge, and best rewarder, who applause
 to bard be fame and fortune! o! it be well,
 well do you too in this, all glorious hero! 
you roman! — on time be wing you have stamp his praise,
 and time shall bear it to eternity. 

now be our labour crown with their reward,
 now bloom the florid hop, and in the stream
 shine in their float silver, while above
 t'embow'ring branch culminate, and form
 a walk impervious to the sun; the pole
 in comely order stand; and while you cleave
 with the small skiff the medway lucid wave,
 in comely order still their rank preserve,
 and seem to march along the extensive plain. 
in neat arrangement thus the man of Kent,
 with native oak at once adorn and arm,
 intrepid march; for well they know the cry
 of die liberty, and astraea voice,
 who as she flee, to echo wood complain.
 of tyranny, and William; like a god,
 refulgent stand the conqueror, on his troop
 he send his look enliven as the sun,
 but on his foe frown agony, frown death. 
on his left side in bright emblazonry
 his falchion burn; forth from his sevenfold shield
 a basilisk shoot adamant; his brow
 wear cloud of fury! — on that with plumage crown
 of various hue sit a tremendous cone:
 thus sit high-canopied above the cloud,
 terrific beauty of nocturnal sky,
 northern Aurora; she through the azure air
 shoot, shoot her tremulous ray in paint streak
 continual, while wave to the wind
 over night dark veil her lucid tress flow. 
the traveler view the unseasonable day
 astound, the proud bend lowly to the earth,
 the pious matron tremble for the world. 
but what can daunt the insuperable soul
 of cantium matchless son? on they proceed,
 all innocent of fear; each face express
 contemptuous admiration, while they view
 the well-fed brigade of embroider slave
 that draw the sword for gain. first of the van,
 with a enormous bough, a shepherd swain
 whistle with rustic note; but such as show
 a heart magnanimous: the man of Kent
 follow the tuneful swain, while over their head
 the green leaf whisper, and the big bough bend. 
it be thus the thracian, who all-quickening lyre
 the flood inspire, and teach the rock to feel,
 play before dance Haemus, to the tune,
 the lute soft tune! the flutter branch wave,
 the rock enjoy it, and the rivulet hear,
 the hillock skip, emerge the humble vale,
 and all the mighty mountain nod applause. 
the conqueror view they, and as one that see
 the vast abrupt of Scylla, or as one
 that from the oblivious lethaean stream
 have drink eternal apathy, he stand. 
his host a universal panic seize
 prodigious, inopine; their armour shake,
 and clatter to the tremble of their limb;
 some to the walk wilderness gin run
 confuse, and in the inhospitable shade
 for shelter seek — wretch! they shelter find,
 eternal shelter in the arm of death! 
thus when Aquarius pour out all his urn.
 down on some lonesome heath, the traveller
 that wander over the wintery waste, accept
 the invitation of some spread beech
 joyous; but soon the treacherous gloom betray
 the unwary visitor, while on his head
 the enlarge drop in double shower descend. 

and now no long in disguise the man
 of Kent appear; down they all drop their bough,
 and shine in brazen panoply divine. 
enough — great William (for full well he know
 how vain will be the contest) to the son
 of glorious Cantium, give their life, and law,
 and liberty secure, and to the prowess
 of kentish wight, like Caesar, deign to yield. 
Caesar and William! hail immortal worthy,
 illustrious vanquish! Cantium, if to they,
 posterity with all her chief unborn,
 ought similar, ought second have to boast,
 once more (so prophecy the muse) thy son
 shall triumph, emulous of their sire — till then
 with olive, and with hopland garland crown,
 over all thy land reign plenty, reign fair peace. 

the hop-garden. a Georgic. book the second.

the hop-garden. a Georgic. book the second.

at length the muse her destine task resume
 with joy; again over all her hopland grove
 she long to expatiate free of wing. long while
 for a much-loving, much-loved youth she weep,
 and sorrow silence over the untimely urn. 
hush then, effeminate sob; and thou, my heart,
 rebel to grief no more — and yet a while,
 a little while, indulge the friendly tear. 
over the wild world, like Noah dove, in vain
 i seek the olive peace, around i wide
 see! see! the watery waste — in vain, forlorn
 i call the phoenix fair sincerity;
 alas! — extinguish to the sky she flee,
 and leave no heir behind she. where be now
 the eternal smile of goodness? where be now
 that all-extensive charity of soul,
 so rich in sweetness, that the classic sound
 in elegance Augustan clothe, the wit
 that flow perennial, hardly be observe,
 or, if observe, set off a bright gem. 
how oft, and yet how seldom do it seem! 
have i enjoy his converse? — when we meet,
 the hour how swift they sweet flee, and till
 again i see he, how they loiter. oh!
 Theophilus, thou dear depart soul,
 what flatter tale thou tell i? how thou'dst hail
 my muse, and took imaginary walk
 all in my hopland grove! stay yet, oh stay! 
thou dear deluder, thou have see but half —
 he be go! and ought that be equal to his praise
 fame have not for i, though she prove most kind. 
however this verse be sacred to thy name,
 these tear, the last sad duty of a friend. 
oft i will indulge the pleasurable pain
 of recollection; oft on medway bank
 i will muse on thou full pensive; while her stream
 regardful ever of my grief, shall flow
 in sullen silence silver along
 the weep shore — or else accordant with
 my loud lament, shall ever and anon
 make melancholy music to the shade,
 the hopland shade, that on her bank expose
 serpentine vine and flow lock of gold. 

you smile nymph, the inseparable train
 of saffron Ceres; you, that gamesome dance,
 and sing to jolly autumn, while he stand
 with his right hand poize the scale of heaven,
 and with his left grasp amalthea horn:
 young chorus of fair bacchanal, descend,
 and leave a while the sickle; yonder hill,
 where stand the load hop-pole, claim your care. 
there mighty Bacchus straddle cross the bin,
 wait your attendance — there he glad review
 his paunch, approach to immensity
 still near, and with pride of heart survey
 obedient mortal, and the world his own. 
see! from the great metropolis they rush,
 the industrious vulgar. they, like prudent bee,
 in kent wide garden roam, expert to crop
 the flowery hop, and provident to work,
 ere winter numb their sunburn hand, and wind
 engoal they, murmur in their gloomy cell. 
from these, such as appear the rest to excel
 in strength and young agility, select. 
these shall support with vigour and address
 the bin-man weighty office; now extract
 from the sequacious earth the pole, and now
 unmarry from the close cling vine. 
over twice three picker, and no more, extend
 the bin-man sway; unless thy ear can bear
 the crack of pole continual, and thy eye
 behold unmoved the hurry peasant tear
 thy wealth, and throw it on the thankless ground. 
but first the careful planter will consult
 his quantity of acre, and his crop,
 how many and how large his kiln; and then
 proportion to his want the hand provide. 
but yet, of great consequence and cost,
 one thing remain unsung, a man of faith
 and long experience, in who thunder voice
 live hoarse authority, potent to quell
 the frequent fray of the tumultuous crew. 
he shall preside over all thy hopland store,
 severe dictator! his unerring hand,
 and eye inquisitive, in heedful guise,
 shall to the brink the measure fill, and fair
 on the twin register the work record. 
and yet i have know they own a female reign,
 and gentle marianne soft orphean voice
 have hymn sweet lesson of humanity
 to the wild brutal crew. oft her command
 have save the pillar of the hopland state,
 the lofty pole from ruin, and sustain,
 like ANNA, or ELIZA, her domain,
 with more than manly dignity. oft i have see,
 even at her frown the boisterous uproar cease,
 and the mad picker, tame to diligence,
 cull from the bin the sprawl sprig, and leaf
 that stain the sample, and its worth debase. 
all thing thus settle and prepare, what now
 can let the planter purpose? unless
 the heaven frown dissent, and ominous wind
 howl through the concave of the trouble sky. 
and oft, alas! the long experience wight
 (oh! can they too prevent they) storm foresee. 
for, as the storm ride on the rise cloud,
 fly the fleet wild-geese far away, or else
 the heifer towards the zenith rear her head,
 and with expand nostril snuff the air:
 the swallow too their airy circuit weave,
 and scream skim the brook; and fen-bred frog
 forth from their hoarse throat their old grutch recite:
 or from her earthly coverlet the ant
 heave her huge egg along the narrow way:
 or bend thaumantia variegate bow
 athwart the cope of heaven: or sable crow
 obstreperous of wing, in croud combine:
 beside, unnumbered troop of bird marine,
 and asia feather flock, that in the mud
 of flow'ry-edged cayster wont to prey,
 now in the shallows duck their speckle head,
 and lust to lave in vain, their unctious plume
 repulsive baffle their effort: next hark
 how the curse raven, with her harmful voice,
 invoke the rain, and croak to herself,
 strut on some spacious solitary shore. 
nor want thy servant and thy wife at home
 sign to presage the shower; for in the hall
 shed Niobe her prescious tear, and warn
 beneath thy leaden tube to fix the vase,
 and catch the fall dew-drop, which supply
 soft water and salubrious, far the best
 to soak thy hop, and brew thy generous beer. 
but though bright Phoebus smile, and in the sky
 the purple-robed serenity appear;
 though every cloud be flee, yet if the rage
 of Boreas, or the blast east prevail,
 the planter have enough to check his hope,
 and in due bound confine his joy; for see
 the ruffian wind, in their abrupt career,
 leave not a hop behind, or at the best
 mangle the circle vine, and intercept
 the juice nutritious: fatal mean, alas! 
their colour and condition to destroy. 
haste then, you peasant; pull the pole, the hop;
 where be the bin? run, run, you nimble maid,
 move every muscle, every nerve extend,
 to save our crop from ruin, and ourselves. 

soon as bright chanticleer explode the night
 with flutter wing, and hymn the new-born day,
 the bugle-horn inspire, who clamorous bray
 shall rouse from sleep the rebel rout, and tune
 to temper for the labour of the day. 
wise the several station of the bin
 by lot determine. justice this, and this
 fair prudence do demand; for not without
 a certain method can thou rule the mob
 irrational, nor every where alike
 fair hang the hop to tempt the picker hand. 

now see the crew mechanic may and main
 labour with lively diligence, inspire
 by appetite of gain and lust of praise:
 what mind so petty, servile, and debase,
 as not to know ambition? her great sway
 from Colin clout to emperor she exert. 
to err be human, human to be vain. 
it be vanity, and mock desire of fame,
 that prompt the rustic, on the steeple top
 sublime, to mark the outline of his shoe,
 and in the area to engrave his name. 
with pride of heart the church-warden survey,
 high over the bellfry, gird with bird and flower,
 his story write in capital: "it be i
" that buy the font; and i repair the pew. " 
with pride like this the emulate mob
 strive for the mastery — who first may fill
 the belly bin, and clean cull the hop. 
nor ought retard, unless invite out
 by Sol decline, and the evening calm,
 Leander lead laetitia to the scene
 of shade and fragrance — then the exult band
 of picker male and female, seize the fair
 reluctant, and with boisterous force and brute,
 by cry unmoved, they bury she in the bin. 
nor do the youth escape — he too they seize,
 and in such posture place as best may serve
 to hide his charmer blush. then with shout
 they rend the echo air, and from they both
 (so custom have ordain) a largess claim. 

thus much be sing of pick — next succeed
 the important care of cure — quit the field,
 and at the kiln the instructive muse attend. 

on your haircloth eight inch deep, nor more,
 let the green hop lie light; next expand
 the smoothe surface with the toothy rake. 
thus far be just above; but more it boot
 that charcoal flame burn equable below,
 the charcoal flame, which from thy cord wood,
 or antiquate pole, with wondrous skill,
 the sable priest of Vulcan shall prepare. 
constant and moderate let the heat ascend;
 which to effect, there be, who with success
 place in the kiln the ventilate fan. 
hail, learned, useful man! who head and heart
 conspire to make we happy, deign to accept
 one honest verse; and if thy industry
 have serve the hopland cause, the muse forebode
 this sole invention, both in use and fame,
 the mystic fan of Bacchus shall exceed. 

when the four hour expire, with careful hand
 the half-baked hop turn over. soon as time
 have well exhaust twice two glass more,
 they will leap and crackle with their burst seed,
 for use domestic, or for sale mature. 

there be, who in the choice of cloth to enfold
 their wealthy crop, the vile, coarse sort,
 with prodigal economy prefer:
 all that be good be cheap, all dear that be base. 
beside, the planter shall a bait prepare,
 the entrap the chapman notice, and divert
 shrewd observation from her busy pry. 

when in the bag thy hop the rustic tread,
 let he wear heel-less sandal; nor presume
 their fragrancy barefooted to defile:
 such filthy way for slave in Malaga
 leave we to practise — whence I have often see,
 when beautiful dorinda ivory hand
 have build the pastry-fabric (food divine
 for christmas gambol and the hour of mirth)
 as the dry foreign fruit, with pierce eye,
 she cull suspicious — lo! she start, she frown
 with indignation at a negro nail. 

shall thou thy harvest for the mart design,
 be thy own factor; nor employ those drone
 who have sting, but make no honey, selfish slave! 
that thrive and fatten on the planter toil. 

what then remain unsung? unless the care
 to stack thy pole oblique in comely cone,
 lest rot or rain destroy they — it be a sight
 most seemly to behold, and give, o winter! 
a landskip not unpleasing even to thou. 

and now, you rival of the hopland state,
 madum and dorovernia rejoice,
 how great amid such rival to excel! 
let grenovicum boast (for boast she may) 
the birth of great Eliza. — hail, my queen! 
and yet i will call thou by a dear name,
 my countrywoman, hail! thy worth alone
 give fame to world, and make whole age glorious! 

let Sevenoaks vaunt the hospitable seat
 of knoll most ancient: awful, my muse,
 these social scene of grandeur and delight,
 of love and veneration, let i tread. 
how oft beneath you oak have amorous prior
 awaken echo with sweet Chloe name! 
while noble Sackville hear, hear approve,
 approve, great recompense. but he,
 alas! have number with the illustrious dead,
 and orphan merit have no guardian now! 

next Shipbourne, though her precinct be confine
 to narrow limit, yet can show a train
 of village beauty, pastoral sweet,
 and rural magnificent. here fairlawn
 open her delightful prospect: dear fairlawn
 there, where at once at variance and agree,
 nature and art hold dalliance. there where rill
 kiss the green droop herbage, there where tree,
 the tall trees-tremble at the approach of heaven,
 and bow their salutation to the sun,
 who foster all their foliage — these be thy,
 yes, little Shipbourne, boast that these be thy —
 and if — but oh! — and if it be no disgrace,
 the birth of he who now record thy praise. 

nor shall thou, Mereworth, remain unsung,
 where noble Westmoreland, his country friend,
 bid british greatness love the silent shade,
 where pile superb, in classic elegance,
 arise, and all be roman, like his heart. 

nor Chatham, though it be not thy to show
 the lofty forest or the verdant lawn,
 yet niggard silence shall not grutch thou praise. 
the lofty forest by thy son prepare
 become the warlike navy, brave the flood,
 and give Sylvanus empire in the main. 
oh that Britannia, in the day of war,
 will not alone minerva valour trust,
 but also hear her wisdom! then her oak
 shape by her own mechanic, will alone
 her island fortify, and fix her fame;
 nor will she weep, like Rachael, for her son,
 who glorious blood, in mad profusion,
 in foreign land be shed — and shed in vain. 

now on fair dover topmost cliff i will stand,
 and look with scorn and triumph on proud France. 
of yore a isthmus jut from this coast,
 join the britannic to the Gallic shore;
 but Neptune on a day, with fury fire,
 rear his tremendous trident, smite the earth,
 and break the unnatural union at a blow. —
 "betwixt you and you, my servant and my son,
" be there (he cry) eternal discord — France
 "shall bow the neck to cantium peerless offspring,
" and as the oak reign lordly over the shrub,
 "so shall the hop have homage from the vine." 
