a fragment.

— my soul be out of tune,
 no harmony reign here, it be discord all:
 be dumb, sweet chorister, i heed you not;
 then why thus swell your liquid throat, to cheer
 a wretch undo, for ever lose to joy,
 and mark for ruin? seek yond leafy grove,
 indulgent bliss there wait you; shun this spot
 drear, joyless, vacant, as my waste soul,
 disrobe of all her bliss: here heave, my heart,
 here sigh thy woe away; unheard the groan,
 unseen the fall tear; in this lone wild
 no busy fool invade thy hoard grief,
 and smile in ignorance at what he feel not. 
yet, yet indulge not, listen wind may catch
 coherent sigh, and waft they far away,
 where levity hold high the senseless roar
 of laughter, and pale woe, abash, retire. 
or, shall my woe be to the wind diffuse,
 no long mine, once past the quiver lip;
 like fly atom in the sightless air,
 some may descend on the gay, grin herd;
 but few, how few, will reach the feeling mind! 

officious truth! unwelcome guest to most,
 yet i will own thou, and bid hope good night,
 fond, soothe flatterer! nineteen year be past,
 since first i listen to her please lore;
 ah, i! how bright she paint future scene,
 and sweet speak of blessing yet unborn! 
now, fond deceiver, where be the promise good? 
but, oh! thou be lovely, and i will never accuse
 or hate thou, though we never meet again. 

with thou, despair, must i then tread the path
 of tedious life, nor cast one look behind,
 on all the pile of bliss gay hope have raise? 
but heaven think otherwise — o, generous world! 
thou who so frank hold embitter draught,
 accept my surly thanks, and few be due
 where little be bestow. the reasoner rave,
 lift the hard eye, and with long-winded speech,
 and self-applauding dialect, condemn
 my mind, thus stray from the tread path:
 i heed you not, nor have i time to spin
 the thread of argument; yet fain will know
 the ready road to rest. teach i, you wise,
 you who have tread the endless, endless whirl
 of measureless conjecture, still uphold
 by brilliant fancy rapture-giving wing:
 o you! who spirit rove beyond yond orb,
 to find the realm of rest, for such there be,
 to prove a home when the sad soul shall need it. 
imagination wander, while the eye
 seem far extend, though the senseless ball
 distinguish nought, but, every sense call in,
 be bury in the dusky, deep recess
 of meditation. what be the grand result? 
you studious sage, where be the fix abode? 
where be that eternal home, beyond the grave? 
oh! deign to tell a fellow-wretch like i,
 unwilling to be nothing; be not you? 
else why this search — and where be the great success? 
say, have you find it? can you teach the road
 which thither lead? ah, no! th'account bring home
 differ so far, million of heaven be form;
 each vain philosopher, by pride mislead,
 present you a futurity his own;
 by that secure, the self-sufficient sage,
 indifferent, view the group of anxious soul
 search the path to rest; if his they miss,
 he swear no other way can ever be find,
 and then consign they over to endless woe. 

oh! narrow notion of a god supreme! 
oh! barbarous portrait of a god all love! 
i will think no more. you deep-distracting doubt,
 bewilder not my soul; for see, the page
 of boundless mercy, and of christian faith,
 clear up the doubtful future; all be peace,
 hope dawn, a earnest of the perfect day. 
