a pindaric, to the athenian society.

i 

i have touch each string, each muse i have invoke,
 yet still the mighty theam,
 Copes my unequal praise;
 perhaps, the god of number be provoke. 
i grasp a subject fit for none but he,
 or dryden sweet lay;
 Dryden! a name i never can yet rehearse,
 but straight my thought be all transform to verse. 

ii.

and now methinks i rise;
 but still the lofty subject baulk my slight,
 and still my muse despair to do great Athens right;
 yet take the zealous tribute which i bring,
 the early product of a female muse;
 until the god, into my breast shall mighty thought infuse. 
when i with more command, and proud voice shall sing;
 but how shall i describe the matchless man? 
i be lose in the bright labyrinth again. 

iii.

when the lewd age, as ignorant as accurse,
 arrive in vice and error to the worst,
 and like astrea banish from the stage,
 virtue and truth be ready stretch for slight;
 their numerous foe,
 scarce one of either champion venture to oppose;
 scarce one brave mind, dare open engage,
 to do they right. 
till prompt with a generous rage;
 you cope with all the abuse of the age;
 unmasked and challenge its abhor crime,
 nor fear to dash the darling vice of the time. 

iv.

successful go on,
 the inform and bless mankind as you have begin,
 till like your self they see;
 the frantic world imagine joy to be,
 unmanly, sensual and effeminate,
 till they with such exalt thought possess;
 as you have inspire into my will breast,
 be charm, like i, from the impend fate. 

v. 

for ah! forgive i heaven, i blush to say't,
 i with the vulgar world think irreligion great,
 though fine my breed, and my notion high;
 though train in the bright tract of strict piety,
 i like my splendid tempter soon grow vain,
 and lay my slight innocence a side;
 yet oft my noble thought i have belie,
 and to be ill be even reduce to feign. 

vi.

until by you,
 with more heroic sentiment inspire,
 i turn and stand the vigorous torrent too,
 and at my former weak retreat admire;
 so much be i by your example fire,
 so much the heavenly form do win:
 which to my eye you will paint virtue in. 

vii.

oh, can my verse;
 with equal flight, to after time rehearse,
 your fame: it shall as bright and deathless be;
 as that immortal flame you have raise in i. 
a flame which time:
 and death it self, want power to control,
 not more sublime,
 be the divine composure of my soul;
 a friendship so exalt and immense,
 a female breast do never before commence. 
