Celia to Damon.

what can i say? what argument can prove
 my truth? what colour can describe my love? 
if it be excess and fury be not know,
 in what thy celia have already do. 

thy infant flame, while yet they be conceal
 in timorous doubt, with pity i behold;
 with easy smile dispel the silent fear,
 that dare not tell i, what i die to hear:
 in vain i strive to check my grow flame,
 or shelter passion under friendship name:
 you see my heart, how it my tongue belie;
 and when you press, how faint i deny —

ever guardian thought can bring it be scatter aid;
 ever reason can support the doubt maid;
 my soul surprise, and from her self disjoin,
 leave all reserve, and all the sex behind:
 from your command her motion she receive;
 and not for i, but you, she breathe and live. 

but ever bless be cytherea shrine;
 and fire eternal on her altar shine;
 since thy dear breast have feel a equal wound;
 since in thy kindness my desire be crown. 
by thy each look, and think, and care it be show,
 thy joy be centre all in i alone;
 and sure i be, thou will not change this hour
 for all the white one, fate have in it be power. —

yet thus belove, thus love to excess;
 yet thus receive and return bliss;
 in this great moment, in this golden now,
 when every trace of what, or when, or how
 shall from my soul by rage love be tear,
 and far on swell sea of rapture bear;
 a melancholy tear afflict my eye;
 and my heart labour with a sudden sigh:
 invade fear repel my coward joy;
 and ill foresee the present bliss destroy. 

poor as it be, this beauty be the cause,
 that with first sigh your pant bosom rise:
 but with no owner beauty long will stay,
 upon the wing of time bear swift away:
 pass but some fleet year, and these poor eye
 (where now without a boast some lustre lie)
 no long shall their little honour keep;
 shall only be of use to read, or weep:
 and on this forehead, where your verse have say,
 the love delight, and the grace play;
 insult age will trace his cruel way,
 and leave sad mark of his destructive sway. 

move by my charm, with they your love may cease,
 and as the fuel sink, the flame decrease:
 or angry heaven may quick dart prepare;
 and sickness strike what time awhile will spare. 
then will my Swain his glow vow renew:
 then will his throb heart to my beat true;
 when my own face deter i from my glass;
 and Kneller only show what Celia be. 

fantastic fame may sound her wild alarm:
 your country, as you think, may want your arm.
 you may neglect, or quench, or hate the flame,
 who smoke too long obscure your rise name:
 and quick cold indifference will ensue;
 when you love joy through honour Optic view. 

then celia loud prayer will prove too weak,
 to this abandon breast to bring you back;
 when my lose lover the tall ship ascend,
 with music gay, and wet with jovial friend:
 the tender accent of a woman cry
 will pass unheard, will unregarded die;
 when the rough seaman loud shout prevail;
 when fair occasion show the spring gale;
 and interest guide the helm; and honour swell the sail. 

some wretched line from this neglect hand,
 may find my hero on the foreign strand,
 warm with new fire, and please with new command:
 while she who write they, of all joy bereave,
 to the rude censure of the world be leave;
 her mangle fame in barbarous pastime lose,
 the coxcomb novel, and the drunkard toast. 

but near care (o pardon it!) supply
 sigh to my breast, and sorrow to my eye. 
love, love himself (the only friend i have)
 may scorn his triumph, have bind his slave. 
that tyrant god, that restless conqueror
 may quit his pleasure, to assert his power;
 forsake the province that bless his sway,
 to vanquish those which will not yet obey. 

another nymph with fatal power may rise,
 to damp the sink beam of celia eye;
 with haughty pride may hear her charm confess;
 and scorn the ardent vow that i have bless:
 you every night may sigh for she in vain;
 and rise each morning to some fresh disdain:
 while celia soft look may cease to charm;
 and her embrace want the power to warm:
 while these fond arm, thus circle you, may prove
 more heavy chain, than those of hopeless love. 

just god! all other thing their like produce:
 the vine arise from her mother juice:
 when feeble plant, or tender flower decay;
 they to their seed their image convey:
 where the old myrtle her good influence shed;
 sprig of like leaf erect their filial head:
 and when the parent rose decay, and die;
 with a resemble face the daughter-bud arise. 
that product only which our passion bear,
 elude the planter miserable care:
 while bloom love assure we golden fruit;
 some inborn poison taint the secret root:
 soon fall the flower of joy: soon seed of hatred shoot. 

say, shepherd, say: be these reflection true? 
or be it but the woman fear, that draw
 this cruel scene, unjust to love and you? 
will you be only, and for ever i? 
shall neither time, nor age our soul disjoin? 
from this dear bosom shall i never be tear? 
or you grow cold, respectful, and forswear? 
and can you not for she you love do more,
 than any youth for any nymph before? 
