a epistle to a lady. 

November, 1789. 

while Morcham do your much love presence share,
 and Lydia health claim your maternal care,
 o madam, deign with candour to peruse
 a rustic lay, present by the muse. 
from loudoun plain she now awake the lyre,
 and glad will to arduous feat aspire. 
on the smooth margin of the stream recline,
 she fond hope to please a taste refine. 
what though she boast of no peculiar charm,
 that will the critic of his force disarm? 
she humble deprecate your doom severe,
 and fain will wish to find you partial here. 
the muse alone do this indulgence claim,
 else it be impious such a thought to frame. 

will you from Morcham cast your mental eye,
 and the recess of our castle spy,
 you will see Honoria, in her elbow chair,
 a mind at ease, thought unperplexed with care;
 with aspect mild, explore the sacred page,
 guide of her youth, and comfort of her age;
 in conduct prudent, and in counsel wise;
 her friendship every virtuous mind must prize. 
then view the pair, in bond of HYMEN bless,
 with little cupid flutter round their breast. 
the bliss that be mutual, all their thought employ,
 who social heart partake no selfish joy. 
to please each other prove their constant aim,
 while every act endear the tender claim. 

Matilda too, your notice must demand;
 to paint will here require a raphael hand:
 to trace the radiant beauty of her mind,
 shall be a task for noble pen assign. 
i will rather far she little foible scan,
 though strict inspection find no more than one. 
such anxious care on other she bestow,
 she quite forget what to herself she owe. 
vouchsafe the charm Celia next a look,
 her mind serene, and in her hand a book:
 eye, which at will, can pleasure give or pain,
 on stupid Humphry Clinker shine in vain. 

as through the hall and kitchen now you pass,
 pray deign to peep among the low class:
 the cook at work; but, madam, who can know
 whether her hand or tongue more swift go? 
they be nimble both; but different be the effect;
 one merit praise, the other disrespect. 
poor mary sigh beneath a load of woe,
 hard and uneasy every turn she do:
 how light soever the task, she will ponder say,
 "ah! be there not a lion in the way?" 
will seem in haste his master boot to clean,
 old James be drive turkey over the green,
 our crazy-pated dairy-maid just now
 be scribble over these senseless line to you. 
hark! there be a call, o pardon what i have pen;
 i be sure you be glad my letter at a end. 
