line on the death of sir WALTER SCOTT.

thou pleasant noble bard of fame far spread,
 now be thou gather to the mighty dead,
 and the dark coffin and the girdle mould
 all that of thou be perishable, hold. 
mourner and mute and weep friend be go;
 the pageant close, and thou be leave alone,
 the cover treasure of a sacred spot,
 that in the course of time shall never be forget. 

soon those who love, admire and honour thou,
 in death still garner-house will gather be;
 and great their number be, who have with pride
 look in thy manly face, sit by thy side,
 and hear thy social converse, — word of cheer,
 and word of power to charm the listen ear! 
at death despotic summons will they come,
 each in his turn from many a different home:
 from town and muirland, cot and mansion warm,
 the regal palace, and the homely farm. 
soldier and lawyer, merchant, priest and peer,
 the squire, the laird of forty pound a-year,
 the crown monarch and the simple hind,
 do all in thou a meet companion find. 

for thou the peasant wife her elbow chair,
 smile a welcome, kind set, and there
 with fair exchange of story, see and jest,
 thou be to her a free and pleasant guest;
 while nature, undisguised, repay thou well
 for time so spend. she and her mate can tell
 unawed, to such a man, their inmost mind;
 they claim thou as their own, their kin their kind. 
from nature book thou can extract a store,
 more precious than the scholar classic lore. 

and how feel he, who early rhyme have be
 to perilous inspection give, and see
 by one who brow be grace from every land,
 with chaplet twine by many a skilful hand? 
how beat his heart, as with the morning ray,
 to Abbotsford he take his anxious way,
 imagine what short he must see,
 he in who presence he so soon will be? 
and how feel he, thy study threshold pass,
 when on thy real face his eye be cast? 
thy open brow with glow of fancy heat;
 thy purr cat upon the table seat;
 thy sleep hound that have his easy lair
 close on the precinct of his master chair;
 the honest welcome of that sudden smile,
 and outstretch hand, misgive thought beguile. 
but when thy cheerful greeting meet his ear,
 "fie on thou! foolish heart, a man like this to fear!" 
thou be to he, when blush the eastern sky,
 a sage of awful mien and lofty eye;
 when noonday heat call forth the industrious bee,
 thou be the monitor both kind and free;
 but when the changeful day be at a end,
 thou be his easy cheerful host, — his friend. 

when all who eye have ever behold thy face,
 depart be to their long resting-place,
 thou will exist in all thy magic then,
 the cherish, speak friend of live man. 
in torrid clime, in region cold and bleak,
 in every land and language will thou speak. 
within the sick man curtain couch thou will dwell;
 within the languid prisoner cheerless cell;
 within the seaman cabin, where the sound
 of many league of water murmur round. 
the buoyant school-boy will forgo his play,
 in secret nook alone with thou to stray;
 the sober sage wise tome will cast aside,
 a hour with thou — a pleasant hour to bide. 

man of all nation, of all creed, all rank,
 will owe to thou a endless meed of thanks,
 which more than in thy pass, chequer day
 of mortal life, they will delight to pay. 
for who shall virtuous sympathy resign,
 or feed foul fancy from a page of thy? 
no, none! thy write as thy life be pure,
 and their fair fame and influence will endure. 

not so with those where perverse skill portray
 distort, blight passion; and display,
 wild, maniac, selfish fiend to be admire,
 as hero with sublime ardour fire. 
such be, to what thy faithful pen have trace,
 with all the shade of vary nature grace,
 like grim cartoon, for flemish loom prepare,
 to titian or murillo form compare;
 stately or mean, they still be form of truth,
 charm, unlearned, and learned — age and youth:
 not ecstasy express in critic phrase,
 but silent smile of pleasure speak their praise. 

when those, who now thy recent death deplore,
 lie in the dust, thought of and know no more,
 as poet and romancer, thy great name
 will bright shine with undiminished fame;
 and future son of fancy fond strive
 to their compatriot work like thy to give. 
but of the many who on her wide sea
 shall bold spread their sail to follow thou,
 more as romancer on thy track will gain,
 than those who emulate the poet strain. 
a tale like WAVERLEY we yet may con,
 but shall we read a lay like Marmion? 
and fearless i say it, though i know
 the voice of public favour say not so:
 for story-telling be a art, i ween,
 which have of old most fascinate be,
 and will be ever, — strong in ready power,
 to combat languor and the present hour;
 and over these common foe will oft prevail,
 when Homer theme and Milton song will fail. 
but strong in both, there be in sooth no need
 against thy left hand for thy right to plead:
 think as we list, one truth, alas! be plain,
 we never shall look upon thy like again. 

thy country, bound by her subject sea,
 add to her fame by give birth to thou;
 in distant land yond fancy group behold,
 where busy trader meet in quest of gold;
 motley and keen, all gather round a youth,
 who simple stand unconscious of the truth,
 look at he wistful, and hark, they speak —
 the Turk and Jew, Armenian and greek,
 their rapid lip the whisper word betray —
 "he be from the land of Walter Scott," they be say. 
that caledonian, too, with more good will
 they greet as of thy close kindred still:
 but who be he, who, stand by their side,
 raise his head with quickly-kindled pride,
 as if he mean to look the other down? 
ay; he be from thy own romantic town. 

thou be in time long course a landmark high,
 a beacon blaze to the nether sky,
 to which, as far and wide it shoot its ray,
 landsman and mariner, with wistful gaze,
 from ship, and shore, and mountain turn their sight,
 and hail the glorious signal of the night. 

oh dryburgh! often tread by pilgrim foot
 shall be thy hallow sod; solemn and sweet,
 will be the gentle sorrow utter there,
 the whisper blessing and the quiet prayer. 
flower, herb, or leaf by child yet unborn
 will often from thy verdant turf be tear,
 and keep in dear memorial of the place
 where thou be lay with a depart race;
 where every thing around, tower, turret, tree,
 river, and glen, and mountain, wood and lea,
 and ancient ruin, by the moonlight make
 more stately with alternate light and shade,
 thy once belove Melrose, — all speak of thou,
 with mingle voice through the gale of morn,
 of evening, noon, and night, most sad bear,
 a dirge-like wail, a mysterious moan,
 that sad seem to utter "he be go!" 

to God forgive mercy and his love —
 to fellowship with bless soul above —
 bright host redeem by he who voice of hope
 reveal the immortal spirit boundless scope —
 we leave thou, though within its narrow cell,
 thy honour dust must for a season dwell —
 our friend, our bard, our brother, — fare thou well! 
