the shepherd and the calm. 

soothe his passion with a warb'le sound,
 a Shepherd-Swain lie stretch upon the ground;
 while all be move, who their attention lend,
 or with the harmony in chorus go,
 to something less than joy, yet more than dull content. 
(between which two extreme true pleasure lie,
 overrun by fool, unreach'd-at by the wise)
 but yet, a fatal prospect to the sea
 will often draw his greedy sight away. 
he see the barque unlade on the shore,
 and guess their wealth, then scorn his little store,
 then will that little lose, or else will make it more
 to merchandise convert be the fold,
 the bag, the bottle, and the hurdle sell;
 the dog be change away, the pretty skell
 who he have feed, and teach, and love so well. 
in vain the Phillis weep, which heretofore
 receive his present, and his garland wear. 
false and upbraid, he forsake the down,
 nor court her smile, nor fear the ocean frown
 for smooth it lay, as if one single wave
 make all the sea, nor wind that sea can heave;
 which blow no more than may his sail supply
 clear be the air below, and Phoebus laugh on high. 
with this adventurer every thing combine,
 and gold to gold his happy voyage join;
 but not so prosperous be the next essay,
 for rugged blast encounter on the way,
 scarce can the man escape, the deep have all their prey. 
our break merchant in the wreck be throw
 upon those land, which once have be his own
 where other flock now pasture on the grass,
 and other corydon have woo his lass. 
a servant, for small profit, there he turn,
 yet thrive again, and less and less he mourn;
 repurchase in time th'abandon sheep,
 which sad experience teach he now to keep. 
when from that very bank, one halcyon day,
 on which he lean, when tempt to the sea,
 he note a calm; the wind and wave be still,
 and promise what the wind nor wave fulfil,
 a settle quiet, and conveyance sure,
 to he that wealth, by traffic, will procure. 
but the rough part the shepherd now perform,
 revile the cheat, and at the flattery storm. 
even thus (quoth he) you seem all rest and ease,
 you sleep tempest, you untroubled sea,
 that never to be forget, that luckless hour,
 in which i put my fortune in your power;
 quit my slender, but secure estate,
 my undisturbed repose, my sweet retreat,
 for treasure which you ravish in a day,
 but sweep my folly, with my good, away. 
then smile no more, nor these false show employ,
 thou momentary calm, thou fleet joy;
 no more on i shall these fair sign prevail,
 some other novice may be win to sail,
 give i a certain fate in the obscure vale. 
