a elegy on the death of miss m—s. 

as yet it be fancy woe alone i sing,
 but now by real grief my lyre be string. 
it be harriet gentle shade demand the lay;
 do thou Melpomene the tribute pay. 
dear to the muse, to the grace dear,
 they all shall weep over harriet honour bier. 

HARRIET who from wisdom hallow page
 have snatch the spoil of every distant age. 
pardon, thou honour shade, these untaught lay
 in which i vain attempt to sing thy praise. 
alas! no rude, no untaught verse like i
 be incense worthy of a harriet shrine. 
a able bard thy many virtue claim,
 a able bard shall celebrate thy name. 
now shall the lyre again by he be string,
 who in the down of life thy praise sing. 
grave shall the sad, the mournful tribute pay,
 and hail thy spirit in the realm of day. 
each female charm, each human virtue thy,
 by Manlius, by i, by all esteem divine. 
long may we gaze on beauty vary throng,
 and give to they the gentle flow song;
 but when, ah! when, shall we thy equal see? 
when look on she we may compare with thou? 

in yonder shade while Harriet urn we place,
 (that shade which once her charm be wont to grace)
 behold you lovely, weep, woe-worn train,
 the boast pride of this our village plain;
 who at this awful hour by sorrow lead,
 seek the drear mansion of the silent dead,
 and at a much love sister hallow bier,
 pay the sad tribute of a hopeless tear;
 while Manlius, who generous breast be fraught
 with all the virtue grecian sage teach,
 mid midnight horror and funereal gloom
 resign behold a much love daughter tomb. 
yet deem not you that he no sorrow feel,
 it be true philosophy his grief conceal. 
know on his peace this dire misfortune prey,
 and will, we dread, cut short his value day. 

but mark yond age venerable band
 who round their harriet grave, in sorrow stand! 
those be the son of poverty and woe,
 who tear at her command have cease to flow:
 but by her death alas! their woe revive,
 again with penury they be doom to strive. 
ah! say who now shall all their grief assuage? 
ah! say who now shall cheer their droop age? 
Manlius in who breast each virtue reign,
 it be he shall now support these age swain,
 shall bid their cruel fear 'their sorrow cease,
 and smooth their passage to the realm of peace. 

but say what form majestic now appear,
 oppress by sorrow and dissolve in tear? 
her sigh, her groan, her wild distract air,
 all, all proclaim a wretched mother care. 
now over the yawn grave she wild bend,
 and now to heaven unnumbered sigh she send;
 while both her son sad partner of her woe,
 in silent grief their heartfelt sorrow show. 

in slow procession over the gloomy plain,
 see the sad father lead the wretched train,
 who now in solemn silence homeward turn,
 and quit, reluctant quit, their harriet urn. 
but mark! though change the spot, not change the scene,
 nor yet their bosom know a grief serene. 
for lo! the sight of yonder dreary wall
 her love idea and their grief recall. 
their grief may heaven in pity soon bid cease,
 soon may their torture soul be hush to peace. 
may heaven-born hope direct their stream eye
 to those bless realm beyond the azure sky,
 where harriet virtue meet a bright reward
 from heaven almighty and eternal lord. 

the epitaph.

traveler! who ever thou be, that seek this tomb,
 and view with pleasure the surround gloom,
 stay, nor to beauty urn thy tear refuse,
 but let they fall like summer sweet dew. 
o long uninjured may this willow wave,
 and long protect this ever honour grave. 
for know, beneath its sad droop shade
 there rest the ash of a lovely maid,
 if virtuous worth be heaven peculiar care,
 she do its bright, noble pleasure share. 
do thou, by Harriet bright example lead,
 the unfrequented path of virtue tread. 
so shall thou dauntless meet the power of death,
 and so shall hope receive thy late breath. 
