the shepherd farewel to his love.

be the same ode.

translate by mr. Roderick.

PHoebe, thank thy false heart, it have fix my repose,
the god have have pity at length on my woe;
i feel it, i feel my soul loose from its chain,
and at last freedom come, often dream of in vain.

the flame be burn out, and each passion at rest.
under which love disguise still may lurk in my breast;
no more, when thou be name, the warm blush arise,
no more slutter my heart, when i meet with your eye.

in my sleep now no long thy image i see,
nor the first of my thought, when i wake, be of thou,
when from thou, no more of thy absence i plain,
when with thou, i feel neither pleasure nor pain.

my heart without fondness can muse on thy charm,
my past pain i recount, yet no passion alarm;
discompose I be no long, when tower i you move,
and at ease with my rival i talk of my love.

whether haughty thy frown, whether gentle thy strain,
in vain thy proud look, thy fond speech in vain;
thy false tongue to beguile i no more have the art,
no more thy keen eye know the way to my heart.

whether pensive or cheerful, no long to you
for this be my thanks, or for that my blame due:
the gay prospect now please, though you be away,
and your presence no more can make dreariness gay.

believe i, i still can allow that thou be fair,
but not that no fair-one can with thou compare;
and though beauteous i own thou, yet still in thy face
i can now spy a fault, which i once think a grace.

when first the fix arrow i pluck from my heart,
oh, methinks i shall die! so severe be the smart:
but from power so oppressive to set myself clear,
torment great than die with patience i will bear.

when lime the poor bird thus with eagerness strain,
nor regret the lose plume, so his freedom he gain;
the loss of his plumage small time will restore,
and once try the false twig, it can cheat he no more.

the old flame, never flatter yourself to believe,
while it dwell on my tongue, in my heart still must live;
our danger, when past, with delight we repeat,
what in suffering be pain, to remembrance be sweet.

it be thus when the soldier return from the war,
he fight over his old battle, and vaunt of his scar:
with pleasure the captive his liberty gain
the fetter thus show, which once hold he enchain.

thus i talk, and i still will talk on while i may,
nor heed i, though you disbelieve what i say:
i ask not that Phoebe my talk shall approve,
let she too, if she can, talk at ease of my love.

a inconstant i leave, a true lover you lose;
which first of we two will have comfort, who know?
this i know — Phoebe never such a true love will find;
i can easy meet with a fair as unkind.
