on the immortality of the soul.

translate from the latin of Isaac Hawkins brown, ESQ;

by Soame jennyns, ESQ;

book i 

to all inferior animal it be give
the enjoy the state allot they by heaven;
no vain research ever disturb their rest,
no fear of dark futurity molest.
man, only man solicitous to know
the spring whence nature operation flow,
plod through a dreary waste with toil and pain,
and reason, hope, and think, and live in vain;
for sable death still hover over his head,
cut short his progress, with his vital thread.
wherefore, since nature err not, do we find
these seed of science in the human mind,
if no congenial fruit be predesign?
for what avail to man this power to roam
through age past, and age yet to come,
the explore new world over all the aetherial way,
chain to a spot, and live but a day?
since all must perish in one common grave,
nor can these long laborious search save,
be it not wise far, supine lay,
to sport with Phyllis in the noontide shade?
or at thy jovial festival appear,
great Bacchus, who alone the soul can clear
from all that it have feel, and all that it can fear?

come on then, let we feast: let Chloe sing,
and soft Neaera touch the tremble string;
enjoy the present hour, nor seek to know
what good or ill tomorrow may bestow.
but these delight soon pall upon the taste;
let we try then if more serious can last:
wealth let we heap on wealth, or fame pursue,
let power and glory be our point in view:
in court, in camp, in senate let we live,
our levee crowd like the buzz hive:
each weak attempt the same sad lesson bring,
alas, what vanity in human thing!

what mean then shall we try? where hope to find
a friendly harbour for the restless mind?
who still, you see, impatient to obtain
knowledge immense, (so nature law ordain)
even now, though fetter in corporeal clay,
climb step by step the prospect to survey,
and seek, unwearied, truth be eternal ray.
no fleet joy she ask, which must depend
on the frail sense, and with they must end;
but such as suit she own immortal fame,
free from all change, eternal the same.

take courage then, these joy we shall attain;
almighty wisdom never act in vain;
nor shall the soul, on which it have bestow
such power, ever perish, like a earthly clod;
but purge at length from foul corruption stain,
free from her prison, and unbind her chain,
she shall her native strength, and native sky regain:
to heaven a old inhabitant return,
and draw nectareous stream from truth perpetual urn.

while life remain, (if life it can be call
the exist in fleshly bondage thus enthrall)
tire with the dull pursuit of worldly thing,
the soul scarce wake, or open her gladsome wing,
yet still the godlike exile in disgrace
retain some mark of her celestial race;
else whence from memory store can she produce
such various thought, or range they so for use?
can matter these contain, dispose, apply?
can in her cell such mighty treasure lie?
or can her native force produce they to the eye?

whence be this power, this foundress of all art,
serve, adorn life, through all its part,
which name impose, by letter mark those name,
adjust proper by legal claim,
from wood, and wild collect rude mankind,
and city, law, and government design?
what can this be, but some bright ray from heaven,
some emanation from omniscience give?

when now the rapid stream of eloquence
bear all before it, passion, reason, sense,
can its dread thunder, or its lightning force
derive their essence from a mortal source?
what think you of the bard enchant art,
which, whether he attempt to warm the heart
with fable scene, or charm the ear with rhyme,
breathe all pathetic, lovely, and sublime?
while thing on earth roll round from age to age,
the same dull farce repeat; on the stage
the poet give we a creation new,
more please, and more perfect than the true;
the mind, who always to perfection hastes,
perfection, such as here she never taste,
with gratitude accept the kind deceit,
and thence foresee a system more complete.
of those what think you, who the circle race
of sun, and their revolve planet trace,
and comet journey through unbounded space?
say, can you doubt, but that the all-searching soul,
that now can traverse heaven from pole to pole;
from thence descend visit but this earth,
and shall once more regain the region of her birth?

can she thus act, unless some power unknown,
from matter quite distinct, and all her own,
support, and impel she? she approve
self-conscious, and condemn, she hate, and love,
mourn, and rejoice, hope, and be afraid,
without the body unrequested aid:
her own internal strength her reason guide,
by this she now compare thing, now divide;
truth be scatter fragment piece by piece collect,
rejoin, and thence her edifice erect;
pile art on art, effect to cause tie,
and rear the aspire fabric to the sky:
from whence, as on a distant plain below,
she see from cause consequence flow,
and the whole chain distinct comprehend,
which from the almighty throne to earth descend:
and last, turn inward her eye,
perceive how all her own idea rise,
contemplate what she be, and whence she come,
and almost comprehend her own amaze frame.
can mere machine be with such power endue,
or conscious of those power, suppose they can?
for body be but a machine alone
move by external force, and impulse not its own.

rate not the extension of the human mind
by the plebeian standard of mankind,
but by the size of those gigantic few,
who Greece and Rome still offer to our view;
or Britain well-deserving equal praise,
parent of hero too in better day.
why shall i try her numerous son to name
by verse, law, eloquence consign to fame?
or who have force fair science into sight,
long lose in darkness, and afraid of light.
over all superior, like the solar ray
first Bacon usher in the dawn day,
and drive the mist of sophistry away;
pervade nature with amaze force,
follow experience still throughout his course,
and finish at length his destine way,
to Newton he bequeathe the radiant lamp of day.

illustrious soul! if any tender care
affect angelic breast for man affair,
if in your present happy heavenly state,
you be not regardless quite of britain fate,
let this degenerate land again be bless
with that true vigour, which she once possess;
compel we to unfold our slumber eye,
and to our ancient dignity to rise.
such wondrous power as these must sure be give
for most important purpose by heaven;
who bid these star as bright example shine
besprinkle thin by the hand divine,
to form to virtue each degenerate time,
and point out to the soul its origin sublime.
that there be a self which after death shall live,
all be concern about, and all believe;
that something be we, when we from life depart,
this all conceive, all feel it at the heart;
the wise of learn antiquity proclaim
this truth, the public voice declare the same;
no land so rude but look beyond the tomb
for future prospect in a world to come.
hence, without hope to be in life repay,
we plant slow oak posterity to shade;
and hence vast pyramid aspire high
lift their proud head aloft, and time defy.
hence be our love of fame, a love so strong,
we think no danger great, or labor long,
by which we hope our being to extend,
and to remote time in glory to descend.

for fame the wretch beneath the gallows lie,
disown every crime for which he die;
of life profuse, tenacious of a name,
fearless of death, and yet afraid of shame.
nature have weave into the human mind
this anxious care for name we leave behind,
the extend our narrow view beyond the tomb,
and give a earnest of a life to come:
for, if when dead, we be but dust or clay,
why think of what posterity shall say?
her praise, or censure can we concern,
nor ever penetrate the silent urn.

what mean the nod plume, the funeral train,
and marble monument that speak in vain,
with all those care, which every nation pay
to their unfeeling dead in different way!
some in the flower-strewn grave the corpse have lay,
and annual obsequy around it pay,
as if to please the poor depart shade;
other on blaze pile the body burn,
and store their ash in the faithful urn;
but all in one great principle agree
to give a fancy immortality.
why shall i mention those, who oozy soil
be render fertile by the overflow Nile,
their dead they bury not, nor burn with fire,
no grave they dig, erect no funeral pire,
but, wash first the embowel body clean,
gum, spice, and melt pitch they pour within;
then with strong fillet bind it round and round,
to make each flaccid part compact, and sound;
and last paint the varnish surface over
with the same feature, which in life it wear:
so strong their presage of a future state,
and that our noble part survive the body fate.

nation behold remote from reason beam,
where indian Ganges roll his sandy stream,
of life impatient rush into the fire,
and will victim to their god expire!
persuade the loose soul to region fly
bless with eternal spring, and cloudless sky.

nor be less fame the oriental wife
for steadfast virtue, and contempt of life:
these heroine mourn not with loud female cry
their husband lose, or with overflow eye,
but, strange to tell! their funeral pile ascend,
and in the same sad flame their sorrow end;
in hope with they beneath the shade to rove,
and there renew their interrupt love.

in clime where Boreas breathe eternal cold,
see numerous nation, warlike, fierce, and bold,
to battle all unanimous run,
nor fire, nor sword, nor instant death they shun:
whence this disdain of life in every breast,
but from a notion on their mind impress,
that all, who for their country die, be bless.
add too to these the once prevail dream,
of sweet elysian grove, and Stygian stream:
all show with what consent mankind agree
in the firm hope of immortality.
grant these the invention of the crafty priest,
yet such invention never can subsist.
unless some glimmer of a future state
be with the mind coaeval, and innate:
for every fiction, which can long persuade,
in truth must have its first foundation lay.

because we be unable to conceive,
how unembodied soul can act, and live,
the vulgar give they form, and limb, and face,
and habitation in peculiar place;
hence reasoner more refine, but not more wise,
strike with the glare of such absurdity,
their whole existence fabulous suspect,
and truth and falsehood in a lump reject;
too indolent to learn what may be know,
or else too proud that ignorance to own.
for hard's the task the daub to pervade
folly and fraud on truth be fair form have lay;
yet let that task be we; for great the prize;
nor let we truth be celestial charm despise,
because that priest, or poet may disguise.

that there be a god from nature voice be clear,
and yet what error to this truth adhere?
how have the fear and folly of mankind
now multiply their god, and now subjoin
to each the frailty of the human mind?
nay superstition spread at length so wide,
beast, bird, and onion too be deify.

the athenian sage revolve in his mind
this weakness, blindness, madness of mankind,
foretell, that in maturer day, though late,
when time shall ripen the decree of fate,
some god will light we, like the rise day,
through error maze, and chase these cloud away.
long since have time fulfil this great decree,
and bring we aid from this divinity.

well worth our search discovery may be make
by nature, void of the celestial aid:
let we try what her conjecture then can reach,
nor scorn plain reason, when she deign to teach.

that mind and body often sympathize
be plain; such be this union nature tie:
but then as often too they disagree,
which prove the soul superior progeny.
sometime the body in full strength we find.
while various ail debilitate the mind;
at other, while the mind its force retain,
the body sink with sickness and with pain:
now do one common fate their being end,
alike they will sicken, and alike they will mend.
but sure experience, on the slight view,
show we, that the reverse of this be true;
for when the body oft expire lie,
its limb quite senseless, and half close its eye,
the mind new force, and eloquence acquire,
and with prophetic voice the die lip inspire.

of like material be they both compose,
how come it, that the mind, when sleep have close
each avenue of sense, expatiate wide
her liberty restore, her bond untie?
and like some bird who from its prison fly,
clap her exult wing, and mount the sky.

grant that corporeal be the human mind,
it must have part in infinitum join;
and each of these must will, perceive, design,
and draw confuse in a different line;
which then can claim dominion over the rest,
or stamp the rule passion in the breast?

perhaps the mind be form by various art
of model, and figure these part;
just as if circle wise be than square;
but sure common sense aloud declare
that site, and figure be as foreign quite
from mental power, as colour black or white.

allow that motion be the cause of thought,
with what strange power must motion then be fraught?
reason, sense, science, must derive their source
from the wheel rapid whirl, or pully force;
top whip by school-boy sage must commence,
their hoop, like they, be cudgel into sense,
and boil pot overflow with eloquence.
whence can this very motion take its birth?
not sure from matter, from dull clod of earth;
but from a live spirit lodge within,
which govern all the bodily machine:
just as the almighty universal soul
inform, direct, and animate the whole.

cease then to wonder how the immortal mind
can live, when from the body quite disjoin;
but rather wonder, if she ever can die,
so frame, so fashion for eternity;
self-moved, not form of part together tie,
which time can dissipate, and force divide;
for being of this make can never die,
who power within themselves, and their own essence lie.

if to conceive how any thing can be
from shape abstract and locality
be hard; what think you of the deity?
his be not the least relation bear,
as far as to the human mind appear,
to shape, or size, similitude or place,
clothe in no form, and bound by no space.
such then be god, a spirit pure refine
from all material dross, and such the human mind.
for in what part of essence can we see
more certain mark of immortality?
even from this dark confinement with delight
she look abroad, and prune herself for flight;
like a unwilling inmate long to roam
from this dull earth, and seek her native home.

go then forgetful of its toil and strife,
pursue the joy of this fallacious life;
like some poor fly, who live but for a day,
sip the fresh dew, and in the sunshine play,
and into nothing then dissolve away.
be these our great pursuit, be this to live?
these all the hope this much-loved world can give!
how much more worthy envy be their fate,
who search for truth in a superior state?
not grope step by step, as we pursue,
and follow reason much entangle clue,
but with one great, and instantaneous view.

but how can sense remain, perhaps you will say,
corporeal organ if we take away!
since it from they proceed, and with they must decay.
why not? or why may not the soul receive
new organ, since even art can these retrieve?
the silver trumpet aid the obstruct ear,
and optic glass the dim eye can clear;
these in mankind new faculty create,
and lift he far above his native state;
call down revolve planet from the sky,
earth secret treasure open to his eye,
the whole minute creation make his own,
with all the wonder of a world unknown.

how can the mind, do she alone depend
on sense, the error of those sense mend?
yet oft, we see those sense she correct,
and oft their information quite reject.
in distance of thing, their shape and size,
our reason judge better than our eye.
declare not this the soul pre-eminence
superior to, and quite distinct from sense?
for sure it be likely, that, since now so high
clog and unfledged she dare her wing to try,
loose, and mature, she shall her strength display,
and soar at length to truth be refulgent ray.

inquire you how these power we shall attain,
it be not for we to know; our search be vain:
can any now remember or relate
how he exist in the embryo state?
or one from birth insensible of day
conceive idea of the solar ray?
that light be deny to he, which, other see,
he know, perhaps you will say, — and so do we.

the mind contemplative find nothing here
on earth, that be worthy of a wish or fear:
he, who sublime pursuit be god and truth,
burns, like some absent and impatient youth,
to join the object of his warm desire,
thence to sequester shade, and stream retire,
and there delight his passion to rehearse
in wisdom sacred voice, or in harmonious verse.

to i most happy therefore he appear,
who have once, unmoved by hope or fear,
survey this sun, earth, ocean, cloud, and flame,
well satisfy return from whence he come.
be life a hundred year, or ever so few,
it be repetition all, and nothing new:
a fair, where thousand meet, but none can stay,
a inn, where traveller bait, then post away;
a sea, where man perpetual be toss,
now plunge in business, now in trifle lose:
who leave it first, the peaceful port first gain;
hold then! no farther launch into the main:
contract your sail; life nothing can bestow
by long continuance, but continue woe:
the wretched privilege daily to deplore
the funeral of our friend, who go before:
disease, pain, anxiety, and care,
and age surround with a thousand snare.

but whither hurry by a generous scorn
of this vain world, ah, whither be i bear?
let we not unbid the almighty standard quit,
however severe our post, we must submit.

can i a firm persuasion once attain
that after death no being will remain;
to those dark shade i will will descend,
where all must sleep, this drama at a end:
nor life accept, although renew by fate
even from its early, and its happy state.

may i from Fortune bounteous hand receive
each boon, each blessing in her power to give,
genius, and science, moral, and good-sense,
unenvied honour, wit and eloquence,
a numerous offspring to the world well know
both for paternal virtue, and their own;
even at this mighty price i will not be bind
to tread the same dull circle round, and round;
the soul require enjoyment more sublime,
by space unbounded, undestroyed by time.

book ii.

god then through all creation give, we find,
sufficient mark of a indulgent mind,
except in ourselves; ourselves of all
his work the chief on this terrestrial ball,
his own bright image, who alone unblest
feel ill perpetual, happy all the rest.
but hold, presumptuous? charge not heaven decree
with such injustice, such partiality.

yet true it be, survey we life around,
whole host of ill on every side be find;
who wound not here and there by chance a foe,
but at the species meditate the blow.
what million perish by each other hand
in war fierce rage? or by the dread command
of tyrant languish out their life in chain,
or lose they in variety of pain?
what number pinch by want and hunger die,
in spite of nature liberality?
(those, still more numerous, i to name disdain,
by lewdness, and intemperance just slay;)
what number, guiltless of their own disease,
be snatch by sudden death, or waste by slow degree?

where then be virtue well deserve reward! —
let we pay to virtue every due regard:
that she enable man, let we confess,
to bear those evil, which she can redress;
give hope, and conscious peace, and can assuage
the impetuous tempest both of lust, and rage;
yet she be a guard so far from be sure,
that oft her friend peculiar ill endure:
where vice prevail severe be their fate,
tyrant pursue they with a threefold hate.
how many struggle in their country cause,
and from their country merit applause,
have fall by wretch fond to be enslave,
and perish by the hand themselves have save?

soon as superior worth appear in view,
see knave, and fool unite to pursue!
the man so form they all conspire to blame,
and envy poisonous tooth attack his fame;
shall he at length, so true good and great,
prevail, and rule with honest view the state,
then must he toil for a ungrateful race,
submit to clamor, libel, and disgrace;
threaten, oppose, defeat in his end,
by foe seditious, and aspire friend.
hear this and tremble! all who will be great,
yet know not what attend that dangerous wretched state.

be private life from all these evil free?
vice of all kind, rage, envy there we see,
deceit, that friendship mask insidious wear,
quarrel, and feud, and law intangle snare.

but there be pleasure still in human life,
domestic ease, a tender love wife,
child, who dawn smile your heart engage,
the grace, and comfort of soft-stealing age.
if happiness exist, it be sure here —
but be these joy exempt from care and fear?
need i the misery of that state declare,
when different passion draw the wed pair?
or say how hard those passion to discern,
ere the die cast, and it be too late to learn?
who can insure, that what be right, and good,
these child shall pursue? or if they shall,
death come, when least you fear so black a day,
and all your bloom hope be snatch away.

we say not, that these ill from virtue flow:
do her wise precept rule the world, we know
the golden age will again begin,
but it be our lot in this to suffer, and to sin.

observe this, some sage have decree
that all thing from two cause must proceed;
two principle with equal power endue,
this whole evil, that supreme good.
from this arise the misery we endure,
while that administer a friendly cure;
hence life be chequer still with bliss, and woe,
hence tares with golden crop promiscuous grow,
and poisonous serpent make their dread repose
beneath the covert of the fragrant rose.

can such a system satisfy the mind,
be both these god in equal power conjoin,
or one superior? equal if you say,
chaos return, since neither will obey.
be one superior? good, or ill must reign,
eternal joy, or everlasting pain.
whichever be conquer must entire yield,
and the victorious god enjoy the field.
hence with these fiction of the magi brain!
hence oozy Nile, with all her monstrous train!

or come the stoic near to the right?
he hold, that whatsoever yield delight,
wealth, fame, external all, be useless thing;
himself half starve happy far than king.
it be fine indeed to be so wondrous wise!
by the same reason too he pain deny;
roast he, or flea he, break he on the wheel,
retract he will not, though he can but feel:
pain not a ill, he utter with a groan;
what then? a inconvenience it be, he will own.
what? vigour, health, and beauty? be these good?
no: they may be accept, not pursue:
absurd to squabble thus about a name,
quibble with different word, that mean the same.
stoic, be you not frame of flesh and blood,
you may be bless without external good;
but know, be self-sufficient as you can,
you be not spirit quite, but frail, and mortal man.

but since these sage, so absurd wise,
vain pretend enjoyment to despise,
because external, and in Fortune power,
now i, now thy, the blessing of a hour;
why value then, that strength of mind, they boast,
as often vary, and as quick lose?
a headache hurt it, or a rainy day,
and a slow fever wipe it quite away.

see one who council, one who conquer hand
once save britannia almost sink land:
example of the mind extensive power,
example too how quick fade that flower.
he let i add, who late we see excel
in each politer kind of write well;
whether he strive our folly to expose
in easy verse, or droll and humorous prose;
few year, alas! compel his throne to quit
this mighty monarch over the realm of wit,
see self-surviving he be a idiot grow!
a melancholy proof our part be not our own.

thy tenet, stoic, yet we may forgive,
if in a future state we cease to live.
for here the virtuous suffer much, it be plain;
if pain be evil, this must god arraign;
and on this principle confess we must,
pain can no evil be, or god must be unjust.

blind man! who reason such strait bound confine,
that ere it touch truth extreme line,
it stop amaze, and quit the great design.
own you not, stoic, god be just and true?
dare to proceed; secure this path pursue:
twill soon conduct you far beyond the tomb,
to future justice, and a life to come.
this path you say be hide in endless night,
it be self-conceit alone obstruct your sight,
you stop, ere half your destine course be run,
and triumph, when the conquest be not win;
by this the sophist be of old mislead:
see what a monstrous race from one mistake be breed!

hear then my argument: — confess we must,
a god there be, supreme wise and just:
if so, however thing affect our sight,
as sing our bard, whatever be, be right. 
but be it right, what here so oft appear,
that vice shall triumph, virtue sink in tear?
the inference then, that close this debate,
be, that there must exist a future state.
the wise extend their enquiry wide
see how both state be by connection tie;
fool view but part, and not the whole survey,
so crowd existence all into a day.
hence be they lead to hope, but hope in vain,
that justice never will resume her reign;
on this vain hope adulterer, thief rely,
and to this altar vile assassin fly.
"but rule not god by general law divine?
"man vice, or virtue change not the design. "
what law be these? instruct we if you can: —
there be one design for brute, and one for man:
another guide inactive matter course,
attract, and attract by its force:
hence mutual gravity subsist between
far distant world, and tie the vast machine.

the law of life why need i call to mind,
obey by bird, and beast of every kind;
by all the sandy desert savage brood,
and all the numerous offspring of the flood;
of these none uncontrolled, and lawless rove,
but to some destine end spontaneous move.
lead by that instinct, heaven itself inspire,
or so much reason, as their state require;
see all with skill acquire their daily food,
all use those arm, which nature have bestow;
produce their tender progeny, and feed
with care parental, while that care they need;
in these love office complete bless,
no hope beyond they, nor vain fear molest.

man over a wide field extend his view;
god through the wonder of his work pursue,
explore thence his attribute, and law,
adore, love, imitate the eternal cause;
for sure in nothing we approach so nigh
the great example of divinity,
as in benevolence: the patriot soul
know not self-centered for itself to roll,
but warm, enlighten, animate the whole:
its mighty orb embrace first his friend,
his country next, then man; nor here it end,
but to the mean animal descend.

wise nature have this social law confirm,
by form man so helpless, and unarmed;
his want of other aid, and power of speech
the implore that aid, this lesson daily teach.
mankind with other animal compare,
single how weak, and impotent they be!
but view they in their complicate state,
their power how wondrous, and their strength how great,
when social virtue individual join,
and in one solid mass, like gravity combine!
this then be the first great law by nature give,
stamp on our soul, and ratify by heaven;
all from utility this law approve,
as every private bliss must spring from social love.

why deviate then so many from this law?
see passion, custom, vice, and folly draw!
survey the roll globe from east to west,
how few, alas! how very few be bless?
beneath the freeze pole, and burn line,
what poverty, and indolence combine,
to cloud with error mist the human mind?
no trace of man, but in the form we find.

and be we free from error, and distress,
who heaven with clear light have please to bless?
who true religion lead? (for she but lead
by soft persuasion, not by force proceed;)
behold how we avoid this radiant sun!
this proffer guide how obstinate shun,
and after sophistry vain system run!
for these as for essential we engage
in war, and massacre, with holy rage;
brother by brother impious hand be slay,
mistaken zeal, how savage be thy reign!

unpunished vice here so much abound,
all right, and wrong, all order they confound;
these be the giant, who the god defy,
and mountain heap on mountain to the sky.
see this the almighty judge, or see spare,
and deem the crime of man beneath his care?
he see; and will at last reward bestow,
and punishment, not less assure for be slow.

nor doubt i, though this state confuse appear,
that even in this god sometime interfere:
sometime, lest man shall quite his power disown,
he make that power to tremble nation know:
but rare this; not for each vulgar end,
as superstition idle tale pretend,
who think all foe to god, who be her own,
direct his thunder, and usurp his throne.

nor know i not, how much a conscious mind
avail to punish, or reward mankind;
even in this life thou, impious wretch, must feel
the fury scourge, and the infernal wheel;
fom man tribunal, though thou hope to run,
thyself thou can not, nor thy conscience shun:
what must thou suffer, when each dire disease,
the progeny of vice, thy fabric seize?
consumption, fever, and the rack pain
of spasm, and gout, and stone, a frightful train!
when life new torture can alone supply,
life thy sole hope thou will hate, yet dread to die.

shall such a wretch to numerous year arrive,
it can be little worth his while to live;
no honour, no regard his age attend,
companion fly: he never can have a friend:
he flatterer leave he, and with wild affright
he look within, and shudder at the sight:
when threaten death uplift his point dart,
with what impatience he apply to art,
life to prolong amid disease and pain!
why this, if after it no sense remain?
why shall he choose these misery to endure,
if death can grant a everlasting cure?
it be plain there be something whisper in his ear,
(though fain he will hide it) he have much to fear.

see the reverse! how happy those we find,
who know by merit to engage mankind?
praise by each tongue, by every heart belove,
for virtue practise, and for art improve:
their easy aspect shine with smile serene,
and all be peace, and happiness within:
their sleep be never disturb by fear, or strife,
nor lust, nor wine, impair the spring of life.

he fortune can not sink, nor much elate,
who view extend beyond this mortal state;
by age when summon to resign his breath,
calm, and serene, he see approach death,
as the safe port, the peaceful silent shore,
where he may rest, life tedious voyage over:
he, and he only, be of death afraid,
who his own conscience have a coward make;
while he, who virtue radiant course have run,
descend like a serenely-setting sun:
he thought triumphant heaven alone employ,
and hope anticipate his future joy.

so good, so bless the illustrious Hough we find,
who image dwell with pleasure on my mind;
the mitre glory, freedom constant friend,
in time which ask a champion to defend;
who after near a hundred virtuous year,
his sense perfect, free from pain and fear,
replete with life, with honour, and with age,
like a applaud actor leave the stage;
or like some victor in the Olympic game,
who have run his course, the crown of glory claim.

from this just contrast plain it appear,
how conscience can inspire both hope and fear;
but whence proceed these hope, or whence this dread,
if nothing real can affect the dead?
see all thing join to promise, and presage
the sure arrival of a future age!
whatever their lot be here, the good and wise,
nor dote on life, nor peevish despise.
a honest man, when Fortune storm begin,
have consolation always sure within,
and, if she send a more propitious gale,
he be please, but not forgetful it may fail.

nor fear that he, who sit so loose to life,
shall too much shun its labor, and its strife;
and scorn wealth, content to be mean,
shrink from the duty of this bustle scene;
or, when his country safety claim his aid,
avoid the fight inglorious, and afraid:
who scorn life most must sure be most brave,
and he, who power contemn, be least a slave:
virtue will lead he to ambition end,
and prompt he to defend his country, and his friend.

but still his merit you can not regard,
who thus pursue a posthumous reward;
his soul, you cry, be uncorrupt and great,
who quite uninfluenced by a future state,
embrace virtue from a noble sense
of her abstract, native excellence,
from the self-conscious joy her essence bring,
the beauty, fitness, harmony of thing.
it may be so: yet he deserve applause,
who follow where instructive nature draw;
aim at reward by her indulgence give,
and soar triumphant on her wing to heaven.

say what this venal virtuous man pursue,
no mean reward, no mercenary view;
not wealth usurious, or a numerous train,
not fame by fraud acquire, or title vain!
he follow but where nature point the road,
rise in virtue school, till he ascend to god.

but we the inglorious common herd of man,
sail without compass, toil without a plan;
in Fortune vary storm for ever tost,
shadow pursue, that in pursuit be lose;
mere infant all, till life extreme day,
scramble for toy, then toss they away.
who rest of immortality assure
be safe, whatever ill be here endure:
he hope not vain in a world like this,
to meet with pure uninterrupted bliss;
for good and ill, in this imperfect state,
be ever mix by the decree of fate.
with wisdom rich harvest folly grow,
and baleful hemlock mingle with the rose;
all thing be blend, changeable, and vain,
no hope, no wish we perfect obtain;
god may perhaps (might human reason line
pretend to fathom infinite design)
have thus ordain thing, that the restless mind
no happiness complete on earth may find;
and, by this friendly chastisement make wise,
to heaven her safe, best retreat may rise.

come then, since now in safety we have pass
through error rock, and see the port at last,
let we review, and recollect the whole. —
thus stand my argument. — the think soul
can terrestrial, or material be,
but claim by nature immortality:
god, who create it, can make it end,
we question not, but can apprehend
he will; because it be by he endue
with strong idea of all perfect good:
with wondrous power to know, and calculate
thing too remote from this our earthly state;
with sure presage of a life to come,
all false and useless; if beyond the tomb
our being cease: we therefore can believe
god either act in vain, or can deceive.

if every rule of equity demand,
that vice and virtue from the almighty hand,
shall due reward, and punishment receive,
and this by no mean happen while we live,
it follow, that a time must sure come,
when each shall meet their well-adjusted doom:
then shall this scene, which now to human sight
seem so unworthy wisdom infinite,
a system of consummate skill appear,
and every cloud disperse, be beautiful and clear.

doubt we of this! what solid proof remain,
that over the world a wise disposer reign?
while all creation speak a power divine,
be it deficient in the main design?
not so: the day shall come, (pretend not now
presumptuous to inquire or when, or how)
but after death shall come the important day,
when god to all his justice shall display;
each action with impartial eye regard,
and in a just proportion punish and reward.
