Terpsichore: a lyric muse, on the death of John dryden, ESQ; extempore.

just as the god be listen to my strain,
 and thousand love dance over the æthereal plain;
 with my own radiant hair my harp i string,
 and in glad consort all my sister sing;
 a universal harmony above,
 inspire we all with gaiety and love. 
a horrid sound dash our immortal mirth,
 waft by sigh, from the unlucky earth. 
(who will think celestial form shall sorrow know,
 or sympathize with sad event below? 
but by our great immortal self we do. 
for when the loud unwelcome message spread,
 with dismal accent tuneful, dryden dead,
 all our gay joy in have affright flee. 
a sullen gloom seize all the god around,
 my feeble hand no more the lyre can sound:
 and all the soft young love with droop wing,
 lisp their concern, and my neglect string;
 tremble themselves into a mournful air,
 then sight and hush into a sad despair. 
there let they ever unregarded lie,
 apollo too, do his cease its harmony. 
he with we sacred nymph profuse mourn,
 with we the least desire of respite scorn;
 entire eternal grief our being seize
 for he who best can we and mankind please. 
great Dryden, in who vast capacious mind,
 our utmost power do fit reception find;
 which favour he do generous dispense,
 joy the glad world with his amaze sense,
 and like we too diffuse his influence;
 his genius will such inspiration bear,
 that his illustrious line do not appear
 as if our product, but our self be there. 
mourn you forsake world, you will never again
 be bless with so divine, so great a Swain. 
in you no more let tuneful mirth be find,
 the very sphere shall cease their wonted sound,
 and every orb stop its harmonious round:
 all nature hush as if entrance she lie,
 sink in old chaos ever the inlight'n ray
 of heaven awake she in the firstborn day. 
with such still horror let we our sorrow bear,
 lest sigh in time, harmonious shall appear. 
if ever to write again be man intent,
 (uncalled on let we silent lament,)
 and take his work, for a eternal president,
