IL BELLICOSO.

MDCCXLIV.

BY MR. MASON.

HENCE, dull lethargic Peace,
 Born in some hoary Beadsman's cell obscure;
 Or in Circaean bower,
 Where Manhood dies, and Reason's vigils cease;
 Hie to congenial climes,
 Where some seraglio's downy tyrant reigns;
 Or where Italian swains,
 Midst wavy shades, and myrtle-blooming bowers,
 Lull their ambrosial hours,
 And deck with languid trills their tinkling rhymes. 
But rouse, thou God by Furies drest,
 In helm with Terror's plumed crest,
 In adamantine steel bedight,
 Glistening formidably bright,
 With step unfix'd and aspect wild;
 Jealous Juno's raging child,
 Who thee conceiv'd in Flora's bower,
 By touch of rare Olenian flower:
 Oft the goddess sigh'd in vain,
 Envying Jove's prolific brain,
 And oft she stray'd Olympus round,
 Till this specific help she found;
 Then fruitful grown, she quits the skies,
 To Thracia's sanguine plain she hies,
 There teems thee forth, of nervous mold,
 Haughty, furious, swift and bold,
 Names thee Mars, and bids thee call
 The world from Pleasure's flowery thrall. 
Come then, Genius of the war,
 Roll me in thy iron car;
 And while thy coursers pierce the sky,
 Breathing fury as they fly,
 Let Courage hurry swift before,
 All stain'd around with purple gore,
 And Victory follow close behind,
 With wreath of palm and laurel join'd,
 While high above, fair Fame assumes
 Her place, and waves her eagle plumes. 
Then let the trumpet swell the note,
 Roaring rough thro' brazen throat;
 Let the drum sonorous beat,
 With thick vibrations hoarsely sweet;
 Boxen hautboys too be found,
 Nor be miss'd the fife's shrill sound;
 Nor yet the bagpipe's swelling strain,
 Solace sweet to Highland swain,
 Whether on some mountain's brow,
 Now squeaking high, now droning low,
 He plays deft lilts to Scottish lass,
 Tripping it o'er the pliant grass,
 Or whether in the battle's fray,
 He lively pipes a bolder lay;
 The bolder lay (such magic reigns
 In all its moving Phrygian strains)
 Disperses swift to all the train,
 Fury stern, and pale Disdain
 Strikes every fire from every mind,
 Nor leaves one latent spark behind. 
Bear me now to tented ground,
 Where gaudy streamers wave around,
 Where Britain's ensigns high display'd,
 Lend the earth a scarlet shade;
 And pikes, and spears, and lances gay,
 Glitter in the solar ray;
 Here I'll join the hardy crowd,
 As they sport in gamesome mood,
 Wrestling on the circled ground,
 Wreathing limbs with limbs around,
 Or as they pitch the massy bar,
 Or teach the disk to whizz in air;
 And when night returns, regale
 With chat full blunt, and chirping ale;
 While some voice of manly base
 Sings my darling Chevy-Chace;
 How the child that's yet unborn
 May rue earl Percy's hound and horn;
 How Witherington in doleful dumps,
 Fought right valiant on his stumps;
 And many a knight and 'squire full gay
 At morn, at night were clad in clay;
 While first and last we join and sing,
 "God prosper long our noble king!" 
And when Midnight spreads around
 Her sable vestments on the ground,
 Hence I'll, for a studious seat,
 To some strong citadel retreat,
 By ditch and rampart high ypent,
 And battery strong and battlement! 
There, in some state-room richly dight
 With maily coats and faulchions bright,
 Emblazon'd shields of quaint impress,
 And a whole army's glittering dress,
 While the taper burneth blue,
 (As Brutus erst was wont to do)
 Let me turn the ample page
 Of some grave historic Sage;
 Or in Homer's sacred song,
 Mix the Grecian bards among;
 Nestor wise with silver'd head,
 And Ajax stern, and Diomed,
 And many more, whose wonderous might
 Could equal e'en the gods in fight;
 Or list to Virgil's epic lyre,
 Or lofty Lucan wrapp'd in fire;
 But rather far let Shakespeare's Muse
 Her genuine British fires diffuse;
 And briskly with her magic strain
 Hurry me to Gallic plain,
 Just when each patriot Talbot bleeds,
 Or when heaven-prosper'd Harry leads
 His troops with seven-fold courage steel'd,
 To Agincourt's immortal field. 
But when th' imbattled troops advance,
 O Mars, my every thought intrance! 
Guide me, thundering martial god,
 Guide thro' Glory's arduous road! 
While hailing bullets round me fly,
 And human thunders shake the sky,
 While crowds of heroes heap the ground,
 And dying groans are heard around,
 With armour clanking, clarions sounding,
 Cannons bellowing, shouts rebounding;
 Guide me, thundering, martial god,
 Guide thro' Glory's arduous road! 
But should on land thy triumphs cease,
 Still lead me far from hated Peace;
 Me bear, dread Power, for warlike sport,
 To some wave-incircled fort;
 Or (if it yield more open sight)
 To some hoar promontory's height,
 Whose high-arch'd brow o'erlooks the scene,
 Where Tritons blue and Naiads green,
 Sportive from their coral cave,
 Through the fluid chrystal lave;
 There eagerly I ken from far
 All the waste of naval War,
 And catch a sympathetic rage,
 While the numerous fleets engage,
 And every distant shore rebounds
 To the cannons rattling sounds,
 And the sulphurous fire-ship rends,
 And thousand fates around her sends,
 And limbs dissever'd hurl'd on high,
 Smoke amid th' affrighted sky. 
Then let black clouds above my head,
 With gleams of scarlet thick bespread,
 With lightning's flash and thunder's growl,
 Suit the spleen that shades my soul. 
There too let cranes, a numerous flight,
 With beaks and claws rage bloody flight,
 And airy knights from every cloud
 Prick forth, their armour rattling loud;
 With blazing swords and comets drear,
 Dragging a trail of flaming hair;
 Such as diffus'd their baneful gleam
 Over besieg'd Jerusalem,
 Or hung o'er Rome ere Julius fell,
 And if old Sages rightly spell,
 Were ever deemed to soreshow
 Changes in our realms below. 

And when at length cold creeping Age
 Freezes the torrent of my rage,
 Let me live amongst a crew
 Of invalids, of kindred hue! 
Of some main limb bereft by War,
 Or blest with some deep glorious scar;
 Scar, that endless glory draws
 From Liberty and Albion's cause:
 Then oft well pleas'd with them retire
 To circle round a sea-coal fire,
 And all our past campaigns recite,
 Of Vigo's sack and Blenheim's fight;
 How valiant Rooke majestic trod,
 How Marlbro' thunder'd; half a god! 
And then, with sage prophetic eye,
 In future battles to descry,
 That Britain shall not fail to yield
 Equal generals for the field;
 That France again shall pour her blood,
 And Danube roll a purpled flood. 

And when my children round me throng,
 The same grand theme shall grace my tongue;
 To teach them, should fair England need
 Their blood, 'tis theirs to wish to bleed;
 And, as I speak, to mark with joy
 New courage start in every boy;
 And gladsome read in all their eyes,
 Each will a future hero rise. 
These delights if Mars afford,
 Mars, with thee I whet my sword. 
