a pastoral elegy.

at first in vale obscure the lyre i string;
 vale, where the muse her annual labour sing:
 now, leave these, she range over the plain,
 and tune her voice to flock and shepherd swain;
 yet, fresh in grief, but feeble move her wing,
 weep, while she fly, and tremble, as she sing. 

two country swain, in friendship firm join,
 love each alike, and be, like brother, kind:
 great Caroline her royal bounty show
 to one, and raise he from the grovel crowd;
 when straight his smile look, and cheerful mien,
 proclaim the goodness of a gracious queen;
 but gloomy sadness soon his face possess,
 and cloud all the joy before express:
 the other gay and pleasant still appear;
 nor grieve for evil past, nor future fear:
 one day they meet; menalcas first begin;
 and thus the mournful tale, alternate, run. 

menalcas.

why, Colin, do thou wear that pensive look,
 and sigh stand, support by thy Crook? 
say, from what cause this melancholy spring;
 or do thou verify what Damon sing? 
 "vain man can never satiate his desire;
" the more he have, the more he still require:
 "today he be crave, and tomorrow cloy;
" new pleasure grow insipid, when enjoy. " 
so, when our sheep on hill refuse to feed,
 we straight remove they to the verdant Mead;
 where all, intent, the luscious herbage graze;
 and, for that day, their pasture seem to please:
 the next, they range around the flowery space;
 and bleat tell, they loath the taint grass. 

Colin.

it be yesterday a giddy sheep i view,
 which rise in cuddy fold, and stagger stand;
 while one, with burly horn, secure from pain,
 run, envious, and push he down again. 
so you, vain jest youth! unmoved with care,
 insult the hapless Swain, that be in despair. 

menalcas.

i nor insult, nor intend guile;
 and, if i jest, it be to make thou smile:
 but tell i, Swain, what wondrous turn of fate
 overcloud thy face, that look serene of late? 
what, be thy harvest blast on the ground? 
or have the royal Carolina frown? 
unveil thy grief, and make thy sorrow know;
 you know, my friend misfortune be my own. 

Colin.

my harvest be not blast on the ground,
 nor have the royal Carolina frown:
 but late, when the sun have gay dress
 the lofty mountain in a purple vest,
 i early rise, to tend my fleecy care;
 wet be the grass, and pierce cold the air. 
my lovely Sylvia, stay behind, i say,
 till i have weave a garland for thy head;
 till i a bower, with shady branch, form,
 to shun the scorch ray, or rapid storm;
 and, when the dew be exhale, which night distil,
 bless Colin with thy presence in the field. 
she answer not; but from her bosom send
 a deep presage sigh, before i go. 
the sun have paint every object gay,
 when to the cheerful field i take my way;
 the lark with matin welcome in the morn;
 the thrush and Finch sit chirp on the thorn;
 the swallow round, in airy circle, fly;
 and, ah! poor Colin then be joyful too:
 but sudden i see the mist arise,
 and darken cloud overspread the dusky sky,
 the horizon seem to cast a gloomy frown,
 while from his airy height the lark sink down
 the tuneful bird their joyous song deny;
 and bode owl, and sooty raven, cry. 
my droop heart, which feel unusual weight,
 shock with such omen, cease almost to beat:
 yet these, say i, portend no evil, while
 my royal mistress condescend to smile:
 if she be propitious, what can Colin fear? 
inure the less ill of life to bear. 
thus say, i take my way to yonder grove;
 and form, with spread bough, a arch alcove:
 so close i twist in each pliant spray,
 as may exclude the wind, or sunny ray. 
with sweet flower i deck the mossy ground,
 and strew the fragrant woodbind all around. 
here, when, say i, my Sylvia come afield,
 this grateful bower a safe retreat shall yield:
 if rainy, here she may the storm evade;
 if fair, the branch will project a shade:
 here Sylvia shall, with Colin, take her rest;
 and Colin here, with Sylvia, shall be bless. 
as thus i speak, around i cast my eye,
 and see celestial Celia draw nigh:
 i see; but wonder why her heavenly mien
 be cloud over, that use to be serene. 
celia the mistress of the flowery plain,
 who bounty know to every worthy Swain
 not godlike Pan preside with more care,
 nor to arcadian shepherd have be so dear. 
when Celia to the rural shade retire,
 she every breast with rise hope inspire;
 expect swain, with joyous look, proclaim
 the happy time, and hail the generous dame:
 as languid plant, which half the year lie dead,
 when spring approach, raise their droop head. 
she cross the plain with a deject air;
 her pensive aspect show her pious care;
 and, loath unwelcome tiding to reveal,
 she sigh speak, and leave the unfinished tale:
 "ah poor unhappy Swain! return, return;
" the sable cloud foretell a rainy morn:
 "nor only be the day overcast with gloom;
" thy please hope be blast all at home;
 "thy Sylvia, o!" she say, and drop the rest;
 but my presage heart too right guess:
 i silent stand, and speak my grief with tear;
 you know, my heart be firm link to she. 

menalcas.

i know, your heart be link in friendship fast;
 long may that mutual bond of friendship last:
 may HYMEN to you both propitious prove,
 and death but late untie the knot of love. 

Colin.

o! stop, menalcas, and my loss deplore;
 the good, the faithful Sylvia be no more:
 that gloomy morn she, in my absence, die;
 and rigid death the last farewell deny. 
another loss i can content have bear;
 but must the loss of Sylvia always mourn. 
my lovely Sylvia be my soft theme,
 my song by day, by night my please dream:
 but now in sigh i spend the linger day;
 and, weep, pass the tardy night away:
 nor do thy friend indulge a needless care;
 my loss be great, and just be my despair. 

menalcas.

thy loss and sorrow equal be great;
 but death the law of nature, fix by fate:
 our flock, our herd, our all precarious stand;
 and fall we must, when heaven our fall command. 

Colin.

yet flock and herd be with reluctance spare;
 and what be flock and herd, with her compare? 
a hungry fox steal ten of cuddy lamb,
 a lurch mongrel kill their bleat dam:
 say, do not Cuddy for his loss repine? 
but, ah! what loss be he, compare with i? 

menalcas.

i have a flute, which Damon late make;
 no shepherd on a sweet ever play:
 i tune it yesterday, and straight a throng
 of nymph and swain run crowd to my song;
 my listen ewe, awhile, forsake their meat;
 my tender lamb, though hungry, cease to bleat:
 i will tune again the soft harmonious lay;
 music, perhaps, may chase thy care away. 

Colin.

menalcas, music for a light ill;
 such woe as i will baffle all thy skill. 
upon his flute Alexis often play,
 and strive to charm my sorrow with his lay;
 upon his flute Alexis play in vain;
 his lay, though charm, can charm my pain. 
the tuneful bird rejoice on every spray,
 my wanton lambkin in their pasture play;
 in vain the tuneful bird rejoice, in vain
 my wanton lambkin sport upon the plain. 

with cheerful green the spacious field be crown,
 and beauteous flower adorn the paint ground;
 the snowy blossom on the branch shine,
 a please scene to every eye, but i! 
for neither cheerful green, that crown the field,
 nor snowy blossom, which the branch yield,
 nor flower, that spread the paint meadow over,
 delight my eye, now Sylvia be no more. 

menalcas.

it be more than time thy mournful dirge to end;
 for, see, the whistle ploughman homeward tend;
 our fleecy flock stand wait round the fold;
 damp feel the dew, the ruffle breeze cold;
 the set sun forsake the blush sky,
 and hazy fog from marshy ground arise:
 then fold thy sheep, thy anxious care remove;
 nor weep on earth, for she who sing above. 
