Zara, at the court of anamaboe, to the african prince when in ENGLAND.

by the same.

shall i the language of my heart conceal,
 nor warm paint the passion that i feel;
 my rise wish shall groundless fear confine,
 and doubt ungenerous chill the glow line;
 will not my prince, with noble warmth, disdain
 that love, as languid, which can stoop to feign? 
let guilt dissemble — in my faithful breast
 love reign unblamed, and be that love confess. 
i give my bosom naked to thy view,
 for, what have shame with innocence to do? 
in fancy, now, i clasp thou to my heart,
 exchange my vow, and all my joy impart. 
i catch new transport from thy speak eye; —
 but whence this sad involuntary sigh? 
why pant my bosom with intrude fear? 
why, from my eye, distil unbidden tear? 
why do my hand thus tremble as i write? 
why fade thy love idea from my sight? 
o! be thou safe on britain happy shore,
 from wind that bellow, and from sea that roar? 
and have my prince — (oh, more than mortal pain!) 
betray by ruffian, feel the captive chain? 
bind be those limb, ordain alone to prove
 the toil of empire, and the sweet of love? 
hold, hold! barbarian of the fierce kind! 
fear heaven red lightning — it be a prince you bind;
 a prince, who no indignity can hide,
 they know, presumptuous! and the god defy. 
whereve he move, let love-joined reverence rise,
 and all mankind behold with zara eye! 

thy breast alone, when bound over the wave
 to freedom clime, from slavery and slave;
 thy breast alone the please thought can frame
 of what i feel, when thy dear letter come:
 a thousand time i hold they to my breast,
 a thousand time my lip the paper press:
 my full heart pant with a joy too strong,
 and "oh, my prince!" die falter on my tongue:
 faint i sink, unequal to the strife,
 and mild joy sustain return life. 
hope, sweet enchantress, round my lovesick head
 delightful scene of bless delusion spread. 

 "come, come, my prince! my charmer! haste away;
" come, come, i cry, thy Zara blame thy stay. 
 "for thou, the shrub their rich sweet retain;
" for thou, new colour wait to paint the plain;
 "for thou, cool breeze linger in the grove,
" the bird expect thou in the green alcove;
 "till thy return, the rill sorget to fall,
" till thy return, the sun, the soul of all! —
 "he come, my maid, in his meridian charm,
" he come refulgent to his zara arm:
 "with jocund song proclaim my love return;
" with jocund heart his nuptial bed adorn. 
 "bright as the sun, yet gentle as the dove,
" he come, unite majesty and love.  "—
 too soon, alas! the bless delusion fly;
 care swell my breast, and sorrow fill my eye. 
ah! why do thy fond word suggest a fear —
 too vast, too numerous, those already here! 
ah! why with doubt torment my bleed breast,
 of sea which storm control, and foe infest! 
my heart, in all this tedious absence, know
 no thought but those of sea, and storm, and foe. 

each joyless morning, with the rise sun,
 quick to the strand my foot spontaneous run:
 "where, where be my prince! what tiding have you bring!" 
of each i meet, with plead tear i seek. 
in vain i seek, some, conscious of my pain,
 with horrid silence point to the main. 
some with a sneer the brutal thought express,
 and plunge the dagger of a barbarous jest. 
day follow day, and still i wish the next,
 new hope still flatter, and new doubt perplex;
 day follow day, the wish tomorrow come,
 my hope, doubt, fear, anxiety the same. 
at length — "o power supreme! whoever thou be,
" thy shrine the sky, the sea, the earth, or heart;
 "since every clime, and all the unbounded main,
" and hostile bark, and storm, be thy domain,
 "if faithful passion can thy bounty move,
" and goodness sure must be the friend of love,
 "safe to these arm my lovely prince restore,
" safe to his zara arm, to part no more. 
 "o! grant to virtue thy protect care,
" and grant thy love to love avail prayer,
 "together then, and emulous to praise,
" a flowery altar to thy name we will raise;
 "there, first and last, on each return day,
" to thou our vow of gratitude we will pay. " 

fool that i be, to all my comfort blind,
 why, when thou go, do Zara stay behind? 
how can i fond hope one joy to prove,
 amid all the wild anxiety of love? 

have fate in other mould, thy Zara form,
 and my bold breast in manly friendship warm,
 how have i glow exult at thy side! 
how all the shaft of adverse fate defy! 
or yet a woman, and not nerve for toil,
 with thou, o! have i turn a burn soil! 
in the cold prison have i lie with thou,
 in love still happy, we have still be free;
 then fortune brave, have own superior might,
 and pine with envy, while we force delight. 

why shall thou bid thy love remember thou? 
thy all my thought have be, and still shall be. 
each night the cool savannah have i seek,
 and breathe the fondness of enamour thought;
 the curl breeze murmur as i sigh,
 and hoarse, at distance, roar my foe the tide:
 my breast still haunt by a mot train,
 now doubt, now hope prevail, now joy, now pain,
 now fix i stand, my spirit flee to thy,
 nor note the time, nor see the sun decline;

now rouse i start, and winge with fear i run,
 in vain, alas! for it be myself i shun. 
when kind sleep its lenient balm supply,
 and give that comfort wake thought deny. 
last night — but why, ah Zara! why impart,
 the fond, fond fancy of a lovesick heart? 
yet true delight on fancy wing be bring,
 and love soft rapture realise in thought —
 last night i see, methinks i see it now —
 heaven awful concave round thy Zara bow;
 when sudden thence a flame chariot fly,
 which earth receive, and six white courser draw. 
then — quick transition — do thy Zara ride,
 bear to the chariot — wondrous — by thy side:
 all glorious both, from clime to clime we fly,
 each happy clime with sweet surprise we view. 
a thousand voice sing — "all bliss betide
" the prince of lybia, and his faithful bride. " 
" it be do, it be do, "resound through the sky. 
and quick aloft the car begin to rise;
 ten thousand beauty crowd on my sight,
 ten thousand glory beam a dazzle light. 
my thought can bear no more, the vision flee,
 and wretched Zara view her lonely bed. —
 come, sweet interpreter, and ease my soul;
 come to my bosom, and explain the whole. 
alas! my prince — yet hold, my struggle breast! 
sure we shall meet again, again be bless. 
" hope all, thou say, i live, and still be free; "
o! then prevent those hope, and haste to i. 
ease all the doubt thy zara bosom know,
 and kind stop the torrent of her woe. 

but, that i know too well thy generous heart,
 one doubt, than all, more torment will impart:
 it be this, in britain happy court to shine,
 amid a thousand bloom maid, be thy —
 but thou, a thousand bloom maid among,
 be still thyself, incapable of wrong;
 no outward charm can captivate thy mind,
 thy love be friendship heighten and refine;
 it be what my soul, and not my form inspire,
 and burn with spotless and immortal fire. 
thy joy, like i, from conscious truth arise,
 and, know these joy, what other can thou prize? 
be jealous doubt the curse of sordid mind;
 hence, jealous doubt, i give you to the wind. —

once more, o come! and snatch i to thy arm! 
come, shield my beat heart from vain alarm! 
come, let i hang enamour on thy breast,
 weep please tear, and be with joy distress! 
let i still hear, and still demand thy tale,
 and, oft renew, still let my suit prevail! 
much still remain to tell and to inquire,
 my hand still write, and write prompt desire;
 my pen deny my last farewell to write,
 still, still, "return," my wishful thought indite:
 o! hear, my prince, thy love, thy mistress call,
 think over each tender name, and hear by all. 
o! please intercourse of soul with soul,
 thus, while i write, i see, i clasp thou whole;
 and these kind letter tremble Zara draw,
 in every line shall bring she to thy view. 
return, return, in love and truth excel;
 return, i write; i can add — farewell. 
