o what a pity!

o what a pity!
when Britain, teem like a o’er stor’d hive
bid her young swarm look about and live,
the wise advice be relish’d by the brood
and each, in distant land, pursu’d the public good.
some to the rosy east convey’d their all
and glean’d the pearly shore of rich Bengal;
other, the Indies of the west explor’d,
and find a world with rare production stor’d:
while some, prefer scene of peace and rest
these mild region of the north possess’d,
like swain of rural care, they liv’d by toil,
and as they purchase, they improv’d the soil:
clear’d the rude wild, release the wood bind clay,
and shew’d the long hide earth the face of day;
teach nature order, and the heedless flood,
to stand embay’d, where grow perhaps a wood.
look here or there, each alter’d spot declare
it owe its change and fortune to their care;
where this fair city stand, the howl bear
and savage panther share their nightly fare,
the hungry wolf, beset the trav’llers way,
and the sly fox purloin till break of day:
while the pale moon, in midnight state behold
the circle indian dance round the field,
who nightly tun’d their rude unletter’d lay
in many a barb’rous concert to her praise.
look mild down you minister of fate
who fix the seal to deed of future date;
or you who tender office ’tis to mourn
with friendly sorrow o’er a nation’s urn;
or you, who kindness watch o’er mankind
prevent those mischief more man design’d:
you, one, or all, whatever be your name
look kind down, and check the barb’rous flame.
teach british heart the power of nature’s law,
and king to know a murder from a war.
shall these fair plain just rescu’d from wood
and fertile meadow from the lawless flood,
become so soon abandon’d and accurs’d
and change to scene more wretched than at first.
shall these fair pile, the work and pride of those
who painless head, be sink in dark repose;
who, when they lay the first foundation stone
cry, “bless these labour when we’re dead and go.”
shall these to ruin fall, consume and burn,
and hide with their ash their erector’s urn?
shall groan with groan in dismal concert flow
and rachel’s doleful voice add woe to woe?
shall street with street unite in gorey stream
and house with house communicate in flame?
shall genuine love in british heart expire
and nature cease to act ’tween son and sire?
while hell, exult in the mischief, cry,
there drop a briton, there a buckskin die.
forbid it heav’n, nor let the hasty hand
of barb’rous pow’r depopulate the land;
lest hoary swain in age yet unborn
beneath some village shade, or lonely thorn,
to list’ning fons the horrid tale proclaim,
and brand a briton with a nero’s name.
yet if the parent with a brutal joy,
proceed in arm to murder and destroy,
may all that’s noble call our army hence
to stand like man, or fall in brave defence,
while i disown the place that give i birth,
and call my native home a hell on earth.
