the progress of dullness.

[part i.]

"our Tom be grow a sturdy boy;
his progress fill my heart with joy;
a steady soul that yield to rule,
and quite ingenious too, at school.
our master say, (i be sure he be right)
there be not a lad in town so bright.
he will cypher brave, write and read,
and say his catechism and creed,
and scorn to hesitate or falter
in primmer, spelling-book or psalter.
hard work indeed — he do notlove it;
his genius be too muchabove it.
give he a good substantial teacher,
i will lay he make a special preacher.
i have love good learning all my life:
we will send the lad to college, wife. "
thus sway by fond and sightless passion,
his parent hold a consultation:
if on their couch, or round their fire,
i need not tell, nor you inquire.
the point agree; the boy well please,
from country care and labour ease;
no more to rise by break of day
to drive home cow, or deal out hay;
to work no more in snow or hail,
and blow his finger over the flail,
or amid the toil of harvest sweat
beneath the summer sultry heat.
serene, he bid the farm, good-bye,
and quit the blow without a sigh.
propitious to their constant friend,
the power of idleness attend.
so to the priest in form he go,
prepare to study and to doze.
the parson in his youth before,
have run the same dull progress over:
his sole concern to see with care
his church, and farm in good repair.
his skill in tongue, that once he know,
have bid he long, a last adieu;
away his latin rule have flee,
and greek have vanish from his head.
then view our youth with grammar teaze.
untaught in meaning, sense or reason;
of knowledge ever he gain his fill, he
must diet long on husk of Lillie,
drudge on for weary month in vain,
by memory strength, and dint of brain;
from thence to murder virgil verse,
and construe Tully into farce,
or labour with his grave preceptor,
in greek to blunder over a chapter.
the latin testament afford
the need help of ready word;
at hand the dictionary lay,
give up it be page in frequent aid;
hard by the lexicon and grammar,
those help for memory when they stammer;
the lesson's short; the priest content;
his task to hear be soon end.
he let he mind his own concern,
then tell his parent how he learn.
a year thus spend in gather knowledge,
the lad set forth to unlade at college,
while down his sire and priest attend he,
to introduce and recommend he:
or if detain, a letter send
of much apocryphal content,
to set he forth, (how dull soever)
as very learn and very clever;
a genius of the first emission,
with burn love for erudition;
so studious he will outwatch the moon
and think the planet set too soon;
he have but little time tofit in;
examination too must frighten;
depend upo he must do well,
he know much more than he can tell;
admit he, and in little space
he will beat his rival in the race;
his father income be but small,
he come now, if he come at all.
so say, so do, at college now
he enter well — no matter how —
new scene awhile his fancy please,
but all must yield to love of ease.
in the same round condemn each day,
to study, read, recite and pray;
to make his hour of business double —
he can endure the increase trouble:
and find at length, as time grow press,
all plague be easy than his lesson.
with sleepy eye and countenance heavy,
with much excuse of non paravi,
much absence, tardes and egress,
the college-evil on he seize.
then every book, which ought to please,
stir up the seed of dire disease:
greek spoil his eye (the print so fine)
grow dim with study — and with wine;
of tully latin much afraid,
each page, he call the doctor aid;
while geometry, with line so crooked,
sprain all his wit tooverlook it.
his sickness put on every name.
it be cause and use still the same;
it be toothache, cholic, gout or stone,
with phase various as the moon:
but though through all the body spread,
still make its cap'tal seat, the head.
in all disease, it be expect,
the weak part be most infect.
kind headache hail! thou bless disease,
the friend of idleness and ease;
who mid the still and dreary bind,
where college-wall her son surround,
in spite of fear, in justice 'spite,
assume over law dispense right,
set from his task the blunderer free,
excuse by dullness and by thou.
thy votary bid a bold defiance
to all the call and threat of science,
slight learning human and divine,
and hear no prayer, and fear no fine.
and yet how oft the studious gain,
the dullness of a letter brain;
despise such low thing the while
as english grammar, phrase and style;
despise every nice art,
that aid the tongue, or mend the heart:
read ancient author over in vain,
nor taste one beauty they contain;
humble on trust accept the sense,
but deal for word at vast expense;
search well how every term must vary
from lexicon to dictionary;
and plod on in one dull tone,
gain ancient tongue, and lose their own,
bid every graceful charm defiance,
and woo the skeleton of science.
come you, who fine art despise,
and scoff at verse as heathen lie;
in all the pride of dullness rage
at pope, or Milton deathless page;
or sting by truth deep-searching line,
rave even at rhyme as low as i:
say you who boast the name of wise,
wherein substantial learning lie.
be it, superb in classic lore,
to speak what Homer speak before,
to write the language Tully write,
the style, the cadence and the note?
be there a charm in sound of greek,
no language else can learn to speak;
that cure distemper brain at once,
like Pliny rhyme for break bone?
be there a spirit find in latin,
that must evap'rate in translate?
and say, be sense and genius bind
to any vehicle of sound?
be it by mathematic aid
to count the world in light array,
to know each star, that lift it be eye,
to sparkle in the midnight sky?
say you, who draw the curious line
between the useful and the fine,
how little can this noble art
it be aid in human thing impart,
or give to life a cheerful ray,
and force our pain, and care away.
be it to know whatever be do
above the circle of the sun?
be it to lift the active mind
beyond the bound by heaven assign:
and leave our little world at home,
through realm of entity to roam;
attempt the secret dark to scan,
eternal wisdom hide from man;
for sense, deal load of definition,
and fritter truth in subdivision,
and make religion but the sign
in din of battle when to join?
vain man, to madness still a prey,
thy space a point, thy life a day,
a feeble worm, that aim to stride
in all the foppery of pride!
the glimmer lamp of reason ray
be give to guide thy darksome way.
why will thou spread thy insect-wing,
and strive to reach sublime thing?
thy doubt confess, thy blindness own,
nor vex thy thought with scene unknown.
indulgent heaven to man below,
have all explain we need to know;
have clear teach enough to prove
content below, and bliss above.
thy boastful wish how proud and vain,
while heaven forbid the vaunt strain!
for metaphysic right show
but teach how little can be know:
though quibble still maintain their station,
conjecture serve for demonstration,
army of pen draw forth to fight,
and ******* and ****** write.
oh! may i live to see that day,
when sense shall point to youth their way;
through every maze of science guide;
over education law preside:
the good retain; with just discern
explode the quackery of learning;
give ancient art their real due,
explain their fault, and beauty too;
teach where to imitate, and mend,
and point their use and their end.
then bright philosophy will shine,
and ethics teach the law divine;
our youth may learn each noble art,
that show a passage to the heart;
from ancient language well know
transfuse new beauty to our own;
with taste and fancy well refine,
where moral rapture warm the mind,
from school dismiss, with liberal hand,
spread useful learning over the land;
and bid the eastern world admire
our rise worth, and brighten fire.
but while through fancy realm we roam,
the main concern be leave at home;
return, our hero still we find
the same, as blunder and as blind.
four year at college doze away
in sleep, and slothfulness and play,
too dull for vice, with clear conscience,
charge with no fault, but that of nonsense,
(and nonsense long, with serious air
have wander unmolested there)
he pass trial fair, and free,
and take in form his first degree.
a scholar see he now commence
without the aid of book or sense:
for pass college cure the brain,
like mill to grind man young again.
the scholar-dress, that oncearray he,
the charm, admitto te ad gradum,
with touch of parchment can refine,
and make the very coxcomb shine,
confer the gift of tongue at once,
and fill with sense the vacant dunce.
so kingly crown contain quintessence
of worship, dignity and presence;
give learning, genius, virtue, worth,
wit, valour, wisdom and so forth;
hide the bald pate, and cover over
the cap of folly wear before.
our hero wit and learning now may
be prove by token of diploma,
of that diploma, which with speed
he learn to construe and to read;
and stalk abroad with conscious stride,
in all the air of pedant-pride,
with passport sign for wit and knowledge,
and current under seal of college.
few month now past, he see with pain
his purse as empty as his brain;
his father leave he then to fate,
and throw he off, as useless weight;
but give he good advice, to teach
a school at first, and then to preach.
thou reason well; it must be so;
for nothing else thy son can do.
as thief of old, to avoid the halter,
take refuge in the holy altar:
oft dullness fly from disgrace
find safety in that sacred place;
there bold rear his head, or rest
secure from ridicule or jest;
where dread satire may not dare
offend his wig extreme hair;
where scripture sanctify his strain,
and reverence hide the want of brain.
next see our youth at school appear,
procure for forty pound a year,
his ragged regiment round assemble,
teach, not to read, but fear and tremble.
before he, rod prepare his way,
those dread antidote to play.
then throne aloft in elbow-chair,
with solemn face and awful air,
he try, with ease and unconcern,
to teach what never himself can learn;
give law and punishment alone,
judge, jury, bailiff, all in one;
hold all good learning must depend
upon his rod extreme end,
who great electric virtue such,
each genius brighten at the touch;
with threat and blow (incitement press)
drive on his lad to learn each lesson;
think flog cure all moral ill,
and break their head to break their will.
the year be do; he take his leave;
the child smile; the parent grieve;
and seek again, their school to keep,
one just as good, and just as cheap.
now to some priest, that be fame for teach,
he go to learn the art of preach;
and settle down with earnest zeal
sermon to study, and to steal:
six month from all the world retire
to kindle up his cover fire;
learn the nice art, to make with ease
the scripture speak whatever he please;
with judgement unperceived to quote
what Poole explain, or Henry write;
to give the gospel new edition,
split doctrine into proposition,
draw motive, use, inference,
and torture word in thousand sense;
learn the grave style and goodly phrase,
safe-handed down from Cromwell day,
and shun with anxious care, the while
the infection of a modern style:
or on the wing of folly fly
aloft in metaphysic sky;
the system of the world explain,
till night and chaos come again;
deride what old divine can say,
point out to heaven a near way:
explode all know, establish rule,
affirm our father all be fool:
the present age be grow wise,
but wisdom in her cradle lie;
late, like Minerva, bear and breed,
not from a Jove, but scribbler head,
while thousand youth their homagelend she,
and nurse father rock andtend she.
round he much manuscript be spread,
extract from live work, and dead,
theme, sermon, plan of controversy,
that hack and mangle without mercy,
and whence, to glad the reader eye,
the future dialogue shall rise.
at length mature the grand design,
he stalk abroad, a grave divine.
mean while, from every distant seat
at state time the clergy meet.
our hero come, his sermon read,
explain the doctrine of he creed,
a licence gain to preach and pray,
and make his bow, and go his way.
what though his wit can never dispense
one page of grammar, or of sense;
what though his learning be so slight,
he scarce know to spell or write;
what though his skull be cudgel-proof!
he be orthodox, and that be enough.
perhaps with genius we will dispense;
but sure we look at least for sense.
you father of our church attend
the serious counsel of a friend,
who utmost wish, in noble way,
your sacred dignity to raise.
though blunt the style, the truth set down
you can deny — though some may frown.
yes, there be man, nor those a few,
the foe of virtue, and of you;
who, nurture long in dullness 'school,
make vice their trade, and sin by rule,
who deem it courage, heaven to brave,
and wit, to scoff at all that be grave;
vent steal jest, with strange grimace,
from folly book of common place:
while mid the simple throng around
each kindred blockhead greet the sound,
and, like electric fire, at once,
the laugh be catch from dunce to dunce.
the deist scoff you may despise;
within yourself your danger lie;
for who will wish, neglect rule,
to aid the triumph of a fool?
from heaven at first your order come,
from heaven receive it be sacred name,
indulge to man, to point the way,
that lead from darkness up to day.
your highborn dignity attend,
and view your origin and end.
while human soul be all your care,
by warn, counsel, preach, prayer,
in band of christian friendship join,
where pure affection warm the mind,
while each perform the pious race,
nor dullness ever usurp a place;
no vice shall brave your awful test,
nor folly dare to broach the jest,
each wait eye shall humble bend,
and reverence on your step attend.
but when each point of serious weight,
be tear with wrangle and debate,
when truth, mid rage of dire division,
be leave, to fight for definition,
and fool assume your sacred place,
it threat your order with disgrace;
bid genius from your seat withdraw,
and seek the pert, loquacious law;
or deign in physic path to rank,
with every quack and mountebank;
or in the way of trade content,
plod ledger over of cent. per cent.  
while in your seat so sacred, whence
we look for piety and sense,
pert dullness rave in school-boy style;
your friend must blush, your foe will smile.
while man, who teach the glorious way,
where heaven unfold celestial day,
assume the task sublime, to bring
the message of the eternal king,
disgrace those honour they receive,
and want that sense, they aim to give.
now in the desk with solemn air,
our hero make his audience stare;
assert with all dogmatic boldness,
where impudence be yok to dullness;
read over his note with halt pace,
mask in the stiffness of his face;
with gesture such as may become
those statue once that speak at Rome,
or livy ox, that to the state
declare the oracle of fate,
in awkward tone, nor say, nor sing,
slow-rumbling over the falter tongue,
two hour his drawl speech hold on,
and name it preach when he be do.
with rove tire, he fix down
for life, in some unsettled town.
people and priest full well agree;
for why — they know no more than he.
vast tract of unknown land he gain,
better than those the moon contain:
there deal in preach and in prayer,
and starve on sixty pound a year,
and cull his text, and till his farm,
and do not good, and little harm;
on sunday, in his best array,
deal forth the dullness of the day;
and while above he spend his breath,
the yawn audience nod beneath.
thus glib-tongued mercury in his hand
stretch forth the sleep-compelling wand,
each eye in endless doze to keep —
the god of speak, and of sleep.
