[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book vi.

the winter walk at noon.

there be in soul a sympathy with sound,
 and as the mind be pitch the ear be please
 with melt air or martial, brisk or grave. 
some chord in unison with what we hear
 be touch within we, and the heart reply. 
how soft the music of those village bell
 fall at interval upon the ear
 in cadence sweet! now die all away,
 now peal loud again and loud still,
 clear and sonorous as the gale come on. 
with easy force it open all the cell
 where memory sleep. wherever i have hear
 a kindred melody, the scene recur,
 and with it all its pleasure and its pain. 
such comprehensive view the spirit take,
 that in a few short moment i retrace
 (as in a map the voyager his course)
 the wind of my way through many year. 
short as in retrospect the journey seem,
 it seem not always short; the rugged path
 and prospect oft so dreary and forlorn
 move many a sigh at its dishearten length. 
yet feel present evil, while the past
 faint impress the mind, or not at all,
 how ready we wish time spend revoke,
 that we may try the ground again, where once
 (through inexperience as we now perceive)
 we miss that happiness we may have find. 
some friend be go, perhaps his son best friend
 a father, who authority, in show
 when most severe, and muster all its force,
 be but the grave countenance of love. 
who favour like the cloud of spring, may lower
 and utter now and then a awful voice,
 but have a blessing in its dark frown,
 threaten at once and nourish the plant. 
we love, but not enough the gentle hand
 that rear we. at a thoughtless age allure
 by every gild folly, we renounce
 his shelter side, and wilful forgo
 that converse which we now in vain regret. 
how glad will the man recall to life
 the boy neglect sire! a mother too,
 that soft friend, perhaps more glad still
 may he demand they at the gate of death. 
sorrow have since they go subdue and tame
 the playful humour, he can now endure,
 (himself grow sober in the vale of tear)
 and feel a parent presence no restraint. 
but not to understand a treasure worth
 till time have steal away the slight good,
 be cause of half the poverty we feel,
 and make the world the wilderness it be,
 the few that pray at all pray oft amiss,
 and seek grace to improve the prize they hold
 will urge a wise suit, than ask more. 

the night be winter in his rough mood,
 the morning sharp and clear. but now at noon
 upon the southern side of the slant hill,
 and where the wood fence off the northern blast,
 the season smile resign all its rage
 and have the warmth of may. the vault be blue
 without a cloud, and white without a speck
 the dazzle splendour of the scene below. 
again the harmony come over the vale,
 and through the tree i view the embattle tower
 whence all the music. i again perceive
 the soothe influence of the waft strain,
 and settle in soft muse as i tread
 the walk still verdant under oak and elm,
 who outspread branch overarch the glade. 
the roof though movable through all its length
 as the wind sway it, have yet well suffice,
 and intercept in their silent fall
 the frequent flake, have keep a path for i. 
no noise be here, or none that hinder thought. 
the red-breast warble still, but be content
 with slender note and more than half suppress. 
please with his solitude, and flit light
 from spray to spray, wherever he rest he shake
 from many a twig the pendent drop of ice,
 that tinkle in the wither leaf below. 
stillness accompany with sound so soft
 charm more than silence. meditation here
 may think down hour to moment. here the heart
 may give a useful lesson to the head,
 and learn wise grow without his book. 
knowledge and wisdom, far from be one,
 have oft time no connexion. knowledge dwell
 in head replete with thought of other man,
 wisdom in mind attentive to their own. 
knowledge, a rude unprofitable mass,
 the mere material with which wisdom build,
 until smooth and square and fit to its place
 do but encumber who it seem to enrich. 
knowledge be proud that he have learn so much,
 wisdom be humble that he know no more. 
book be not seldom talisman and spell
 by which the magic art of shrewd wit
 hold a unthinking multitude enthrall. 
some to the fascination of a name
 surrender judgement hoodwinked. some the stile
 infatuate, and through labyrinth and wild
 of error, lead they by a tune entrance. 
while sloth seduce more, too weak to bear
 the insupportable fatigue of thought,
 and swallow therefore without pause or choice
 the total grist unsifted, husk and all. 
but tree, and rivulet who rapid course
 defy the check of winter, haunt of deer,
 and sheep-walk populous with bleat lamb,
 and lane in which the primrose here her time
 peep through the moss that clothes the hawthorn root,
 deceive no student. wisdom there, and truth,
 not shy as in the world, and to be win
 by slow solicitation, seize at once
 the rove thought, and fix it on themselves. 

what prodigy can power divine perform
 more grand, than it produce year by year,
 and all in sight of inattentive man? 
familiar with the effect we slight the cause,
 and in the constancy of nature course,
 the regular return of genial month,
 and renovation of a fade world,
 see nought to wonder at. shall god again
 as once in Gibeon, interrupt the race
 of the undeviating and punctual sun,
 how will the world admire! but speak it less
 an agency divine, to make he know
 his moment when to sink and when to rise
 age after age, than to arrest his course? 
all we behold be miracle, but see
 so due, all be miracle in vain. 
where now the vital energy that move
 while summer be, the pure and subtle lymph
 through the imperceptible maeander vein
 of leaf and flower? it sleep; and the icy touch
 of unprolific winter have impress
 a cold stagnation on the intestine tide. 
but let the month go round, a few short month,
 and all shall be restore. these naked shoot
 barren as lance, among which the wind
 make wintery music, sigh as it go,
 shall put their graceful foliage on again,
 and more aspire and with ampler spread
 shall boast new charm, and more than they have lose. 
then, each in its peculiar honour clad,
 shall publish even to the distant eye
 its family and tribe. laburnum rich
 in stream gold; syringa iv'ry-pure;
 the scent and the scentless rose; this red
 and of a humble growth, the other tall,
 and throw up into the dark gloom
 of neighbour cypress or more sable yew
 her silver globe, light as the foamy surf
 that the wind sever from the break wave. 
the lilac various in array, now white,
 now sanguine, and her beauteous head now set
 with purple spike pyramidal, as if
 studious of ornament, yet unresolved
 which hue she most approve, she choose they all. 
copious of flower the woodbine, pale and wan,
 but well compensate their sickly look
 with never-cloying odour, early and late. 
hypericum all bloom, so thick a swarm
 of flower like fly clthe her slender rod
 that scarce a leaf appear. mezerion too
 though leafless well attire, and thick beset
 with blush wreath invest every spray. 
Althaea with the purple eye, the broom,
 yellow and bright as bullion unalloyed
 her blossom, and luxuriant above all
 the jasmine, throw wide her elegant sweet,
 the deep dark green of who unvarnished leaf
 make more conspicuous, and illumine more
 the bright profusion of her scatter star. —
 these have be, and these shall be in their day. 
and all this uniform uncoloured scene
 shall be dismantle of its fleecy load,
 and flush into variety again. 
from dearth to plenty, and from death to life,
 be nature progress when she lecture man
 in heavenly truth; evince as she make
 the grand transition, that there live and work
 a soul in all thing, and that soul be god. 
the beauty of the wilderness be he,
 that make so gay the solitary place
 where no eye see they. and the fair form
 that cultivation glory in, be he. 
he set the bright procession on its way,
 and marshal all the order of the year. 
he mark the bound which winter may not pass,
 and blunt his point fury. in its case
 russet and rude, fold up the tender germ
 uninjured, with inimitable art,
 and here one flowery season fade and die
 design the bloom wonder of the next. 

some say that in the origin of thing
 when all creation start into birth,
 the infant element receive a law
 from which they swerve not since. that under force
 of that control ordinance they move,
 and need not his immediate hand, who first
 prescribe their course, to regulate it now. 
thus dream they, and contrive to save a god
 the encumbrance of his own concern, and spare
 the great artificer of all that move
 the stress of a continual act, the pain
 of unremitted vigilance and care,
 as too laborious and severe a task. 
so man, the moth, be not afraid it seem
 to span omnipotence, and measure may
 that know no measure, by the scanty rule
 and standard of his own, that be to day,
 and be not, here tomorrow sun go down. 
but how shall matter occupy a charge
 dull as it be, and satisfy a law
 so vast in its demand, unless impel
 to ceaseless service by a ceaseless force,
 and under pressure of some conscious cause? 
the lord of all, himself through all diffuse,
 sustain and be the life of all that life. 
nature be but a name for a effect
 who cause be god. he feed the secret fire
 by which the mighty process be maintain,
 who sleep not, be not weary; in who sight
 slow-circling age be as transient day;
 who work be without labour, who design
 no flaw deform, no difficulty thwart,
 and who beneficence no charge exhaust
 he blind antiquity profane, not serve,
 with self-taught rite and under various name
 female and male, Pomona, pale, Pan,
 and Flora and Vertumnus; people earth
 with tutelary goddess and god
 that be not, and commend as they will
 to each some province, garden, field, or grove. 
but all be under one. one spirit — he
 who wear the plat thorn with bleed brow,
 rule universal nature. not a flower
 but show some touch in freckle, streak or stain,
 of his unrivaled pencil. he inspire
 their balmy odour and impart their hue,
 and bath their eye with nectar, and include
 in grain as countless as the seaside sand,
 the form with which he sprinkle all the earth. 
happy who walk with he! who what he find
 of flavour or of scent in fruit or flower,
 or what he view of beautiful or grand
 in nature, from the broad majestic oak
 to the green blade that twinkle in the fun,
 prompt with remembrance of a present god. 
his presence who make all so fair, perceive,
 make all still fair. as with he no scene
 be dreary, so with he all season please. 
though winter have be none, have man be true,
 and earth be punish for its tenant sake,
 yet not in vengeance; as this smile sky
 so soon succeed such a angry night,
 and these dissolve snow, and this clear stream
 recover fast its liquid music, prove. 

who then that have a mind well string and tune
 to contemplation, and within his reach
 a scene so friendly to his favourite task,
 will waste attention at the chequer board,
 his host of wooden warrior to and fro
 march and countermarch, with a eye
 as fix as marble, with a forehead ridge
 and furrow into storm, and with a hand
 tremble, as if eternity be hang
 in balance on his conduct of a pin? 
nor envy he aught more their idle sport
 who pant with application misapply
 to trivial toy, and push ivory ball
 across the velvet level, feel a joy
 Akin to rapture, when the bauble find
 its destine goal of difficult access. 
nor deem he wise he, who give his noon
 to miss, the mercer plague, from shop to shop
 wander, and litt'r with unfolded silk
 the polish counter, and approve none,
 or promise with smile to call again. 
nor he, who by his vanity seduce
 and soothe into a dream that he discern
 the difference of a Guido from a daub,
 frequent the crowd auction. station there
 as due as the Langford of the show,
 with glass at eye, and catalogue in hand,
 and tongue accomplish in the fulsome cant
 and pedantry that coxcomb learn with ease,
 oft as the price-deciding hammer fall
 he note it in his book, then rap his box
 swear it be a bargain, rail at his hard fate
 that he have let it pass — but never bid. 

here unmoleft, through whatever sign
 the sun proceed, i wander. neither mist,
 nor freeze sky, nor sultry, check i,
 nor stranger intermeddle with my joy. 
even in the spring and playtime of the year
 that call the unwonted villager abroad
 with all her little one, a sportive train,
 to gather king-cup in the yellow mead,
 and prink their hair with daisy, or to pick
 a cheap but wholesome salad from the brook,
 these shade be all my own. the timorous hare
 grow so familiar with her frequent guest
 scarce shun i; and the stock dove unalarmed
 sit coo in the pine-tree, nor suspend
 his long love-ditty for my near approach. 
draw from his refuge in some lonely elm
 that age or injury have hollow deep,
 where on his bed of wool and mat leaf
 he have outsleep the winter, venture forth
 to frisk awhile, and bask in the warm sun,
 the squirrel, flippant, pert, and full of play. 
he see i, and at once, swift as a bird
 ascend the neighbour beech; there whisk his brush
 and perk his ear, and stamp and scold aloud,
 with all the prettiness of feign alarm,
 and anger insignificant fierce. 

the heart be hard in nature, and unfit
 for human fellowship, as be void
 of sympathy, and therefore dead alike
 to love and friendship both, that be not please
 with sight of animal enjoy life,
 nor feel their happiness augment his own. 
the bound fawn that dart across the glade
 when none pursue, through mere delight of heart,
 and spirit buoyant with excess of glee;
 the horse, as wanton and almost as fleet,
 that skim the spacious meadow at full speed,
 then stop and snort, and throw high his heel
 start to the voluntary race again;
 the very kine that gambol at high noon,
 the total herd receive first from one
 that lead the dance, a summons to be gay,
 though wild their strange vagary, and uncouth
 their effort, yet resolve with one consent
 to give such act and utterance as they may
 to ecstasy too big to be suppress —
 these, and a thousand image of bliss,
 with which kind nature grace every scene
 where cruel man defeat not her design,
 impart to the benevolent, who wish
 all that be capable of pleasure, please,
 a far superior happiness to they,
 the comfort of a reasonable joy. 

man scarce have rise, obedient to his call
 who form he, from the dust his future grave,
 when he be crown as never king be since. 
god set the diadem upon his head,
 and angel choirs attend. wonder stand
 the new-made monarch, while before he pass,
 all happy and all perfect in their kind
 the creature, summon from their various haunt
 to see their sovereign, and confess his sway. 
vast be his empire, absolute his power,
 or bound only by a law who force
 it be he sublime privilege to feel
 and own, the law of universal love. 
he rule with meekness, they obey with joy. 
no cruel purpose lurk within his heart,
 and no distrust of his intent in they. 
so Eden be a scene of harmless sport,
 where kindness on his part who rule the whole
 beget a tranquil confidence in all,
 and fear as yet be not, nor cause for fear. 
but sin mar all. and the revolt of man,
 that source of evil not exhaust yet,
 be punish with revolt of he from he. 
garden of god, how terrible the change
 thy grove and lawn then witness! every heart,
 each animal of every name, conceive
 a jealousy and a instinctive fear,
 and conscious of some danger, either flee
 precipitate the loathe abode of man,
 or growl defiance in such angry sort,
 as teach he too to tremble in his turn. 
thus harmony and family accord
 be drive from paradise; and in that hour
 the seed of cruelty that since have swell
 to such gigantic and enormous growth,
 be sow in human nature fruitful soil. 
hence date the persecution and the pain
 that man inflict on all inferior kind
 regardless of their plaint. to make he sport,
 to gratify the frenzy of his wrath,
 or his base gluttony, be cause good
 and just in his account, why bird and beast
 shall suffer torture, and the stream be dye
 with blood of their inhabitant impale. 
earth groan beneath the burden of a war
 wage with defenceless innocence, while he,
 not satisfy to prey on all around,
 add tenfold bitterness to death, by pang
 needless, and first torment here he devour. 
now happy they that occupy the scene
 the most remote from his abhor resort,
 who once as delegate of god on earth
 they fear, and as his perfect image love. 
the wilderness be they with all its cave,
 its hollow glenn, its thicket, and its plain
 unvisited by man. there they be free,
 and howl and roar as like they, uncontrolled,
 nor ask his leave to slumber or to play. 
woe to the tyrant if he dare intrude
 within the confine of their wild domain;
 the lion tell he — i be monarch here —
 and if he spare he, spare he on the term
 of royal mercy, and through generous scorn
 to rend a victim tremble at his foot. 
in measure as by force of instinct draw,
 or by necessity constrain, they live
 dependent upon man, those in his field,
 these at his crib, and some beneath his roof,
 they prove too often at how dear a rate
 he sell protection. witness, at his foot
 the spaniel die for some venial fault,
 under dissection of the knot scourge. 
witness, the patient ox, with stripe and yell
 drive to the slaughter, goad as he run
 to madness, while the savage at his heel
 laugh at the frantic sufferer fury spend
 upon the guiltless passenger overthrow. 
he too be witness, noble of the train
 that wait on man, the flight-performing horse. 
with unsuspecting readiness he take
 his murderer on his back, and push all day
 with bleed side and flank that heave for life
 to the far-distant goal, arrive and die. 
so little mercy show who need so much! 
do law, so jealous in the cause of man,
 denounce no doom on the delinquent? none. 
he live, and over his brim beaker boast
 (as if barbarity be high desert)
 the inglorious feat, and clamorous in praise
 of the poor brute, seem wise to suppose
 the honour of his matchless horse his own. 
but many a crime, deem innocent on earth,
 be register in heaven, and these no doubt,
 have each their record, with a curse annex. 
man may dismiss compassion from his heart,
 but god will never. when he charge the Jew
 the assist his foe down-fallen beast to rise,
 and when the bush-exploring boy that seize
 the young, to let the parent bird go free,
 prove he not plain that his mean work
 be yet his care, and have a interest all,
 all, in the universal father love. 
on Noah, and in he on all mankind
 the charter be confer by which we hold
 the flesh of animal in fee, and claim
 over all we feed on, power of life and death. 
but read the instrument, and mark it well. 
the oppression of a tyrannous controul
 can find no warrant there. feed then, and yield
 thanks for thy food. carnivorous through sin
 feed on the slay, but spare the live brute. 

the governor of all, himself to all
 so bountiful, in who attentive ear
 the unfledged raven and the lion whelp
 plead not in vain for pity on the pang
 of hunger unassuaged, have interpose,
 not seldom, his avenge arm, to smite
 the injurious trampler upon nature law
 that claim forbearance even for a brute. 
he hate the hardness of a balaam heart;
 and prophet as he be, he may not strike
 the blameless animal, without rebuke,
 on which he ride. her opportune offence
 save he, or the unrelenting seer have die. 
he see that human equity be slack
 to interfere, though in so just a cause,
 and make the task his own. inspire dumb
 and helpless victim with a sense so keen
 of injury, with such knowledge of their strength,
 and such sagacity to take revenge,
 that oft the beast have seem to judge the man. 
a ancient, not a legendary tale,
 by one of sound intelligence rehearse
 (if such, who plead for providence, may seem
 in modern eye) shall make the doctrine clear. 

where England stretch towards the set sun
 narrow and long, overlook the western wave,
 dwell young misagathus. a scorner he
 of god and goodness, atheist in ostent,
 vicious in act, in temper savage-fierce. 
he journey, and his chance be as he go,
 to join a traveler of far different note
 Evander, fame for piety, for year
 deserve honour, but for wisdom more. 
fame have not leave the venerable man
 a stranger to the manner of the youth,
 who face too be familiar to his view. 
their way be on the margin of the land,
 over the green summit of the rock who base
 beat back the roar surge, scarce hear so high. 
the charity that warm his heart be move
 at sight of the man-monster. with a smile
 gentle, and affable, and full of grace,
 as fearful of offend who he wish
 much to persuade, he ply his ear with truth
 not harsh thunder forth or rude press,
 but like his purpose, gracious, kind, and sweet. 
and do thou dream, the impenetrable man
 exclaim, that i, the lullaby of age
 and fantasy of dotard such as thou
 can cheat, or move a moment fear in i? 
Mark now the proof i give thou, that the brave
 need no such aid as superstition lend
 to steel their heart against the dread of death. 
he speak, and to the precipice at hand
 push with a madman fury. fancy shrink,
 and the blood thrill and curdle at the thought
 of such a gulph as he design his grave. 
but though the felon on his back can dare
 the dreadful leap, more rational his steed
 decline the death, and wheel swift round
 or here his hoof have press the crumble verge,
 baffle his rider, save against his will. 
the frenzy of the brain may be redress
 by medicine well apply, but without grace
 the heart insanity admit no cure. 
enrage the more by what may have reform
 his horrible intent, again he seek
 destruction with a zeal to be destroy,
 with sound whip and rowel dye in blood. 
but still in vain. the providence that mean
 a long date to the far noble beast,
 spare yet again the ignoble for his sake. 
and now, his prowess prove, and his sincere
 incurable obduracy evince,
 his rage grow cool; and please perhaps to have earn
 so cheap the renown of that attempt,
 with look of some complacence he resume
 his road, deride much the blank amaze
 of good Evander, still where he be leave
 fix motionless, and petrify with dread. 
so on they fare; discourse on other theme
 ensue, seem to obliterate the past,
 and tamer far for so much fury show,
 (as be the course of rash and fiery man)
 the rude companion smile as if transform. 
but it be a transient calm. a storm be near,
 a unsuspected storm. his hour be come. 
the impious challenger of power divine
 be now to learn, that heaven though slow to wrath,
 be never with impunity defy. 
his horse, as he have catch his master mood,
 snort, and start into sudden rage,
 unbidden, and not now to be control,
 rush to the cliff, and have reach it, stand. 
at once the shock unseated he. he fly
 sheer over the craggy barrier, and immerse
 deep in the flood, find, when he seek it not,
 the death he have deserve, and die alone. 
so god wrought double justice; make the fool
 the victim of his own tremendous choice
 and teach a brute the way to safe revenge. 

i will not enter on my list of friend
 (though grace with polish manner and fine sense
 yet want sensibility) the man
 who needless set foot upon a worm. 
a inadvertent step may crush the snail
 that crawl at evening in the public path,
 but he that have humanity, forewarn,
 will tread aside, and let the reptile live. 
the creep vermin, loathsome to the sight,
 and charge perhaps with venom, that intrude
 a visitor unwelcome into scene
 sacred to neatness and repose, the alcove,
 the chamber, or refectory, may die. 
a necessary act incur no blame. 
not so when hold within their proper bound
 and guiltless of offence, they range the air,
 or take their pastime in the spacious field. 
there they be privilege. and he that hunt
 or harm they there, be guilty of a wrong,
 disturb the economy of nature realm,
 who when she form, design they a abode. 
the sum be this: if man convenience, health,
 or safety interfere, his right and claim
 be paramount, and must extinguish they. 
else they be all — the mean thing that be,
 as free to live and to enjoy that life,
 as god be free to form they at the first,
 who in his sovereign wisdom make they all. 
you therefore who love mercy, teach your son
 to love it too. the springtime of our year
 be soon dishonour and defile in most
 by bud ill, that ask a prudent hand
 to check they. but alas! none soon shoot,
 if unrestrained, into luxuriant growth,
 than cruelty, most devilish of they all. 
mercy to he that show it, be the rule
 and righteous limitation of its act
 by which heaven move in pardon guilty man;
 and he that show none, be ripe in year,
 and conscious of the out'rage he commit
 shall seek it, and not find it in his turn. 

distinguish much by reason, and still more
 by our capacity of grace divine,
 from creature that exist but for our sake,
 which have serve we, perish, we be hold
 accountable, and god, some future day,
 will reckon with we round for the abuse
 of what he deem no mean or trivial trust. 
superior as we be, they yet depend
 not more on human help, than we on they. 
their strength, or speed, or vigilance, be give
 in aid of our defect. in some be find
 such teachable and apprehensive part,
 that man attainment in his own concern
 match with the expertness of the brute in they,
 be ofttimes vanquish and throw far behind. 
some show that nice sagacity of smell,
 and read with such discernment, in the port
 and figure of the man, his secret aim,
 that oft we owe our safety to a skill
 we can not teach, and must despair to learn. 
but learn we may, if not too proud to stoop
 to quadrupede instructor, many a good
 and useful quality, and virtue too,
 rare exemplify among ourselves. 
attachment never to be wean, or change
 by any change of fortune, proof alike
 against unkindness, absence, and neglect;
 fidelity, that neither bribe nor threat
 can move or warp, and gratitude for small
 and trivial favour, last as the life,
 and glisten even in the die eye. 

man praise man. desert in art or arm
 win public honour; and ten thousand sit
 patient present at a sacred song,
 commemoration-mad; content to hear
 (oh wonderful effect of music power!) 
messiah eulogy, for handel sake. 
but less, methinks, than sacrilege may serve —
 (for be it less? what heathen will have dare
 to strip Jove statue of his oaken wreath
 and hang it up in honour of a man!) 
much less may serve, when all that we design
 be but to gratify a itch ear,
 and give the day to a musician praise. 
remember Handel? who that be not bear
 deaf as the dead to harmony, forget,
 or can, the more than Homer of his age? 
yes — we remember he. and while we praise
 a talent so divine, remember too
 that his most holy book from who it come
 be never mean, be never use before
 to buckram out the memory of a man. 
but hush! — the muse perhaps be too severe,
 and with a gravity beyond the size
 and measure of the offence, rebuke a deed
 less impious than absurd, and owe more
 to want of judgement than to wrong design. 
so in the chapel of old Ely house,
 when wander Charles, who mean to be the third,
 have flee from William, and the news be fresh,
 the simple clerk but loyal, do announce,
 and eke do rear right merry, two staff,
 sing to the praise and glory of king George. 
— man praise man, and Garrick memory next,
 when time have somewhat mellow it, and make
 the idol of our worship while he live,
 the god of our idolatry once more,
 shall have its altar; and the world shall go
 in pilgrimage to bow before his shrine. 
the theatre too small, shall suffocate
 its squeeze content, and more than it admit
 shall sigh at their exclusion, and return
 ungratified. for there some noble lord
 shall stuff his shoulder with king Richard bunch,
 or wrap himself in Hamlet inky cloak,
 and strut, and storm and straddle, stamp and stare,
 the show the world how Garrick do not act. 
for Garrick be a worshipper himself;
 he draw the liturgy, and frame the rite
 and solemn ceremonial of the day,
 and call the world to worship on the bank
 of Avon fame in song. ah pleasant proof! 
that piety have still in human heart
 some place, a spark or two not yet extinct. 
the mulberry tree be hang with bloom wreath,
 the mulberry tree stand centre of the dance,
 the mulberry tree be hymn with dulcet air,
 and from his touchwood trunk, the mulberry tree
 supply such relic, as devotion hold
 still sacred, and preserve with pious care. 
so it be a hallow time. decorum reign,
 and mirth without offence. no few return
 doubtless much edify, and all refresh. 
— man praise man. the rabble all alive,
 from tipling-bench, cellar, stall, and sty,
 swarm in the street. the statesman of the day,
 a pompous and slow-moving pageant come. 
some shout he, and some hang upon his car
 to gaze in his eye and bless he. maiden wave
 their kerchief, and old woman weep for joy. 
while other not so satisfy unhorse
 the gild equipage, and turn loose
 his streed, usurp a place they well deserve. 
why? what have charm they? have he save the state
 no. do he purpose its salvation? no.
 enchant novelty, that moon at full,
 that find out every crevice of the head
 that be not sound and perfect, have in they
 wrought this disturbance. but the wane be near,
 and his own cattle must suffice he soon. 
thus idle do we waste the breath of praise,
 and dedicate a tribute, in its use
 and just direction, sacred, to a thing
 doom to the dust, or lodge already there. 
encomium in old time be poet work. 
but poet have lavish long since
 exhaust all material of the art,
 the task now fall into the public hand. 
and i, content with a humble theme,
 have pour my stream of panegyric down
 the vale of nature, where it creep and wind
 among her lovely work, with a secure
 and unambitious course, reflect clear
 if not the virtue yet the worth of brute,
 and i be recompense, and deem the toil
 of poetry not lose, if verse of i
 may stand between a animal and woe,
 and teach one tyrant pity for his drudge. 

the groan of nature in this nether world
 which heaven have hear for age, have a end. 
foretell by prophet, and by poet sing
 who fire be kindle at the prophet lamp,
 the time of rest, the promise sabbath come. 
six thousand year of sorrow have well-nigh
 fulfil their tardy and disastrous course
 over a sinful world. and what remain
 of this tempestuous state of human thing,
 be mere as the work of a sea
 before a calm, that rock itself to rest. 
for he who car the wind be, and the cloud
 the dust that wait upon his sultry march
 when sin have move he, and his wrath be hot,
 shall visit earth in mercy; shall descend
 propitious, in his chariot pave with love,
 and what his storm have blast and deface
 for man revolt, shall with a smile repair. 

sweet be the harp of prophesy. too sweet
 not to be wrong by a mere mortal touch;
 nor can the wonder it record, be sing
 to mean music, and not suffer loss. 
but when a poet, or when one like i,
 happy to rove among poetic flower
 though poor in skill to rear they, light at last
 on some fair theme, some theme divine fair,
 such be the impulse and the spur he feel
 to give it praise proportion to its worth,
 that not to attempt it, arduous as he deem
 the labour, be a task more arduous still. 

oh scene surpass fable, and yet true,
 scene of accomplish bliss! which who can see
 though but in distant prospect, and not feel
 his soul refresh with foretaste of the joy? 
river of gladness water all the earth,
 and clothe all clime with beauty; the reproach
 of barrenness be past. the fruitful field
 laugh with abundance, and the land once lean,
 or fertile only in its own disgrace,
 exult to see its thistly curse repeal. 
the various season weave into one,
 and that one season a eternal spring,
 the garden fear no blight, and need no fence
 for there be none to covet, all be full. 
the lion and the libbard and the bear
 graze with the fearless siock. all bask at noon
 together, or all gambol in the shade
 of the same grove, and drink one common stream. 
antipathy be none. no foe to man
 lurk in the serpent now. the mother see
 and smile to see her infant playful hand
 stretch forth to dally with the crest worm,
 to stroke his azure neck, or to receive
 the lambent homage of his arrowy tongue. 
all creature worship man, and all mankind
 one lord, one father. error have no place;
 that creep pestilence be drive away,
 the breath of heaven have chase it. in the heart
 no passion touch a discordant string,
 but all be harmony and love. disease
 be not. the pure and uncontaminate blood
 hold its due course, nor fear the frost of age. 
one song employ all nation, and all cry
 "worthy the lamb, for he be slay for we"
 the dweller in the vale and on the rock
 shout to each other, and the mountain top
 from distant mountain catch the fly joy,
 until nation after nation teach the strain,
 earth roll the rapturous hosanna round. 
behold the measure of the promise fill,
 see Salem build, the labour of a god!
 bright as a sun the sacred city shine;
 all kingdom and all prince of the earth
 flock to that light; the glory of all land
 flow into she, unbounded be her joy
 and endless her increase. thy ram be there
 nebaioth, and the flock of Kedar there;
 the loom of ormus, and the mine of ind,
 and saba spicy grove pay tribute there. 
praise be in all her gate. upon her wall,
 and in her street, and in her spacious court
 be hear salvation. eastern Java there
 kneel with the native of the farther west,
 and Aethiopia spread abroad the hand
 and worship. her report have travel forth
 into all land. from every clime they come
 to see thy beauty and to share thy joy
 o Sion! a assembly such as earth
 see never, such as heaven stoop down to see. 

thus heavenward all thing tend. for all be once
 perfect, and all must be at length restore. 
so god have great purpose; who will else
 in his dishonour work himself endure
 dishonour, and be wrong without redress. 
haste then, and wheel away a shatter world
 you slow-revolving season! we will see,
 (a sight to which our eye be stranger yet)
 a world that do not dread and hate his law,
 and suffer for its crime. will learn how fair
 the creature be that god pronounce good,
 how pleasant in itself what please he. 
here every drop of honey hide a sting,
 worm wind themselves into our sweet flower,
 and even the joy that haply some poor heart
 derive from heaven, pure as the fountain be
 be sully in the stream; take a taint
 from touch of human lip, at best impure. 
oh for a world in principle as chaste
 as this be gross and selfish! over which
 custom and prejudice shall bear no sway
 that govern all thing here, shoulder aside
 the meek and modest truth, and force she
 to seek a refuge from the tongue of strife
 in nook obscure, far from the way of man. 
where violence shall never lift the sword,
 nor cunning justify the proud man wrong,
 leave the poor no remedy but tear. 
where he that fill a office, shall esteem
 the occasion it present of do good
 more than the perquisite. where law shall speak
 seldom, and never but as wisdom prompt
 and equity; not jealous more to guard
 a worthless form, than to decide aright. 
where fashion shall not sanctify abuse,
 nor smooth good-breeding (supplemental grace)
 with lean performance ape the work of love. 

come then, and add to thy many crown
 receive yet one, the crown of all the earth,
 thou who alone art worthy! it be thy
 by ancient covenant here nature birth,
 and thou have make it thy by purchase since,
 and overpay its value with thy blood. 
thy saint proclaim thou king; and in their heart
 thy title be engrave with a pen
 dip in the fountain of eternal love. 
thy saint proclaim thou king; and thy delay
 give courage to their foe, who, can they see
 the dawn of thy last advent long-desired,
 will creep into the bowel of the hill,
 and flee for safety to the fall rock. 
the very spirit of the world be tire
 of its own taunt question ask so long,
 "where be the promise of your lord approach?"
the infidel have shoot his bolt away,
 until his exhaust quiver yield none,
 he glean the blunt shaft that have recoil,
 and aim they at the shield of truth again. 
the veil be rend, rend too by priestly hand,
 that hide divinity from mortal eye,
 and all the mystery to faith propose
 insult and traduce, be cast aside
 as useless, to the mole and to the bat. 
they now be deem the faithful and be praise,
 who constant only in reject thou,
 deny thy godhead with a martyr zeal,
 and quit their office for their error sake. 
blind and in love with darkness! yet even these
 worthy, compare with sycophant, who knee
 thy name, adore, and then preach thou man. 
so fare thy church. but how thy church may fare
 the world take little thought; who will may preach,
 and what they will. all pastor be alike
 to wander sheep, resolve to follow none. 
two god divide they all, pleasure and gain. 
for these they live, they sacrifice to these,
 and in their service wage perpetual war
 with conscience and with thou. lust in their heart,
 and mischief in their hand, they roam the earth
 to prey upon each other; stubborn, fierce,
 high-minded, foam out their own disgrace. 
thy prophet speak of such; and note down
 the feature of the last degenerate time,
 exhibit every lineament of these. 
come then, and add to thy many crown
 receive yet one, as radiant as the rest,
 due to thy last and most effectual work,
 thy word fulfil, the conquest of a world. 

he be the happy man, who life even now
 show somewhat of that happy life to come. 
who doom to a obscure but tranquil state
 be please with it, and be he free to choose,
 will make his fate his choice. who peace, the fruit
 of virtue, and who virtue, fruit of faith,
 prepare for happiness; bespeak he one
 content indeed to sojourn while he must
 below the sky, but have there his home. 
the world overlook he in her busy search
 of object more illustrious in her view;
 and occupy as earnest as she
 though more sublime, he overlook the world. 
she scorn his pleasure, for she know they not;
 he seek not she, for he have prove they vain. 
he can skim the ground like summer bird
 pursue gild fly, and such he deem
 her honour, her emolument, her joy. 
therefore in contemplation be his bliss,
 who power be such, that who she lift from earth
 she make familiar with a heaven unseen,
 and show he glory yet to be reveal. 
not slothful he, though seem unemployed,
 and censure oft as useless. still stream
 oft water fair meadow, and the bird
 that flutter least, be long on the wing. 
ask he indeed, what trophy he have raise,
 or what achievement of immortal fame
 he purpose, and he shall answer — none. 
his warfare be within. there unfatigued
 his fervent spirit labour. there he fight,
 and there obtain fresh triumph over himself,
 and never-withering wreath, compare with which
 the laurel that a Caesar reap be weed. 
perhaps the self-approving haughty world
 that as she sweep he with her whistle silk
 scarce deign to notice he, or if she see
 deem he a cypher in the work of god,
 receive advantage from his noiseless hour
 of which she little dream. perhaps she owe
 her sunshine and her rain, her bloom spring
 and plenteous harvest, to the prayer he make,
 when Isaac like, the solitary saint
 walk forth to meditate at even-tide,
 and think on she, who think not for herself. 
forgive he then, thou bustler in concern
 of little worth, and idler in the best,
 if author of no mischief and some good,
 he seek his proper happiness by mean
 that may advance, but can hinder thy. 
nor though he tread the secret path of life,
 engage no notice, and enjoy much ease,
 account he a encumbrance on the state,
 receive benefit, and render none. 
his sphere though humble, if that humble sphere
 shine with his fair example, and though small
 his influence, if that influence all be spend
 in soothe sorrow and in quench strife,
 in aid helpless indigence, in work
 from which at least a grateful few derive
 some taste of comfort in a world of woe,
 then let the supercilious great confess
 he serve his country; recompense well
 the state beneath the shadow of who vine
 he sit secure, and in the scale of life
 hold no ignoble, though a slight place. 
the man who virtue be more feel than see,
 must drop indeed the hope of public praise,
 but he may boast what few that win it can,
 that if his country stand not by his skill,
 at least his folly have not wrought she fall. 
polite refinement offer he in vain
 her golden tube, through which a sensual world
 draw gross impurity, and like it well,
 the neat conveyance hide all the offence. 
not that he peevish reject a mode
 because that world adopt it. if it bear
 the stamp and clear impression of good sense,
 and be not costly more than of true worth,
 he put it on, and for decorum sake
 can wear it even as graceful as she. 
she judge of refinement by the eye,
 he by the test of conscience, and a heart
 not soon deceive; aware that what be base
 no polish can make sterling, and that vice
 though well perfume and elegant dress,
 like a unburied carcase trick with flower
 be but a garnish nuisance, fit far
 for clean riddance than for fair attire. 
so life glide smooth and by stealth away,
 more golden than that age of fable gold
 renown in ancient song; not vex with care
 or stain with guilt, beneficent, approve
 of god and man, and peaceful in its end. 
so glide my life away! and so at last
 my share of duty decent fulfil,
 may some disease, not tardy to perform
 its destine office, yet with gentle stroke,
 dismiss i weary to a safe retreat
 beneath the turf that i have often tread. 
it shall not grieve i, then, that once when call
 to dress a sofa with the flower of verse,
 i play awhile, obedient to the fair
 with that light task, but soon to please she more
 who flower alone i know will little please,
 let fall the unfinished wreath, and rove for fruit. 
rove far and gather much. some harsh, it be true,
 pick from the thorn and brier of reproof,
 but wholesome, well-digested. grateful some
 to palate that can taste immortal truth,
 insipid else, and sure to be despise. 
but all be in his hand who praise i seek. 
in vain the poet sing, and the world hear,
 if he regard not, though divine the theme. 
it be not in artful measure, in the chime
 and idle tinkle of a minstrel lyre
 to charm his ear, who eye be on the heart. 
who frown can disappoint the proud strain,
 who approbation — prosper even i. 
