the battle of the Nile. 

shout! for the lord have triumph glorious!
upon the shore of that renown land,
where erst his mighty arm and outstretch hand
he lift high,
and dash, in piece dash the enemy; —
upon that ancient coast,
where Pharaoh chariot and his host
he cast into the deep,
while over their silent pomp he bid the swell sea sweep;
upon that eastern shore,
that see his awful arm reveal of yore,
again have he arise, and oppose
his foe' defy vaunt: over they the deep have close!

shade of mighty chief of yore,
who triumph on the self-same shore:
Ammon, who first over ocean empire wide
do bid the bold bark stem the roar tide;
sesac, who from the east to farther west
do rear thy pillar over realm subdue;
and thou, who bone do rest
in the huge pyramid dim solitude,
beneath the uncouth stone,
thy name and deed unknown;
and philip glorious son,
with conquest flush, for field and city win;
and thou, imperial Cæsar, who sole sway
the long-disputed world at length confess,
when on these shore thy bleed rival lay! 

oh, can you, start from your long cold rest,
burst death oblivious trance,
and once again with plume pride advance,
how will you own your fame surpass,
and on the sand your trophy cast,
when, the storm of conflict over,
and cease the burn battle roar,
beneath the morning orient light,
you see, with sail all swell white,
britain proud fleet, to many a joyful cry,
ride over the roll surge in awful sovereignty!

for fierce ambition fire your mind —
beside your glitter car,
amid the thick war,
go superstition, sorceress blind,
in dimly-figured robe, with scowl mien,
half hide in jealous hood;
and tyranny, beneath who helm be see
his eye suffuse with blood;
and giant pride,
that the great sun with haughty smile defy;
and avarice, that grasp his guilty gold;
these, as the sorceress her loud sistrum ring,
their dismal pæan sing;
and still, far off, pale pity hang her head,
while over the die and the dead
the victor brazen wheel with gory axle roll.
now look on he, in holy courage bold;
the asserter of his country cause behold!
he lift his gaze to heaven, serene brave,
and while around war fearful banner wave,
he pray: protect we, as our cause be just;
for in thy might alone, judge of the world, we trust! 

and they be scatter — the destroyer die!
they that usurp the bloody victor claim,
that speak of freedom; but, behold a cry!
they, that like a wasteful flame,
or the huge sandy pillar, that amain
whirl 'amid the silence of the desert plain,
deathful in their career of terror come,
and scatter ruin as they pass!
so rush they, like the simoom horrid blast;
they sweep, and all around be wilderness!
but from thy throne on high,
thou, god, have hear the cry
of nation in distress!
Britain go forth, beneath thy might,
to quell the proud blasphemer in the fight;
and Egypt, far along her wind main,
echo the shout of joy, and genuine freedom strain!

now let they, who thy name, o god! defy,
invoke the mighty prophet of the east;
or deck, as erst, the mystic feast
to Ashtaroth, queen of the starry sky!
let they, in some cavern dark,
seek Osiris' bury ark;
or call on Typhon, of gigantic form,
lift his hundred arm, and howl 'amid the storm!
or to that grisly king
in vain their cymbal let they ring,
to he in tophet vale revere
(with smoke his brazen idol smear),
grim Moloch, in who fume furnace blue
the unpitying priest the shriek infant throw,
while to shrill cry, and drum' and timbrel' sound,
the frantic and unhearing troop dance round;
to he despair let they go,
and tell their fearful tale of hideous overthrow!

calm breathe the air along the evening bay,
where, all in warlike pride,
the Gallic squadron stretch its long array;
and over the tranquil tide
with beauteous bend the streamer wave on high
but, ah! how change the scene ere night descend!
hark to the shout that heaven high concave rend!
hark to that die cry!
while, loud yet, the cannon roar
resound along the nile affright shore,
where, from his oozy bed,
the cower crocodile have raise his head!
what burst flame
lighten the long track of the gleamy brine!
from yond proud ship it come,
that tower the leader of the hostile line!
now loud explosion rend the midnight air!
hear you the last deep groan of despair?
heaven fiery cope unwonted thunder fill,
then, with one dreadful pause, earth, air, and sea be still!

but now the mingle fight
begin its awful strife again!
through the dun shade of night
along the darkly-heaving main
be see the frequent flash;
and many a tower mast with dreadful crash
ring fall. be the scene of slaughter over?
be the death-cry hear no more?
lo! where the east a glimmer freckle streak,
slow over the shadowy wave the grey dawn break. 
behold, o sun, the flood
strew with the dead, and dark with blood!
behold, all scatter on the rock tide,
the wreck of haughty gallia pride!
but britain float bulwark, with serene
and silent pomp, amid the deathful scene
move glorious, and more beautiful display
their ensign stream to thy orient ray.

awful genius of the land!
who (thy reign of glory close)
by marble wreck, half-hid in sand,
have mournful repose;
who long, amid the wasteful desert wide,
have love with deathlike stillness to abide;
or wrap in tenfold gloom,
from noise of human thing for age hide,
have sit upon the shapeless tomb
in the forlorn and drip pyramid;
awake! arise!
though thou behold the day no more
that see thy pride and pomp of yore;
though, like the sound that in the morning ray
tremble and die away
from Memnon statue; though, like these, the voice
that bid thy vernal plain rejoice,
the voice of science, be not long hear;
and all thy gorgeous state have disappear:
yet hear, with triumph, and with hope again,
the shout of joy that swell from thy forsake main!

and, oh! may he, at who command
deep darkness shade a mourn land;
at who command, burst from night,
and flame with redouble light,
the sun of science mount again,
and re-illumes the wide-extended plain!
may he, from this eventful day,
illustrious Egypt, to thy shore
science, freedom, peace restore,
and bid thy crowd port their ancient pomp display!
no more shall superstition mark,
in character uncouth and dark,
her dreary, monumental shrine!
no more shall meek-eyed piety
outcast, insult lie
beneath the mosque, who golden crescent shine,
but start from her trance,
over nubia sand advance
beyond the farther fountain of the Nile!
the dismal gallas shall behold her smile,
and abyssinia inmost rock rejoice
to hear her awful lore, yet soft console voice!

Hasten, o god! the time, when never more
pale pity, from her moonlight seat shall hear,
and drop at the sound a fruitless tear,
the far-off battle melancholy roar;
when never more horror portentous cry
shall sound amid the trouble sky;
or dark destruction grimly-smiling mien,
through the red flash of the fight be see!
father in heaven! our ardent hope fulfil;
thou speak "peace," and the vex world be still!
yet shall oppression huge arise,
and with bloody banner spread,
upon the gasp nation tread,
while he thy name defy,
trust in thou alone, we hope to quell
his furious might, his purpose fall;
and as the ensign of his baffle pride
over the sea be scatter wide,
we will take up a joyous strain and cry —
shout! for the lord have triumph glorious!
