the monk of la Trappe;

a tale.

the monk of la Trappe:

a tale.

how much be man to pride a slave! 
to compass a ambitious end,
 though he have godlike power to bless,
 he act the persecute fiend;

for sound title, pompous name,
 that never give one real joy,
 his life be past in constant care,
 which all his happiness annoy:

not only to himself severe,
 when fierce ambition cruel reign,
 he heed no touch from nature tie,
 nor dove-like pity melt strain. 

he harm the friend who he esteem;
 he seek the wretch his soul disprove;
 he do the deed his heart arraign,
 even immolate the child he love. 

and shall no warn voice prevail? 
will man but by experience learn? 
experience, dear-bought by himself,
 his real interest to discern? 

no! — from himself alone he learn —
 the ill which from ambition flow,
 that all, but virtue heavenly charm,
 be folly, vanity, and woe. 

till he have try the tortuous path,
 which blindfold he be doom to tread,
 he think unhurt the ordeal to pass,
 and tempt the danger he shall dread. 

when passion blow the treacherous gale,
 reason and prudence quit their post;
 the mind obey the boisterous storm,
 unshipped its helm, its compass lose. 

in vain the muse, — even heaven in vain, —
 point out the course it ought to steer;
 their warn be unheeded all,
 till fate allow no time to veer. 

yet once again the muse essay,
 (oh! may her warn voice prevail!) 
to show ambition fatal ill,
 her moral point, from a tale. 

the sun appear to set in blood;
 dark gather cloud deform the east;
 over the lone wild a pilgrim rove,
 nor see, nor hope a place of rest. 

it be bleak December dreary night,
 frore snow and beat hail descend;
 wander he roam, nor know which course
 his weary way-worn step to bend. 

long have by tread the stiffen plain,
 fatigue, benumb with pierce cold;
 just as his hopeless spirit droop,
 a not far distant bell be toll. 

calm for a moment even his woe;
 hush be his sorrow and his fear;
 and to the side whence the sound come,
 his quicken, onward course he steer. 

the bell now cease — a strike clock,
 proclaim the solemn hour of night:
 and now he hear sweet music sound;
 and see a spread, glare light. 

scarce his weaken eye-ball bear
 to meet its dazzle, welcome ray;
 it show a building large extent,
 a cloister convent dome, display. 

its lofty portico he gain,
 to shroud his tempest-beaten head:
 and pious, kneel beneath its roof,
 while midnight mass within be say. 

the deep, full organ swell sound,
 cheer his just faint, woe-struck heart;
 soft mournful voice raise the tear,
 which from his half-closed eyelid start:

the service cease. — Hubert appear:
 on the smooth brow of this love sage
 autumnal grace, which linger long,
 yield to the majesty of age. 

say, cry the kind benignant sire,
 why at this hour thou kneel here? 
can i assistance lend to check,
 that heart-heaved sigh, that fall tear? 

thy pilgrim weed, thy sandaled foot,
 thy rugged poverty declare:
 perhaps thou be houseless and forlorn;
 then haste my happy cell to share. 

he say, and light to his cell,
 the hapless way-spent pilgrim sigh;
 what thanks, my father! can i give? 
no thanks, the priestly saint reply. 

god be the parent of we all;
 the child of want, and woe, his care;
 while with i thou partake his gift,
 thou have a brother rightful share. 

then sit and eat, and cheerful eat,
 what i with heartfelt pleasure give;
 have thou the plenteous store i have,
 the helpless will from thou receive. 

alas! the tear which escape thy eye,
 some deep-felt hopeless grief disclose;
 they seem to say, "thou tend my want,
 but can not heal my mental woe." 

thy uncouth garb, thy pilgrim staff,
 may cheat a undiscern eye; —
 have thou not bask in fortune smile? 
the blush guest make no reply. 

think not i mean to ensnare thy youth;
 for young, my son! i see thou be,
 aught of thy secret to disclose:
 yet will i ease thy trouble heart. 

the ingenuous blush of modest worth,
 glow noble on thy downcast face;
 each tender virtue there express,
 with simple, native, manly, grace. 

the awful front of misery,
 must my respect and pity move;
 when shrine in such a form as thy,
 it claim a father care, and love. 

then can i, stranger! (frank speak)
 do aught for thou beyond this hour? 
thy grief, thy prospect, all unknown,
 tell! free tax my utmost power. 

though bound i must own that power;
 not circumscribe be hubert heart;
 what that permit, this willing do:
 thy want, within its reach, impart. 

and be this Meudon? (say the youth)
 be thou that saint Hubert, say! 
who pious life have constant serve,
 to give his holy doctrine sway? 

be thou that Hubert, who refuse
 a mitre gorgeous envy load? 
who shun for peace the path of fame,
 and honour court, thorn-strowed road? 

this dome, my son! be Meudon call. —
 enough, — the heart-sad pilgrim cry, —
 forgive i that i know thou not,
 friend of the wretch! the wanderer guide:

kneel, the tremble pilgrim say,
 father! let i thy blessing share;
 though i be crimson over with sin,
 god will look down, and hear thy prayer. 

o, ask a blessing for a wretch! 
may heaven, the pious Hubert say,
 forgive and bless thou, hapless son! 
and shower its bounty on thy head. 

i ask but peace, the youth reply;
 and sure heaven point out the way,
 when here it lead my wander step;
 far from my destine course astray. 

with thou i no concealment need;
 my inmost thought, i dare disclose;
 the present error of my mind,
 and all my bitter unearned woe. 

thy pierce eye pervade disguise:
 these weed be not my birthright's dress. 
for fortune give i title, wealth;
 but dash, untouched, my cup of bliss. 

even hope be go — my soul be dark —
 some dire, some unknown stroke i dread. 
the hand of wrath be raise on high,
 the hand of heaven against this head. 

oh! why at i be aim the bolt? 
the shake, bruise, break reed. 
to show what god can do, man bear,
 must i, eternal justice! bleed? 

on i, on i, thy bolt descend,
 my harrass heart foreboding show —
 it be thus i weep, it be thus i fear,
 before my fatal last of woe. 

it be then these deathlike damp i feel,
 this causeless, sicken horror know;
 before the love Eulalia send
 her fatal, tender, last adieu. 

still fresh i feel the dire request —
 "Henry renounce, forgive, resign —
" my hand, my break vow, my heart;
 "for i must never, now, be thy,

 "duty compel my hand from thou:
" but not from thou, my heart be tear. 
 "adieu! forgive the cruel act,
" thy wretched friend, shall ever mourn. " 

yes, i forgive thy break vow! 
it be strong compulsion urge the deed, —
 but thou, old man! — my father be friend! 
why do thou doom my heart to bleed? 

what have thou do? — what thy reward? 
force we to curse our hapless fate. 
say, be thy fell ambition gorge,
 thy daughter make a wretch in state? —

my be the pang beyond distress —
 thou be her sire — i curse thou not —
 father! i wander from my tale;
 and mourn with useless grief my lot. —

i love a gentle, smile maid,
 who mind surpass her far-famed charm. 
her father promise i her hand;
 yet tear she from these faithful arm. 

then joyless night enwrap my soul;
 the sun never rise to gild my day;
 unblest he start from the east,
 or radiant shed his part ray. 

Eulalia in another arm! 
be what i can not bear to see. 
he who can bear such prize to lose,
 have never love, nor feel, like i. 

i shun the sight of nuptial joy;
 nor stay till they have seal my doom:
 determine i the world forsake;
 and seek la trappe impervious gloom. 

where rigid piety resign
 a faithless world, not worth its care;
 here i the habit take, and vow:
 not from religion, but despair. 

father! thou tremble at my guilt! —
 perjure i be, even at heaven shrine,
 perpetual silence there i vow,
 and never again the world to join. 

but fix despair, and frantic grief,
 have tempt i to break those vow. 
will heaven forgive the crime i have dare,
 and pardon what it disallow? —

two year i have drag the heavy chain,
 of life incumbent, hate load;
 far from the cheerful walk of man;
 with nought converse, but my god:

and all my order rigid rule,
 with gloomy pleasure i have observe:
 labour, and fast, midnight prayer,
 from silence, never till now I have swerve. 

oh! have i ere this fatal hour,
 which bring my guilty footstep here,
 in sackcloth and in ash clothe,
 expire press the welcome bier! 

then have this prison of my soul,
 be to my slow-made grave consign;
 bear by my brothers pious love,
 as in my requiem they have join. 

thou grave! — (now, love, thy only balm!) 
my hope — my wish — my peace — my gain! —
 will i may plunge to thou uncalled! 
quick snatch i to thy dark domain. —

with terror now the pilgrim start;
 aghast he fix his eager eye,
 as if some hideous form he see:
 and, frantic thus to Hubert cry. 

father! the fatal vision here! —
 mark what her tremble lip shall say! —
 she sink — a horrid mass deform,
 see! see! she slow melt away. 

she be here again; — in beauty beam; —
 oh! keep that charm, lovely form! 
she sink — to fell corruption dross,
 to feed the loathsome, bloat worm. 

come thou again? o, speak, my love! 
as erst beside my slow-dug grave. 
say now thy spirit wait for i! 
or what thy dreadful visit crave! 

be not my love for thou, as pure
 as thy own spotless, heavenly mind? 
no other love, but that of god,
 glow in this breast, where thou be shrine. 

for thou, i break my heaven-sealed vow;
 to search, why thou disturb my rest. 
say! do thou want to rouse the friend
 within thy Henry faithful breast? 

say! if misfortune ruthless hand,
 make i thy only choose aid? 
i will dare as much as man may dare,
 protect thou if thou be betray. 

dear, lovely, dreadful, vision speak! 
say why thou nightly thus be see? 
tell i thy spirit wait for i! 
or what thy fearful visit mean! —

sink not to earth! — distract i not! 
rise in thy beauty to my sight. 
let loveliness still round thou fling,
 her radiant robe of live light. 

god of my soul! avert thy wrath! 
o shield i from this horrid sight! 
let madness, seize on memory power! 
and shroud each sense in dun night. 

why sink thou thus a shapeless mass? 
thy form thus moulder to decay? 
o, take i to the shade of death! 
terrific vision! lead the way! —

prostrate the rave pilgrim fall. 
the pious Hubert raise his head;
 keel beside his ghastly form;
 while over his woe, his bosom bleed. 

i will share thy grief; be calm, my son! 
bless be that man who patient bear,
 his heaven-appointed lot below;
 affliction, in this vale of tear. 

take comfort then, my hapless son! —
 say, cry the youth, have thou a charm
 can cure despair; and heal my mind;
 my memory of its sting disarm? 

if not, what comfort can thou give? 
all other aid but that be vain. 
will, with a breath control the wave;
 or strive the rage wind, to chain? 

think thou, unbuffeted, this storm
 have lawless rule, without control? 
or unresisting i obey,
 this black tempest, of the soul? 

over the sick mind, what balm have power,
 within art ample, heal bound? 
i seek a cure, may haply prove,
 a scorpion venom to my wound. 

thou know our order rigid rule:
 no converse with the world allow;
 but i must know, the fate of she,
 to who my early faith be vow. 

her see, that know, my mind will calm,
 nor more with vision be oppress. 
i will expiate then my perjure vow;
 and patient wait eternal rest. 

father, adieu! betray i not;
 full many a league i have yet to stray;
 these pilgrim weed disguise i once,
 as to la Trappe i steer my way. 

beneath this humble, friendly garb,
 i will view, unseen, the form i love:
 return and expiate my offence;
 and from my soul this load remove. 

forbear to tempt this wintery gloom;
 o, dread the danger of the way! 
(the father say) know thou be proscribe,
 thy wildness will thy crime betray. 

renounce, my son! thy dangerous plan —
 never but with life, the youth reply;
 let i but live to see she once! 
then, parent earth! my sorrow hide! 

constrain i not, forgo thy grasp —
 what can avail thy feeble age
 against youth, in all its prime of strength,
 nerve by athletic, frantic rage? 

oh! stay i not — unloose thy hold —
 o venerable sire! forbear —
 oh! force i not to break thy grasp —
 dread to contend with fix despair —

what can thou against my youthful arm? —
 i venerate thy hoary hair,
 yet not their sacred prevalence,
 nor even thy tremble, start tear,

can win my soul to change its course. 
no lion force; not tempere steel
 shall bind i here — yet bless i, sire! 
forgive the guilt thou never can feel! 

alas! my son! a instant stay. 
no long shall my arm contend:
 i will not detain by force, or fraud: —
 but hear the counsel of a friend. 

just heaven! direct my trouble thought! 
instruct i what i ought to do;
 how soothe this hapless, wretched youth;
 yet keep my duty still in view! 

my soul disdain the traitor part;
 thy secret trust to my breast,
 there lock, my son! shall still repose,
 while thought and memory shall rest. 

stay till tomorrow noon be past. 
be rule, and in thy friend confide;
 then will i share the adventurous toil,
 thy wander mind, thy footstep guide. 

soon as the sun shall gild the east,
 a awful rite demand my care. 
as priest, help thou to sing the mass;
 claim, in that sacrifice, thy share. 

if all thy purpose be to see
 the form thou ought not now to love,
 to calm thy mind and ease thy fear,
 my offer aid thou will approve. 

perhaps beyond stern duty rule
 prescribe, protect thou, i go;
 but man shall err on mercy side;
 and stem, not aid, the storm of woe. 

a mind like thy indulgence want. 
yet better, son! thy plan delay. 
may i not urge thou to return? 
and to la Trappe retrace thy way? 

no more! — (with warmth, the pilgrim cry)
 a prophet eloquence will fail,
 when yawn gulf beneath my foot,
 nor heaven fear wrath can aught avail. 

think thou thy voice can more than these —? 
bid the fix star in orbit roll;
 bid ocean wave obey thy law,
 and hurl they foam to the pole. 

do this: — then hope the mind to rule,
 the strike mind of free-born man,
 which, like the comets lawless blaze,
 though all unequal, have its plan. 

distract i not — the woe-stung mind,
 too near approach to that height,
 whence reason roam burst all bound;
 and join with madness in her flight. 

urge i no more! — in mercy, cease! —
 father! i never will return;
 till i have see the form i love,
 or clasp these arm around her urn. 

force or mean fraud thou will not use. 
i dare in hubert promise trust:
 thy hoary hair, thy sacred fame,
 vouch, that thou can not be unjust. 

glad i accept thou as my guide. 
thy welcome presence shall supply
 the real presence of my god. 
as he, i will fear thy pierce eye. 

heaven know my heart, its frailty know; —
 it err from woe, not wilful sin:
 scan thou its movement, thou be just,
 and aid the monitor within. 

i thank thou, father! for thy care;
 be the companion of my way:
 i will wait the morn. — my duty call
 to prayer. let i its voice obey. 

tremble he kneel, — "great god, he cry,
" omniscient, all-pervading mind! 
 "upon a prostrate, sinful worm,
" look from that heaven, where thou be shrine. 

 "not in avenge terror rob,
" thy sword of justice raise on high;
 "but, clad in mercy mild beam,
" thou, let my tremble soul, descry. 

 "else, dare i not, my prayer prefer,
" be thou but terrible and just;
 "who see my unknown secret sin:
" but thou be mercy, — i be dust. 

 "pity a strike, wound mind;
" forlorn of thou for end divine. 
 "o! heal the soul, thy wrath have pierce:
" and be the praise, and glory, thy. —

 "yet, awful power! thy will be do! 
" meek let i bow before thy rod,
 "if i must bear this worst of ill,
" nor dare to murmur at my god!  

 "o! if my voice can reach the height,
" where mercy beam surround thy throne. 
 "another prayer i will prefer,
" for a soul dear than my own. 

 "lend still a moment to my mind,
" the strength to guide my voice aright;
 "avert the horror of my soul; —
" o! take this phantom from my sight. 

 "but if some secret, unknown sin,
" against my soul thy wrath do move;
 "still let i suffer in myself;
" and not in she i madden love. 

 "though wound to my inmost soul,
" i feel the torture frenzy know,
 "pierce by this worst of human ill,
" yet add to i, her sum of woe! 

 "if, god of justice! to her share,
" fall aught of ill, oh! be it mine! 
 "watch over she with a parent care;
" still let thy grace around her shine. 

 "mild as her virtue be her fate. 
" let peace, and glory, crown her head. 
 "let grief never find her heart its home,
" and but for i, one tear be shed. 

 "let that be pity gentle tear,
" which sadly-pleasing move the heart;
 "not that which, harrow the foul,
" be see from passion eye to start. 

 "refine her mind from earthly love:
" late may she learn my hapless doom. 
 "let not my purpose teem with woe. 
" grant we! — vain wish, — one common tomb! 

 "god of my soul! dread be, hear! 
" awful, omnipotent, yet just.
 "bruise not the shake, break reed:
" nor the worm, humble to the dust. 

 "if aught that be impious i have ask,
" not to my error be it join:
 "pardon the wander of my heart;
" and the frail weakness of my mind. 

 "yet save thy first of work below, —
" a virtuous mind in beauty form, —
 "keep she, dread god! from every ill;
" and on my head direct the storm. 

 "thanks for this gleam of reason light. 
" yet fearful be the scene it show:
 "i view the horror i have feel:
" o! add not madness to my woe. 

 "avert that tempest from my mind:
" the wreck of man preeminence:
 "chain this wild demon of my soul. 
" god! show thy bless omnipotence. " 

with frantic and disorder haste,
 the pilgrim say his wonted prayer,
 the midnight office of la Trappe,
 with agonize sigh and tear. 

the pious Hubert watch his guest;
 and view the work of his soul,
 wish to relieve his anguish mind;
 yet fear the storm, he will control. 

in meditation and in prayer,
 the young monk spend night live-long hour. 
his ruffle, harrass mind seem soothe;
 and show religion heal power. 

the morning break; dark, gloomy, sad. 
and in the east, no sun appear. 
hail, rain, and snow, deform the sky;
 each leafless tree be drop tear. 

a toll bell to early mass,
 now call the pious, hallow priest;
 prostrate he kiss the altar base,
 attend by his sorrow guest. 

each say his mass, and then retire
 fast; to meditate, and pray. 
compose the strange guest appear;
 yet can not prayer his gloom allay. 

as in the sacristy they kneel,
 Hubert, sad Anselm, thus address,
 "can thou assist in the next mass? 
" or be thy soul too much distress? 

 "cuthbertha then those vow will make
" which nought on earth can ever erase;
 "will thou her write vow receive,
" and place they on the altar base,

 "while i the benediction give,
" and join the saint, virgin choir,
 "to celebrate the sacrifice
" which zeal and piety inspire? " 

the stranger will bow assent. 
the deep-toned bell proclaim the hour:
 in priestly vestment, at the shrine,
 again their orison they pour. 

the curtain draw before the grate,
 conceal the saint vestal band. 
now draw aside, the virgin choir,
 in order round the novice stand. 

cover with cloth of black hue,
 a altar in the midst be rear,
 the intend victim kneel there
 in sable, flow robe appear. 

a veil of lawn, of pure white,
 which sweep with graceful fold the ground,
 around her face and shoulder spread;
 a crown of thorn her temple bind. 

emblem of all that be fair and good,
 shine modesty upon her brow;
 and with a blush her cheek suffuse,
 more deep than beauty transient glow. 

yet she be beauty choice form,
 approach almost to divine;
 that, but for some slow-falling tear,
 she seem a angel at the shrine. 

tremble with tear, her soft, blue eye
 shine like the moon before the storm;
 now bright, now darken by the mist,
 as gather cloud the sky deform. 

the organ solemn descant flow:
 with eager gaze she seek the sky:
 then kiss, with pious awe, the cross,
 while heavenly rapture fill her eye. 

the expect crowd gaze on the maid;
 a sigh be heave from every breast,
 at sight of the sweet victim charm,
 for who the sacred shrine be dress. 

for beauty melt the fierce heart;
 subdue the stern, firm mind:
 but victim beauty claim the sigh
 of love, and tender sorrow join. 

she rise; her gentle bosom heave;
 the Lilly oft usurp her cheek;
 as to the curtained grate she walk,
 with downcast eye, mild, modest, meek. 

her fold hand, her downcast eye,
 the sigh by piety repress,
 speak resignation to her fate,
 but comfort alien to her breast. 

close to the altar foot she kneel. 
with tremulous voice, her vow she make:
 vow — which engage to quit the world, —
 for ever, for the cloister shade. 

Anselm approach to take the scroll,
 and place it on the altar base. —
 his gloomy, ground-fixed eye now view,
 for the first time, cuthbertha face. 

forgetful of the place, the time,
 cuthbertha, Henry name, exclaim. —
 the parchment scape his tremble hand —
 Anselm, the love Eulalia, name. 

 "o, faithful find! what joy in grief! —
" lift up again thy dove-like eye! 
 "o god of wrath! eternal bar
" against our, once guiltless, union rise. 

the affright Hubert seize his arm. —
 "o know, my son! he whisper say,
" thy word be double impious here;
 "God on the shrine; his vengeance dread. 

 "go, seek my cell, and hide thou there! —"
 "no!" cry the awe-struck, wretched youth;
 "the wing shaft of death be speed;
" let my last look behold her truth. 

 "approach, and bless the tremble saint;
" thy sacred office now pursue! —
 "grant this, my last request in life, —
" let my dim eye love victim view. " 

a awful silence now ensue. —
 pale terror in each face appear;
 it reign a moment — and be chace
 by one, loud burst of groan and tear. —

grief find a universal voice;
 for woe, beyond the reach of cure:
 all pity, love, and mourn, the pair,
 call, such stern trial, to endure. 

Hubert draw near the beauteous nun;
 the holy benediction give. 
her half-closed eye to heaven be raise,
 she seem, some earnest wish, to crave. 

with tremble haste cuthbertha rise. 
her charm eye have lose their fire. 
dreadful calm, she gaze around,
 as slow she totter down the choir. 

there, on her knee, her requiem sing. 
then, prostrate, kiss the hallow ground. 
a pall seclude she from view:
 while all the sister chant round. 

thrice, round the emblematic pall,
 the abbess shake the holy dew. 
and thrice, with graceful, well-taught hand,
 the smoke incense, circle throw. 

the vestal band the office sing:
 while beneath the pall cuthbertha lie. 
the ritual do; the pall romove:
 "sester," the abbess say, "arise." 

cuthbertha heed not the voice. —
 the tremble nun around she draw. 
they raise her languid, charm form;
 and, death, in every feature view. 

each art which stackn life recall,
 with eager, well-meant haste, they try. 
she strive for speech; but it be in vain;
 her quiver lip their aid deny. 

again she strive, and raise her eye,
 her outstretch hand together press;
 then, like a tempest-beaten flower,
 sink, — never to rise, — on helen breast. 

despair and horror in his look,
 Anselm on his cuthbertha gaze;
 distract see, that death stern hand,
 the beauteous edifice have raze. 

and as they bear her corpse away,
 his fix eye speak, that poignant woe,
 which word, or tear, can never express:
 soul, pierce like he, can only know. 

fall at hubert foot, he say, —
 "let the grave join — our vow be past —"
 this effort his affection make,
 but it be die nature last. —

the boon the hapless Henry ask,
 to the sad pair the sister give. 
in death they have fulfil their vow;
 which reach no further than the grave. 

you fair! you young! you gay! you vain! 
this tale, o not unsoftened hear! 
these hapless lover claim one sigh;
 their woe, but not their death, a tear. 

one tear of sorrow, even from heart,
 adversity have never teach,
 and soften in her rugged school;
 and bid to taste her wholesome draught. —

within that heart, which view unmoved
 all other grief except its own,
 friendship shall never find a place;
 nor virtue ever erect her throne. 

what though no woe assail you now,
 no anguish, no corrod care,
 be not Eulalia happy once? 
the fair too, where all be fair? 

till Henry be deny her love;
 and secret leave his lordly seat;
 she never have taste sorrow pang;
 but then her misery rise complete. 

her gentle bosom know no peace;
 nought now can ease its throb pain. 
the faithful, much-loved Henry lose:
 her sire relent now in vain. 

a burn fever fire her blood:
 insatiate death watch for his prey;
 though youth repel his eager grasp,
 it be only for a short delay. 

the ambitious sire his folly curse,
 his daughter fade in her bloom,
 the duteous victim to his pride,
 slow sink to a early tomb. —

he mope melancholy seize;
 with mind distraught that know no rest;
 the thought, that he have kill his child,
 for ever haunt his cruel breast. 

hopeless a cloister life she choose. 
far from those scene which love have know,
 where hour now pass with leaden pace;
 which once, with swift wing, have fly. 

she fear that Henry frantic mind,
 have raise his hand against his life;
 and rash plunge in endless woe;
 from passion fell, conflict strife. 

to weep, and pray, for he she love,
 to god she dedicate her hour;
 her sigh, her unseen tear, be he;
 and he the orison, she pour. 

the nun of Meudon, at her death,
 first learn, the reason of her grief. —
 unseen, the mourner love to weep;
 nor will be think to want relief. 

think not, you fair! you be secure
 (though happy now) from grief and care. 
the woe i sing you never may know:
 but other fall to mortals' share. 

if virtue in your bosom glow:
 if pity there her altar rear:
 the sympathy these woe excite,
 shall teach to stem, some fall tear. 

to be the hand of providence,
 its angel, minister below. 
dispenser thou, the donor god,
 who give, give thou to bestow. 

then not unuseful have the muse
 from meudon annal sketch this tale;
 of Henry woe, eulalia love:
 and snatch it from oblivion vale. 
