ON THE GOODNESS OF THE SUPREME BEING.

BY THE SAME.

ORPHEUS, for so the Gentiles call'd thy name,
 Israel's sweet Psalmist, who alone could'st wake
 Th' inanimate to motion; who alone
 The joyful hillocks, the applauding rocks,
 And floods with musical persuasion drew;
 Thou who to hail and snow gav'st voice and sound,
 And mad'st the mute melodious! — greater yet
 Was thy divinest skill, and rul'd o'er more
 Than art and nature; for thy tuneful touch
 Drove trembling Satan from the heart of Saul,
 And quell'd the evil Angel: — in this breast
 Some portion of thy genuine spirit breathe,
 And lift me from myself, each thought impure
 Banish; each low idea raise, refine,
 Enlarge, and sanctify; — so shall the muse
 Above the stars aspire, and aim to praise
 Her God on earth, as he is prais'd in heaven. 

Immense Creator! whose all-powerful hand
 Fram'd universal Being, and whose eye
 Saw like thyself, that all things form'd were good;
 Where shall the timorous bard thy praise begin,
 Where end the purest sacrifice of song,
 And just thanksgiving? — The thought-kindling light,
 Thy prime production, darts upon my mind
 Its vivifying beams, my heart illumines,
 And fills my soul with gratitude and Thee. 
Hail to the chearful rays of ruddy morn,
 That paint the streaky East, and blithsome rouse
 The birds, the cattle, and mankind from rest! 
Hail to the freshness of the early breeze,
 And Iris dancing on the new-fall'n dew! 
Without the aid of yonder golden globe
 Lost were the garnet's lustre, lost the lily,
 The tulip and auricula's spotted pride;
 Lost were the peacock's plumage, to the sight
 So pleasing in its pomp and glossy glow. 
O thrice-illustrious! were it not for Thee
 Those pansies, that reclining from the bank,
 View thro' th' immaculate, pellucid stream
 Their portraiture in the inverted heaven,
 Might as well change their tripled boast, the white,
 The purple, and the gold, that far outvie
 The Eastern monarch's garb, ev'n with the dock,
 Ev'n with the baneful hemlock's irksome green. 
Without thy aid, without thy gladsome beams
 The tribes of woodland warblers would remain
 Mute on the bending branches, nor recite
 The praise of him, who, e'er he form'd their lord,
 Their voices tun'd to transport, wing'd their flight,
 And bade them call for nurture, and receive;
 And lo! they call; the blackbird and the thrush,
 The woodlark, and the redbreast jointly call;
 He hears and feeds their feather'd families,
 He feeds his sweet musicians, — nor neglects
 Th' invoking ravens in the greenwood wide;
 And tho' their throats coarse ruttling hurt the ear,
 They mean it all for music, thanks and praise
 They mean, and leave ingratitude to man, —
 But not to all, — for hark the organs blow
 Their swelling notes round the cathedral's dome,
 And grace th' harmonious choir, celestial feast
 To pious ears, and med'cine of the mind;
 The thrilling trebles and the manly base
 Join in accordance meet, and with one voice
 All to the sacred subject suit their song. 
While in each breast sweet melancholy reigns
 Angelically pensive, till the joy
 Improves and purifies; — the solemn scene
 The Sun thro' storied panes surveys with awe,
 And bashfully with-holds each bolder beam. 
Here, as her home, from morn to eve frequents
 The cherub Gratitude; — behold her eyes! 
With love and gladness weepingly they shed
 Ecstatic smiles; the incense, that her hands
 Uprear, is sweeter than the breath of May
 Caught from the nectarine's blossom, and her voice
 Is more than voice can tell; to him she sings,
 To him who feeds, who clothes, and who adorns,
 Who made, and who preserves, whatever dwells
 In air, in stedfast earth, or sickle sea. 
O He is good, he is immensely good! 
Who all things form'd, and form'd them all for man;
 Who mark'd the climates, varied every zone,
 Dispensing all his blessings for the best
 In order and in beauty: — rise, attend,
 Attest, and praise, ye quarters of the world! 
Bow down, ye elephants, submissive bow
 To Him, who made the mite; tho' Asia's pride,
 Ye carry armies on your tower-crown'd backs,
 And grace the turban'd tyrants, bow to Him
 Who is as great, as perfect, and as good
 In his less striking wonders, till at length
 The eye's at fault, and seeks th' assisting glass. 
Approach and bring from Araby the blest,
 The fragrant cassia, frankincense, and myrrh,
 And meekly kneeling at the altar's foot
 Lay all the tributary incense down. 
Stoop, sable Africa, with reverence stoop,
 And from thy brow take off the painted plume;
 With golden ingots all thy camels load
 T' adorn his temples, hasten with thy spear
 Reverted, and thy trusty bow unstrung,
 While unpursued thy lions roam and roar,
 And ruin'd towers, rude rocks, and caverns wide
 Remurmur to the glorious, surly sound. 
And thou, fair Indian, whose immense domain
 To counterpoise the Hemisphere extends,
 Haste from the West, and with thy fruits and flowers,
 Thy mines and med'cines, wealthy maid, attend. 
More than the plenteousness so fam'd to flow
 By fabling bards from Amalthea's horn
 Is thine; thine therefore be a portion due
 Of thanks and praise: come with thy brilliant crown
 And vest of furr; and from thy fragrant lap
 Pomegranates and the rich ananas pour. 
But chiefly thou, Europa, seat of Grace
 And Christian excellence, his Goodness own,
 Forth from ten thousand temples pour his praise;
 Clad in the armour of the living God
 Approach, unsheath the Spirit's flaming sword;
 Faith's shield, Salvation's glory, — compass'd helm
 With fortitude assume, and o'er your heart
 Fair truth's invulnerable breast-plate spread;
 Then join the general chorus of all worlds,
 And let the song of charity begin
 In strains seraphic, and melodious prayer. 
 "O all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
" Thou God of Goodness and of Glory, hear! 
 "Thou, who to lowliest minds dost condescend,
" Assuming passions to enforce thy laws,
 "Adopting jealousy to prove thy love:
" Thou, who resign'd humility uphold,
 "Ev'n as the slorist props the drooping rose,
" But quell tyrannic pride with peerless power,
 "Ev'n as the tempest rives the stubborn oak:
" O all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
 "Thou God of Goodness and of Glory, hear! 
" Bless all mankind, and bring them in the end
 "To heaven, to immortality, and THEE!" 
