on the goodness of the supreme be.

by the same.

Orpheus, for so the Gentiles call thy name,
 israel sweet psalmist, who alone can wake
 the inanimate to motion; who alone
 the joyful hillock, the applaud rock,
 and flood with musical persuasion draw;
 thou who to hail and snow give voice and sound,
 and make the mute melodious! — great yet
 be thy divine skill, and rule over more
 than art and nature; for thy tuneful touch
 drive tremble Satan from the heart of Saul,
 and quell the evil angel: — in this breast
 some portion of thy genuine spirit breathe,
 and lift i from myself, each think impure
 banish; each low idea raise, refine,
 enlarge, and sanctify; — so shall the muse
 above the star aspire, and aim to praise
 her god on earth, as he be praise in heaven. 

immense creator! who all-powerful hand
 frame universal be, and who eye
 see like thyself, that all thing form be good;
 where shall the timorous bard thy praise begin,
 where end the pure sacrifice of song,
 and just thanksgiving? — the thought-kindling light,
 thy prime production, dart upon my mind
 its vivify beam, my heart illumine,
 and fill my soul with gratitude and thou. 
hail to the cheerful ray of ruddy morn,
 that paint the streaky east, and blithsome rouse
 the bird, the cattle, and mankind from rest! 
hail to the freshness of the early breeze,
 and Iris dance on the new-fallen dew! 
without the aid of yonder golden globe
 lose be the garnet lustre, lose the lily,
 the tulip and auricula spot pride;
 lose be the peacock plumage, to the sight
 so please in its pomp and glossy glow. 
o thrice-illustrious! be it not for thou
 those pansy, that recline from the bank,
 view through the immaculate, pellucid stream
 their portraiture in the invert heaven,
 may as well change their triple boast, the white,
 the purple, and the gold, that far outvie
 the eastern monarch garb, even with the dock,
 even with the baneful hemlock irksome green. 
without thy aid, without thy gladsome beam
 the tribe of woodland warbler will remain
 mute on the bend branch, nor recite
 the praise of he, who, ever he form their lord,
 their voice tune to transport, winge their flight,
 and bid they call for nurture, and receive;
 and lo! they call; the blackbird and the thrush,
 the woodlark, and the redbreast joint call;
 he hear and feed their feather family,
 he feed his sweet musician, — nor neglect
 the invoke raven in the greenwood wide;
 and though their throat coarse ruttle hurt the ear,
 they mean it all for music, thanks and praise
 they mean, and leave ingratitude to man, —
 but not to all, — for hark the organ blow
 their swell note round the cathedral dome,
 and grace the harmonious choir, celestial feast
 to pious ear, and medicine of the mind;
 the thrill treble and the manly base
 join in accordance meet, and with one voice
 all to the sacred subject suit their song. 
while in each breast sweet melancholy reign
 angelical pensive, till the joy
 improve and purify; — the solemn scene
 the sun through story pane survey with awe,
 and bashful withhold each bold beam. 
here, as her home, from morn to eve frequent
 the cherub gratitude; — behold her eye! 
with love and gladness weep they shed
 ecstatic smile; the incense, that her hand
 uprear, be sweet than the breath of may
 catch from the nectarine blossom, and her voice
 be more than voice can tell; to he she sing,
 to he who feed, who clothes, and who adorn,
 who make, and who preserve, whatever dwell
 in air, in steadfast earth, or sickle sea. 
o he be good, he be immense good! 
who all thing form, and form they all for man;
 who mark the climates, vary every zone,
 dispense all his blessing for the best
 in order and in beauty: — rise, attend,
 attest, and praise, you quarter of the world! 
bow down, you elephant, submissive bow
 to he, who make the mite; though asia pride,
 you carry army on your tower-crowned back,
 and grace the turbane tyrant, bow to he
 who be as great, as perfect, and as good
 in his less strike wonder, till at length
 the eye at fault, and seek the assist glass. 
approach and bring from Araby the bless,
 the fragrant cassia, frankincense, and myrrh,
 and meek kneel at the altar foot
 lay all the tributary incense down. 
stoop, sable Africa, with reverence stoop,
 and from thy brow take off the paint plume;
 with golden ingot all thy camel load
 the adorn his temple, hasten with thy spear
 revert, and thy trusty bow unstring,
 while unpursued thy lion roam and roar,
 and ruin tower, rude rock, and cavern wide
 remurmur to the glorious, surly sound. 
and thou, fair indian, who immense domain
 to counterpoise the hemisphere extend,
 haste from the west, and with thy fruit and flower,
 thy mine and medicine, wealthy maid, attend. 
more than the plenteousness so fame to flow
 by fable bard from amalthea horn
 be thy; thy therefore be a portion due
 of thanks and praise: come with thy brilliant crown
 and vest of furr; and from thy fragrant lap
 pomegranate and the rich anana pour. 
but chief thou, Europa, seat of grace
 and christian excellence, his goodness own,
 forth from ten thousand temple pour his praise;
 clad in the armour of the live god
 approach, unsheath the spirit flame sword;
 faith shield, salvation glory, — compass helm
 with fortitude assume, and over your heart
 fair truth be invulnerable breast-plate spread;
 then join the general chorus of all world,
 and let the song of charity begin
 in strain seraphic, and melodious prayer. 
 "o all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
" thou god of goodness and of glory, hear! 
 "thou, who to lowly mind do condescend,
" assume passion to enforce thy law,
 "adopt jealousy to prove thy love:
" thou, who resign humility uphold,
 "even as the slorist prop the droop rose,
" but quell tyrannic pride with peerless power,
 "even as the tempest rive the stubborn oak:
" o all-sufficient, all-beneficent,
 "thou god of goodness and of glory, hear! 
" bless all mankind, and bring they in the end
 "to heaven, to immortality, and thou!" 
