the conspiracy of king.

eternal truth, thy trump undaunted lend,
people and priest and court and king, attend;
while, bear on western gale from that far shore
where justice reign, and tyrant tread no more,
the untainted voice, that no dissuasion awe,
that fear no frown, and seek no blind applause,
shall tell the bliss that freedom shed abroad,
the right of nature and the gift of god.
think not, you knave, who meanness style the great,
drone of the church and harpy of the state, —
you, who curse sire, for blood and plunder fame,
sultan or king or tsar or emperor name,
teach the delude world their claim to own,
and raise the crest reptile to a throne, —
you, who pretend to your dark host be give
the lamp of life, the mystic key of heaven;
who impious art with magic spell begin,
when shade of ignorance veil the race of man;
who change, from age to age the sly deceit,
as science beam, and virtue learn the cheat;
tyrant of double power, the soul that blind,
to rob, to scourge, and brutalise mankind, —
think not i come to croak with omened yell
the dire damnation of your future hell,
to bend a bigot or reform a knave,
by open all the scene beyond the grave.
i know your crust soul: while one defy
in sceptic scorn the vengeance of the sky,
the other boast, — "i ken thou, power divine,
"but fear thou not; the avenge bolt be i. "
no! it be the present world that prompt the song,
the world we see, the world that feel the wrong,
the world of man, who argument you know,
of man, long curb to servitude and woe.
man, rouse from sloth; by indignation sting,
their strong hand loose, and find their fearless tongue;
who voice of thunder, who descend steel,
shall speak to soul, and teach dull nerve to feel.
think not (ah no! the weak delusion shun,
Burke lead you wrong, the world be not his own)
indulge not once the thought, the vapoury dream,
the fool repast, the madman threadbare theme,
that nation, rise in the light of truth,
strong with new life and pure regenerate youth,
will shrink from toil so splendid begin,
their bliss abandon and their glory shun,
betray the trust by heaven own hand consign,
the great concentr stake, the interest of mankind.
you speak of king combine, some league that draw
europe whole force, to save your sink cause;
of fancy host by myriad that advance
to crush the untried power of new-born France.
misguided man! these idle tale despise;
let one bright ray of reason strike your eye;
show i your king, the sceptre horde parade, —
see their pomp vanish! see your vision fade!
indignant man resume the shaft he give,
Disarms the tyrant and unbind the slave,
display the unclad skeleton of king,
spectre of power, and serpent without sting.
and shall mankind, — shall France, who giant may
rent the dark veil, and drag they forth to light,
heed now their threat in die anguish toss?
and she who fell the monster, fear the ghost?
bid young alcides, in his grasp who take,
and gripe with naked hand the twist snake,
their force exhaust, bid he prostrate fall,
and dread their shadow tremble on the wall.
but grant to king and court their ancient play,
recall their splendour and revive their sway;
can all your cant and all your cry persuade
one power to join you in your wild crusade?
in vain you search to earth remote end;
no court can aid you, and no king defend.
not the mad knave who sweden sceptre steal,
nor she, who thunder shake the northern pole;
nor Frederic widow sword, that scorn to tell
on who weak brow his crown reluctant fall.
not the tri-sceptred prince, of austrian mould,
the ape of wisdom and the slave of gold,
theresa son, who, with a feeble grace,
just mimic all the vice of his race;
for he no charm can foreign strife afford,
too mean to spend his wealth, too wise to trust his sword.
glance over the Pyrenees, — but you will disdain
to break the dream that sooth the monk of Spain.
he count his bead, and spend his holy zeal
to raise once more the inquisitorial wheel,
prepare the faggot and the flame renew,
to roast the french, as once the moor and Jew;
while able hand the busy task divide,
his queen to dandle and his state to guide,
you ask great Pitt to join your desperate work, —
see how his annual aid confound the Turk!
like a war-elephant his bulk he show,
and tread down friend, when frighten by his foe.
where then, forsake villain, will you turn?
of France the outcast, and of earth the scorn;
what new-made charm can dissipate your fear?
can Burke mad foam, or calonne house of peer?
can Artois 'sword, that erst near calpe wall,
where Crillon seek and Elliott be to fall,
burn with the fire of fame, but harmless burn,
for sheathe the sword remain, and in its sheath return? 
oh Burke, degenerate slave! with grief and shame
the muse indignant must repeat thy name.
strange man, declare, — since at creation birth,
from crumble chaos spring this heaven and earth,
since wreck and outcast relic still remain,
whirl ceaseless round confusion dreary reign,
declare, from all these fragment, whence you steal
that genius wild, that monstrous mass of soul;
where spread the wide waste of all extreme,
full darkness frown, and heaven own splendour beam;
truth, error, falsehood, rhetoric rage tide,
and pomp and meanness, prejudice and pride,
strain to a endless clang thy voice of fire,
thy thought bewilder and thy audience tire.
like Phoebus 'son, we see thou wing thy way,
snatch the loose reins, and mount the car of day,
to earth now plunge plough thy waste course,
the great sublime of weakness and of force.
but while the world keen eye, with generous glance,
thy fault can pardon and thy worth enhance,
when foe be hush, when justice dare commend,
and even fond freedom claim thou as a friend,
why, in a gulph of baseness, sink forlorn,
and change pure praise for infamy and scorn?
and do thou hope, by thy infuriate quill
to rouse mankind the blood of realm to spill?
then to restore, on death-devoted plain,
their scourge to tyrant, and to man his chain?
to swell their soul with thy own bigot rage,
and blot the glory of so bright a age?
first stretch thy arm, and, with less impious might,
wipe out the star, and quench the solar light:
"for heaven and earth," the voice of god ordain,
"shall pass and perish, but my word remain,"
the eternal word, which give in spite of thou,
reason to man, that bid the man be free.
thou can not hope: it be heaven return grace,
in kind compassion to our injure race,
which strip that soul, ere it shall flee from hence,
of the last garp of decency or sense,
leave thou its own foul horror to display,
in all the blackness of its native day,
to sink at last, from earth glad surface hurl,
the sordid sovereign of the letter world.
in some sad hour, ere death dim terror spread,
ere sea of dark oblivion whelm thy head,
reflect, lose man, — if those, thy kindred knave,
over the broad Rhine who flag rebellious wave,
once draw the sword; its burn point shall bring
to thy quick nerve a never-ending sting;
the blood they shed thy weight of woe shall swell,
and their grim ghost for ever with thou dwell. 
learn hence, you tyrant, ere you learn too late,
of all your craft the inevitable fate.
the hour be come, the world unclose eye
discern with rapture where its wisdom lie;
from western heaven the invert orient spring,
the morn of man, the dreadful night of king.
dim, like the day-struck owl, you grope in light,
no arm for combat, no resource in flight;
if on your guard your linger hope repose,
your guard be man, and man you have make your foe;
if to your rocky rampart you repair,
 de launay fate can tell your fortune there.
no turn, no shift, no courtly art avail,
each mask be break, all illusion fail;
drive to your last retreat of shame and fear,
one counsel wait you, one relief be near:
by worth internal, rise to self-wrought fame,
your equal rank, your human kindred claim;
it be reason choice, it be wisdom final plan,
to drop the monarch and assume the man.
hail man, exalt title! first and best,
on God own image by his hand impress,
to which at last the reason race be drive,
and seek anew what first it gain from heaven.
o man, my brother, how the cordial flame
of all endearment kindle at the name!
in every clime, thy visage greet my eye,
in every tongue thy kindred accent rise;
the thought expand swell my heart with glee,
it find a friend, and love itself in thou.
say then, fraternal family divine,
who mutual want and mutual aid combine,
say from what source the dire delusion rise,
that soul like we be ever make for foe;
why earth maternal bosom, where we tread,
to rear our mansion and receive our bread,
shall blush so often for the race she bear,
so long be drench with flood of filial gore;
why to small realm forever rest confine
our great affection, mean for all mankind.
though clime divide we; shall the stream or sea,
that form a barrier betwixt my friend and i,
inspire the wish his peaceful state to mar,
and meet his falchion in the rank of war?
not sea, nor clime, nor wild ambition fire
in nation 'mind can ever the wish inspire;
where equal right each sober voice shall guide,
no blood will stain they, and no war divide.
it be dark deception, it be the glare of state,
man sink in title, lose in small and great;
it be rank, distinction, all the hell that spring
from those prolific monster, court and king.
these be the vampire nurse on nature spoil;
for these with pang the starve peasant toil,
for these the earth broad surface teem with grain,
they the dread labour of the devious main;
and when the waste world but dare refuse
the gift oppressive and extort due,
they bid wild slaughter spread the gory plain,
the lifeblood gush from a thousand vein,
erect their throne amid the sanguine flood,
and dip their purple in the nation blood.
the gaze crowd, of glitter state afraid,
adore the power their coward meanness make;
in war short interval, while regal show
still blind their reason and insult their woe.
what strange event for proud procession call!
see kingdom crowd to a birth-night ball!
see the long pomp in gorgeous glare display,
the tinseled guard, the squadroned horse parade;
see herald gay, with emblem on their vest,
in tissue robe, tall, beauteous page dress,
amid superior rank of splendid slave,
lord, duke and prince, titulary knave,
confuse shine their cross, gem and star,
sceptre and globe and crown and spoil of war.
on gild orb see thunder chariot roll,
steed snort fire, and champ bitt of gold,
prance to the trumpet voice; while each assume
a lofty gait, and lift his neck of plume.
high on a move throne, and near the van,
the tyrant ride, the choose scourge of man;
clarion and flute and drum his way prepare,
and shout million rend the trouble air;
million, who ceaseless toil the pomp sustain,
who hour of stupid joy repay a age of pain.
of these no more. from order, slave and king,
to thou, o man, my heart rebound spring,
behold the ascend bliss that wait your call,
heaven own bequest, the heritage of all.
awake to wisdom, seize the proffer prize;
from shade to light, from grief to glory rise.
freedom at last, with reason in her train,
extend over earth her everlasting reign;
see gallia son, so late the tyrant sport,
machine in war and sycophant at court,
start into man, expand their well-taught mind,
lord of themselves and leader of mankind.
on equal right their base of empire lie,
on wall of wisdom see the structure rise;
wide over the gaze world it tower sublime,
a model form for each surround clime.
to useful toil they bend their noble aim,
make patriot view and moral view the same,
renounce the wish of war, bid conquest cease,
invite all man to happiness and peace,
to faith and justice rear the youthful race,
with strength exalt they and with science grace,
till truth bless banner, over the region hurl,
shake tyrant from their throne, and cheer the wake world.
in nothern clime, where feudal shade of late
chill every heart and palsy every state,
behold illumine by the instructive age,
that great phenomenon, a sceptre sage.
there Stanislaus unfold his prudent plan,
tear the strong bandage from the eye of man,
point the progressive march, and shape the way,
that lead a realm from darkness into day.
and deign, for once, to turn a transient eye
to that wide world that skirt the western sky;
hail the mild morning, where the dawn begin,
the full fruition of the hope of man:
where sage experience seal the sacred cause;
and that rare union, liberty and law,
speak to the reason race; to freedom rise
like they be equal, and like they be wise.
