to another friend under affliction.

since the first man by disobedience fall
 a easy conquest to the power of hell,
 there be none, in every stage of life can be
 from the insult of bold affliction free. 
if a short respite give we some relief,
 and interrupt the series of our grief,
 so quick the pang of misery return,
 we joy by minute, but by year we mourn. 

reason refine and to perfection bring,
 by wise philosophy, and serious thought,
 support the soul beneath the ponderous weight
 of angry star, and unpropitious fate,
 then be the time she shall exert her power,
 and make we practice what she teach before. 
for why be such voluminous author read,
 the learned labour of the famous dead. 
but to prepare the mind for its defence,
 by sage result, and well-digested, sense;
 that when the storm of misery appear
 with all its real, or fantastic fear,
 we either may the roll danger fly,
 or stem the tide before it swell too high. 

but though the theory of wisdom know
 with ease, what shall, and what shall not be do:
 yet all the labour in the practice lie,
 to be in more than word, and notion wise,
 the sacred truth of sound philosophy
 we study early, but we late apply. 
when stubborn anguish seize on the soul,
 right-reason will its haughty rage control;
 but if it may be suffer, to endure
 the pain be just, when we reject the cure. 
for many man, close observation find,
 of copious learning, and exalt mind;
 who tremble at the sight of dare woe,
 and stoop ignoble to the vile foe;
 as if they understand not how to be
 or wise, or brave, but in felicity;
 and by some action, servile, or unjust,
 lay all their former glory in the dust. 
for wisdom first the wretched mortal fly,
 and leave he naked to his enemy. 
so that when most his prudence shall be show,
 the most imprudent giddy thing be do:
 for when the mind be surround with distress,
 fear, or inconstancy, the judgement press,
 and render it incapable to make
 wise resolution, or good counsel take. 
yet there be a steadiness of soul, and think,
 by reason breed, and by religion teach,
 which, like a rock amid the stormy wave,
 unmoved remains, and all affliction brave. 

in sharp misfortune some will search too deep,
 what heaven prohibit, and will secret keep:
 but those event it be better not to know,
 which know, serve only to increase our woe. 
knowledge forbid, (it be dangerous to pursue,)
 with guilt begin, and end with ruin too. 
for have our early parent be content
 not to know more, than to be innocent:
 their ignorance of evil have preserve
 their joy entire; for then they have not swerve. 
but they imagine, (their desire be such,)
 they know too little, till they know too much. 
ever since by folly most to wisdom rise,
 and few be, but by sad experience, wise. 

consider, friend! who all your blessing give,
 what be recall again, and what you have;
 and do not murmur, when you be bereave
 of little, if you have abundance leave. 
consider too, how many thousand be
 under the worst of misery, despair:
 and do repine at what you now endure,
 custom will give you ease, or time will cure. 
once more consider, that the present ill,
 though it be great, may yet be great still;
 and be not anxious; for to undergo
 one grief, be nothing to a numerous woe. 
but since it be impossible to be
 human, and not expose to misery,
 bear it, my friend, as brave as you can;
 you be not more, and be not less than man! 

affliction past, can no existence find,
 but in the wild idea of the mind:
 and why shall we for those misfortune mourn,
 which have be suffer, and can never return? 
those that have weather a tempestuous night,
 and find a calm approach with the light,
 will not, unless their reason they disown,
 still make those danger present, that be go. 
what be behind the curtain, none can see;
 it may be joy, suppose it misery. 
it be future still, and that, which be not here,
 may never come, or we may never bare. 
therefore the present ill, alone we ought
 to view, in reason, with a trouble thought:
 but, if we may the sacred page trust,
 he be always happy, that be always just. 
