the cure.

a dialogue.

Claius 

come Coridon, sit by i gentle Swain;
thy cheek be pale: speak Shepheard, where be thy pain?

Cor. 

say, Claius priest of our great Pan (for you
of humane science utmost limit know)
be physic power to the body use confine,
have you no medicine for a trouble mind?

Clai.

yes, for as balsam rage pain appease
sage counsel to distemper soul give ease,
even love be no incurable disease.
ha Swain! what mean that sudden blush and start?
have i guest right, and touch the tender part?

Cor. 

i will conceal, but have not learn to feign —
you have guest, and while you name it, wake my pain. 

Clai.

to effect the cure we will take the safe course,
and trace the malady to its first scource:
say then, what female gim and bait be lay;
or be your fond soul by its self betray?

Cor. 

when from severe business i withdraw,
betwixt love and i a fatal friendship grow:
such be my ignorance and his craft, my Brest
admit the impostor for its guest;
with my heart blood our covenant we seal,
a solemn contract never to be repeal:
then all delight young sorcerer enjoy,
a while do my delude soul employ,
love feed my wake thought with glorious theam,
and bless my slumber with transport dream.
when at a awful distance i survey
my nymph, transport, to my self i say,
ah charm fair! oh excellence divine!
while love will whisper answer — Swaine she be thy. 

Clai.

thus, while from far our high-placed hope appear,
(the gulf between conceal) we deem they near.

Cori.

yet bold through all obstacle i press.

Clai.

why therefore Shepheard be you not possess?

Cori.

force not the unwilling secret from my Brest,
there let it lurk in sympathize night,
and never roam from its dark cell to fright. 
let it suffice that on a barren soil
i have lose of many year the expense and toil.

Clai.

do the false nymph —
the wage you so dear earn refuse?

Cori.

my self i can, will not she accuse.
but my relief must from your counsel rise:
examine not good Claius, but advise;
bring your best art (for it will your best require)
t'unspell my soul from love torment fire.

Clai.

call reason to your aid, you will put to flight
the foe not to be quell by other may.
of happy love delight sum up the account,
and learn to what the total will amount;
then in the Ballance love vexation weigh,
how certain these, and how uncertain they.
sordid his joy, and of delight so nice,
that female coyness only give they price.
short-lived the warm amourist desire,
at kindle Hymen, oft love torch expire.
there be that from large dower derive their flame
and these in full career pursue their game;
they wreck their wit, the golden prize to gain,
but dream not how that gold be wrought into a chain. 

Cor. 

when late love false suggestion i obey,
it be in pursuit of happiness i stray.
my credulous youth have see no bright flame,
and Streight conclude that from heaven it come.
in error night love fire shine bright and gay,
but at the approach of reason conquer ray
the meteor lose in the full blaze of day.

Clai.

mistake not Swain, i will not quench your flame,
but slip your passion at a noble game.
wave sensual joy, and with a flame refine
court those divine pleasure of the mind.
to sacred virtue next make your address;
confess you have no regard of happiness,
or live henceforth of virtue service proud,
the bright beauty and the best endow.
she will guard your youth from passion baneful rage,
with peaceful thought divert the pain of age.
but then in large stream her blessing flow,
when love grow bankrupt can no more bestow.
when rigurous death shall check your circle blood,
and life die stifle in the freeze flood,
your pensive nymph at large may tell her grief,
but to your ravish soul give no relief;
it will lurk a pensive ghost in cave all day,
and to it be relic midnight visit pay.
but pious soul by death be gainer make,
by virtue to the elysian seat convey;
there mirth and peace, and soft transport reign,
delight refine from all alley of pain;
the grateful soil untilled her harvest yield;
unclouded sky and ever-verdant field.
there aemulation no dissension give,
for happy each in other bliss live.
no care o'th future their free thought employ,
the business of the place be to enjoy. 
that Swain be most industrious hold that best
improve his bliss, exceed in joy the rest.
if love can bless beyond these height, return
to drag his chain, and in his favour burn;
take leave of blissful immortality,
chide my impertinent zeal to set you free,
and court the frown of some imperious she. 

Cor. 

destroy not thus your generous courtesy
by a unfriendly and unjust surmise;
heaven send i freedom, and to sell the pledge,
must brand i with the foul sacrilege.
against love and beauty i will maintain the fort
and fix a guard of virtue in my heart. 

Clai.

if beauty force too rash you despise,
it be odds but you be ruin by surprise:
will you live free from female tyranny?
Nere parly with the tempt sex, but fly.
their very tear be Fewell to desire,
and with their sigh they will fan th'expiring fire.
their mirth and grief, their kindness and disdain,
be fatal all, and work poor shepherd pain!
nature and art conspire to arm the fair;
for in the charm, all thing charm be;
their glance dart, and every curl a snare. 
