to the king of England

Wednesday, November 11th, 1778. 

the rain pour down — the city look forlorn —
and gloomy subject suit the howl morn.
close by my fire; with door and window fast,
and sweet shelter’d from the drive blast,
to gay thought, i bid a day’s adieu,
to spend a scene of solitude with you.
so oft have black revenge engross’d the care
of all the leisure hour man find to spare;
so oft have guilt in all its thousand den
call’d forth the vengeance of chastise pen;
that when i fain will ease my heart on you,
no thought be leave untold — no passion new.
from flight to flight the mental path appear
wear with the step of near six thousand year,
and fill’d throughout with ev’ry scene of pain,
from cain to george, and back from george to cain.
alike in cruelty, alike in hate,
in guilt alike, and more alike in fate;
both curs’d supreme (for the blood they draw)
each from the rise world while each be new.
go second Cain, true likeness of the first,
and strew thy blast head with homely dust —
in ash sit — in wretched sackcloth weep —
and with unpitied sorrow cease to sleep.
go, haunt the tomb, and single out the place
where earth itself shall suffer a disgrace.
go, spell the letter on some mould’ring urn,
and ask if he who sleep there can return.
go count the number that in silence lie,
and learn by study what it be to die.
for sure that heart — if any heart you own —
conceit that man expire without a groan;
that he who live, receive from you a grace,
or death be nothing but a change of place;
that peace be dull; that joy from sorrow spring.
and be the royal raree-show of thing.
else why these scene that wind the feeling mind,
this sport of death — this cockpit of mankind.
why sob the widow in perpetual pain;
why cry the orphan — “oh my father’s slay.”
why hang the sire his paralytic head,
and nod with manly grief — “my son be dead.”
why shriek the maiden, (robb’d of ease and sense,)
“he’s go — he’s kill’d — oh! heaven take i hence.”
why drop the tear from off the sister’s cheek,
and sweet tell the sorrow she will speak.
why lisp the infant on its mother’s lap,
and look round the parlour — “where be pap.”
why weep the mother when the question’s ask’d,
and kiss a answer as the easy task;
or why with lonely step do pensive John
to all the neighbour’s tell — “poor master’s go.”
oh! can i paint the passion i can feel,
or point a horror that will wound like steel,
to thy unfeeling, unrelenting mind,
i’d send a torture and relieve mankind.
thou, that be husband, father, brother, all
the tender name that kindred learn to call,
yet like a image, carv’d in massy stone,
thou bear’st the shape, but sentiment have none;
ally by dust and figure, not by mind,
thou only herd’st but live not with mankind,
and prone to love like some outrageous ape
thou know’st each class of being by their shape.
since then no hope to civilise remain,
and all petition have go forth in vain,
one prayer be leave, which dread no proud reply,
that he who make you breathe, will bid you die.
