the wind.

when dark November bid the leaf adieu,
and the gale sing amid the seaboy shroud,
methinks i see four wing form, that fly,
with garment stream light, amid the cloud;
from adverse region of the sky,
in dim succession, they go by.
the first, as over the billowy deep he pass,
blow from its brazen trump a far-resounding blast.
upon a beak promontory high,
with stream heart, and cloudy brow severe,
mark you the father of the frown year! 
dark vapour roll over the tempestuous sky,
when creep winter from his cave come forth;
stern courier of the storm, he cry, what from the north?

north wind.

from the vast and desert deep,
where the lonely kraken sleep,
where fix the icy mountain high
glimmer to the twilight sky;
where, six linger month to last,
the night have close, the day be past,
father, lo, i come, i come:
i have hear the wizard drum,
and the wither Lapland hag,
seal, with mutter spell, her bag:
over mountain white, and forest seré,
i fly, and with a wink be here.

winter.

spirit of unwearied wing,
from the baltic's freeze main,
from the russ bleak domain,
say, what tiding do thou bring!
shout, and the noise of battle! and again
the wing wind blow loud a deadly blast;
shout, and the noise of battle! the long main
seem with hoarse voice to answer as he pass.
the moody south go by, and silence keep;
the cloudy rack oft hide his mournful mien,
and frequent fall the shower, as if he weep
the eternal havoc of this mortal scene.
he have hear the yell, and cry,
and howl dance of anarchy,
where the Rhone, with rush flood,
murmur to the main, through blood: —
he seem to wish he can for ever throw
his misty mantle over a world of woe.
but rouse he from his despond trance,
cold eurus blow his sharp and shrill horn;
in his right hand he bear a icy lance,
that far off glitter in the frost of morn;
the old man know the clarion from afar,
what from the east? he cry.

east wind.

shout, and the noise of war!
far over the land have be my flight,
over many a forest dark as night,
over champaign where the Tartar speed,
over wolga's wild and giant reed,
over the carpathian summit hoar,
beneath who snow and shadow frore,
poland level length unfold
her trackless wood and wilder wold,
like a spirit, seek rest,
i have pass from east to west,
while sound of discord and lament
rise from the earth wherever i go.
i care not; hurry, as in scorn,
i shake my lance, and blow my horn;
the day show clear; and merry
along the atlantic now i fly.
who come in soft and spicy vest,
from the mild region of the west?
a azure veil bend wave over his head,
and shower of violet from his hand be shed.
it be zephyr, with a look as young and fair
as when his lucid wing convey
that beautiful and gentle maid
Psyche, transport through the air,
the blissful couch of love own god to share.
winter, avaunt! thy haggard eye
will scare he, as he wander by,
he and the timid butterfly.
he bring again the morn of may;
the lark, amid the clear blue sky,
carol, but be not see so high,
and all the winter wind fly far away!
i cry: o father of the world, who may
the storm, the darkness, and the wind obey,
oh, when will thus the long tempestuous night
of warfare and of woe be roll away!
oh, when will cease the uproar and the din,
and peace breathe soft, summer be come in!
