[fragment] ix.

thou ask, fair daughter of the isle! who memory be preserve in these tomb? the memory of ronnan the bold, and connan the chief of man; and of she, the fair of maid, rivine the lovely and the good. the wing of time be load with care. every moment have woe of its own. why seek we our grief from afar? or give our tear to those of other time? but thou command, and i obey, o fair daughter of the isle!

conar be mighty in war. Caul be the friend of stranger. his gate be open to all; midnight darken not on his bar door. both live upon the son of the mountain. their bow be the support of the poor.

connan be the image of conar soul. Caul be renew in ronnan his son. rivine the daughter of conar be the love of ronnan; her brother connan be his friend. she be fair as the harvest-moon set in the sea of molochasquir. her soul be settle on ronnan; the youth be the dream of her night.

rivine, my love! say ronnan, i go to my king in Norway. a year and a day shall bring i back. will thou be true to ronnan?

ronnan! a year and a day i will spend in sorrow. ronnan, behave like a man, and my soul shall exult in thy valour. connan my friend, say ronnan, will thou preserve rivine thy sister? durstan be in love with the maid; and soon shall the sea bring the stranger to our coast.

ronnan, i will defend: do thou secure go. — he go. he return on his day. but durstan return before he.

give i thy daughter, conar, say durstan; or fear and feel my power.

he who dare attempt my sister, say connan, must meet this edge of steel. unerring in battle be my arm: my sword, as the lightning of heaven.

ronnan the warrior come; and much he threaten durstan.

but, faith euran the servant of gold, ronnan! by the gate of the north shall durstan this night carry thy fairone away. accurse, answer ronnan, be this arm if death meet he not there.

connan! faith euran, this night shall the stranger carry thy sister away. my sword shall meet he, reply connan, and he shall lie low on earth.

the friend meet by night, and they seek. blood and sweat run down their limb as water on the mossy rock. connan fall; and cry, o durstan, be favourable to rivine! — and be it my friend, cry ronnan, i have slay? o connan! i know thou not.

he go, and he fight with durstan. day begin to rise on the combat, when faint they fall, and expire. rivine come out with the morn; and — o what detain my ronnan! — she see he lie pale in his blood; and her brother lie pale by his side. what can she say? what can she do? her complaint be many and vain. she open this grave for the warrior; and fall into it herself, before it be close; like the sun snatch away in a storm.

thou have hear this tale of grief, o fair daughter of the isle! rivine be fair as thyself: shed on her grave a tear.

