[Psyche] Canto vi.

Canto vi.

when pleasure sparkle in the cup of youth,
 and the gay hour on downy wing advance,
 oh! then it be sweet to hear the lip of truth
 breathe the soft vow of love, sweet to entrance
 the rapture soul by intermingle glance
 of mutual bliss; sweet amid roseate bower,
 lead by the hand of love, to weave the dance,
 or unmolested crop life fairy flower,
 or bask in joy bright sun through calm unclouded hour. 

yet they, who light of heart in mayday pride
 meet love with smile and gay amorous song,
 (though he their soft pleasure may provide,
 even then when pleasure in full concert throng)
 they can know with what enchantment strong
 he steal upon the tender suffer soul,
 what gentle soothe charm to he belong,
 how melt sorrow own his soft control,
 subside passion hush in mild wave to roll. 

when vex by care and harass by distress,
 the storm of fortune chill thy soul with dread,
 let love, console love! still sweet bless,
 and his assuasive balm benign shed:
 he downy plumage over thy pillow spread
 shall lull thy weep sorrow to repose;
 to love the tender heart have ever flee,
 as on its mother breast the infant throw
 its sob face, and there in sleep forget its woe. 

oh! fond cherish then the lovely plant,
 which lenient heaven have give thy pain to ease;
 its lustre shall thy summer hour enchant,
 and load with fragrance every prosperous breeze,
 and when rude winter shall thy rose seize,
 when nought through all thy bower but thorn remain,
 this still with undeciduous charm shall please,
 screen from the blast and shelter from the rain,
 and still with verdure, cheer the desolate plain. 

through the hard season love with plaintive note
 like the kind red-breast tender shall sing,
 which swell amid dreary snow its tuneful throat,
 brush the cold dew from its shiver wing,
 with cheerful promise of return spring
 to the mute tenant of the leafless grove. 
guard thy best treasure from the venom sting
 of baneful peevishness; oh! never prove
 how soon ill-temper power can banish gentle love! 

repentance may the storm of passion chase,
 and love, who shrink affright from the blast,
 may hush his just complaint in soft embrace,
 and smile wipe his tearful eye at last:
 yet when the wind be rude violence be past,
 look what a wreck the scatter field display! 
see on the ground the wither blossom cast! 
and hear sad philomel with piteous lay
 deplore the tempest rage that sweep her young away. 

the tear capricious beauty love to shed,
 the pout lip, the sullen silent tongue,
 may wake the impassion lover tender dread,
 and touch the spring that clasp his soul so strong;
 but ah, beware! the gentle power too long
 will not endure the frown of angry strife;
 he shun contention, and the gloomy throng
 who blast the joy of calm domestic life,
 and fly when discord shake her brand with quarrel rife. 

oh! he will tell you that these quarrel bring
 the ruin, not renewal of his flame:
 if oft repeat, lo! on rapid wing
 he fly to hide his fair but tender frame;
 from violence, reproach, or peevish blame
 irrevocable fly. lament in vain! 
indifference come the abandon heart to claim,
 assert for ever her repulsive reign,
 close follow by disgust and all her chill train. 

indifference, dread power! what art shall save
 the good so cherish from thy grasp hand? 
how shall young love escape the untimely grave
 thy treacherous art prepare? or how withstand
 the insidious foe, who with her leaden band
 enchain the thoughtless, slumber deity? 
ah, never more to wake! or ever expand
 his golden pinion to the breezy sky,
 or open to the sun his dim and languid eye. 

who can describe the hopeless, silent pang
 with which the gentle heart first mark her sway? 
eye the sure progress of her icy fang
 resistless, slow fasten on her prey;
 see rapture brilliant colour fade away,
 and all the glow of beam sympathy;
 anxious to watch the cold avert ray
 that speak no more to the fond meeting eye
 enchant tale of love, and tenderness, and joy. 

too faithful heart! thou never can retrieve
 thy wither hope: conceal the cruel pain! 
over thy lose treasure still in silence grieve;
 but never to the unfeeling ear complain:
 from fruitless struggle dear buy refrain! 
submit at once — the bitter task resign,
 nor watch and fan the expire flame in vain;
 patience console maid, may yet be thy,
 go seek her quiet cell, and hear her voice divine! 

but lo! the joyous sun, the soft-breathed gale
 by zephyr send to kiss the placid sea,
 curl the green wave, and fill the swell sail;
 the seaman shout, which jocund hail the breeze,
 call the glad knight the favour hour to seize. 
her gentle hostess Psyche oft embrace,
 who still solicitous her guest to please
 on her fair breast a talisman have place,
 and with the value gem her part blessing grace. 

how gay now the bark pursue its way
 urge by the steady gale! while round the keel
 the bubble current in sweet whisper play,
 their force repulsive now no more they feel;
 no cloud the unsullied face of heaven conceal,
 but the clear azure one pure dome display,
 whether it bid the star of day reveal
 his potent beam, or cynthia mild ray
 on deep cerulean sky invite the eye to gaze. 

almost unconscious they their course pursue,
 so smooth the vessel cut the watery plain;
 the wide horizon to their boundless view
 give but the sky, and neptune ample reign:
 still the unruffled bosom of the main
 smile undiversified by vary wind;
 no toil the idle mariner sustain,
 while, listless, slumber over his charge recline,
 the pilot care no more the unerring helm to mind. 

with light exult heart glad Psyche see
 their rapid progress as they quit the shore:
 yet weary languor steal by slow degree
 upon her tranquil mind; she joy not more
 the never change scene to wander over
 with still admire eye; the enchant song
 yield not that lively charm it know before,
 when first enrapture by his tuneful tongue
 she bid her vocal knight the heavenly strain prolong. 

a damp chill mist now deaden all the air,
 a drowsy dullness seem over all to creep,
 no more the heaven their smile of brightness wear,
 the wind be hush, while the dim glassy deep
 oppress by sluggish vapour seem to sleep;
 see his light scarf the knight over Psyche throw,
 solicitous his lovely charge to keep
 from still increase cold; while deep repose
 benumb each torpid sense and bid her eye-lid close. 

now as with languid stroke they ply the oar,
 while the dense fog obscure their gloomy way;
 HYMEN, well use to coast these dangerous shore,
 rouse from the dream trance in which he lie,
 cry to the knight in voice of dread dismay,
 "steer hence thy bark, oh! yet in time beware;
 here lie petrea, which with baneful sway
 Glacella rule, i feel the dank cold air,
 i hear her chill voice, methinks it speak despair!" 

even while he speak, behold the vessel stand
 immoveable! in vain the pilot try
 the helm to turn; fix in the shallow strand,
 no more obedient to his hand, it lie,
 the disappoint oar no aid supply
 while sweep over the sand it mock their force. 
the anxious knight to Constance now apply,
 to his oft try assistance have recourse,
 and bid his active mind design some swift resource. 

debate doubtful awhile they stand,
 at length on their unite strength rely,
 to force the bark on the support flood;
 they rouse the seaman, who half slumber lie,
 subdue and load by the oppressive sky. 
then wade amid the fog, with care explore
 what side the deep water may supply,
 and where the shallows least protect the shore,
 while through their darksome search the star shed light before. 

mean time deep slumber of the vaporous mist
 hang on the heavy eye-lid of the fair;
 and HYMEN too, unable to resist
 the drowsy force of the overwhelm air,
 lay at her foot at length forget his care. 
when lo! glacella treacherous slave advance,
 deep wrap in thick gloom; the sleep fair
 they seize, and bear away in heedless trance,
 long ere her guardian knight suspect the bitter chance. 

thus the lorn traveller imprudent sleep
 where his high glacier proud Locendro show;
 thus over his limb resistless torpor creep,
 as yield to the fatal deep repose
 he sink benumb upon the alpine snow,
 and sleep no more to wake; no more to view
 the bloom scene his native vale disclose,
 or ever more the craggy path pursue,
 or over the lichen steep the chamois chase renew. 

lo! to their queen they bear their sleep prey,
 deep in her ice-built castle gloomy state,
 there on a pompous couch they gentle lie
 Psyche, as yet unconscious of her fate,
 and when her heavy eye half open late
 dim observe the strange and unknown scene,
 as in a dream she view her change estate,
 gaze around with doubtful, trouble mien
 now on the stupid crowd, now on their dull proud queen

with vacant smile, and word but half express,
 in one ungracious, never-varying tone,
 Glacella welcome she bewilder guest,
 and bid the chief supporter of her throne
 approach and make their mighty mistress know,
 proud selfishness, her dark ill-favoured lord! 
her gorgeous seat, which still he share alone,
 he slow leave obedient to her word,
 and ever as he move the cringe train adore. 

nought of his shapeless form to sight appear,
 impenetrable fur conceal each part;
 harsh and unplease sound in psyche ear
 that voice which have subdue full many a heart;
 while he, exert every specious art,
 persuade she to adore their queen control;
 yet will he not glacella name impart,
 but with false title, which she artful steal
 from fair philosophy, delude the err soul. 

 "rest, happy fair!" he cry, "who here have find
 from all the storm of life a safe retreat,
 sorrow thy breast henceforth no more shall wound
 nor care invade thou in this quiet seat:
 the voice of the distress no more shall meet
 the sympathise ear; another woe
 shall never interrupt the stillness sweet,
 which here shall hush thou to serene repose,
 nor damp the constant joy these scene for thou disclose. 

 "fatigue no more thy soft and lovely frame
 with vain benevolence and fruitless care;
 no deep heave sigh shall here thy pity claim,
 nor hateful want demand thy wealth to share;
 for thou shall independence still prepare
 pleasure unmingled, and for ever sure;
 his lip our sovereign peaceful law declare,
 centre existence in thyself secure,
 nor let a alien shade thy sunshine ever obscure." 

he speak, and lo! unnumbered door unfold,
 and various scene of revelry display;
 here grandeur sink beneath the massive gold;
 here discontent beauty pine away,
 and vain conscious ask her promise sway;
 here luxury prepare his sumptuous feast,
 while lurk apathy behind he lie
 to poison all the insipid food he dress,
 and shake his poppy crown over every sate guest. 

the hireling minstrel strike their weary lyre,
 and slumber over the oft repeat strain;
 no listless youth to active grace they fire:
 here eloquence herself may plead in vain,
 nor one of all the heartless crowd can gain:
 and thou, oh! sweet than the muse song,
 affection voice divine! with cold disdain
 even thou be hear, while amid the insult throng
 thy daunt, shiver form move timid along! 

thus over the oil surface soft slide
 the unadmitted stream, rapid it flow,
 and from the impervious plain pellucid glide;
 repulse with gentle murmur thus it go,
 till in the porous earth it find repose,
 conceal and shelter in its parent breast: —
 oh! man best treasure in this vale of woe! 
still cheer the sad, and comfort the distress,
 nor ever be thy voice by selfishness oppress! 

Psyche with languid step he lead around,
 and bid her all the castle splendour see. 
here dissipation constant sport abound,
 while her loose hand in seem bounty free,
 her scentless rose, paint mimicry,
 profuse shed; here pride unheeded tell
 to nod crowd his ancient pedigree;
 and folly with reiterate spell
 to count her spot card the yawn group compel. 

 "see how, attentive to her subject ease,"
 to their reluctant prey exclaim her guide,
 each fleet joy of life she bid they seize,
 anxious for each gay pastime to provide;
 see she fast spread power increase wide,
 adore and worship in each splendid dome! 
lo! beauty glow for ever at her side,
 she bid her cheek the unvary rose assume;
 and Bacchus see for she his votive ivy bloom. 

 "be aught then want in this fairy bower? 
or be there aught which yet thy heart can move?" 
that heart, unyielding to their sovereign power,
 in gentle whisper sigh answer, "love!" 
while scornful smile the fond reply reprove,
 "lo!" he exclaim, "thy vanquish Cupid view;
 he oft with powerful arm have vain strive
 our sovereign rocky fortress to subdue,
 now, subject to her reign, he yield obedience due." 

wonder she gaze around, and where he point,
 a idiot child in golden chain she spy,
 rich cumbrous gem load all his feeble joint,
 a gaudy bandage feel his stupid eye,
 and foul desire his short-lived torch supply:
 by the capricious hand of fashion lead,
 her sudden start with totter step he try
 submissive to attend: he have she breed,
 and selfishness himself the nursling ever feed. 

with lustre false his tinsel arm to deck
 ungraceful ornament around he shine,
 gift of his sportive guide; she round his neck
 a glitter cord insult have throw,
 load its pendent purse with many a stone
 and worthless dross, and ever as he go,
 his leaden dart, with wanton aim unknown,
 now here, now there, in careless chance she send,
 that oft their blunt force in empty air be spend. 

shock, from the gross imposture Psyche turn
 with horror and disgust her fearful eye;
 her fate forlorn in silent anguish mourn,
 and call her knight with many a hopeless sigh. 
but see, the crowd in sudden tumult fly! 
the door, fast close to exclude some foe,
 proclaim to psyche hope her hero nigh:
 escape from her guard she fly, when lo! 
his form the burst gate in awful beauty show. 

 "fly from these dangerous wall," his page exclaim;
 "swift let we haste our float bark to gain! 
see thy knight wondrous dart in terror flame;
 soon shall these ice-built wall no shape retain! 
nor can their queen his dread sight sustain." 
scarce she hear while rapid she flee,
 even as a bird, escape the wily train
 the fouler with destructive art have spread,
 nor pant stay its flight, nor yet forego its dread. 

see how astonish now the crowd supine,
 rouse by his potent voice, confuse arise;
 in totter mass over their head decline
 dissolve wall; they gaze with wild surprise,
 and each affright from the ruin fly: —
 pity he view the vain unfeeling band
 beneath his care, a vile and worthless prize,
 their queen alone his vengeful arm demand,
 but unknown force be she his terror to withstand. 

a shield she have of more than Gorgon power,
 and who she will she can transform to stone,
 nor ever have it fail she till that hour:
 she prove his form invincible alone,
 and call its force petrific on her own. 
amaze he see the indurate train,
 the callous tenant of the silent throne,
 and all the marble subject of their reign,
 inviolable hard, their breathless shape retain. 

the magic shield he thence in triumph bear,
 resolve, in pity to the human race,
 her noxious hand its might shall guide no more,
 and bid the sea conceal its Hydra face:
 oh! kind mean, though much defeat grace! 
for though the overwhelm weight of sound wave
 conceal its rugged orb a little space,
 snatch by Glacella from the dark deep cave,
 once more the arm of love with potent spell it brave. 

but Psyche, rescue from their cruel scorn,
 urge her knight to hasten from the shore:
 the buoyant vessel on the billow bear
 ride proud over the mount surge once more;
 again they spread the sail, the feather oar
 skim with impatient stroke the sparkle tide;
 the blush HYMEN now their smile restore
 again to frolic gay at their side,
 though still their 'playful taunt reproach their slumber guide. 

Psyche look back with horror on the coast;
 black, drear, and desolate be all the scene:
 the rocky cliff still human shape may boast;
 there the sad victim of the cruel queen,
 memorial of her baneful power, be see:
 no vine crown hill, no glow vale appear,
 nor the white cottage laugh upon the green;
 the black and leafless thorn alone be there,
 and the chill mountain lift their summit wild and bare. 

her spirit lighten as they leave behind
 the dreary prospect of glacella isle;
 she bless with gladden heart the light-winged wind
 that bear she swift from a scene so vile;
 with glisten eye, and hope prophetic smile,
 she hear her knight foretell their danger over,
 that sure success shall crown their fate toil,
 and soon arrive at that happy shore,
 love shall again be find, and leave his bride no more. 

now, from light slumber and delicious dream,
 the jocund cry of joy arouse the fair;
 the morn that kiss her eye with golden beam,
 bid she the universal transport share;
 divine breathe the aromatic air,
 and psyche heart, half faint with delight,
 in the peculiar odour waft there
 recall the breeze which, over scene most bright,
 their wing of perfume shake, and linger stay their flight. 

the lovely shore the mariner descry,
 and many a gladsome cheer the prospect hail;
 its graceful hill rise full before the eye,
 while eager expand all their sail
 they woo the freshness of the morning gale:
 the approach scene new open charm display,
 and psyche palpitate courage fail,
 she see arrive at length the important day,
 uncertain yet of power the mandate to obey. 

but one dear object every wish confine,
 her spouse be promise in that bower of rest;
 and shall the sun, that now so cheerful shine,
 indeed behold she to his bosom press,
 and in his heavenly smile of fondness bless? 
oh! it be too much! — exhaust life she fear
 will struggle leave her agitate breast,
 ere to her longing eye his form appear,
 or the soft hand of love shall wipe away her tear. 

!oh how impatience gain upon the soul
 when the long promise hour of joy draw near! 
how slow the tardy moment seem to roll! 
what spectre rise of inconsistent fear! 
to the fond doubt heart its hope appear
 too bright fair, too sweet to realize;
 all seem but day-dream of delight too dear! 
strange hope and fear in painful contest rise,
 while the scarce trust bliss seem but to cheat the eye. 

but safe anchor in the happy port,
 lead by her knight the golden sand she press:
 he heart beat high, his pant breath heave short,
 and sigh proclaim his agitate breast
 by some important secret thought oppress:
 "at length," he cry, "behold the fate spring! 
yond rugged cliff conceal the fountain bless,
 (dark rock its crystal source overshadow,)
 and Constance swift for thou the destine urn shall bring." 

he speak, but scarce she hear, her soul intent
 survey as in a dream each well know scene:
 now from the point hill her eye she bend
 inquisitive over all the slope green;
 the graceful temple meet for beauty queen,
 the orange grove that ever bloom glow,
 the silvery flood, the ambrosial air screne,
 the matchless tree that fragrant shade bestow,
 all speak to psyche soul, all seem their queen to know. 

let the vain rover, who his youth have past
 mislead in idle search of happiness,
 declare, by late experience teach at last,
 in all his toil he gain but weariness,
 woo the coy goddess but to find that less
 she ever grant where dear she be buy;
 she love the shelter bower of home to bless,
 mark with her peaceful hand the favourite spot,
 and smile to see that love have home his Psyche bring. 

on the dear earth she kneel the turf to press,
 with grateful lip and fond stream eye,
 "be these the unknown bower of happiness? 
oh! just call, and gain at last!" she cry,
 as eager to seize the urn she fly. 
but lo! while yet she gaze with wonder eye
 Constance ascend the steep to gain the prize,
 the eagle eyry be not build so high
 as soon she see his star bright blaze to the sky. 

with light and nimble foot the boy descend,
 and lift the urn triumphant in his hand;
 low at the turf-raised altar Psyche bend,
 while her fond eye she promise love demand;
 close at her side her faithful guardian stand,
 as thus with timid voice she pay her vow,
 "Venus, fulfil be thy adore command,
 thy voice divine the suppliant claim allow,
 the smile of favour grant, restore she heavenly spouse." 

scarce on the altar have she place the urn,
 when lo! in whisper to her ravish ear
 speak the soft voice of love!  "turn, Psyche, turn! 
and see at last, release from every fear,
 thy spouse, thy faithful knight, thy lover here!" 
from his celestial brow the helmet fall,
 in joy full glow, unveil his charm appear,
 beam delight and love unspeakable,
 while in one rapturous glance their mingle soul they tell. 

two taper thus, with pure converge ray,
 in momentary flash their beam unite,
 shed but one inseparable blaze
 of blend radiance and effulgence bright,
 self-lost in mutual intermingle light;
 thus, in her lover circle arm embrace,
 the faint psyche soul, by sudden flight,
 with his its subtle essence interlace;
 oh! bliss too vast for thought! by word how poor trace! 

fond youth! who fate have summon to depart,
 and quit the object of thy tender love,
 how oft in absence shall thy pensive heart
 count the sad hour which must in exile move,
 and still their irksome weariness reprove;
 distance with cruel weight but load thy chain
 with every step which bid thou farther rove,
 while thy revert eye, with fruitless pain,
 shall seek the tread path its treasure to regain. 

for thou what rapturous moment be prepare! 
for thou shall dawn the long expect day! 
and he who never thy tender woe have share,
 have never know the transport they shall pay,
 to wash the memory of those woe away:
 the bitter tear of absence thou must shed,
 to know the bliss which tear of joy convey,
 when the long hour of sad regret be flee,
 and in one dear embrace thy pain compensate! 

even from afar behold, how eager
 with rapture thou shall hail the love abode! 
perhaps already, with impatient eye,
 from the dear casement she have mark thy road,
 and many a sigh for thy return bestow:
 even there she meet thy fond enamour glance:
 thy soul with grateful tenderness overflow,
 which firm bear the hand of hard mischance,
 faint in the strong power of joy over whelm trance. 

with Psyche thou alone can sympathise,
 thy heart benevolent share her joy! 
see she unclose her rapture beam eye,
 and catch that soft pleasurable sigh,
 that tell unutterable ecstasy! 
while hark melodious number through the air,
 on cloud of fragrance waft from the sky,
 their ravish soul to pious awe prepare,
 and lo! the herald dove the queen of love declare. 

with fond embrace she clasp she long lose son,
 and graceful receive his lovely bride,
 "Psyche! thou hardly have my favour win!" 
with roseate smile her heavenly parent cry,
 "yet hence thy charm immortal, deify,
 with the young joy, thy future offspring fair,
 shall bloom for ever at thy lover side;
 all rule Jove high mandate i declare,
 bless denizen of heaven! arise its joy to share." 

she cease, and lo! a thousand voice, join
 in sweet chorus, love high triumph sing;
 there, with the grace and the hour entwine,
 his fairy train their rosy garland bring,
 or round their mistress sport on halcyon wing;
 while she enrapture life in his dear eye,
 and drink immortal love from that pure spring
 of never-failing full felicity,
 bathe in ambrosial shower of bliss eternal! 

dream of delight farewell! your charm no more
 shall gild the hour of solitary gloom! 
the page remain — but can the page restore
 the vanish bower which fancy teach to bloom? 
all, no! her smile no long can illume
 the path my Psyche tread no more for i;
 consign to dark oblivion silent tomb
 the visionary scene no more i see,
 fast from the fade line the vivid colour flee! 

note.

