a pastoral elegy.

Philomela.

so, gentle destiny, decide the strife;
 ah! spare but she, and take my hate life. 

Daphne.

cease, cease, dear nymph, the fate ordain not so. 

Philomela.

the more ungentle they; but will thou go? 

Daphne.

i must; and wish my epilogue be do,
 that from this tiresome stage i may be go. 

Philomela.

ah i! ah i! this break my feeble heart:
 but find thou no reluctancy to part? 

Daphne.

without the least reluctance, all below,
 save thou, dear nymph, i will forgo:
 my Swain, my mate, my flock and garland too. 
in those bless shade, to which my soul must flee,
 more beauteous nymph, and kind shepherd be;
 who never reflect on what they leave behind,
 rapt with the joy they in Elysium find. 
by silver stream, through blissful shade they rove,
 their pleasure to eternity improve. 
there all the smile year be clothe with green;
 no autumn, but eternal spring be see. 
there the winge choir in loud and artful strain
 transmit their echo to the happy plain:
 and thither Strephon will my soul pursue,
 when he, like i, have bid the world adieu. 
there, if her innocence she still retain,
 my Philomela i shall clasp again;
 and there, when death shall stop his noble race,
 with a more godlike and heroic grace,
 thou shall behold the matchless theron face. 
but now farewell, my late sand be run,
 and Charon wait impatient to be go. 
farewell, poor earth; from thy unhappy shore
 none ever launch more joyful before. 
not death grim look affright i, though so near;
 alas! why shall the brave and virtuous fear:

Philomela.

she be go, she be go, my dear companion go,
 and leave i in this desert world alone;
 unforeed, her beauteous soul have take its flight,
 serene, and glitter to eternal light. 
more blind than love, or chance, relentless death,
 why do thou stop my charm daphnes breath? 
the best the brave, and faithful friend alive;
 fate-cut my thread, i will not the loss survive. 
alas! why rise the unwelcome sun? 
there be nothing worth our sight now daphne go. 
go smile on some bless clime, where thou have not see
 a loss so vast, nor wretch so curse as i;
 who grief have wrap in so condense a shade,
 as thy intrude beam shall never invade:
 for, what avail thy light now daphne go,
 and leave i weep on the shore alone? 
yet can the gentle fair but see i mourn,
 from that bless place she will perhaps return. 
but vain, alas! be my complaint; she be go,
 and leave i in this desert world alone. 
for ah! deprive my dear life of thou,
 the world be all a hermitage to i:
 no more together we shall sit or walk,
 no more of Pan, or of Elysium talk:
 no more, no more shall i the fleet day
 in kind endearment soft pass away:
 no more the noble height of friendship prove,
 now daphne go, i know not who to love. 
mourn all the groves and stream, mourn every thing,
 you will hear no more the pretty siren sing. 
tune, shepherd, tune your pipe to mournful strain;
 for we have lose the glory of our plain. 
let every thing a sad look put on;
 for daphne dead, for the love nymph be go. 
