on the death of a friend.

adieu, dear Emma; — now, alas! no more,
death icy hand, have chill thy tender frame,
in endless sigh, the loss i will deplore,
revere thy memory, and exalt thy name.
let soft humanity incline a ear,
let gentle pity listen to my song,
let every tender bosom grant a tear,
and Emma virtue, flow from every tongue.
her heart be faithful, and her soul sincere,
her temper gentle as the turtle dove,
in person beauteous, and in judgement clear,
inspire by virtue, and sustain by love.
her conscious soul unknowing how to feign,
be true to honour, and it be sacred law,
her tender bosom feel another pain,
and glow with fervent zeal, in friendship cause.
and yet, alas! these virtue can not save,
for one short moment, the depart breath,
fate have decree this victim to the grave,
and all must yield to the cold arm of death.
then what avail my misery and grief,
can it to life the heavenly maid restore,
can tear or wish now afford relief,
or give i back the treasure i deplore.
can earthly sorrow add one joy to those,
who pure delight exceed all human thought,
can weak mortality afford repose,
great than that, with which thy soul be fraught.
yet friendship, say, the strain, i must prolong,
her virtue still demand a generous tear,
they still require the tributary song,
a faithful friend her memory to revere.
while i have life, or memory, or sense,
to Emma kindred shrine my praise be due,
her soul be guide by pure innocence,
nor envy, nor deceit, her bosom know.
she be the first to sing in virtue praise,
to cherish truth in every tender breast,
and teach the young to tread the potent way,
which lead to glory, and eternal rest.
alas! you gay, consider well her fate,
remember life be but a fleet day,
however with affluence bless, or soon, or late,
death cruel summons we must all obey.
be innocent, be chaste, from folly free,
in this precarious life serene move,
submit with patience to just heaven decree,
be firm in friendship, and sincere in love.
let sacred honour guide your err foot,
with kind compassion, and with grace divine,
let every virtue in your bosom meet,
and meek humility, with wisdom join.
content, like Emma, in a humble state,
seek not for grandeur, or vain pageantry,
nor yet with envious eye behold the great;
the beggar, and the prince, alike must die.
then, ah! farewell, my generous, honour friend,
accept the tear, to thy remembrance due,
till memory and feeling have a end,
nor worldly pleasure shall my grief subdue.
may kindred angel waft thy soul to rest,
may all thy merit meet it be full reward,
may you be number with the pure and bless,
and Emma spirit be Maria guard.
