line on the death of WILLIAM sotheby, ESQ.

learning and fancy be combine
 to stimulate his manly mind;
 open, generous and acute,
 steady of purpose, in pursuit
 ardent and hopeful; all the while
 in childlike ignorance of guile. 
there be who say that envy lurk conceal
 where genius strive, by slight trait reveal,
 a truth, if truth it be, by he forget,
 he turn his eye away and see it not. 
success in other, frank and free,
 he hail with word of friendly glee. 
praise give to they he can not feel
 do aught from his own portion steal;
 and when offence, design and rude,
 do on his peaceful path obtrude,
 he soon forgive the paltry pain,
 nor can resentment in his breast retain. 
his be the charity of right goodwill,
 that love, confide, believe and think no ill. 
he, by his saviour noble precept lead,
 still follow what be right with heart and head. 
religion do with lofty honour dwell
 within his bosom sacred cell. 

but say i learning do in he agree
 with fancy, union rare! how can it be? 
his eighteenth year behold he fond cheer
 his warlike steed and on its back career. 
a gay dragoon with spur on heel,
 and brandish blade of flash steel;
 with wealth at will, the world before he,
 to go where whim or fashion bear he. 
no friendly tutor by his side,
 his academic course to guide. 
no classic honour to invite,
 no emulation to excite. 
but, in default of these, his soul
 with native fire supply the whole;
 and neither hall nor college claim
 honour from he who honour name
 shall henceforth with the high stand,
 the most efficient scholar of our land. 
to he what meed of thanks the unlearned owe! 
and even the learned, who best he merit know. 
with Homer, Virgil, Wieland, all converse
 like true compatriot in his pliant verse. 
pliant but elevate, graceful, bold,
 and worthy of the bard of old. 

nor will we thankless peruse
 the beauty of his native muse,
 where lofty thought and feeling sweet,
 and moral truth commingle meet. 
where fancy spread her absent scene,
 the flowery mead, the forest green;
 the plain, the mountain peak, the fane sublime,
 the ruin long revere of italy fair clime. 
yea thanks be he, heart-given and kind,
 for all his pen have leave behind! 

though bitter in his cup be mix,
 and in his heart sharp arrow fix,
 the current of his life run clear;
 with virtuous love and duteous child bless,
 he journey onward to the christian rest,
 and happy be his long career. 

social and joyous to the end,
 around he gather many a friend,
 who mind his dear remembrance hold,
 though seventy year and more
 his head have silver over,
 as one who never be old. 
rejoice in his well-earned fame,
 they oft repeat his honour name,
 and as their thought on all his virtue dwell
 with sorrow, cheer and sweet, bid he a last farewell. 
