a long story

in britain isle, no matter where,
a ancient pile of building stand:
the huntingdon and hatton there
employ the power of fairy hand

to raise the ceiling fret height,
each panel in achievement clothe,
rich window that exclude the light,
and passage that lead to nothing.

full oft within the spacious wall,
when he have fifty winter over he,
my grave lord-keeper lead the brawl;
the seal and mace dance before he.

his bushy beard and shoe-string green,
his high-crowned hat and satin-doublet,
move the stout heart of England queen,
though pope and Spaniard can not trouble it.

what, in the very first beginning!
shame of the versify tribe!
your history whither be you spin?
can you do nothing but describe?

a house there be (and that be enough)
from whence one fatal morning issue
a brace of warrior, not in buff,
but rustle in their silk and tissue.

the first come cap-a-pee from France
her conquer destiny fulfil,
who mean beauty eye askance,
and vain ape her art of kill.

the other Amazon kind heaven
have arm with spirit, wit, and satire:
but Cobham have the polish give,
and tip her arrow with good-nature.

to celebrate her eye, her air —
coarse panegyric will but tease she.
Melissa be her nom de guerre.
alas, who will not wish to please she!

with bonnet blue and capucine,
and apron long they hide their armour,
and veil their weapon bright and keen
in pity to the country-farmer.

fame in the shape of mr. p[ur]t
(by this time all the parish know it)
have tell that thereabouts there lurk
a wicked imp they call a poet,

who prowl the country far and near,
bewitch the child of the peasant,
dry up the cow and lame the deer,
and suck the egg and kill the pheasant.

my lady hear their joint petition,
swear by her coronet and ermine,
she will issue out her high commission
to rid the manor of such vermin.

the heroine undertake the task;
through lane unknown, over stile they venture,
rap at the door nor stay to ask,
but bounce into the parlour enter.

the tremble family they daunt,
they flirt, they sing, they laugh, they tattle,
rummage his mother, pinch his aunt,
and up stair in a whirlwind rattle.

each hole and cupboard they explore,
each creek and cranny of his chamber,
run hurry-skurry round the floor,
and over the bed and tester clamber,

into the drawer and china pry,
paper and book, a huge imbroglio!
under a tea-cup he may lie,
or crease, like dogs-ear, in a folio.

on the first march of the troop
the muse, hopeless of his pardon,
convey he underneath their hoop
to a small closet in the garden.

so rumour say (who will, believe)
but that they leave the door ajar,
where, safe and laugh in his sleeve,
he hear the distant din of war.

short be his joy. he little know
the power of magic be no fable.
out of the window, whisk, they fly,
but leave a spell upon the table.

the word too eager to unriddle,
the poet feel a strange disorder:
transparent birdlime form the middle,
and chain invisible the border.

so cunning be the apparatus,
the powerful pothook do so move he,
that, will he, will he, to the great-house
he go, as if the devil drive he.

yet no his way (no sign of grace,
for folk in fear be apt to pray)
to Phoebus he prefer his case,
and beg his aid that dreadful day.

the godhead will have back his quarrel,
but, with a blush on recollection,
own that his quiver and his laurel
against four such eye be no protection.

the court be sit, the culprit there,
forth from their gloomy mansion creep
the lady Janes and joan repair,
and from the gallery stand peep:

such as in silence of the night
come (sweep) along some wind entry
(styack have often see the sight)
or at the chapel-door stand sentry;

in peak hood and mantle tarnish,
sour visage, enough to scare you,
high dame of honour once, that garnish
the drawing-room of fierce queen mary!

the peeress come. the audience stare,
and doff their hat with due submission:
she curtsy, as she take her chair,
to all the people of condition.

the bard with many a artful fib
have in imagination fence he,
disprove the argument of squib,
and all that groom can urge against he.

but soon his rhetoric forsake he,
when he the solemn hall have see;
a sudden fit of ague shake he,
he stand as mute as poor Macleane. 

yet something he be hear to mutter,
'how in the park beneath a old-tree
'(without design to hurt the butter,
'or any malice to the poultry,)

'he once or twice have pen a sonnet;
'yet hope that he may save his bacon:
'number will give their oath upon it,
'he never be for a conjurer take. '

the ghostly prude with hagged face
already have condemn the sinner.
my lady rise and with a grace —
she smile, and bid he come to dinner.

'Jesu-Maria! madam Bridget,
'why, what can the viscountess mean? '
(cry the square hood in woeful fidget)
'the time be alter quite and clean!

'decorum turn to mere civility;
'her air and all her manner show it.
'commend i to her affability!
'speak to a commoner and poet! '

(here 500 stanza be lose.) 

and so god save our noble king,
and guard we from long-winded lubber,
that to eternity will sing,
and keep my lady from her rubber.
