the cotter Saturday night.

inscribe to R. A****, ESQ;

i 

my love, my honour, much respect friend,
 no mercenary bard his homage pay;
 with honest pride, i scorn each selfish end,
 my dear meed, a friend esteem and praise:
 to you i sing, in simple scottish lay,
 the lowly train in life sequester scene;
 the native feeling strong, the guileless way,
 what A**** in a cottage will have be;
 ah! though he worth unknown, far happy there i ween! 

ii.

November chill blaw loud with angry sugh;
 the shorten winter-day be near a close;
 the miry beast retreat from the pleugh;
 the blacken train of craw to their repose:
 the toil-worn Cotter from his labour go,
 this night his weekly moil be at a end,
 collect his spade, his mattock and his hoe,
 hope the morn in ease and rest to spend,
 and weary, over the moor, his course do hameward bend. 

iii.

at length his lonely cot appear in view,
 beneath the shelter of a age tree;
 the expectant wee-thing, toddlan, stacher through
 to meet their dad, with flichterin noise and glee. 
his wee-bit ingle, blinkan bonilie,
 his clean hearth-stane, his thrifty wifie smile,
 the lisp infant, prattle on his knee,
 do all his weary kiaugh and care beguile,
 and make he quite forget his labour and his toil. 

[iv].

believe, the elder bairn come drap in,
 at service out, among the farmer round;
 some call the pleugh, some herd, some tentie rin
 a canny errand to a neebour town:
 their old hope, their Jenny, worman-grown,
 in youthful bloom, love sparkle in she e'e,
 come home, perhaps, to show a braw new gown,
 or deposit her sair-won penny-fee,
 to help her parent dear, if they in hardship be. 

v. 

with joy unfeigned, brother and sister meet,
 and each for other weelfare kindly spier:
 the social hour, swift-winged, unnoticed fleet;
 each tell the uncos that he see or hear. 
the parent partial eye their hopeful year;
 anticipation forward point the view;
 the mother, with her needle and her sheer,
 gar old clae look almost as well as the new;
 the father mix all with admonition due. 

vi.

their master and their mistress command,
 the youngker all be warn to obey;
 and mind their labor with a eydent hand,
 and never, though out of sight, to jauk or play:
 'and o! be sure to fear the lord always! 
' and mind your duty, due, morn and night! 
lest in temptation path you go astray,
 'implore his counsel and assist might:
' they never seek in vain that seek the lord aright. ' 

vii.

but hark! a rap come gentle to the door;
 Jenny, who ken the meaning of the same,
 tell how a neebour lad come over the moor,
 to do some errand, and convoy she home. 
the wily mother see the conscious flame
 sparkle in Jenny e'e, and flush her cheek,
 with heartstruck, anxious care enquire his name,
 while Jenny hafflin be afraid to speak;
 weel-pleased the mother hear, it be no wild, worthless rake. 

viii.

with kind welcome, Jenny bring he ben;
 a strappan youth; he take the mother eye;
 Blythe Jenny see the visit be not ill take;
 the father crack of horse, pleugh and kye. 
the youngster artless heart overflow with joy,
 but blate and laithful, scarce can well behave;
 the mother, with a woman wile, can spy
 what make the youth so bashful and so grave;
 weel-pleased to think she bairn' respect like the lave. 

ix.

o happy love! where love like this be find! 
o heart-felt rapture! bliss beyond compare! 
i have pace much this weary, mortal round,
 and sage experience bid i this declare —
 'if heaven a draught of heavenly pleasure spare,
' one cordial in this melancholy vale,
 'it be when a youthful, love, modest pair,
' in other arm, breathe out the tender tale,
 'beneath the milkwhite thorn that scent the evening gale.' 

x. 

be there, in human form, that bear a heart —
 a wretch! a villain! lose to love and truth! 
that can, with study, sly, ensnare art,
 betray sweet Jenny unsuspecting youth? 
curse on his perjure art! dissemble smooth! 
be Honer, virtue, conscience, all exile? 
be there no pity, no relent Ruth,
 point to the parent fondle over their child? 
then paint the ruin maid, and their distraction wild! 

xi.

but now the supper crown their simple board,
 the healsome porritch, chief of scotia food:
 the soupe their only Hawkie do afford,
 that 'yont the hallan snug chow her cood:
 the dame bring forth, in complimental mood,
 to grace the lad, her weel-hained kebbuck, fall,
 and aft he be press, and aft he ca's it guide;
 the frugal wify, garrulous, will tell,
 how it be a towmond old, since Lint be in the bell. 

xii.

the cheerful supper do, with serious face,
 they, round the ingle, form a circle wide;
 the sire turn over, with patriarchal grace,
 the big ha'-bible, once his father pride:
 he bonnet rev'rentlv be lay aside,
 his lyart haffet wear thin and bare;
 those strain that once do sweet in Zion glide,
 he wale a portion with judicious care;
' and let we worship god! 'he say with solemn air. 

xiii.

they chant their artless note in simple guise;
 they tune their heart, by far the noble aim:
 perhaps dundee wild warble measure rise,
 or plaintive martyr, worthy of the name;
 or noble Elgin beet the heavenward flame,
 the sweet far of scotia holy lay:
 compare with these, italian trill be tame;
 the tickle ear no heart-felt rapture raise;
 no unison have they, with our creator praise. 

xiv.

the priestlike father read the sacred page,
 how Abram be the friend of god on high;
 or, Moses bid eternal warfare wage,
 with. amalek ungracious progeny;
 or how the royal bard do groan lie,
 beneath the stroke of heaven avenge ire;
 or Job pathetic plaint, and wail cry;
 or rapt isaiah wild, seraphic fire;
 or other holy seer that tune the sacred lyre. 

XV. 

perhaps the christian volume be the theme,
 how guiltless blood for guilty man be shed;
 how he, who bear in heaven the second name,
 have not on earth whereon to lay his head:
 how his first follower and servant speed;
 the precept sage they write to many a land:
 how he, who lone in Patmos banish,
 see in the sun a mighty angel stand;
 and hear great bab'lon doom pronounce by heaven command. 

xvi.

then kneel down to heaven eternal king,
 the saint, the father, and the husband pray:
 hope 'spring exult on triumphant wing,' 
that thus they all shall meet in future day:
 there, ever bask in uncreated ray,
 no more to sigh, or shed the bitter tear,
 together hymn their creator praise,
 in such society, yet still more dear;
 while circle time move round in a eternal sphere. 

xvii.

compare with this, how poor religion pride,
 in all the pomp of method, and of art,
 when man display to congregation wide,
 devotion every grace, except the heart! 
the power, incense, the pageant will desert,
 the pompous strain, the sacredotal stole;
 but haply, in some cottage far apart,
 may hear, well please, the language of the soul;
 and in his book of life the inmate poor enrol. 

xviii.

then homeward all take off their several way;
 the youngling cottager retire to rest:
 the parent-pair their secret homage pay,
 and proffer up to heaven the warm request,
 that he who still the raven clamorous nest,
 and deck the lily fair in flowery pride,
 will, in the way his wisdom see the best,
 for they and for their little one provide;
 but chief, in their heart with grace divine preside. 

xix.

from scene like these, old scotia grandeur spring,
 that make she love at home, revere abroad:
 prince and lord be but the breath of king,
 'a honest man be the noble work of god;'
 and certes, in fair virtue heavenly road,
 the cottage leave the palace far behind:
 what be a lordling pomp? a cumbrous load,
 disguise oft the wretch of human kind,
 study in art of hell, in wickedness refine! 

xx.

o Scotia! my dear, my native soil! 
for who my warm wish to heaven be send! 
long may thy hardy son of rustic toil,
 be bless with health, and peace, and sweet content! 
and o may heaven their simple life prevent
 from luxury contagion, weak and vile! 
then however crown and coronet be rend,
 a virtuous populace may rise the while,
 and stand a wall of fire around their much-loved isle. 

xxi.

o thou! who pour the patriotic tide,
 that stream through great, unhappy wallace heart;
 who dare to, noble, stem tyrannic pride,
 or noble die, the second glorious part:
 (the patriot god, peculiar thou be,
 his friend, inspirer, guardian and reward!) 
o never, never scotia realm desert,
 but still the patriot, and the patriot-bard,
 in bright succession raise, her ornament and guard! 
