the camelion:

a fable after monsieur de la Motte.

by the same.

oft have it be my lot to mark
a proud, conceited, talk spark,
with eye, that hardly serve at most
to guard their master against a post,
yet round the world the blade have be
to see whatever can be see,
return from his finish tour,
grow ten time perter than before;
whatever word you chance to drop,
the travel fool your mouth will stop,
"sir, if my judgement you will allow —
"I have see — and sure i ought to know —
so beg you will pay a due submission,
and acquiesce in his decision.

two traveller of such a cast;
as over arabia wild they pass,
and on their way in friendly chat
now talk of this and then of that,
discourse awhile among other matter
of the camelion form and nature.
"a stranger animal, cry one,
"sure never live beneath the sun.
"a lizard body lean and long,
"a fish head, a serpent tongue,
"its tooth with triple claw disjoin;
"and what a length of tail behind!
"how slow its pace, and then its hue —
"who ever see so fine a blue? "

"hold there, the other quick reply,
"it be green — i see it with these eye,
"as late with open mouth it lie,
"and warm it in the sunny ray;
"stretch at its ease the beast i view,
"and see it eat the air for food. "

"I have see it, sir, as well as you,
"and must again affirm it blue.
"at leisure i the beast survey
"extend in the cool shade. "

"it be green, it be green, sir, i assure you —
"green! cry the other in a fury —

"why, sir — do you think i have lose my eye?"
"it be no great loss, the friend reply,
"for, if they always serve you thus,
"you will find they but of little use."

so high at last the contest rose,
from word they almost come to blow:
when lucky come by a third —
to he the question they refer;
and beg he will tell they, if he know,
whether the thing be green or blue.

"sir, cry the umpire, cease your pother —
"the creature neither one nor the other.
"i catch the animal last night,
"and view it over by candlelight:
"i mark it well — it be black as jet —
"you stare — but sir, i have get it yet,
"and can produce it." "pray, sir, do:
"i will lay my life, the thing be blue. "
"and i will be swear, that when you have see
"the reptile, you will pronounce he green."

"well then, at once to ease the doubt,
"reply the man, i will turn he out:
"and when before your eye i have set he,
"if you do find he black, i will eat he. "

he say; then full before their sight
produce the beast, and lo! it be white. —
both stare, the man look wondrous wise —
"my child," the chameleon cry,
(then first the creature find a tongue)
"you all be right, and all be wrong:
"when next you talk of what you view,
"think other see, as well as you:
"nor wonder, if you find that none
"prefer your eye-sight to his own."
