religion.

a rhapsody.

bright emanation of all righteous power,
 religion! bear i to thy sacred bower;
 where fix in faith, by holy patience bless,
 calm resignation yield the wretched rest;
 where hope divine to penitence be give,
 beam in each breast, and list the soul to heaven. 

you son of show, you unreflecting gay,
 time-trifling youth, the splendor of a day;
 who light bound over life surface skim,
 monarch of mode, and worshipper of whim. 
thus, through the air, the wing-poized warbler sing;
 wanton thus fly, display their paint wing:
 so strut the fowl, with eye-bespangled train,
 like you self please; as pretty, and — as vain. 
the time must come when dress and dancing' over,
 and your frail form can play the fool no more:
 ever it be too late, look with religious eye;
 think, think, you faulty, and be timely wise. 

you tender, lovely, love-inspiring race,
 who word be music, and who motion grace;
 who soft endear look insidious play,
 feast the fond eye, and snatch the soul away. 
you laugh sex, who vain wanton, rove
 through the Elysium of unbounded love:
 though round enamour croud observant sigh,
 watch the soft smile, and catch the glance eye;
 still must you lose this sense-ensnaring form,
 and what now feed your lover, feast a worm. 
yet, yet, you conscious beauty-beaming train,
 a moment think; then, if you dare, — be vain. 

dispassion race! you wealthy slave of care,
 who cheek never feel the trickle, tender tear;
 who breast never heave with sympathetic sigh;
 who heart never open to the ask eye. 
you son of trade, you busy tasteless train,
 who god be gold, and who religion gain;
 your greedy mind, to social joy unknown,
 in one, dull, drudge round, roll restless on. 
can you expect a charity from heaven? 
shall you! you stubborn heart, be forgive? 
fruitless your sigh, repentant, will appear;
 you will want that mercy you deride here;
 unmoved the godhead will your sorrow view,
 as weep want, on earth, be see by you. 

star-lustred breast, you court-delectant race,
 you soul of honour, and you son of place,
 big with each blessing that attend a throne,
 on the low wealthless look contemptuous down:
 yet, spite of pride, the statesman and the slave. 
rise, undistinguished, from the equal grave. —
 go search within for all ennoble earth;
 go teach the tomb-bred worm respect to birth
 correct his feed, and refine his taste:
 alas! —
 courtier and clown compose alike his feast

what will avail the diamond sparkle blaze,
 the glare of title, or the vulgar gaze,
 when worn-out nature pant gasp for breath,
 and friend fly, fright, from the face of death? 
 "to the sad sense what then can give content"
 "the sweet reflection of a life well spend." 

calm each great soul quit his clay-cumb'rous load. 
Springs to the sky, and humble wait his god. 
while the low wretch, by crime raise wealth-grown great,
 start at life loss; and, frightful, meet his fate;
 wide-opening, wild he rowl his ghastful eye:
 he shake; he shrink; and, agonize, cry,
 "have mercy, heaven! — can i its mercy share? 
" see! grief-stabbed merit open its bosom there:
 "hear, from the grave, the plaintive orphan groan
" burst sorrow forth, and strike the heavenly "throne. 
" hark! the lust-ruined fair extend her cry,
 "and the sound shake along the tremble sky" 

what shall we say in that great day of dread,
 when the rend grave shall render back their dead? 
when, at the trumpet sound, the cloud give way,
 and the world blaze in eternal day? 
there the fierce tyrant feel the avenge rod,
 and pride sink tremble at the sight of god;
 there suffering virtue happiness receive;
 there the fool atheist, though too late, believe:
 the poor lose sinner hear the eternal doom;
 and, woe appal, cling shudder to his tomb. 

bring, you bright fair, your love-attending croud;
 command your slay, you hero, from their shroud;
 you prime in state display your deep scheme;
 and, you nice wit, your fancy-forming dream;
 try, try, you proud, in that tremendous hour,
 the skill of science, or the strength of power,
 self-pleasing wisdom, the renown of birth,
 all, all the vis'onary joy of earth;
 lay they before the universal lord;
 go, plead your merit, and revoke his word. 

soon shall shadow stop the lightning blaze
 or glowworm dim the sun refulgent ray. 

but chief you to who the word be give
 soulsaving sect, you delegate of heaven;
 who pious toil dispel the sinner fear,
 stop the throb sigh, and dry confession fear. 
thus, but unpensioned, the apostle go
 on foot, coarse clad, with homely fare content,
 declare the dictate of the almighty lord,
 but prove no doctrine by the dint of sword. 
love, justice, faith, humility they press,
 yet threaten no damnation to the rest. 
plain and unsullied, like the simple maid,
 religion bloom, by interest unallayed:
 Leal true fervent, penitence sincere,
 bill the wrap soul, and speak the heart-selt prayer. 

then social bliss descend from above,
 spread through each sex, and ripen into love:
 no feign desire feed the heavenly flame;
 pure blaze the passion, as from god it come:
 all being then with mutual rapture strive;
 love be religion; and religion, love. 

you motley son, compose of noise and show;
 you beauty-haunting, gingle, glitter crew
 though round the fair you ever fond rove;
 think not, insipids, you be form for love. 

scorn worldly wealth, you pray'r-deliv'ring race,
 heaven equal hear — equal dispense place:
 with soul-felt awe adore all nature lord;
 bold proclaim his wonder-working word:
 snatch the smooth mask from the rich sinner face;
 check the gay vicious in their guilty race:
 humble the haughty, bend the scoffer down,
 and scourge the shameless, though the powerful frown. 

raise, though in rag, and lend the wretched cure,
 assist the friendless, and protect the poor:
 bounteous, over earth, the sun bestow his ray,
 shine over a throne, and through the cottage play:
 bounteous thus heaven the gospel-light have spread;
 pure you receive, return it unallayed:
 shun the mean wrangle, syllogistic rule;
 scorn quibble logic, and the mode of school;
 free from dull, learned jargon, plain preach,
 and act with ardour up to what you teach. 

you congregate lay, who due creep
 as the bell toll for church — to fall asleep. 

you well-dressed train who modish resort,
 and treat the temple as you use the court. 

you senseless rude who, with affrontive stare,
 blush the meek beauty in her hour of prayer. 

you empty idling, who insipid smile,
 pretty pace through the sound isle;
 devotion hour, loiter, laugh away;
 too nice to kneel, and much too proud to pray

no more, you vain, the sacred dome debase,
 wanton with worship, and your god disgrace,
 with i fall prostrate — penitent adore;
 confess your error, and offend no more. 

by chance condemn to wander from my birth
 a err exile, over the face of earth,
 wild through the world of vice; — licentious race! —
 I have start folly, and enjoy the chace:
 please with each passion, i pursue their aim,
 cheere the gay pack, and grasp the guilty game;
 reveal regardless, leap reflection over,
 until youth, until health, fame, fortune, be no more:
 too late i feel the thought-corroding pain
 of sharp remembrance, and severe disdain:
 each paint pleasure its avenger breed;
 sorrow sad train, to riot troop succeed:
 slow waste sickness steal on swift debauch;
 contempt on pride, pale want on waste approach. 
scorn by the sad, the cynie, and the dull,
 the would-be wit, and milky mind fool. 

eternal good! from thou our hope descend;
 with thou it centre, and in thou it end:
 to thou, with shame-torn heart, i tremble kneel;
 heal i with mercy; oh! my saviour, heal! 
great lord of life, if dare i request,
 still let i sigh among mankind unblessed;
 still sickness, shipwreck, prison, plague to know;
 whatever my fate be — still my faith in you:
 still shall thy name attune thy suppliant song;
 still shall thy praise dwell rapturous on his tongue
 wretched or bless, still shall i always own,
 whatever i feel, heaven holy will be do. 
