the mariner.

soft come the breath of spring; smooth flow the tide;
and blue the heaven in its mirror smile;
the white sail tremble, swell, expand wide,
the busy sailor at the anchor toil.

with anxious friend, that shed the part tear,
the deck be throng — how swift the moment fly;
the vessel heave, the farewell sign appear;
mute be each tongue, and eloquent each eye!

the last dread moment come! — the sailor-youth
hide the big drop, and smile amid his pain,
sooth his sad bride, and vow eternal truth,
"farewell, my love — we shall — shall meet again!"

long on the stern, with wave hand, he stand;
the crowd shore sink, lessen, from his view,
as gradual glide the bark along the flood;
his bride be see no more — "adieu! — adieu!"

the breeze of eve moan low, her smile be over,
dim steal her twilight down the crimson west,
he climb the top-most mast, to seek once more
the far-seen coast, where all his wish rest.

he view its dark line on the distant sky,
and fancy lead he to his little home,
he see his weep love, he hear her sigh,
he sooth her grief, and tell of joy to come.

eve yield to night, the breeze to wintery gale,
in one vast shade the sea and shore repose;
he turn his ache eye, — his spirit fail,
the chill tear fall; — sad to the deck he go!

the storm of midnight swell, the sail be furl,
deep sound the lead, but find no friendly shore;
fast over the wave the wretched bark be hurl,
"o Ellen, Ellen! we must meet no more!"

lightning, that show the vast and foamy deep,
the rend thunder, as they onward roll,
the loud, loud wind, that over the billow sweep —
shake the firm nerve, appal the brave soul!

ah! what avail the seaman toil care!
the strain cordage burst, the mast be rive;
the sound of terror groan along the air,
then sink afar; — the bark on rock be drive;

fierce over the wreck the whelm water pass,
the helpless crew sink in the roar main!
Henry faint accent tremble in the blast —
farewell my love! — we never shall meet again! "

oft, at the calm and silent evening hour,
when summer-breeze linger on the wave,
a melancholy voice be hear to pour
its lonely sweetness over poor Henry grave!

and oft, at midnight, airy strain be hear
around the grove, where ellen form be lay;
nor be the dirge by village-maiden fear,
for lover' spirit guard the holy shade!
