godred crovan,

a poem.

compose by dopnal syrric scheld of godred crovan; king of the isle of Man. 

arise, o son of Harald the black, for the son of syrric sleep upon the mountain, under the mossy rock; prepare thy silver lance, shake the clot gore of the wolf from thy spread shield; Fingal of the brown lake, who sword divide the lofty pine, who spear be ever moist with the blood of the slay, will assist thy arm. cullisin who sleep on the brow of the mountain, who foot be swift as the day of mirth, will draw forth his troop from the forest. the lion of the plain, morvor and essyr, will swell thy army, as the fall rain swell the silver brook: they wait for thy presence, as the brown meadow for the spring; they will shoot out in blood, and blossom in victory.

godred crovan, son of Harald the black, who name have put to flight army, arise.

godred arise; he meet the chief on the plain; they sit down, and feast till the evening: there sit cochlin with the long spear, who arm be a thunderbolt: on the bank of the sea he fight a host, and rain blood on the plain of mervor: brown be his face as the sun-burnt heath; strong his arm as the roar sea: he shake his black lock like cloud toss by the wind: he sing the song of joy. Godwin of the rushy plain lie upon the skin of the wolf; his eye be star, his blow be lightning. tatwallin sit by his side, he sing sweet as the bird of spring, he fight like the angry lion.

o tatwallin! sing the action of Harold the swift.

tatwallin arise from his seat, the horn of mirth grace his right-hand.

hear, you son of blood, while the horn of mirth be refresh your soul, the action of Harald the swift.


 "the wolf of Norway beat his anlace on his silver shield; the son of war assemble around he: Swain of the cleft-hill shake the spear on his left; and Harald the black, the lion of Iceland, on his right, dye in gore. Fergus of the spread hill be case in black armour; his eye shine with rage, his sword sport with the beam of the sun.

 "warrior, say the chief of the host, let we assault the foe; swift as the hawk let we fly to the war; strong as the bull, fierce as the wolf, will we rage in the fight: the follower of Harold, the son of Godwin, shall melt away as the summer cloud; they shall fall like the flower of the field; their soul will fade with the blast of our valour.

 "Swain prepare for war; he sound the brazen helmet, his follower lift high the deadly spear.

 "the son of Godwin appear on the bridge, his banner wave in the wind; like a storm he scatter the troop of Swain.

 "Edmund shoot the arrow of death.

 "mad by defeat, Swain plunge into his band: the sword of Edmund sound on his helmet; their silver shield be hear upon the stream: the sword of Edmund sink to the heart of the son of egwin; he bite the bloody sand at his foot.

 "Harald the black stand on the bridge, he swell the river with gore: he divide the head of Edmund, as the lightning tear the top of the strong rock: army melt before he, none can withstand his rage. the son of Godwin view he from the hill of death; he seize the flame banner, and sound the silver shield.

 "girth, Leofric, and Morcar, pillar of the war, fly to his shadow: with a troop of knight, fierce as evening wolf, they beset Harald the black; like a tempest they rage, like a rock he repel their assault: hill of the slay arise before he, the course of the stream be turn aside.

 "warrior, say the son of Godwin, though we rage like a tempest, like a rock he repel our assault. Morcar, let one of thy knight descend beneath the bridge, and pierce he through the back with a spear.

 "Selwyn, swift as a fall meteor, shoot beneath the wave; the sharp spear pierce through the back of Harald the black; he fall like a mountain in a earthquake; his eye shoot fire, and his tooth gnash with rage: he die.

 "the hope of Norway be no more; Harold the swift lead his troop to the bridge; they start at the sight of the mighty body, they weep, they sle.

 "thou, godred, only thou! of all the thousand of the war, prepare thy sword for battle; they drag thou from the field.

 "great be the sorrow of the son of Norway."

tatwallin end his song, the chief arise from the green plain; they assemble their troop on the bank of lexy.

ceormond, with the green spear, martial his band: he deduce his lineage from Woden, and display the shield of penda. strong as the tower of Pendragon on the hill, furious as the soul of the unburied warrior; his company be all chief. upon the high hill he encounter moryon; like dash wave, they rush to the war; their sword rain blood to the valley beneath. moryon, wild as the winter wind, rage in the fight; the point javelin quiver in his breast, he roll down the high hill. son of Woden, great be thy might, by thy hand the two son of osmor fall to the valley.

how be thy warrior stretch upon the bank of the lexy, like willow!

ealward, of the brown rock, who dye his anlace in the blood of the wolf of the hill, who spear, like a star, blast the soul of the foe; see he sleep with the chief upon the skin of the wolf; the battle be rage in his fancy; he grasp the bloody spear; his enemy fly before he; joy and rage dance on his brow: thus sleep, he be as the sun slight cover with a cloud.

dugnal, who inhabit the isle, who bark be swift than the wind, stand on the bank of the stream; his eye be bend on the spangle wave; his hand press the silver-headed spear; he be a lion in the war, in the council wise as the ancient priest.

wilver stand on the right-hand of godred; he be a rock, unmoved by the tempest of war.

lagman be a young oak; he flourish in the heat of the glory of his fire: the warrior be like the star of the winter night.

the noise of a multitude be hear from the hill: godred set his troop in order for war; they be see on the brow of the hill. many be the foe of godred; great be the courage of his warrior.

raignald of the isle attend the chief of his foe; his arm be strong as the flourish oak; his wisdom deep as the black lake; his swift ship slay over the wave; he defy to battle the prince of the mountain.

bladdyn fall by his hand; he burn the palace of the wood: the horn, emboss with gold, grace his spoil; he return to his castle over a sea of blood.

dunhelm bear the banner of the foe; he be the dragon of the mossy plain; he keep the water of the seven spring. wynfylt, and his warrior, seek to bear away the water in the horn of hospitality. dunhelm arise from his strong fort; his anlace glitter over his head.

child of the hill, say the son of olave, restore the water to the gently-running stream.

the son of meurig answer not: the anlace of dunhelm divide his head; his blow fall like the stone of hail, when the loud wind shake the top of the lofty tree; the warrior flee like the cloud of night, at the approach of the sun.

elgar, from the border of Northumberland, be among the enemy of godred crovan, son of Harald the black: he lead his troop down the hill, and begin the fight with ospray: like the rage of the lake of blood, when the loud wind whistle over the sharp cliff of the rock, be the noise of the battle.

summerled rise in the sight like the ray of the morning; blood beam about he; his helmet sell from his head; his eye be like the light upon the billow.

octha, who fight for godred, oppose the passage of his rage: his shield be like the rise sun, his spear the tower of mabyn: the spear of summerled sound on the shield of octha; he hear the shrill cry of joy, as the break weapon fall to the ground: his sword fall upon the shoulder of summerled; he gnash his tooth, and die.

ospray, like a lion, ravage the band of elgar. octha follow behind he, die his long white robe in blood.

elgar fly to the son of vorti; his spear sound upon his helmet; the sword of octha divide the shield of elgar: the northumbrian warrior retire to his band. dunhelm drive his long spear through the heart of octha; he fall to the ground. wilver set his foot upon his breathless corpse, and bury he beneath the body of the foe.

raignald, with his band, fly to the relief of dunhelm: the troop of wilver and ospray slow retire. dunhelm fall by the javelin of a unknown warrior; so fall the eagle by the arrow of the child.

raignald rage like the fire of the mountain; the troop of dugnal and ceormond melt before he.

dugnal lift high his broad shield against the breast of raignald; his sword hang over his head: the troop of raignald retire with their chief. ealward, and the son of Harald the black, fly to the war: the foe retire before they. raignald encourage his man: like a eagle he rage in the fight.

the troop of godred halt; the band of dugnal and ceormond forsake their leader.

godred retire to the bank of the lexy; the foe follow behind, but be drive back with shame. on the bank of the lexy the warrior be scatter like break oak.

godred sound the silver shield; the chief assemble round his tent.

let we again to the war, o chief, and drive the foe over the mountain.

they prepare for war; dugnal lead the wolf of the isle; with a loud voice they begin the fight. ealward fall by the sword of raignald. cullisin scatter the javelin of fate. Fingal rage in the fight, but sell by the sword of elgar.

cochlin hear the die groan of his friend; his sword pierce the heart of elgar, he fall upon the body of Fingal.

morvor and essyr rage like son of blood, thousand fall around they. Godwin scatter slaughter through the host of the foe. tatwallin sweep down the chief of the battle; like the noise of torrent roll down the high mountain, be the noise of the fight; the foot of the warrior be wet with blood; the sword of cochlin be break, his spear pierce through the foe like lightning through the oak: the chief of godred fill the field with the body of the dead: the night approach, and victory be undecided: the black cloud bend to the earth, raignald and godred both retire.

the chief of godred assemble at the tent of council: tatwallin, arise and sing,


 "when the flower arise in the verdant meadow, when the bird of spring be hear in the grove of Thor, the son of victa prepare his knight for war; strong as the mossy tomb of ursic be the warrior he have choose for his band; they issue out to the war. wecca shake the crooked anlace at their head.

 "halt, say the son of victa, let the troop stand still: still as the silent wood, when the wind be lay asleep, the saxon stand on the spread plain.

 "son of blood! say the immortal wecca, the foe against who we must fight be strong than the whole power of our king; let the son of Henna, with three hundred warrior, be hide in the darkbrown wood; when the enemy faint in the battle, let they spread themselves like the burst cloud, and rain a shower of blood; the foe will be weaken, astonish, and fly.

 "the warrior hold their broad shield over the head of the son of victa; they give he the chaplet of victory, and sing the song of joy.

 "hennack, with the flower of the war, retire to the dark-brown wood: the sun arise array in garment of blood; wecca lead his man to the battle: like bear they rage in the fight; yet the enemy flee not, neither be they move: the fight continue till noon; the troop of the son of victa fight like the dragon of the mountain, the foe saint, they be weaken, yet they flee not.

 "the son of Henna draw forth his band to the plain; like a tempest they fall upon the foe; they be astonish; they flee.

 "godred crovan, son of Harald the black, the lion of Iceland, and all the warrior who fight in his cause, let we pursue the same method; let the mountain of secafull conceal dugnal and three hundred choose warrior from the eye of raignald; when he be spend in the fight, let they issue to the war."

godred arise from his throne, he lead tatwallin to a seat at his right-hand.

dugnal prepare his troop; sing, o tatwallin, the action of Hengist and Horsa.

tatwallin arise from his seat:


 "when the black cloud stoop below the top of the high hill, when the wolf come forth from the wood, when the branch of the pine perish, when the yew only smile upon the russet-heath, the son of Woden lead the furious warrior to the bank of the swift stream; there sit the horse of the hill, who crooked sword shine like the star of the evening.

 "peada be the banner of the hill: when he wave his golden torce upon the body of the slay, the heart of his companion beam with victory: he join the numerous band of the son of Woden; like a swell stream they enter the border of the land of cuccurcha.

 "locca of the brown valley sound the shield; the king of urrin hear the sound, he start from his seat: assemble the lion of war, for the enemy be upon the border.

 "son of Morven, upon who shield be see the hawk and the serpent, swift as the wind fly to the warrior of abon stream: son of war, prepare the spread shield, the sword of fire, the spear, the azure banner make sacred by the god.

 "cuccurcha issue to the war, as a enemy wolf to the field.

 "selward, who face be a summer cloud, gleam with the recent lightning of the storm, shake the broad anlace.

 "eadgar and emmieldred, son of the mighty rovan, who discomfit osniron with his steed of fire, when the god of war, the blood stain Woden, pitch his tent on the bank of the wide lake, be see in the troop.

 "creadda, who foot be like those of the horse, lift high the silver shield.

 "on the plain, near the palace of frica, he encounter with egward; their sword rain blood, shield echo to the valley of slaughter.

 "these be the warrior of cuccurcha, the lion of the war.

 "Hengist and Horsa meet they on the sandy plain; the shaft of death cloud the sun, swift as the ship of Horsa, strong as the arm of suchullin: peada ravage the band of cuccurcha like a mountain. eadgar sustain the blow of Hengist; great be the fury of emmieldred, his spear divide the broad shield, his anlace sink into the heart: the sword of anyoni pierce the breast of cuccurcha, he fall like a oak to the plain.

 "creadda rage in the battle, he be a wild boar of the wood: the anlace of Horsa sound on his round helm, he gnash his tooth, he churn the smoke gore, he die. locca recline on his long spear, he be weary with deal death among his foe: the anlace of Hengist alight on his back, he fall to the ground.

 "the man of urrin sle to the forest: the lion of war, Hengist and Horsa, throw the spear of flight; they burn up the soul of the fly foe; the great image be red with blood; the flame light the star; the moon come forth to grace the feast; the chaplet of victory hang on the brow of the warrior."

tatwallin end his song,

the morning creep from the mountain, dugnal with his troop retire to the forest on the mountain of scoafull.

godred crovan, son of Harald the black, the lion of Iceland, prepare for battle. raignald come down to the plain: long be the fight and bloody.

godred crovan beat his anlace on the shield; the warrior upon the mountain hear the sound of the silver shield; swift as the hunt stag they fly to the war, they hear the noise of the battle, the shout of the onset swell in the wind, the loud din of the war increase, as the thunder roll from afar; they fly down the mountain, where the fragment of the sharp rock be scatter around; they ascend like the vapour, fold up the high hill, upon the border of osloch; their helmet sweep the dawn of the morning; the saffron light shine on the broad shield; through the dark dell they cut a passage, through the dell where the beam of the sun be never see.

on the rushy moor of rossin they astonish the foe, and join in the war.

there fight godred crovan, death sit on his sword, the yell breath of the die foe shake his banner; his shield, the stream of lexy, which urround the dark-brown wood, and shine at the noon of day; his anlace drop blood, and tear through the helmet of the foe like the red lightning of the storm.

dugnal, chief of the mountain warrior, who drive rygwallon from his chariot of war, lift his shield and spear through the heart of Morval; the weapon persorate, he yell like a wolf of the mountain, he die.

weolmund, of the white rock, arise in the fight; like the fire of the earth he burn up the rank of the foe; his spear a blast oak, his shield the sea when the wind be still, he appear a hill, on who top the winter snow be see, and the summer sun melt it up: victory sit on his helmet, death on his anlace.

wilver, who support the totter rock, who fly like the bird of summer over the plain, shake the crooked sword as he rage upon the hill of the slay, and be red with live gore: the spear of the foe be gather about he, the sharp javelin sound on his shield; he look around the field, the savage Edwin fly to his aid; like two wolf they rage in the war, their shield be red with blood.

the bear of the north throw his lance: the furclad Godard syrric display his starry shield, the chief fall at his foot, he rise on the breast of rynon, storm of blood surround his sword, blood flow around he.

when the storm rage in the sky, the torrent roll to the plain, the tree of the wood be bear away, the castle fall to the ground, such be the fury of the fight on the moor of rossin: the chief fall, our foe halt, they fly swift as the cloud of winter. ospray throw the spear of chaso; swift as their fear he fly to the pursuit; the soul of godred melt, he roll the blue banner, wrought with gold, round the crimson stream: his warrior dance around he, they sing the song of Harald the black; they hail he king; the golden sandal be throw over his helmet. may the god grant this war for empire be his last.

