ode to concord.

by the same.

soul of the world, first mover, say,
 from thou what glorious being come,
 powerful to raise this universal frame? 
who teach the ponderous wheel to play? 
give beauty to look forth with radiant eye,
 and clothe with ambient day the crystal sky? 
it be concord, who enthrone above,
 with sevenfold adamantine chain
 the path of wander orb restrain,
 kindle the genial fire of love,
 and walk the court of genuine light,
 (while all heaven hail the wonder of her sight)
 where bliss have banish chance, and sore annoy,
 and goodness fill the cup of general joy. 

nor be she to the heaven confine;
 forth on the morning wing she ride,
 she skim the glow evening purple tide,
 and leave the set sun behind. 
where dove sit coo at the noontide hour,
 and linnet warble in the woodbine bower;
 where the pale moon her lustre spread,
 the love-lorn bird divide her song,
 the soft flute sooth the rural throng,
 and dew drop load the flowrets head;
 where the ingenuous chorus sing,
 the delicate touch fly over the tremble string,
 from the gild roof the symphony rebound;
 thy, goddess, be the charm, and thy the silver sound. 

the buxom air, the saphire main,
 all height and depth confess thy gracious reign;
 but chief be thy delight to dwell
 lodge in the human breast, thy dear cell. 
favour and friendship meet thou there,
 and tender transport with the gush tear:
 there wedlock at thy altar bend,
 there halcyon peace secure brood,
 and meek tranquillity attend
 to quell unruly rage, and sooth the swell flood. 

now by the magic of thy tongue,
 that call up first the roll sphere;
 through the gay circle of revolve year,
 with rapturous sound of mystic song,
 attune in heavenly harmony to run:
 and by the virtue of the enchant zone,
 which when the fair idalian queen
 accept, with universal sway,
 the smile and win passion play
 in her resistless look and mien;
 the love thy heavenly gift admire,
 and tip their little dart with lambent fire;
 fresh wreath the grace bring, and form the round;
 where rise daisy mark the measure ground. 

now by the rosy mildness sweet,
 of which when youthful spring awake,
 from thy abundance ample she partake,
 what time the silk-plumed zephyr meet
 in saba grove, to kiss the bend bloom
 with balmy lip, and wanton in perfume:
 and by the ripen, redolent grace,
 when summer in the persian field
 to sober-seeming autumn yield
 her treasure on the load spray,
 the sky-robed plum, the purple vine,
 the velvet peach, and damask nectarine;
 while plenty, wave she hesperian bough,
 gladden Pomona with the golden show. 

great goddess! with the word of peace
 bid this wild uproar of contention cease;
 bid amity, with gentle ray,
 the woe that lowr on faction brow display. 
shall Rome to thou a rebel prove? 
for hellish hate abandon heavenly love? 
here, gentle concord, on each breast
 let thy spring-sweetness bland distil,
 here thy ambrosial fragrance rest,
 and all mankind obey thy sovereign will. 
