the hymn of Cleanthes.

by Gilbert west, ESQ.

o under various sacred name adore! 
divinity supreme! all-potent lord! 
author of nature! who unbounded sway
 and legislative power all thing obey! 
majestic Jove! all hail! to thou belong
 the suppliant prayer, and tributary song:
 to thou from all thy mortal offspring due;
 from thou we come, from thou our being draw;
 whatever live and move, great sire! be thy,
 embody portion of the soul divine. 
therefore to thou will i attune my string,
 and of thy wondrous power for ever sing. 
the wheel orb, the wander fire above,
 that round this earthly sphere incessant move,
 through all this boundless world admit thy sway,
 and roll spontaneous where thou point the way. 
such be the awe impress on nature round
 when through the void thy dreadful thunder sound. 
those flame agent of thy matchless power,
 astonish world, hear, tremble, and adore. 
thus paramount to all, by all obey,
 rule that reason which through all convey
 inform this general mass, thou reign adore,
 supreme, unbounded, universal lord. 
for nor in earth, nor earth-encircling flood,
 nor yond etherial pole, the seat of god,
 be ought perform without thy aid divine;
 strength, wisdom, virtue, mighty Jove, be thy! 
vice be the act of man, by passion tost,
 and in the shoreless sea of folly lose,
 but thou, what vice disorder, can compose;
 and profit by the malice of thy foe:
 so blend good with evil, fair with foul,
 as thence to model one harmonious whole:
 one universal law of truth and right;
 but wretched mortal shun the heavenly light;
 and, though to bliss direct still their choice,
 hear not, or heed not reason sacred voice,
 that common guide ordain to point the road
 that lead obedient man to solid good. 
thence quit virtue lovely path they rove,
 as various object various passion move. 
some through oppose crowd and threaten war
 seek power bright throne, and fame triumphal car. 
some, bend on wealth, pursue with endless pain
 oppressive, sordid, and dishonest gain:
 while other, to soft indolence resign,
 drown in corporeal sweet the immortal mind. 
but, o great father, thunder-ruling god!
 who in thick darkness make thy dread abode! 
thou, from who bounty all good gift descend,
 do thou from ignorance mankind defend! 
the cloud of vice and folly, o controul;
 and shed the beam of wisdom on the soul! 
those radiant beam, by who all-piercing flame
 thy justice rule this universal frame. 
that honour with a portion of thy light
 we may essay thy goodness to requite
 with honorary song and grateful lay,
 and hymn thy glorious work with ceaseless praise,
 the proper task of man: and sure to sing
 of nature law, and nature mighty king
 be bliss supreme. let god with mortal join! 
the subject may transport a breast divine. 
