Agrippina, a tragedy

act i 

scene i 

Agrippina 

it be well, begone! your errand be perform.
the message need no comment. tell your master,
his mother shall obey he. say you see she
yield due reverence to his high command:
alone, unguarded and without a lictor
as fit the daughter of Germanicus.
say, she retire to Antium; there to tend
her household care, a woman best employment.
what if you add, how she turn pale and tremble:
you think, you spy a tear stand in her eye,
and will have drop, but that her pride restrain it?
(go! you can paint it well) it will profit you,
and please the stripling. yet it will dash his joy
to hear the spirit of Britannicus
yet walk on earth: at least there be who know
without a spell to raise, and bid it fire
a thousand haughty heart, unused to shake
when a boy frown, nor to be lure with smile
to taste of hollow kindness, or partake
his hospitable board: they be aware
of the unpledge bowl, they love not aconite.

aceronia 

he be go; and much i hope these wall alone
and the mute air be privy to your passion.
forgive your servant fear, who see the danger
which fierce resentment can fail to raise
in haughty youth and irritate power.

Agrippina 

and do thou talk to i, to i, of danger,
of haughty youth and irritate power,
to she that give it being, her that arm
this paint Jove, and teach his novice hand
to aim the fork bolt; while he stand tremble,
scare at the sound and dazzle with its brightness?

it be like, thou have forget, when yet a stranger
to adoration, to the grateful steam
of flattery incense and obsequious vow
from voluntary realm, a puny boy,
deck with no other lustre than the blood
of agrippina race, he live unknown
to fame or fortune; haply eye at distance
some edileship, ambitious of the power
to judge of weight and measure; scarce dare
on expectation strong wing to soar
high as the consulate, that empty shade
of long-forgotten liberty: when i
open his young eye to bear the blaze of greatness;
show he where empire tower, and bid he strike
the noble quarry. god! then be the time
to shrink from danger; fear may then have wear
the mask of prudence; but a heart like i,
a heart that glow with the pure Julian fire,
if bright ambition from her craggy seat
display the radiant prize, will mount undaunted,
gain the rough height, and grasp the dangerous honour.

aceronia 

through various life i have pursue your step,
have see your soul, and wonder at its dare:
hence rise my fear. nor be i yet to learn
how vast the debt of gratitude which Nero
to such a mother owe; the world you give he
suffice not to pay the obligation.

i well remember too (for i be present)
when in a secret and dead hour of night,
due sacrifice perform with barbarous rite
of mutter charm and solemn invocation,
you bid the Magi call the dreadful power
that read futurity, to know the fate
impend over your son: their answer be,
if the son reign, the mother perish.
perish (you cry) the mother! reign the son!
he reign, the rest be heaven; who oft have bid,
even when its will seem write in line of blood,
the unthought event disclose a white meaning.
think too how oft in weak and sickly mind
the sweet of kindness lavish indulge
rankle to gall; and benefit too great
to be repay, sit heavy on the soul,
as unrequited wrong. the will homage
of prostrate Rome, the senate joint applause,
the riches of the earth, the train of pleasure
that wait on youth and arbitrary sway:
these be your gift, and with they you bestow
the very power he have to be ungrateful.

Agrippina 

thus ever grave and undisturbed reflection
pour its cool dictate in the mad ear
of rage, and think to quench the fire it feel not.
say thou i must be cautious, must be silent,
and tremble at the phantom i have raise?
carry to he thy timid counsel. he
perchance may heed they: tell he too, that one
who have such liberal power to give, may still
with equal power resume that gift, and raise
a tempest that shall shake she own creation
to its original atom — tell i! say,
this mighty emperor, this dread hero,
have he behold the glitter front of war?
know his soft ear the trumpet thrill voice,
and outcry of the battle? have his limb
sweat under iron harness? be he not
the silken son of dalliance, nurse in ease
and pleasure flowery lap? Rubellius live,
and Sulla have his friend, though school by fear
to bow the supple knee, and court the time
with show of fair obeisance; and a call
like i may serve belike to wake pretension
drowsy than they, who boast the genuine blood
of our imperial house. [can my nod]
rouse [up] eight hardy legion, wont to stem
with stubborn nerve the tide, and face the rigour
of bleak germania snow [?] four, not less brave,
that in Armenia quell the parthian force
under the warlike Corbulo, by [i]
mark for their leader: these, by tie confirm
of old respect and gratitude, be [i].
sure the masians too, and those of Egypt,
have not forget [my] sire: the eye of Rome
and the praetorian camp have long revere,
with custom awe, the daughter, sister, wife,
and mother of their caesar. ha! by Juno,
it bear a noble semblance. on this base
my great revenge shall rise; or say we sound
the trump of liberty; there will not want,
even in the servile senate, ear to own
her spirit-stirring voice; Soranus there,
and Cassius; veto too, and Thrasea,
mind of the antique cast, rough, stubborn soul,
that struggle with the yoke. how shall the spark
unquenchable, that glow within their breast,
blaze into freedom, when the idle herd
(slave from the womb, create but to stare
and bellow in the circus) yet will start,
and shake they at the name of liberty,
sting by a senseless word, a vain tradition,
as there be magic in it? wrinkle beldame
teach it their grandchild, as somewhat rare
that ancient appear, but when, extend
beyond their chronicle — oh! it be a cause
to arm the hand of childhood, and rebrace
the slacken sinew of time-wearied age.

yes, we may meet, ungrateful boy, we may!
again the bury genius of old Rome
shall from the dust uprear his reverend head,
rouse by the shout of million: there before
his high tribunal thou and i appear.
let majesty sit on thy awful brow
and lighten from thy eye: around thou call
the gild swarm that wanton in the sunshine
of thy full favour; Seneca be there
in gorgeous phrase of labour eloquence
to dress thy plea, and burrhus strengthen it
with his plain soldier oath and honest seem.
against thou, liberty and Agrippina:
the world, the prize; and fair befall the victor.

but soft! why do i waste the fruitless hour
in threat unexecuted? haste thou, fly
these hate wall that seem to mock my shame,
and cast i forth in duty to their lord.

my thought ache at he; not the basilisk
more deadly to the sight than be to i
the cool injurious eye of freeze kindness.
i will not meet its poison. let he feel
before he see i. yes, i will be go,
but not to Antium — all shall be confess,
whatever the frivolous tongue of giddy fame
have spread among the crowd; thing that but whisper
have arch the hearer brow and rivet
his eye in fearful ecstasy: no matter
what, so it be strange, and dreadful. — sorcery,
assassination, poison; the deep
my guilt, the black his ingratitude.

and you, you mane of ambition victim,
enshrine Claudius, with the pity ghost
of the syllani, doom to early death
(you unavailing horror, fruitless crime!),
if from the realm of night my voice you hear,
in lieu of penitence and vain remorse,
accept my vengeance. though by i you bleed,
he be the cause. my love, my fear for he,
dry the soft spring of pity in my heart,
and freeze they up with deadly cruelty.
yet if your injure shade demand my fate,
if murder cry for murder, blood for blood,
let i not fall alone; but crush his pride,
and sink the traitor in his mother ruin.

scene ii.

Otho 

thus far we be safe. thanks to the rosy queen
of amorous theft: and have her wanton son
lent we his wing, we can not have beguile
with more elusive speed the dazzle sight
of wakeful jealousy. be gay secure;
dispel, my fair, with smile, the timorous cloud
that hang on thy clear brow. so Helen look,
so her white neck recline, so be she bear
by the young trojan to his gild bark
with fond reluctance, yield modesty,
and oft revert eye, as if she know not
whether she fear or wish to be pursue.
