a poem, [on the death of our late sovereign lady queen MARY.]

tune to the solemn strain of general woe,
 do thou my Muse thy pious sorrow show,
 and let the mighty consternation prove,
 that grief, though cold, as much of heat may move,
 as the first rapture of aspire love. 

hark! how the dismal trump of busy fame —
 do to the world unwilling ear proclaim
 our royal mistress lament fate,
 and death proud triumph over the just, and great;
 not the dread call of heaven at the last day,
 when soul unsentence shall for judgement stay,
 can more amaze terror then infuse,
 than Europe shake with, at the wound news:

fate by this unexpected loss have show,
 the force of grief before be never know;
 even envy that injurious hypocrite:
 that, at her virtue noon, affirm it night,
 now blind with gaze on her lustre lie,
 and shed her praise at her watere eye:

her murmur foe, that think themselves oppress,
 be now in undistinguish sable dress:
 for each religion do its faith enjoy,
 she one defend, but do none destroy,
 unless to bring the day destruction be,
 when bigot wander in obscurity:
 thus, though to different path of faith w'incline,
 yet all opinion in their sorrow join:
 so jar rival, when the fair one dye,
 like long love friend embrace with weep eye. 

when heaven after the universal flood,
 with new-born soul the unpeopled world renew,
 her bright spirit sure be keep above
 as the best pattern of immortal love,
 yet, after thousand of revolve year,
 in frailèr flesh th'imprison soul appear:
 but, as the sun, till in the Westen sky,
 let none behold he with undazzled eye:
 so here on earth her virtue shine so bright,
 that none can praise they, till they see it be night
 she be set: nor can this tedious life endure,
 (too long a penance for a soul so pure)
 alas! she long her first abode to see,
 and mourn her absence from divinity,
 grace with her fellow-angel as she go,
 she rain her virtue from the firmament,
 and if a stream of virtue find below,
 it must from she the boundless ocean flow. 

now though the sea supply all stream, that run,
 yet that it self be guide by the moon,
 so be her bright soul by strict devotion. 
so constant her pious vow she pay,
 so fix her thought, that even in dream she pray,
 so fast she want she give god relieve,
 her prayer be still but thanks for gift receive:
 her faith unbounded give her reason law,
 when this command the other stand in awe:
 religious discord she may well prevent,
 for in example she be argument. 

her fruitful soul with endless virtue bless
 with various flower be like a garden dress,
 where choice stand unresolved which scent be best,
 alternate odour still perfume the air,
 occasion be the season of the year,
 which like the kind return spring revive
 each good that sleep; for though it sleep it live,
 one tree there be, which cold and frost can bear,
 the bay-devotion flourish all the year. 

but, as the fruit alone commend the tree,
 so do her virtue praise her piety,
 of which the eldest-born be charity. 
and this the needy to their comfort know;
 for, while she live, they charitable grow;
 heaven do but lend the sum it may bestow,
 and take receit for all it do allow;
 for still she interest pay to the poor below;
 and if their number do increase appear,
 sometime she from her private want will spare,
 and trust heaven be in debt to she. 

how many parent have their child save
 from threaten want by her sure alm relieve? 
what tribe have she receive from hand unknown,
 which she with joy adopt, as her own? 

methinks i see a starve mother grief,
 struggle betwixt nature, and her babe relief,
 unable to endure the infant cry,
 and yet it need less able to supply,
 at length she yield to hard necessity. 
and must we part (she cry') my darling joy? 
must absence all our harmless love destroy? 
then sigh kiss it, and hugg it close,
 and dread to part but more she hope to loose. 
resolve, at last, she stop her flow eye,
 and strait to court unseen the babe convey,
 secure of nourishment she leave it there,
 and next day find it in the nurse care. 

thus, least hereafter some show want relief,
 her early pity be preventative,
 the old, who seem to pine in cold despair,
 revive their hope, and crown they still in she:
 so when our saviour the disease do cure,
 he bring from distant part the sick, and poor,
 who, by some fame physician art give over,
 swell with new hope, now feel their pain no more. 
at least with great ease their ache endure,
 half heal by faith, ere they can reach the cure,
 and as in tribe the new believer come,
 the dumb, the lunatic, the blind, and lame,
 they walk, they see they speak, and praise his name. 

never do a life so short more good produce,
 in which each minute be of double use,
 so soon she finish her appoint task,
 her virtue labour more, than heaven do ask. 
that when her hasty soul arrive above,
 she do their equal joy, and wonder move,
 all know the place near god right hand be she;
 but think it vacant yet for several year. 

now though her charity do boundless reign,
 yet not the poor the great loss sustain:
 for she to many a subsistence leave,
 though of the foundress, not the Dole bereave. 
our grief alas! yet rise in degree,
 as those that mourn she do in quality:
 next to the poor be those of noble art,
 which she encourage to their best desert:
 music, and poetry, not long ago,
 our nation pride, be almost treason now,
 but that they both our tide of grief can move,
 as well as heretofore our joy, or love. 

at court the rise flood of pious tear,
 yet great still, (as do the loss) appear,
 where all like walk ghost, in grief be see,
 for a lose friend, a mother and a queen. 

but oh! the rapid force, that sweep away
 great caesar quiet, and his cheerful day! 
now! now! my muse: let loose thy stream of woe,
 let they unbounded, as the ocean flow,
 swell with big sigh the rage tempest high,
 then mount, and over the distant danger fly,
 and in thy transient view, survey the soul,
 who all around the angry billow roll,
 behold the shipwreck of our monarch joy,
 which thirsty death in field can never destroy:
 thus mariner the sea abroad over come,
 yet sink with all the fraught in sight of home. 

why! why! you power must bleed majesty
 so vast a wound receive from destiny? 
be it not enough to see a nation groan? 
but must the loss be double on a throne? 
why do you gild with such a glorious sun
 his happy life, and let it set so soon? 
the light, that slow die leave sight behind:
 but, when it be snatch away, it strike we blind;
 without regret we spare the absent day,
 rest secure of his return ray;
 but when for ever he resign his light,
 it be worse, than death to live in such a night,
 in such a night, who move be sure to stray,
 in such a night our guide may loose his way,
 and though the unguarded flock shall quite be lose,
 the Shepard first be hurt, and feel the affliction most,
 thus our great master in his grief have show,
 he love the life depart, as his own. 

in vain, alas! will weak philosophy
 prescribe we rule to govern passion by:
 for when a joy of such important weight
 be take out, grief turn the Ballance strait,
 reason but hold the scale, and sit to see,
 the joy remove, if it proportion be:
 so though each think new sorrow shall create,
 t'woue be to what he lose but equal weight,
 and what he lose his grief alone relate. 

for what be obvious to each common eye
 declare more virtue do in secret lie
 which from the darken world be still conceal,
 and to her mourn lord alone reveal,
 though from her orb she give promiscuous light,
 some shorten ray he keep from human sight,
 and only let our dazzle fancy rove,
 to form the virtue of her fruitful love,
 though heaven no offspring from her bed design,
 but bad her live the phoenix of her kind
 her love be fruitful still: for love in the mind. 
her soul be marry to her monarch will,
 which he can scarce declare, she will so soon fulfil,
 desire of please, as the child of love,
 they both, like tender parent, do approve,
 she more of mother fondness may express,
 he seldom seek it, but never love it less. 
have such a bride to Solomon be give,
 he never have wander for his amorous heaven,
 her unexhausted charm have fix his love,
 nor can a change his happiness improve. 

so firm a union nature never make,
 in who we have the sure foundation lay,
 of a most perfect, and immortal bliss,
 till death convince our fancy happiness,
 fond secure of their eternal sway. 
t'our self we promise everlasting day:
 for, while so bright their godlike virtue shine,
 abroad his courage, and her care at home,
 what can we think of such a heavenly pair,
 but they immortal as their action be
 for, till one die, we think that heaven be here

all the poor help weak reason can afford,
 to calm the sigh of her afflict lord,
 be, when each nation shall the news receive,
 as they the loss, so they will divide the grief:
 nay even in louis she must nature stir,
 if not his sorrow, yet at least his fear,
 he dread, that she the fate of France may prove,
 know her death our monarch soul do move,
 who by this loss secure from great harm,
 his foe regardless now may dare to arm,
 and have nought, that more his mind can load,
 he doubt will double all his rage abroad. 

yet hold my muse, thy wander wing retain,
 a mournful thought now lure thou back again,
 when to the restless toil of horrid war
 our king inexorable shall repair,
 who shall he leave, our guardian angel here? 
or, when his hard-fought battle he have win,
 where shall be joyful throw his laurel down? 
who grateful love his conquest now shall crown? 
secure of late we spare our warlike prince,
 before our domestic safety flee from hence,
 who, while her absent hero lead the war,
 teach we the pleasure of obedience here. 

yet let he go, and safe return with spoil,
 our grief, alas! prevent a civil broil,
 whatere abroad, at home it must be peace,
 the woe we feel rebellion can redress,
 we be crush to concord by our misery. 

look down, bright saint from thy aetherial seat,
 and view the pious ruin of thy state,
 assuage the torrent of our monarch woe,
 which over his drown reason seem to flow,
 return the hero part that reign in thou,
 when thou in smile do meet mortality,
 teach he thy early fate, like thou, to bear,
 nor let he woman in his grief appear,
 let happy dream inform his restless mind,
 to what advantage thou have life resign,
 give to his joyful view thy crown of bliss,
 and to his thought restore their wander peace,
 while to his sorrow this relief be give,
 have lose a queen on earth, and gain a friend in heaven. 
