ode to a gentleman upon his travel through Italy.

by the same.

while i with fond officious care
 for you my chord shell prepare,
 and not unmindful frame a humble lay;
 where shall this verse my cynthio find? 
what scene of art now charm your mind? 
say, on what sacred spot of roman ground you stray? 

perhaps you cull each valley bloom,
 to strew over virgil laureled tomb,
 whence oft at midnight echo voice sound;
 for at that hour of silence, there
 the shade of ancient bard repair,
 to join in choral song his hallow urn around:

or wander in the cool shade
 of Sabine bower, where Horace stray,
 and oft repeat in eager thought elate,
 (as round in classic search you trace
 with curious eye the please place)
 "that fount he love, and there beneath that hill he sit." 

how long my rapture breast with you
 great raphael magic stroke to view,
 to who bless hand each charm the grace give! 
whence each fair form with beauty glow,
 like that of Venus, when she rise
 naked in blush charm from ocean hoary wave. 

as oft by rove fancy lead
 to smooth clitumnus bank you tread,
 what awful thought his fable water raise! 
while the low-thoughted swain, who flock
 graze around, from some steep rock
 with vulgar disregard his mazy course survey. 

now through the ruin dome my muse
 your step with eager flight pursue,
 that their cleave pile on tiber plain present,
 among who hollow-winding cell
 forlorn and wild Rome genius dwell,
 his golden sceptre break, and purple mantle rent. 

oft to those mossy moulder wall,
 those cavern dark, and silent hall,
 let i repair by midnight paly fire;
 there muse on empire fall state,
 and frail ambition hapless fate,
 while more than mortal thought the solemn scene inspire. 

what lust of power from the cold north
 can tempt those vandal-robber forth,
 fair Italy, thy vine-clad vale to waste! 
who hand profane, with hostile blade,
 thy story temple dare invade,
 and all thy parian seat of attic be deface. 

they, weep art in fetter bind,
 and gore her breast with many a wound,
 and veil her charm in cloud of thick night;
 sad poesy, much-injured maid,
 they drive to some dim convent shade,
 and quench in gloomy mist her lamp resplendent light. 

there long she weep, to darkness doom,
 until cosmo hand her light relume,
 that once again in lofty Tasso shine;
 since have sweet Spenser catch her fire,
 she breathe once more in Milton lyre,
 and warm the soul divine of Shakespear, fancy son. 

nor she, mild queen, will cease to smile
 on she britannia much-loved isle,
 where these her best, her favourite three be bear,
 while Theron warble graecian strain,
 or polish Dodington remain,
 the droop train of art to cherish and adorn. 
