ode on the rebellion in the year mdccxlv.

by R. Schomberg, m.  d. 

do thou, fair liberty, descend
 to tune my harp, and guide my hand,
 thy sacred sister with thou bring,
 she too shall aid i, as i sing,
 and every briton breast engage
 with well-becoming zeal, and kindle honest rage. 

daughter of royal brunswick line,
 great Anna, more than half divine,
 thou too, the happy theme inspire,
 so shall i strike the golden lyre
 with manly force, and raise my voice
 above a common strain, if thou approve my choice. 

Britannia hail! hail happy isle,
 where joy inhabit, pleasure smile;
 great nurse of hero, seat of charm,
 supreme in art, and first in arm,
 queen of the sea, and distant trade,
 arise, majestic nymph, and show thy awful head. 

ambitious Caesar see thou fair,
 (what will not proud ambition dare!) 
and strait he court thou as his own,
 fond to possess thy splendid throne. 
Albion submit, though not to chain,
 but ever uncontrolled the imperial virgin reign. 

the roman eagle shrink his head,
 before the invite saxon flee;
 aspire nation shake her state,
 (dread consequence of be great)
 wild heptarchy begin her reign,
 till overawe she yield her sceptre to the Dane. 

awhile in ignorance she lie,
 the pagan world obscure her day:
 the goth, a wild barbarian train,
 and savage Vandals, sweep her plain:
 soon of herself through cloud she shine,
 and brighten once again a strong meridian sun

the royal Alfred, great bear,
 Britain to govern and adorn,
 his kingdom honour, subjects good,
 this well preserve, that understand,
 court Astraea to his throne;
 oppression sink disarm, nor more his people groan,

the happy prince nor rest here;
 his ship to different region steer,
 and in britannia lap unlade
 the sweet reward of gainful trade;
 far distant india burn shore
 behold his float strength, and wonder at his power. 

commerce advance! by heaven design
 to polish, and enrich mankind;
 old maja daughter, albion care,
 advance, and breathe thy native air! 
here dwell, and fix thy sweet resort,
 nation shall hither flock, to pay their eager court. 

thou give to hide knowledge birth;
 by thou, the limit of the earth
 great enlarge, show world unknown,
 the frigid and the torrid zone;
 guide and influence by thou,
 we first be teach to learn divine astronomy. 

to thou her silk rich Persia bring,
 the proud magnificence of king,
 arabia spice and india mine,
 peru vast golden womb be thy;
 behold the costly pillar rise,
 and swell thy lofty seat, and temple to the sky. 

seat along the aonian spring,
 no more the vocal sister sing:
 Oxford, the seat of learning now,
 crown with her bay apollo brow;
 again refresh science stream,
 poeonian Phoebus hence, send forth his warm beam. 

next Cambridge rear her awful head,
 whence art from danish arm have flee;
 Virgil and Homer here retire,
 and please her studious son inspire;
 philosophy shine heavenly bright,
 the thicken cloud disperse, and all be wondrous light. 

favour of god, here Newton see
 error obscure nature law;
 he see, and clear the gloomy way,
 and show mankind eternal day:
 he show, and world behold with joy
 labour which distant time nor envy shall destroy. 

innate bright the diamond shine,
 though deep conceal in indian mine;
 the lapidary nice art
 luxuriant flame on every part;
 till then, false jewel we admire,
 behold their tinsel blaze, and artificial fire. 

priest thus with show enslave the mind,
 to show, the human eye incline;
 to papal power our prince bend,
 nor see the error they defend,
 while monkish artifice long
 dazzle implicit world, and lead a bigot throng. 

religion tremble at their crime,
 but please, foresee succeed time;
 succeed time when she alone
 shall govern britain royal throne;
 with undisturbed and downy rest
 baffle the son of Rome, but all her child bless. 

Edward the happy theme begin,
 a glorious and immortal plan! 
sky azure-opening greet his day,
 the reformation point the way;
 by reason and by virtue lead,
 behold she beauteous form, and mark her solemn tread! 

not so imperious mary sway,
 blind zeal again obscure her blaze. 
disgrace, religion mournful stand,
 while persecution smile in blood:
 heaven see, enrage, the horrid deed,
 shorten her tyrant reign, no more she subject bleed. 

Eliza shine serene bright,
 and on her throne reflect light;
 her royal brother will maintain:
 for this, the virgin princess reign,
 reign most supreme wise and great,
 and neighbour realm preserve, and save her sink state. 

when spanish fleet her coast alarm,
 Eliza raise her mighty arm,
 her people darling, she secure,
 smile (of easy conquest sure),
 quell like a Jove their giant rage,
 her thunder burst aloud, nor dare the foe engage. 

as when the sun dart forth his beam,
 whence tremble light refulgent stream,
 and kind gladden for a while,
 alike adorn, and aid our toil,
 a sudden cloud overspread his ray,
 destroy our flatter hope, and dim our golden day:

so when eclipse Eliza reign,
 and heaven recall the saint again,
 too happy to be long admire,
 with she our short-lived bliss retire:
 darkness return, the light disdain
 to shine on a soul series of inglorious reign. 

thou awful shade of pope, inspire,
 and give expression to my lyre! 
lend harmony to every line,
 and teach my verse to flow like thy! 
Maria wondrous charm i will sing,
 will thou, love poet, dictate to the silver string. 

her William see britannia grief,
 and swift he fly to her relief,
 with noble resolution draw
 the sword vindictive in her cause;
 the glorious cause demand his sword,
 religion once again, and liberty restore. 

with horror he behold the state
 oppress beneath the papal weight;
 he kindle not war be fierce flame,
 but like a guardian angel come,
 (britannia best and sure friend)
 to save the fade honour of a groan land. 

the grand event, the bold design,
 the immortal task, Nassau, be thy;
 the british lion, rouse by thou,
 first break his chain, and dare be free;
 the royal line of great Nassau
 be send mankind by heaven to keep the world in awe. 

the dark horizon clear again,
 and shine propitious on his reign;
 fair liberty assume her seat,
 and crush oppression at her foot:
 religion triumph, Albion smile,
 once more the first of state, again the queen of isle. 

inspire by heaven, the wise Nassau
 her rise greatness well foresee
 rise from royal brunswick care,
 Brunswick by senate mark his heir;
 briton rejoice shout applause,
 by he secure our faith, our property, our law. 

but first our powerful realm obey,
 illustrious Anne, thy easy sway. 
check by thy power, insult Gaul
 behold with grief his legion fall:
 they fall, for Malbro' draw the sword,
 pre-eminent in arm, victorious, and adore. 

Gallia behold with treacherous eye
 sophia highborn offspring rise
 to glory, empire, and renown,
 deck with britannia glitter crown:
 again she dare the isle engage,
 and stir intestine war, and raise seditious rage. 

the rancorous hate of France in vain
 threaten mavortian brunswick reign;
 guardian of liberty and peace,
 he bid rebellious discord cease;
 the injure monarch soon forgive,
 and by his nod, again the offend rebel live. 

with distant conquest he extend
 the throne his royal son ascend;
 imperial dignity and grace
 serene smile upon his face:
 Brunswick to martial honour breed,
 govern, by virtue counsel, and by glory lead. 

trade, art, and science, flourish here,
 and bless each fair revolve year;
 gay-smiling plenty reign around,
 and golden harvest load the ground;
 so liberty, and George, and briton shall be crown! 

while Brunswick europe right maintain,
 and fight her cause on flandria plain,
 proud Gallia, treacherous brave,
 call coward treason from her cave,
 though Agincourt and Blenheim tell,
 how all her valour sink, and boast hero fall. 

fame Dettingen still reek with blood,
 where like a god great Brunswick stand;
 triumphant fame on silken wing
 ride smile on before the king;
 like Mars he shake the point spear,
 the gaul retreat, and all their battle shrink with fear. 

tremendous death and horror stride
 close by intrepid William side:
 William, he bleed, and soldier grieve;
 "revenge (they cry) the wound receive"! 
bright Venus mourn her favourite care,
 and quick she bid her nymph the heal drug prepare. 

the cyprian goddess stand confess,
 as when Aeneas' wind she dress:
 her weep nymph around she wait,
 impatient for the prince fate;
 with heal herb, and balmy sweet,
 the dionoean queen the cannon rage defeat. 

who be these base, these dastard foe,
 that dare their country law oppose! 
their life and fortune not their own,
 but give in mercy from the throne:
 do they, ungrateful man, presume
 to act the scheme of France, or play the part of Rome? 

discord and horror stalk along,
 with pale rebellion in the throng;
 Bellona stain the purple field,
 and Mars display his brazen shield;
 William his brother-god appear,
 to curb the traitorous war, and ease britannia fear. 

he come, the hero come, and strait
 conscious rebellion know her fate;
 his troop, with manly rage inspire,
 rush on, by his example fire;
 his name strike terror to the foe,
 precipitate they fly, nor wait the impend blow. 

brave Huske and Hawley strive in vain
 to animate the embattle plain;
 train up in arm, the warrior fly
 from rank to rank, resolve to die,
 or conquer, in their country cause;
 but heaven to Cumberland decree the crown applause. 

hence worthless slave, and wear the chain
 of punic France, and haughty Spain;
 blind by Rome, your ruin court,
 and be your very master sport;
 like Cain roam, of bliss bereave,
 no clime, no country you, no friendly shelter leave. 

shall Gauls insult the wide domain,
 when Neptune view they with disdain? 
shall they with dark invafive scheme
 (the mere result of idle dream)
 threaten britannia guard shore,
 nor dread the angry god, nor fear his cannons roar? 

proud boaster hence, and learn to know,
 our Albion dread no foreign foe;
 her fleet but ask propitious gale,
 but ask, and conquest swell her sail;
 France strike the flag, our colour near,
 whiten her golden flower, and shrink with coward fear. 

briton, unite by their law,
 can never swerve from freedom cause;
 bless in great George, we guard his reign,
 and Gallic insolence disdain! 
well may we guard the imperial throne,
 which every briton voice, and virtue make his own. 

calm as a god, behold he there,
 express his soft paternal care;
 mercy sit mourning on his face,
 to see severe law take place;
 and while rebellious subject die,
 sigh swell his royal breast, and tear his pity eye. 

such Brunswick be who rule our land! 
such be the monarch we defend! 
bless and bless! (a mutual good,
 by briton only understand)
 late may he England sceptre wield,
 protect our law at home, and guard we in the field! 

a long illustrious race of king
 from Frederick and Augusta spring;
 this Brunswick view with joyous eye,
 and know in they he never shall die;
 he see his royal offspring smile,
 the grace of future world, and honour of their isle. 
