the triumph of Isis.

occasion by the forgo poem.

by dr. THOMAS Warton.

on close flower when genial gale diffuse
 the fragrant tribute of refresh dew;
 when chant the milkmaid at her balmy pail,
 and weary reaper whistle over the vale;
 charm by the murmur of the quiver shade,
 over isis willow-fringed bank i stray:
 and calm muse through the twilight way,
 in pensive mood i frame the doric lie. 
when lo! from open cloud, a golden gleam
 pour sudden splendor over the shadowy stream;
 and from the wave arise its guardian queen,
 know by she sweep steal of glossy green;
 while in the coral crown that bind her brow,
 be weave the Delphic laurel verdant bough. 

as the smooth surface of the dimp flood,
 the silver-slippered Isis light tread,
 from her loose hair the drop dew she press,
 and thus my ear in accent mild address. 

no more, my son, the rural reed employ,
 nor trill the tristing strain of empty joy;
 no more thy love-resounding sonnet suit
 to note of pastoral pipe or oaten flute. 
for hark! high-throned on you majestic wall,
 to the dear muse afflict freedom call:
 when freedom call, and Oxford bid thou sing,
 why stay thy hand to strike the sound string? 
while thus, in freedom and in phoebus spite,
 the venal son of slavish cam, unite;
 to shake yond tower, when malice rear her crest,
 shall all my son in silence idle rest? 

still sing, o cam, your favourite freedom cause;
 still boast of freedom, while you break her law:
 to power your song of gratulation pay,
 to court address soft flattery soothe lay. 
what though your gentle mason plaintive verse
 have hang with sweet wreath musaeus hearse;
 what though your vaunt bard ingenuous woe,
 soft as my stream, in tuneful number flow? 
yet strive his muse, by fame or envy lead,
 to tear the laurel from a sister head? —
 misguided youth! with rude unclassic rage
 to blot the beauty of thy white page;
 a rage that sully even thy guiltless lay,
 and blast the vernal bloom of half thy bay. 

let granta boast the patron of her name,
 each pompous fool of fortune and of fame:
 still of preferment let she shine the queen,
 prolific parent of each bow dean:
 be she each prelate of the pamper cheek,
 each courtly chaplain sanctify and sleek;
 still let the drone of her exhaustless hive
 on fat plurality supine thrive:
 still let her senate title slave revere,
 nor dare to know the patriot from the peer;
 for tinseled court their laureled mount despise,
 in star and string superlative wise:
 no long charm by virtue golden lyre,
 who sing of old amid the aonian choir,
 where cam, slow wind through the breezy reed,
 with kindly wave his grove of laurel feed. 

it be we, my son, to deal the sacred bay,
 where honour call, and justice point the way;
 to wear the well-earned wreath which merit bring,
 and snatch a gift beyond the reach of king. 
scorn, and scorn by court, yond muses bower
 still nor enjoy, nor ask the smile of power. 
though wakeful vengeance watch my crystal spring. 
though persecution wave her iron wing,
 and over yond spiry temple as she fly,
 "these destine seat be mine," exult cry;
 on Isis still each gift of fortune wait,
 still peace and plenty deck my beauteous gate. 
see science walk with fresh chaplet crown;
 with song of joy my festal grove resound;
 my muse divine still keep her wonted state,
 the front erect, and high majestic gait:
 green as of old, each olived portal smile,
 and still the grace build my parian pile:
 my gothic spire in ancient grandeur rise,
 and dare with wonted pride to rush into the sky;

ah! shall thou fall (forbid it heavenly power!) 
dash into dust with all thy cloud-captain tower;
 who but will mourn to british virtue dear,
 what patriot can refuse the manly tear! 
what british Marius can refrain to weep
 over mighty Carthage fall, a prostrate heap! 

even late when radcliffe delegate train
 auspicious shine in isis happy plain;
 when yond proud dome, fair learning ample shrine;
 beneath its attic roof receive the nine;
 mute be the voice of joy and loud applause,
 to Radcliffe due, and isis honour cause? 
what free-born crowd adorn the festive day,
 nor blush to wear my tributary bay! 
how each brave breast with honest ardour heave,
 when sheldon fane the patriot band receive;
 while, as we loud hail the choose few,
 Rome awful senate rush upon our view! 

o may the day in late annal shine,
 that make a Beaufort, and a Harley mine:
 then bid they leave the lofty scene awhile,
 the pomp of guiltless state, the patriot toil,
 for bleed albion aid the sage design,
 to hold short dalliance with the tuneful nine. 
then music leave her golden sphere on high,
 and bear each strain of triumph from the sky:
 swell the full song, and to my chief around
 pour the full paean of mellifluous sound,
 my naiad blythe the float accent catch,
 and listen dance beneath their pearly grot:
 in gentle eddy play my wanton wave,
 and all my reed their soft whisper give;
 each lie with bright green adorn my bower,
 and breathe a fresh fragrance on my flower. 

but lo! at once the swell concert cease,
 and crowd theatre be hush in peace,
 see, on yond sage how all attentive stand,
 to catch his dart eye, and wave hand. 
hark! he begin, with all a tully art
 to pour the dictate of a Cato heart. 
skilled to pronounce what noble thought inspire,
 he blend the speaker with the patriot fire;
 bold to conceive, nor timorous to conceal,
 what briton dare to think, he dare to tell. 
it be he alike the ear and eye to charm,
 to win with action, and with sense to warm;
 untaught in flowery diction to dispense
 the lull sound of sweet impertinence;
 in frown or smile he gain a equal prize,
 nor mean fear to fall, not creep to rise;
 bid happy day to Albion be restore,
 bid ancient justice rear her radiant sword;
 from i, as from my country, win applause,
 and make a oxford a britannia cause. 

while arm like these my steadfast sage wield,
 while i be truth be impenetrable shield;
 say, shall the puny champion fond dare
 to wage with force like this, scholastic war? 
still vain scribble on with pert pretence,
 with all the rage of pedant impotence? 
say, shall i suffer this domestic pest,
 this parricide that wound a mother breast? 

thus in the stately ship that long have bear
 britain victorious cross from shore to shore,
 by chance, beneath she close sequester cell,
 some low-born worm, a lurk mischief dwell;
 eat his blind way, and saps with secret toil
 the deep foundation of the watery pile. 
in vain the forest lend its stately pride,
 rear her tall mast, and frame her knotty side;
 in vain the thunder martial rage she stand,
 with each fierce conflict of the stormy flood;
 more sure the reptile little art devour,
 than wave, or war, or eurus wintery power. 

you venerable bower, you seat sublime,
 clad in the mossy vest of fleet time;
 you stately pile of old munificence,
 at once the pride of learning and defence,
 where ancient piety, a matron hoar,
 still seem to keep the hospitable door;
 you cloister pale, that lengthen to the sight,
 still step by step to muse mild invite;
 you high arch walk, where oft the bard have catch
 the glow sentiment, the lofty thought;
 you temple dim, where pious duty pay
 her holy hymn of ever-echoing praise;
 lo! your love Isis, from the border vale,
 with all a mother fondness bid you hail! —
 hail, Oxford, hail! of all that be good and great,
 of all that be fair, the guardian and the seat;
 nurse of each brave pursuit, each generous aim,
 by truth exalt to the throne of fame! 
like Greece in science and in liberty,
 as Athens learn, as Lacedaemon free! 

even now, confess to my adore eye,
 in awful rank thy sacred son arise;
 with every various flower their temple wreathe,
 that in thy garden green its fragrance breathe. 
tune to knightly tale his british reed,
 thy crowd bard immortal Chaucer lead:
 his hoary head overlook the gaze choir,
 and beam on all around celestial fire:
 with graceful step see ADDISON advance,
 the sweet child of attic elegance:
 to all, but his belove embrace, deny,
 see Locke lead reason, his majestic bride:
 see sacred Hammond, as he tread the field,
 with godlike arm uprear his heavenly shield. 

all who, beneath the shade of gentle peace,
 best plan the labour of domestic ease;
 who teach with truth, or with persuasion move;
 who soothe with number, or with sense improve;
 who tell the power of reason, or refine,
 all, all that strengthen or adorn the mind;
 each priest of health, who mix the balmy bowl,
 to rear frail man, and stay the fieeting soul;
 all crowd around, and echo to the sky,
 hail, Oxford, hail! with filial transport cry. 

and see you solemn band! with virtuous aim,
 it be they in thought the glorious deed to frame:
 with pious plan each muse feature glow,
 and well-weighed counsel mark their meaning brow:
 "lo! these the leader of thy patriot line,"
 Hamden and Hooker, Hyde and Sidney shine. 
these from thy source the fire of freedom catch:
 how well thy son by their example teach! 
while in each breast the hereditary flame
 still blaze, unextinguished and the same! 

nor all the toil of thoughtful peace engage,
 it be thy to form the hero as the sage. 
i see the sable-suited prince advance
 with lily crown, the spoil of bleed France,
 Edward — the muse in you hallow shade
 bind on his tender thigh the martial blade:
 bid he the steel for british freedom draw,
 and Oxford teach the deed that Cressy see. 

and see, great father of the laureate band,
 the british king before i seem to stand. 
he by my plenty-crowned scene beguile,
 and genial influence of my season mild,
 hither of yore (forlorn, forget maid)
 the muse in prattle infancy convey;
 from gothic rage the helpless virgin bear,
 and fix her cradle on my friendly shore:
 soon grow the maid beneath his foster hand,
 soon pour her blessing over the enlighten land. 
though rude the dome, and humble the retreat,
 where first his pious care ordain her seat,
 lo! now on high she dwell in attic bower,
 and proud lift to heaven she hundred tower. 
he first fair learning and britannia cause
 adorn with manner, and advance with law:
 he bid relent the briton savage heart,
 and form his soul to social scene of art,
 wise and best of king! — with ravish gaze
 elate the long procession he survey:
 joyful he smile to find, that not in vain
 he plan the rudiment of learning reign:
 himself he mark in each ingenuous breast,
 with all the founder in the race express:
 with rapture view, fair freedom still survive
 in you bright dome (ill-fated fugitive)
 (such see, as when the goddess pour the beam
 unsullied on his ancient diadem)
 well-pleased that in his own pierian seat
 she plume her wing, and rest her weary foot;
 that here at last she take her favourite stand,
 "here deign to linger, ere she leave the land." 
