elegy v.  to a friend sick. write at Rome, 1756. 

it be in this isle, o Wright indulge my lay,
who naval form divide the Tuscan flood,
in the bright dawn of her illustrious day
Rome fix her temple to the heal god.

here stand his altar, here his arm he bare,
and round his mystic staff the serpent twine,
through crowd portal hymn of praise be hear,
and victim bleed, and sacred seer divine.

on every breathe wall, on every round
of column, swell with proportion grace,
its state seat some votive tablet find,
and story wonder dignify the place.

oft from the balmy blessing of repose,
and the cool stillness of the night deep shade,
to light and health the exult votarist rise,
while fancy work with medicine powerful aid.

oft in his dream (no long clog with fear
of some broad torrent, or some headlong steep,
with each dire form imagination wear
when harrass nature sink in turbid sleep)

oft in his dream he see diffusive day
through burst gloom its cheerful beam extend;
on billowy cloud see sportive genii play,
and bright hygeia from her heaven descend.

what marvel then, that man overflow mind
shall wreath-bound column raise, and altar fair,
and grateful offering pay, to power so kind,
though fancy-formed, and creature of the air.

who that have writhe beneath the scourge of pain,
or feel the burden languor of disease,
but will with joy the slight respite gain,
and idolise the hand which lend he ease?

to thou, my friend, unwilling to thou
for truth like these the anxious muse appeal.
can memory answer from affliction free,
or speak the sufferer what, i fear, he feel?

no, let i hope ere this in romely grove
hygeia revel with the bloom spring,
ere this the vocal seat the muse love
with hymn of praise, like paeon temple, ring.

it be not write in the book of fate
that, wander far from albion sea-girt plain,
thy distant friend shall mourn thy short date,
and tell to alien wood and stream his pain.

it be not write. many a year shall roll,
if aught the inspire muse aright presage,
of blameless intercourse from soul to soul,
and friendship well mature from youth to age.
