bride-cake.

how shall the muse in chink rhyme impart
 the warmth of gratitude that fire my heart,
 to thou, my friend, who teach the easy way
 to see my destiny as clear as day! 
nor need i now, with tremble step and slow,
 to yonder church porch in terror go;
 or hail pale Cynthia in the come year,
 when first she be see, and kindly mean to hear
 each love petition, when the kneel maid
 cold ash pour on her fantastic head,
 and there invoke the goddess to unfold
 some scroll of destiny, by fate enrol,
 that name the man, who bounteous they afford,
 to be her lover, husband, fool, or lord;
 nor need the cake of silence now be make,
 and i quite tongue-tied backward go to bed;
 saint Agnes, why such cruel fast impose! 
i ask thou not one secret to disclose;
 nor shall the apple ever be pare again
 to form a letter in my lover name. 
it be do! it be do! the bridal cake declare
 the fix prediction of my happy star! 
fate lighten fancy with her lucid beam,
 and, lo! her shadow glide over my dream, —
 sweet dream inspire by tender nuptial tie,
 how shall i paint they in their lovely dye! 
how tell Myrinda half the joy i feel,
 and all the secret of my dream reveal! 
yet shall my pen the arduous task essay,
 and some faint image to thy mind convey. 

when night dark curtain close day gild scene,
 wrap up in gloom and silent serene;
 calm as when summer-evening gentle fall
 to contemplation give the silent call;
 calm as that heart devoid of lovers care,
 that plague not HYMEN with incessant prayer;
 thus close the eve, in which the fate be kind,
 and show a presage to my wonder mind. 

when every thought of busy day be flee,
 and the ringe cake lie beneath my dream head;
 sweet sleep exert all her magic power,
 and soon convey i to a wellknown bower,
 which when i see, my heart with pleasure thril,
 for there sweet Damon oft my eye behold. 
with joy i start, nor approach too near,
 for love, i find, be close ally to fear;
 then view the beauty of the lovely scene
 where Fortha glide, that sweet meander stream,
 where nature bloom, though far across the Tweed,
 and open her treasure in the scotian mead;
 where truth and valour, simple, yet sublime,
 adorn a hero in the northern clime;
 wrap up in revery of my lovely youth,
 who heart be all softness, emblem fair of truth;
 who mind be as fertile as the teem spring, —
 like autumn rich in every virtuous thing;
 humane as mercy, kind as treasure love;
 say, say, Myrinda, can he fail to move? 
while thus enrapture, see, the youth appear,
 scarce can my telltale eye withhold from tear! 
strange, yet a truth, and gain upon belief,
 that joy excessive hurt as much as grief. 

see, see, he come with eager haste to meet,
 and cast his heart and fortune at my foot! 
hear i, he cry, Belinda, deign to hear
 the unforced dictate of a soul sincere;
 nor shall the tale in flattery garb be dress,
 for love alone direct my captive breast;
 no rhetoric set your happiness to view,
 or draw each prospect in chameleon hue;
 plain be the tale, nor varnish over by art,
 for i will not steal but have thou give thy heart;
 nor do i fancy, even if bless with thou,
 my life thus guard shall from woe be free;
 while misery cling to every mortal here,
 a chain of grief the happy man must wear:
 the gay, enchant by romantic scene,
 plan out life building in their golden dream,
 and vain think the edifice shall stand
 firm as if rear by a immortal hand;
 but, ah! when sorrow blow, and woe descend,
 the fabric fall, and all enchantment end;
 awake to woe his soul have light deem,
 he rail at fate — nor think his idle dream. 
but let we not by folly still the voice
 which reason whisper and direct the choice;
 be not deceive by shadow of a shade,
 elate with praise, or vanity parade;
 through all the maze of my change life,
 be thou my fond companion and my wife;
 in grief, thy sympathy will ease my heart,
 in joy, new pleasure to my soul impart;
 so shall my dear, my love Belinda find
 her every wish re-echo in my mind;
 dispose of i, and over my will command;
 (and here methinks he seize my will hand;)
 suffer this ring, the sweet persuader cry,
 around thy finger, and become my bride,
 in holy bond: — but here away i break,
 ah! foolish i, and tremble thus awake;
 and, when my eye behold Sol radiant gleam,
 the vision vanish — lo! it be all a dream. 
