the african prince, now in ENGLAND, to Zara at his father court,

write in the year mdccxlix.

by dr. Dodd.

prince, my fair, unfortunate great,
 bear to the pompous vassalage of state,
 whenever the public call, be doom to sly
 domestic bliss, and break the private tie. 
fame pay with empty breath the toil they bear,
 and love soft joy be change for glorious care;
 yet conscious virtue, in the silent hour,
 reward the hero with a noble dower. 
for this alone i dare the roar sea,
 yet more, for this i dare to part with thou. 
but while my bosom feel the noble flame,
 still unreproved, it own thy gentle claim. 
though virtue awful form my soul approve,
 it be thy, thy only, Zara, that it love. 
a private lot have make the claim but one,
 the prince alone must love, for virtue, shun. 
ah! why distinguish from the happy crowd,
 to i the bliss of million disallow? 
why be i single for imperial sway,
 since love and duty point a different way? 

fix the dread voyage, and the day decree,
 when, duty victim, love be doom to bleed,
 too well my memory can these scene renew,
 we meet to sigh, to weep our last adieu. 
that conscious palm, beneath who tower shade
 so oft our vow of mutual love be make;
 where hope so oft anticipate joy,
 and plan of future year the best employ;
 that palm be witness to the tear we shed,
 when that fond hope, and all those joy be flee. 
thy tremble lip, with tremble lip, i press,
 and hold thou pant to my pant breast. 
our sorrow, grow too mighty to sustain,
 now snatch we, faint, from the sense of pain. 
together sink in the trance divine,
 i catch thy fleet soul, and give thou mine! 
o! bless oblivion of torment care! 
o! why recall to life and to despair? 
the dreadful summons come, to part — and why? 
why not the kind summons but to die? 
to die together be to part no more,
 to land in safety on some peaceful shore,
 where love be the business of immortal life,
 and happy spirit only guess at strife. 
 "if in some distant land my prince shall find
" some nymph more fair, you cry, as Zara kind "—
 mysterious doubt! which can at once impart
 relief to i, and anguish to thy heart. 
still let i triumph in the fear express,
 the voice of love that whisper in thy breast;
 nor call i cruel, for my truth shall prove
 it be but the vain anxiety of love. 

tear from thy fond embrace, the strand i gain,
 where mourning friend inflict superfluous pain;
 my father there his struggle sigh suppress,
 and in dumb anguish clasp i to his breast,
 then seek, conceal the conflict of his mind,
 to give the fortitude he can not find;
 each life-taught precept kind he renew,
 "thy country be good, say he, be still pursue! 
" if, when the gracious god my son restore,
 "these eye shall sleep in death, to wake no more;
" if then these limb, that now in age decay,
 "shall moulder mix with earth parental clay;
" round my green tomb perform the sacred rite,
 "assume my throne, and let thy yoke be light;
" from land of freedom glorious precept bring,
 "and reign at once a father and a king." 

how vain proud, the arrogant great
 presume to boast a monarch godlike state! 
subject alike, the peasant and the king,
 to life dark ill, and care corrod sting. 
from guilt and fraud, that strike in silence sure,
 no shield can guard we, and no arm secure. 
by these, my fair, subdue, thy prince be lose,
 a naked captive on a barbarous coast. 

nurture in ease, a thousand servant round,
 my want prevent, and my wish crown,
 no painful labour stretch the tedious day,
 on downy foot my moment dance away. 
whereve i look, officious courtier bow,
 whereve i pass, a shout people crowd;
 no fear intrude on the joy i know,
 each man my friend, my lovely mistress you. 
what dreadful change! abandon and alone,
 the shout prince be now a slave unknown;
 to watch his eye, no bend courtier wait,
 no hail crowd proclaim his regal state;
 a slave condemn, with unrewarded toil,
 to turn, from morn to eve, a burn soil. 
faint beneath the sun meridian heat,
 rouse by the scourge, the taunt jest i meet:
 "thanks to thy friend, they cry, who care recall
" a prince to life, in who a nation fall! " 
unwholesome scrap, my strength but half sustain,
 from corner glean, and even by dog disdain;
 at night i mingle with a wretched crew,
 who by long use with woe familiar grow;
 of manner brutish, merciless, and rude,
 they mock my suffering, and my pang renew;
 in groan, not sleep, i pass the weary night,
 and rise to labour with the morning light. 

yet, thus of dignity and ease beguile,
 thus scorn and scourge, insult and revile,
 if heaven with thou my faithful arm have bless,
 and fill with love my interval of rest,
 short though they be, my soul have never know
 one secret wish to glitter on a throne;
 the toilsome day have hear no sigh of i,
 nor stripe, nor scorn, have urge i to repine. 
a monarch, still beyond a monarch bless,
 thy love my diadem, my throne thy breast;
 my courtier, watchful of my look, thy eye,
 shall shine, persuade, and flatter, and advise;
 thy voice my music, and thy arm shall be —
 ah! not the prison of a slave in i! 
can i with infamy content remain,
 and wish thy lovely form to share my chain? 
can this bring ease? forgive the unworthy thought,
 and let the love that sin atone the fault. 
can i, a slave, and hopeless to be free,
 crawl, tame recent from the scourge, to thou? 
thy bloom beauty can these arm embrace? 
my gullty joy enslave a infant race? 
no: rather blast i lightning, whirlwind tear,
 and drive these limb in atom through the air;
 rather than this, o! curse i still with life,
 and let my Zara smile a rival wife:
 be my alone the accumulate woe,
 nor let i propagate my curse below. 

but, from this dreadful scene, with joy i turn;
 to trust in heaven, of i let Zara learn. 
the wretch, the sordid hypocrite, who sell
 his charge, a unsuspecting prince, for gold,
 that justice mark, who eye can never sleep,
 and death, commission, smite he on the deep. 
the generous crew their port in safety gain,
 and tell my mournful tale, nor tell in vain;
 the king, with horror of the atrocious deed,
 in haste command, and the slave be free. 
no more britannia cheek, the blush of shame,
 burns for my wrong, her king restore her fame:
 propitious gale, to freedom happy shore
 waft i triumphant, and the prince restore;
 whatever be great and gay around i shine,
 and all the splendour of a court be i. 
here knowledge too, by piety refine,
 shed a bless radiance over my brighten mind;
 from earth i travel upward to the sky,
 i learn to live, to reign, yet more, to die. 
o! i have tale to tell, of love divine —
 such blissful tiding! they shall soon be thy. 
i long to tell thou, what, amaze, i see,
 what habit, building, trade, and polity! 
how art and nature vie to entertain
 in public show, and mix delight with pain. 
o! Zara, here, a story like my own,
 with mimic skill, in borrow name, be show;
 a indian chief, like i, by fraud betray,
 and partner in his woe a indian maid. 
i can recall the scene, it be pain too great,
 and, if recall, shall shudder to relate. 

to write the wonder here, i strive in vain;
 each word will ask a thousand to explain. 
the time shall come, o! speed the linger hour! 
when zara charm shall lend description power;
 when place beside thou in the cool alcove,
 or through the green savannah as we rove,
 the frequent kiss shall interrupt the tale,
 and look shall speak my sense, though language fail. 
then shall the prodigy, that round i rise,
 fill thy dear bosom with a sweet surprise;
 then all my knowledge to thy faithful heart,
 with danger gain, secure i will impart. 
methinks i see thy change look express
 the alternate sense of pleasure and distress;
 as all the wind of my fate i trace,
 and wing thy fancy swift from place to place. 

yet where, alas! have flatter thought convey
 the ravish lover with his darling maid? 
between we, still unmeasured ocean roll,
 which hostile bark infest, and storm control. 
be calm my bosom, since the unmeasured main,
 and hostile bark, and storm, be God domain:
 he rule resistless, and his power shall guide
 my life in safety over the roar tide;
 shall bless the love that be build on virtue base,
 and spare i to evangelise my race. 
farewell! thy prince still live, and still be free:
 farewell! hope all thing, and remember i. 
