a night-piece.

by the same.

while night in solemn shade invest the pole,
 and calm reflection soothe the pensive soul;
 while reason undisturbed assert her sway,
 and life deceitful colour fade away:
 to thou! all-conscious presence! i devote
 this peaceful interval of sober thought. 
here all my better faculty confine,
 and be this hour of sacred silence thy. 

if by the day illusive scene mislead,
 my err soul from virtue path have stray:
 snare by example, or by passion warm,
 some false delight my giddy sense have charm,
 my calm thought the wretched choice reprove,
 and my best hope be centre in thy love. 
deprive of this, can life one joy afford! 
its utmost boast a vain unmeaning word. 

but ah! how oft my lawless passion rove,
 and break those awful precept i approve! 
pursue the fatal impulse i abhor,
 and violate the virtue i adore! 
oft when thy better spirit guardian care
 warm my fond soul to shun the tempt snare,
 my stubborn will his gentle aid repress. 
and check the rise goodness in my breast,
 mad with vain hope, or urge by false desire,
 still his soft voice, and quench his sacred fire. 

with grief oppress, and prostrate in the dust,
 shall thou condemn, i own the sentence just. 
but oh! thy soft title let i claim,
 and plead my cause by mercy gentle name. 
mercy, that wipe the penitential tear,
 and dissipate the horror of despair:
 from rigorous justice steal the vengeful hour;
 soften the dreadful attribute of power;
 disarm the wrath of a offend god,
 and seal my pardon in a saviour blood. 

all-powerful grace, exert thy gentle sway,
 and teach my rebel passion to obey:
 lest lurk folly with insidious art
 regain my volatile inconstant heart. 
shall every high resolve devotion frame,
 be only lifeless sound and specious name? 
o rather while thy hope and fear control,
 in this still hour each motion of my soul,
 secure its safety by a sudden doom,
 and be the soft retreat of sleep my tomb. 
calm let i slumber in that dark repose,
 till the last morn its orient beam disclose:
 then, when the great archangel potent sound
 shall echo through creation ample round,
 wake from the sleep of death with joy survey
 the open splendor of eternal day. 
