Laura: or, the complaint.

a elegy.

by JAMES Marriott, l. l.  d. 

you grove, with venerable moss array,
 that over yond cavern stretch your pendent shade,
 where sacred silence lull the rural vale,
 and love in whisper tell his tender tale,
 you lonely rock, you stream that ever flow,
 still as my tear, and constant as my woe,
 to you behold the wretched Laura fly,
 and haunt those seat from whence her sorrow rise;
 where, lose to love, how often have she stray? 
when the fond lover lead his blush maid,
 when his soft lip, too eloquent his art,
 pour the warm wish, and breathe out all his heart. 

ah once love seat, your please scene be over,
 nor you can charm, since he can love no more;
 though smile your lawn with vernal glory crown,
 in vain gay nature paint the enamel ground;
 while through your solitary path i rove,
 a prey to grief, to sickness, and to love. 
though gentle zephyr fan the bend bower,
 though breathe the incense of your open flower,
 nor open flower, nor gentle zephyr charm,
 nor beauteous scene a grief like mine disarm;
 fade every flower, and languish every sense,
 you have no sweet for fall innocence. 

tear by remorse, sad victim of despair,
 where shall i turn? or where address my prayer? 
far as the morn its early beam display,
 or where the star of evening dart its ray;
 far as wide earth be stretch, or ocean roll,
 where blow the wind, or heaven invest the pole,
 in vain my flutter soul will wing its way;
 stern care pursue, wherever the wretched stray. 

soft god of sleep, who ever-peaceful reign
 lull earth, and heaven, and all the extend main,
 powerful to give the labour heart to rest,
 to wipe the tear, and heal the wound breast,
 say, by what crime offend, fly from i,
 invoke, thy unpropitious deity? 
or doom, on rack of wild fancy tear,
 in dream my agonize soul to mourn? 
why be i oft on angry billow toss,
 now in some wide and dreary desert lose? 
why yet in life infernal torture feel,
 bind by fierce demon to some rapid wheel? 
now seem to climb, while hill on hill arise,
 in vain: or fall in tempest from the sky,
 tread burn plain, or swim in sea of fire,
 just reach the shore, then see the shore retire? 
as oft, dear youth! thy please form appear;
 i stretch my arm, and wake dissolve in tear;
 yet wake fancy all that loss supply,
 and still i view thou with a lover eye;
 entranced, in thought, over all thy charm i gaze,
 see thy bright eye diffuse their soft ray,
 hang on thy hand, and on thy breast recline,
 play with thy lock that waver with the wind,
 joy in thy joy, or in thy sorrow join,
 and on thy lip my spirit mix with thy. 
now over dark wild, or rugged rock we stray,
 love light the gloom, and smooth the dreary way;
 now on soft bank our weary limb repose,
 where every flower of vernal beauty glow;
 but light as air each please vision fly,
 swift as the fun dispel the morning dew;
 while with the day return the sense of woe,
 we wake more wretched when the cheat we know. 

imagination! mistress of the soul,
 what power unseen the active mind controul? 
and fill the wake thought, or busy sleep? 
when not a breeze disturb the tranquil deep,
 nor lofty pine through all the forest move,
 why stir the motion of resistless love? 

urge by the golden morn, the night recede,
 and year to year in changeful course succeed;
 nor night, nor morn, nor year to i restore
 the peace which laura heart possess before;
 involve in cloud one darksome scene i view;
 bleed the same wound, and all my pain renew. 

o boast of laura long-forgotten praise! 
past be the triumph of my happy day,
 when place supreme on beauty radiant throne,
 i see with conscious pride each heart my own;
 wherever i turn, a thousand nymph admire;
 whenever i smile, a thousand swain expire:
 i speak, it be music dwell upon my tongue;
 i move a goddess, and a angel sing. 
my careless step in joy be teach to rove;
 each voice be flattery, and each look be love;
 but beauty power, too mighty long to last,
 flee on the wing of rapid time be past. 

as some proud vessel to the prosperous gale
 her streamer wave, and spread the silken sail,
 while silver oar to flute soft breathe sweep
 with measure stroke the scarce heave deep,
 but soon tempestuous cloud the scene deform,
 and the loud surge remurmur to the storm;
 thus big with hope, from dark suspicion free,
 i sail with transport on life summer sea;
 the gay attendant of my happy state,
 the smile, the grace round be see to wait,
 and all the moment, as they swift fly,
 shower down soft joy, and pleasure ever new. 
how change this fleet image of a day? 
how set in awful gloom the evening ray? 
while, fix on earth her eye in sad suspense,
 pour the deep sigh incessant penitence. 

if youthful charm decay with age or pain,
 beauty, thy crowd worshipper how vain! 
why then such crowd of incense round ascend? 
why prostrate monarch at thy altar bend? 
why earth and ocean mighty bound explore
 at once to win thou, and increase thy power? 
let sad example reason dictate aid;
 here see what ruin grief and love have make;
 even love, who live by beauty smile care,
 bask in her eye, and wanton on her breast,
 with cruel force the fatal shaft employ,
 and soon what he most adore destroy. 

how cold i feel life idle current flow,
 where once the dance spirit love to glow! 
no more these eye with youthful rapture shine,
 nor cheek soft blush speak a warmth divine;
 graceful no more amid the festive dance
 my step with easy dignity advance,
 and all the glossy lock, who ringlet spread,
 over my fair neck, the honour of my head,
 cease the neat labour of my hand to know;
 ill suit the care of elegance with woe! 

why do not nature, when she give to charm,
 with unrelenting pride my bosom arm? 
why be my soul its tender pity teach,
 each soft affection, and each generous thought? 
hence spring my sorrow, hence with sigh i prove
 how feeble woman, and how fierce be love. 

in unavailing stream my tear be shed;
 sad laura bliss be with Lorenzo flee. 
for thou, false youth, be every joy resign,
 young health, sweet peace, and innocence of mind;
 be these the constant vow thy tongue profess,
 when first thy arm my yield beauty press? 
thus do thy kiss dispel my empty fear,
 or win voice delight my rapture ear;
 thus swear thy lip, by ocean, earth, and sky;
 by hell dread power, and heaven all-piercing eye? 
yawn not the grave for thou? why sleep the storm
 to blast thy limb, and rend thy perjure form? 
unmoved, o faithless, can thou hear my pain,
 like the proud rock which brave the unwearied main? 
soon the shipwrecked pilot shall appease
 with sigh the howl wind, with tear the sea,
 than laura prayer thy heart unfeeling move,
 o lose to fame, to honour, and to love. 
nurse in dark cavern on some mountain wild
 to cruel manhood grow the dare child,
 no female breast supply thy infant food,
 but tiger growl over their savage brood. 
curse be that fatal hour thy charm be see,
 while yet this mind be guiltless, and serene. 
with thou, false man, i urge my hasty flight,
 and dare the horror of tempestuous night,
 nor fear with thou through plain unknown to rove,
 deaf to the dictate of paternal love. 
in vain for i a parent tear be shed,
 and to the grave descend his hoary head. 

when at my foot entranced my lover lie,
 and pour in tender sigh his soul away,
 fond, foolish heart! to think the tale divine;
 why start not my hand when press in thy? 
too well remembrance paint the fatal hour
 when love, great conqueror, summon all his power;
 when bold groan, your glance flash with fire,
 and your pale lip all tremble with desire;
 back to my heart my blood tumultuous fly,
 from every poor distil the chill dew,
 when shame presage speak each future pain,
 and struggle virtue arm my soul in vain. 
but o let silence all my weakness veil,
 and burn blush only tell the tale. 

ah! faithless man! and thou more wretched maid,
 to guilt, and grief, and misery betray! 
far fly thy lover: to some distant plain
 now cleave his bound bark the peaceful main;
 avenge heaven, that hear the vow he swear,
 bid howl the blacken storm, and thunder roar. 
till wave on wave in tumble mountain roll,
 now sink to hell, and now ascend the pole;
 then on some plank over foam billow bear,
 tremble, his perjure faith the wretch shall mourn,
 but mourn in vain: his vigorous arm shall fail,
 guilt sink he down, and angry heaven prevail;
 no friendly hand to earth his limb convey,
 but dog and vulture tear the bloat prey. 

yet, ah! fond heart! avert, kind heaven, the stroke,
 my heart deny what tremble lip have speak. 
the vary accent real nature prove,
 and only show how wild a thing be love. 
go, much love youth, with every blessing crown,
 and laura wish ever guard thou round. 
i to the silent shade and sad retreat,
 where love be expire flame forget their heat,
 death woo all-powerful: ere he part the clew,
 once more thy Laura bid her love adieu:
 bid health and affluence every bliss afford,
 bid thou be love, be happy, and adore;
 in ease, in mirth, glide each glad hour away;
 no pain to spot thy Fortune cloudless day;
 nor sigh to swell, no tear to flow for i:
 o grant, heaven, all; but grant thou constancy. 

yet from my hand this last address receive,
 this last address be all that hand can give. 
in vain thy bark with spread canvas fly,
 if these sad line shall meet thy conscious eye,
 and, teach with win eloquence to move,
 the wind and water waft the voice of love;
 that voice, o grant what die lip implore,
 ask but one tear from thou; and ask no more. 

then world, farewell; farewell life fond desire,
 false flatter hope, and love torment fire. 
already, death, before my close eye
 thy airy form and glimmer shade arise. 
hark! hear i not for i yonder pass bell
 toll forth, with frequent pause, its sullen knell? 
wait not for i yonder sexton on his spade,
 Blythe whistle over the grave his toil have make? 
say, why in lengthen pomp yonder sable train,
 with measure step, slow, stalk along the plain? 
say, why yonder hearse with fade flower be crown,
 and midnight gale the deepmouthed dirge resound? 
hail, sister worm, and thou my kindred dust,
 secure to you my weary limb i trust. 
dim burn life lamp; o death, thy work complete,
 and give my soul to gain her last retreat. 
such as before the birth of nature sway,
 ere spring light the first great word obey,
 let silence reign — come, fate, exert thy might;
 and darkness wrap i in eternal night. 
