a poem on the inhumanity of the slave-trade.

Bristol, thy heart have throb to glory. — slave,
 even christian slave, have shake their chain, and gaze
 with wonder and amazement on thou. hence
 you grovel soul, who think the term i give,
 of christian slave, a paradox! to you
 i do not turn, but leave you to conception
 narrow; with that be bless, nor dare to stretch
 your shackle soul along the course of freedom. 

yet, Bristol, list! nor deem lactilla soul
 lessen by distance; snatch she rustic thought,
 her crude idea, from their pant state,
 and let they fly in wide expansion; lend
 thy energy, so little understand
 by the rude million, and i will dare the strain
 of heaven-born liberty till nature move
 obedient to her voice. alas! my friend,
 strong rapture die within the soul, while power
 drag on his bleed victim. custom, law,
 you blessing, and you curse of mankind,
 what evil do you cause? we feel enslave,
 yet move in your direction. custom, thou
 will preach up filial piety; thy son
 will groan, and stare with impudence at heaven,
 as if they do abjure the act, where sin
 sit full on inhumanity; the church
 they fill with mouth, vaporous sigh and tear,
 which, like the guileful crocodile, oft fall,
 nor fall, but at the cost of human bliss. 

custom, thou have undo we! lead we far
 from god-like probity, from truth, and heaven. 

but come, you soul who feel for human woe,
 though dress in savage guise! approach, thou son,
 who heart will shudder at a father chain,
 and melt over thy love brother as he lie
 gasp in torment undeserved. oh, sight
 horrid and insupportable! far worse
 than a immediate, a heroic death;
 yet to this sight i summon thou. approach,
 thou slave of avarice, that can see the maid
 weep over her inky sire! spare i, thou god
 of all-indulgent mercy, if i scorn
 this gloomy wretch, and turn my tearful eye
 to more enlighten being. yes, my tear
 shall hang on the green furze, like pear dew
 upon the blossom of the morn. my song
 shall teach sad philomel a loud note,
 when nature swell her woe. over suffering man
 my soul with sorrow bend! then come, you few
 who feel a more than cold, material essence;
 here you may vent your sigh, till the bleak north
 find its adherent aid. — ah, no more! 
the dingy youth come on, sullen in chain;
 he smile on the rough sailor, who aloud
 strike at the spacious heaven, the earth, the sea,
 in breath too blasphemous; yet not to he
 blasphemous, for he dread not either: — lose
 in dear internal imagery, the soul
 of indian luco rise to his eye,
 silent, not inexpressive: the strong beam
 with eager wildness yet drink in the view
 of he too humble home, where he have leave
 his mourn father, and his Incilanda. 

curse on the toil spread by a christian hand
 to rob the indian of his freedom! curse
 on he who from a bend parent steal
 his dear support of age, his darling child;
 perhaps a son, or a more tender daughter,
 who may have close his eyelid, as the spark
 of life gentle retire. oh, thou poor world! 
thou fleet good to individual! see
 how much for thou they care, how wide they open
 their helpless arm to clasp thou; vapour thou! 
more swift than pass wind! thou leave they nought
 amid unreal scene, but a scant grave. 

i know the crafty merchant will oppose
 the plea of nature to my strain, and urge
 his toil be for his child: the soft plea
 dissolve my soul — but when i sell a son,
 thou god of nature, let it be my own! 

behold that christian! see what horrid joy
 light up his moody feature, while he grasp
 the wished-for gold, purchase of human blood! 
away, thou seller of mankind! bring on
 thy daughter to this market! bring thy wife! 
thy age mother, though of little worth,
 with all thy ruddy boy! sell they, thou wretch,
 and swell the price of luco! why that start? 
why gaze as thou will fright i from my challenge
 with look of anguish? be it nature strain
 thy heart-string at the image? yes, my charge
 be full against she, and she rend thy soul,
 while i but strike upon thy pitiless ear,
 fear she right be violate. — speak,
 astound the voice of justice! bid thy tear
 melt the unpitying power, while thus she claim
 the pledge of thy love. oh, throw thy arm
 around thy little one, and loud plead
 thou can not sell thy child. — yet, beware
 lest luco groan be hear; shall that prevail,
 justice will scorn thou in her turn, and hold
 thy act against thy prayer. why clasp, she cry,
 that bloom youth? be it because thou love he? 
why luco be belove: then will thou feel,
 thou selfish christian, for thy private woe,
 yet cause such pang to he that be a father? 
whence come thy right to barter for thy fellow? 
where be thy statute? who the iron pen
 that give thou precedent? give i the seal
 of virtue, or religion, for thy trade,
 and i will never upbraid thou; but if force
 superior, hard brutality alone
 become thy boast, hence to some savage haunt,
 nor claim protection from my social law. 

luco be go; his little brother weep,
 while his fond mother climb the hoary rock
 who point overhang the main. no luco there,
 no sound, save the hoarse billow. on she rove,
 with love, fear, hope, hold alternate rage
 in she too anxious bosom. dreary main! 
thy murmur now be riot, while she stand
 listen to every breeze, wait the step
 of gentle luco. ah, return! return! 
too hapless mother, thy indulgent arm
 shall never clasp thy fetter luco more. 
see Incilanda! artless maid, my soul
 keep pace with thou, and mourn. now over the hill
 she creep, with timid foot, while Sol embrown
 the bosom of the isle, to where she leave
 her faithful lover: here the wellknown cave,
 by nature form amid the rock, endear
 the image of her luco; here his pipe,
 form of the polish cane, neglect lie,
 no more to vibrate; here the useless dart,
 the twang bow, and the fierce panther skin,
 salute the virgin eye. but where be luco? 
he come not down the steep, though he have vow,
 when the sun beam at noon shall sidelong gild
 the cave wide entrance, he will swift descend
 to bless his Incilanda. ten pale moon
 have glide by, since to his generous breast
 he clasp the tender maid, and whisper love. 
oh, mutual sentiment! thou dangerous bliss! 
so exquisite, that heaven have be unjust
 have it bestow less exquisite of ill;
 when thou be hold no more, thy pang be deep,
 thy joy convulsive to the soul; yet all
 be mean to smooth uneven road of life. 

for Incilanda, luco range the wild,
 hold her image to his pant heart;
 for she he strain the bow, for she he strip
 the bird of beauteous plumage; happy hour,
 when with these guiltless trophy he adorn
 the brow of she he love. her gentle breast
 with gratitude be fill, nor know she aught
 of language strong enough to paint her soul,
 or ease the great emotion; while her eye
 pursue the generous luco to the field,
 and glow with rapture at his wish return. 

ah, sweet suspense! betwixt the mingle care
 of friendship, love, and gratitude, so mix,
 that even the soul may cheat herself. — down, down,
 intrude memory! bid thy struggle cease,
 at this soft scene of innate war. what sound
 break on her ear? she, start, whisper "luco." 
be still, fond maid; list to the tardy step
 of leaden-footed woe. a father come,
 but not to seek his son, who from the deck
 have breathe a last adieu: no, he shut out
 the soft, fallacious gleam of hope, and turn
 within upon the mind: horrid and dark
 be his wild, unenlightened power: no ray
 of force philosophy to calm his soul,
 but all the anarchy of wound nature. 

now he arraign his country god, who sit,
 in his bright fancy, far beyond the hill,
 unrivete the chain of slave: his heart
 beat quick with stubborn fury, while he doubt
 their justice to his child. weep old man,
 hate not a christian god, who record hold
 thy injure luco name. fright he start,
 blaspheme the deity, who altar rise
 upon the indian helpless neck, and sink,
 despise comfort, till by grief and age
 his angry spirit be force out. oh, guide,
 you angel-form, this joyless shade to world
 where the poor indian, with the sage, be prove
 the work of a creator. pause not here,
 distract maid! ah, leave the breathless form,
 on who cold cheek thy tear so swift fall,
 too unavailing! on this stone, she cry,
 my luco sit, and to the wander star
 point my eye, while from his gentle tongue
 fall old tradition of his country woe. 
where now shall Incilanda seek he? hence,
 defenceless mourner, ere the dreary night
 wrap thou in add horror. oh, despair,
 how eager thou rend the heart! she pine
 in anguish deep, and sullen: luco form
 pursue she, live in restless thought, and chide
 soft consolation. banish from his arm,
 she seek the cold embrace of death; her soul
 escape in one sad sigh. too hapless maid! 
yet happy far than he thou lov'dst; his tear,
 his sigh, his groan avail not, for they plead
 most weak with a christian. sink, thou wretch,
 who act shall on the cheek of albion son
 throw shame red blush: thou, who have fright far
 those simple wretch from thy god, and teach
 their err mind to mourn hispartial love,
 profuse pour on thou, while they be leave
 neglect to thy mercy. thus deceive,
 how double dark must be their road to death! 

luco be bear around the neighbour isle,
 lose the knowledge of his native shore
 amid the pathless wave; destine to plant
 the sweet luxuriant cane. he strive to please,
 nor once complain, but great smother grief. 
his hand be blister, and his foot be wear,
 till every stroke deal by his mattock give
 keen agony to life; while from his breast
 the sigh arise, burden with the name
 of Incilanda. time inure the youth,
 his limb grow nervous, strain by will toil;
 and resignation, or a calm despair,
 (most useful either) lull he to repose. 

a christian renegade, that from his soul
 abjure the tenet of our school, nor dread
 a future punishment, nor hope for mercy,
 have flee from England, to avoid those law
 which must have make his life a retribution
 to violate justice, and have gain,
 by fawn guile, the confidence (ill place)
 of luco master. over the slave he stand
 with knot whip, lest faint nature shun
 the task too arduous, while his cruel soul,
 unnatural, ever feed, with gross delight,
 upon his suffering. many slave there be,
 but none who can suppress the sigh, and bend,
 so quiet as luco: long he bear
 the stripe, that from his manly bosom draw
 the sanguine stream (too little prize); at length
 hope flee his soul, give her struggle over,
 and he resolve to die. the sun have reach
 his zenith — pause faint, luco stand,
 lean upon his hoe, while memory bring,
 in piteous imagery, his age father,
 his poor fond mother, and his faithful maid:
 the mental group in wild motion set
 fruitless imagination; fury, grief,
 alternate shame, the sense of insult, all
 conspire to aid the inward storm; yet word
 be no relief, he stand in silent woe. 

Gorgon, remorseless christian, see the slave
 stand muse, amid the rank, and, steal soft
 behind the studious luco, strike his cheek
 with a too-heavy whip, that reach his eye,
 make it dark for ever. luco turn,
 in strong agony, and with his hoe
 strike the rude christian on the forehead. pride,
 with hateful malice, seize on gorgon soul,
 by nature fierce; while luco seek the beach,
 and plunge beneath the wave; but near he lie
 a planter barge, who seaman grasp his hair
 drag to life a wretch who wish to die. 

rumour now spread the tale, while Gorgon breath
 envenom, aid her blast: impute crime
 oppose the plea of luco, till he scorn
 even a just defence, and stand prepare. 
the planter, conscious that to fear alone
 they owe their cruel power, resolve to blend
 new torment with the pang of death, and hold
 their victim high in dreadful view, to fright
 the wretched number leave. luco be chain
 to a huge tree, his fellow-slave be range
 to share the horrid sight; fuel be place
 in a increase train, some pace back,
 to kindle slow, and approach the youth,
 with more than native terror. see, it burn! 
he gaze on the grow flame, and call
 for "water, water!" the small boon deny. 
even christian throng each other, to behold
 the different alteration of his face,
 as the hot death approach. (oh, shame, shame
 upon the follower of Jesus! shame
 on he that dare avow a god!) he writhe,
 while down his breast glide the unpitied tear,
 and in their socket strain their scorch ball. 
 "burn, burn i quick! i can die!" he cry:
 "bring fire more close!" the planter heed he not,
 but still prolong luco torture, threat
 their tremble slave around. his lip be dry,
 his sense seem to quiver, ever they quit
 his frame for ever, rally strong, then drive
 from the tremendous conflict. sight no more
 be luco, his parch tongue be ever mute;
 yet in his soul his Incilanda stay,
 till both escape together. turn, my muse,
 from this sad scene; lead bristol mild soul
 to where the solitary spirit rove,
 wrap in the robe of innocence, to shade
 where pity breathe in the gale, dissolve
 the mind, when fancy paint such real woe. 

now speak, you christian (who for gain enslave
 a soul like luco, tear she from joy
 in life short vale; and if there be a hell,
 as you believe, to that you thrust she down,
 a blind, involuntary victim), where
 be your true essence of religion? where
 your proof of righteousness, when you conceal
 the knowledge of the deity from those
 who will adore he fervent? your god
 you rob of worshipper, his altar keep
 unhailed, while drive from the sacred font
 the eager slave, lest he shall hope in Jesus. 

be this your piety? be these your law,
 whereby the glory of the godhead spread
 over barbarous clime? you hypocrite, disown
 the christian name, nor shame its cause: yet where
 shall soul like you find welcome? will the Turk,
 pagan, or wild Arab, open their arm
 to gain such proselyte? no; he that own
 the name of mussulman will start, and shun
 your worse than serpent touch; he free his slave
 who turn to Mahomet. the Spaniard stand
 your bright contrast; he condemn the youth
 for ever to the mine; but ere the wretch
 sink to the deep domain, the hand of faith
 bath his faint temple in the sacred stream,
 bid his spirit hope. briton, do thou
 act up to this? if so, bring on thy slave
 to calv'ry mount, raise high their kindred soul
 to he who die to save they: this alone
 will teach they calm to obey thy rage,
 and deem a life of misery but a day,
 to long eternity. ah, think how soon
 thy head shall on earth dreary pillow lie,
 with thy poor slave, each silent, and unknown
 to his once furious neighbour. think how swift
 the sand of time ebb out, for he and thou. 
why groan that indian youth, in burn chain
 suspend over the beach? the labour sun
 strike from his full meridian on the slave
 who arm be blister by the heat iron,
 which still corrode, seek the bone. what crime
 merit so dire a death? another gasp
 with strong agony, while life decline
 from recent amputation. gracious god!
 why thus in mercy let thy whirlwind sleep
 over a vile race of christian, who profane
 thy glorious attribute? sweep they from earth,
 or check their cruel power: the savage tribe
 be angel when compare to brute like these. 

advance, you christian, and oppose my strain:
 who dare condemn it? prove from law divine,
 from deep philosophy, or social love,

that you derive your privilege. i scorn
 the cry of avarice, or the trade that drain
 a fellow-creature blood: bid commerce plead
 her public good, her nation many want,
 her son throw idle on the beach, forbid
 to seize the image of their god and sell it: —
 i will hear her voice, and virtue hundred tongue
 shall sound against she. have our public good
 fell rapine for its basis? must our want
 find their supply in murder? shall the son
 of commerce shiver stand, if not employ
 worse than the midnight robber? curse fall
 on the destructive system that shall need
 such base support! do England need they? no;
 her law, with prudence, hang the meager thief
 that from his neighbour steal a slender sum,
 though famine drive he on. over he the priest,
 beneath the fatal tree, lament the crime,
 approve the law, and bid he calm die. 
say, do this law, that doom the thief, protect
 the wretch who make another life his prey,
 by hellish force to take it at his will? 
be this a english law, who guidance fail
 when crime be swell to magnitude so vast,
 that justice dare not scan they? or do law
 bid justice a eternal distance keep
 from England great tribunal, when the slave
 call loud on justice only? speak, you few
 who fill britannia senate, and be deem
 the father of your country! boast your law,
 defend the honour of a land so fall,
 that fame from every battlement be fly,
 and heathen start, even at a christian name. 

hail, social love! true soul of order, hail! 
thy soft emanation, pity, grief,
 lively emotion, sudden joy, and pang,
 too. deep for language, be thy own: then rise,
 thou gentle angel! spread thy silken wing
 over drowsy man, breathe in his soul, and give
 her god-like power thy animate force,
 to banish inhumanity. oh, loose
 the fetter of his mind, enlarge his view,
 break down for he the bound of avarice, lift
 his feeble faculty beyond a world
 to which he soon must prove a stranger! spread
 before his ravish eye the vary tint
 of future glory; bid they live to fame,
 who banner wave for ever. thus inspire,
 all that be great, and good, and sweet mild,
 shall fill his noble bosom. he shall melt,
 yea, by thy sympathy unseen, shall feel
 another pang: for the lament maid
 his heart shall heave a sigh; with the old slave
 (who head be bend with sorrow) he shall cast
 his eye back on the joy of youth, and say,
 "thou once can feel, as i do, love be pure bliss;
" parental fondness, and the dear return
 "of filial tenderness be thy, till tear
" from the dissolve scene.  "— oh, social love,
 thou universal good, thou that can fill
 the vacuum of immensity, and live
 in endless void! thou that in motion first
 set the long lazy atom, by thy force
 quick assimilate, and restrain
 by strong attraction; touch the soul of man;
 subdue he; make a fellow-creature woe
 his own by heart-felt sympathy, while wealth
 be make subservient to his soft disease. 

and when thou have to high perfection wrought
 this mighty work, say, "such be bristol soul." 
