the fifteen comfort of a scotch-man.

the first comfort.

be dumb you beggar of the rhyme trade
 geld the loose wit, and let the muse be splay
 charge not the parish with the Bastard phrase
 of balm, elixar, both the india,
 of shrine, saint, sacrilege, and such as these
 expression, common as their mistress.
of she i write, no pen can reach her worth,
 nor find a epithet to set she forth;
 i mean heroic Anne, our gracious queen,
 in war victorious, and in pomp serene;
 the circle of who reign contain all bliss,
 and daily study Scotland happiness.

the second comfort.

now sacred Anne do wear the british crown,
 the church do flourish, and be lofty grow;
 the law be rise from a long, long trance,
 and our unite be a check to France;
 which union even will make our foe baptise
 themselves all convert in our watery eye;
 which we for very joy do weep, to see
 how Anne design to make posterity
 for ever happy, while she be on the throne,
 in make Scot and english both as one.

the third comfort

among the numerous throng, we scots do come,
 to wish the grand support of Christendom
 health, that be the joy of life, and soul of mirth,
 bane of despair, and comfort of our birth:
 may with your year, as clear last and rise,
 as it be ever wind have blast paradise!
wealth! the support of pleasure and the crown,
 the only prop of glory and renown.
may the same virtuous temper, the same fire,
 that never flag too low, nor do mount high,
 inflame your breast, and to it by heaven be send
 that which all seek (but find not) true content.
may all your aim achieve their purpose end,
 then loyal Scotland never will want a friend,
 to be the guardian of their church and state,
 while the rose and thistle do incorporate.

the four comfort.

poor lousy, beggare France, and half-starved Spain,
 dare not presume to appear upon the main;
 for now saint Andrew, and saint George do join,
 upon the ocean they will in glory shine.
who union-colour on the roll sea,
 will show the force of british heraldry:
 thus on that element the scots too fame
 will get, and to though encient scottish name
 will honour add, by have such a fleet
 that dare our foe upon the ocean meet,
 and make they lower their top-sail too at sea,
 as own that the only sovereignty
 thereof be sacred anna lawful right,
 for which her loyal subject too will fight.

the five comfort.

in a protestant succession now the crown
 be fix, and none must mount the british throne,
 but what will the reform faith defend,
 and to the church of England be a friend;
 for by her grandeur we support be,
 while conscience do his enjoy its liberty.
and that which also give our heart content,
 as that two nation have one parliament.

the sixth comfort.

as to our comfort what can more be say?
freedom we have, and intercourse of trade,
 to any port or place the kingdom round;
 beside, all scottish ship that shall be find,
 at sign of this treaty, on the sea,
 of any sort of foreign build, shall be
 as ship of the build of Great-Britain deem:
 so much be Scotland by the queen esteem,
 that her indulgence make we all conspire
 to act, and to comply with her desire.

the seven comfort.

now, now, old Scotland be for ever make,
 since (with the english) in the way of trade,
 we have the same allowance, restitution,
 lawful encouragement, and prohibition.
no article the loyal scots do blame,
 for excise with we, as you, be all the same;
 for seven year we shall be duty-free
 in make salt; and farthermore we see,
 the land-tax will be very easy here,
 the yoke be light for any one to bear.

the eight comfort.

duty on paper stamp we shall not pay,
 nor duty which they do on velome lie;
 and farther to confirm we in our right,
 we shall no duty pay for window-light;
 nay, royal favour still be more enlarge,
 for coal consume at home we shall be charge,
 nor charge with any duty lay on malt,
 so if we will unite, it be all our fault:
 both nation will be one, and we shall be
 to all intent as englishman (sir) free;
 all animosity be lay aside,
 in love and unity we shall take pride,
 and in eternal friendship so dispose
 our self, as to be dreadful to our foe.

the nine comfort.

one british parliament will now be make,
 and we have a equivalent in trade:
 the coin of the unite kingdom too
 be all alike, that all may have their due:
 our weight and measure too must be the same,
 that people may not different measure b lame.

the tenth comfort.

the law concern regulate trade,
 in favour of our constitution make;
 the court of session must the same remain
 as former, in this the present reign;
 all misdemeanour do upon the sea,
 to be subject to the british admiralty.
nay, further to increase our happiness,
 man office for life may still possess;
 and yet to make we happy over again,
 the queen be please, that all the right remain
 of royal scottish Burroughs, as they now
 at present be: what more can she allow?
or we from royal bounty still require,
 since we have all as subject can desire.

the eleventh comfort.

we shall have lord and commons too to sit
 in parliament, wherever the queen think fit,
 who will have all the privilege too,
 that be real to their noble peerage due;
 the same as english peer they will enjoy,
 which treaty will the hope of France destroy
 and that in time we may our breach heal,
 Great-Britain must but use one only seal,
 quarter with those arm as best may sure,
 this union, which make ANNA absolute,
 empress imperial over the bless realm,
 of which she do so wise rule the helm.

the twelve comfort.

all law and statute in each realm, so far
 as to the union they contrary be,
 from and after it they cease, and shall be void,
 that liberty by we may be enjoy.
what can we then of England ask for more,
 no great blessing they can have in store,
 than what be grant, so let we all sit down,
 and drink the health of Anne, who wear the crown,
 and wish her long to reign, that she may be
 a terror to the gallic monarchy.

the thirteenth comfort.

the scottish parliament have do their best,
 that these two kingdom may be double bless;
 upon the english parliament we wait,
 with low submission for to know our fate,
 hope kind heaven will cause they to agree
 to this long wish and hope for unity,
 which sure will prove of such consequence,
 that it will be a thorn in the side of France,
 and make they rue the day that ever we come
 to be a people of one crown, and name:
 for our unite make the frenchman fear,
 some dreadful storm to they approach near.

the fourteenth comfort.

now, now, the scots with England do unite,
 Lewis and Maintenon be in a fright;
 you Spaniard too, your droop kingdom drench
 till tear the flame of purgatory quench:
 but you that can cry, yet will seem to weep
 your hankerchief in holy water steep,
 then virgin mary, and the saint invoke,
 to keep your kingdom from the frenchman yoke.
but if you will still be fool, and will not own
 king Charles, by force we will put on he a crown.

the fifteen comfort.

glory and honour crown great anna name,
 and let her greatness shine with endless fame;
 for make such a union that shall shake
 proud France, and make its haughty monarch quake,
 so while we praise to our sovereign give,
 let we pray that Anne a nestor age may live
