the complaint of the goddess of the glacier

to doctor Darwin. 

while over the alpine cliff i muse stray,
 and gaze on nature, in her charm severe,
 the last soft beam of part day display
 the glacier-goddess, on her crystal sphere. 

her sledgy car, with sparkle frost-work bright,
 over the pellucid ice her snow-bird draw,
 and on her fleecy robe refract light
 the full-blown rose vermeil colour throw. 

slow as she graceful lift her misty veil,
 indignant grief her mournful glance express,
 and thus, in falter tone, the vestal pale
 breathe the deep sorrow of her beat breast:

 "native of that green isle, where Darwin wave
 his magic wand over nature vernal reign,
 her airy essence and her central cave,
 her fire electric, and her nereid train:

 "go, tell he, stranger, have his muse explore
 my realm, new marvel have enchain her eye;
 go, tell he, in my sunless fane be store
 treasure no vulgar glance shall ever descry. 

 "you nymph of fire! around your glow brow
 what lavish wreath your poet love to twine;
 know, partial bard! philosophy allow
 that one bright chaplet may belong to i! 

 "ah, why a vestal to a 'fiend' transform,
 bid to my steep thy glitter band repair,
 direct with cruel aim their arrowy storm,
 and chain a goddess to the 'northern bear?' 

 "stay thy rash step! my potent hand impel
 the rush avalanche to gulf below! 
i can transfix thou, numb, in icy cell,
 or shroud thou in unfathomed fold of snow! 

 "come not in hostile garb! — with soft art,
 with dear power, my yield spirit seize;
 wake thy rich lyre, and melt my gelid heart
 with incense sweet than the western breeze. 

 "thy muse shall mount my lammer-geyer's wing,
 pass over my untrod height, with dare course,
 while the cold genii of each new-born spring
 for thou unlock the rivers viewless source. 

 "for thou my sylph, with tender care, shall mark
 the pointless pathway of the secret rill,
 and light with lambent ray the cavern dark,
 where chemic nature mystic wealth distil. 

 "for thou my sylph in distant land shall trace,
 where, far diffuse, my vivify power
 awake, ungrateful bard, in blush grace,
 to life and love, awake thy wed flower. 

 "for thou — but ah, my pensive form he fly
 for nymph of golden lock and florid hue! 
no charm have snow-white tint, or azure eye —"
 she weep, and, fold in a cloud, withdraw. 
