the pleasure of contemplation.

by miss Whately.

queen of the halycon breast, and heavenward eye,
 sweet contemplation, with thy ray benign
 light my lone passage through this vale of life,
 and raise the siege of care! this silent hour
 to thou be sacred, when the star of eve,
 like dian virgin tremble ere they bathe,
 shoot over the hesperian wave its quiver ray. 

all nature join to fill my labour breast
 with high sensation: awful silence reign
 above, around; the sound wind no more
 wild through the fluctuate forest fly
 with gust impetuous; zephyr scarce breathe
 upon the tremble foliage; flock, and herd,
 retire beneath the friendly shade repose
 fan by oblivion wing. ha! be not this,
 this the dread hour, as ancient fable tell,
 when flit spirit from their prison break,
 by moon-light glide along the dusky vale,
 the solemn church-yard, or the dreary grove;
 fond to revisit their once love abode,
 and view each friendly scene of past delight? 

satyr, and fawn, that in sequester wood,
 and deep-embowering shade delight to dwell;
 quit their cave, where in the reign of day
 they sleep in silence, over the daisy green
 pursue their gambol, and with printless foot
 chase the fleet shadow over the wave plain. 

dryad, and naiad, from each spring and grove,
 trip blithsome over the lawn; or, near the side
 of mossy fountain, sport in cynthia beam. 

the fairy elf, attendant on their queen,
 with light step bind along the velvet mead,
 and leave the green impression of their dance
 in ring mysterious to the pass swain;
 while the pellucid glowworm kind lend
 her silver lamp to light the festive scene. 

from yond majestic pile, in ruin great,
 who lofty tower once on approach foe
 look stern defiance, the sad bird of night
 in mournful accent to the moon complain:
 those tower with venerable ivy crown,
 and moulder into ruin, yield no more
 a safe retirement to the hostile band;
 but there the lonely bat, that shun the day,
 dwell in dull solitude; and scream thence
 wheel the night raven shrill, with hideous note
 portend death to the deject swain. 

each plant and floweret bathe in evening dew,
 exhale refresh sweet: from the smooth lake,
 on who still bosom sleep the tall tree shade,
 the moon soft ray reflect mild shine. 

now tower fancy take her airy flight
 without restraint, and leave this earth behind;
 from pole to pole, from world to world she fly;
 rock, sea, nor sky, can interrupt her course. 

be this what man, to thought estrange, miscall
 despondence? this dull melancholy scene? 
to trace the eternal cause through all his work,
 minute and magnificent wise? 
Mark the gradation which through nature plan
 join each to each, and form the vast design? 
and though day glorious guide withdraw his beam
 impartial, cheere other sky and shore;
 rich intellect, that scorn corporeal band,
 with more than midday radiance gild the scene:
 the mind, now rescue from the care of day,
 rove unrestrained through the wide realm of space;
 where (think stupendous!) system infinite,
 in regular confusion teach to move,
 like gem bespangle yond etherial plain. 

you son of pleasure, and you foe to thought,
 who search for bliss in the capacious bowl,
 and blind woo intemperance for joy;
 dare you retire, hold converse with yourself,
 and in the silent hour of darkness court
 kind contemplation with her peaceful train;
 how won the minute dance on downy foot,
 and unperceived the midnight taper waste,
 while intellectual pleasure reign supreme! 

you muse, grace, virtue, heaven-born maid! 
who love in peaceful solitude to dwell
 with meek-eyed innocence, and radiant truth,
 and blush modesty; that fright fly
 the dark intrigue, and midnight masquerade;
 what be this pleasure which inchant mankind? 
it be noise, it be toil, it be frenzy: like the cup
 of Circe, fame of old, who taste it find
 the etherial spark divine to brute transform. 

and now, methinks, i hear the libertine
 with supercilious leer cry, "preach no more
" your musty moral; hence, to desert fly,
 "and in the gloom of solitary cave
" austere dwell: what be life, debar from joy? 
 "crown then the bowl; let music lend her aid,
" and beauty she, to soothe my wayward care. " 

ah! little do he know the nymph he style
 a foe to pleasure; pleasure be not more
 his aim than she; with he she join to blame
 the hermit gloom, and savage penance;
 each social joy approve. oh! without thou,
 fair friendship, life be nothing; without thou,
 the page of fancy will no long charm,
 and solitude disgust even pensive mind. 

nought i condemn but that excess which cloud
 the mental faculty, to soothe the sense:
 let reason, truth, and virtue, guide thy step,
 and every blessing heaven bestow, be thy. 
