to ANNA Matilda. 

and have i strive in vain to move
 thy heart, fair phantom of my love? 
and can thou think it be my design,
 calm to list thy note divine,
 that i responsive lay may send,
 to gain a cold platonic friend? 
far other hope thy verse inspire,
 and all my breast with passion fire. 
for fancy to my mind have give
 thy form, as of the form of heaven —
 have bathe thy lip with vermil dew;
 have touch thy cheek with morning hue! 
and down thy neck have sweet roll
 luxuriant lock of mazy gold. 
yes, i have hope, at least to press,
 and lure thou to the chaste caress;
 catch from thy breath the quiver sigh,
 and meet the murder of thy eye. 
ah! when i deem such joy at hand,
 remorseless come the stern command,
 nor call my wander footstep home,
 but far, and farther bid i roam;
 and then thy vestal note dispense
 the meed of cold indifference! 
curse power! that to myself unknown,
 still turn the heart i love, to stone! 
dwell with the fair who most i prize,
 and scorn my tear, and mock my sigh. 

yes, ANNA! i will hasten forth
 to the bleak region of the north,
 where Erickson, immortal lord! 
pour on the Dane his vengeful sword;
 or where wide over the barbarous plain,
 fierce rurick hold his ancient reign. 
then once more will i trace the Rhine,
 and mark the rhone swift billow shine;
 once more on virgil tomb i will muse,
 and laura gem with evening dew;
 once more rome Via sacra tread,
 and ponder on the mighty dead. 
more eastward then direct my way,
 to thirsty egypt desert stray,
 fix in wonder, to behold
 the pyramid renowned of old;
 fall near one of which, i ween,
 the hieroglyphic Sphinx be see! 
the lion virgin Sphinx, that show
 what time the rich Nile overflow. 
then will i sail the egean tide,
 or seek scamander tuneful side;
 wander the secret grove among,
 where Homer wake the immortal song;
 traverse the nemaean wood,
 mark the spot where Sparta stand;
 or at humble Athens see
 its still remain majesty! —
 yet to indifference ever a foe,
 may beauty other joy bestow;
 her rapturous science i will pursue,
 the science Newton never know. 

now blow the wind with melancholy force,
 and over the Baltic point my weary course;
 loud shout the mariner, the white sail swell —
 ANNA Matilda! fare thou, fare thou well! 
farewell, whoever thou be, and may thou find
 health and repose, and last peace of mind;
 still pour the various verse with fancy clear,
 to thrill the pulse, and charm the attentive ear;
 nor may relentless care thy day destroy,
 but every hope be ripen into joy! 

and o! farewell to distant britain shore,
 which i perhaps be doom to see no more;
 where valour, wisdom, taste, and virtue dwell,
 dear land of liberty, alas! farewell, —
 yet oft, even there, by wild ambition tost,
 the soul best season settle in a frost. 
yet even there, despond, late i know,
 that friendship, foreign-formed, be rare true. 
for they, who most i love, who kindness save
 my shatter bark, when erst the tempest rave:
 at home, even with the common herd can fly,
 gaze on the wound deer, and pass he by! 
nor yet can pride subdue my pang severe,
 but scorn itself evaporate in a tear. 

thou, too, delusive maid! who win charm
 seduce i first from slow wealth beckon arm;
 sweet poetry! my early, false friend,
 here shall my frantic adoration end. 
take back the simple flute thy treachery give,
 take back, and plunge it in oblivion wave,
 so shall its sad note hence no malice raise —
 the bard unknown — forget be the lay. 
but shall, with anna verse, his hapless rhime,
 in future meet the impartial eye of time,
 say, that thy wretched victim long endure,
 pain which be seldom feel, and never cure! 
say, amid the lassitude of hope overthrow,
 matilda strain can comfort he alone. 
yet be the veil mysterious never remove,
 from he the admire, and from she the love,
 and no kind intercourse the song repay,
 but each to each remain — a shadow and a shade. 
