a epistle from the elector of Bavaria to the french king, after the battle of Ramillies.

if yet, great sir, your heart can comfort know,
and the return sigh less frequent flow;
if yet your ear can suffer anna fame,
and bear, without a start, her marlbro name;
if half the slay over wide ramillia spread,
be yet forget, and in your fancy dead:

attend, and be yourself, while i recite
(oh! that i only can of loss write!)
to what a mighty sum our ill amount,
and give a faithful, though a sad account.

let not Bavaria be condemn unheard,
nor, until examine, have his conduct clear;
charge not on i alone that fatal day,
your own commander bear too great a sway.
think! sir, with pity think! what i have lose,
my native realm and my paternal coast,
all that a firm confederate can bestow,
even faith and fame, if you believe the foe.
think what a heavy load overwhelm my breast,
with its own sorrow and with you oppress;
after one battle lose, and country go,
vanquish again, alas! and twice undo.

oh! where shall i begin? what language find
to heal the rage anguish of your mind?
or if you deign a will ear to lend,
oh! where will my disastrous story end?

conquest i often promise, i confess,
and who from such a power can promise less?
there gallia force, and here bavaria shine,
the experience household fill our crowd line;
already have our tower thought overthrow
the belgian host, while we survey our own,
destroy their province with sword and flame,
let in their sea, and sack their Amsterdam;
already have we share the fancy spoil,
(imaginary trophy crown our toil)
batavian standard to this temple give,
in that the british cross doom to wave,
a rural seat assign each captive chief,
in flowery garden to assuage his grief,
and by his art, and first escape prepare,
on marlbro have bestow a double guard.

Paris impatient for the conquer foe,
hasten the tuneful hymn and solemn show;
triumphal chariot for the victor stay,
and finish arch cast a pompous shade;
with nice art the bard have dress their lay,
of nothing fearful but to reach our praise;
but all our hope and expectation cross,
what line have we? what fame have Boileau lose?

your army now, fix on its high design,
rush forth like vernal swarm, and quit their line;
eager the dyle they pass to seek the fight,
judoina field with sudden tent be white,
the foe descend, like torrent from the hill,
and all the neighbour vale tumultuous fill:
prelude cannon tell the approach storm,
and work army take a dreadful form.

soon your victorious arm, and strong force,
tear all the left, and break the belgian horse;
their scatter troop be rally to the fight,
but only rally for a second flight:
as when high heaven on some aspire wood,
which in close rank, and thick order stand,
pour its collect store of vengeance down,
Cedars be see with fir and oak overthrow,
long ravage and interval of waste!
so gore their line appear, and so deface.
the third attack have end all the war,
sink their whole force, and save your future care,
have marlbro, only marlbro, not be there.

as some good genius fly, to save the realm
which, in his absence bear, a plague overwhelm,
through open squadron do the hero haste,
and raise their droop courage as he pass.

amid the rout Belgians he arrive,
turn the pursuit, the faint fight revive,
supply each rank, fill every vacant space,
and bring the battle to its former face.

with tremble heart we see our fate decree;
where marlbro fight how can a foe succeed?
to reach his life our bold warrior strive,
on he the storm with all its thunder drive;
he stem the war, and half encompass round
still clear his way, and still maintain his ground:
amaze i see he in such danger live,
and envy he the death i wish to give.

but how our rise pleasure shall i tell?
the thunder steed, and the great rider, fall:
we thank kind heaven, and hope the victor slay,
but all our hope, and all our thanks be vain:
free from the guilt of any hostile wound
alive he lie, and dreadful on the ground.

as when a lion in the toil be cast,
that uncontrolled have lay the country waste,
the insult hind surround he, who before
flee from his haunt, and tremble at his roar;
so round beset the mighty briton lie,
and vulgar foe attempt the glorious prize.
till fresh battalion to his succour bring,
contend army for the hero fight;
the want steed some friendly hand prepare,
and meet a fatal, but a great, reward:
a glorious death; of his love lord bereave,
the pious office unperformed he leave.

the rescue chief, by the past danger warm,
our weaken household with new fury storm:
while all around to our admire eye
fresh foe, and undiscovered squadron, rise.
the boast guard that spread your name so far,
and turn wherever they fight the doubtful war,
with heap of slaughter strow the fatal plain,
and do a thousand glorious thing in vain;
break with unequal force such number die,
that i myself rejoice to see they fly.
but oh! how few preserve themselves by flight?
or find a shelter from the approach night?
thousand fall undistinguished in the dark,
and five whole league with wide destruction mark.

scarce at ramillia do the slaughter end,
when the swift victor have approach Ostend;
take in whole state and country in his way,
Brussels, nor Ghent, nor Antwerp gain a day;
within the compass of one circle moon,
the Lis, the demer, and the scheld his own.
what in the foe, and what in William hand,
do for a age the power of France withstand;
though each campaign she crowd nation drain,
and the fat soil with blood of thousand stain;
those fort and province do marlbro gain
in twice three sun, and not a soldier slay;
none can suspend the fortune of their town,
but who their harvest and their country drown;
compel to call (his valour to evade)
the less destructive ocean to their aid.

oh! be our loss to flandria plain confine!
but what a train of ill be still behind!
beyond the Adige Vendome feel the blow,
and Villars now retire without a foe,
the fate of Flanders spread in Spain the flame,
and their new monarch rob of half he fame;
but France shall hear, in some late distant reign,
a unborn Lewis curse ramillia plain.

whither, oh! whither shall Bavaria run?
or where himself, or where the victor shun?
shall i no more with vain ambition roam,
but my own subject rule in peace at home?
thence a abandon fugitive I be drive,
like the first guilty man by angry heaven
from his bless mansion, where the avenge lord
still guard the passage with a brandish sword.
or shall i to brabantia court retire,
and reign over distant province for hire?
shall i with borrow government dispense,
a royal servant and another prince?
these country too (oh my hard fate!) be lose,
and i be banish from a foreign coast;
now may i sight secure of future toil,
of no new country a third battle spoil.

oh, Tallard! once i do thy chain deplore,
but envy now the fate i mourn before;
by bondage bless, protect by the foe,
you live content with one overthrow;
her captive, Britain kind keep away
from the disgrace of the last fatal day.

how do my fall the haughty victor raise,
and join divide nation in his praise;
grateful Germania unknown title frame,
and Churchill write among her sovereign name.
part of her state obey a british lord,
small part! of the great empire he restore.
from the proud Spaniard he extort applause,
and rival with the dutch their great nassaus. 
in every language be his battle know,
the Swede and pole for he, despise their own.
a thousand sect in he their safety place,
and our own saint be thank for our disgrace.
England alone, and that some pleasure give,
envy herself the blessing she receive.

my grief each place renew wherever i go,
and every art contribute to my woe;
ramillia plain each painter pencil yield,
Bavaria fly in all their canvas field:
on i, young poet their rude lay indite,
and on my sorrow practise how to write;
i in their scene with borrow passion rage,
and act a shameful part on every stage.

in flandria will the tale be ever tell,
nor will it grow, with ever tell, old:
the lisp infant will their marlbro raise,
and their new speech grow plain in his praise;
his story will employ their middle year,
and in their late age recall their fear,
while to their child child they relate
the business of a day, their country fate:
then lead they forth, their thought to entertain,
and show the wonder youth ramillia plain;
it be here they fight, the household flee that way,
and this the spot where marlbro prostrate lay.

here they, perhaps, shall add bavaria name,
censure his courage, and his conduct blame:
it be false, it be false, i do not base yield,
i leave indeed, but leave a bloody field:
believe not, future age, never believe
the vile aspersion which these wretch give;
if you too far my injure honour try,
take heed, my ghost, it will, it shall, be nigh,
rise in his face, and give the slave the lie.

why shall the star thus on Britannia smile,
and partial blessing crown the favourite isle?
holland do her for their great founder own;
Britannia give to Portugal a crown:
twice by her queen do proud Iberia fall;
her Edwards and her henry conquer Gaul:
the Swede her arm from late oppression free,
and if he dare oppress, will curb the Swede. 
she, from herself, decide her neighbour fate,
rescue by turn, by turn subdue their state;
in the wide globe no part can nature stretch
beyond her arm, and out of britain reach:
who fear, she ever can have Bavaria see?
such realm, and kingdom, hill, and sea between?
yet there, — oh sad remembrance of my woe!
distant Bavaria do her triumph show.
proud state! must Europe lie at thy command,
no prince without thou rise, without thou stand!
what share? what part be thy of all the spoil?
thy only be the hazard and the toil.
a empire thou have save and all its state,
iberia realm have feel severe fate:
what will thou more? still do thy arm advance?
heaven know what doom thou have reserve for France! 

from who wise care do all the treasure rise,
that slaughter host and shatter fleet supply?
from whence such boundless conquest do she reap,
purchase with all her boast million cheap?

o bless! oh envy queen! that do command
at such a time, in such a happy land;
great in her army and her powerful fleet!
great in her treasure! in her triumph great!
but great still! and what we envy most,
that can a marlbro for her subject boast!

oh, Gallia! from what splendor be thou hurl?
the terror once of all the western world;
thy spread map each year do large grow,
new mountain still do rise, new river flow;
but now surround by thy ancient mound,
do inward shrink from thy new-conquered bound.
why do not nature, far from marlbro worth,
in distant age bring her louis forth?
each uncontrolled have conquer world alone,
happy, for Europe, they together shine.

cease! louis, cease! from war and slaughter cease!
oh! sue at last, it be time to sue, for peace!
urge not too far your twice unhappy fate,
nor marlbro strong arm confess too late:
who never camp nor rough encounter see,
can no just image of the hero draw:
he must, alas! that marlbro true know,
face he in battle, and whole army lose.
believe i, sir, on my unwilling breast,
fate have his virtue one by one impress:
with what a force our schellemberg he storm?
and blenheim battle with what conduct form?
how great his vigilance; how quick his thought;
what his contempt of death, ramillia teach.
these nature cool for peace and counsel form,
for battle those with rage and fury warm;
but to her favourite Britain do impart
the cool head at once and warm heart;
so do sicilia lofty mountain show
flame in her bosom, on her head the snow.

my youth with flatter smile do fortune crown,
the more severe on my age to frown?
of pleasure endless store i drink my fill,
officious nature wait on my will;
the austrian rescue, and the Turk overthrow,
Europe and Asia fill with my renown:
blast be all my glory and my fame,
lose be my country and illustrious name;
the title from their present lord be tear,
which my great ancestor so long have bear;
no native honour shall my offspring grace,
the last elector with a numerous race.
half my unhappy subject lose by war,
the rest for a worse fate the victor spare:
be they for this entrust to my care?
this the reward the brave, the faithful share?
my son lament, in distant dungeon throw,
unacted crime, and folly not their own;
but oh! my comfort! — my overflow eye
gush forth with tear, and all my sorrow rise,
while the dear tender exile i bemoan;
oh royal bride! oh daughter of a throne!
not thus i promise when i seek thy bed,
thou do the brave, the great Bavaria wed:
curse be ambition! curse the thirst of power!
and curse that once-loved title emperor!

excuse, great sir, the rave of a mind,
that can so just a cause for sorrow find;
my word too rude may a monarch greet,
for oh! be ever grief like my discreet!
no suffering shall my firm alliance end,
a unsuccessful, but a faithful friend.
