upon the divine attribute.

a pindaric essay.

unity. eternity.

i 

whence spring this glorious frame, or when begin
 thing to exist, they can not always be? 
to what stupendous energy
 shall we ascribe the origin of man? 
that cause, from whence all being else arise,
 must self-existent be alone,
 entire perfect, and but one:
 nor equal, nor superior know;
 two first, in reason, we can never suppose. 
if that, in false opinion, we allow,
 that once there absolute nothing be,
 then nothing can be now:
 for by what instrument, or how
 shall nonexistence to existence pass? 
thus something must from everlasting be,
 or matter, or a deity. 
if matter only uncreate we grant,
 we shall volition, wit, and reason want;
 a agent infinite, and action free,
 whence do volition, whence do reason flow? 
how come we to reflect, design, and know? 
this from a noble nature spring,
 distinct in essence from material thing;
 for thoughtless matter can thought bestow. 
but if we own a god supreme,
 and all perfection possible in he:
 in he do boundless excellence reside,
 power to create, and providence to guide. 
unmake himself, can not begin have,
 but to all substance prime existence give;
 can, what he will destroy, and what he please save. 

power.

ii.

the undesigning hand of giddy chance,
 can never fill with globe of light,
 so beautiful, and so amaze bright,
 the lofty concave of the vast expanse;
 these can proceed from no less power than infinite. 
there be not one atom of this wondrous frame,
 nor essence intellectual, but take
 existence, when the great creator speak,
 and from the common womb of empty nothing come. 
let substance be, he cry, and strait arise
 angelic, and corporeal too,
 all that material nature show,
 and what do thing invisible compose,
 at the same instant spring, and into be fly. 
mount to the convex of the high sphere,
 which draw a mighty circle round
 the interior orb, as their capacious bind,
 there million of new miracle appear;
 there dwell the old son of power immense,
 who first be to perfection wrought,
 first to complete existence bring,
 to who their maker do dispense
 the large portion of create excellence. 
eternal now, not of necessity,
 as if they can not cease to be,
 or be from possible destruction free. 
but on the will of god depend,
 for that, which can begin, can end. 
who, when the low world be make,
 without the least miscarriage, or defect
 by the almighty architect,
 unite adoration pay,
 and with ecstatic gratitude his law obey. 

iii.

philosophy of old, in vain essay
 to tell we, how this mighty frame
 into such beauteous order come;
 but by false reason, false foundation lay,
 she labour hard, but still the more she wrought,
 the more be wilder in the maze of thought. 
sometime she fancy thing to be
 coeval with the deity,
 and in the form, which now they be
 from everlasting age be. 
sometime the casual event
 of atom float in a space immense,
 void of all wisdom, rule, and sense,
 but, by a lucky accident,
 tumble into this scheme of wondrous excellence. 
it be a establish article of old
 chief of the philosophic creed,
 and do in natural production hold,
 that from mere nothing, nothing can proceed:
 material substance never can have rise,
 if some existence have not be before,
 in wisdom infinite, immense in power,
 whatever be make, a maker must suppose,
 as a effect, a cause, that can produce it show. 
nature and art indeed have bound assign,
 and only form to thing, not be, give,
 that, from omnipotence they must receive:
 but the eternal self-existent mind,
 can with a single fiat cause to be
 all, that the wonder eye survey,
 and all, it can see. 
nature may shape a beauteous tree,
 and art a noble palace raise,
 but must not to creative power aspire;
 that, their great god alone can claim,
 as preexisting substance do require;
 so where they nothing find, can nothing frame. 

wisdom.

iv.

matter produce have still a chaos be,
 for jar element engage,
 eternal battle will have wage,
 and fill with endless horror the tumultuous scene;
 if wisdom infinite, for less
 can not the vast prodigious embrio wield,
 or strength complete to labour nature yield,
 have not with actual address
 compose the bellow hurry, and establish peace. 
whatever this visible creation show
 that be lovely, uniform, and bright. 
that gild the morning, or adorn the night,
 to she its eminence and beauty owe. 
by her all creature have their end assign,
 proportion to their nature, and their kind;
 to which they steady advance,
 move by right-reason high command,
 or guide by the secret hand
 of real instinct, not imaginary chance. 
nothing, but man, reject she sacred rule,
 who from the end of their creation fly,
 and deviate into misery;
 as if the liberty to act like fool
 be the chief cause, that heaven make they free. 

providence.

v. 

bold be the wretch, and blasphemous the man,
 who, finite, will attempt to scan
 the work of he that be infinite wise,
 and those he can comprehend, deny;
 as if a space immense be measurable by a span. 
thus the proud sceptic will not own
 that providence the world direct,
 or its affair inspect,
 but leave it to it self alone. 
how do it with almighty grandeur suit,
 to be concern with our impertinence;
 or interpose his power for the defence
 of a poor mortal, or a senseless brute? 
villain can never so successful prove,
 and unmolested in those pleasure live,
 which honour, ease, and affluence give:
 while such as heaven adore, and virtue love,
 and most there care of providence deserve,
 oppress with pain, and ignominy starve. 
what reason can the wise show,
 why murder do unpunished go? 
if the most high, that be just and good,
 intend and govern all below;
 and yet regard not the loud cry of guiltless blood. 
but shall we thing unsearchable deny,
 because our reason can tell we why
 they be allow or act by the deity? 
it be equal above the reach of thought
 to comprehend, how matter shall be bring
 from nothing, as existent be
 from all eternity. 
and yet that matter be, we feel and see,
 nor be it easy to define
 what ligature the soul and body join:
 or how the memory do the impression take
 of thing, and to the mind restore they back. 

vi.

do not the almighty, with immediate care,
 direct and govern this capacious all,
 how soon will thing into confusion fall;
 earthquake the tremble ground will tear,
 and blaze comet rule the trouble air. 
wide inundation with resistless force
 the low province overflow,
 in spite of all that human strength can do,
 to stop a rage sea impetuous course:
 murder and rapine every place will fill,
 and sink virtue stoop to prosperous ill.
 devour pestilence rave,
 and all that part of nature which have breath,
 deliver to the tyranny of death,
 and hurry to the dungeon of the grave,
 if watchful providence be not concern to save. 
let the brave soldier speak, who oft have be
 in dreadful siege, and fierce battle see;
 how he be preserve, when bomb, and bullet fly
 so thick, that scarce one inch of air be free;
 and though he do ten thousand see
 fall at his foot, and in a moment die,
 unhurt retreat, or gain unhurt the victory. 
let the poor shipwrecked sailor show,
 to what invisible protect power
 he do his life and safety owe,
 when the loud storm his well-built vessel tear,
 and half a shatter plank convey he to the shore. 
nay, let the ungrateful sceptic tell we, how
 his tender infancy protection find,
 and helpless childhood be with safety crown,
 if he will no providence allow? 
when he have nothing but his nurse arm
 to guard he from innumerable fatal harm. 
from childhood, how to youth he run
 secure, and from thence to man? 
how in the strength and vigour of his year,
 the feeble bark of life he save,
 amid the fury of tempestuous wave,
 from all the danger he foresee, or fear;
 yet every hour betwixt Scylla and charibdis steer;
 if providence, which can the sea command,
 hold not the rudder with a steady hand? 

omnipresence.

vii.

it be happy for the son of man, that he,
 who all existence out of nothing make,
 support his creature by immediate aid;
 but then this all-intending deity
 must omnipresent be. 
for how shall we, by demonstration, show
 the godhead be this moment here,
 if he be not present every where;
 and always so? 
what be not perceptable by sense, may be
 ten thousand mile remote from i,
 unless his nature be from limitation free. 
in vain we for protection pray;
 for benefit receive high altar raise,
 and offer up our hymn and praise;
 in vain his anger dread, or law obey. 
a absent god from ruin can defend
 no more, than can a absent friend;
 no more be capable to know
 how grateful we make return,
 when the loud music sound, and victim burn,
 than a poor indian slave of Mexico. 
if so, it be equal in vain,
 the prosperous sing, and wretched mourn;
 he can hear the praise, or mitigate the pain. 
but by what be be confine
 the godhead we adore? 
he must have equal, or superior power:
 if equal only, they each other bind;
 so neither god if we define he right,
 for neither infinite:
 but if the other have superior may,
 then he, we worship, can pretend to be
 omnipotent, and free
 from all restraint, and so no deity. 
if god be limit in space, his view,
 his knowledge, power, and wisdom be so too:
 unless we will own that these perfection be
 at all time present every where;
 yet he himself not actual there. 
which to suppose, this strange conclusion bring,
 his essence, and his attribute be different thing. 

immutability.

viii.

as the supreme omniscient mind
 be by no boundary confine,
 so reason must acknowledge he to be
 from possible mutation free;
 for what he be, he be from all eternity. 
change, whether the effect of force, or will,
 must argue imperfection still. 
but imperfection in a deity
 that be absolute perfect, can be:
 who can compel, without his own consent,
 a god to change, that be omnipotent? 
and every alteration without force,
 be for the better, or the worse:
 he that be infinite wise,
 to alter for the worse will never choose,
 that, a depravity of nature show;
 and he, in who all true perfection lie,
 can by change to great excellency rise. 
if god be mutable; which way, or how
 shall we demonstrate, that will please he now,
 which do a thousand year ago? 
and it be impossible to know
 what he forbid, or what he will allow. 
murder, enchantment, lust, and perjury,
 do in the foremost rank of vice stand,
 prohibit by a express command;
 but whether such they still remain to be,
 no argument will positive prove,
 without immediate notice from above;
 if the almighty legislator can
 be change, like his inconstant subject, man
 uncertain thus what to perform, or shun,
 we all intolerable hazard run,
 when a eternal stake be to be lose, or win. 

justice.

ix.

rejoice, you son of piety, and sing
 loud hallelujah to his glorious name,
 who be, and will for ever be the same:
 your grateful incense to his temple bring,
 that from the smoke altar may arise
 cloud of perfume to the imperial sky. 
his promise stand firm to you,
 and endless joy will be bestow,
 as sure, as that there be a god,
 on all who virtue choose, and righteous path pursue. 
nor shall we more his menace distrust,
 for while he be a deity, he must
 (as infinite good) be infinite just. 
but do it with a gracious godhead suit,
 who mercy be his darling attribute,
 to punish crime, that temporary be,
 and those but trivial offence too,
 mere slip of human nature, small and few,
 with everlasting misery? 
this shock the mind, with deep reflection fraught,
 and reason bend beneath the ponderous thought. 
crime take their estimate from guilt, and grow
 more heinous still, the more they do incense
 that god, to who all creature owe
 profound reverence. 
though as to that degree, they raise
 the anger of the merciful most high,
 we have no standard to discern it by,
 but the infliction, he, on the offender lay. 
so that if endless punishment on all
 our unrepented sin must fall,
 none, not the least, can be account small. 
that god, be in perfection just, must be
 allow by all, that own a deity:
 if so, from equity he can swerve,
 nor punish sinner, more than they deserve. 
his will reveal, be both express and clear,
 "you curse of my father, go
"to everlasting woe;
 if everlasting mean eternal here,
 duration absolute without end,
 against which sense some zealous contend,
 that when apply to pain, it only mean,
 they shall ten thousand age last,
 ten thousand more, perhaps, when they be past. 
but not eternal in a literal sense;
 yet own the pleasure of the just remain,
 so long as there be a god exist to reign. 
though none can give a solid reason, why
 the word eternity,
 to heaven and hell indifferent join,
 shall carry sense of a different kind;
 and it be a sad experiment to try. 

goodness.

x. 

but if there be one attribute divine,
 with great lustre than the rest can shine,
 it be goodness, which we every moment see
 the godhead exercise with such delight,
 it seem, it only seem, to be
 the best belove perfection of the deity,
 and more than infinite. 
without that, he can never prove
 a proper object of our praise or love. 
be he not good, he will be no more concern
 to hear the wretched in affliction cry,
 or see the guiltless for the guilty die,
 than Nero, when the flame city burn,
 and weep roman over its ruin mourn. 
eternal justice then will be
 but everlasting cruelty:
 power unrestrained, almighty violence,
 and wisdom unconfined, but craft immense. 
it be goodness constitute he that he be,
 and those
 who will deny he this,
 a god without a deity suppose. 
when the lewd atheist blasphemous swear
 by his tremendous name,
 there be no god, but all be a sham;
 insipid tattle, praise and prayer:
 virtue, pretence; and all the sacred rule
 religion teach, trick to cully fool;
 justice will strike the audacious villain dead,
 but mercy boundless save his guilty head;
 give he protection, and allow he bread. 
do not the sinner, who no danger awe,
 without restraint his infamy pursue,
 rejoice, and glory in it too;
 laugh at the power divine, and ridicule his law:
 labour in vice, his rival to excel,
 that when he be dead, they may their pupil tell
 how witty the fool be damn, how hard he fall. 
yet this vile wretch in safety live,
 blessing in common with the best receive,
 though he be proud to affront the god those blessing give,
 the cheerful sun his influence shed on all,
 have no respect to good or ill;
 and fruitful shower without distinction fall,
 which field with corn, with grass the pasture fill,
 the bounteous hand of heaven bestow
 success and honour many time on those
 who scorn his favourite, and caress his foe. 

xi.

to this good god, who my adventurous pen
 have dare to celebrate
 in lofty pindar strain;
 though with unequal strength to bear the weight
 of such a ponderous theme, so infinite great:
 to this good god, celestial spirit pay,
 with ecstasy divine, incessant praise,
 while on the glory of his face they gaze,
 in the bright region of eternal day. 
to he each rational existence here,
 who breast one spark of gratitude contain,
 in who there be the least remains
 of piety or fear,
 his tribute bring of joyful sacrifice,
 for pardon pray, and for protection fly,
 nay, the inanimate creation give,
 by prompt obedience to his word,
 instinctive honour to their lord;
 and shame the think world, who in rebellion live. 
with heaven and earth then, o my soul, unite,
 and the great god of both, adore, and bless,
 who give thou competence, content and peace,
 the only fountain of sincere delight. 
that from the transitory joy below,
 thou, by a happy exit, may remove
 to those ineffable, above:
 which from the vision of the godhead flow,
 and neither end, decrease, nor interruption know. 
