to the reverend HENRY Goldsmith.

the traveller: or, a prospect of society.

remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow,
 or by the lazy scheld or wander po;
 or onward, where the rude carinthian boor
 against the houseless stranger shut the door;
 or where campania plain forsake lie,
 a weary waste expand to the sky:
 wherever i roam, whatever realm to see,
 my heart untraveled fond turn to thou;
 still to my brother turn, with ceaseless pain,
 or drag at each remove a lengthen chain. 

eternal blessing crown my early friend,
 and round his dwelling guardian saint attend;
 bless be that spot, where cheerful guest retire
 to pause from toil, and trim their evening fire;
 bless that abode, where want and pain repair,
 and every stranger find a ready chair;
 bless be those feast where mirth and peace abound,
 where all the ruddy family around
 laugh at the jest or prank that never fail,
 or sigh with pity at some mournful tale,
 or press the bashful stranger to his food,
 and learn the luxury of do good. 

but i, not destine such delight to share,
 my prime of life in wander spend and care! 
impel, with step unceasing, to pursue
 some fleet good, that mock i with the view;
 that, like the circle bound earth and sky,
 allure from far, yet, as i follow, fly;
 my fortune lead to traverse realm alone,
 and find no spot of all the world my own. 
even now, where alpine solitude ascend,
 i sit i down a pensive hour to spend;
 and, place on high above the storm career,
 look downward where a hundred realm appear;
 lake, forest, city, plain extend wide,
 the pomp of king, the shepherd humble pride. 

when thus creation charm around combine,
 amid the store, shall thankless pride repine? 
say, shall the philosophic mind disdain
 that good, which make each humble bosom vain? 
let school-taught pride dissemble all it can,
 these little thing be great to little man;
 and wise he, who sympathetic mind
 exult in all the good of all mankind. 
you glitter town, with wealth and splendour crown,
 you field, where summer spread profusion round,
 you lake, who vessel catch the busy gale,
 you bend swain, that dress the flowery vale,
 for i your tributary store combine;
 creation tenant, all the world be i. 

as some lone miser visit his store,
 bend at his treasure, count, recount it over;
 hoard after hoard his rise rapture fill,
 yet still he sigh, for hoard be want still:
 thus to my breast alternate passion rise,
 please with each good that heaven to man supply:
 yet oft a sigh prevail, and sorrow fall,
 to see the sum of human bliss so small;
 and oft i wish, amid the scene, to find
 some spot to real happiness consign,
 where my wear soul, each wander hope at rest,
 may gather bliss to see my fellow bless. 

yet, where to find that happy spot below,
 who can direct, when all pretend to know? 
the shudder tenant of the frigid zone
 bold proclaim that happy spot his own,
 extol the treasure of his stormy sea,
 and his long night of revelry and ease;
 the naked savage, pant at the line,
 boast of his golden sand and palmy wine,
 bask in the glare, or stem the tepid wave,
 and thank his god for all the good they give. 
nor less the patriot boast wherever we roam,
 his first, best country, ever be, at home. 

and yet, perhaps, if country we compare,
 and estimate the blessing which they share;
 though patriot flatter, still shall wisdom find
 a equal portion deal to all mankind,
 as different good, by art or nature give
 to different nation, make their blessing even. 

nature, a mother kind alike to all,
 still grant her bliss at labour earnest call;
 with food as well the peasant be supply
 on idra cliff as arno shelvy side;
 and though the rocky crest summit frown,
 these rock, by custom, turn to bed of down. 

from art more various be the blessing send;
 wealth, splendor, honour, liberty, content:
 yet these each other power so strong contest,
 that either seem destructive of the rest. 
hence every state to one love blessing prone,
 conform and model life to that alone. 
each to the favourite happiness attend,
 and spurn the plan that aim at other end;
 until, carry to excess in each domain,
 this favourite good beget peculiar pain. 

but let we try these truth with close eye,
 and trace they through the prospect as it lie:
 here for a while, my proper care resign,
 here let i sit in sorrow for mankind;
 like yond neglect shrub at random cast,
 that shade the steep, and sigh at every blast. 

far to the right, where appennine ascend,
 bright as the summer, Italy extend:
 her upland slope deck the mountain side,
 wood over wood in gay theatric pride;
 while oft some temple moulder top between,
 with venerable grandeur mark the scene. 

can nature bounty satisfy the breast,
 the son of Italy be sure bless. 
whatever fruit in different clime be find,
 that proud rise or humble court the ground;
 whatever bloom in torrid tract appear,
 who bright succession deck the vary year;
 whatever sweet salute the northern sky
 with vernal life that blossom but to die;
 these here disport own the kindred soil,
 nor ask luxuriance from the planter toil;
 while sea-born gale their gelid wing expand
 to winnow fragrance round the smile land. 

but small the bliss that sense alone bestow,
 and sensual bliss be all this nation know. 
in florid beauty grove and field appear,
 man seem the only growth that dwindle here. 
contrast fault through all their manner reign,
 though poor, luxurious; though submissive, vain;
 though grave, yet trifle; zealous, yet untrue;
 and even in penance plan sin anew. 
all evil here contaminate the mind,
 that opulence depart leaf behind;
 for wealth be they; nor far remove the date,
 when commerce proud flourish through the state;
 at her command the palace learn to rise,
 again the long-fallen colomn seek the sky;
 the canvas glow beyond even nature warm,
 the pregnant quarry teem with human form. 
but, more unsteady than the southern gale,
 soon commerce turn on other shore her sail;
 while nought remain of all that riches give,
 but town unmanned, and lord without a slave. 

yet still the loss of wealth be here supply
 by art, the splendid wreck of former pride;
 from these the feeble heart and long-fallen mind
 a easy compensation seem to find. 
here may be see, in bloodless pomp array,
 the pasteboard triumph and the cavalcade;
 procession form for piety and love,
 a mistress or a saint in every grove. 
by sport like these be all their care beguile,
 the sport of child satisfy the child;
 at sport like these, while foreign arm advance,
 in passive ease they leave the world to chance. 

when noble aim have suffer long controul,
 they sink at last, or feeble man the soul;
 while low delight, succeed fast behind,
 in happy meanness occupy the mind:
 as in those dome, where caesar once bear sway,
 deface by time and totter in decay,
 amid the ruin, heedless of the dead,
 the shelter-seeking peasant build his shed,
 and, wonder man can want the large pile,
 exult, and own his cottage with a smile. 

my soul turn from they; turn we to survey
 where rough clime a noble race display,
 where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansion tread,
 and force a churlish soil for scanty bread;
 no product here the barren hill afford,
 but man and steel, the soldier and his sword. 
no vernal bloom their torpid rock array,
 but winter linger chill the lap of may;
 no zephyr fond soothe the mountain breast,
 but meteor glare, and stormy gloom invest. 
yet still, even here, content can spread a charm,
 redress the clime, and all its rage disarm. 
though poor the peasant hut, his feast though small,
 he see his little lot the lot of all;
 see no contiguous palace rear its head
 to shame the meanness of his humble shed;
 no costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal
 to make he loath his vegetable meal;
 but calm, and breed in ignorance and toil,
 each wish contract, fit he to the soil. 
cheerful at morn he wake from short repose,
 breast the keen air, and carol as he go;
 with patient angle troll the finny deep,
 or drive his venturous plough-share to the steep;
 or seek the den where snow-track mark the way,
 and drag the struggle savage into day. 
at night return, every labour speed,
 he sit he down, the monarch of a shed;
 smile by his cheerful fire, and round survey
 his child look, that brighten at the blaze;
 while his love partner, boastful of her hoard,
 display the clean platter on the board:
 and haply too some pilgrim, thither lead,
 with many a tale repay the nightly bed. 

thus every good his native wild impart,
 imprint the patriot passion on his heart;
 and even those hill that round his mansion rise
 enhance the bliss his scanty fund supply. 
dear be that shed to which his soul conform,
 and dear that hill which lift he to the storm;
 and as a babe, when scare sound molest,
 cling close and close to the mother breast,
 so the loud torrent, and the whirlwind roar,
 but bind he to his native mountain more. 

these be the charm to barren state assign,
 their want be few, their wish all confine. 
yet let they only share the praise due,
 if few their want, their pleasure be but few;
 since every want that stimulate the breast,
 become a source of pleasure when redress. 
hence from such land each please science fly,
 that first excite desire, and then supply;
 unknown to they, when sensual pleasure cloy,
 to fill the languid pause with fine joy;
 unknown those power that raise the soul to flame,
 catch every nerve, and vibrate through the frame. 
their level life be but a smoulder fire,
 nor quench by want, nor fan by strong desire;
 unfit for rapture, or, if rapture cheer
 on some high festival of once a year,
 in wild excess the vulgar breast take fire,
 until, bury in debauch, the bliss expire. 

but not their joy alone thus coarse flow;
 their moral, like their pleasure, be but low:
 for, as refinement stop, from sire to son,
 unaltered, unimproved, their manner run;
 and love and friendship fine point dart
 fall blunt from each indurate heart:
 some stern virtue over the mountain breast
 may sit, like falcon cower on the nest,
 but all the gentle moral, such as play
 through life be more culture walk, and charm our way,
 these far disperse, on timorous pinion fly,
 to sport and flutter in a kind sky. 

to kind sky, where gentle manner reign,
 we turn; and France display her bright domain. 
gay sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
 please with thyself, who all the world can please,
 how often have i lead thy sportive choir,
 with tuneless pipe, beside the murmur Loire! 
where shade elm along the margin grow,
 and freshen from the wave the zephyr fly;
 and haply, though my harsh touch falter still,
 but mock all tune, and mar the dancer skill;
 yet will the village praise my wondrous power,
 and dance, forgetful of the noontide hour. 
alike all age. dame of ancient day
 have lead their child through the mirthful maze,
 and the gay grandsire, skill in gestic lore,
 have frisk beneath the burden of threescore. 

so bright a life these thoughtless realm display;
 thus idle busy roll their world away:
 they be those art that mind to mind endear,
 for honour form the social temper here. 
honour, that praise which real merit gain,
 or even imaginary worth obtain,
 here pass current; pay from hand to hand,
 it shift in splendid traffic round the land:
 from court to camp, to cottage it stray,
 and all be teach a avarice of praise;
 they please, be please, they give to get esteem,
 until, seem bless, they grow to what they seem. 

but while this soft art their bliss supply,
 it give their folly also room to rise;
 for praise too dear love or warm seek,
 enfeeble all internal strength of thought:
 and the weak soul, within itself unblest,
 lean for all pleasure on another breast. 
hence ostentation here, with tawdry art,
 pant for the vulgar praise which fool impart;
 here vanity assume her pert grimace,
 and trim her robe of frieze with copper lace;
 here beggar pride defraud her daily cheer,
 to boast one splendid banquet once a year;
 the mind still turn where shift fashion draw,
 nor weigh the solid worth of self-applause. 

to man of other mind my fancy fly,
 embosomed in the deep where holland lie;
 methinks her patient son before i stand,
 where the broad ocean lean against the land,
 and, sedulous to stop the come tide,
 lift the tall rampire artificial pride;
 onward methinks, and diligent slow,
 the firm connect bulwark seem to go;
 spread its long arm amid the watery roar,
 scoop out a empire, and usurp the shore:
 while the pent ocean rise over the pile,
 see a amphibious world beneath he smile;
 the slow canal, the yellow-blossomed vale,
 the willow-tufted bank, the glide sail,
 the crowd mart, the cultivate plain,
 a new creation rescue from his reign. 

thus, while around the wave-subjected soil
 impel the native to repeat toil,
 industrious habit in each bosom reign,
 and industry beget a love of gain. 
hence all the good from opulence that spring,
 with all those ill superfluous treasure bring,
 be here display. their much love wealth impart
 convenience, plenty, elegance, and art;
 but view they close, craft and fraud appear,
 even liberty itself be barter here. 
at gold superior charm all freedom fly,
 the needy sell it, and the rich man buy;
 a land of tyrant, and a den of slave,
 here wretch seek dishonourable grave,
 and calm bend, to servitude conform,
 dull as their lake that sleep beneath the storm. 

heaven! how unlike their belgic sire of old! 
rough, poor, content, ungovernable bold;
 war in each breast, and freedom on each brow;
 how much unlike the son of Britain now! 

fire at the sound, my genius spread her wing,
 and fly where Britain court the western spring;
 where lawn extend that scorn arcadian pride,
 and bright stream than fame hydaspis glide. 
there all around the gentle breeze stray,
 there gentle music melt on every spray;
 creation mild charm be there combine,
 extreme be only in the master mind. 
stern over each bosom reason hold her state,
 with dare aim irregular great;
 pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
 i see the lord of human kind pass by,
 intent on high design, a thoughtful band,
 by form unfashioned, fresh from nature hand;
 fierce in their native hardiness of soul,
 true to imagine right, above controul,
 while even the peasant boast these right to scan,
 and learn to venerate himself as man. 

thy, freedom, thy the blessing picture here,
 thy be those charm that dazzle and endear;
 too bless, indeed, be such without alloy,
 but, foster even by freedom, ill annoy:
 that independence briton prize too high,
 keep man from man, and break the social tie;
 the self-dependent lordling stand alone,
 all kindred claim that soften life unknown:
 here by the bond of nature feeble hold,
 mind combat mind, repel and repel;
 ferment arise, imprison faction roar,
 repress ambition struggle round her shore,
 while overwrought, the general system feel
 its motion stop, or frenzy fire the wheel. 

nor this the worst. as social bond decay,
 as duty, love, and honour fail to sway,
 fictitious bond, the bond of wealth and law,
 still gather strength and force unwilling awe. 
hence all obedience bow to these alone,
 and talent sink, and merit weep unknown;
 till time may come, when strip of all her charm,
 that land of scholar, and that nurse of arm,
 where noble stem transmit the patriot claim,
 and monarch toil, and poet pant for fame,
 one sink of level avarice shall lie,
 and scholar, soldier, king, unhonoured die. 

yet think not, thus when freedom ill i state,
 i mean to flatter king, or court the great;
 you power of truth that bid my soul aspire,
 far from my bosom drive the low desire! 
and thou, fair freedom, teach alike to feel
 the rabble rage, and tyrant angry steel;
 thou transitory flower, alike undo
 by cold contempt, or favour foster sun,
 still may thy bloom the changeful clime endure,
 i only will repress they to secure:
 for just experience tell in every soil,
 that those who think must govern those that toil;
 and all that freedom high aim can reach,
 be but to lay proportion load on each;
 much on the low, the rest, as rank supply,
 shall in columnar diminution rise;
 while, shall one order disproportioned grow,
 its double weight must ruin all below. 
o then how blind to all that truth require,
 who think it freedom when a part aspire! 
calm be my soul, nor apt to rise in arm,
 except when fast approach danger warm:
 but when contend chief blockade the throne,
 contract regal power to stretch their own;
 when i behold a factious band agree
 to call it freedom when themselves be free;
 each wanton judge new penal statute draw,
 law grind the poor, and rich man rule the law;
 the wealth of clime, where savage nation roam,
 pillage from slave to purchase slave at home;
 fear, pity, justice, indignation start,
 tear off reserve, and bare my swell heart;
 until half a patriot, half a coward grow,
 i fly from petty tyrant to the throne. 

yes, brother, curse with i that baleful hour,
 when first ambition strike at regal power;
 and thus pollute honour in its source,
 give wealth to sway the mind with double force. 
have we not see, round britain people shore,
 her useful son exchange for useless over? 
see all her triumph but destruction haste,
 like flare taper brighten as they waste;
 see opulence, her grandeur to maintain,
 lead stern depopulation in her train,
 and, over field where scatter hamlet rise,
 in barren solitary pomp repose? 
have we not see, at pleasure lordly call,
 the smile long-frequented village fall;
 behold the duteous son, the sire decay,
 the modest matron, and the blush maid,
 force from their home, a melancholy train,
 to traverse clime beyond the western main;
 where wild Oswego spread her swamp around,
 and Niagara stun with thunder sound? 

even now, perhaps, as there some pilgrim stray
 through tangle forest, and through dangerous way;
 where beast with man divide empire claim,
 and the brown indian take a deadly aim;
 there, while above the giddy tempest fly,
 and all around distressful yell arise,
 the pensive exile, bend with his woe,
 to stop too fearful, and too faint to go,
 cast a fond look where England glory shine,
 and bid his bosom sympathize with i. 

vain, very vain, my weary search to find
 that bliss which only centre in the mind:
 why have i stray from pleasure and repose,
 to seek a good each government bestow? 
in every government, though terror reign,
 though tyrant king, or tyrant law restrain,
 how small of all that human heart endure,
 that part which law or king can cause or cure. 
still to ourselves in every place consign,
 our own felicity we make or find:
 with secret course, which no loud storm annoy,
 glide the smooth current of domestic joy. 
the lift ax, the agonize wheel,
 Luke iron crown, and damien bed of steel,
 to man remote from power but rare know,
 leave reason, faith, and conscience, all our own. 
