to winter.

by mr. woty. 

what! though thou come in sable mantle clad,
 yet, winter! be thou welcome to my eye:
 thou here i hail, though terror round thou wait,
 and wind tempestuous howl along the sky. 

but shall i then so soon forget the day
 when Ceres lead i through her wheaten mine! 
when autumn pluck i, with his tawny hand,
 empurple cluster from ambrosial vine! 

so soon forget, when up the yield pole
 i see ascend the silver-bearded hop! 
when summer, wave high her crown of hay,
 pour over the mead her odoriferous crop! 

i must forget they — and thou too, o spring! 
though many a chaplet thou have weave for i:
 for, now prepare to quit the enchant scene,
 cold, weep winter! i come all to thou. 

hail to thy roll cloud, and rapid storm! 
though they deform fair nature lovely face:
 hail to thy wind, that sweep along the earth! 
though tree they root up from their solid base. 

how sickly over be the face of thing! 
where be the spice kiss of the southern gale! 
where the wild rose, that smile upon the thorn,
 the mountain flower, and lily of the vale! 

how gloomy it be to cast the eye around,
 and view the tree disrobe of every leaf,
 the velvet path grow rough with clot shower,
 and every field deprive of every sheaf! 

how far more gloomy over the rain-beat heath,
 alone to travel in the dead of night! 
no twinkle star to gild the arch of heaven,
 no moon to lend her temporary light:

to see the lightning spread its ample sheet,
 discern the wild waste through its liquid fire,
 to hear the thunder rend the trouble air,
 as time itself and nature will expire:

and yet, o winter! have thy poet see
 thy face as smooth, and placid as the spring,
 have feel, with comfort feel, the beam of heaven,
 and hear thy valley and thy woodland ring. 

what time the sun with burnish lock arise,
 the long lose charm of nature to renew,
 when pearl of ice bedeck the grassy turf,
 and tree-top float in the silver dew. 

father of heaven and earth! this change be thy:
 by thou the season in gradation roll,
 thou great omniscient ruler of the world! 
thou Alpha and Omega of the whole! 

here humble bow we down our head to thou! 
it be we the voice of gratitude to raise,
 thy to diffuse thy blessing over the land;
 thy to receive the incense of our praise. 

pure if it rise from the conscious heart,
 with thou for ever do the symbol live;
 though small for all thy love be man return,
 thou ask no more, than he have power to give. 
