Gotham.

book iii.

can the fond mother from herself depart,
 can she forget the darling of her heart,
 the little darling who she bear and breed,
 nurse on her knee, and at her bosom feed? 
to who, she seem she every thought to give,
 and in who life alone, she seem to live? 
yes, from herself, the mother may depart,
 she may forget the darling of her heart,
 the little darling, who she bear and breed,
 nurse on her knee, and at her bosom feed,
 to who she seem she every thought to give,
 and in who life alone, she seem to live;
 but i can forget, while life remain,
 and pour her current through these swell vein,
 while memory offer up at reason shrine,
 but i can forget, that gotham mine. 

can the stern mother, than the brute more wild,
 from her disnatured breast, tear her young child,
 flesh of her flesh, and of her bone the bone,
 and dash the smile babe against a stone? 
yes, the stern mother, than the brute more wild,
 from her disnatured breast, may tear her child;
 flesh of her flesh, and of her bone the bone,
 and dash the smile babe against a stone;
 but i, forbid it heaven, but i can never
 the love of Gotham, from this bosom tear,
 can never so far true royalty pervert
 from its fair course, to do my people hurt. 

with how much ease, with how much confidence,
 as if, superior to each gross sense,
 reason have only, in full power array,
 to manifest her will, and be obey,
 man make resolve, and pass into decree
 the motion of the mind! with how much ease
 in such resolve, do passion make a flaw,
 and bring to nothing, what be raise to law. 

in empire young, scarce warm on gotham throne,
 the danger, and the sweet of power, unknown,
 please, though i scarce know why, like some young child,
 who little sense each new toy turn wild,
 how do i hold sweet dalliance with my crown,
 and wanton with dominion, how lie down,
 without the sanction of a precedent,
 rule of most large and absolute extent;
 rule, which from sense of public virtue spring,
 and, all at once, commence a patriot king. 

but, for the day of trial be at hand,
 and the whole fortune of a mighty land
 be stake on i, and all their weal or woe
 must from my good, or evil conduct flow,
 will i, or can i, on a fair review,
 as i assume that name, deserve it too? 
have i well weigh the great, the noble part
 i be now to play? have i explore my heart,
 that labyrinth of fraud, that deep, dark cell,
 where, unsuspected even by i, may dwell
 ten thousand folly? have i find out there
 what i be fit to do, and what to bear? 
have i trace every passion to its rise,
 nor spare one lurk seed of treacherous vice? 
have i, familiar with my nature grow,
 and be i fair to myself make know? 

a patriot king — why it be a name which bear
 the more immediate stamp of heaven, which wear
 the near, best resemblance we can show
 of god above, through all his work below. 

to still the voice of discord in the land,
 to make weak faction discontent band,
 detect, weak, and crumble, to decay,
 with hunger pinch, on their own vital prey;
 like brother, in the self-same interest warm,
 like different body, with one soul inform,
 to make a nation, noble raise above
 all mean thought, grow up in common love;
 to give the law due vigour, and to hold
 that sacred balance, temperate, yet bold,
 with such a equal hand, that those who fear
 may yet approve, and own my justice clear;
 to be a common father, to secure
 the weak from violence, from pride the poor;
 vice, and her son, to banish in disgrace,
 to make corruption dread to show her face,
 to bid afflict virtue take new state,
 and be, at last, acquaint with the great;
 of all religion to elect the best,
 nor let her priest be make a stand jest;
 reward for worth, with liberal hand to carve,
 to love the art, nor let the artist starve;
 to make fair plenty through the realm increase,
 give fame in war, and happiness in peace,
 to see my people virtuous, great and free,
 and know that all those blessing flow from i,
 o it be a joy too exquisite, a thought
 which flatter nature more than flattery ought. 
it be a great, glorious task, for man too hard,
 but not less great, less glorious the reward,
 the best reward which here to man be give,
 it be more than earth, and little short of heaven;
 a task (if such comparison may be)
 the same in nature, differ in degree,
 like that which god, on who for aid i call,
 perform with ease, and yet perform to all. 

how much do they mistake, how little know
 of king, of kingdom, and the pain which flow
 from royalty, who fancy that a crown
 because it glisten, must be line with down. 
with outside show, and vain appearance catch
 they look no farther, and, by folly teach,
 prize high the toy of throne, but never find
 one of the many care which lurk behind. 
the gem they worship, which a crown adorn,
 nor once suspect that crown be line with thorn. 
o might reflection folly place supply,
 will we one moment use her pierce eye,
 then shall we learn what woe from grandeur spring,
 and learn to pity, not to envy king. 

the villager, bear humble and breed hard,
 content his wealth, and poverty his guard,
 in action simple just, in conscience clear,
 by guilt untainted, undisturbed by fear,
 his mean but scanty, and his want but few,
 labour his business and his pleasure too,
 enjoy more comfort in a single hour,
 than age give the wretch condemn to power. 

call up by health, he rise with the day,
 and go to work, as if he go to play,
 whistle off toil, one half of which may make
 the stout Atlas of a palace quake;
 against heat and cold, which make we coward faint,
 harden by constant use, without complaint
 he bear, what we shall think it death to bear;
 short be his meal, and homely be his fare;
 his thirst he flake at some pure neighbour brook,
 nor ask for sauce where appetite stand cook. 
when the dew fall and when the sun retire
 behind the mountain, when the village fire,
 which, waken all at once, speak supper nigh,
 at distance catch, and fix his longing eye,
 homeward he hie, and with his manly brood
 of raw-boned cub, enjoy that clean, coarse food,
 which, season with good humour, his fond bride
 against his return be happy to provide. 
then, free from care, and free from thought, he creep
 into his straw, and till the morning sleep. 

not so the king — with anxious care oppress,
 his bosom labour, and admit not rest. 
a glorious wretch, he sweat beneath the weight
 of majesty, and give up ease for state. 
even when his smile, which, by the fool of pride,
 be treasure and preserve from side to side
 fly round the court, even when, compel by form,
 he seem most calm, his soul be in a storm! 
care, like a spectre, see by he alone,
 with all her nest of viper, round his throne
 by day crawl full in view; when night bid sleep,
 sweet nurse of nature, over the sense creep,
 when misery herself, no more complain,
 and slave, if possible, forget their chain,
 though his sense weaken, though his eye grow dim,
 that rest which come to all, come not to he. 
even at that hour, care, tyrant care, forbid,
 the dew of sleep to fall upon his lid;
 from night to night she watch at his bed;
 now, as one mope, sit brood over his head,
 anon she start, and, bear on raven wing,
 croak forth aloud — sleep be not make for king. 

thrice have the moon, who govern this vast ball,
 who rule most absolute over i, and all,
 to who, by full conviction teach to bow,
 at new, at full i pay the duteous vow,
 thrice have the moon her wonted course pursue,
 thrice have she lose her form, and thrice renew. 
since (bless be that season, for before
 i be a mere, mere mortal, and no more,
 one of the herd, a lump of common clay,
 inform with life, to die and pass away)
 since i become a king, and gotham throne,
 with full and ample power, become my own;
 thrice have the moon her wonted course pursue,
 thrice have she lose her form, and thrice renew,
 since sleep, kind sleep, who like a friend supply
 new vigour for new toil, have close these eye. 
nor, if my toil be answer with success,
 and i be make a instrument to bless
 the people who i love, shall i repine;
 they be the benefit, the labour mine. 

mindful of that high rank in which i stand,
 of million lord, sole ruler in the land,
 let i, and reason shall her aid afford,
 rule my own spirit, of myself by lord. 
with a ill grace that monarch wear his crown,
 who, stern and hard of nature, wear a frown
 against fault in other man, yet all the while,
 meet his own vice with a partial smile. 
how can a king (yet on record we find
 such king have be, such curse of mankind)
 enforce that law, against some poor subject elf,
 which conscience tell he he have break himself? 
can he some petty rogue to justice call
 for rob one, when he himself rob all? 
must not, unless extinguish, conscience fly
 into his cheek, and blast his fade eye,
 to scourge the oppressor, when the state, distress
 and sink to ruin, be by he oppress? 
against himself do he not sentence give? 
if one must die, tother not fit to live. 

weak be that throne, and in itself unsound
 which take not solid virtue for its ground. 
all envy power in other, and complain
 of that which they will perish to obtain. 
nor can those spirit, turbulent and bold,
 not to be awe by threat, nor buy with gold,
 be hush to peace, but when fair, legal sway,
 make it their real interest to obey,
 when king, and none but fool can then rebel,
 not less in virtue, than in power excel. 

be that my object, that my constant care,
 and may my soul best wish centre there. 
be it my task to seek, nor seek in vain,
 not only how to live, but how to reign,
 and, to those virtue which from reason spring,
 and grace the man, join those which grace the king. 

first (for strict duty bid my care extend,
 and reach to all, who on that care depend,
 bid i with servant keep a steady hand,
 and watch over all my proxy in the land)
 first (and that method reason shall support)
 before i look into, and purge my court,
 before i cleanse the stable of the state,
 let i fix thing which to myself relate. 
that do, and all account well settle here,
 in resolution firm, in honour clear,
 tremble you slave, who dare abuse your trust,
 who dare by villain, when your king be just. 

be there, among those officer of state,
 to who our sacred power we delegate,
 who hold our place and office in the realm,
 who, in our name commission, guide the helm,
 be there, who, trust to our love of ease,
 oppress our subject, wrest out just decree,
 and make the law, warp from their fair intent,
 to speak a language which they never mean,
 be there such man, and can the fool depend
 on hold out in safety to their end? 
can they so much, from thought of danger free,
 deceive themselves, so much misdeem of i,
 to think that i will prove a statesman tool,
 and live a stranger where i ought to rule? 
what, to myself and to my state unjust,
 shall i from minister take thing on trust,
 and, sink low the credit of my throne,
 depend upon dependant of my own? 
shall i, most certain source of future care,
 not use my judgement, but depend on they,
 shall i, true puppetlike, be mock with state,
 have nothing but the name of be great,
 attend at council, which i must not weigh,
 do, what they bid; and what they dictate, say,
 enrobe, and hoist up into my chair,
 only to be a royal cypher there? 
perish the thought — it be treason to my throne —
 and who but think it, can his thought be know,
 insult i more, than he, who, league with hell,
 shall rise in arm, and against my crown rebel. 

the wicked statesman, who false heart pursue
 a train of guilt, who act with double view,
 and wear a double face, who base design
 strike at his monarch throne, who undermine
 even while he seem his wish to support,
 who seize all department, pack a court,
 maintain a agent on the judgement seat
 to screen his crime, and make his fraud complete,
 new model army, and around the throne
 will suffer none but creature of his own,
 conscious of such his baseness, well may try,
 against the light to shut his master eye,
 to keep he coop, and far remove from those,
 who, brave and honest, dare his crime disclose,
 nor ever let he in one place appear,
 where truth, unwelcome truth, may wound his ear. 

attempt like these, well weigh, themselves proclaim,
 and, while they publish, balk their author aim. 
king must be blind, into such snare to run,
 or worse, with open eye must be undo. 
the minister of honesty and worth,
 demand the day to bring his action forth,
 call on the sun to shine with fierce ray
 and brave that trial which must end in praise. 
none fly the day, and seek the shade of night,
 but those who action can bear the light;
 none wish their king in ignorance to hold,
 but those who feel that knowledge must unfold
 their hide guilt, and, that dark mist dispel
 by which their place and their life be hold,
 confusion wait they, and, by justice lead,
 in vengeance fall on every traitor head. 

aware of this, and caution against the pit
 where king have oft be lose, shall i submit
 and rust in chain like these? shall i give way,
 and while my helpless subject fall a prey
 to power abuse, in ignorance sit down,
 nor dare assert the honour of my crown? 
when stern rebellion, (if that odious name
 just belong to those, who only aim
 be to preserve their country, who oppose
 in honour league, none but their country be foe,
 who only seek their own, and find their cause
 in due regard for violate law,)
 when stern rebellion, who no long feel,
 nor fear rebuke, a nation at her heel,
 a nation up in arm, though strong not proud,
 knock at the palace gate, and, call loud
 for due redress, present, from truth be fair pen,
 a list of wrong, not to be bear by man,
 how must that king be humble, how disgrace
 all that be royal, in his name and place,
 who, thus call forth to answer, can advance
 no other plea but that of ignorance. 
a vile defence, which, be his all at stake,
 the mean subject well may blush to make;
 a filthy source, from whence shame ever spring;
 a stain to all, but most a stain to king. 
the soul, with great and manly feeling warm,
 pant for knowledge, rest not till inform,
 and shall not i, fire with the glorious zeal,
 feel those brave passion, which my subject feel,
 or can a just excuse from ignorance flow
 to i, who first, great duty be — to know. 

hence ignorance — thy settle, dull, blank eye
 will hurt i, though i know no reason why —
 hence ignorance — thy slavish shackle bind
 the free-born soul, and lethargy the mind —
 of thou, beget by pride, who look with scorn
 on every mean match, of thou be bear
 that grave inflexibility of soul,
 which reason can convince, nor fear controul,
 which neither argument, nor prayer can reach,
 and nothing less than utter ruin teach —
 hence ignorance — hence to that depth of night,
 where thou be bear, where not one gleam of light
 may wound thy eye — hence to some dreary cell
 where monk with superstition love to dwell,
 or in some college soothe thy lazy pride,
 and with the head of college reside,
 fit mate for royalty thou can not be,
 and if no mate for king, no mate for i. 

come study, like a torrent swell with rain,
 which, rush down the mountain, over the plain
 spread horror wide, and yet, in horror kind,
 leaf feed of future fruitfulness behind,
 come study — painful though thy course and slow,
 thy real worth by thy effect we know —
 parent of knowledge, come — not thou i call,
 who, grave and dull, in college or in hall,
 do fit, all solemn sad, and mope weigh
 thing, which when find, thy labour can repay —
 nor, in one hand, fit emblem of thy trade,
 a rod, in other, gaudy array
 a hornbook, gilt and letter, call i thou,
 who do in form preside over a, b, c —
 nor, siren though thou be, and thy strange charm,
 as it be by magic, lure man to thy arm,
 do i call thou, who through a wind maze,
 a labyrinth of puzzle, please way,
 do lead we at the last to those rich plain,
 where, in full glory, real science reign. 

fair though thou be, and lovely to my eye,
 though full reward in thy possession lie
 to crown man wish, and do thy favourite grace,
 though (be i station in a humble place,)
 i can be ever happy in thy sight,
 toil with thou all the day, and through the night
 toil on from watch to watch, bid my eye,
 fast rivet on science, sleep defy,
 yet, (such the hardship which from empire flow)
 must i thy sweet society forgo,
 and to some happy rival arm resign
 those charm, which can alas! no more be i. 

no more, from hour to hour, from day to day,
 shall i pursue thy step, and urge my way
 where eager love of science call, no more
 attempt those path which man never tread before. 
no more, the mountain scale, the desert cross,
 lose myself, nor know i be lose,
 travel through wood, through wild, from morn to night,
 from night to morn, yet travel with delight,
 and have find thou, lay i down content,
 own all my toil well pay, my time well spend. 

farewell the muse too — for such mean thing
 must not presume to dwell with mighty king —
 farewell you muse — though it cut my heart
 even to the quick, we must for ever part. 

when the fresh morn bid lusty nature wake;
 when the bird, sweet twitter through the brake,
 tune their soft pipe; when from the neighbour bloom,
 sip the dew, each zephyr steal perfume;
 when all thing with new vigour be inspire,
 and seem to say they never can be tire;
 how often have we stray, while sportive rhime
 deceive the way, and clip the wing of time,
 over hill, over dale! how often laugh to see,
 yourself make visible to none but i,
 the clown, his work suspend, gape and stare,
 and seem to think that i converse with air! 

when the sun, beat on the parch soil,
 seem to proclaim a interval of toil,
 when a faint languor creep through every breast,
 and thing most use to labour, wish for rest,
 how often, underneath a reverend oak,
 where safe, and fearless of the impious stroke
 some sacred dryad live, or in some grove,
 where with capricious finger fancy weave
 her fairy bower, while nature all the while
 look on, and view her mockery with a smile
 how we hold converse sweet! how often lay,
 fast by the Thames, in ham inspire shade,
 among those poet, which make up your train,
 and, after death, pour forth the sacred strain,
 have i, at your command, in verse grow grey,
 put not impair, hear Dryden tune that lie,
 which may have draw a angel from his sphere,
 and keep he from his office listen here. 

when dreary night, with Morpheus in her train,
 lead on by silence to resume her reign,
 with darkness cover, as with a robe,
 this scene of levity, blank half the globe,
 how oft, enchant with your heavenly strain,
 which steal i from myself, which in soft chain
 of music bind my soul, how oft have i,
 sound more than human float through the sky,
 attentive sit, while night, against her will. 
transport with the harmony, stand still! 
how oft in rapture, which man scarce can bear,
 have i, when go, still think the muse there,
 still hear their music, and, as mute as death,
 sit all attention, draw in every breath,
 lest, breathe all too rude, i shall wound,
 and mar that magic excellence of sound:
 then, sense return with return of day,
 have chide the night, which flee so fast away. 

such my pursuit, and such my joy of yore,
 such be my mate, but now my mate no more. 
place out of envy walk, (for envy sure
 will never haunt the cottage of the poor,
 will never stoop to wound my homespun lay)
 with some few friend, and some small share of praise,
 beneath oppression, undisturbed by strife,
 in peace i tread the humble vale of life. 
farewell these scene of ease, this tranquil state;
 welcome the trouble which on empire wait. 
light toy from this day forth i disavow,
 they please i once, but can suit i now;
 to common man all common thing be free,
 what honour they may fix disgrace on i. 
call to a throne, and over a mighty land
 ordain to rule, my head, my heart, my hand
 be all engross, each private view withstand,
 and task to labour for the public good;
 be this my study, to this one great end
 may every thought, may every action tend. 

let i the page of history turn over,
 the instructive page, and heedful explore
 what faithful pen of former time have write,
 of former king; what they do worthy note,
 what worthy blame, and from the sacred tomb
 where righteous monarch sleep, where laurel bloom
 unhurt by time, let i a garland twine,
 which, rob not their fame, may add to i. 

nor let i with a vain and idle eye
 glance over those scene, and in a hurry fly
 quick as a post which travel day and night,
 nor let i dwell there, lure by false delight,
 and, into barren theory betray,
 forget that monarch be for action make. 
when amorous spring, repair all his charm,
 call nature forth from hoary winter arm,
 where, like a virgin to some lecher sell,
 three wretched month, she lie benumb, and cold;
 when the weak flower, which, shrink from the breath
 of the rude north, and, timorous of death,
 to its kind mother earth for shelter flee,
 and on her bosom hide its tender head,
 peep forth afresh, and, cheere by mild sky,
 bid in full splendour all her beauty rise;
 the hive be up in arm — expert to teach,
 nor, proud, to be teach unwilling, each
 seem from her fellow a new zeal to catch;
 strength in her limb, and on her wing dispatch,
 the bee go forth; from herb to herb she fly,
 from flower to flower, and load her labour thigh
 with treasure sweet, rob those flower, which leave,
 find not themselves make poor by the theft,
 their scent as lively, and their look as fair,
 as if the pillager have not be there. 
never do she flit on pleasure silken wing,
 never do she, loiter, let the bloom of spring
 unrifled pass, and on the downy breast
 of some fair flower indulge untimely rest. 
never do she, drink deep of those rich dew
 which chemist night prepare, that faith abuse
 due to the hive, and, selfish in her toil,
 to her own private use convert the spoil. 
love of the stock first call she forth to roam,
 and to the stock she bring her booty home. 

be this my pattern — as become a king,
 let i fly all abroad on reason wing,
 let my eye, like the lightning, through the earth
 run to and fro, nor let one deed of worth,
 in any place and time, nor let one man
 who action may enrich dominion plan,
 escape my note; be all, from the first day
 of nature to this hour, be all my prey. 
from those, who time at the desire of fame
 have spare, let virtue catch a equal flame;
 from those, who not in mercy, but in rage,
 time have reprieve to damn from age to age,
 let i take warn, lesson to distil,
 and, imitate heaven, draw good from ill.
 nor let these great research in my breast
 a monument of useless labour rest,
 no — let they spread — the effect let Gotham share,
 and reap the harvest of their monarch care,
 be other time, and other country know,
 only to give fresh blessing to my own. 

let i (and may that god to who i fly,
 on who for needful succour i rely
 in this great hour, that glorious god of truth,
 through who i reign, in mercy to my youth,
 assist my weakness, and, direct i right,
 from every speck which hang upon the sight,
 purge my mind eye, nor let one cloud remain
 to spread the shade of error over my brain)
 let i, impartial, with unwearied thought,
 try man and thing; let i, as monarch ought,
 examine well on what my power depend,
 what be the general principle, and end
 of government, how empire first begin,
 and wherefore man be raise to reign over man. 

let i consider, as from one great source
 we see a thousand river take their course,
 disperse, and into different channel lead,
 yet by their parent still supply and feed,
 that government, (though branch out far and wide,
 in various mode to various land apply)
 however it differ in its outward frame,
 in the main groundwork's every where the same;
 the same her view, though different her plan,
 her grand and general view, the good of man. 

let i find out, by reason sacred beam,
 what system in itself most perfect seem,
 most worthy man, most likely to conduce
 to all the purpose of general use;
 let i find too, where, by fair reason try,
 it fail, when to particular apply,
 why in that mode all nation do not join,
 and, chief, why it can suit with i. 

let i the gradual rise of empire trace
 until they seem found on perfection base,
 then (for when human thing have make their way
 to excellence, they hasten to decay)
 let i, while observation lend her clue,
 step by step, to their quick decline pursue,
 enable by a chain of fact to tell
 not only how they rise, but how they fall. 

let i not only the distemper know
 which in all state from common cause grow,
 but likewise those, which by the will of fate,
 on each peculiar mode of empire wait,
 which in its very constitution lurk,
 too sure at last, to do its destine work;
 let i, forewarn, each sign, each system learn,
 that i my people danger may discern,
 ever it be too late wish health to reassure,
 and, if it can be find, find out a cure. 

let i (though great, grave brother of the gown,
 preach all faith up, and preach all reason down,
 make those jar, who reason mean to join,
 and vest in themselves a right divine)
 let i, through reason glass, with search eye,
 into the depth of that religion pry,
 which law have sanction; let i find out there
 what be form, what be essence; what, like vagrant air,
 we well may change; and what, without a crime,
 can be change to the last hour of time. 
nor let i suffer that outrageous zeal,
 which, without knowledge, furious bigot feel,
 fair in pretence, though at the heart unsound,
 these separate point at random to confound. 

the time have be, when priest have dare to tread,
 proud and insult, on their monarch head,
 when, while they make religion a pretence,
 out of the world they banish common sense,
 when some soft king, too open to deceit,
 easy and unsuspecting, join the cheat,
 dupe by mock piety, and give his name
 to serve the vile purpose of shame. 
fear not, my people, where no cause of fear
 can just rise — your king secure you here,
 your king, who scorn the haughty prelate nod,
 nor deem the voice of priest, the voice of god. 

let i (though lawyer may perhaps forbid
 their monarch to behold what they wish hide,
 and, for the purpose of knavish gain,
 will have their trade a mystery remain)
 let i, disdain all such slavish awe,
 dive to the very bottom of the law;
 let i (the weak, dead letter leave behind)
 search out the principle, the spirit find,
 till, from the part, make master of the whole,
 i see the constitution very soul. 

let i (though statesman will no doubt resist,
 and to my eye present a fearful lift
 of man, who will be opposite to i,
 of man, great man, determine to resign)
 let i (with firmness, which become a king,
 conscious from what a source my action spring,
 determine not by world to be withstand,
 when my grand object be my country be good)
 unraveling all low ministerial scene,
 destroy their job, lie bare their way and mean,
 and track they step by step; let i well know
 how place, pension, and preferment go,
 why guilt provide for, when worth be not,
 and why one man of merit be forget,
 let i in peace, in war, supreme preside,
 and dare to know my way without a guide. 

let i (though dignity, by nature proud,
 retire from view, and swell behind a cloud,
 as if the sun shine with less powerful ray,
 less grace, less glory, shine every day;
 though when she come forth into public sight,
 unbending as a ghost, she stalk upright,
 with such a air as we have often see,
 and often laugh at in a tragic queen,
 nor, at her presence, though base myriad crook
 the supple knee, vouchsafe a single look. 
let i (all vain parade, all empty pride,
 all terror of dominion lay aside,
 all ornament, and needless help of art,
 all those big look, which speak a little heart)
 know (which few king alas! have ever know)
 how affability become a throne,
 destroy all fear, bid love with reverence live,
 and give those grace pride can never give. 
let the stern tyrant keep a distant state,
 and, hate all man, fear return of hate,
 conscious of guilt, retreat behind his throne,
 secure from all upbraid but his own,
 let all my subject have access to i,
 be my ear open as my heart be free;
 in full, fair tide, let information flow,
 that evil be half cure, who cause we know. 

and thou, where ever thou be, thou wretched thing,
 who be afraid to look up to a king,
 lay by thy fear — make but thy grievance plain,
 and, if i not redress thou, may my reign
 close up that very moment — to prevent
 the course of justice, from her fair intent,
 in vain my near, dear friend shall plead,
 in vain my mother kneel — my soul may bleed,
 but must not change — when justice draw the dart,
 though it be doom to, pierce a favourite heart,
 it be mine to give it force, to give it aim —
 i know it duty, and i feel it fame. 
