ode to liberty.

by dr. JOSEPH Warton.

o goddess, on who step attend
 pleasure and laughter-loving health,
 white-mantled peace with olive-wand,
 young joy, and diamond-sceptered wealth,
 blithe plenty, with her load horn,
 with science bright-eyed as the morn,
 in Britain, which for age past
 have be thy choice darling care,
 who make she wise, and strong, and fair,
 may thy best blessing ever last. 

for thou, the pine prisoner mourn,
 deprive of food, of mirth, of light;
 for thou pale slave to galley chain,
 that ply tough oar from morn to night;
 thou the proud sultan beauteous train,
 by eunuch guard, weep in vain,
 tear the rose from their lock;
 and guinea captive king lament,
 by christian lord to labour send,
 whip like the dull, unfeeling ox. 

inspire by thou, deaf to fond nature cry,
 stern Brutus, when Rome genius loud speak,
 give she the matchless filial sacrifice,
 nor turn, nor tremble at the deathful stroke! 
and he of late age, but equal fame,
 dare stab the tyrant, though he love the friend. 
how burn the spartan with warm patriot-flame,
 in thy great cause his valorous life to end! 
how burst Gustavus from the swedish mine! 
like light from chaos dark, eternal to shine. 

when heaven to all thy joy bestow,
 and grave upon our heart — be free —
 shall coward man those joy resign,
 and dare reverse this great decree? 
submit he to some idol-king,
 some selfish, passion-guided thing,
 abhor man, by man abhor,
 around who throne stand tremble doubt,
 who jealous eye still roll about,
 and murder with his reek sword? 

where trample tyranny with fate
 and black revenge gigantic go:
 hark, how the die infant shriek,
 how hopeless age be sink in woe! 
fly, mortal, from that fate land,
 though river roll over golden sand:
 though bird in shade of Cassia sing,
 harvest and fruit spontaneous rise,
 no storm disturb the smile sky,
 and each soft breeze rich odour bring. 

Britannia, watch! — remember peerless Rome,
 her high-towered head dash mean to the ground;
 remember, freedom guardian, grecia doom,
 who weep the despotic Turk have bind:
 may never thy oak-crowned hill, rich mead and down,
 (fame, virtue, courage, poverty, forget)
 thy peaceful village, and busy town,
 be doom some death-dispensing tyrant lot;
 on deep foundation may thy freedom stand,
 long as the surge shall lash thy sea-encircled land. 
