the modern fine lady.

skill'd in each art, that can adorn the fair,
the spritely dance, the soft italian air,
the toss of quality, and high-bred fleer,
now lady Harriot reach her fifteen year.
winge with diversion all her moment fly,
each, as it pass, present something new;
breakfast and auction wear the morn away,
each evening give a opera, or a play;
then brag eternal joy all night remain,
and kind usher in the morn again.

for love no time have she, or inclination,
yet must coquet it for the sake of fashion;
for this she listen to each fop that be near,
the embroider colonel flatter with a sneer,
and the crop ensign nuzzle in her ear.
but with most warmth she dress and air inspire
the ambitious bosom of the land esquire,
who fain will quit plump Dolly soft charm,
for wither lean right honourable arm;
he bow with reverence at her sacred shrine,
and treat she as if spring from race divine,
which she return with insolence and scorn,
nor deign to smile on a plebeian bear.

ere long by friend, by card, and lover cross,
her fortune, health, and reputation lose;
her money go, yet not a tradesman pay,
her fame, yet she still damn to be a maid,
her spirit sink, her nerve be so unstring,
she weep, if but a handsome thief be hang:
by mercer, laceman, mantua-maker press,
but most for ready cash for play distress,
where can she turn? — the esquire must all repair,
she condescend to listen to his prayer,
and marry he at length in mere despair.

but soon the endearment of a husband cloy,
her soul, her frame incapable of joy:
she feel no transport in the bridal bed,
of which so oft she have hear, so much have read;
then vex, that she shall be condemn alone
to seek in vain this philosophic stone,
to able tutor she resolve apply,
a prostitute from curiosity:
hence man of every sort, and every size,
impatient for heaven cordial drop, she try;
the fribble beau, the rough unwieldy clown,
the ruddy templar new on the town,
the hibernian captain of gigantic make,
the brimful parson, and the exhaust rake.

but still malignant fate her wish deny,
card yield superior joy, to card she fly;
all night from rout to rout her chairman run,
again she play, and be again undo.

behold she now in ruin frightful jaw!
bond, judgment, execution, open their paw;
seize jewel, furniture, and plate, nor spare
the gild chariot, or the tosseled chair,
for lonely seat she be force to quit the town,
and Tubbs convey the wretched exile down.

now rumble over the stone of tyburn-road,
never press with a more grieve or guilty load,
she bid adieu to all the wellknown street,
and envy every cinderwench she meet:
and now the dread country first appear,
with sigh unfeigned the die noise she hear
of distant coach faint by degree,
then start and tremble at the sight of tree.
silent and sullen, like some captive queen,
she be draw along, unwilling to be see,
until at length appear the ruin hall
within the grass-green moat, and ivy wall,
the doleful prison where for ever she,
but not, alas! her grief, must bury be.

her coach the curate and the tradesman meet,
great-coated tenant her arrival greet,
and boy with stubble bonfire light the street,
while bell her ear with tongue discordant grate,
type of the nuptial tie they celebrate:
but no rejoice can unbend her brow,
nor deign she to return one awkward bow,
but bounce in disdain once to speak,
and wipe the trickle tear from off her cheek.

now see she in the sad decline of life,
a peevish mistress, and a sulky wife;
her nerve unbrace, her fade cheek grow pale
with many a real, many a fancy ail;
of card, admirer, equipage bereave;
her insolence, and title only leave;
severe humble to her one-horse chair,
and the low pastime of a country fair:
too wretched to endure one lonely day,
too proud one friendly visit to repay,
too indolent to read, too criminal to pray.
at length half dead, half mad, and quite confine,
shun, and shun by all of human kind,
even rob of the last comfort of her life,
insult the poor curate callous wife,
pride, disappoint pride, now stop her breath,
and with true scorpion rage she sting herself to death.
