epithalamium.

by the same.

you nymph, that from diana sport retire,
yond forest leave awhile, and love to haunt
the border valley; see you, as they pass,
a choose pair, the glory of your plain,
array in youth full bloom, and nature prime?
see you the glance of beauty, when the fair,
quiver with charm, and by the grace dress,
march on: with joy the bridegroom flush, beyond
what lively fancy, unpossessed, can dream?

hear you the music of the grove around
warble, while choirs of gratulation ring
from every spray; and nightingale, soft tune,
in note peculiar thril the nuptial song!
such as in neighbour windsor favourite shade
they chant; and, if their handel ear be true,
no where on silence steal with lay so sweet.

auspicious omen brood on the fair hour!
do ever Hymen look more fresh appear,
or his bright vest with deep yellow flow?
the vest that on occasion high and rare
pontifical he wear, when heart sincere
combine; of healthy cheek, and sparkle eye
as in the state of nature, ere his shaft
by gold be blunt. how the blaze torch,
fan by love pinion, shed unusual fire!
lo! by the trail of light, he leave behind,
as from the shrine his jubilee return,
the muse, invite guest, attend her theme
right to the nuptial bower. there enter, thrice
she hem, thrice bless the threshold with a sneeze,
prelude of happiness to come. her lyre
she string, — a friendly, voluntary strain.

"hail (she begin) distinguish pair! how fit
to join in wed love, each other choice!
bridegroom, thy taste be elegant indeed,
and finger nice, that on some sunny bank
in beauty garden cull so fair a flower,
to thy transplant from her native soil.
cherish besure thy bloom charge; keep off
each blast unkind, and zephyr gale alone
blow there, and genial sun for ever smile.
who not applaud thy vow? hereafter who
dispute thy palate, judge and exact,
owner of curious bliss? — nor thou, fair bride,
repine, nor homeward cast thy longing eye;
it be time to sever from the virgin choir.
what joy in loneliness to waste the hour
unfruitful? see, hard by, loddona stream
cold and inactive creep along; her face
shade with pensive willow, — till anon
marry to jovial Thames, brisk she glide
over many a laugh mead. — it be nature will
such union: bless society! where soul
move, as in dance, to melody divine
fit partner. (how unlike the noisy broil
of wed strife!) hence friendship generous glow
at love high noon; and hence the sober flame
steady, as life decline. — all comfort hence
of child and parent, strong, dear tie!
think not the fair original design
to flourish and be lose. the world expect
some copy to adorn another age. —
thank the kind god; be happy, live and love.
