a poem, on the supposition of a advertisement appear in a morning paper, of the publication of a volume of poem, by a servant maid. 

the tea-kettle bubble, the tea thing be set,
 the candle be light, the lady be meet;
 the how d'ye's be over, and enter bustle,
 the company seat, and silk cease to rustle:
 the great mrs. consequence open her fan;
 and thus the discourse in a instant begin:
 (all affect reserve, and formality scorn,)
 i suppose you all see in the paper this morning,
 a volume of poem advertise — it be say
 they be produce by the pen of a poor servant maid. 
a servant write verse! say madam du bloom;
 pray what be the subject? — a mop, or a broom? 
he, he, he, — say miss flounce; i suppose we shall see
 a ode on a dishclout — what else can it be? 
say miss Coquettilla, why lady so tart? 
perhaps Tom the footman have fire her heart;
 and she will tell we how charm he look in new clothes,
 and how nimble his hand move in brush the shoe;
 or how the last time that he go to may-fair,
 he buy she some sweetheart of gingerbread ware. 
for my part i think, say old lady marr-joy,
 a servant may find herself other employ:
 be she i i will employ she as long as it be light,
 and send she to bed without candle at night. 
why so? say miss Rhymer, displease; i protest
 it be pity a genius shall be so depress! 
what idea can such low-bred creature conceive,
 say mrs. Noworthy, and laugh in her sleeve. 
say old miss prudella, if servant can tell
 how to write to their mother, to say they be well,
 and read of a Sunday the duty of man;
 which be more i believe than one half of they can;
 i think it be much proper they shall rest there,
 than be reach at thing so much out of their sphere. 
say old mrs. candour, i have now get a maid
 that be the plague of my life — a young gossip jade;
 there be no end of the people that after she come,
 and whenever i be out, she be never at home;
 i will rather ten time she will sit down and write,
 than gossip all over the town every night. 
some whimsical trollop most like, say miss prim,
 have be scribble of nonsense, just out of a whim,
 and conscious it neither be witty or pretty,
 conceal her true name, and ascribe it to Betty. 
i once have a servant myself, say miss pine,
 that write on a wedding, some very good line;
 say mrs. domestic, and when they be do,
 i can see for my part, what use they be on;
 have she write a receipt, to have instruct you how
 to warm a cold breast of veal, like a ragou,
 or to make cowslip wine, that will pass for champaign;
 it may have be useful, again and again. 
on the sofa be old lady pedigree place,
 she own that for poetry she have no taste,
 that the study of heraldry be more in fashion,
 and boast she know all the crest in the nation. 
say mrs. Routella, — Tom, take out the urn,
 and stir up the fire, you see it do burn. 
the tea thing remove, and the tea-table go,
 the card-table bring, and the card lay thereon,
 the lady ambitious for each other crown,
 like courtier contend for honour sit down. 
