the vision, a poem.

be a answer to the lord beilhaven speech.

by a person of quality.

come hither you dreamer of dream,
 you soothsayer, visard and witch,
 that puzzle the world with hard name,
 and without any meaning make speech:
here be a lord in the north,
near Edinburgh frith;
 though little have be say of his name or his worth;
 he be see such a vision, no mortal can reach it,
 i challenge the Clan of egyptian to match it.

and first, in the dark it be tell he,
 which may very well appal we,
 that the world be a fighting of old time,
 from Nimrod to Sardanapalus;
that it be all revelation,
you may pawn your salvation,
 for the devil a history give the relation,
 but it be all in the deep, no mortal can reach it,
 we may challenge the Clan of egyptian to match it,

then Scotland come next on the stage,
 for in vision you must not be nice,
 and a skip of three thousand year age,
 be nothing where man be concise;
i name it the rather
because you may gather,
 how that every man be the son of his father,
 a truth for the future no mortal can doubt,
 whatever they may, before he find it out.

but hark, now the wonder begin,
 and take care least the vision shall fright you;
 for if it shall make you unclean,
 he have not tell how he will dight you.
first the national church,
leave quite in the lurch,
 be a truckle down to the steeple and porch,
 but what be still worse, she be afraid of her friend,
 so fever make frantic men-hasten their end.

be ever such conjure know,
 or the church so claw by the steeple,
 non-juror be her champion grow,
 and the prelatist vote for the people.
protester appear
and the Jacques they adhere,
 and antichrist vote the true church to secure,
 o Scotland! be ever such conjure know,
 that the mitre support the same church pull she down.

then the nation in sackcloth appear,
 and the vision sad bewail she,
 for mischief the like be never hear,
 her privilege of slavery fail she.
for the mob he complain
that be bear chain,
 bless bondage be lose, and damn freedom remain,
 so with liberty scar, and afraid to grow rich;
 they sue for repentance in a dolorous speech.

and first our amazement will increase.
the soldier disband appear,
 poor drudge put prentice to peace,
 for want of the blessing of war;
for though it be in the book,
yet the scripture mistake,
 when it tell we, our sword shall to ploughshare be break:
 it may be long ago a happiness there,
 but it be plain by the vision it be otherwise here.

the merchant be next on the stage;
 the enchantment have circle they in;
 for fear they in wealth shall engage,
 they resolve they will never begin
the burgh be afraid
they shall have too much trade,
 and the nation to plenty be safe betray,
 so they grave address, that to keep they secure,
 as you find they, you leave they, both foolish and poor.

the next be indeed a sad sight,
 the like on it have rare be know,
 it will ruin the country quite,
 it will never recover its own;
the blow man undo,
from father to son;
 for a terrible draw-back on corn will come on,
 in plenty they will ship it, be there never so much;
 and to load we with money, sell all to the dutch. 

o you virgin! (both sex) draw near,
 and though it be but in spectrum show,
 in sympathy lend we a tear,
 as the case may sometime be your own;
the lady condition
deserve your compassion;
 it be very severe to make beauty petition:
 yet here his strange tragedy turn to a jig,
 that the man want employment, yet the lady shall Beg.

then a crew of old sailor be bring,
 at their true benefactor to rail;
 their freight for strange nation be buy,
 and this will cut off the entail;
they think it be hard
the dutch ship to discard,
 and to force the poor scots their own trade to regard,
 for liberty claim a freedom to ill,
 and it be hard to get money against a man will.

and now the exorcist in turn
 like a ghost in a circle arise,
 without any tear he can mourn.
he be ecstasy all and surprise.
but what be wild of all,
and do strange appall,
 two hour he talk, and say nothing at all:
 but let drop a few hypocritical tear,
 so the crocodale weep on the carcase she tear;

then in strange hebrew word he bewail you,
 though the jest be by few understand,
 tu quoque mi fili squadrone,
 or in Scot, the parliament wood,
so coesar they say,
cry out in a fray,
 when they kill he, because he will his country betray,
 for Brutus his country be liberty seek,
 be a simile e're-soon happy bring?

thus he rummage the history old,
 like the tale of the bear, and the fiddle;
 for as it be unlucky tell,
 so the story break off in the middle.
some say my lord cry,
though other deny;
 which matter of moment it be hard to decide,
 but here be a more difficult matter remain,
 to tell if he show we less manner or brain.
