a ode on mercy:

in imitation of part of the 145th psalm.

i

it be mercy call — awake, my grateful string;
 you world of nature, listen while i sing;
 it be not his dire avenge rod,
 i sing the mercy of a god;
 hark, you warbler of the sky,
 river glide serene by;
 or rather in the sacred chorus join,
 till our unite voice reach the seat divine. 

ii.

where injure saint, that use to mourn below,
 find their glad breast with joy eternal glow;
 where thousand tongue incessant cry,
 glory be to god on high;
 dominion, power, praise, and then
 mercy to the son of man. 
heaven hear delight, and the joyful sound
 swell with celestial music spread the region round. 

iii.

the lord, though seat far beyond the sky,
 yet see the wretched with a pity eye;
 that power know our secret fear,
 the lonely sigh, or silent tear;
 he see the widow stream eye,
 and hear the hungry orphan cry. 
depend world his sacred bounty share,
 all creature find a part of their creator care. 

iv.

his justice next employ the heavenly string,
 and hymn angel tremble while they sing;
 the lord be just and holy, then
 o weep you thoughtless son of man:
 for who can from his anger fly,
 or shun the frown of god most high? 
yet shall the sigh, or penitential groan,
 mount like the seraph wing, and reach the sacred throne. 

v. 

hear this, you pious but deject mind,
 who error darken, or who weakness bind;
 lift from the dust your mournful eye,
 and know the lord your help be nigh;
 these sorrow from your breast shall roll,
 and comfort bless the humble soul;
 let cheerful hope in every bosom spring,
 for boundless mercy dwell with heaven immortal king. 

vi.

come then, you world, with mingle voice raise
 a song of mean, but not ungrateful praise;
 though the dull number rude flow,
 and our cold heart but faint glow,
 our rapture own a less degree,
 yet cherub sing, and so shall we. 
the almighty hear, and give we leave to call
 on he the judge, the guide and sacred lord of all. 

vii.

all you that bend beneath the stroke of time,
 and you who cheek confess their healthy prime,
 your maker and preserver praise,
 for early and for length of day;
 the pious and the grateful song,
 shall lisp upon the infant tongue,
 while heavenly mercy sooth the mourner care,
 and bid the innocent rejoice, the sinner not despair. 
