absence.

a pastoral ballad.

by —.

how sweet to recall the sweet moment of joy! 
it be this, and this only can absence employ,
 can ease my fond heart, and beguile my soft pain,
 till i see with delight my dear charmer again. 
ah! who ever know such full transport as i,
 while with she, the swift minute unheeded pass by,
 alas! with the sweet recollection i burn,
 bring back your delight, you dear moment, return! 

ah i! what delight in my bosom will rise
 while with eager attention i have hang on her eye,
 and watch the kind beam of compassion and love,
 while she pity my passion, and seem to approve;
 ah i! with what rapture attention i have hang,
 to catch the sweet accent that flow from her tongue,
 when tenderness bid the dear maiden impart
 the please sensation that glow in her heart. 

o how do my fair one consume the long day? 
be the charmer quite easy while i be away? 
indeed if our thought like our heart shall agree,
 the dear lovely maiden be think on i:
 ah! do she but think with such fondness as i,
 how much will she grieve, and how oft will she sigh! 
yet with so much fond love may her bosom never burn,
 if she sigh as i sigh, if she mourn as i mourn. 

but why do i wander? why sigh thus alone? 
alas! it be the loss of my fair that i moan. 
why thus every hour do my sorrow increase? 
alas! it be absence that ruin my peace. 
why swell my sad bosom with fear and with grief? 
ah! nought but her presence can bring i relief. 
why thus down my cheek trickle fast the big tear? 
alas! can i help it? — my fair be not here. 

till i nourish this passion i all unconcerned
 see peace my companion wherever i turn,
 till now with my heart all at ease i can rest,
 and a sigh be a stranger unknown to my breast. 
what then be this love? and why do i endure
 these grief in my mind, nor endeavour to cure? 
when thus my fond heart be overwhelm with despair,
 and i know no delight when away from my fair? 

yet, Colin, these pain, spite of all thou have say,
 by one hour of her presence be far overpay,
 these sorrow from absence which now you deplore,
 then vanish, be lose, and be think of no more. 
recall those rash word, and forbear to complain,
 since the next tender meeting reward all your pain,
 let sweet expectation then lessen your care,
 let hope soften absence, and keep off despair. 

sure, sure those dear pleasure once more will return;
 how long in this absence distress must i mourn? 
how long must i wish, while my lot i deplore,
 that dear angel-face! — can i see it once more! 
that dear angel-voice! — time, how swift do thou seem,
 while i listen enchant as love be her theme! 
o come those dear hour! and to soothe my fond pain
 love again be her theme, and i listen again! 

how dull and how slow do the moment retreat! 
time be when they fly: — now there be lead on their foot. 
you loiterer, be go; why so long do you stay? 
you fly when i be with she, you creep when away. 
ah! Colin, how foolish time be progress to blame,
 his pace be equal, his motion the same;
 it be the joy of her presence make time appear fleet,
 it be the pain of her absence add lead to his foot. 
