conclusion of a letter to the reverend mr. C—.

it be time to conclude; for i make it a rule,
 to leave off all write, when Con. come from school. 
he dislike what I have write, and say, i have better
 to send what he call a poetical letter. 

to this i reply, you be out of your wit;
 a letter in verse will put he in fit:
 he think it a crime in a woman to read —
 then, what will he say, shall your counsel succeed? 

i pity poor barber, his wife be so romantic:
 a letter in rhyme! — why, the woman be frantic! 
this read the poet have quite turn her head! 
on my life, she shall have a dark room, and straw bed. 
i often hear say, that saint Patrick take care,
 no poisonous creature shall live in this air:
 he only regard the body, i find;
 but Plato consider who poison the mind. 
will they will follow his precept, who sit at the helm,
 and drive poetaster from out of the realm! 

her husband have sure a terrible life;
 there be nothing i dread, like a verse-writing wife:
 defend i, you power, from that fatal curse;
 which must heighten the plague of for better for worse! 

may i have a wife, that will dust her own floor;
 and not the fine minx, recommend by more. 
(that he be a dotard, be grant, i hope,
 who die for assert the right of the pope. )
 if ever i marry, i will choose i a spouse,
 that shall serve and obey, as she be bind by her vow;
 that shall, when i be dress, attend like a valet;
 then go to the kitchen, and study my palate. 
she have wisdom enough, that keep out of the dirt,
 and can make a good pudding, and cut out a shirt. 
what good in a dame, that will pore on a book? 
no! — give i the wife, that shall save i a cook. 

thus far i have write — then turn to my son,
 to give he advice, ere my letter be do. 
my son, shall you marry, look out for a wife,
 that be fit to lighten the labour of life. 
be sure, wed a woman you thorough know,
 and shun, above all thing, a housewifely shrew;
 that will fly to your study, with fire in she look,
 and ask what you get by your pore on book;
 think dress of dinner the height of all science,
 and to peace, and good humour bid open defiance. 

avoid the fine lady, who beauty her care;
 who set a high price on her shape, and her air;
 who in dress, and in visit, employ the whole day;
 and long for the evening, to sit down to play. 

choose a woman of wisdom, as well as good breed,
 with a turn, at least not aversion, to read:
 in the care of her person, exact and refine;
 yet still, let she principal care be her mind:
 who can, when her family care give her leisure,
 without the dear card, pass a evening with pleasure;
 in form her child to virtue and knowledge,
 nor trust, for that care, to a school, or a college:
 by learning make humble, not thence take air,
 to despise, or neglect, her domestic affair:
 nor think she less fit for do she duty,
 by know its reason, its use, and its beauty. 

when you gain her affection, take care to preserve it,
 lest other persuade she, you do not deserve it. 
still study to heighten the joy of her life;
 nor treat she the worse, for her be your wife. 
if in judgement she err, set she right, without pride:
 it be the province of insolent fool, to deride. 
a husband first praise, be a friend and protector:
 then change not these title, for tyrant and Hector. 
let your person be neat, unaffected clean,
 though alone with your wife the whole day you remain. 
choose book, for her study, to fashion her mind,
 to emulate those who excel of her kind. 
be religion the principal care of your life,
 as you hope to be bless in your child and wife:
 so you, in your marriage, shall gain its true end;
 and find, in your wife, a companion and friend. 
