on a disease old man, who weep at thought of leave the world.

i 

shame on thy beard! that thou can bugbears dread!
fear death who thou so oft have see,
so oft his guest at funeral be;
thy self 'ith better half already dead! 
it be strange to see that freeze head
such plenteous moisture shed;
whence can this stream be feed?
the tear be just, which at thy birth do flow,
for then alas! thou have to engage
life be inconvenience, but now
thou be allow to quit the tragic stage,
now to be careful to prolong the scene,
and act thy misery over again,
be folly not to be forgive in even thy dote age. 

ii.

full fourscore year (bless we! a dreadful space)
the world have use thou ill,
abuse thou to thy face;
and dotard can thou still
solicit she embrace?
in vain thou covete to enjoy
this haughty dame, when age and pain
have shrink thy nerve, and chill thy vein,
who to thy flourish year, be so reserve and coy.

iii.

can cramp, catharr, and palsy be
such ravish company,
that thou shall mourn the loss of their society?
what pleasure can the grave deprive
thy sense of? what inconvenience give,
which thou be exempt from alive? 
at worst thou can but have
cold lodging in the grave;
nor lie thou warm now though cover over
in Furr, till thy faint limb can bear no more:
thou sleep each night in so much sear-cloth bind,
thou'dst need no more be thou to take thy lodging under-ground. 

iv.

go; lay thy frivolous hope of health aside;
no long potion take,
no more incision make,
let thy dull flesh no more be scarify:
resign, resign thy fate breath,
consult with no physician more, but death:
when all thy surgeon instrument prove vain,
his never-failing dart
will bleed thou gentle at thy heart,
and let out life, the Sourse of all thy pain:
let then thy funeral pile be make,
with rosemary and cypress grace,
aloft on it thy carcass place;
beside thou there thy crutch lay:
those utensil will thus oblige thou more,
foment the kind flame, then when they bear
thy crazy and decrepit limb before!
