answer to the forgo line.

by the late lord Hervey.

too well these line that fatal truth declare,
which long i have know, yet now i blush to hear.
but say, what hope thy fond ill-fated love,
what can it hope, though mutual it shall prove?
this little form be fair in vain for you,
in vain for i thy honest heart be true;
for will thou fix dishonour on my name,
and give i up to penitence and shame;
or gild my ruin with the name of wife,
and make i a poor virtuous wretch for life:
can thou submit to wear the marriage chain,
(too sure a cure for all thy present pain)
no saffron robe for we the godhead wear,
his torch invert, and his face in tear.
though every soft wish be ample crown,
love soon will cease to smile where fortune frown;
then will thy soul my fond consent deplore,
and blame what it solicit before;
thy own exhaust will reproach my truth,
and say i have undo thy blind youth;
that i have damp ambition noble flame,
eclipse thy talent, and obscure thy fame;
to madrigal and ode that wit confine,
that will in senate or in court have shine.
glorious active in thy country cause,
assert freedom, and enact law.

or say, at best, that negative kind
you only mourn, and silent repine;
the jealous daemon in my own fond breast
will all these thought incessant suggest,
and all that sense must feel, though pity have suppress.
yet add grief my apprehension fill
(if there can be addition to those ill)
when they shall cry, who harsh reproof i dread,
"it be thy own deed, thy folly on thy head!"
age know not to allow for thoughtless youth,
nor pity tenderness, nor honour truth;
hold it romantic to confess a heart,
and say those virgin act a wise a wise part
who hospital and bedlam will explore
to find the rich, and only dread the poor;
who legal prostitute, for interest sake,
clodios and timons to their bosom take,
and, if avenge heaven permit increase,
people the world with folly and disease.
those, title, deed, and rent-roll only wed,
while the best bidder mount the venal bed,
and the grave aunt and formal sire approve
this nuptial sale, this auction of their love.
but if regard to worth or sense be show,
that poor degenerate child her friend disown,
who dare to deviate by a virtuous choice
from her great name be hereditary vice.

these scene my prudence usher to my mind,
of all the storm and quicksand i must find,
if i embark upon this summer sea,
where flattery smooth, and pleasure gild the way.
have our ill fate never blow thy dangerous flame
beyond the limit of a friend cold name,
i may upon that score thy heart receive,
and with that guiltless name my own deceive;
that commerce now in vain you recommend,
i dread the latent lover in the friend;
of ignorance i want the poor excuse,
and know, i both must take, or both refuse.

hear then the safe, the firm resolve i make,
never to encourage one i must forsake.
while other maid a shameless path pursue,
neither to interest, nor to honour true,
and proud to swell the triumph of their eye,
exult in love from lover they despise;
their maxim all reverse i mean to prove,
and though i like the lover, quit the love.
