genius, virtue, and reputation.

a fable. from Mons. de la Motte, book v. fable 6. 

as genius, virtue, reputation,
three worthy friend, over all the nation
agree to roam; then pass the sea,
and visit Italy and Greece:
by travel to improve their part,
and learn the language and art;
not like our modern fop and beau,
the improve the pattern of their clothes:

thus genius say; — "companion dear,
"to what i speak, incline a ear.
"some chance, perhaps, may we divide:
"let we against the worst provide,
"and give some sign by which to find
"a friend thus lose, or leave behind.
"for i, if cruel fate shall ever
"i and my dear companion sever,
"go, seek i amid the wall of Rome,
"at angelo or raphael tomb;
"or else at virgil sacred shrine,
"lament with the mournful nine. "

next virtue, pause; — (for she know
the place be but very few,
where she can fair hope to stay
till her companion come that way;)
"pass by (she cry) the court, the ball,
"the masquerade and carnival,
"where all in false disguise appear,
"but vice, who face be ever bare;
"it be ten to one, i be not there.
"caelia, the lovely maid on earth!
"I have be her friend, ever since her birth;
"perfection in her person charm,
"and virtue all her bosom warm;
"a matchless pattern for the fair:
"her dwelling seek, you will find i there."

cry reputation, "i, like you,
"have once a soft companion too:
"as fair her person, and her fame,
"and coquettissa be her name.
"ten thousand lover swell her train;
"ten thousand lover sigh in vain:
"whereve she go, the dangler come;
"yet still i be her favourite flame,
"till once, — (it be at the public show)
"the play be do, we rise to go;
"a thing, who long have cy the fair,
"his neck stiff yok in solitaire,
"with clean white glove first make approach,
"then beg to lead she to her coach:
"she smile, and give her lily hand;
"away they trip it to the strand:
"a hackney-coach receive the pair,
"they want to — but, i will tell where.
"then lose she reputation quite,
"friend take example from that night,
"and never leave i from your sight.
"for oh! if cruel fate intend
"ever to part i from my friend,
"think that i be dead; my death deplore,
"but never hope to see i more!
"in vain you will search the world around;
"lose reputation never to be find."
