a ode to sculpture.

lead by the muse, my step pervade
the sacred haunt, the peaceful shade,
where art and sculpture reign:
i see, i see, at their command,
the live stone in order stand,
and marble breathe through every vein!
time break his hostile scythe; he sigh
to find his power malignant flee;
"and what avail my dart, he cry,
"since these can animate the dead?
"since wake to mimic life, again in stone
"the patriot seem to speak, the hero frown? "
there virtue silent train be see,
fast fix their look, erect their mien.
lo! while, with more than stoic soul,
the attic sage exhaust the bowl,
a pale suffusion shade his eye,
till by degree the marble die!
see there the injure poet bleed!
ah! see he droop his languid head!
what start nerve, what die pain,
what horror freeze every vein!
these be thy work, o sculpture! thy to show
in rugged rock a feeling sense of woe.
yet not alone such theme demand
the phydian stroke, the daedal hand;
i view with melt eye
a soft scene of grief display,
while from her breast the duteous maid
her infant sire with food supply.
in pity stone she weep, to see
his squalid hair, and gall chain:
and tremble, on her bend knee,
his hoary head her hand sustain;
while every look, and sorrow feature prove,
how soft her breast, how great her filial love.
lo! there the wild assyrian queen,
with threaten brow, and frantic mien!
revenge! revenge! the marble cry,
while fury sparkle in her eye.
thus be her awful form behold,
when babylon proud son rebel;
she leave the woman vain care,
and fly with loose dishevel hair;
she stretch her hand, imbrue in blood,
while pale sedition tremble stand;
in sudden silence, the mad crowd obey
her awful voice, and Stygian discord flee!
with hope, or fear, or love, by turn,
the marble leap, or shrink, or burn,
as sculpture wave her hand;
the vary passion of the mind
her faithful handmaid be assign,
and rise and fall by her command.
when now life be waste lamp expire,
when sink to dust this mortal frame,
she, like Prometheus, grasp the fire;
her touch revive the lambent flame;
while phoenixlike, the statesman, bard, or sage,
spring fresh to life, and breathe through every age.
hence, where the organ full and clear,
with loud hosanna charm the ear,
behold (a prism within his hand)
absorb in thought, great Newton stand;
such be his solemn wonted state,
his serious brow, and muse gait,
when, teach on eagles-wing to fly,
he trace the wonder of the sky;
the chamber of the sun explore,
where tint of thousand hue be store;
whence every flower in paint robe be dress,
and vary Iris steal her gaudy vest.
here, as devotion, heavenly queen,
conduct she best, her favourite train,
at Newton shrine they bow!
and while with rapture eye they gaze,
with virtue pure vestal ray,
behold their ardent bosom glow!
hail, mighty mind! hail, awful name!
i feel inspire my labour breast;
and lo! i pant, i burn for fame!
come, science, bright etherial guest,
oh come, and lead thy mean, humble son,
through wisdom arduous path to fair renown.
can i to one faint ray aspire,
one spark of that celestial fire,
the lead cynosure, that glow
while smith explore the dark abode,
where wisdom sit on nature shrine,
how great my boast! what praise be i!
illustrious sage! who first can tell
wherein the power of music dwell;
and every magic chain untie,
that bind the soul of harmony! 
to thou, when moulder in the dust,
to thou shall swell the breathe bust:
shall here (for this reward thy merit claim)
"stand next in place to Newton, as in fame."
