[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night ix. the consolation.

contain, among other thing, 1. — a moral survey of the nocturnal heaven. 2. — a night address to the deity.

humble inscribe to his grace the duke of Newcastle, one of his majesty principal secretary of state.

as when a traveller, a long day pass
 in painful search of what he can find,
 at night approach, content with the next cot,
 there ruminate awhile his labour lose;
 then cheer his heart with what his fate afford,
 and chant his sonnet to deceive the time,
 till the due season call he to repose:
 thus i, long travel in the way of man,
 and dance, with the rest, the giddy maze
 where disappointment smile at hope career;
 warn by the languor of life evening ray,
 at length have house i in a humble shed;
 where, future wander banish from my thought,
 and wait patient the sweet hour of rest,
 i chase the moment with a serious song. 
song soothe our pain; and age have pain to soothe. 

when age, care, crime, and friend embrace at heart
 tear from my bleed breast, and death dark shade,
 which hover over i, quench they ethereal fire,
 can thou, o night! indulge one labour more? 
one labour more indulge! then sleep, my strain! 
till, haply, wake by raphael golden lyre,
 where night, death, age, care, crime, and sorrow cease;
 to bear a part in everlasting lay,
 though far, far high set, — in aim, i trust,
 symphonious to this humble prelude here. 

have not the muse assert pleasure pure,
 like those above, explode other joy? 
weigh what be urge, Lorenzo, fair weigh;
 and tell i, have thou cause to triumph still? 
i think thou will forbear a boast so bold. 
but if, beneath the favour of mistake,
 thy smile sincere, not more sincere can be
 lorenzo smile than my compassion for he. 
the sick in body call for aid: the sick
 in mind be covetous of more disease;
 and when at worst, they dream themselves quite well. 
to know ourselves disease, be half our cure. 
when nature blush by custom be wipe off,
 and conscience, deaden by repeat stroke,
 have into manner naturalise our crime;
 the curse of curse be, our curse to love;
 to triumph in the blackness of our guilt,
 (as indian glory in the deep jet,)
 and throw aside our sense with our peace. 

but, grant no guilt, no shame, no least alloy;
 grant joy and glory, quite unsullied, shine;
 yet still it ill deserve lorenzo heart. 
no joy, no glory, glitter in thy sight,
 but, through the thin partition of a hour,
 i see its sable weave by destiny;
 and that in sorrow bury; this in shame;
 while howl fury ring the doleful knell;
 and conscience, now so soft thou scarce can hear
 her whisper, echo her eternal peal. 

where the prime actor of the last year scene? 
their port so proud, their buskin, and their plume! 
how many sleep who keep the world awake
 with lustre and with noise! have death proclaim
 a truce, and hang his sate lance on high? 
it be brandish still, nor shall the present year
 be more tenacious of her human leaf,
 or spread of feeble life a thin fall. 
but needless monument to wake the thought;
 life gay scene speak man mortality;
 though in a style more florid, full as plain
 as mausoleum, pyramid, and tomb:
 what be our noble ornament, but death
 turn flatterer of life, in paint, or marble,
 the well-stained canvas, or the feature stone? 
our father grace, or rather haunt, the scene. 
joy people her pavilion from the dead. 

 "profess diversion! can these escape?"
far from it: these present we with a shroud;
 and talk of death, like garland over a grave. 
as some bold plunderer for bury wealth,
 we ransack tomb for pastime; from the dust
 call up the sleep hero; bid he tread
 the scene for our amusement. how like god
 we sit; and, wrap in immortality,
 shed generous tear on wretch bear to die;
 their fate deplore, to forget our own! 

what, all the pomp and triumph of our life,
 but legacy in blossom? our lean soil,
 luxuriant grow, and rank in vanity,
 from friend inter beneath, a rich manure! 
like other worm, we banquet on the dead;
 like other worm, shall we crawl on, nor know
 our present frailty, or approach fate? 

Lorenzo! such the glory of the world! 
what be the world itself? thy world? — a grave. 
where be the dust that have not be alive? 
the spade, the plough, disturb our ancestor;
 from human mould we reap our daily bread. 
the globe around earth hollow surface shake,
 and be the ceiling of her sleep son. 
over devastation we blind revel keep;
 whole bury town support the dancer heel. 
the moist of human frame the sun exhale;
 wind scatter, through the mighty void, the dry;
 earth repossess part of what she give,
 and the free spirit mount on wing of fire;
 each element partake our scatter spoil;
 as nature, wide, our ruin spread: man death
 inhabit all thing but the thought of man! 

nor man alone; his breathe bust expire,
 his tomb be mortal; empire die. where now
 the roman? greek? they stalk, a empty name! 
yet few regard they in this useful light;
 though half our learning be their epitaph. 
when down thy vale, unlocked by midnight think,
 that love to wander in thy sunless realm,
 o death! i stretch my view; what vision rise! 
what triumph, toil imperial, art divine,
 in wither laurel, glide before my sight! 
what length of far-famed age, billowed high
 with human agitation, roll along
 in unsubstantial image of air! 
the melancholy ghost of dead renown,
 whisper faint echo of the world applause,
 with penitential aspect, as they pass,
 all point at earth, and hiss at human pride,
 the wisdom of the wise, and prancing of the great. 

but, o Lorenzo, far the rest above,
 of ghastly nature and enormous size,
 one form assault my sight, and chill my blood,
 and shake my frame. of one depart world
 i see the mighty shadow: oozy wreath
 and dismal sea-weed crown she! over her urn,
 recline, she weep her desolate realm,
 and bloat son; and, weep, prophecy
 another dissolution, soon, in flame:
 but, like Cassandra, prophecy in vain;
 in vain, to many; not, i trust, to thou. 

for, know thou not, or be thou loath to know,
 the great decree, the counsel of the sky? 
deluge and conflagration, dreadful power! 
prime minister of vengeance! chain in cave
 distinct, apart, the giant fury roar;
 apart, or, such their horrid rage for ruin,
 in mutual conflict will they rise, and wage
 eternal war, till one be quite devour. 
but not for this ordain their boundless rage
 when heaven inferior instrument of wrath,
 war, famine, pestilence, be find too weak
 to scourge a world for her enormous crime,
 these be let loose, alternate; down they rush,
 swift and tempestuous, from they eternal throne,
 with irresistible commission arm,
 the world, in vain correct, to destroy,
 and ease creation of the shock scene. 

see thou, Lorenzo, what depend on man? 
the fate of nature; as for man her birth. 
earth actor change earth transitory scene,
 and make creation groan with human guilt. 
how must it groan, in a new deluge whelm,
 but not of water! at the destine hour,
 by the loud trumpet summon to the charge,
 see, all the formidable son of fire,
 eruption, earthquake, comet, lightning, play
 their various engine; all at once disgorge
 their blaze magazine; and take by storm
 this poor terrestrial citadel of man. 

amaze period! when each mountain-height
 out-burns Vesuvius; rock eternal pour
 their melt mass, as river once they pour;
 star rush; and final ruin fierce drive
 her ploughshare over creation! — while aloft
 more than astonishment, if more can be! 
far other firmament than ever be see,
 than ever be think by man! far other star! 
star animate, that govern these of fire. 
far other sun! — a sun, o how unlike
 the babe at Bethlehem! how unlike the man
 that groan on Calvary! yet he it be;
 that man of sorrow! o how change! what pomp! 
in grandeur terrible, all heaven descend! 
and god, ambitious, triumph in his train. 
a swift archangel, with his golden wing,
 as blot and cloud, that darken and disgrace
 the scene divine, sweep star and sun aside. 
and now, all dross remove, heaven own pure day,
 full on the confine of our ether, flame:
 while (dreadful contrast!) far (how far!) beneath,
 hell, burst, belch forth her blaze sea,
 and storm sulphureous; her voracious jaw
 expand wide, and roar for her prey. 

Lorenzo, welcome to this scene; the last
 in nature course, the first in wisdom thought. 
this strike, if aught can strike thou; this awake
 the most supine; this snatch man from death. 
Rouse, rouse, Lorenzo, then, and follow i,
 where truth, the most momentous man can hear,
 loud call my soul, and ardour wing her flight. 
i find my inspiration in my theme;
 the grandeur of my subject be my muse. 

at midnight, (when mankind be wrap in peace,
 and worldly fancy feed on golden dream,)
 to give more dread to man most dreadful hour,
 at midnight, it be presume, this pomp will burst
 from tenfold darkness; sudden as the spark
 from smite steel; from nitrous grain, the blaze. 
man, start from his couch, shall sleep no more;
 the day be break which never more shall close! 
above, around, beneath, amazement all! 
terror and glory join in their extreme! 
our god in grandeur, and our world on fire! 
all nature struggle in the pang of death! 
do thou not hear she? do thou not deplore
 her strong convulsion, and her final groan? 
where be we now? ah i! the ground be go
 on which we stand! Lorenzo, while thou may,
 provide more firm support, or sink for ever! 
 "where? how? from whence?"vain hope! it be too late! 
where, where, for shelter, shall the guilty fly,
 when consternation turn the good man pale? 

great day! for which all other day be make;
 for which earth rise from chaos, man from earth;
 and a eternity, the date of god,
 descend on poor earth-created man! 
great day of dread, decision, and despair! 
at thought of thou each sublunary wish
 let go its eager grasp, and drop the world;
 and catch at each reed of hope in heaven. 
at thought of thou! — and be thou absent then? 
Lorenzo, no; it be here! — it be begin: —
 already be begin the grand assize,
 in thou, in all; depute conscience scale
 the dread tribunal, and forestall our doom;
 forestall; and, by forestal, prove it sure. 
why on himself shall man void judgement pass? 
be idle nature laugh at her son? 
who conscience send, her sentence will support,
 and god above assert that god in man. 

thrice happy they that enter now the court
 heaven open in their bosom: but, how rare,
 ah i! that magnanimity, how rare! 
what hero like the man who stand himself;
 who dare to meet his naked heart alone;
 who hear, intrepid, the full charge it bring,
 resolve to silence future murmur there? 
the coward fly; and, fly, be undo. 
(art thou a coward? no!) the coward fly;
 think, but think slight; ask, but fear to know;
 ask, "what be truth?"with Pilate; and retire;
 dissolve the court, and mingle with the throng;
 asylum sad from reason, hope, and heaven! 

shall all but man look out, with ardent eye,
 for that great day which be ordain for man? 
o day of consummation! mark supreme
 (if man be wise) of human thought! nor least,
 or in the sight of angel or their king! 
angel, who radiant circle, height over height,
 order over order, rise, blaze over blaze,
 as in a theatre, surround this scene,
 intent on man, and anxious for his fate:
 angel look out for thou; for thou, their lord,
 to vindicate his glory; and for thou
 creation universal call aloud,
 to disinvolve the moral world, and give
 to nature renovation bright charm. 
shall man alone, who fate, who final fate,
 hang on that hour, exclude it from his thought? 
i think of nothing else; i see, i feel it! 
all nature, like a earthquake, tremble round! 
all deity, like summer swarm, on wing! 
all bask in the full meridian blaze! 
i see the judge enthrone, the flame guard,
 the volume open, open every heart! 
a sunbeam point out each secret thought! 
no patron, intercessor none! now past
 the sweet, the clement, mediatorial hour! 
for guilt no plea! to pain, no pause, no bound! 
inexorable all, and all extreme! 

nor man alone; the foe of god and man,
 from his dark den, blaspheme, drag his chain,
 and rear his brazen front, with thunder scar;
 receive his sentence, and begin his hell. 
all vengeance past, now, seem abundant grace:
 like meteor in a stormy sky, how roll
 his baleful eye! he curse who he dread;
 and deem it the first moment of his fall. 

it be present to my thought! — and yet where be it? 
angel can tell i; angel can guess
 the period; from create being lock
 in darkness. but the process and the place
 be less obscure: for these may man inquire. 
say, thou great close of human hope and fear,
 great key of heart, great finisher of fate,
 great end, and great begin! say, where be thou? 
be thou in time, or in eternity? 
nor in eternity, nor time, i find thou. 
these, as two monarch, on their border meet,
 (monarch of all elapse, or unarrived!) 
as in debate, how best their power ally
 may swell the grandeur, or discharge the wrath,
 of he who both their monarchy obey. 

time — this vast fabric for he build (and doom
 with he to fall) now burst over his head;
 his lamp, the sun, extinguish — from beneath
 the frown of hideous darkness call his son
 from their long slumber; from earth heave womb,
 to second birth. contemporary throng! 
rouse at one call, upstart from one bed,
 press in one crowd, appal with one amaze,
 he turn they over, eternity, to thou. 
then (as a king depose disdain to live)
 he fall on his own scythe; nor fall alone;
 his great foe fall with he; time, and he
 who murder all time be offspring, death, expire. 

time be! eternity now reign alone! 
awful eternity, offend queen! 
and her resentment to mankind how just! 
with kind intent solicit access,
 how often have she knock at human heart! 
rich to repay their hospitality,
 how often call, and with the voice of god!
 yet bear repulse, exclude as a cheat,
 a dream! while foul foe find welcome there! 
a dream, a cheat, now, all thing but her smile. 

for, lo! her twice ten thousand gate, throw wide
 as thrice from Indus to the freeze pole —
 with banner stream as the comet blaze,
 and clarion loud than the deep in storm,
 sonorous as immortal breath can blow —
 pour forth their myriad, potentate, and power,
 of light, of darkness; in a middle field,
 wide as creation, populous as wide! 
a neutral region! there to mark they event
 of that great drama, who precede scene
 detain they close spectator, through a length
 of age, ripen to this grand result;
 age, as yet unnumbered but by god;
 who now, pronounce sentence, vindicate
 the right of virtue, and his own renown. 

eternity, the various sentence past,
 assign the sever throng distinct abode,
 sulphureous or ambrosial. what ensue? 
the deed predominant, the deed of deed! 
which make a hell of hell, a heaven of heaven! 
the goddess, with determine aspect, turn
 her adamantine key enormous size
 through destiny inextricable ward,
 deep drive every bolt on both their fate. 
then, from the crystal battlement of heaven,
 down, down she hurl it through the dark profound,
 ten thousand thousand fathom; there to rust,
 and never unlock her resolution more. 
the deep resound; and hell, through all her gloom,
 return, in groan, the melancholy roar. 

o how unlike the chorus of the sky! 
o how unlike those shout of joy, that shake
 the whole ethereal! how the concave ring! 
nor strange, when deity their voice exalt;
 and loud far than when creation rise,
 to see creation godlike aim and end
 so well accomplish, so divine close! 
to see the mighty dramatist last act
 (as meet) in glory rise over the rest! 
no fancy god, a god indeed, descend,
 to solve all knot; to strike the moral home;
 to throw full day on dark scene of time;
 to clear, commend, exalt, and crown the whole. 
hence, in one peal of loud, eternal praise,
 the charm spectator thunder their applause;
 and the vast void, beyond, applause resound. 

what then be i? —
 amid applaud world,
 and world celestial, be there find on earth
 a peevish, dissonant, rebellious string,
 which jar in the grand chorus, and complain? 
censure on thou, Lorenzo, i suspend,
 and turn it on myself; how great due! 
all, all be right, by god ordain or do;
 and who but god resume the friend he give? 
and have i be complain then so long? 
complain of his favour, — pain and death? 
who, without pain advice, will ever be good? 
who, without death, but will be good in vain? 
pain be to save from pain; all punishment,
 to make for peace; and death, to save from death;
 and second death, to guard immortal life;
 to rouse the careless, the presumptuous awe,
 and turn the tide of soul another way;
 by the same tenderness divine ordain,
 that plant Eden, and high-bloomed for man
 a fair Eden, endless, in the sky. 

heaven give we friend to bless the present scene;
 resume they, to prepare we for the next. 
all evil natural be moral good:
 all discipline, indulgence, on the whole. 
none be unhappy: all have cause to smile
 but such as to themselves that cause deny. 
our fault be at the bottom of our pain;
 error, in act or judgement, be the source
 of endless sigh: we sin, or we mistake;
 and nature tax, when false opinion sting. 
let impious grief be banish, joy indulge;
 but chief then, when grief put in her claim. 
joy from the joyous frequent betray,
 oft live in vanity, and die in woe. 
joy, amid ill, corroborate, exalt;
 it be joy and conquest; joy and virtue too. 
a noble fortitude in ill delight
 heaven, earth, ourselves; it be duty, glory, peace. 
affliction be the good man shine scene! 
prosperity conceal his bright ray;
 as night to star, woe lustre give to man. 
hero in battle, pilot in the storm,
 and virtue in calamity, admire. 
the crown of manhood be a winter-joy;
 a evergreen that stand the northern blast,
 and blossom in the rigour of our fate. 

it be a prime part of happiness to know
 how much unhappiness must prove our lot;
 a part which few possess! i will pay life tax
 without one rebel murmur from this hour,
 nor think it misery to be a man;
 who think it be, shall never be a god:
 some ill we wish for, when we wish to live. 

what speak proud passion?  "wish my being lose!"
presumptuous, blasphemous, absurd, and false! 
the triumph of my soul be — that i be;
 and therefore that i may be — what? Lorenzo! 
look inward, and look deep, and deep still;
 unfathomable deep our treasure run
 in golden vein through all eternity! 
age, and age, and succeed still
 new age, where this phantom of a hour,
 which court, each night, dull slumber, for repair,
 shall wake, and wonder, and exult, and praise,
 and fly through infinite, and all unlock;
 and, (if deserve,) by heaven redundant love
 make half adorable itself, adore;
 and find in adoration endless joy! 
where thou, not master of a moment here,
 frail as the flower, and fleet as the gale,
 may boast a whole eternity, enrich
 with all a kind omnipotence can pour. 
since Adam fall, no mortal, uninspired,
 have ever yet conceive, or ever shall,
 how kind be god, how great (if good) be man. 
no man too large from heaven love can hope,
 if what be hope he labour to secure. 

ill? — there be none! all-gracious! none from thou;
 from man full many! numerous be the race
 of black ill, and those immortal too,
 beget by madness on fair liberty;
 heaven daughter, hell-debauched! her hand alone
 unlock destruction to the son of man,
 fast bar by thy; high-walled with adamant,
 guard with terror reach to this world,
 and cover with the thunder of thy law;
 who threat be mercy, who injunction guide,
 assist, not restrain, reason choice;
 who sanction, unavoidable result
 from nature course, indulgent reveal;
 if unrevealed, more dangerous, nor less sure. 
thus, a indulgent father warn his son,
 "do this; fly that;"— nor always tell the cause;
 please to reward, as duty to his will,
 a conduct needful to their own repose. 

great god of wonder! (if, thy love survey,
 aught else the name of wonderful retain,)
 what rock be these, on which to build our trust? 
thy way admit no blemish; none i find;
 or this alone — that "none be to be find."
not one, to soften censure hardy crime;
 not one, to palliate peevish grief complaint,
 who, like a demon, murmur, from the dust,
 dare into judgement call her judge. — supreme! 
for all i bless thou; most, for the severe;
 her death — my own at hand — the fiery gulf,
 that flame bound of wrath omnipotent! 
it thunder; — but it thunder to preserve;
 it strengthen what it strike; its wholesome dread
 avert the dread pain; its hideous groan
 join heaven sweet hallelujah in thy praise,
 great source of good alone! how kind in all! 
in vengeance kind! pain, death, gehenna, save. 

thus, in thy world material, mighty mind! 
not that alone which solace and shine,
 the rough and gloomy challenge our praise. 
the winter be as needful as the spring;
 the thunder, as the sun; a stagnate mass
 of vapour breed a pestilential air:
 nor more propitious the favonian breeze
 to nature health, than purify storm. 
the dread volcano minister to good;
 its smother flame may undermine the world. 
loud. flitna fulminate in love to man;
 comet good omen be, when due scan;
 and, in their use, eclipse learn to shine. 

man be responsible for ill receive! 
those we call wretched be a choose band,
 compel to refuge in the right, for peace. 
amid my list of blessing infinite,
 stand this the foremost — that "my heart have bleed."
it be heaven last effort of goodwill to man;
 when pain can bless, heaven quit we in despair. 
who fail to grieve, when just occasion call,
 or grieve too much, deserve not to be bless;
 inhuman, or effeminate, his heart:
 reason absolve the grief which reason end. 
may heaven never trust my friend with happiness,
 till it have teach he how to bear it well,
 by previous pain; and make it safe to smile! 
such smile be i, and such may they remain;
 nor hazard their extinction, from excess. 
my change of heart a change of style demand;
 the consolation cancel the complaint,
 and make a convert of my guilty song. 

as when, overlabour, and incline to breathe,
 a pant traveller some rise ground,
 some small ascent, have gain; he turn he round,
 and measure with his eye the various vale,
 the field, wood, mead, and river he have pass;
 and, satiate of his journey, think of home,
 endear by distance, nor affect more toil:
 thus i, though small indeed be that ascent
 the muse have gain, review the path she tread,
 various, extensive, beat but by few;
 and, conscious of her prudence in repose,
 pause; and with pleasure meditate a end,
 though still remote; so fruitful be my theme. 
through many a field of moral and divine,
 the muse have stray; and much of sorrow see
 in human way; and much of false and vain;
 which none, who travel this bad road, can miss. 
over friend decease full hearty she weep;
 of love divine the wonder she display;
 prove man immortal; show the source of joy;
 the grand tribunal raise; assign the bound
 of human grief: in few, to close the whole,
 the moral muse have shadow out a sketch,
 though not in form, nor with a raphael-stroke,
 of most our weakness need believe or do,
 in this our land of travel, and of hope,
 for peace on earth, or prospect of the sky. 

what then remain? — much! much! a mighty debt
 to be discharge: these thought, o night! be thy;
 from thou they come, like lovers secret sigh,
 while other sleep. so Cynthia, (poet feign,)
 in shadow veil, soft slide from her sphere,
 her shepherd cheere; of she enamour less
 than i of thou. — and be thou still unsung,
 beneath who brow, and by who aid, i sing? 
immortal silence! — where shall i begin? 
where end? or how steal music from the sphere
 to soothe their goddess? 
o majestic night! 
nature great ancestor! day elder-born,
 and fate to survive the transient sun! 
by mortal and immortal see with awe! 
a starry crown thy raven brow adorn;
 a azure zone, thy waist; cloud, in heaven loom
 wrought through variety of shape and shade,
 in ample fold of drapery divine,
 thy flow mantle form, and, heaven throughout,
 voluminous pour thy pompous train. 
thy gloomy grandeurs (nature most august,
 inspire aspect!) claim a grateful verse;
 and, like a sable curtain starred with gold,
 draw over my labour pass, shall close the scene. 

and what, o man! so worthy to be sing? 
what more prepare we for the song of heaven? 
creation of archangel be the theme! 
what, to be sing, so needful? what so well
 celestial joy prepare we to sustain? 
the soul of man, his face design to see
 who give these wonder to be see by man,
 have here a previous scene of object great
 on which to dwell; to stretch to that expanse
 of thought, to rise to that exalt height
 of admiration, to contract that awe,
 and give her whole capacity that strength,
 which best may qualify for final joy. 
the more our spirit be enlarge on earth,
 the deep draught shall they receive of heaven. 

heaven king! who face unveiled consummate bliss;
 redundant bliss! which fill that mighty void
 the whole creation leave in human heart! 
thou, who do touch the lip of jesse son,
 rapt in sweet contemplation of these fire,
 and set his harp in concert with the sphere! 
while of thy work material the supreme
 i dare attempt, assist my dare song. 
loose i from earth enclosure, from the sun
 contract circle set my heart at large;
 eliminate my spirit, give it range
 through province of thought yet unexplored;
 teach i, by this stupendous scaffold,
 creation golden step, to climb to thou. 
teach i with art great nature to control,
 and spread a lustre over the shade of night. 
feel i thy kind assent? and shall the sun
 be see at midnight, rise in my song? 

Lorenzo! come, and warm thou: thou who heart,
 who little heart, be moor within a nook
 of this obscure terrestrial, anchor weigh. 
another ocean call, a noble port;
 i be thy pilot, i thy prosperous gale. 
gainful thy voyage through yond azure main;
 main without tempest, pirate, rock, or shore;
 and whence thou may import eternal wealth;
 and leave to beggare mind the pearl and gold. 
thy travel do thou boast over foreign realm? 
thou stranger to the world! thy tour begin;
 thy tour through nature universal orb. 
nature delineate her whole chart at large,
 on soar soul, that sail among the sphere;
 and man how purblind, if unknown the whole! 
who circle spacious earth, then travel here,
 shall own he never be from home before! 
come, my Prometheus, from thy point rock
 of false ambition if unchain, we will mount;
 we will innocent steal celestial fire,
 and kindle our devotion at the star;
 a theft that shall not chain, but set thou free. 

above our atmosphere intestine war,
 rain fountain-head, the magazine of hail;
 above the northern nest of feather snow,
 the brew of thunder, and the flame forge
 that form the crooked lightning; above the cave
 where infant tempest wait their grow wing,
 and tune their tender voice to that roar
 which soon, perhaps, shall shake a guilty world;
 above misconstrue omen of the sky,
 far-travelled comets calculate blaze,
 elance thy thought, and think of more than man. 
thy soul, till now, contract, wither, shrink,
 blight by blast of earth unwholesome air,
 will blossom here; spread all her faculty
 to these bright ardour; every power unfold,
 and rise into sublimity of thought. 
star teach as well as shine. at nature birth,
 thus their commission run, — "be kind to man."
where be thou, poor benight traveller! 
the star will light thou, though the moon shall fail. 
where be thou, more benight, more astray
 in way immoral? the star call thou back;
 and, if obey their counsel, set thou right. 

this prospect vast, what be it? — weigh aright,
 it be nature system of divinity,
 and every student of the night inspire. 
it be elder scripture, write by God own hand;
 scripture authentic, uncorrupt by man. 
Lorenzo, with my radius (the rich gift
 of thought nocturnal!) i will point out to thou
 its various lesson; some that may surprise
 a un-adept in mystery of night;
 little, perhaps, expect in her school,
 nor think to grow on planet, or on star. 
Bulls, lion, scorpion, monster, here we feign:
 ourselves more monstrous, not to see what here
 exist indeed — a lecture to mankind! 

what read we here? — the existence of a god? 
yes: and of other being, man above;
 native of ether, son of high clime! 
and, what may move lorenzo wonder more,
 eternity be write in the sky. 
and who eternity? Lorenzo! thy:
 mankind eternity. nor faith alone,
 virtue grow here; here spring the sovereign cure
 of almost every vice; but chief thy, —
 wrath, pride, ambition, and impure desire. 

Lorenzo, thou can wake at midnight too,
 though not on moral bend: ambition, pleasure,
 those tyrant i for thou so late fight,
 afford their harass slave but slender rest. 
thou, to who midnight be immoral noon;
 and the sun noontide blaze, prime dawn of day;
 not by thy climate, but capricious crime,
 commence one of our antipode! 
in thy nocturnal rove, one moment halt,
 betwixt stage and stage of riot and cabal;
 and lift thy eye (if bold a eye to lift,
 if bold to meet the face of injure heaven)
 to yonder star: for other end they shine,
 than to light reveller from shame to shame,
 and thus be make accomplice in guilt. 

why from yond arch, that infinite of space,
 with infinite of lucid orb replete,
 which set the live firmament on fire,
 at the first glance, in such a overwhelm
 of wonderful, on man astonish sight
 rush omnipotence? — to curb our pride;
 our reason rouse, and lead it to that power
 who love let down these silver chain of light,
 to draw up man ambition to himself,
 and bind our chaste affection to his throne. 
thus the three virtue, least alive on earth,
 and welcome on heaven coast with most applause, —
 a humble, pure, and heavenly-minded heart, —
 be here inspire. and can thou gaze too long? 

nor stand thy wrath deprive of its reproof,
 or un-upbraided by this radiant choir. 
the planet of each system represent
 kind neighbour; mutual amity prevail;
 sweet interchange of ray, receive, return;
 enlighten, and enlighten! all, at once,
 attract, and attract! patriot-like,
 none sin against the welfare of the whole;
 but their reciprocal, unselfish aid
 afford a emblem of millennial love. 
nothing in nature, much less conscious being,
 be ever create sole for itself:
 thus man his sovereign duty learn in this
 material picture of benevolence. 

and know, of all our supercilious race,
 thou most inflammable, thou wasp of man! 
man angry heart, inspect, will be find
 as right set as be the starry sphere;
 it be nature structure, break by stubborn will,
 breed all that uncelestial discord there. 
will thou not feel the bias nature give? 
can thou descend from converse with the sky,
 and seize thy brother throat? for what? a clod? 
a inch of earth? the planet cry, "forbear."
they chase our double darkness; nature gloom,
 and (kind still!) our intellectual night. 

and see, day amiable sister send
 her invitation, in the soft ray
 of mitigate lustre; court thy sight,
 which suffer from her tyrant brother blaze. 
night grant thou the full freedom of the sky,
 nor rude reprimand thy lift eye;
 with gain and joy she bribe thou to be wise. 
night open the noble scene, and shed a awe
 which give those venerable scene full weight,
 and deep reception in they entender heart;
 while light peep through the darkness like a spy,
 and darkness show its grandeur by the light. 
nor be the profit great than the joy,
 if human heart at glorious object glow,
 and admiration can inspire delight. 

what speak i more than i, this moment, feel? 
with please stupor first the soul be strike;
 (stupor ordain to make she true wise!) 
then into transport start from her trance,
 with love and admiration how she glow! 
this gorgeous apparatus, this display,
 this ostentation of creative power,
 this theatre, — what eye can take it in? 
by what divine enchantment be it raise,
 for mind of the first magnitude to launch
 in endless speculation, and adore? 
one sun by day, by night ten thousand shine;
 and light we deep into the deity;
 how boundless in magnificence and might! 
o what a confluence of ethereal fire,
 from urn unnumbered, down the steep of heaven,
 stream to a point, and centre in my sight! 
nor tarry there; i feel it at my heart. 
my heart, at once, it humble and exalt;
 lay it in dust, and call it to the sky. 
who see it unexalted, or unawed? 
who see it, and can stop at what be see? 
material offspring of omnipotence! 
inanimate, all-animating birth! 
work worthy he who make it! worthy praise,
 all praise, praise more than human! nor deny
 thy praise divine! — but though man, drown in sleep,
 withhold his homage, not alone i wake;
 bright legion swarm unseen, and sing, unheard
 by mortal ear, the glorious architect,
 in this his universal temple hang
 with lustre, with innumerable light,
 that shed religion on the soul; at once,
 the temple and the preacher! o how loud
 it call devotion, genuine growth of night! 

devotion! daughter of astronomy! 
a undevout astronomer be mad. 
true, all thing speak a god; but, in the small,
 man trace out he; in great, he seize man;
 seize, and elevate, and rap, and fill
 with new inquiry, amid associate new. 
tell i, you star, you planet, tell i, all
 you starred and planete inhabitant! what be it? 
what be these son of wonder? say, proud arch,
 (within who azure palace they dwell,)
 build with divine ambition! in disdain
 of limit build! build in the taste of heaven! 
vast concave, ample dome! be thou design
 a meet apartment for the deity? —
 not so; that think alone thy state impair,
 thy lofty sink, and shallows thy profound,
 and straiten thy diffusive; dwarf the whole,
 and make a universe a orrery. 

but when i drop my eye, and look on man,
 thy right regain, thy grandeur be restore,
 o nature! wide fly off they expand round. 
as when whole magazine at once be fire,
 the smite air be hollow by the blow;
 the vast displosion dissipate the cloud;
 shock ether billow dash the distant sky:
 thus (but far more) they expand round fly off,
 and leave a mighty void, a spacious womb,
 may teem with new creation; reinflamed
 thy luminary triumph, and assume
 divinity themselves. nor be it strange,
 matter high-wrought to such surprise pomp,
 such godlike glory, steal the style of god
 from age dark, obtuse, and steep in sense;
 for, sure, to sense they true be divine,
 and half-absolved idolatry from guilt;
 nay, turn it into virtue. such it be
 in those who put forth all they have of man
 unlost, to lift their thought, nor mount high;
 but, weak of wing, on planet perch; and think
 what be their high, must be their adore. 

but they how weak, who can no high mount! 
and be there then, Lorenzo, those to who
 unseen and unexistent be the same;
 and, if incomprehensible be join,
 who dare pronounce it madness to believe? 
why have the mighty builder throw aside
 all measure in his work; stretch out his line
 so far, and spread amazement over the whole? 
then, (as he take delight in wide extreme,)
 deep in the bosom of his universe,
 drop down that reason mite, that insect, man,
 to crawl, and gaze, and wonder, at the scene? —
 that man may never presume to plead amazement
 for disbelief of wonder in himself. 
shall god be less miraculous than what
 his hand have form? shall mystery descend
 from unmysterious? thing more elevate
 be more familiar? uncreated lie
 more obvious than create, to the grasp
 of human thought? the more of wonderful
 be hear in he, the more we shall assent. 
can we conceive he, god he can not be;
 or he not god, or we can not be man. 
a god alone can comprehend a god:
 man distance, how immense! on such a theme,
 know this, Lorenzo, (seem it never so strange,)
 nothing can satisfy but what confound;
 nothing but what astonish be true. 
the scene thou see attest the truth i sing,
 and every star shed light upon thy creed. 
these star, this furniture, this cost of heaven,
 if but report, thou have never believe;
 but thy eye tell thou the romance be true. 
the grand of nature be they almighty oath,
 in reason court, to silence unbelief. 

how my mind, open at this scene, imbibe
 the moral emanation of the sky,
 while nought, perhaps, Lorenzo less admire! 
have the great sovereign send ten thousand world
 to tell we he reside above they all,
 in glory unapproachable recess? 
and dare earth bold inhabitant deny
 the sumptuous, the magnific embassy
 a moment audience? turn we? nor will hear
 from who they come, or what they will impart
 for man emolument, — sole cause that stoop
 their grandeur to man eye? Lorenzo, rouse! 
let thought, awaken, take the lightning wing,
 and glance from east to west, from pole to pole. 
who see, but be confound or convince,
 renounce reason, or a god adore? 
mankind be send into the world to see:
 sight give the science needful to their peace;
 that obvious science ask small learning aid. 
will thou on metaphysic pinion soar? 
or wound thy patience amid logic thorn? 
or travel history enormous round? 
nature no such hard task enjoin: she give
 a make to man directive of his thought;
 a make set upright, point to the star,
 as who shall say, "read thy chief lesson there."
too late to read this manuscript of heaven,
 when, like a parchment scroll, shrink up by flame,
 it fold lorenzo lesson from his sight! 

lesson how various! not the god alone,
 i see his minister; i see, diffuse
 in radiant order, essence sublime,
 of various office, of various plume,
 in heavenly livery distinct clad,
 azure, green, purple, pearl, or downy gold,
 or all commix; they stand, with wing outspread,
 listen to catch the master least command,
 and fly through nature ere the moment end;
 number innumerable! — well-conceived
 by pagan and by christian! over each sphere
 preside a angel, to direct its course,
 and feed, or fan, its flame; or to discharge
 other high trust unknown. for who can see
 such pomp of matter, and imagine mind,
 for which alone inanimate be make,
 more spare dispense? that noble son,
 far like the great sire! — it be thus the sky
 inform we of superior numberless,
 as much in excellence above mankind,
 as above earth in magnitude the sphere. 
these, as a cloud of witness, hang over we;
 in a throng theatre be all our deed;
 perhaps a thousand demi-god descend
 on every beam we see, to walk with man. 
awful reflection! strong restraint from ill! 

yet, here, our virtue find still strong aid
 from these ethereal glory sense survey. 
something, like magic, strike from this blue vault:
 with just attention be it view? we feel
 a sudden succour, unimplored, unthought:
 nature herself do half the work of man. 
sea, river, mountain, forest, desert, rock,
 the promontory height, the depth profound
 of subterranean, excavate grot,
 black-browed, and vault high, and yawn wide
 from nature structure, or the scoop of time;
 if ample of dimension, vast of size,
 even these a aggrandise impulse give;
 of solemn thought enthusiastic height
 even these infuse. — but what of vast in these? 
nothing: or we must own the sky forget. 
much less in art. — vain art! thou pigmy power! 
how do thou swell, and strut, with human pride,
 to show thy littleness! what childish toy,
 thy watery column squirt to the cloud! 
thy basine river, and imprison sea! 
thy mountain mould into form of man! 
thy hundred-gated capital! or those
 where three day travel leave we much to ride;
 gaze on miracle by mortal wrought,
 arch triumphal, theatre immense,
 or nod garden pendent in mid-air,
 or temple proud to meet their god half-way! 
yet these affect we in no common kind. 
what then the force of such superior scene? 
enter a temple, it will strike a awe:
 what awe from this the deity have build? 
a good man see, though silent, counsel give:
 the touch spectator wish to be wise:
 in a bright mirror his own hand have make,
 here we see something like the face of god. 
seem it not then enough to say, Lorenzo,
 to man abandon, "have thou see the sky?"

and yet, so thwart nature kind design
 by dare man, he make her sacred awe
 (that guard from ill) his shelter, his temptation
 to more than common guilt, and quite invert
 celestial art intent. the tremble star
 see crime gigantic stalk through the gloom
 with front erect, that hide their head by day,
 and make night still dark by their deed. 
slumber in covert till the shade descend,
 rapine and murder, link, now prowl for prey. 
the miser earth his treasure; and the thief,
 watch the mole, half-beggar he ere morn. 
now plot and foul conspiracy awake;
 and, muffle up their horror from the moon,
 havoc and devastation they prepare,
 and kingdom totter in the field of blood. 
now son of riot in mid-revel rage. 
what shall i do? suppress it? or proclaim? —
 why sleep the thunder? now, Lorenzo, now,
 his best friend couch the rank adulterer
 ascend secure, and laugh at god and man. 
preposterous madman, void of fear or shame,
 lay their crime bare to these chaste eye of heaven;
 yet shrink and shudder at a mortal sight. 
be moon and star for villain only make? 
to guide, yet screen, they with tenebrious light? 
no; they be make to fashion the sublime
 of human heart, and wise make the wise. 

those end be answer once, when mortal live
 of strong wing, of aquiline ascent
 in theory sublime. o how unlike
 those vermin of the night, — this moment sing,
 who crawl on earth, and on her venom feed! —
 those ancient sage, human star! they meet
 their brother of the sky at midnight hour;
 their counsel ask; and, what they ask, obey. 
the Stagyrite, and Plato, he who drink
 the poison bowl, and he of Tusculum,
 with he of Corduba, (immortal name!) 
in these unbounded and elysian walk,
 a area fit for god and godlike man,
 they take their nightly round through radiant path
 by seraph tread; instruct, chief, thus
 to tread in their bright footstep here below;
 to walk in worth still bright than the sky. 
there they contract their contempt of earth;
 of hope eternal kindle there the fire;
 there, as in near approach, they glow, and grow
 (great visitant!) more intimate with god,
 more worth to man, more joyous to themselves. 
through various virtue, they with ardour run
 the zodiac of their learn, illustrious life. 

in christian heart, o for a pagan zeal! 
a needful but opprobrious prayer! as much
 our ardour less, as great be our light. 
how monstrous this in moral! scarce more strange
 will this phenomenon in nature strike, —
 a sun that freeze she, or a star that warm! 

what teach these hero of the moral world? 
to these thou give thy praise, give credit too. 
these doctor never be pension to deceive thou;
 and pagan tutor be thy taste. — they teach,
 that narrow view betray to misery:
 that wise it be to comprehend the whole:
 that virtue rise from nature, ponder well,
 the single base of virtue build to heaven:
 that god and nature our attention claim:
 that nature be the glass reflect god,
 as by the sea reflect be the sun,
 too glorious to be gaze on in his sphere:
 that mind immortal love immortal aim:
 that boundless mind affect a boundless space:
 that vast survey, and the sublime of thing,
 the soul assimilate, and make her great:
 that, therefore, heaven her glory, as a fund
 of inspiration, thus spread out to man. 
such be their doctrine; such the night inspire. 

and what more true? what truth of great weight? 
the soul of man be make to walk the sky;
 delightful outlet of her prison here! 
there, disencumber from her chain, the tie
 of toy terrestrial, she can rove at large;
 there free can respire, dilate, extend,
 in full proportion let loose all her power,
 and, undeluded, grasp at something great. 
nor as a stranger do she wander there;
 but, wonderful herself, through wonder stray;
 contemplate their grandeur, find her own;
 Dives deep in their economy divine,
 sit high in judgement on their various law,
 and, like a master, judge not amiss. 
hence great please, and just proud, the soul
 grow conscious of her birth celestial; breathe
 more life, more vigour, in her native air;
 and feel herself at home among the star;
 and, feeling, emulate her country praise. 

what call we then the firmament, Lorenzo? —
 as earth the body, since the sky sustain
 the soul with food, that give immortal life,
 call it "the noble pasture of the mind,"
 which there expatiate, strengthen, and exult,
 and riot through the luxury of thought. 
call it "the garden of the deity,"
 blossom with star, redundant in the growth
 of fruit ambrosial, moral fruit to man. 
call it "the breast-plate of the true high priest,"
 ardent with gem oracular, that give,
 in point of high moment, right response;
 and ill neglect, if we prize our peace. 

thus have we find a true astrology:
 thus have we find a new and noble sense
 in which alone star govern human fate. 
o that the star (as some have feign) let fall
 bloodshed and havoc on embattle realm,
 and rescue monarch from so black a guilt! 
Bourbon! this wish how generous in a foe! 
will thou be great, will thou become a god,
 and stick thy deathless name among the star,
 for mighty conquest on a needle point? 
instead of forge chain for foreigner,
 bastile thy tutor. grandeur all thy aim? 
as yet thou know not what it be: how great,
 how glorious then appear the mind of man,
 when in it all the star and planet roll! 
and what it seem it be; great object make
 great mind, enlarge as their view enlarge;
 those still more godlike, as these more divine. 

and more divine than these thou can not see. 
dazzle, overpower, with the delicious draught
 of miscellaneous splendour, how i reel
 from thought to thought, inebriate, without end! 
a Eden this, a paradise unlost! 
i meet the deity in every view,
 and tremble at my nakedness before he! 
o that i can but reach the tree of life! 
for here it grow, unguarded from our taste;
 no flame sword deny our entrance here;
 will man but gather, he may live for ever. 

Lorenzo, much of moral have thou see. 
of curious art be thou more fond? then mark
 the mathematic glory of the sky,
 in number, weight, and measure, all ordain. 
lorenzo boast builder, chance and fate,
 be leave to finish his aerial tower:
 wisdom and choice their wellknown character
 here deep impress; and claim it for their own. 
though splendid all, no splendour void of use;
 use rival beauty; art contend with power;
 no wanton waste amid effuse expense;
 the great economist adjust all
 to prudent pomp, magnificent wise. 
how rich the prospect, and for ever new! 
and new to the man that view it most;
 for new still in infinite succeed. 
then, these aerial racer, o how swift! 
how the shaft loiter from the strong string! 
spirit alone can distance the career. 
Orb above orb ascend without end! 
circle in circle, without end, enclose! 
wheel within wheel; Ezekiel! like to thy! 
like thy, it seem a vision or a dream;
 though see, we labour to believe it true! 
what involution! what extent what swarm
 of world, that laugh at earth! immense great! 
immense distant from each other sphere! 
what then the wondrous space through which they roll? 
at once it quite ingulf all human thought;
 it be comprehension absolute defeat. 

nor think thou see a wild disorder here:
 through this illustrious chaos to the sight,
 arrangement neat, and chaste order, reign. 
the path prescribe, inviolable keep,
 upbraid the lawless sally of mankind. 
world, ever thwart, never interfere. 
what knot be tie! how soon be they dissolve,
 and set the seem marry planet free! 
they rove for ever, without error rove;
 confusion unconfuse! nor less admire
 this tumult untumultuous! all on wing,
 in motion all! yet what profound repose! 
what fervid action, yet no noise! as awe
 to silence by the presence of their lord:
 or hush, by his command, in love to man,
 and bid let fall soft beam on human rest,
 restless themselves. on yond cerulean plain,
 in exultation to their god, and thy,
 they dance, they sing eternal jubilee,
 eternal celebration of his praise. 
but, since their song arrive not at our ear,
 their dance perplex exhibit to the sight
 fair hieroglyphic of his peerless power. 
Mark, how the labyrinthian turn they take,
 the circle intricate, and mystic maze,
 weave the grand cipher of omnipotence;
 to god, how great! how legible to man! 

Leaves so much wonder great wonder still? 
where be the pillar that support the sky? 
what more than atlantean shoulder prop
 the incumbent load? what magic, what strange art,
 in fluid air these ponderous orb sustain? 
who will not think they hang in golden chain? 
and so they be, — in the high will of heaven,
 which fix all; make adamant of air,
 or air of adamant; make all of nought,
 or nought of all; if such the dread decree. 

imagine from their deep foundation tear
 the most gigantic son of earth, the broad
 and tower Alps, all toss into the sea;
 and, light as down, or volatile as air,
 their bulk enormous dance on the wave,
 in time and measure exquisite; while all
 the wind, in emulation of the sphere,
 tune their sonorous instrument aloft,
 the concert swell, and animate the ball:
 will this appear amaze? what then world,
 in a far thin element sustain,
 and act the same part, with great skill,
 more rapid movement, and for noble end? 

more obvious end to pass, be not these star
 the seat majestic, proud imperial throne,
 on which angelic delegate of heaven,
 at certain period, as the sovereign nod,
 discharge high trust of vengeance or of love;
 to clothe, in outward grandeur, grand design,
 and act most solemn still more solemnise? 

you citizen of air! what ardent thanks,
 what full effusion of the grateful heart,
 be due from man indulge in such a sight! 
a sight so noble, and a sight so kind! 
it drop new truth at every new survey! 
feel not Lorenzo something stir within,
 that sweep away all period? as these sphere
 measure duration, they no less inspire
 the godlike hope of age without end. 
the boundless space, through which these rover take
 their restless roam, suggest the sister-thought
 of boundless time. thus by kind nature skill,
 to man unlaboured, that important guest,
 eternity, find entrance at the sight:
 and a eternity for man ordain,
 or these his destine midnight counsellor,
 the star, have never whisper it to man. 
nature inform, but never insult, her son. 
can she then kindle the most ardent wish
 to disappoint it? — that be blasphemy. 
thus of thy creed a second article,
 momentous as they existence of a god,
 be find (as i conceive) where rare seek:
 and thou may read thy soul immortal here. 

here, then, Lorenzo! on these glory dwell;
 nor want the gilt, illuminate roof,
 that call the wretched gay to dark delight. 
assembly? — this be one divine bright;
 here, unendanger in health, wealth, or fame,
 range through the fair, and the sultan scorn. 
he, wise as thou, no crescent hold so fair
 as that which on his turban awe a world;
 and think the moon be proud to copy he. 
look on she, and gain more than world can give, —
 a mind superior to the charm of power. 
thou muffle in delusion of this life! 
can yonder moon turn ocean in his bed,
 from side to side, in constant ebb and flow,
 and purify from stench his watery realm? 
and fail her moral influence? want she power
 to turn lorenzo stubborn tide of thought
 from stagnate on earth infect shore,
 and purge from nuisance his corrupt heart? 
fail her attraction when it draw to heaven? 
nay, and to what thou value more, earth joy? 
mind elevate, and pant for unseen,
 and defecate from sense, alone obtain
 full relish of existence undeflowered,
 the life of life, the zest of worldly bliss. 
all else on earth amount — to what? to this:
 "bad to be suffer; blessing to be leave:"
 earth rich inventory boast no more. 

of high scene be then the call obey. 
o let i gaze! — of gaze there be no end. 
o let i think! — thought too be wilder here;
 in midway flight imagination tire;
 yet soon reprune her wing to soar anew,
 her point unable to forbear or gain;
 so great the pleasure, so profound the plan! 
a banquet this, where man and angel meet,
 eat the same manna, mingle earth and heaven. 
how distant some of these nocturnal sun! 
so distant, (say the sage,) it be not absurd
 to doubt, if beam, set out at nature birth,
 be yet arrive at this so foreign world;
 though nothing half so rapid as their flight. 
a eye of awe and wonder let i roll,
 and roll for ever: who can satiate sight
 in such a scene? in such a ocean wide
 of deep astonishment? where depth, height, breadth,
 be lose in their extreme; and where to count
 the thick-sown glory in this field of fire,
 perhaps a seraph computation fail. 
now go, ambition! boast thy boundless might
 in conquest over the tenth part of a grain. 

and yet Lorenzo call for miracle,
 to give his totter faith a solid base. 
why call for less than be already thy? 
thou be no novice in theology:
 what be a miracle? — it be a reproach,
 it be a implicit satire, on mankind;
 and while it satisfy, it censure too. 
to common sense, great nature course proclaim
 a deity: when mankind fall asleep,
 a miracle be send, as a alarm,
 to wake the world, and prove he over again,
 by recent argument, but not more strong. 
say, which import more plenitude of power, —
 or nature law to fix, or to repeal? 
to make a sun, or stop his mid career? 
to countermand his order, and send back
 the flame courier to the fright east,
 warm, and astonish, at his evening ray? 
or bid the moon, as with her journey tire,
 in ajalon soft flowery vale repose? 
great thing be these; still great, to create. 
from Adam bower look down through the whole train
 of miracle; — resistless be their power? 
they do not, can, more amaze the mind
 than this, call unmiraculous, survey,
 if due weigh, if rational see,
 if see with human eye. the brute, indeed,
 see nought but spangle here; the fool, no more. 
say thou, "the course of nature govern all?"
the course of nature be the art of god. 
the miracle thou call for, this attest;
 for say, can nature nature course control? 

but, miracle apart, who see he not,
 nature controller, author, guide, and end? 
who turn his eye on nature midnight face
 but must inquire — "what hand behind the scene,
 what arm almighty, put these wheel globe
 in motion, and wound-up the vast machine? 
who round in his palm these spacious orb? 
who bowl they flame through the dark profound,
 numerous as glitter gem of morning dew,
 or spark from populous city in a blaze,
 and set the bosom of old night on fire,
 people her desert, and make horror smile?"
or, if the military style delight thou,
 (for star have fight their battle, league with man,)
 "who marshal this bright host? enrol their name? 
appoint their post, their march, and return,
 punctual, at state period? who disband
 these veteran troop, their final duty do,
 if ever disband?"he, who potent word,
 like the loud trumpet, levy first their power
 in night inglorious empire, where they sleep
 in bed of darkness, arm they with fierce flame,
 arrange and discipline, and clothe in gold;
 and call they out of chaos to the field,
 where now they be with vice and unbelief. 
o let we join this army! join these
 will give we heart intrepid at that hour
 when bright flame shall cut a dark night;
 when these strong demonstration of a god
 shall hide their head, or tumble from their sphere,
 and one eternal curtain cover all! 

strike at that thought, as new-awaked, i lift
 a more enlighten eye, and read the star,
 to man still more propitious; and their aid
 (though guiltless of idolatry) implore;
 nor long rob they of their noble name. 
o you divider of my time! you bright
 accomptant of my day, and month, and year,
 in your fair calendar distinct mark! 
since that authentic, radiant register,
 though man inspect it not, stand good against he;
 since you, and year, roll on, though man stand still;
 teach i my day to number, and apply
 my tremble heart to wisdom; now beyond
 all shadow of excuse for fool on. 
age smooth our path to prudence; sweep aside
 the snare keen appetite and passion spread
 to catch stray soul; and woe to that grey head
 who folly will undo what age have do! 
aid, then, aid, all you star! — much rather, thou,
 great artist! thou, who finger set aright
 this exquisite machine, with all its wheel,
 though intervolve, exact; and point out
 life rapid and irrevocable flight,
 with such a index fair as none can miss
 who lift a eye, nor sleep till it be close. 
open my eye, dread deity! to read
 the tacit doctrine of thy work; to see
 thing as they be, unaltered through the glass
 of worldly wish. time, eternity! 
(it be these, mismeasured, ruin all mankind:)
 set they before i; let i lay they both
 in equal scale, and learn their various weight. 
let time appear a moment as it be:
 and let eternity full orb, at once,
 turn on my soul, and strike it into heaven. 
when shall i see far more than charm i now? 
gaze on creation model in thy breast
 unveiled, nor wonder at the transcript more? 
when this vile foreign dust, which smother all
 that travel earth deep vale, shall i shake off? 
when shall my soul her incarnation quit,
 and, re-adopted to thy bless embrace,
 obtain her apotheosis in thou? 

do think, Lorenzo, this be wander wide? 
no: it be direct strike at the mark:
 to wake thy dead devotion be my point;
 and how i bless night consecrate shade,
 which to a temple turn a universe,
 fill we with great idea full of heaven,
 and antidote the pestilential earth! 
in every storm that either frown or fall,
 what a asylum have the soul in prayer! 
and what a fane be this, in which to pray! 
and what a god must dwell in such a fane! 
o what a genius must inform the sky! 
and be lorenzo salamander-heart
 cold and untouched amid these sacred fire? 
o you nocturnal spark, you glow ember,
 on heaven broad hearth! who burn, or burn no more,
 who blaze, or die, as great jehovah breath
 or blow you, or forbear; assist my song;
 pour your whole influence; exorcise his heart,
 so long possess; and bring he back to man. 

and be Lorenzo a demurrer still? 
pride in thy part provoke thou to contest
 truth which, contest, put thy part to shame. 
nor shame they more lorenzo head than heart;
 a faithless heart, how despicable small! 
too strait aught great or generous to receive! 
fill with a atom! fill and foul with self! 
and self-mistaken! self, that last a hour! 
instinct and passion, of the noble kind,
 lie suffocate there! or they alone,
 reason apart, will wake high hope; and open,
 to ravish thought, that intellectual sphere
 where order, wisdom, goodness, providence,
 their endless miracle of love display,
 and promise all the true great desire. 
the mind that will be happy, must be great;
 great in its wish; great in its survey. 
extend view a narrow mind extend;
 push out its corrugate, expansive make,
 which, ere long, more than planet shall embrace. 
a man of compass make a man of worth:
 divine contemplate, and become divine. 

as man be make for glory and for bliss,
 all littleness be in approach to woe. 
open thy bosom, set thy wish wide,
 and let-in manhood; let-in happiness. 
admit the boundless theatre of thought
 from nothing up to god; which make a man. 
take god from nature, nothing great be leave;
 man mind be in a pit, and nothing see;
 man heart be in a jake, and love the mire. 
emerge from thy profound; erect thy eye;
 see thy distress; how close be thou besiege! 
besiege by nature, the proud sceptic foe! 
enclose by these innumerable world,
 sparkle conviction on the dark mind,
 as in a golden net of providence
 how be thou catch, sure captive of belief! 
from this thy bless captivity what art,
 what blasphemy to reason, set thou free? 
this scene be heaven indulgent violence:
 can thou bear up against this tide of glory? 
what be earth, bosom in these ambient orb,
 but faith in god impose and press on man? 
dare thou still litigate thy desperate cause,
 spite of these numerous awful witness,
 and doubt the deposition of the sky? 
o how laborious be thy way to ruin! 
laborious? it be impracticable quite;
 to sink beyond a doubt, in this debate,
 with all his weight of wisdom, and of will,
 and crime flagitious, i defy a fool. 
some wish they do; but no man disbelieve. 
god be a spirit; spirit can strike
 these gross material organ; god by man
 as much be see as man a god can see,
 in these astonish exploit of power. 
what order, beauty, motion, distance, size! 
concertion of design, how exquisite! 
how complicate in their divine police! 
apt mean, great end, consent to general good! —
 each attribute of these material god,
 so long (and that with specious plea) adore,
 a separate conquest gain over rebel think,
 and lead in triumph the whole mind of man. 

Lorenzo, this may seem harangue to thou;
 such all be apt to seem that thwart our will. 
and do thou then demand a simple proof
 of this great master-moral of the sky,
 unskilled, or disincline, to read it there? 
since it be the basis, and all drop without it,
 take it, in one compact, unbroken chain. 
such proof insist on a attentive ear;
 it will not make one amid a mob of thought,
 and, for thy notice, struggle with the world. 
retire; the world shut out; thy thought call home;
 imagination airy wing repress;
 lock up thy sense; let no passion stir;
 wake all to reason; let she reign alone:
 then, in thy soul deep silence, and the depth
 of nature silence, midnight, thus inquire,
 as i have do, — and shall inquire no more. 
in nature channel thus the question run: —

 "what be i? and from whence? — i nothing know
 but that i be; and, since i be, conclude
 something eternal: have there ever be nought,
 nought still have be: eternal there must be. 
but what eternal? — why not human race? 
and Adam ancestor without a end? —
 that be hard to be conceive, since every link
 of that long-chained succession be so frail;
 can every part depend, and not the whole? 
yet grant it true: new difficulty rise:
 i be still quite out at sea; nor see the shore. 
whence earth, and these bright orb? eternal too? 
grant matter be eternal; still these orb
 will want some other father; — much design
 be see in all their motion, all their make;
 design imply intelligence and art:
 that can be from themselves — or man; that art
 man scarce can comprehend, can man bestow? 
and nothing great, yet allow, than man. —
 who motion, foreign to the small grain,
 shoot through vast mass of enormous weight? 
who bid brute matter restive lump assume
 such various form, and give it wing to fly? 
have matter innate motion? then each atom,
 assert its indisputable right
 to dance, will form a universe of dust. 
have matter none? then whence these glorious form
 and boundless flight, from shapeless and repose? 
have matter more than motion? have it think,
 judgement, and genius? be it deep learn
 in mathematics? have it frame such law,
 which but to guess, a Newton make immortal? —
 if so, how each sage atom laugh at i,
 who think a clod inferior to a man! 
if art to form, and counsel to conduct,
 (and that with great far than human skill,)
 reside not in each block — a godhead reign! 
grant, then, invisible, eternal mind;
 that grant, all be solve. but, grant that,
 draw i not over i a still dark cloud? 
grant i not that which i can never conceive? 
a be without origin or end! —
 hail, human liberty! there be no god. —
 yet why? on either scheme that knot subsist;
 subsist it must, in god, or human race:
 if in the last, how many knot beside,
 indissoluble all! — why choose it there,
 where, choose, still subsist ten thousand more? 
reject it where, that choose, all the rest,
 disperse, leave reason whole horizon clear? 
this be not reason dictate; reason say,
 "close with the side where one grain turn the scale." 
what vast preponderance be here! can reason
 with loud voice exclaim — "believe a god?" 
and reason hear be the sole mark of man. 
what thing impossible must man think true
 on any other system! and how strange
 to disbelieve through mere credulity!"

if in this chain Lorenzo find no flaw,
 let it for ever bind he to belief. 
and where the link in which a flaw he find? 
and if a god there be, that god how great! 
how great that power, who providential care
 through these bright orbs dark centre dart a ray,
 of nature universal thread the whole,
 and hang creation, like a precious gem,
 though little, on the footstool of his throne! 

that little gem, how large! a weight let fall
 from a fix star, in age can it reach
 this distant earth? say, then, Lorenzo, where,
 where end this mighty building? where begin
 the suburb of creation? where the wall
 who battlement look over into the vale
 of nonexistence, nothing be strange abode? 
say, at what point of space Jehovah drop
 his slacken line, and lay his balance by;
 weigh world, and measure infinite, no more? 
where rear his terminate pillar high
 its extramundane head; and say to god,
 in character illustrious as the sun? —
 i stand, the plan proud period; i pronounce
 the work accomplish; the creation close:
 shout, all you god! nor shout, you god, alone;
 of all that life, or, if devoid of life,
 that rest, or roll, you height and depth, resound! 
resound! resound! you depth and height, resound! 

hard be those question? — answer hard still. 
be this the sole exploit, the single birth,
 the solitary son, of power divine? 
or have they almighty father, with a breath,
 impregnate the womb of distant space? 
have he not bid, in various province,
 brother-creation the dark bowel burst
 of night primeval; barren now no more? 
and he the central sun, transpierce all
 those giant-generation, which disport
 and dance, as mote, in his meridian ray;
 that ray withdraw, benight, or absorb
 in that abyss of horror whence they spring;
 while chaos triumph, repossess of all
 rival creation ravish from his throne? 
chaos! of nature both the womb and grave! 

think thou my scheme, Lorenzo, spread too wide? 
be this extravagant? — no; this be just;
 just in conjecture, though it be false in fact. 
if it be a error, it be a error spring
 from noble root, high thought of the most high. 
but wherefore error? who can prove it such? —
 he that can set omnipotence a bound. 
can man conceive beyond what god can do? 
nothing but quite impossible be hard. 
he summons into being, with like ease,
 a whole creation, and a single grain. 
Speaks he the word? a thousand world be bear! 
a thousand world? there be space for million more! 
and in what space can his great fiat fail? 
condemn i not, cold critic! but indulge
 the warm imagination. why condemn? 
why not indulge such thought as swell our heart
 with full admiration of that power
 who give our heart with such high thought to swell? 
why not indulge in his augment praise? 
dart not his glory a still bright ray,
 the less be leave to chaos, and the realm
 of hideous night, where fancy stray aghast,
 and, though most talkative, make no report? 

still seem my thought enormous? think again: —
 experience self shall aid thy lame belief. 
glass — that revelation to the sight! —
 have they not lead we deep in the disclose
 of finespun nature, exquisite small,
 and, though demonstrate, still ill-conceived? 
if then, on the reverse, the mind will mount
 in magnitude, what mind can mount too far,
 to keep the balance, and creation poise? 
defect alone can err on such a theme. 
what be too great, if we the cause survey? 
stupendous architect! thou, thou be all! 
my soul fly up and down in thought of thou,
 and find herself but at the centre still! 
i be, thy name! existence, all thy own! 
creation nothing; flatter much, if style
 "the thin, the fleet atmosphere of god."

o for the voice — of what? of who? what voice
 can answer to my want, in such ascent
 as dare to deem one universe too small? 
tell i, Lorenzo! (for now fancy glow,
 fire in the vortex of almighty power,)
 be not this home-creation, in the map
 of universal nature, as a speck,
 like fair Britannia in our little ball;
 exceed fair, and glorious, for its size,
 but, elsewhere, far out-measured, far outshine? 
in fancy (for the fact beyond we lie)
 can thou not figure it, a isle, almost
 too small for notice, in the vast of be;
 sever by mighty sea of unbuilt space
 from other realm; from ample continent
 of high life, where noble native dwell;
 less northern, less remote from deity,
 glow beneath the line of the supreme;
 where soul in excellence make haste, put forth
 luxuriant growth; nor the late autumn wait
 of human worth, but ripen soon to god? 

yet why drown fancy in such depth as these? 
return, presumptuous rover, and confess
 the bound of man, nor blame they as too small. 
enjoy we not full scope in what be see? 
full ample the dominion of the sun! 
full glorious to behold! how far, how wide,
 the matchless monarch, from his flame throne,
 lavish of lustre, throw his beam about he,
 farther and fast than a thought can fly,
 and feed his planet with eternal fire! 
this Heliopolis, by great far
 than the proud tyrant of the Nile, be build;
 and he alone, who build it, can destroy. 
beyond this city, why stray human thought? 
one wonderful, enough for man to know! 
one infinite, enough for man to range! 
one firmament, enough for man to read! 
o what voluminous instruction here! 
what page of wisdom be deny he? none;
 if learn his chief lesson make he wise. 
nor be instruction here our only gain:
 there dwell a noble pathos in the sky,
 which warm our passion, proselyte our heart. 
how eloquent shine the glow pole! 
with what authority it give its charge,
 remonstrate great truth in style sublime,
 though silent, loud! hear earth around; above
 the planet hear; and not unheard in hell:
 hell have her wonder, though too proud to praise. 
be earth, then, more infernal? have she those
 who neither praise, Lorenzo, nor admire? 

lorenzo admiration, pre-engage,
 never ask the moon one question; never hold
 least correspondence with a single star;
 never rear a altar to the queen of heaven
 walk in brightness; or her train adore. 
their sublunary rival have long since
 engross his whole devotion; star malign,
 which make their fond astronomer run mad,
 darken his intellect, corrupt his heart;
 cause he to sacrifice his fame and peace
 to momentary madness, call delight. 
idolater more gross than ever kiss
 the lift hand to Luna, or pour out
 the blood to Jove! — o thou, to who belong
 all sacrifice! o thou great Jove unfeigned! 
divine instructor! thy first volume this
 for man perusal! all in capital! 
in moon and star (heaven golden alphabet!) 
emblazed to seize the sight; who run may read;
 who read can understand. it be unconfined
 to christian land or Jewry; fair write
 in language universal to mankind:
 a language lofty to the learn, yet plain
 to those that feed the flock, or guide the plough,
 or from its husk strike out the bound grain:
 a language worthy the great mind that speak! 
preface and comment to the sacred page! 
which oft refer its reader to the sky,
 as presuppose his first lesson there,
 and scripture self a fragment, that unread. 
stupendous book of wisdom to the wise! 
stupendous book! and open, night, by thou. 

by thou much open, i confess, o night! 
yet more i wish; but how shall i prevail? 
say, gentle night, who modest, maiden beam
 give we a new creation, and present
 the world great picture soften to the sight;
 nay, kind far, far more indulgent still,
 say, thou, who mild dominion silver key
 unlock our hemisphere, and set to view
 world beyond number, world conceal by day
 behind the proud and envious star of noon! 
can thou not draw a deep scene? and show
 the mighty potentate, to who belong
 these rich regalia pompous display
 to kindle that high hope? like he of uz,
 i gaze around; i search on every side: —
 o for a glimpse of he my soul adore! 
as the chase hart, amid the desert waste,
 pant for the live stream; for he who make she
 so pant the thirsty soul, amid the blank
 of sublunary joy. say, goddess, where? 
where blaze his bright court? where burn his throne? 
thou know, for thou be near he; by thou, round
 his grand pavilion, sacred fame report
 the sable curtain draw. if not, can none
 of thy fair daughter-train, so swift of wing,
 who travel far, discover where he dwell? 
a star his dwelling point out below. 
you Pleiades, Arcturus, Mazzaroth,
 and thou, Orion, of still keen eye! 
say, you who guide the wilder in the wave,
 and bring they out of tempest into port! 
on which hand must i bend my course to find he? 
these courtier keep the secret of their king;
 i wake whole night, in vain, to steal it from they. 

i wake; and, wake, climb night radiant scale,
 from sphere to sphere; the step by nature set
 for man ascent, at once to tempt and aid;
 to tempt his eye, and aid his tower thought,
 till it arrive at the great goal of all. 

in ardent contemplation rapid car,
 from earth, as from my barrier, i set out. 
how swift i mount! diminish earth recede;
 i pass the moon; and from her further side
 pierce heaven blue curtain; strike into remote;
 where, with his lift tube, the subtle sage
 his artificial airy journey take,
 and to celestial lengthen human sight. 
i pause at every planet on my road,
 and ask for he who give their orb to roll,
 their forehead fair to shine. from Saturn ring,
 in which of earth a army may be lose,
 with the bold comet take my bold flight
 amid those sovereign glory of the sky,
 of independent, native lustre proud! 
the soul of system, and the lord of life,
 through their wide empire! — what behold i now? 
a wilderness of wonder burn round,
 where large sun inhabit high sphere? 
perhaps the viuas of descend god! 
nor halt i here; my toil be but begin,
 it be but the threshold of the deity,
 or far beneath it i be grovel still. 
nor be it strange; i build on a mistake:
 the grandeur of his work, whence folly seek
 for aid, to reason set his glory high;
 who build thus high for worm, (mere worm to he,)
 o where, Lorenzo, must the builder dwell? 

pause, then; and, for a moment, here respire —
 if human thought can keep its station here. 
where be i? where be earth? nay, where be thou,
 o sun? — be the sun turn recluse? — and be
 his boast expedition short to i? 
to i, how short! on nature Alps i stand,
 and see a thousand firmament beneath,
 a thousand system, as a thousand grain! 
so much a stranger, and so late arrive,
 how can man curious spirit not inquire,
 what be the native of this world sublime,
 of this so foreign, unterrestrial sphere,
 where mortal, untranslated, never stray? 

 "o you, as distant from my little home
 as swift sunbeam in a age can fly! 
far from my native element i roam,
 in quest of new and wonderful to man. 
what province this of his immense domain,
 who all obey? or mortal here, or god? 
you borderer on the coast of bliss, what be you? 
a colony from heaven? or only raise,
 by frequent visit from heaven neighbour realm,
 to secondary god, and half divine? 
whatever your nature, this be past dispute, —
 far other life you live, far other tongue
 you talk, far other thought, perhaps, you think,
 than man. how various be the work of god!
 but say, what think? be reason here enthrone,
 and absolute? or sense in arm against she? 
have you two light? or need you not reveal? 
enjoy your happy realm their golden age? 
and have your Eden a abstemious eve? 
our eve fair daughter prove their pedigree. 
and ask their Adams, "who will not be wise? " 
or, if your mother fall, be you redeem? 
and if redeem, be your redeemer scorn? 
be this your final residence? if not,
 change you your scene, translate? or by death? 
and if by death, what death? — know you disease? 
or horrid war? — with war, this fatal hour,
 Europa groan (so call we a small field,
 where king run mad). in our world death depute
 intemperance to do the work of age,
 and, hang up the quiver nature give he,
 as slow of execution, for dispatch
 send forth imperial butcher; bid they slay
 their sheep, (the silly sheep they fleece before,)
 and toss he twice ten thousand at a meal. 
sit all your executioner on throne? 
with you, can rage for plunder make a god,
 and bloodshed wash out every other stain? —
 but you, perhaps, can bleed: from matter gross
 your spirit clean be delicate clad
 in finespun ether, privilege to soar,
 unload, uninfected: how unlike
 the lot of man! how few of human race
 by their own mud unmurdered! how we wage
 self-war eternal! — be your painful day
 of hardy conflict over? or be you still
 raw candidate at school? and have you those
 who disaffect reversion, as with we? —
 but what be we? you never hear of man,
 or earth; the bedlam of the universe! 
where reason (undiseased with you) run mad,
 and nurse folly child as her own;
 fond of the foul. in the sacred mount
 of holiness, where reason be pronounce
 infallible; and thunder, like a god;
 even there, by saint the demon be outdo:
 what these think wrong, our saint refine to right;
 and kind teach dull hell her own black art:
 Satan, instruct, over their moral smile. —
 but this how strange to you, who know not man! 
have the least rumour of our race arrive? 
call here Elijah, in his flame car? 
pass by you the good Enoch, on his road
 to those fair field, whence Lucifer be hurl;
 who brush, perhaps, your sphere, in his descent,
 stain your pure crystal ether, or let fall
 a short eclipse from his portentous shade? 
o that the fiend have lodge on some broad orb
 athwart his way, nor reach his present home! 
then blacken earth with footstep foul in hell,
 nor wash in ocean, as from Rome he pass
 to britain isle; too, too conspicuous there! "

but this be all digression. where be he
 that over heaven battlement the felon hurl
 to groan, and chain, and darkness? where be he
 who see creation summit in a vale? 
he who, while man be man, he can but seek;
 and, if he find, commence more than man? 
o for a telescope his throne to reach! 
tell i, you learn on earth, or bless above! 
you search, you newtonian angel! tell,
 where your great master orb? his planet, where? 
those conscious satellite, those morning star,
 firstborn of deity! from central love,
 by veneration most profound, throw off;
 by sweet attraction no less strong draw;
 awe, and yet rapture; rapture, yet serene;
 past thought illustrious, but with borrow beam;
 in still approach circle, still remote,
 revolve round the sun eternal sire? 
or send, in line direct, on embassy
 to nation — in what latitude? — beyond
 terrestrial thought horizon. — and on what
 high errand send? — here human effort end;
 and leave i still a stranger to his throne. 

full well it may! i quite mistake my road;
 bear in a age more curious than devout;
 more fond to fix the place of heaven or hell,
 than studious this to shun, or that secure. 
it be not the curious, but the pious, path
 that lead i to my point: Lorenzo, know,
 without or star or angel for their guide,
 who worship god shall find he. humble love,
 and not proud reason, keep the door of heaven;
 love find admission, where proud science fail. 
man science be the culture of his heart;
 and not to lose his plummet in the depth
 of nature, or the more profound of god:
 either to know, be a attempt that set
 the wise on a level with the fool. 
to fathom nature (ill-attempted here!) 
past doubt, be deep philosophy above:
 high degree in bliss archangel take,
 as deep learn; the deep, learning still. 
for, what a thunder of omnipotence
 (so might i dare to speak) be see in all! 
in man, in earth, in more amaze sky! 
teach this lesson, pride be loath to learn: —
 "not deep to discern, not much to know,
 mankind be bear to wonder and adore."

and be there cause for high wonder still
 than that which strike we from our past survey? 
yes; and for deep adoration too. 
from my late airy travel unconfined,
 have i learn nothing? — yes, Lorenzo, this: —
 each of these star be a religious house;
 i see their altar smoke, their incense rise,
 and hear hosanna ring through every sphere,
 a seminary fraught with future god. 
nature all over be consecrate ground,
 teem with growth immortal and divine. 
the great proprietor all-bounteous hand
 leave nothing waste; but sow these fiery field
 with seed of reason, which to virtue rise
 beneath his genial ray; and, if escape
 the pestilential blast of stubborn will,
 when grow mature, be gather for the sky. 
and be devotion think too much on earth,
 when being, so superior, homage boast,
 and triumph in prostration to the throne? 

but wherefore more of planet, or of star? 
ethereal journey, and, discover there,
 ten thousand world, ten thousand way devout,
 all nature send incense to the throne,
 except the bold lorenzos of our sphere? 
open the solemn source of my soul,
 since i have pour, like feign Eridanus,
 my flow number over the flame sky,
 nor see, of fancy or of fact what more
 invite the muse, — here turn we, and review
 our past nocturnal landscape wide: — then say,
 say then, Lorenzo! with what burst of heart,
 the whole, at once, revolve in his thought,
 must man exclaim, adore, and aghast! —

 "o what a root! o what a branch be here! 
o what a father! what a family! 
world, system, and creation! — and creation,
 in one agglomerate cluster, hang,
 great vine, on thou! on thou the cluster hang;
 the filial cluster, infinite spread
 in glow globe, with various being fraught;
 and drink (nectareous draught!) immortal life. 
or, shall i say? (for who can say enough?) 
a constellation of ten thousand gem,
 (and o! of what dimension, of what weight!) 
set in one signet, flame on the right hand
 of majesty divine! the blaze seal
 that deep stamp on all-created mind,
 indelible, his sovereign attribute,
 omnipotence and love! that pass bind,
 and this surpass that. nor stop we here
 for want of power in god, but think in man. 
even this, acknowledge, leave we still in debt:
 if great aught, that great all be thy,
 dread sire! — accept this miniature of thou;
 and pardon a attempt from mortal thought,
 in which archangel may have fail unblamed. "

how such idea of they almighty power,
 and such idea of they almighty plan,
 (idea not absurd,) distend the thought
 of feeble mortal! nor of they alone! 
the fullness of the deity break forth
 in inconceivable to man and god. 
think, then, o think, nor ever drop the thought,
 how low must man descend, when god adore! 
have i not, then, accomplish my proud boast? 
do i not tell thou, we will mount, Lorenzo,
 and "kindle our devotion at the star?"

and have i fail? and do i flatter thou? 
and art all adamant? and do confute
 all urge, with one irrefragable smile? 
Lorenzo! mirth how miserable here! 
swear by the star, by he who make they, swear,
 thy heart, henceforth, shall be as pure as they! 
then thou, like they, shall shine; like they, shall rise
 from low to lofty, from obscure to bright,
 by due gradation, nature sacred law. 
the star, from whence? — ask chaos: he can tell. 
these bright temptation to idolatry
 from darkness and confusion take their birth;
 son of deformity! from fluid dregs
 tartarean, first they rise to mass rude,
 and then to sphere opaque; then dim shine;
 then brighten; then blaze out in perfect day. 
nature delight in progress; in advance
 from worse to better: but, when mind ascend,
 progress in part depend upon themselves. 
heaven aid exertion; great make the great;
 the voluntary little lessen more. 
o be a man, and thou shall be a god,
 and half self-made! — ambition how divine! 

o thou, ambitious of disgrace alone,
 still undevout, unkindled? though high-taught,
 school by the sky, and pupil of the star! 
rank coward to the fashionable world,
 be thou ashamed to bend thy knee to heaven? 
curse fume of pride, exhale from deep hell! 
pride in religion be man high praise. 
bent on destruction, and in love with death! 
not all these luminary, quench at once,
 be half so sad as one benight mind,
 which grope for happiness, and meet despair. 
how, like a widow in her weed, the night,
 amid her glimmer taper, silent sit! 
how sorrowful, how desolate, she weep
 perpetual dew, and sadden nature scene! 
a scene more sad sin make the darken soul,
 all comfort kill, nor leave one spark alive. 

though blind of heart, still open be thy eye:
 why such magnificence in all thou see? 
of matter grandeur, know, one end be this,
 to tell the rational who gaze on it, —
 "though that immense great, still great he
 who breast capacious can embrace and lodge,
 unburdened, nature universal scheme;
 can grasp creation with a single thought;
 creation grasp; and not exclude its sire:"
 to tell he farther, — "it behove he much
 to guard they important, yet depend, fate
 of be bright than a thousand sun:
 one single ray of thought outshine they all."
and if man hear obedient, soon he will soar
 superior height, and on his purple wing,
 his purple wing bedrop with eye of gold,
 rise, where thought be now deny to rise,
 look down triumphant on these dazzle sphere. 

why then persist? — no mortal ever live,
 but, die, he pronounce (when word be true)
 the whole that charm thou absolute vain;
 vain, and far worse! — think thou with die man;
 o condescend to think as angel think! 
o tolerate a chance for happiness! 
our nature such, ill choice insure ill fate;
 and hell have be, though there have be no god. 
do thou not know, my new astronomer,
 earth, turn from the sun, bring night to man? 
man, turn from his god, bring endless night;
 where thou can read no moral, find no friend,
 amend no manner, and expect no peace. 
how deep the darkness! and the groan, how loud! 
and far, how far, from lambent be the flame! 
such be lorenzo purchase, such his praise! 
the proud, the politic lorenzo praise! 
though in his ear, and level at his heart,
 i have half read over the volume of the sky. 

for think not thou have hear all this from i;
 my song but echo what great nature speak. 
what have she speak? thus the goddess speak,
 thus speak for ever: — "place at nature head
 a sovereign, which over all thing roll his eye,
 extend his wing, promulgate his command,
 but, above all, diffuse endless good;
 to who, for sure redress, the wrong may fly,
 the vile for mercy, and the pain for peace;
 by who the various tenant of these sphere,
 diversify in fortune, place, and power,
 raise in enjoyment, as in worth they rise,
 arrive at length (if worthy such approach)
 at that bless fountain-head from which they stream;
 where conflict past redouble present joy;
 and present joy look forward on increase;
 and that on more; no period! every step
 a double boon, a promise and a bliss."
how easy sit this scheme on human heart! 
it suit their make, it soothe their vast desire;
 passion be please, and reason ask no more:
 it be rational, it be great! — but what be thy? 
it darken, shock, excruciate, and confound! 
leave we quite naked both of help and hope,
 sink from bad to worse; few year, the sport
 of fortune; then, the morsel of despair. 

say then, Lorenzo, (for thou know it well,)
 what be vice? — mere want of compass in our thought. 
religion, what? — the proof of common-sense. 
how be thou hoot, where the least prevail! 
be it my fault if these truth call thou "fool?"
and thou shall never be miscall by i. 
can neither shame nor terror stand thy friend? 
and be thou still a insect in the mire? 
how, like thy guardian angel, have i fly;
 snatch thou from earth; escort thou through all
 the ethereal army; walk thou, like a god,
 through splendour of flast magnitude, arrange
 on either hand; cloud throw beneath thy foot;
 close cruise on the bright paradise of god;
 and almost introduce thou to the throne! 
and be thou still carouse, for delight,
 rank poison; flast ferment to mere froth,
 and then subside into final gall? 
to being of sublime, immortal make,
 how shock be all joy who end be sure! 
such joy more shock still, the more it charm! 
and do thou choose what end ere well begin,
 and infamous as short? and do thou choose
 (thou, to who palate glory be so sweet)
 to wade into perdition, through contempt,
 not of poor bigot only, but thy own? 
for i have peep into thy cover heart,
 and see it blush beneath a boastful brow;
 for, by strong guilt most violent assault,
 conscience be but disable, not destroy. 

o thou most awful being, and most vain! 
thy will, how frail! how glorious be thy power! 
though dread eternity have sow her seed
 of bliss and woe in thy despotic breast;
 though heaven and hell depend upon thy choice,
 a butterfly come across, and both be flee. 
be this the picture of a rational? 
this horrid image, shall it be most just? 
Lorenzo! no: it can, shall not, be,
 if there be force in reason; or in sound
 chant beneath the glimpse of the moon,
 a magic, at this planetary hour,
 when slumber lock the general lip, and dream
 through senseless maze hunt soul uninspired. 
attend — the sacred mystery begin —
 my solemn night-born adjuration hear. 
hear, and i will raise thy spirit from the dust,
 while the star gaze on this enchantment new;
 enchantment, not infernal, but divine! 

 "by silence, death peculiar attribute;
 by darkness, guilt inevitable doom;
 by darkness and by silence, sister dread! 
that draw the curtain round night ebon throne,
 and raise idea solemn as the scene! 
by night, and all of awful, night present
 to thought or sense! (of awful much to both
 the goddess bring!) by these her tremble fire,
 like vesta, ever burn; and, like she,
 sacred to thought immaculate and pure! 
by these bright orator, that prove, and praise,
 and press thou to revere, the deity;
 perhaps, too, aid thou, when revered awhile,
 to reach his throne; as stage of the soul,
 through which, at different period, she shall pass,
 refine gradual, for her final height,
 and purge off some dross at every sphere! 
by this dark pall throw over the silent world! 
by the world king, and kingdom, most renowned,
 from short ambition zenith set for ever;
 sad presage to vain boaster now in bloom! 
by the long list of swift mortality,
 from Adam downward to this evening knell,
 which midnight wave in fancy startle eye;
 and shock she with a hundred century,
 round death black banner throng, in human thought! 
by thousand, now resign their last breath,
 and call thou — be thou so wise to hear! 
by tomb over tomb arise; human earth
 eject, to make room for — human earth;
 the monarch terror, and the sexton trade! 
by pompous obsequy, that shun the day,
 the torch funereal, and the nod plume,
 which make poor man humiliation proud;
 boast of our ruin, triumph of our dust! 
by the damp vault that weep over royal bone;
 and the pale lamp that show the ghastly dead,
 more ghastly, through the thick incumbent gloom! 
by visit (if there be) from dark scene,
 the glide spectre, and the groan grove! 
by groan and grave, and misery that groan
 for the grave shelter! by despond man,
 senseless to pain of death, from pang of guilt! 
by guilt last audit! by yond moon in blood,
 the rock firmament, the fall star,
 and thunder last discharge, great nature knell! 
by second chaos, and eternal night!"—

be wise: — nor let Philander blame my charm;
 but own not ill-discharged my double debt, —
 love to the living, duty to the dead. 

for know, i be but executor: he leave
 this moral legacy! i make it over
 by his command: Philander hear in i;
 and heaven in both. — if deaf to these, o hear
 florello tender voice; his weal depend
 on thy resolve; it tremble at thy choice:
 for his sake — love thyself. example strike
 all human heart; a bad example more;
 more still a father; that insure his ruin. 
as parent of his being, will thou prove
 the unnatural parent of his misery,
 and make he curse the being which thou give? 
be this the blessing of so fond a father? 
if careless of Lorenzo, spare, o spare
 florello father, and philander friend! 
florello father, ruin, ruin he;
 and from philander friend the world expect
 a conduct, no dishonour to the dead. 
let passion do what noble motive shall;
 let love, and emulation, rise in aid
 to reason; and persuade thou to be — bless. 

this seem not a request to be deny;
 yet (such they infatuation of mankind!)
 it be the most hopeless man can make to man. 
shall i, then, rise in argument and warmth,
 and urge philander posthumous advice,
 from topic yet unbroach? —
 but, o, i faint! my spirit fail! nor strange! 
so long on wing, and in no middle clime;
 to which my great creator glory call,
 and call — but now in vain. sleep dewy wand
 have stroke my droop lid, and promise
 my long arrear of rest; the downy god
 (will to return with our return peace)
 will pay, ere long, and bless i with repose. 
haste, haste, sweet stranger, from the peasant cot,
 the ship-boy hammock, or the soldier straw,
 whence sorrow never chase thou! with thou bring,
 not hideous vision, as of late; but draught
 delicious of well-tasted, cordial rest;
 man rich restorative; his balmy bath,
 that supple, lubricate, and keep in play
 the various movement of this nice machine,
 which ask such frequent period of repair. 
when tire with vain rotation of the day,
 sleep wind we up for the succeed dawn;
 fresh we spin on, till sickness clog our wheel,
 or death quite break the spring, and motion end. 
when will it end with i? 

— — "thou only know,
 thou, who broad eye the future and the past
 join to the present; make one of three
 to mortal thought! thou know, and thou alone,
 all-knowing! all-unknown! and yet wellknown! 
near, though remote; and, though unfathomed, feel! 
and, though invisible, for ever see! 
and see in all, the great and the minute! 
each globe above, with its gigantic race,
 each flower, each leaf, with its small people swarm,
 (those puny voucher of omnipotence!) 
to the first thought that ask, "from whence?" declare
 their common source. thou fountain, run over
 in river of communicate joy! 
who give we speech for far, far humble theme! 
say, by what name shall i presume to call
 he i see burn in these countless sun,
 as Moses, in the bush? illustrious mind! 
the whole creation less, far less, to thou,
 than that to the creation ample round. 
how shall i name thou? — how my labour soul
 heave underneath the thought, too big for birth! 

 "great system of perfection! mighty cause
 of cause mighty! cause uncause! sole root
 of nature, that luxuriant growth of god! 
first father of effect, that progeny
 of endless series! where the golden chain
 last link admit a period, who can tell? 
father of all that be or hear or hear! 
father of all that be or see or see! 
father of all that be or shall arise! 
father of this immeasurable mass
 of matter multiform, or dense or rare,
 opaque or lucid, rapid or at rest,
 minute, or pass bind! in each extreme,
 of like amaze and mystery to man. 
father of these bright million of the night! 
of which the least full godhead have proclaim,
 and throw the gazer on his knee. — or, say,
 be appellation high still thy choice? 
father of matter temporary lord! 
father of spirit, noble offspring! spark
 of high paternal glory; rich-endowed
 with various measure, and with various mode
 of instinct, reason, intuition; beam
 more pale or bright, from day divine, to break
 the dark of matter organize; (the ware
 of all create spirit;) beam, that rise
 each over other in superior light,
 till the last ripen into lustre strong,
 of next approach to godhead. father fond
 (far fond than ever bear that name on earth)
 of intellectual being! being bless
 with power to please thou; not of passive ply
 to law they know not! being lodge in seat
 of well-adapted joy, in different dome
 of this imperial palace for thy son;
 of this proud, populous, well-policied,
 though boundless, habitation, plan by thou;
 who several clan their several climate suit;
 and transposition, doubtless, will destroy. 
or, o! indulge, immortal king! indulge
 a title, less august indeed, but more
 endear; ah! how sweet in human ear,
 sweet in our ear, and triumph in our heart! 
father of immortality to man! 
a theme that late set my soul on fire. —
 and thou the next, yet equal! thou, by who
 that blessing be convey, (far more!) be buy,
 ineffable the price! by who all world
 be make, and one redeem! illustrious light,
 from light illustrious! thou, who regal power,
 finite in time, but infinite in space,
 on more than adamantine basis fix,
 over more, far more, than diadem and throne
 inviolable reign; the dread of god! 
and, o! the friend of man! beneath who foot,
 and by the mandate of who awful nod,
 all region, revolution, fortune, fate,
 of high, of low, of mind and matter, roll
 through the short channel of expire time,
 or shoreless ocean of eternity,
 calm or tempestuous, (as thy spirit breathe,)
 in absolute subjection! — and, o thou,
 the glorious third! distinct, not separate! 
beam from both, with both incorporate! 
and (strange to tell!) incorporate with dust! 
by condescension, as thy glory, great,
 enshrine in man! of human heart, if pure,
 divine inhabitant! the tie divine
 of heaven with distant earth! by who, i trust,
 (if not inspire) uncensured this address
 to thou, to they — to who? mysterious power! 
reveal, yet unrevealed! darkness in light! 
number in unity! our joy, our dread! 
the triple bolt that lay all wrong in ruin! 
that animate all right, the triple sun! 
sun of the soul, her never-setting sun! 
Triune, unutterable, unconceived,
 abscond yet demonstrable, great god!
 great than great, better than the best! 
kind than kind! with soft pity eye,
 or (strong still to speak it) with thy own,
 from thy bright home, from that high firmament,
 where thou, from all eternity, have dwell,
 beyond archangel unassisted ken;
 from far above what mortal high call;
 from elevation pinnacle; look down,
 through — what? confound interval! through all,
 and more than labour fancy can conceive, —
 through radiant rank of essence unknown;
 through hierarchy from hierarchy detach,
 round various banner of omnipotence,
 with endless change of rapturous duty fire;
 through wondrous beings interpose swarm,
 all cluster at the call, to dwell in thou;
 through this wide waste of world; this vista vast,
 all sand over with sun! sun turn to night
 before thy feeble beam, — look down, down, down,
 on a poor breathe particle in dust,
 or, low, — a immortal in his crime. 
his crime forgive; forgive his virtue too, —
 those small fault, half-convert to the right! 
nor let i close these eye, which never more
 may see the sun, (though night descend scale
 now weigh up morn,) unpitied and unblessed! 
in thy displeasure dwell eternal pain:
 pain, our aversion; pain, which strike i now:
 and, since all pain be terrible to man,
 though transient, terrible; at thy good hour,
 gentle, ah! gentle, lay i in my bed,
 my clay-cold bed! by nature, now, so near! 
by nature, near; still near by disease! 
till then, be this a emblem of my grave! 
let it outpreach the preacher; every night
 let it outcry the boy at philip ear;
 that tongue of death, that herald of the tomb! 
and when (the shelter of thy wing implore)
 my sense, soothe, shall sink in soft repose;
 o sink this truth still deep in my soul,
 suggest by my pillow, sign by fate,
 first, in fate volume, at the page of man: —
 man sickly soul, though turn and toss for ever
 from side to side, can rest on nought but thou, —
 here in full trust, hereafter in full joy;
 on thou, the promise, sure, eternal down
 of spirit, toil in travel through this vale. 
nor of that pillow shall my soul despond;
 for — love almighty! love almighty! (sing,
 exult, creation!) love almighty reign! 
that death of death, that cordial of despair! 
and loud eternity triumphant song! 

 "of who no more: for, o thou patron-god! 
thou god and mortal! thence more god to man! 
man theme eternal, man eternal theme! 
thou can not escape uninjured from our praise. 
uninjured from our praise can he escape,
 who, disembosomed from the father, bow
 the heaven of heaven, to kiss the distant earth? 
breathe out in agony a sinless soul;
 against the cross, death iron sceptre break;
 from famish ruin pluck her human prey;
 throw wide the gate celestial to his foe;
 their gratitude, for such a boundless debt,
 depute their suffer brother to receive;
 and, if deep human guilt in payment fail,
 as deep guilt, prohibit our despair,
 enjoin it, as our duty, to rejoice;
 and, (to close all,) omnipotent kind,
 take his delight among the son of man?"

what word be these? — and do they come from heaven? 
and be they speak to man? to guilty man? 
what be all mystery to love like this? 
the song of angel, all the melody
 of choral god, be waft in the sound;
 heal and exhilarate the break heart,
 though plunge before in horror dark as night:
 rich prelibation of consummate joy! 
nor wait we dissolution to be bless. 

this final effort of the moral muse,
 how just title! nor for i alone;
 for all that read! what spirit of support,
 what height of consolation, crown my song! 

then farewell, night! of darkness now no more:
 joy break, shine, triumph; it be eternal day. 
shall that which rise out of nought complain
 of a few evil, pay with endless joy? 
my soul! henceforth, in sweet union join
 the two support of human happiness,
 which some erroneous think can never meet, —
 true taste of life, and constant thought of death;
 the thought of death, sole victor of its dread! 
hope be thy joy, and probity thy skill;
 thy patron, he who diadem have drop
 yond gem of heaven; eternity, thy prize:
 and leave the racer of the world their own,
 their feather, and their froth, for endless toil:
 they part with all for that which be not bread;
 they mortify, they starve, on wealth, fame, power;
 and laugh to scorn the fool that aim at more. 
how must a spirit, late escape from earth, —
 suppose philander, lucia, or narcissa, —
 the truth of thing new-blazing in its eye,
 look back, astonish, on the way of man,
 who lives whole drift be to forget their grave! 
and when our present privilege be pass,
 to scourge we with due sense of its abuse,
 the same astonishment will seize we all. 
what then must pain we, will preserve we now. 
Lorenzo! it be not yet too late; Lorenzo! 
seize wisdom, ere it be torment to be wise;
 that be, seize wisdom, ere she seize thou. 
for what, my small philosopher, be hell? 
it be nothing but full knowledge of the truth,
 when truth, resist long, be swear our foe,
 and call eternity to do she right. 

thus, darkness aid intellectual light,
 and sacred silence whisper truth divine,
 and truth divine convert pain to peace,
 my song the midnight raven have outwinge,
 and shoot, ambitious of unbounded scene,
 beyond the flame limit of the world,
 her gloomy flight. but what avail the flight
 of fancy, when our heart remain below? 
virtue abound in flatterer and foe;
 it be pride to praise she, penance to perform. 
to more than word, to more than worth of tongue,
 Lorenzo! rise at this auspicious hour:
 a hour when heaven most intimate with man;
 when, like a fall star, the ray divine
 glide swift into the bosom of the just;
 and just be all, determine to reclaim;
 which set that title high, within thy reach. 
awake then; thy Philander call; awake! 
thou who shall wake when the creation sleep;
 when, like a taper, all these sun expire;
 when time, like he of Gaza, in his wrath,
 pluck the pillar that support the world,
 in nature ample ruin lie entomb;
 and midnight, universal midnight, reign. 
