on discontent.

to Stella.

say, dear Stella, why this pensive air? 
tell i, o tell thy sorrow and thy care;
 why thy lip tremble, and thy cheek be pale? 
why heave thy bosom with a mournful gale? 
let not thy eye for distant evil flow,
 nor rack thy bosom with prophetic woe:
 imagine ill deceive our ache eye,
 as lengthen shade appear of monstrous size,
 when set Phoebus gild the evening sky. 

though picture joy delude our pant soul,
 when round the heart its smile phantom roll;
 the gay impostor mock our reach arm;
 yet while it last, the please vision charm:
 not so distrust, her gloomy forehead rear;
 she bring cold anguish and a crowd of fear:
 ah lovely Stella! as you prize your rest,
 expel this fury from your guiltless breast. 

the wise and mighty guardian of mankind,
 to each dividual have their draught assign;
 and though no pearl shall in our potion fall,
 let we be cheerful while he spare the Gall:
 unmeaning transport for a moment please,
 yet peace alone can bless your equal day. 

but cold view or quick throw aside,
 see cringe merit at the gate of pride;
 see wit and wisdom (that our father prize)
 in youth neglect as in age despise:
 behold (the scorn, as late the dread of all)
 the politician from his glory fall:
 he who sly genius can a kingdom rule,
 shall have his exit hiss by every fool:
 with ache bosom and a stream eye
 the hoary soldier see his honour fly;
 who in his age must to oppression bow,
 and yield his laurel to a young brow:
 those laurel shall the proud successor wear
 a while; then strip and leave they to his heir. 

if these be wretched let not we repine,
 who mean talent never be make to shine:
 our good and ill, our vice and virtue fall
 within the compass of domestic wall:
 to those small limit be thy view confine,
 and bless thy cottage with a humble mind. 

look not at joy that dazzle from afar,
 nor envy glaro on his gild car;
 for all degree their day of anguish know,
 and the most happy have a taste of woe:
 then calm take what providence ordain,
 he swell the load who murmur and complain:
 for all thing vary: and who sit to day
 half-drowned in tear; tomorrow may be gay. 
