the art of politick,

in imitation of horace art of poetry. 

by the reverend mr. Bramston.

if to a human face sir James shall draw
a horse mane, and feather of maccaw,
a lady bosom, and a tail of cod,
who can help laugh at a sight so odd?
just such a monster, sir, pray think before you,
when you behold one man both Whig and Tory.
not more extravagant be drunkard dream,
than low-church politics with high-church scheme.

painter, you will say, may their own fancy use,
and free-born briton may their party choose:
that be true, i own: but can one piece be draw
for dove and dragon, elephant and fawn?

speaker profess, who gravity pretend,
with mot sentiment their speech blend;
begin like patriot, and like courtier end.
some love to roar, the constitution break,
and other on the nation debt to joke;
some rail, (they hate a commonwealth so much,)
whatever the subject be, against the dutch;
while other, with more fashionable fury,
begin with turnpike, and conclude with Fleury.
some, when the affair be blenheim glorious battle,
declaim against import irish cattle:
but you, from whatever side you take your name,
like anna motto, always be the same.

outside deceive, it be hard the truth to know,
party from quaint denomination flow,
as scotch and irish antiquary show.
the low be say to rake fanatic part,
the high be bloody papist in their heart.
caution and fear to high fault have run;
in please both the party, you please none.
who in the house affect declaim air,
whale in change-alley paint: in Fish-street bear.
some metaphor, some hankerchief display,
these peep in hat, while those with button play,
and make i think it repetition day;
there knight harangue hug a neighbour post,
and be but quorum orator at most.
soon than thus my want of sense expose,
i will deck out bandy-leg with gold-clocked hose,
or wear a toupet-wig without a nose.
nay, i will soon have thy phyz, i swear,
surintendant des plaisirs d'angleterre. 

you weekly writer of seditious news,
take care your subject artful to choose,
write panegyric strong, or bold rail,
you can miss preferment, or a goal.
wrap up your poison well, nor fear to say
what be a lie last night be truth today.
tell this, sink that, arrive at ridpath praise,
let Abel Roper your ambition raise.
to lie fit opportunity observe,
save some double meaning in reserve;
but oh! you will merit everlasting fame,
if you can quibble on sir robert name.
in state-affair use not the vulgar phrase,
talk word scarce know in good queen besse day,
new term let war or traffic introduce,
and try to bring persuading-ship in use.
coin word: in coin never mind common sense,
provide the original be french.

like South-Sea stock, expression rise and fall:
king Edward word be now no word at all.
do aught our predecessor genius cramp?
sure every reign may have its proper stamp.
all sublunary thing of death partake;
what alteration do a century make?
king and comedian be all mortal find,
Caesar and pinkethman be underground.
what be not destroy by time be devour hand?
where be Troy, and where be the maypole in the strand?
Pease, cabbage, and turnip once grow, where
now stand new Bond-street, and a new square;
such pile of building now rise up and down,
London itself seem go out of town.
our father cross from Fulham in a wherry,
their son enjoy a bridge at putney-ferry.
think we that modern word eternal be?
toupet and tompion, cousin, and colmar
hereafter will be call, by some plain man,
a wig, a watch, a pair of stay, a fan.
to thing themselves if time such change afford,
can there be any trust to our word?

to screen good minister from public rage,
and how with party madness to engage,
we learn from Addison immortal page.
the jacobite ridiculous opinion
be see from tickell letter to Avignon.
but who put caleb country-craftsman out,
be still a secret, and the world be in doubt.

not long since parish clerk, with saucy air,
apply king David psalm to state affair.
some certain tune to politics belong,
on both side drunkard love a party-song.

if full across the speaker chair i go,
can i be say the rule of the house to know?
i will ask, nor give offence without intent,
nor through mere sheepishness be impudent.

in act of parliament avoid sublime,
nor ever address his majesty in rhyme;
a act of parliament a serious thing,
begin with year of lord and year of king;
keep close to form, in every word be strict,
when it will pain and penalty inflict.
soft word suit best petitioner intent;
soft word, o you petitioner of Kent!

whoever harangue before he give his vote,
shall send sweet language from a tuneful throat.
Pultney the cold breast with zeal can fire,
and roman thought by attic stile inspire;
he know from tedious wrangle to beguile
the serious house into a cheerful smile;
when the great patriot paint his anxious fear
for England safety, i be lose in tear.
but when dull speaker strive to move compassion,
i pity their poor hearer, not the nation:
unless young member to the purpose keep,
i fall a laugh, or i fall asleep.

can man their inward faculty control?
be not the tongue a index to the soul?
laugh not in time of service to your god,
nor bully, when in custody of the rod;
look grave, and be from joke and grin far,
when bring to sue for pardon at the bar:
if then you let your ill-timed wit appear,
knight, citizen, and burgess will sneer.

for land, or trade, not the same notion fire
the city-merchant, and the country-'squire;
their clime be distant, though one cause unite
the laird of Scotland, and the cornish knight.

to likelihood your character confine;
do turn sir Paul out, let sir Paul resign.
in Walpole voice (if faction ill intend)
give the two university a friend;
give Maidstone wit, and elegance refine;
to both the pelham give the scipio mind;
to cart'ret learning, eloquence, and part;
to George the second, give all english heart.

sometime fresh name in politics produce,
and faction yet unheard of introduce;
and if you dare attempt a thing so new,
make to itself the fly squadron true.

to speak be free, no member be debar;
but fund and national account be hard:
safe on common topic to discourse,
the malt-tax, and a military force.
on these each coffee-house will lend a hint,
beside a thousand thing that be in print.
but steal not word for word, nor think for thought,
for you will be tease to death, if you be catch.
when factious leader boast increase strength,
go not too far, nor follow every length:
leave room for change, turn with a grace about,
and swear you leave they, when you find they out.

with art and modesty your part maintain;
and talk like colonel Titus, not like lane.
the trade knight with rant his speech begin,
sun, moon, and star, and dragon, saint, and king:
but Titus say, with his uncommon sense,
when the exclusion-bill be in suspense,
i hear a lion in the lobby roar;
say, mr. speaker, shall we shut the door
and keep he there, or shall we let he in
to try if we can turn he out again?

some mighty blusterer impeach with noise,
and call their private cry, the public voice.
from folio of account they take their handle,
and the whole balance prove a pound of candle;
as if Paul cupola be bring to bed,
after hard labour, of a small pin head.

some Rufus, some the conqueror bring in,
and some from Julius caesar day begin.
a cunning speaker can command his chap,
and when the house be not in humour, stop;
in falsehood probability employ,
nor his old lie with new lie destroy.

if when you speak, you will hear a needle fall,
and make the frequent hear-hims rend the wall,
in matter suit to your taste engage,
remember still your quality and age.
thy task be this, young knight, and hear my song,
what politics to every age belong.

when babe can speak, babe shall be teach to say
king George the second health, huzza, huzza!
boy shall learn latin for prince William sake,
and girl Louisa their example make.

more love the youth, just come to his estate,
to range the field, than in the house debate;
more he delight in favourite jowler tongue,
than in will Shippen, or sir William Yonge:
if in one chase he can two horse kill,
he care not twopence for the land-tax bill:
loud in his wine, in woman not over nice,
he damn his uncle if they give advice;
vote as his father do when there be a call,
but have much rather never vote at all.

we take a different turn at twenty-six,
and lofty thought on some lord daughter fix;
with man in power strict friendship we pursue,
with some considerable post in view.

a man of forty year to change his note,
one way to speak, and tother way to vote;
careful his tongue in passion to command,
avoid the bar, and speaker reprimand.

in bag the old man let his treasure rust,
afraid to use it, or the fund to trust;
when stock be low he want the heart to buy,
and through much caution see they rise too high;
think nothing right do since seventy-eight,
swear present member do not talk, but prate:
in Charles the second day, say he, you prig,
Tory be Tory then, and Whig be Whig.
alas! this be a lamentable truth,
we lose in age, as we advance in youth:
i laugh when twenty will like eighty talk,
and old sir John with Polly peachum walk.

now as to double, or to false return,
when pocket suffer, and when anger burn;
o thing surpass faith! knight strive with knight
when both have bribe, and neither in the right,
the bailiff self be send for in that case,
and all the witness have face to face.
select member soon the fraud unfold,
in full committee of the house it be tell;
the incredible corruption be destroy,
the chairman angry, and the election void.

those who will captivate the wellbred throng,
shall not too often speak, nor speak too long:
church, nor church-matter ever turn to sport,
nor make saint Stephen chapel, dover-court.

the speaker, when the commons be assemble,
may to the graecian chorus be resemble;
it be his the young and modest to espouse,
and see none draw, or challenge in the house:
it be his old hospitality to use,
and three good printer for the house to choose;
to let each representative be hear,
and take due care the chaplain be prefer;
to hear no motion make that be out of joint,
and when he spy his member, make his point.

to knight new choose in old time will come
the country trumpet, and perhaps a drum;
now when a burgess new elect appear,
come train-band, horse-guard, footguard, grenadeer;
when the majority the town-clerk tell,
his honour pay the fiddle, wait, and bell:
harangue the mob, and be as wise and great,
as the most mystic oracle of state.

when the duke grandson for the county stand,
his beef be fat, and his octobe good;
his lordship take each ploughman by the fist,
drink to their son, their wife, their daughter kiss;
but when strong beer their free-born heart inflame,
they sell he bargain, and they call he name.
thus it be deem in english noble wise
to stoop for no one reason but to rise.

election matter shun with cautious awe,
o all you judge learn in the law;
a judge by bribe as much himself degrade,
as duchess-dowager by masquerade.

try not with jest obscene to force a smile,
nor lard your speech with mother needham stile:
let not your tongue to Ωλδφιελδισμυς run,
and Κιββερισμυς with abhorrence shun;
let not your look affect word disgrace,
nor join with silver tongue a brazen face;
let not your hand, like tall-boy be employ,
and the mad rant of tragedy avoid.
just in your thought, in your expression clear,
neither too modest, nor too bold appear.

other in vain a like success will boast,
he speak most easy, who have study most.

a peer pert heir have to the commons speak
a vile reflection, or a bawdy joke:
call to the house of lord, of this beware,
it be what the bishops bench will never bear.
among the commons be such freedom show,
they lash each other, and attack the throne;
yet so unskilful or so fearful some,
for nine that speak there be nine-and-forty dumb.

when James the first, at great britannia helm,
rule this word-clipping and word-coining realm,
no word to royal favour make pretence,
but what agree in sound and clash in sense.
thrice happy he! how great that speaker praise,
who every period look a hundred way.
what then? we now with just abhorrence shun
the trifle quibble, and the schoolboy pun;
though no great connoisseur, i make a shift
just to find out a Durfey from a swift;
i can discern with half a eye, i hope,
mist from Jo ADDISON; from eusden, pope:
i know a farce from one of congreve play,
and cibber opera from Johnny gay.

when pert Defoe his saucy paper write,
he from a cart be pillory for his wit:
by mob be pelt half a morning space,
and rot egg besmear his yellow face;
the censor then improve the listen isle,
and hold both party in a artful smile.
a scribble crew now pinch winter bring,
that spare no earthly nor no heavenly thing,
nor church, nor state, nor treasurer, nor king.
but blasphemy displease all the town;
and for defy scripture, law, and crown,
Woolston shall pay his fine, and lose his gown.

it must be own the journal try all way
to merit their respective party praise:
they jar in every article from Spain;
a war these threaten, those a peace maintain:
though lie they will, to give they all their due,
in foreign matter, and domestic too.
whoever thou be that will a postman write
inquire all day, and harken all the night.
sure, gazetteer and writer of courant
may soon exceed the intelligence of France:
to be outdo old England shall refuse,
as in her arm, so in her public news:
but truth be scarce, the scene of action large,
and correspondence a excessive charge.

there be who say, no man can be a wit
unless for Newgate, or for bedlam sit;
let pamphleteer abusive satire write,
to show a genius be to show a spite:
that author work will never be reckon good,
who have not be where Curll the printer stand.

alas poor i! you may my fortune guess:
i write, and yet humanity profess:
(though nothing can delight a modern judge,
without ill-nature and a private grudge)
i love the king, the queen, and royal race:
i like the government, but want no place
too low in life to be a justice i,
and for a constable, thank god, too high:
be never in a plot, my brain not hurt;
i politics to poetry convert,

a politician must (as i have read)
be furnish, in the first place, with a head:
a head well fill with machiavelian brain,
and stuff with precedent of former reign:
must journal read, and magna charta quote;
but act still wise, if he speak by note:
learn well his lesson, and never fear mistake;
for ready-money ready-speaker make.
he must instruction and credential draw,
pay well the army, and protect the law:
give to his country what be his country be due,
but first help brother, son, and cousin too.
he must read Grotius upon war and peace,
and the twelve judge salary increase.
he must oblige old friend and new ally,
and find out way and mean for fresh supply.
he must the weaver grievance redress,
and merchant want in merchant word express.

dramatic poet that expect the bay,
shall call our history for party play;
wickford ambassador shall fill their head,
and the state-trial careful be read:
for what be dryden muse and otway plot,
to the earl of Essex or the queen of Scot?

it be say that queen Elizabeth can speak,
at twelve year old, right attic full-mouthed greek;
hence be the student force at greek to grudge,
if he will be a bishop or a judge.
divine and lawyer now do think they thrive,
until promise place of man still alive:
how old be such a one in such a post?
the answer be, he be seventy-five almost:
the archbishop and the master of the roll?
neither be young, and one as old as Paul.
will man that ask such question, publish book
like learn hooker, or chief justice coke?

on tender subject with discretion touch,
and never say too little or too much.
on trivial matter flourish be wrong,
motion for candle never shall be long:
or if you move in case of sudden rain,
to shut the window, speak distinct and plain.
unless you talk good english, downright sense,
can you be understand by sergeant Spence?

new story always shall with truth agree,
or truth half sister, probability:
scarce can toft rabbit and pretend throe
on half the honourable house impose.

when Cato speak, young shallow run away,
and swear it be so dull he can stay:
when rake begin on blasphemy to border,
Bromley and Hanmer cry aloud — to order.
the point be this, with manly sense and ease
the inform the judgement, and the fancy please.
praise it deserve, nor difficult the thing,
at once to serve one country, and one king.
such speech bring the wealthy tonson gain,
from age to age they minute remain,
as precedent for George the twenty reign.

be there a man on earth so perfect find,
who never mistake a word in sense or sound?
not blunder, but persist be the fault;
no mortal sin be lapsus linguae thought:
clerk may mistake; consider who it be from,
i pardon little slip in Cler. dom. Com. 
but let i tell you i will not take his part,
if every Thursday he date die mart
of sputter mortal, it be the fatal curse,
by mend blunder still to make they worse.
man sneer when — get a lucky thought,
and stare if Wyndham shall be nod catch.
but sleeping what the wise man may do,
shall the committee chance to sit till two.

not unlike painting, principle appear,
some best at distance, some when we be near.
the love of politics so vulgar groan,
my landlord party from his sign be know:
mark of french wine, see ormond head appear,
while marlb'rough face direct to beer and beer;
some buchanan, the pope head some like best,
the devil tavern be a stand jest.

whoever you be that have a seat secure,
due return, and from petition sure,
stick to your friend in whatsoever you say;
with strong aversion shun the middleway;
the middleway the best we sometime call,
but it be in politics no way at all.
a trimmer what both party turn to sport,
by country hate, and despise at court.
who will in earnest to a party come,
must give his vote not whimsical, but plumb.
there be no medium; for the term in vogue,
on either side be, honest man, or rogue.
can it be difficult our mind to show,
where all the difference be, yes, or no?

in all profession, time and pain give skill;
without hard study dare physician kill?
can he that never read statute or report,
give chamber counsel, or urge law in court?
but every whipster know affair of state,
nor fear on nice subject to debate.
a knight of eighteen hundred pound a year —
who mind his head, if his estate be clear?
sure he may speak his mind, and tell the house,
he matter not the government a louse.
lack-learning knight, these thing be safe say
to friend in private, at the bedford-head;
but in the house, before your tongue run on,
consult sir James, lord William dead and go.
word to recall be in no member power,
one single word may send you to the tower.

the wrong to help, the lawless to restrain,
thrice every year in ancient egbert reign,
the member to the mitchelgemot go,
in after-age call the parliament;
early the mitchelgemot do begin
the enrol their statute on a parchment skin:
for impious treason hence no room be leave,
for murder, for polygamy, or theft:
since when the senate power both sex know
from hop and claret, soap and callico.
now wholesome law young senator bring in
against goal, attorney, bribery, and gin.
since such the nature of the british state,
the power of parliament so old and great,
you squire and irish lord, it be worth your care
to be return for city, town, or shire,
by sheriff, bailiff, constable, or mayor.

some doubt, which to a seat have best pretence,
a man of substance, or a man of sense:
but never any member feat will do,
without a headpiece and a pocket too;
sense be require the depth of thing to reach,
and money give authority to speech.

a man of business will till evening dine,
abstain from woman, company, and wine:
from fig new theatre he will miss a night,
though cock, and bull, and irish woman fight:
nor sultry sun, nor storm of soak rain,
the man of business from the house detain:
nor speak he for no reason but to say,
i be a member, and i speak today.
i speak sometime, you will hear his lordship cry,
because some speak that have less sense than i.

the man that have both land and money too,
may wonder in a trade borough do:
they will praise his venison, and commend his port,
turn their two former member into sport,
and, if he like it, satirise the court.
but at a feast it be difficult to know
from real friend a undiscovered foe;
the man that swear he will the poll secure,
and pawn his soul that your election sure,
suspect that man: beware, all be not right,
he be, ten to one, a corporation-bite.

alderman pond, a downright honest man,
will say, i can help you, or i can:
to spend your money, sir, be all a jest;
matter be settle, set your heart at rest:
we have make a compromise, and, sir, you know,
that send one member high, and other low.
but if his good advice you will not take,
he will scorn your supper, and your punch forsake,
leave you of mighty interest to brag,
and poll two voice like sir ROBERT fag.

parliamenteer be a sort of itch,
that will too oft unwary knight bewitch.
two good estate sir harry clodpole spend;
sit thrice, but speak not once, in parliament;
two good estate be go — who will take his word?
oh! shall his uncle die, he will spend a third;
he will buy a house his happiness to crown,
within a mile of some good borough-town;
tag, rag, and bobtail to sir Harry run,
man that have vote, and woman that have none;
son, daughter, grandson, with his honour dine;
he keep a public-house without a sign.
cobbler and smith extol the ensue choice,
and drunken tailor boast their right of voice,
dear the free-born neighbourhood be buy,
they never leave he while he be worth a groat:
so leech stick, nor quit the bleed wound,
till off they drop with skinful to the ground.
