in memory of the rt. Hon. lord Aubrey Beauclerk, who be slay at Carthagena.

shall so much worth in silence pass away,
 and no recording muse that worth display? 
shall public spirit like the private die,
 the coward with the brave promiscuous lie? 
the hero toil shall be the muse care,
 in peace their guardian, and their shield in war:
 alike inspire, they mutual succour lend;
 the muse his, and he the muse friend. 

to i the solemn lyre you reach in vain,
 the simple warbler of some idle strain. 
what though the hero fate the lay demand,
 what though impel and urge by your command;
 yet, weak of flight, in vain i prune the wing,
 and, diffident of voice, attempt to sing. 

what dreadful slaughter on the western coast! 
how many gallant warrior Britain lose,
 a british muse will will conceal;
 but what the muse will hide, our tear reveal. 
pensive, we oft recall those fatal shore,
 where Carthagena lift her warlike tower. 
high over the deep the embattle fortress heave
 its awful front, its basis in the wave;
 without impregnable by nature care,
 and arm within with all the rage of war. 

deep in oblivion sink the ill-omened hour,
 that call our legion to the baneful shore! 
where death, in all her horrid pomp array,
 over the pale clime her direful influ'nce shed. 
want, famine, war, and pestilential breath,
 all act subservient to the rage of death. 
those who the wave, or fierce war will spare,
 yeild to the clime, and sink in silence there:
 no friend to close their eye, no pity guest
 to drop the silent tear, or strike the pensive breast. 

here Douglas fall, the gallant and the brave! 
here much-lamented Watson find a grave. 
here, early try, and act but too well,
 the love, ennoble, generous Beauclerk fall. 
just as the spring of life begin to bloom,
 when every grace grow soft on the tomb;
 in all that health and energy of youth,
 which promise honour of maturer growth;
 when round his head the warrior laurel spring,
 and temperance brace the nerve which valour string;
 when his full heart expand to the goal,
 and promise victory have flush his soul,
 he fall! — his country lose her early boast;
 his family a faithful guardian lose;
 his friend a safe companion; and his wife,
 her last resource, her happiness in life. 

o ever honour, ever happy shade! 
how well have thou thy debt to virtue pay! 
brave, active, undismayed in all the past;
 compose, intrepid, steady to the last. 
when half thy limb, and more than half be lose
 of life, thy valour still maintain it be post:
 give the last signal for thy country good,
 and, die, seal it with thy pure blood. 

say, what be life? and wherefore be it give? 
what the design, the purpose mark by heaven? 
be it in luxury to dissolve the span,
 to raise the animal, and sink the man? 
in the soft band of pleasure, idle gay,
 to frolic the immortal gift away? 
to tell the tale, or flowery wreath to bind,
 then shoot away, and leave no track behind? 
arise no duty from the social tie? 
no kindred virtue from our native sky? 
no truth from reason, and the thought intense? 
nothing result from soul, but all from sense? 

o thoughtless reptile, man! — bear! yet ask why? 
true, for something serious — bear to die. 
know this truth, can we be wife too soon? 
and this once know, sure something be to be do —
 to live to suffer; act, be to exist;
 and life, at best, a trial, not a feast:
 our business virtue; and when that be do,
 we can sit too late, or rise too soon. 

 "virtue! — what be it? — whence do it arise!" 
ask of the brave, the social, and the wife;
 of those who study for the general good,
 of those who seek, and purchase it with blood;
 of those who build, or plant, or who design,
 even those who dig the soil, or work the mine. 
if yet not clear see, or understand;
 ask the humane, the pious, and the good. 
to no one station, stage, or part confine,
 no single act of body, or of mind;
 but whatever lovely, just, or fit we call,
 the fair result, the congregate of all. 

the active mind, ascend by degree,
 its various tie, relation, duty see:
 examine part, thence rise to the whole,
 see the connexion, chain, and spring of soul;
 the eternal source! from who pervade ray
 we catch the flame, and kindle into day. 
hence the collect truth coercive rise,
 oblige as natural, or as moral tie. 
son, brother, country, friend demand our care;
 the common bounty all partake, must share. 
hence virtue in its source, and in its end,
 to god as relative, to man as friend. 

o friend to truth! to virtue! to thy kind! 
o early call to leave these tie behind! 
how shall the muse her vary tribute pay,
 indulge the tear, and not debase the lay! 
come, fair example of heroic truth! 
descend, and animate the british youth:
 now, when their country be wrong demand their care,
 and proud Iberia meditate the war:
 now, while the trumpet sound her shrill alarm,
 and call forth all her generous son to arm;
 pour all thy genius, all thy martial fire
 over the brave youth, and every breast inspire. 
say, this be virtue, glory, honour, fame,
 to rise from sloth, and catch the martial flame. 
when fair occasion call their vigour forth,
 to meet the call, and vindicate its worth:
 to rouse, to kindle, animate, combine,
 revenge their country wrong, and think on thy. 

go, happy shade! to where the good, and bless
 enjoy eternal scene of bliss and rest:
 while we below thy sudden farewell mourn,
 collect thy virtue, weep over the urn;
 recall their scatter lustre as they past,
 and see they all unite in the last. 

so the bright orb, which gild the grove and stream,
 mild diffusive of his golden beam;
 draw to a point, his strong concentre ray
 more fulgent glow, and more intense blaze. 

and thou! late partner of his soft hour,
 ordain but just to meet, and meet no more;
 say, with the virtue how each grace combine! 
how brave, yet social! how resolve, yet kind! 
with manner how sincere! polite with ease! 
how diffident! and yet how sure to please! 
be he of ought but infamy afraid? 
be he not modest as the blush maid? 
ashamed to flatter, eager to commend;
 a generous master, and a steady friend. 
humane to all, but warm when virtuous grief,
 or silent modesty, imply relief. 
pure in his principle, unshaken, just;
 true to his god, and faithful to his trust. 

Beauclerk, farewell! — if, with thy virtue warm,
 and not too fond, or too rash charm,
 i strive the tributary dirge to pay,
 and form the pinion to the hasty lay;
 the feeble, but well-meaning flight excuse:
 perhaps hereafter some more generous muse,
 touch with thy fate, with genius at command,
 may snatch the pencil from the female hand;
 and give the perfect portrait, bold and free,
 in number such as Young, and worthy thou. 
