to the honourable and reverend F. c. 

in frolic hour, ere serious thought have birth,
there be a time, my dear c—s, when
the muse will take i on her airy wing
and waft to view romantic; there present
some motley vision, shade and sun: the cliff
overhang, sparkle brook, and ruin grey;
bad i meander trace, and catch the form
of vary cloud, and rainbow learn to paint.

sometime ambition, brush by, will twitch
my mantle, and with win look sublime
allure to follow. what though steep the track,
her mountain top will overpay when climb
the scaler toil; her temple there be fine,
and lovely thence the prospect. she can tell
where laurel grow, whence many a wreath antique;
but more advise to shun the barren twig,
(what be immortal verdure without fruit?)
and woo some thrive art: her numerous mine
be open to the searcher skill and pain.

catch by the harangue, heart beat, and flutter pulse
sound irregular march to be go —
what, pause a moment when ambition call?
no, the blood gallop to the distant goal,
and throb to reach it. let the lame sit still.
when fortune gentle, at the hill verge extreme,
array in decent garb, but somewhat thin,
smile approach, and what occasion ask,
of climb? she already provident
have cater well, if stomach can digest
her viand, and a palate not too nice.
unfit she say, for perilous attempt,
that manly limb require, and sinew tough.

she take, and lay i in a vale remote,
amid the gloomy scene of fir and yew,
on poppy bed, where Morpheus strew the ground:
obscurity her curtain round i draw,
and siren sloth a dull quietus sing.

since no fairy light, no quicken ray,
nor stir of pulse, nor object to entice
abroad the spirit; but the cloister heart
sit squat at home, like pagod in a nitch
obscure, or grandee with nod-watching eye,
and fold arm, in presence of the throne,
Turk, or indostan. — city, forum, court
and prate sanhedrim, and drum war,
affect no more than story tell to bed
lethargic, which at interval the sick
hear and forget, and wake to doze again.
instead of converse and variety,
the same trite round, the same stale silent scene:
such be thy comfort, bless solitude!
but innocence be there, but peace all kind,
and simple quiet with her downy couch,
Meads low, tune of bird, and lapse of stream,
and saunter, with a book, and warble muse,
in praise of hawthorn. — life whole business this!
be it to bask in the sun, if so, a snail
be happy crawl on a southern wall.

why sit content upon a cottage-sill
at even-tide, and bless the coarse meal
in sooty corner? why sweet slumber wait
the hard pallet? not because from haunt remote
sequester in a dingle bushy lap:
it be labour make the peasant savoury fare,
and work out his repose: for ease must ask
the leave of diligence to be enjoy.

oh! listen not to that enchantress ease
with seem smile, her palatable cup
by stand grow insipid; and beware
the bottom, for there be poison in the lees.
what health impair, and crowd inactive maim?
what daily martyr to her sluggish cause!
less strict devoir the Russ and persian claim
despotic; and as subject long inure
to servile burden, grow supine and tame,
so fare it with our sovereign and her train.

what though with lure fallacious she pretend
from worldly bondage to set free, what gain
her votary? what avail from iron chain
exempt, if rosy fetter bind as fast.

bestir, and answer your creation end.
think we that man with vigorous power endow,
and room to stretch, be destine to sit still?
sluggard be nature rebel, slight her law,
nor live up to the term on which they hold
their vital lease. laborious term and hard,
but such the tenure of our earthly state!
riches and fame be industry reward;
the nimble runner course fortune down,
and then he banquet, for she feed the bold.

think what you owe your country, what yourself.
if splendour charm not, yet avoid the scorn
that tread on lowly station. think of some
assiduous booby mount over your head,
and thence with saucy grandeur look down:
think of (reflection stab!) the pity friend
with shoulder shrug, and sorry. think that time
have golden minute, if discreet seize:
and if some sad example, indolent,
to warn and scare be want — think of i.
