dorinda at her glass.

dorinda, once the fair of the train,
 toast of the town, and triumph of the plain;
 who shine eye a thousand heart alarm,
 who wit inspire, and who folly charm:
 who, with invention, rack her careful breast
 to find new grace to insult the rest,
 now see her temple take a swarthy hue,
 and the dark vein resign their beauteous blue;
 while on her cheek the fade rose die,
 and the last sparkle tremble in her eye. 

bright Sol have drive the sable cloud away,
 and cheere the heaven with a stream of day,
 the woodland choir their little throat prepare,
 to chant new carol to the morning air:
 in silence wrap, and curtained from the day,
 on her sad pillow lose dorinda lay;
 to mirth a stranger, and the like to ease,
 no pleasure charm she, nor no slumber please. 
for if to close her weary lid she try,
 detest wrinkle swim before her eye;
 at length the mourner raise her ache head,
 and discontent left her hate bed. 
but sigh shun the relic of her pride,
 and leave the toilet for the chimney side:
 her careless lock upon her shoulder lay
 uncurl, alas! because they half be grey;
 no magic bath employ her skilful hand,
 but useless phial on her table stand:
 she slight her form, no more by youth inspire,
 and loathe that idol which she once admire. 
at length all tremble, of herself afraid,
 to her love glass repair the weep maid,
 and with a sigh address the alter shade. 
say, what be thou, that wear a gloomy form,
 with lower forehead, like a northern storm;
 cheek pale and hollow, as the face of woe,
 and lip that with no gay Vermilion glow? 
where be that form which this false mirror tell
 bloom like the morn, and shall for age hold;
 but now a spectre in its room appear,
 all scar with furrow, and deface with tear;
 say, come thou from the region of despair,
 to shake my sense with a meager stare? 
some stragg'le horror may thy phantom be,
 but sure not the mimic shape of i. 
ah! yes — the shade its mourn visage rear,
 pant when i sigh, and answer to my tear:
 now who shall bow before this wither shrine,
 this mortal image, that be late divine? 
what victim now will praise these fade eye,
 once the gay basis for a thousand lie? 

deceitful beauty — false as thou be gay,
 and be it thus thy votary find their pay;
 this the reward of many careful year,
 of morning labour, and of noonday fear,
 the glove anoint, and the bathe hour,
 and soft cosmetick more prevail power;
 yet to thy worship still the fair one run,
 and hail thy temple with the rise sun;
 still the brown damsel to thy altar pay
 sweet-scented unguent, and the dew of may;
 Sempronia smooth her wrinkle brow with care,
 and Isabella curl her grizzle hair:
 see poor Augusta of her glass afraid,
 who even tremble at the name of maid,
 spread the fine mechlin on her shake head,
 while her thin cheek disown the mimic red. 
soft Silvia, who no lover breast alarm,
 yet simper out the evening of her charm,
 and though her cheek can boast no rosy dye,
 her gay brocade allure the gaze eye. 

but hear, my sister — hear a ancient maid,
 too long by folly, and her art betray;
 from these light trifle turn your partial eye,
 it be sad dorinda pray you to be wise;
 and thou Celinda, thou must short feel
 the sad effect of time be revolve wheel;
 thy spring be past, thy summer sun decline,
 see autumn next, and winter stalk behind:
 but let not reason with thy beauty fly,
 nor place thy merit in a brilliant eye;
 it be thy to charm we by sublime way,
 and make thy temper, like thy feature, please:
 and thou, Sempronia, trudge to morning prayer,
 nor trim thy eyebrow with so nice a care;
 dear nymph believe — it be true, as you be alive,
 those temple show the mark of fifty-five. 
let Isabel unload her ache head
 of twist paper, and of bind lead;
 let sage Augusta now, without a frown,
 strip those gay ribbon from her age crown;
 change the palace slipper of delicious hue
 for a warm stock, and a easy shoe;
 guard her swell ancle from rheumatic pain,
 and from her cheek expunge the guilty stain. 

will smile Silvia lie that hoop aside,
it will snow her prudence, not betray her pride:
 she, like the rest, have once she flagrant day,
 but now she twinkle in a faint ray. 
those youthful air set off their mistress now,
 just as the patch adorn her autumn brow:
 in vain her foot in sparkle lace glow,
 since none regard her forehead, nor her toe. 
who will not burst with laughter, or with spleen,
 at prudo, once a beauty, as i ween? 
but now her feature wear a dusky hue,
 the little love have bid her eye adieu:
 yet she pursue the pleasure of her prime,
 and vain desire, not subdue by time;
 thrust in among the frolick and the gay,
 but shut her daughter from the beam of day:
 the child, she say, be indolent and grave,
 and tell the world Ophelia can behave:
 but while Ophelia be forbid the room,
 her mother hobble in a rigadoon;
 or to the sound of melt music die,
 and in their socket roll her blink eye;
 or stun the audience with her hideous squal,
 while scorn and satire whisper through the hall. 

hear this, you fair one, that survive your charm,
 nor reach at folly with your age arm;
 thus pope have sing, thus let dorinda sing;
 "virtue, brave boy, — it be virtue make a king:"
 why not a queen? fair virtue be the same
 in the rough hero, and the smile dame:
 dorinda soul her beauty shall pursue,
 though late i see she, and embrace she too:
 come, you bless grace, that be sure to please,
 the smile of friendship, and the careless ease;
 the breast of candour, the relent ear,
 the hand of bounty, and the heart sincere:
 may these the twilight of my day attend,
 and may that evening never want a friend
 to smooth my passage to the silent gloom,
 and give a tear to grace the mournful tomb. 
