to the memory of the late captain T. H. Abbott. 

respectful address to the officer of the artillery.

from dreary scene low prostrate on the ground,
 where anguish rage with a gloom profound;
 where poverty in every form appear,
 to chill a wretched prisoner with fear,
 a spirit flee; the brave, undaunted mind
 smile at despair, and leave its load behind;
 oh! Henry, must thou undistinguished lie,
 sink, unremembered all thy virtue die;
 and will no friend who all those virtue make,
 pay a just tribute to thy part shade? 
yes, i be that friend; accept the pity tear,
 the kind offer of a heart sincere;
 oh! take it then from she you once approve,
 the friend you honour, and the maid you love;
 benignant shade! oh! yet one glance bestow,
 i will guard thy memory, and indulge my woe;
 how hard thy fate! from peace, from pleasure tear,
 doom to imprisonment, in want to mourn;
 on the damp earth expose, thy gallant breast
 with sickness, anguish, pine care oppress;
 too proud for pity, conscious of the past,
 forget, unheeded even to the last,
 thou find no friend to close thy die eye,
 to anxious watch the unrepeated sigh;
 no gentle hand thy late want relieve,
 nor cordial drop thy close lip receive
 but lose, neglect, unrewarded die,
 a man in who the virtue do reside:
 you brave companion of his happy day,
 oh! aid my feeble voice to speak his praise;
 he once be leader of a choose band,
 and carry conquest through a foreign land;
 love by his equal, to his soldier dear,
 to each forgive, to himself severe
 his mild compassion cheere the wretch fate,
 but unregarded be his suffer fate,
 till death, more kind than country, friend, or king,
 shelter his sorrow with his fable wing:
 pardon, you brave! long, long do you protect
 that injure worth his country do neglect;
 then join with i the kind embalm tear,
 for Henry fate deserve a pang sincere;
 and may thy rest be sweet, thou good and brave! 
bright honour rear her standard over thy grave;
 and though no marble may adorn the spot,
 a name so honour can be forget;
 dear to the soldier, by the good approve,
 sacred to friend, and by relation love. 
and oh! bless spirit! gracious and benign,
 over all my way oh! let thy influence shine:
 pure, unimpassioned now thy care extend,
 and be my guardian, comforter, and friend:
 direct the good, the shaft of ill repel,
 till i shall bid each earthly bliss farewell;
 then may thy spirit welcome mine above
 to the bright region of seraphic love. 
