on J. W. range pamphlet.

by the same.

what ken my eye, enchant? man of ease,
in elbow chair, and under brow of thought
intense, on some great matter fix, no doubt:
what mean the myrmidon on either hand
in paper-coat, and orderly array,
spread far and wide, on table, desk, and stool,
variety of troop, white, purple, pied,
and grey, and blue battalion trim; and who
in marble regimental, some in vest
gay edge with gold; of various garb, and tongue,
and clime; extend over the wooden plain.

not force more numerous from her teem loin
pour forth hungaria to the danube bank
croat and pandeurs: nor the swarm war
of Turk and nadir, nod opposite
with particoloured turban. sing, o Muse,
their marshale number, and puissance. first,
with sable shield, and arm opaque, advance
divinity polemic, sober rage,
yet deadly! (and can rage in mind divine
inhabit!) council, synod, cloister, school,
cowl beat off cowl, and mitre mitre knock.
presbytery here with wither face askew,
vengeance demure; and there devout fierce
catholicos, in lawn sprinkle with blood.

not far behind with her divide troop
come policy, with democratic shout
on one hand, on the other loud acclaim
for power hereditary, and right divine:
i see the various portraiture display,
Brutus and Nimrod, libertine, and slave,
and crown, and breech flutter in the air.

who next with aspect sage and parchment wave
voluminous come on? i know their beard
historic, see the style acute, with which
they fight old time, maugre his desperate scythe,
and as he cleave the pyramid, apply
their puny prop. hence annal, journal hence,
and memoir, doubtful truth, and certain lie,
and tale, and all the magazine of war.

what Muse, o poetry, can pass unsung
thy flow banner, and gay tent, adorn
with airy trophy? or will leave thy name
uncatalogued, be it but nereus-like
to beautify the list. not that thou want
the offensive dart, until satire quiver fail.

all these, and more come flock; — but await
the dread commander voice, and dare no more
start from their place, than do the theban stone,
ere yet Amphion sing. — from side to side
the sedentary chief, in studious mood,
and deep revolve, dart his experience eye.
forth from his presence hie his aid-decamp,
a sturdy cambro-briton, to survey
the posture of the field; from rank to rank
post succinct. he give the word, which way
the squadron to advance, where wheel their course.
"vanguard to right and left." forthwith the band,
as at the sound of trump, obedient move
in perfect phalanx. each their station know
and quarter, as the general will ordain.

first to its place spontaneous verse repair,
know the call, and practise to obey
his summons. peaceful controversy sheath
her claw, contract to make room for Scot
and Tom. Aquinas, slumber side by side;
and Bellarmine, and Luther, hear no more
than delphi shrine, or Memnon statue dumb.
all, all, in order due and silence, look
a modern convocation. history lie
by history, — Hyde and Oldmixon agree.

which when the marshal, from his easy chair
of callimanco, saw; knit his calm brow
thoughtful, and thus the assemble leaf bespeak.

you hierarchy, and commonweal, and throne,
folio, octavo, and you minor power
of paper, ere to winterquarter send,
hear i, you listen book. first i direct
submission to your lord and faith entire.
do i not list you, and enrol your name
on parchment? see the volume; look at i.
do i not mark you (as the prussian late
he subject) badge of service when require?
it be well, — and let i next, you flimsy peer,
love brotherlike and union recommend:
live peaceful, as by i together tie
in band of strict amity: shall then
your master lend you to some neighbour state
auxiliary; remember you preserve
your first allegiance pure, and cheerful home
return, when summon by your natural prince.
be humble, nor repine, though smear with ink
and dust inglorious; know your birth and end,
for rag you be, and must to rag return.
