Lancaster castle,

by moonlight.

now the full moon depart day supply,
her ray serene invite i here to stray:
hail she in azure, queen of spangle sky;
and bless the chearer of the traveller way.

but chief, beneath these venerable tower,
i find the scene for contemplation fraught;
congenial scene to solitary hour,
congenial to the muse of pensive thought.

within yond grate, now twinkle light dispense
their little blaze, to those who durance 'bide;
along those battlement the moon beam glance,
and over that awful portal shadow glide.

thou ancient pile! who founder sleep unknown,
but since to age, first he give his plan,
full many a change have britain empire show,
and pass have many a race of feeble man.

how far remote, tradition spare to say;
nor find its date in legend fertile page;
but moulder time have wrought it no decay;
nor have it feel the shock of hostile rage.

while low full many a noble fabric lie;
by savage fray, or time subdue at length;
genius still kind to thou its aid supply,
add grandeur to thy grandeur, strength to strength.

here station, to her god their altar rise,
when Rome of Britain take her transient hold;
this site, her skilful warrior early choose;
and seat here, annoy the foe so bold.

when jar nation and long time have pass,
this front thy royal gaunt thus bid arise;
summon some h — n, in gothic taste,
with solemn grandeur to attract all eye.

sublime thy fabric, and how fair around,
survey by day the lovely view appear!
but fade now, as memory tint be find,
when it will draw for age its youthful year.

though distant hill be wrap in cloud of night,
and vivid colour mix in grave shade;
where first i breathe the air and see the light,
with rapture still, my native town be survey.

oft from its street my eye well please i cast,
on verdant hill, whence rise its early name;
and still, a little tribute to the past,
it yet retain, in part, its ancient claim.

here oft in infancy with awe i have tread,
hear of secret cavern deep and drear;
and many a wind subterranean road,
wonder why man his fellow man shall fear?

quit the calm serene that sooth around,
within these wall humanity shall turn;
think on the hold where human misery find,
and ask for who those glimmer taper burn.

some there, perhaps, be rear with fond pride,
wear rich attire, and feed on costly fare;
but now, of common liberty deny,
and the free current of the vital air.

you fall! where be now those crowd call,
that throng from dissipation giddy train?
say, need there massy bolt and lofty wall,
to banish friend when fortune on the wane?

but scene more solemn still attend my way,
as through the church-yard path i pensive tread;
yond gloomy tower, alas! no light display,
and all be silent as the sleep dead.

save where a shriek for mercy strike the ear,
which ah! if pity hear, it hear in vain;
for dare vice be stop in mad career,
and awful justice hold its rigid reign.

over sanguinary law the good must mourn,
and breathe a wish, that nation, generous, great,
to other mode, for warn soon will turn,
and death assign but for the murderer fate.

oh you who night be ease, and day delight,
think on the prisoner in his lonely cell;
within who heart, through all his long dark night,
bitter reflection, sad forebode dwell.

he, his fond mother nurse with tender love,
joy in his growth, guard his health with care,
think not of hardship, when for he she strive,
and for his good her little all will spare.

alas! a tempt world seduce his youth,
and from a virtuous course his heart can steal,
maternal tear he scorn and warn truth,
which add a pang to all he be doom to feel.

he through his day of bondage deep mourn,
Waters his little garden with his tear,
in thought, to time of innocence return,
when simple pleasure charm his harmless year.

you good, with gentle counsel calm his heart!
increase his comfort, you, where much be give,
spare tear from fiction, pity here impart,
from folly spare, to take your hold on heaven!

h — n, to thou my muse glad tribute pay,
long ere thy gentle spirit be set free;
be painful duty soothe by general praise,
and soft humanity dispense by thou.

may all who bind the bond the wretched bear,
and hold dominion in their sad abode;
with lenient hand fulfil their task severe,
and have their mercy show, to plead with god.

may thy pity spirit here pervade,
Howard, thy generous effort still avail;
the cell of bondage few woe invade,
for man with man may mercy still prevail.

with howard name revere my song shall close,
for he what trophy shall Britannia raise?
in distant land his ash must repose,
her prison be his monument of praise.
