on the marriage of his serene highness the prince of orange. 

illustrious prince! forgive the feeble lay,
 that now aspire to hail your nuptial day;
 nor scorn a muse, the mean of the nine,
 who bring her humble offer to your shrine. 
and you, imperial nymph! who lovely face
 invite the hero to your chaste embrace,
 vouchsafe a spark of your celestial fire;
 harmonious word, and please thought inspire,
 soft, as your love, and tuneful, as your lyre:
 so shall my number charm the listen ear,
 and even the glad Nassau delight hear. 
Nassau have long enrich the book of fame,
 and ANNA now adorn the noble name. 
nation, who see the light of orange rise,
 with awful splendour, in the belgian sky;
 shall soon behold it with new lustre shine,
 join to a glorious star, of brunswic line. 

so, where the flow Sambre gentle glide,
 the Swain delight to view the beauteous tide:
 but, when his more extend eye survey
 the shine torrent join the spacious maese;
 both river, thus, with friendly union flow,
 and to the sight superior beauty show. 

whenever the god a noble race intend,
 they suit the cause to the destine end,
 nor yoke unequal heart in nuptial love:
 jove valiant bird disdain the fearful dove;
 great mind, by native sympathy, combine,
 as golden particle the close join. 
paternal virtue in their bosom roll,
 ally in love by nobleness of soul:
 hence throne and sceptre shine neglect thing,
 hence royal ANNE prefer Nassau to king;
 while briton with unite heart rejoice,
 and will senator applaud the choice,
 to see their king (to honour ever true)
 discharge the debt to sacred WILLIAM due;
 immortal WILLIAM! by who prudent care
 we yet enjoy the fruit of all our war;
 our law, religion, liberty, and peace,
 and even the blessing of the brunswic race. 

nor thou, illustrious orange! blush to own,
 thy honour, thus ally to albion crown;
 bless with a princess, in who form we trace
 her father majesty, and mother grace;
 bright orb of power, that, with propitious ray,
 dispel our cloud, and beautify our day:
 not as the comet, rage through the air,
 insect the world with pestilence and war;
 but, like the sun, their beam of goodness glow,
 inspire life, and cheere all below. 
such be the glorious sire, and gracious dame,
 from whence the beauteous bride of orange come. 
and shall unerring nature change her kind? 
what lion ever produce a timorous hind? 
the royal eagle royal eagle breed,
 and hero from heroic sire proceed:
 Rome founder, thus, confess his race divine;
 thus Nassau copy the nassovian line;
 thus anna noble stream of virtue flow,
 high, as the regal spring, from whence it rise. 
thrice happy nymph, with every grace supply! 
thrice happy prince, with such a heavenly bride! 
in who superior sense with judgement join,
 her beauty much, but more she merit shine. 
how glorious! when such worth adorn the great,
 we hear, we see, admire, and imitate:
 virtue, in they, attract remote eye;
 but, in the vulgar soul, unheeded lie. 
as radiant Phoebus dart superior light,
 while small planet shun the watchful sight. 

accomplish thus, let her example fire
 the droop muse, and wake the sound lyre:
 to aid religion, be her chief care,
 (heaven just claim the soul, it make so fair)
 to stem the torrent of licentious rage,
 and prop the virtue of a sink age;
 exalt science to her ancient height,
 to raise decline art, and make the rude polite:
 while great Nassau, who native glory warm,
 whenever his country call he forth to arm,
 may fire the belgian in the field of Mars,
 consult their peace, or animate their war;
 paint his forefather to their wonder eye,
 and teach they how to conquer, or to die;
 like he, who brave dare to break their chain,
 though hold by all the force and fraud of Spain:
 for injure liberty the sword he draw,
 resolve to gain, or perish in the cause;
 and have long the doubtful combat try,
 like Caesar vanquish, and like Caesar die;
 though different far the motive of their mind;
 that fight to conquer, this to save mankind;
 till praise, lament, envy, and admire,
 the hero, patriot, and the prince expire. 

o! where do then the guardian angel hide? 
nor watch to turn the guilty ball aside;
 when he, who arm host can not withstand,
 now fall a victim to one villain hand! 

but rise, you muse, quit the pensive lay:
 nor damp the joy of this auspicious day. 
since yet the glorious name of orange stand,
 since royal ANNA seal the nuptial band;
 soon may imperial adolph rise again,
 again new fred'ric thunder on the main,
 rouze the martial youth to war alarm,
 (if proud iberian shine again in arm)
 to guard their country from tyrannic power,
 and be, what glorious WILLIAM be before. 

nor shall the state invade force fear,
 ere pregnant time the promise hero bear;
 nor want ally their freedom to defend,
 since brunswic reign, and Albion be their friend. 
as branch oak protect the rural Swain,
 secure from summer heat, and winter rain;
 so shall our monarch, with paternal aid,
 his regal shelter over Batavia spread:
 long as the sceptre fill his royal hand,
 a true Palladium shall insure the land. 

and if the prescient muse guide my lay,
 or future secret Phoebus can display;
 the day shall shine distinguish from the rest,
 that ANNA dignify, and HYMEN bless;
 in which AUGUSTUS fortify his throne,
 and plan a scheme of union for his son;
 bespeak ally for prince yet to come,
 new friend to Britain, and new foe to Rome. 

proceed, great monarch! new ally to gain,
 and with new nuptial league our peace maintain:
 so shall thy beauteous nymph secure with charm
 that safety, other king defend with arm;
 they, Venus like, can Mars himself surprise,
 and awe stern tyrant with their conquer eye. 
