Delia, a elegy.

yes, Delia love! my fond vow be bless;
 farewell the memory of her past disdain;
 one kind relent glance have heal my breast,
 and balance in a moment year of pain. 

over her soft cheek consent blush move,
 and with kind stealth her secret soul betray;
 blush, which usher in the morn of love,
 sure as the redden east foretell the day. 

her tender smile shall pay i with delight
 for many a bitter pang of jealous fear;
 for many a anxious day, and sleepless night,
 for many a stifle sigh, and silent tear. 

Delia shall come, and bless my lone retreat;
 she do not scorn the shepherd lowly life;
 she will not blush to leave the splendid seat,
 and own the title of a poor man wife. 

the simple knot shall bind her gather hair,
 the russet garment clasp her lovely breast:
 Delia shall mix among the rural fair,
 by charm alone distinguish from the rest. 

and meek simplicity, neglect maid,
 shall bid my fair in native grace shine:
 she, only she, shall lend her modest aid,
 chaste, sober priestess, at sweet beauty shrine! 

how sweet to muse by murmur spring recline;
 or loiter careless in the shady grove,
 indulge the gentle feeling of the mind,
 and pity those who live to aught but love! 

when delia hand unlock her shine hair,
 and over her shoulder spread the flow gold,
 base be the man who one bright tress will spare
 for all the over of india coarse mould. 

by her dear side with what content i will toil,
 patient of any labour in her sight;
 guide the slow plough, or turn the stubborn soil,
 till the last, linger beam of doubtful light. 

but soft task divide my delia hour;
 to watch the firstling at their harmless play;
 with welcome shade to screen the languid flower,
 that sicken in the summer parch ray. 

oft will she stoop amid her evening walk,
 with tender hand each bruise plant to rear;
 to bind the droop lily break stalk,
 and nurse the blossom of the infant year. 

when beat rain forbid our foot to roam,
 we will shelter sit, and turn the story page;
 there see what passion shake the lofty dome
 with mad ambition or ungoverned rage:

what headlong ruin oft involve the great;
 what conscious terror guilty bosom prove;
 what strange and sudden turn of adverse fate
 tear the sad virgin from her plight love. 

Delia shall read, and drop a gentle tear;
 then cast her eye around the low-roofed cot,
 and own the fate have deal more kind here,
 that bless with only love our little lot. 

for love have swear (i hear the awful vow)
 the waver heart shall never be his care,
 that stoop at any base shrine to bow:
 and what he can rule, he scorn to share. 

my heart in Delia be so full bless,
 it have not room to lodge another joy;
 my peace all lean upon that gentle breast,
 and only there misfortune can annoy. 

our silent hour shall steal unmarked away
 in one long tender calm of rural peace;
 and measure many a fair unblemished day
 of cheerful leisure and poetic ease. 

the proud unfeeling world their lot shall scorn
 who amid inglorious shade can poor dwell:
 yet if some youth, for gentle passion bear,
 shall chance to wander near our lowly cell,

his feeling breast with pure flame shall glow;
 and leave pomp, and state, and care behind,
 shall own the world have little to bestow
 where two fond heart in equal love be join. 
