the first hymn of Callimachus.

to Jupiter.

while we to Jove select the holy victim;
 who apter shall we sing, than Jove himself,
 the god for ever great, for ever king;
 who slay the earth-born race, and measure right
 to heaven great habitant? Dictæan hear thou
 more joyful, or Lycæan, long dispute
 and various thought have trace. on ida mount,
 or Dicte, studious of his country be praise,
 the cretan boast thy natal place: but oft
 he meet reproof deserve: for he presumptuous
 have build a tomb for thou, who never know
 to die, but live the same today and ever. 
arcadian therefore be thy birth: great Rhea
 pregnant to high parrhasia cliff retire,
 and wild Lycæus, black with shade pine:
 holy retreat! since no female hither,
 conscious of social love and nature rite,
 must dare approach, from the inferior reptile
 to woman, form divine. there the bless parent
 ungird her spacious bosom, and discharge
 the ponderous birth: she seek a neighbour spring,
 to wash the recent babe: in vain: Arcadia,
 (however streamy now) adust and dry,
 deny the goddess water: where deep Melas,
 and rocky Cratis flow, the chariot smoke,
 obscure with rise dust: the thirsty traveler
 in vain require the current, then imprison
 in subterranean cavern: forest grow
 upon the barren hollow, high overshade
 the haunt of savage beast, where now Iaon,
 and Erimanth incline their friendly urn. 

thou too, o earth, great Rhea say, bring forth;
 and short shall be thy pang: she say; and high
 she rear her arm, and with her sceptre strike
 the yawn cliff: from it be dispart height
 down the mount the gush torrent run,
 and cheere the valley: there the heavenly mother
 bathe, mighty king, thy tender limb: she wrap they
 in purple band: she give the precious pledge
 to prudent Neda, charge she to guard thou,
 careful and secret: Neda of the nymph
 that tend the great birth, next philyre
 and Styx, the old. smile she receive thou,
 and conscious of the grace, absolve her trust:
 not unrewarded; since the river bear
 the favourite virgin name: fair Neda rowl
 by leprion ancient wall, a fruitful stream. 
fast by her flowery bank the son of Arcas,
 favourite of heaven, with happy care protect
 their fleecy charge; and joyous drink her wave. 

thou, god, to Cnossus Neda bring: the nymph
 and corybantes thou their sacred charge
 receive; adraste rock thy golden cradle:
 the goat, now bright amid her fellow-star,
 kind Amalthea, reach her tett distented
 with milk, thy early food: the sedulous bee
 distil her honey on thy purple lip. 

around, the fierce Curetes (order solemn
 to thy foreknow mother!) tread tumultuous
 their mystic dance, and clange their sound arm;
 industrious with the warlike din to quell
 thy infant-cries, and mock the ear of Saturn. 

swift growth and wondrous grace, o heavenly Jove,
 wait thy bloom year: inventive wit,
 and perfect judgement crown thy youthful act.
 that Saturn son receive the threefold empire
 of heaven, of ocean, and deep hell beneath,
 as the dark urn and chance of lot determine,
 old poet mention, fable. thing of moment
 well nigh equivalent and neighbour value
 by lot be part: but high heaven, thy share,
 in equal balance lay against sea or hell,
 fling up the adverse scale, and shun proportion. 
wherefore not chance, but power, above thy brother
 exalt thou, their king. when thy great will
 command thy chariot forth; impetuous strength,
 and fiery swiftness wing the rapid wheel,
 incessant; high the eagle fly before thou. 
and oh! as i and my consult thy Augur,
 grant the glad omen; let thy favourite rise
 propitious, ever soar from the right. 

thou to the less god have well assign
 their proper share of power; thy own, great Jove,
 boundless and universal. those who labour
 the sweaty forge, who edge the crooked scythe,
 bend stubborn steel, and harden gleening armor,
 acknowledge vulcan aid. the early hunter
 bless diana hand, who lead he safe
 over hang cliff; who spread his net successful,
 and guide the arrow through the panther heart. 
the soldier from successful camp return,
 with laurel wreathe, and rich with hostile spoil,
 sever the bull to Mars. the skilful bard,
 strike the thracian harp, invoke Apollo,
 to make his hero and himself immortal. 
those, mighty Jove, mean time, thy glorious care,
 who model nation, publish law, announce
 or life or death, and find or change the empire. 
man own the power of king; and king of Jove. 

and as their action tend subordinate
 to what thy will design, thou give the mean
 proportion to the work; thou see impartial,
 how they those mean employ. each monarch rule
 his different realm, accountable to thou,
 great ruler of the world: these only have
 to speak and be obey; to those be give
 assistant day to ripen the design;
 to some whole month; revolve year to some:
 other, ill fate, be condemn to toil
 their tedious life, and mourn their purpose blast
 with fruitless act, and impotence of council. 

hail! great son of Saturn, wise disposer
 of every good: thy praise what man yet bear
 have sing? or who that may be bear shall sing? 
again, and often hail! indulge our prayer,
 great father! grant we virtue, grant we wealth:
 for without virtue, wealth to man avail not;
 and virtue without wealth exert less power,
 and less diffuse good. then grant we, gracious,
 virtue, and wealth; for both be of thy gift. 
