ode on sleep.

by the same.

why, gentle god, this long delay,
 since night, and careless quiet reign? 
o hither take thy silent way,
 and sooth, ah sooth my wakeful pain! 
so shall my hand for thou the wreath entwine,
 and strew fresh poppy at thy votive shrine. 

when from the north, all wan and pale,
 the sun withdraw his cheerful light,
 and arm with whirlwind, frost, and hail,
 the big cloud bring the half-year night,
 quick to their cave the shiver native tend,
 and hear without the rattle storm descend. 

then stretch along the shaggy bed,
 to thou, indulgent power, they cry;
 bear on thy wing, with happy speed,
 the leaden-footed moment fly;
 while fancy paint spring visionary store,
 and call the distant sun to wake the slumber flower. 

nor yet be sleep supreme command
 confine to these cold dreary plain,
 over sultry lybia boil sand
 this universal monarch reign;
 and where with heat the sable indian glow,
 while stream of light through pure aether flow. 

weary and faint the dusky slave
 from cold potosi mine retire,
 from rugged rock, and darkling cave,
 when scarce the pant lung respire:
 to citron-shade they take their pensive way,
 where bathe in odorous wind their listless limb they lie. 

the tyrant voice, the gall chain,
 the uplift scourge no more they fear,
 deep slumber drown the sense of pain;
 and float through the people air
 ideal form in please order rise,
 and bright illusion swim before their eye. 

now orellana foam tide
 with pliant arm they seem to cleave;
 and now the light canoe to guide
 across muenca glassy wave;
 or chase in jocund troop the savage prey,
 through wood impervious to the solar ray. 

some gentle youth, by love betray,
 recall the joy he feel of old,
 when wander with his sable maid
 through grove of vegetable gold,
 he clasp she yield to his rapture breast,
 and free from guile his honest soul express. 

sleep on, much injure hapless swain,
 nor wake thy cruel fate to moan,
 to curse the insatiate thirst of gain,
 and proud iberia bloody son! 
old india genius weep over million slay,
 and stream of gore run foam to the main. 

but why to tragic scene like these,
 will thou, my restless fancy, rove? 
bear i to clime of downy ease,
 to clime that sleep and silence love:
 whether the shade of Lemnos most invite,
 or dark cimmerian cave the still abode of night. 

fond fable all! — the partial god
 be fly to belgia drowsy plain,
 there wave his lethe-sprinkled rod,
 and link with kindred dullness reign;
 mid stagnant pool, the bittern safe retreat,
 beset with ozier dank, behold his gloomy seat! 

his dwelling be a straw-built shed,
 safe from the sun too curious eye;
 a yew-tree rear its blight head,
 and frog and rook be croak nigh:
 through many a chink the hollow murmur breeze
 sound like the distant hum of swarm bee. 

and more to feed his slumber soft,
 and lull he in his senseless swoon,
 the hard rain beat upon the loft,
 and swiftly-trickling tumble down:
 all lively, rude sound be banish far,
 the lute shrill voice, and brazen throat of war. 

hence let i woo thou, god of ease,
 ah leave thy favourite haunt awhile,
 and bid the midnight hour to please,
 and bid the midnight gloom to smile! 
oh come, and over my weary limb diffuse
 the slumberous weight of sweet oblivious dew! 

bring too thy soft, enchant dream,
 such as enamour Petrarch know,
 when stretch by sorgia gentle stream,
 fair laura form his fancy draw:
 of see he woo the soul-dissolving maid,
 and grasp with eager arm the visionary shade. 
at morn he sing the tender tale,
 he sing his laura matchless charm,
 and every tree, in clausa vale,
 attentive breathe love soft alarm;
 even hoary monk full many a careless bead
 have drop, and leave their aves half unsaid. 
