ode to liberty.

by the same.

strophe.

who shall awake the spartan fife,
 and call in solemn sound to life
 the youth, who lock divine spread,
 like vernal hyacinth in sullen hue,
 at once the breath of fear and virtue shed,
 applaud freedom love of old to view? 
what new Alcaeus fancy-blessed,
 shall sing the sword in myrtle dress,
 at wisdom shrine awhile its flame conceal,
 (what place so fit to seal a deed renowned?) 
till she her bright lightning round reveal,
 it leap in glory forth, and deal her prompt wound! 
o goddess, in that feeling hour,
 when most its sound will court thy ear,
 let not my shell misguided power
 ever draw thy sad, thy mindful tear. 
no, freedom, no, i will not tell,
 how Rome, before thy weep face,
 with heavy sound, a giant-statue, fall,
 push by a wild and artless race
 from off its wide ambitious base,
 when time his northern son of spoil awake,
 and all the blend work of strength and grace,
 with many a rude repeat stroke,
 and many a barbarous yell, to thousand fragment break. 

epode.

yet even, wherever the least appear,
 the admire world thy hand revere;
 still, amid the scatter state around,
 some remnant of her strength be find;
 they see, by what escape the storm,
 how wondrous rose her perfect form;
 how in the great, the labour whole,
 each mighty master pour his soul! 
for sunny Florence, seat of art,
 beneath her vine preserve a part,
 till they, who science love to name,
 (o who can fear it i) quench her flame. 
and lo, a humble relic lay
 in jealous pisa olive shade! 
see small Marino join the theme,
 though least, not last in thy esteem:
 strike, loud strike the ennoble string
 to those, who merchant son be king;
 to he, who, deck with pearly pride,
 in Adria wed his green-haired bride. 
hail port of glory, wealth, and pleasure,
 never let i change this lydian measure:
 nor ever her former pride relate,
 to sad liguria bleed state. 
ah no! more please thy haunt i seek,
 on wild helvetia mountain bleak:
 (where, when the favour of thy choice,
 the dare archer hear thy voice;
 forth from his eyrie rouse in dread,
 the raven eagle northward flee.) 
or dwell in willowed mead more near. 
with those to who thy stork be dear:
 those who the rod of Alva bruise,
 who crown a british queen refuse! 
the magic work, thou feel the strain,
 one holy name alone remain;
 the perfect spell shall then avail,
 hail nymph, adore by Britain, hail! 

antistrophe.

beyond, the measure vast of thought,
 the work, the wizard time have wrought! 
the Gaul, it be hold of antique story,
 see Britain link to his now adverse strand,
 no sea between, nor cliff sublime and hoary,
 he pass with unwet foot through all our land. 
to the blow Baltic then, they say,
 the wild wave find another way,
 where Orcas howl, his wolfish mountain round;
 till all the banded west at once begin rise,
 a wide wild storm even nature self confound,
 wither her giant son with strange uncouth surprise. 
this pillared earth so firm and wide,
 by wind and inward labour tear,
 in thunder dread be push aside,
 and down the shoulder billow bear. 
and see, like gem she laugh train,
 the little isle on every side,
 Mona, once hide from those who search the main,
 where thousand elfin shape abide,
 and wight who check the wester tide,
 for thou consent heaven have each bestow,
 a fair attendant on her sovereign pride:
 to thou this bless divorce she owe,
 for thou have make her vale thy love, thy last abode! 

second epode.

then too, it be say, a hoary pile,
 'midst the green navel of our isle,
 thy shrine in some religious wood,
 o soul-enforcing goddess, stand! 
there oft the paint native foot
 be wont thy form celestial meet:
 though now with hopeless toil we trace
 time be backward roll, to find its place;
 whether the fiery-tressed Dane,
 or roman self overturn the fane,
 or in what heaven-left age it fall,
 it be hard for modern song to tell. 
yet still, if truth those beam infuse,
 which guide at once, and charm the muse,
 beyond yond braid cloud that lie,
 pave the light-embroidered sky:
 amid the bright pavillion plain,
 the beauteous model still remain. 
there happy than in island bless,
 or bower by spring or Hebe dress,
 the chief who fill our albion story,
 in warlike weed, retire in glory,
 hear their consort Druids sing
 their triumph to the immortal string. 

how may the poet now unfold,
 what never tongue or number tell? 
how learn delight, and amaze,
 what hand unknown that fabric raise! 
even now, before his favour eye,
 in gothic pride it seem to rise! 
yet graecia graceful order join,
 majestic through the mix design;
 the secret builder know to choose,
 each sphere-found gem of rich hue:
 whatever heaven pure mould contain,
 when near sun emblaze its vein;
 there on the wall the patriot sight
 may ever hang with fresh delight,
 and, grave with some prophetic rage,
 read albion same through every age. 

you form divine, you laureate band,
 that near her inmost altar stand! 
now sooth she, to her blisssul train
 Blythe concord social form to gain:
 concord, who myrtle wand can steep
 even anger blood-shot eye in sleep:
 before who breathe bosom balm,
 rage drop his steel, and storm grow calm;
 her let our sire and matron hoar
 welcome to britain ravage shore,
 our youth, enamour of the fair,
 play with the tangle of her hair,
 till, in one loud applaud find,
 the nation shout to she around,
 o how supreme be thou bless,
 thou, lady, thou shall rule the west! 
