to a lady, send with a present of shell and stone design for a grotto.

by the same.

with gift like these, the spoil of neighbour shore,
the indian swain his sable love adore,
offering well suit to the dusky shrine
of his rude goddess, but unworthy mine:
and yet they seem not such a worthless prize,
if nice view by philosophic eye:
and such be you, that nature work admire
with warmth like that, which they themselves inspire.

to such how fair appear each grain of sand,
or humble weed, as wrought by nature hand!
how far superior to all human power
spring the green blade, or bud the paint flower!
in all her birth, though of the mean kind,
a just observer entertainment find,
with fond delight her low production see,
and how she gentle rise by degree;
a shell, or stone he can with pleasure view,
hence trace her noble work, the heaven — and you.

behold how bright these gaudy trifle shine,
the lovely sport of a hand divine!
see with what art each curious shell be make,
here carve in fretwork, there with pearl inlay!
what vivid streak the enamel stone adorn,
fair as the painting of the purple morn!
yet still not half their charm can reach our eye,
while thus confuse the sparkle chaos lie;
double they will please, when in your grotto place,
they plain speak the fair disposer taste;
then glory yet unseen shall over they rise,
new order from your hand, new lustre from your eye.

how sweet, how charm will appear this grot,
when by your art to full perfection bring!
here verdant plant, and bloom flower will grow,
there bubble current through the shell-work flow;
here coral mix with shell of various die,
there polish stone will charm our wonder eye;
delightful bower of bliss! secure retreat!
fit for the muse, and statira seat.

but still how good must be that fair-one mind,
who thus in solitude can pleasure find!
the muse her company, good-sense her guide,
resistless charm her power, but not her pride;
who thus forsake the town, the park, and play,
in silent shade to pass her hour away;
who better like to breathe fresh country air,
than ride imprison in a velvet chair,
and make the warble nightingale her choice,
before the thrill of farinelli voice;
prefer her book, and conscience void of ill,
to consort, ball, assembly, and quadrille:
sweet bower more please, than gild chariot see,
for grove the playhouse quit, and beau for tree.

bless be the man, who heaven shall grant one hour
with such a lovely nymph, in such a lovely bower.
