the death of nicou,

a african eclogue.

on tiber bank, Tiber, who water glide
 in slow meander down to gaigra side;
 and circle all the horrid mountain round,
 rush impetuous to the deep profound;
 roll over the ragged rock with hideous yell;
 collect its wave beneath the earth vast shell:
 there for a while in loud confusion hurl,
 it crumble mountain down and shake the world. 
till bear upon the pinion of the air,
 through the rent earth the burst wave appear;
 fierce propel the whiten billow rise,
 break from the cavern and ascend the sky:
 then lose and conquer by superior force,
 through hot Arabia hold its rapid course. 
on tiber bank where scarlet jass'mine bloom,
 and purple aloe shed a rich perfume:
 where, when the sun be melt in his heat,
 the reek tiger find a cool retreat;
 bask in the sedge, lose the sultry beam,
 and wanton with their shadow in the stream,
 on tiber bank, by sacred priest revere,
 where in the day of old a god appear:
 it be in the dead of night, at chalma feast,
 the tribe of alra sleep around the priest. 
he speak; as evening thunder burst near,
 his horrid accent break upon the ear;
 attend, alraddas, with your sacred priest! 
this day the sun be rise in the east;
 the sun, which shall illumine all the earth,
 now, now isrise, in a mortal birth. 
he vanish like a vapour of the night,
 and sink away in a faint blaze of light. 
swift from the branch of the holy oak,
 horror, confusion, fear, and torment break:
 and still when midnight trim her mazy lamp,
 they take their way through tiber watery swamp. 
on tiber bank, close rank, a war train,
 stretch to the distant edge of galca plain:
 so when arrive at gaigra high steep,
 we view the wide expansion of the deep;
 see in the gilding of her watery robe,
 the quick declension of the circle globe;
 from the blue sea a chain of mountain rise,
 blend at once with water and with ske:
 beyond our sight in vast extension curl,
 the check of wave, the guardian of the world. 
strong be the warrior, as the ghost of cawn,
 who throw the hill-of-archers, to the lawn:
 when the soft earth at his appearance flee;
 and rise billow play around his head:
 when a strong tempest rise from the main,
 dash the full cloud, unbroken on the plain. 
nicou, immortal in the sacred song,
 hold the red sword of war, and lead the strong;
 from his own tribe the sable warrior come,
 well try in battle, and well know in fame. 
nicou, descend from the god of war,
 who live coeval with the morning star:
 narada be his name; who can tell,
 how all the world through great narada fall! 
vichon, the god who rule above the sky,
 look on narada, but with envious eye:
 the warrior dare he, ridicule his might,
 bend his white bow, and summon he to fight. 
vichon, disdainful, bid his lightning fly,
 and scatter burn arrow in the sky;
 throw down a star the armour of his foot,
 to burn the air with supernatural heat;
 bid a loud tempest roar beneath the ground;
 lift the sea, and all the earth be drown. 
narada still escape; a sacred tree
 lift he up, and bear he through the sea. 
the water still ascend fierce and high,
 he tower into the chamber of the sky:
 there vichon sit; his armour on his bed,
 he think narada with the mighty dead. 
before his seat the heavenly warrior stand,
 the lightning quiver in his yellow hand. 
the god astonish drop; hurl from the shore,
 he drop to torment, and to rise no more. 
headlong he fall; it be his own arm compel,
 condemn in ever-burning fire to dwell. 
from this narada, mighty nicou spring;
 the mighty nicou, furious, wild and young. 
who lead th'em battle archer to the field,
 and bear a thunderbolt upon his shield:
 that shield his glorious father die to gain,
 when the white warrior flee along the plain:
 when the full sail can not provoke the flood,
 till nicou come, and swell the sea with blood. 
slow at the end of his robust array,
 the mighty warrior pensive take his way:
 against the son of nair, the young rorest,
 once the companion of his youthful breast. 
strong be the passion of the son of nair,
 strong, as the tempest of the evening air. 
insatiate in desire; fierce as the boar;
 firm in resolve as cannie rocky shore. 
long have the god endeavour to destroy,
 all nicou friendship, happiness, and joy:
 they seek in vain, until vicat, vichon son,
 never in feat of wickedness outdo,
 see Nica, sister to the mountain king,
 dress beautiful, with all the flower of spring:
 he see and scatter poison in her eye;
 from limb to limb, in vary form he fly;
 dwell on her crimson lip, and add grace
 to every glossy feature of her face. 
rorest be fire with passion at the sight,
 friendship and honour, sink to vicat right:
 he see, he love, and burn with desire,
 bear the soft maid from brother, sister, sire. 
pine with sorrow, Nica fade, die,
 like a fair aloe in its morning pride. 
this bring the warrior to the bloody mead,
 and send to young rorest the threaten reed. 
he draw his army forth: oh! need i tell! 
that nicou conquer, and the lover fall:
 he breathless army mantle all the plain;
 and death sit smile on the heap of slay. 
the battle end, with his reek dart,
 the pensive nicou pierce his beat heart:
 and to his mourning valiant warrior cry,
 i, and my sister ghost be satisfy. 
