a poem panegyrical on his grace the d. of Albemarle;

with remark on his voyage for Jamaica, and the late treasure bring home in the JAMES and MARY.

epistle dedicatory to her grace the duchess.

when Brutus with the rest do Cesar doom,
and by his death give liberty to Rome:
great Cato daughter his dear faithful wife,
that know the secret of that fatal strife,
from her love husband side will never part,
both have one will, one courage, and one heart,
her generous virtue think it base to share
part of his joy, and nothing of his care;
and therefore all his harm with patience bear,
and when he die she likewise be no more:
her virtue, madam, flourish now in you,
a second Porcia, faithful, chaste and true,
with heaven divine gift your heart be store,
and weave into the merit of your lord;
so fast, and with affection so sublime,
you can look down with scorn on death and time:
since then great Albemarle inspire my muse,
upon a theme it be fit the world peruse;
who shall i beg to consecrate my line,
but you, who know how bright his virtue shine,
you, who have make the business of your life,
to show the world, a pattern of a wife,
joy at your lord good chance, grieve at his ill,
kind, wise, and what be most rare obedient, to his will:
more i can say, nay so much may be say,
these swell line will tire you to read.
if i can boast of a poetic art,
to speak your praise, lavish as your desert,
no flight can be too high, no thought too strong,
nor can the poem ever be too long.
but modest pen, that dare not be too bold,
know truth, the short way be wise tell.

a poem panegyric on his grace the duke of Albemarle, etc. 

i 

happy those island where no sullen sky.
debar with cloud the prospect of the eye,
where the glad sun with joy perform his race,
and sully with no fog his glorious face,
where change of weather make no native mourn,
no ague freeze you, nor no fever burn;
but genuine heat, nature for health design,
and through respire pore your blood refine.

ii.

but above all most happy be that land,
which you, my lord, be go to command,
their darling genius clap her joyful wing,
and your approach in lofty number sing;
the sun be attractive force they know before,
exhal dew from every plant and flower.
but this new influence they learn from you,
that to a point he can draw virtue too.

iii.

it be say indeed this generative heat,
in parch clime most worthy do beget;
and that no northern nation can inspire
her sickly son, with such heroic fire;
but i can never credit this till now,
the sympathy be verify in you:
that still your like for those part have show,
where the hot glitter god attract his own.

iv.

as some fond mother, that with tender care
see her young darling post to the war,
oppress with sorrow, do the part view;
hate he shall go, yet love his glory too:
such grief (my lord) your mourn friend all share,
when of your voyage the sad news they hear,
and joint wish America can know,
the Jem she gain without their loss in you.

v. 

but still to have you, be too great a grace,
perfection never continue in one place;
so angel do in former time appear,
give we true joy, but stay but little here.
to cheer the world, your virtue heaven design,
and can not in one island be confine;
worth like the sun, so universal know,
it be fit shall bless more country than your own.

vi.

well may those happy isle serene appear,
but we, i fear, shall find it cloudy here,
if comet be oblige to infest the sky,
at a state change, or when a monarch die;
methinks they shall their fatal fear infuse,
into our heart, when we a worthy lose;
do not wise heaven think it vain to show
a prodigy, for plague too well we know.

vii.

in take you, fate leave we poor and bare,
the mighty sum be more than we can spare;
for common loss common tear we shower,
but, sir, your merit will command much more:
the ache heart of all your countryman,
when woe be deep, few tear be see;
and when grief burn within, where none can spy,
the bubble fountain of the head be dry.

viii.

to thy own safety England have regard,
the loyal and the brave be rare spare;
in prop of virtue we be not so rich,
but such a pillar go will will make a breach,
crowd may drop off like hair of no esteem,
but when one hero go we lose a limb;
well Britain may thy arm the world over come;
when thou can spare a Albemarle from home.

ix.

he, that when late rebellious seed grow high,
and proud sedition tread on loyalty,
encompass round with danger, and with foe,
numerous as dust, when the wild tempest blow,
with fortitude undaunted dare defy
the force and favour of the enemy,
from his love country shall affection claim,
dear as his own, and last as his fame.

x. 

all good man know that then he noble serve,
and to his utmost power the throne preserve,
iames find his vigilance and conduct right,
though upstart davus snarl and dare not bite;
nor can a royal heart unmindful be
of stanch hereditary loyalty;
for none shall monarch of remissness charge,
their memory be like their glory large.

xi.

a steadfast duty, and a faith entire,
we know the Jem be right that past the fire,
so good, our nation genius be afraid
to lose a prize so proper for her aid,
and lest light coffer by true bounty drain,
a mighty prince shall merchandise send;
Neptune, as if he bribe he not to go,
send he a present from his hoar below.

xii.

seven wonder ancient chronicle relate,
now change the scene, and make the number eight,
it be well renown Britain, that with thou
no land can vie for wit or industry;
if honour can the argument maintain,
as well as politic design for gain,
the world will then thy wondrous merit know,
and heaven above, as the salt deep below.

xiii.

gigantic rock ravish the wealthy over,
a Peoples ruin the rich vessel bear;
and providence for end, now know confine
in coral groves the mistress of mankind,
full forty year the pensive beauty lie,
low in a sea-god cell, to which-none find the way,
till phip inspire arrive, and heaven think well
to bless our hero by a miracle.

xiv.

it be wondrous well if fate will order so,
that monarch every subject heart can know,
they then the difference of man may see,
that serve for interest or for loyalty;
to build their fortune many blow the main,
their duty be encourage by their gain;
but he that leave a greatness so well know
mere to serve his prince, be loyal monk alone.

XV. 

for who but he will leave the bower of peace
of bless contentment and delightful ease;
to war with blast and fever of the sky,
half buz to death by buccaneer fly,
who will the tiresome voyage undergo,
when profit have no golden face to show?
or who but he the hot fatigue will bear,
and leave new-hall to be a viceroy there?

xvi.

new-hall, the true elizium of the eye,
the glorious seat of ancient royalty,
where art and nature seem by heaven design
to strive, which shall be master of their kind;
and as the precious over in golden mine,
nature produce, but it be art that coin;
so she by paradise this model draw,
and be improve the beauty as they grow.

xvii.

the curious garden that delight the eye,
show the gay scene of bless variety;
sweet as a virgin that have never know
the scorch passion of the vicious town
Ceres and Flora here their bounty show,
and fruit and flower so luxurious grow;
as Adam here have use his primitive spade,
and from his Marker have just learn the trade.

xviii.

next take the park and prospect in your view,
Apelles never such a landshape draw,
tall son of earth three quarter of a mile
weave their branch, frame a wondrous isle:
here the poor traveller relief to gain
from the oppress storm of wind and rain,
tire with his tedious journey slack his pace,
sit down, look round, and wonder at the place.

xix.

the nightingale in every grove impart,
by nature, air that need no help of art;
no artist send from Italy come there,
and yet no eunuch ever sing so rare,
curse your ill star, you poor disgender crew,
each linnet have a better fate than you,
for they can in the charm chorus join,
and yet enjoy the pleasure of their kind.

xx.

the happy herd of dear then feast see
emblem of innocence and amity,
that feed and love together, couch and rise,
never debauch with strife or mortal vice,
but silent their great creator praise;
and if they chance to see a human face,
with eager speed, they from the object run,
and gaze and wonder at the monster, man.

xxi.

reflect, vain creature, with erect face,
that claim command over the four-footed race;
how much thy lazy virtue they will out do,
if they be bless with sacred reason too;
proud of thy gift, yet heaven in they do find
more truth, nay more religion in their kind,
from schism, false doctrine, and ambition free,
and pride the darling sin of poor mortality.

xxii.

here ere the lawn with summer blessing crown,
please with their lusty health they nimble bind'
free from the weather wild ingrateful storm
the tremble hare sit quiet in their form:
sweet smell panther of who spot we read
in modern pamphlet, here may welcome feed,
but yet no baptist boar, nor foam bear can graze,
nor one immortal hind in all the place.

xxiii.

when the great general with victorious sword,
thrice happy england best of king restore;
when croud be to obedience force to bow,
and old rebellion giant-head lie low:
the mighty genius of this god of war,
big with his merit, do this place prepare;
and smile on he with a awful grace,
speak thus, thou wondrous man rest here in peace.

xxiv.

here let thy glass of life in quiet run,
and let the world admire what thou have do,
thou, that from chaos do to order bring,
dissent crowd, that shuffle out the king,
and when black gather cloud of mischief grow
too dark, for any but thy eye to view,
that all the jar part thy power may know,
spake loud, let there be light, and it be so.

xxv.

this say, the genius bow his awful head,
and at his foot the conquer trophy lay;
from hence a series of new year run on
till throng with time this great triumphant man,
like some tall lofty pine with blessing crown,
sink with his mellow glory to the ground,
leave behind a theme far more sublime
than ever again will grace succeed time.

xxvii.

sir, still in you we the old hero see
the same true courage, and true loyalty,
the father of his country do return
you in a Phoenix rise from his urn,
who steadfast faith no interest can sway,
so well his heart have teach he to obey;
to serve his prince all danger will run over,
dread to stormy sea, nor no inhospitable shore.

xxvii.

yet though this sir, on duty score you do,
reason advise to be cautious too;
when from high tower you see the dazzle height,
it be direct madness to precipitate.
hard be the game you long have have to play,
many will have you go, and more to stay,
to keep you here, still wish your faithful friend;
but Og, will have you go for his own end.

xxviii.

project Og, by you like taper snuft,
like spider now with innate venom puff,
a bulk sincere, but there be no faith in that,
for all man be not honest that be fat.
this age by a new juggle fallacy,
fatten those most who best can cheat and lye;
who with next heir at law will trust his health,
or who a bloat bancrupt with his wealth?

xxix.

to fame and truth your soul do ever bend,
the brave man be still the true friend:
heaven its best grace to your heart disclose,
there all the element so well compose,
that no unruly passion dare aspire,
not too much earth, nor yet too little fire;
but in your bosom form, all gentle move,
you show at once the eagle and the dove.

xxx.

forgive i sir, that i these truth relate,
and believe flattery be a thing i hate;
the courtier gloss to varnish his dull speech,
can i have flatter well i have be rich;
a well form parasite man art so dear,
i may have get three hundred pound a year,
that now can boast no great wealth my due,
than a good character from such as you.

xxxi.

and rich i be in that, may then your year,
roll on with joy, and may you know no care,
may bounteous plenty bless you with her store,
and all the teem western mine with over,
may spicy breeze cool the parch air,
that no hot ray presume to offend the fair,
and in a happy hour may England boast,
she can win back the treasure she have lose.
