[nereid:] eclogue v. 

Mer.  

Lycon begin — begin the mournful tale;
 you know what it be to love and not prevail:
 describe Pasinthas in his daily moan,
 how much he love, and how he be undo. 

Lyc.  

ungrateful Ioessa, vain coy,
 and proud of youthful charm despise the boy;
 have leave the calm sea pacific arm,
 where constant heat the smile ocean warm. 
to shun the youth: (such be the power of hate)
 some windy bay be now her lone retreat. 
in vain Pasinthas seek in every cave,
 in every creek, and mark each rise wave;
 to every isle he rove with wild despair,
 and ask, if Ioessa have be there. 
in vain he have the fruitless search pursue,
 for she be go, and will no more be woo. 
pierce with the kill thought the lover sigh,
 and still the rise storm with loud cry:
 while thus he sad plain; in mournful round,
 the air through hollow rock repeat the distant sound,
 each wind cavern tell the fruitless care,
 and every rock upbraid the absent fair;
 by the sad echo which it still return,
 it seem to pity, when the triton mourn:
 but the coy nymph, deaf to the mer-man cry,
 be still unmoved, and make no kind reply. 
while thus Pasinthas plain, the dolphin come,
 and weep to hear his moan; the nereid swim
 in beauteous crowd around, and thus they say;
 "weep not, fond triton, for a peevish maid,
" though she be go let not the youth despair,
 "for there be kind nymph, and nymph as fair. 
but, Mergus, love be deaf as well as blind. 
the best advice be think the most unkind. 
restless he go from the fair pity throng
 to a dark cave, where sea-cow lay their young. 
a silent grot sad as his thought he find,
 where frightful gloom, and horror sit around. 
there on its slimy bottom careless lay,
 he sigh and weep; he sigh, and then he say:

have i then love to be repay with scorn;
 you god! it be hard, too cruel to be bear. 
what? — have i poison too the hate sea,
 that Ioessa leave she home for i? 
have you but tell; have you your hatred show,
 i will have love unpitied, and unknown;
 by my own flight i have prevent you,
 and, banish hence, retire to distant shore,
 where rigid last cold, and northern blast
 over whiten land a pear shine cast;
 where icy flake like float isle appear,
 and fierce meet; the noise you will dread to hear,
 nor can your tender limb the pierce climate bear. 
muscle in shoal on mighty whale attend,
 who feed the worthless fish, and court the puny friend:
 fierce shark by gentle usage be reclaim,
 but female pride be savage, and untamed. 
go then, ingrate, who love can never please,
 to boisterous channel, and to foreign sea,
 where rock like you unmoved with careless pride
 repulse the wave, and check the rise tide. 

thus the unhappy youth be hear to moan;
 the wind to sigh, the hollow seem to groan,
 and drop tear fall from the weep stone. 

Merg. 

thy song more grateful than a summer breeze,
 who cool breath, and gentle Fannings please,
 and move in wanton ring the listen sea. 
not half so sweet, when first the morning dawn,
 be juicy oyster, or the luscious prawn. 
but now the sun be dip in cool stream;
 the twilight be no more; no doubtful gleam
 of weak light the flit shade divide,
 but they unmixed prevail, and every object hide. 
the sea be hear with deep sound to roar,
 and slumber water may be say to snore. 
each nymph be stretch on her oozy bed,
 and scarce a fish pop up his sleepy head;
 those who be cling to rock, the shelly heap
 drop from their hold, and fall into the deep. 
nature her self be still, her labour cease,
 and all lie wrap in silence, and unactive ease. 
