a poem on contentment. 

inscribe to Janet Nicol, a poor old wander woman, who live by the wall at Loudoun and use sometime to be visit by the countess.

o Janet, by your kind permission,
 my muse, in tatter low condition,
 will fain attempt, if you will allow,
 to dedicate a song to you. 
possess of few attractive power,
 her case do much resemble you;
 so lest none else shall deign to hear,
 she humble supplicate your ear. 

imprimis, she shall compliment you;
 a Venus or Diana paint you;
 count over your virtue by the hunder,
 and own they be more than she can number. 
this she may do; but then it will grieve she,
 to find no mortal do believe she. 
she call you patroness and friend,
 and beg that blessing may attend
 upon you in your humble cot,
 and keep your 'scutcheon free from blot. 
may sweet contentment, hard to find,
 with radiant lustre light your mind;
 while number of your sister train
 must for the treasure pant in vain. 

bright Celia, with her conquer eye,
 attempt to win the doubtful prize:
 she dart a glance, ah! cruel maid,
 Philander drop! a strap blade. 
the youth as frantic now behave;
 of love and flame, and dart he rave. 
not esculapius son can cure,
 nor ease the pang he must endure. 
at last the charmer give consent;
 then HYMEN do they both torment,
 with nameless ill unknown before,
 and every month augment the score. 

may star propitious guard your life
 from all the misery of a wife:

poor delia sigh and tear next prove
 the pain of ill requite love. 
she dance, have wit, be wondrous fair,
 and seem alonzo heart to snare. 
true love and constancy he vow;
 but this by all must be allow,
 that young man tongue do not impart
 the real language of their heart. 
he wed another, sad to tell! 
and bad the mournful maid farewell. 

o Janet, may you never know
 the pang that lover undergo. 

Cordelia too, with look demure,
 contentment wish to ensure. 
she flatter Cupid wont believe:
 she know that HYMEN can deceive;
 but fond hope in verse to shine,
 assist by the tuneful nine;
 to call their treasure all her own,
 even in despite of fortune frown. 
but weak, alas! be her pretence;
 her song prove destitute of sense. 
each cavil critic do she vex,
 and every censure sore perplex. 

o may you never feel the pain,
 we heedless scribble fool sustain. 

a thousand more from various view,
 the glide meteor swift pursue. 
the patriot toil, in pensive mood,
 for honour and britannia good. 
the courtier deem his sovereign smile
 will all his anxious care beguile. 
o Janet, shun the cox tribe,
 who barter virtue for a bribe. 
the coxcomb care we well can guess;
 he think the charm consist in dress,
 pomatum, powder, linen white,
 wash-ball, perfume, and mirror bright. 
the miser hope his joy to hold,
 fast lock within his bag of gold:
 thief, moth and rust, corrupt his rest;
 may all his sorrow be your jest. 
the plod sage long year have spend
 in search for the gem content,
 which often do, i know not why,
 in heap of rustic rubbish lie. 

and may my honest friend just now,
 without much quest be find by you;
 may your old shoe, your staff and plaidy,
 be always for the journey ready:
 and blithe may ilk neighbour greet you;
 may cake, and scone, and kibbock meet you;
 and may they well ilk pocket cram,
 and in your bottle slip a dram. 
may your wee glass, your pipe and speck,
 be ay' preserve from doleful wreck. 
may your wee house, both snug and warm,
 be safe from every rude alarm
 of wander lover, who will essay
 to make soft innocence their prey:
 or ruffian cast in rough mould,
 who sordid bosom beat for gold. 

content grow joy, in meet there
 the little, lovely, bloom fair,
 who make thy cot and thou her care;
 who gentle, generous, noble mind,
 though great and rich, can here prove kind;
 who footstep mark her path with peace,
 who smile bid every sorrow cease;
 for age and want, and woe provide
 and over misery preside. 

her father worth, and mother charm
 esteem and fond affection warm,
 while kind d – f – s, with rapture spy,
 the sigh breast and swim eye;
 who ray have find in James and thou,
 the melt charm of misery. 
that charm much more the cherub move,
 than do his gift of coo dove;
 who heart, less tender than her own,
 breathe forth their ever please moan. 
sweet innocence, in she we find;
 bright truth illuminate her mind:
 each action say, for she to give
 it be more joy than to receive. 
let James and you for Loudoun pray,
 who charm have lure i from my lay. 

Janet farewell, you have lint and tow,
 o keep your rock ay from the low;
 though turmoil torture land and sea,
 content may smoke a pipe with thou. 
