epilogue to the theatrical representation at strawberry hill,

write by Joanna Baillie and speak by the HON. ANNE S. Damer, November, 1800. 

while fog along the thames damp margin creep,
 and cold wind through his leafless willow sweep;
 and fairy elf, who summer sport have be
 to foot it light on the moonlight green,
 now, hood close, in many a cower form,
 troop with the surly spirit of the storm;
 while by the blaze fire, with saddle nose,
 the sage turn over his leaf of tedious prose,
 and over their new-dealt card, with eager eye,
 good dowager exult or inly sigh,
 and bloom maid from silken work-bag pour
 (like tangle sea-weed on the vex shore)
 of patchwork, net, fringe, a strange and motley store;
 while all, attempt many a different mode,
 will from their shoulder hitch time be heavy load,
 this be our choice, in comic sock bedight,
 to wrestle with a long November night. —
 "in comic sock!" methinks indignant cry
 some grave fastidious friend with angry eye
 scowl severe, "no more the phrase abuse;
 so shod, indeed there have be some excuse;
 but in these wall, a once wellknown retreat,
 where taste and learning keep a favourite seat,
 where gothic arch with a solemn shade
 shall over the thoughtful mind their influence spread;
 where picture, vase, bust, and precious thing
 still speak of sage, poet, hero, king,
 on which the stranger look with pensive gaze,
 and think upon the worth of other day:
 like foolish child, in their mimic play,
 confine at grandame in a rainy day,
 with paltry farce and all its bastard train,
 grotesque and broad, such precinct to profane! 
it be a shame! — but no, i will not speak,
 i feel the blood rise mantling to my cheek." 
indeed wise sir! —
 but he who over our head those arch bend,
 and store these relic dear to sentiment,
 more mild than you with grave pedantic pride,
 will not have range he on your surly side. 

but now to you, who on our frolic scene
 have look well please, and gentle critic be;
 nor will our homely humour proud spurn,
 to you the good, the gay, the fair i turn,
 and thank you all. — if here our feeble power
 have light wing for you some wintery hour;
 shall these remember scene in fancy live,
 and to some future minute pleasure give,
 to right good end we have wear our mum guise,
 and we be repay and happy — ay, and wise. 
who say we be not, on his somber birth
 gay fancy smile not, nor heart-lightning mirth:
 home let he hie to his unsocial rest,
 and heavy sit the nightmare on his breast! 
