to ARTHUR.

go, artess lie, and if thou can disclose
 the soft effusion which this breast enclose,
 go, humble line, and tender impart
 the dear wish of a grateful heart;
 but neither tongue nor pen can ever reveal
 the warm emotion i must ever feel;
 then fancy all thy own kind lip will say,
 think all esteem — love — gratitude can pay. 
have i the sweetness of a angel tongue,
 the charm of number, and the power of song,
 harmonious grace shall flow in every line,
 when offer gratitude at friendship shrine
 but since no muse will deign to aid this lay,
 let feeling dictate, and let truth display;
 oh! form with all that can the heart endear,
 a temper generous, and a soul sincere,
 with kind acceptance grace the offer line,
 where true regard and friendship mild shine;
 then take, my Arthur, from these tremble hand,
 the trifle tribute which thy love demand. 
auspicious hour! when nature frame thy mind
 to bless and dignify the human kind;
 give thou a heart to feel for other woe,
 a generous tear for worth depress to flow;
 impress thy soul with virtue sacred law,
 and firm honour to support her cause,
 soft emanation sparkle in thy eye,
 like those bright world that shine in evening sky;
 but what i think thou, can be express,
 my future conduct will unfold it best;
 each rise morning, and each evening close,
 "i will ask of heaven thy undisturbed repose,"
 that peaceful scene thy slumber may display,
 and joy salute thou each return day. 
and shall again thy country claim thy arm,
 to guard our right, or shield our land from harm,
 amid the din of war, and martial strife,
 i will soothe the danger of my soldier life;
 with all the softness in a female power,
 beguile the languor of each painful hour;
 no frown shall cloud my brow, i will happy be,
 nay feel it pleasure, be share with thou;
 or shall (which heaven avert) some fate blow
 come arm with power to lay my Arthur low,
 fate will be kind to guide i to my rest,
 my dear home, my soldier faithful breast,
 to clasp his faint form, close his dead eye,
 bless his love name, and breathe my late sigh:
 never even in death my Arthur i will resign,
 be all his suffering, all his sorrow i;
 but shall some sweet retirement be thy fate,
 far from ambition path, far from the great,
 to humble shade content i will descend,
 with thou, my husband, my protect friend;
 the cheerful day serene will i fit,
 learn from thy goodness, and admire thy wit;
 while i delight in my bless employ,
 (for hour of innocence be hour of joy)
 and when the evening warn thou to thy rest,
 peaceful repose upon thy faithful breast:
 thus rich in innocence, secure from wrong,
 we will bless the moment as they glide along;
 the bless above will view our peaceful fate,
 and smile to see a emblem of their state;
 be this our meed, kind sovereign of the sky! 
we will live in innocence, in triumph die. 
 "all-giving power!" great fountain of reward,
 from perfect bliss oh! deign i thy regard;
 and if such worth can need my humble prayer,
 oh! make my Arthur thy distinguish care;
 let thy good angel all his step await,
 and shield his bosom from the storm of fate;
 around his couch let nightly guardian 'tend,
 and from each unseen ill my love defend! 
but in this err, ever vary scene,
 shall dark cloud overshade our state serene,
 oh! thou great power, omnipotent and wise! 
teach we thou send blessing in disguise;
 and when arrive that last important hour
 when every pleasure lose every power,
 when the last spark of vital spirit fail,
 and peaceful conscience over death prevail,
 thou best of being! all our step uphold,
 to smooth the passage heavenly scene unfold,
 and safe bear our faint spirit high,
 to some bright mansion in our native sky:
 thus may our guiltless pleasure ever bloom,
 and rise superior over the silent tomb. 
