a epistle from FLORENCE.

to T. a. ESQ; tutor to the earl of P—. write in the year 1740. 

by the honourable —.

when flourish with their state the athenian name,
and learning and politeness be the same,
philosophy with gentle art refine
the honest roughness of the unpractised mind:
she call the latent beam of nature forth,
guide their ardour, and insure their worth.
she poise the impetuous warrior vengeful steel,
mark true ambition from destructive zeal,
point what lustre on that laurel blow,
which virtue only on her son bestow.
hence clement Cimon of unspotted fame,
hence aristides ever favourite name;
hero, who know to wield the righteous spear,
and guard their native tower from foreign fear;
or in firm band of social peace to bind
their country be good, and benefit mankind.
she trim the thoughtful statesman nightly oil,
confirm his mind beneath a empire toil,
or with he to his silent villa steal,
gild his evening hour, and harmonise his soul.

to wood and cave she never bid retreat,
nor fix in cloister monkery her seat:
no lonely precept to her son enjoin,
nor teach they to be man, to shun mankind.
cynic there be, a uncouth selfish race,
of manner foul, and boastful of disgrace:
brute, who no muse have ever love to name,
who ignominy be their only fame,
no hostile trophy grace their honour urn,
around their tomb no sculpture virtue mourn;
nor tell the marble into emblem grave,
a art discover, or a city save.

be this the goal to which the briton-peer
exalt his hope, and press his young career!
be this the goal to which, my friend, may you
with gentle skill direct his early view!
artful the various study to dispense,
and melt the schoolman jargon down to sense.

see the pedantic teacher, wink dull,
the letter tyrant of a tremble school;
teach by force, and prove by a frown,
his lift fasces ram the lesson down.
from torture strain of eloquence he draw
barbaric precept and unmeaning law,
by his own sense will tully word expound,
and a new vandal trample classic ground.

perhaps a bigot to the learned page,
no modern custom can his thought engage;
his little farm by georgick rule he plough,
and prune by metre the luxuriant bough,
still from aratus sphere or maro sign,
the future calm or tempest he divine,
and fear if the prognostic raven find
 expatiate alone along the dreary round.

what scanty precept! study how confine!
too mean to fill your comprehensive mind:
unsatisfied with know when or where
some roman bigot raise a Fane to fear;
on what green medal virtue stand express,
how concord picture, liberty how dress;
or with wise ken judicious define,
when pius mark the honorary coin
of Caracalla, or of antonine.

thirst for knowledge, but to know the right,
through judgement optic guide the illusive sight,
to let in ray on reason darkling cell,
and prejudice lag mist dispel;
for this you turn the greek and roman page,
weigh the contemplative and active sage,
and cull some useful flower from each heroic age.

thence teach the youth the necessary art,
to know the judge from the critic part;
show how ignoble be the passion, fear,
and place some patriot roman model near;
their bright example to his soul instil,
who know no fear, but that of do ill..
tell he, it be all a cant, a trifle all,
to know the fold that from the toga fall,
the clavus breadth, the bulla golden round,
and every leaf that every virtue crown;
but show how bright in each honest breast
than in her shrine, the goddess stand confess.

tell he, it be not the fantastic boy,
elate with power and swell with frantic joy,
it be not a slavish senate, fawn, base,
can stamp with honest fame a worthless race;
though the false coin proclaim he great and wise,
the tyrant life shall tell that coin, it lie.

but when your early care shall have design
to plan the soul and mould the waxen mind;
when you shall pour upon his tender breast
idea that must stand a age test,
oh! there imprint with strong deep dye
the lovely form of goddess liberty!
for she in senate be he train to plead,
for she in battle be he teach to bleed.
lead he where dover rugged cliff resound
with dash sea, fair freedom honest bound,
point to yond azure Carr bedrop with gold,
who weight the neck of gallia son uphold;
where proud sit a iron-sceptered queen,
and fond triumph over the prostrate scene,
cry, that be empire! shun she baleful path,
her word be slavery, and her touch be death!
through wound and blood the fury drive her way,
and murder half, to make the rest her prey.

thus speak each spartan matron, as she dress
with the bright cuirass the young soldier breast;
on the new warrior tender-sinewed thigh,
gird fear of shame and love of liberty.

steel with such precept, for a cause so good,
what scanty band the persian host withstand!
before the son of Greece let Asia tell
how flee her monarch, how her million fell!
when arm for liberty, a few how brave!
how weak a multitude, where each a slave!
no welcome falchion fill their faint hand,
no voice inspire of favourite command:
no peasant fight for wealthy land possess,
no fond remembrance warm the parent breast:
they see their land for royal riot groan,
and toil in vain for banquet, not their own;
they see their infant race to bondage rise,
and frequent hear the ravish virgin cry,
dishonour but to cool a transient gust
of some luxurious satrap barbarous lust.

the great curse any age have know,
have issue from the temple or the throne;
extent of ill from king at first begin,
but priest must aid, and consecrate their sin.
the torture subject may be hear complain,
when sink under a new weight of chain,
or more rebellious may perhaps repine,
when tax to dower a title concubine,
but the priest christen all a right divine.

when at the altar a new monarch kneel,
what conjure awe upon the people steal!
the choose he adore the precious oil,
meek receive the solemn charm, and while
the priest some bless nothing mutter over,
suck in the sacred grease at every poor:
he seem at once to shed his mortal skin,
and feel divinity transfuse within.
the tremble vulgar dread the royal nod,
and worship God anoint more than god.

such sanction give the prelate to such king!
so mischief from those hallow fountain spring.
but bend your eye to yonder harrass plain,
where king and priest in one unite reign;
see fair Italia mourn her holy state,
and droop oppress beneath a papal weight:
where fat celibacy usurp the soil,
and sacred sloth consume the peasant toil:
the holy drone monopolise the sky,
and plunder by a vow of poverty.
the christian cause their lewd profession taint,
unlearned, unchaste, uncharitable saint.

oppression take religion hallow name,
and priestcraft know to play the specious game.
behold how each enthusiastic fool
of ductile piety, become their tool:
observe with how much art, what fine pretence,
they hallow foppery and combat sense.

some hoary hypocrite, grow old in sin,
who thought of heaven with his last hour begin,
count a chaplet with a bigot care,
and mumble somewhat betwixt a charm and prayer,
hug a daub image of his injure lord,
and squeeze out on the dull idol-board
a sore-eyed gum of tear; the flannel crew
with cunning joy the fond repentance view,
pronounce he bless, his miracle proclaim,
teach the slight crow to adore his hallow name,
exalt his praise above the saint of old,
and coin his sink conscience into gold.

or when some pontiff with imperious hand
send forth his edict to excise the land,
the torture hind unwilling obey,
and mutter curse as his mite he pay!
the subtle priest the invidious name forbear,
ask it for holy use or venal prayer;
exhibit all their trumpery to sale,
a bone, a mouldy morsel, or a nail:
the indolatrous devout adore the show,
and in full stream the melt offering flow.

no pagan object, nothing too profane,
to aid the romish zeal for christian gain.
each temple with new weight of idol nod,
and borrow altar smoke to other god.
prometheus Vultur Matthew eagle prove;
and heavenly cherub sprout from heathen love;
young Ganymede a wing angel stand
by holy Luke, and dictate God command:
 Apollo, though degrade, still can bless,
reward with a sainthood, and a s.
each convert godhead be apostolize,
and Jove himself by Peter name baptise.
Astarte shine in Jewish Mary fame,
still queen of heaven, another and the same.

while the proud priest the sacred tyrant reign
of empty city and dispeople plain,
where fetter nature be forbid to rove
in the free commerce of productive love:
behold imprison with her barren kind,
in gloomy cell the votive maid confine;
faint stream of blood, by long stagnation weak,
scarce tinge the fade damask of her cheek;
in vain she pine, the holy faith withstand,
what nature dictate and what god command:
but if some sanguine he, some lusty priest
of jollier moral taste the tempt feast,
from the strong grasp if some poor babe arise,
unwelcome, unendeared, it instant die;
or poison blast soon the hasty joy,
the imperfect seed of infant life destroy,

fair modesty, thou virgin tender-eyed,
from thou the muse the gross act must hide,
nor the dark cloister mystic rite display,
whence numerous brawny monkhood waste away,
and unprolific, though forswear, decay.

Britannia smile, view she gold plain
from mitred bondage free and papal chain;
her jocund son pass each unburdened day
secure quiet, innocent gay:
lord of themselves the happy rustic sing,
each of his little tenement the king.
twice do usurp Rome extend her hand,
to reinslave the new-delivered land;
twice be her sable band to battle warm,
with pardon, bull, and text, and murder arm;
 with Peter sword and MICHAEL lance be send,
and whatever store supply the church armament.
twice do the gallant Albion race repel
the Jesuit legion to the gate of hell;
or whatever angel, friend to Britain, take
or William or Eliza guardian look.

arise, young peer! shine forth in such a cause!
who draw the sword for freedom, just draw.
reflect how dear be that freedom buy;
for that, how oft your ancestor have fight;
through the long series of our prince down,
how wrench some right from each too potent crown.

see abject JOHN, that vassal-monarch, see!
bow down the royal neck, and crouch the supple knee!
oh! prostitution of imperial state!
to a vile romish priest vile delegate.
he the bold baron scorn to obey,
and be the subject of a subject sway;
hero who name to late fame shall shine,
I will by no vision of a right divine,
that bond by eastern politician wrought,
which we have learn, and Rabbi doctor teach,
to straiter bank restrain the royal will,
that great prerogative of do ill..

to late example and experience dead,
see HENRY in his father footstep tread.
too young to govern, immature to power,
his early folly haunt his late hour.
his noble injure, and his realm oppress,
no violate senate wrong redress,
his hoary age sink in the feeble wane
of a inglorious, slight, tedious reign.

the muse too long with idle glory feed,
and train to trumpet over the warlike dead,
the wanton fain on giddy plume will soar,
to Gallic Loire and Jordan humble shore;
again will teach the Saracen and Gaul,
at Edward and at Henry name to fall;
romantic hero! prodigal of blood;
what number stain each ill-disputed flood!
tool to a clergy! war but to feast
with spoil of province each pamper priest.
be dumb, fond maid; thy sacred ink nor spill
on specious tyrant, popular ill;
nor by thy comely lock with rose dight
of either victor colour, red or white.

foiled the assassin king, in union blow
the blend flower on seven Henry brow.
peace light again on the forsake strand,
and banish plenty reassume the land.
no nod crest the crouch infant fright,
no clarion rude break the bride delight;
repose sabre seek their ancient place
to bristle round a gape gorgon face.
the weary arm grotesque deck the wall,
and tatter trophy fret the royal hall.
but peace in vain on the blood-fattened plain
from her exuberant horn her treasure rain:
she deal her gift; but in a useless hour,
to glut the iron hand of gripe power:
such Lancaster, who harrass Britain see,
mask in the garb of antiquate law:
more politic than wise, more wise than great:
a legislator to enslave the state;
cool malicious; by design a knave;
more mean than false, ambitious more than brave;
attach to inter more than honour call;
more strict than just, more covetous than all.

not so the reveller profuse, his son,
his contrast course of tyranny begin;
robust of limb, and flush with florid grace,
strength nerve his youth, and square his jovial face.
to feat of arm and carpet-combat prone,
in either field the vigorous monarch shine:
mark out for riot each luxurious day
in tournament and banquet dance away.
but shift the scene, and view what slaughter stain
each frantic period of his barbarous reign:
a tyrant to the people who he rule,
by ev'y potentate he deal with, fool:
sell by one minister, to all unjust;
sway by each dictate of distemper lust;
change each worship that control the bent
of his adulterous will, and lewd intent;
big in unwieldy majesty and pride,
and smear with queen and martyr blood, he die.

pass we the pious youth too slight see;
the murderous zeal of a weak romish queen:
nor with faint pencil, impotent vain,
shadow the glory of Eliza reign,
who be still too great, though some few fault she have,
to catalogue with all those royal bad.

arise, great JAMES! thy course of wisdom run!
image of David philosophic son!
he come! on either hand in seemly state,
knowledge and peace, his fondle handmaid wait:
obscure learn, elaborate dull,
of quibble cant and grace fanatic full,
throne in full senate, on his pedant tongue,
these for six hour each weighty morning hang;
for these each string of royal power he strain,
for these he sell whatever ELIZA gain;
for these he squander every prudent store
the frugal princess have reserve before,
on pension sycophant and garter boy,
tool of his will, and minion of his joy.
for these he let his beggare daughter roam;
bubble, for these, by spanish art at home;
for these, to sum the blessing of his reign,
poison one son and the other send to Spain.

retire, strict Muse, and thy impartial verse
in pity spare on Charles bleed hearse;
or all his fault in black note translate
to tomb where rot the author of his fate;
to lustful henrietta romish shade,
let all his act of lawless power be lay;
or to the priest, more romish still than she;
and whoever make his gentle virtue err.

on the next prince, expel his native land,
in vain affliction lay her iron hand;
fortune, or fair or frown, on his soul
can stamp no virtue, and no vice controul:
honour, or moral, gratitude, or truth,
nor learn his ripen age, nor know his youth;
the care of nation leave to whore or chance,
plunderer of Britain, pensioner of France;
free to buffoon, to minister deny,
he live a atheist, and a bigot die.

the reins of empire, or resign or steal,
be trust next to James weak controul;
he, meditate to subvert the law,
his hero son in freedom beauteous cause
rise to chastise: unhappy still! however
posterity the gallant action bear.

thus have i try of king and priest to sing,
and all the ill that from their vice spring;
while victor GEORGE thunder over either Spain,
revenge Britain and assert the main;
to will indian deal our equal law,
and from his country be voice affect applause;
 what time fair Florence on her peaceful shore,
free from the din of war and battle roar,
have lap i trifler in inglorious ease,
model precept that may serve and please;
you be the task — and glorious be the plan,
to build the free, the sensible, good man.
