the tomb of Shakespear.

a vision.

by JOHN Gilbert cooper, ESQ;

what time the jocund rosy-bosomed hour
lead forth the train of Phoebus and the spring,
and zephyr mild profuse scatter flower
on earth green mantle from his musky wing,

the morn unbar the ambrosial gate of light,
westward the raven-pinioned darkness fly,
the landscape smile in vernal beauty bright,
and to their grave the sullen ghost withdraw.

the nightingale no long swell her throat
with love-lorn plain tremulous and slow,
and on the wing of silence cease to float
the gurgle note of her melodious woe:

the god of sleep mysterious vision lead
in gay procession before the mental eye,
and my free soul awhile her mansion flee,
to try her plume for immortality.

through field of air, methinks, i take my flight,
through every clime, over every region pass,
no paradise or ruin escape my sight,
hesperian garden, or cimmerian waste.

on avon bank i lit, who stream appear
to wind with eddy fond round shakespeare tomb,
the year first feathery songster warble near,
and violet breathe, and early rose bloom.

here fancy sit, (her dewy finger cold
deck with floweret fresh the unsullied sod,)
and bathe with tear the sad sepulchral mould,
her favourite offspring long and last abode.

ah! what avail, she cry, a poet name?
ah! what avail the immortalise breath
to snatch from dumb oblivion other be fame?
my darling child here lie a prey to death!

let gentle Otway, white-robed pity priest,
from grief domestic teach the tear to flow,
or southern captivate the impassion breast
with heart-felt sigh and sympathy of woe.

for not to these his genius be confine,
nature and i each tuneful power have give,
poetic transport of the mad mind,
and the winge word that waft the soul to heaven:

the fiery glance of the intellectual eye,
pierce all object of creation store,
which on this world extend surface lie;
and plastic thought that still create more.

o grant, with eager rapture i reply,
grant i, great goddess of the changeful eye,
to view each be in poetic pride,
to who thy son give immortality.

sweet fancy smile, and wave her mystic rod,
when strait these vision feel her powerful arm,
and one by one succeed at her nod,
as vassal sprite obey the wizard charm.

first a celestial form (of azure hue
who mantle, bind with breed aetherial, flow
to each soft breeze its balmy breath that draw)
swift down the sunbeam of the noontide ride.

obedient to the necromantic sway
of a old sage to solitude resign,
with fenny vapor he obscure the day,
launch the long lightning, and let loose the wind.

he whirl the tempest through the howl air,
rattle the dreadful thunderclap on high,
and raise a roar elemental war
betwixt the sea-green wave and azure sky.

then, like heaven mild ambassador of love
to man repentant, bid the tumult cease,
smooth the blue bosom of the realm above,
and hush the rebel element to peace.

unlike to this in spirit or in mien
another form succeed to my view;
a two-legged brute which nature make in spleen,
or from the loathe womb unfinished draw.

scarce can he syllable the curse he think,
prone be his eye to earth, his mind to evil,
a carnal fiend to imperfection wrought,
the mongrel offspring of a witch and devil.

next bloom, upon a ancient forest bound,
the flowery margin of a silent stream,
overarch by oak with ivy mantle round,
and gilt by silver cynthia maiden beam.

on the green carpet of the unbend grass,
a dapper train of female fairy play,
and eye their gambol in the watery glass,
that smooth steal along the shadowy glade.

through these the queen Titania pass adore,
mount aloft in her imperial car,
journey to see great Oberon her lord
wage the mock battle of a sportive war.

arm cap-a-pee forth march the fairy king,
a stout warrior never take the field,
his threaten lance a hornet horrid sting,
the sharded beetle scale his sable shield.

around their chief the elfin host appear,
each little helmet sparkle like a star,
and their sharp spear in pierceless phalanx rear,
a grove of thistle, glitter in the air.

the scene then change, from this romantic land,
to a bleak waste by boundary unconfined,
where three smart sister of the weird band
be mutter curse to the troublous wind.

pale want have wither every furrow face,
bow be each carcase with the weight of year,
and each sink eye-ball from its hollow case
distil cold rheum involuntary tear.

horse on three staff they post to the bourn
of a drear island, where the pendant brow
of a rough rock, shagged horrible with thorn,
frown on the boisterous wave which rage below.

deep in a gloomy grot remote from day,
where smile comfort never show her face,
where light never enter, save one rueful ray
discover all the terror of the place,

they hold damn mystery with infernal state,
while ghastly spectre glide slow by,
the scritch-owl scream the die call of fate,
and raven croak their baleful augury.

no human footstep cheere the dread abode,
nor sign of live creature can be see,
save where the reptile snake, or sullen toad,
the murky floor have soil with venom green.

sudden i hear the whirlwind hollow sound,
each weïrd sister vanish into smoke.
now a dire yell of spirit underground
through trouble earth wide yawn surface break;

when lo! each injure apparition rise;
aghast the murderer start from his bed;
guilt tremble breath his heart red current freeze,
and horror dew-drop bathe his frantic head.

more have i see — but now the god of day
over earth broad breast his flood of light have spread,
when Morpheus call his fickle dream away,
and on their wing each bright illusion flee.

yet still the dear enchantress of the brain
my wake eye with wishful wander seek,
who magic will control the ideal train,
the ever-restless progeny of thought.

sweet power, i say, for other gild the ray
of wealth, or honour folly-feathered crown,
or lead the mad multitude astray
to grasp at air-blown bubble of renown.

i (humble lot!) let blameless bliss engage,
free from the noble mob ambitious strife,
free from the muckworm miser lucrous rage,
in calm contentment cottaged vale of life.

if frailty there (for who from they be free?)
through error maze my devious footstep lead,
let they be frailty of humanity,
and my heart plead the pardon of my head.

let not my reason impious require
what heaven have place beyond its narrow span,
but teach it to subdue each fierce desire,
which war within its own small empire, man.

teach i, what all believe, but few possess,
that life be best science be ourselves to know,
the first of human blessing be to bless,
and happy he who feel another woe.

thus cheap wise, and innocent great,
while time be smooth sand shall regular pass,
each destine atom quiet course i will wait,
nor rash break, nor wish to stop the glass.

and when in death my peaceful ash lie,
if ever some tongue congenial speak my name,
friendship shall never blush to breathe a sigh,
and great one envy such a honest fame.
