the glow-worm.

how pleasant be the green-wood deep-matted shade
on a midsummer eve, when the fresh rain be over;
when the yellow beam slope, and sparkle through the glade,
and swift in the thin air the light swallow soar!

but sweet, sweet still, when the sun sink to rest,
and twilight come on, with the fairy so gay
trip through the forest-walk, where flower, unpressed,
bow not their tall head beneath their frolic play.

to music soft sound they dance away the hour,
until moon-light steal down among the tremble leaf,
and checquer all the ground, and guide they to the bower,
the long haunt bower, where the nightingale grieve.

then no more they dance, until her sad song be do,
but, silent as the night, to her mourning attend;
and often as her die note their pity have win,
they vow all her sacred haunt from mortal to defend.

when, down among the mountain, sink the evening star,
and the change moon forsake this shadowy sphere,
how cheerless will they be, though they fairy be,
if i, with my pale light, come not near!

yet cheerless though they will be, they be ungrateful to my love!
for, often when the traveller be benight on his way,
and i glimmer in his path, and will guide he through the grove,
they bind i in their magic spell to lead he far astray;

and in the mire to leave he, till the star be all burn out,
while, in strange-looking shape, they frisk about the ground,
and, afar in the wood, they raise a dismal shout,
until i shrink into my cell again for terror of the sound!

but, see where all the tiny elf come dance in a ring,
with the merry, merry pipe, and the labour, and the horn,
and the timbrel so clear, and the lute with dulcet string;
then round about the oak they go until peep of the morn.

down yonder glade two lover steal, to shun the fairy-queen,
who frown upon their plight vow, and jealous be of i,
that yester-eve i light they, along the dewy green,
to seek the purple flower, who juice from all her spell can free.

and now, to punish i, she keep afar her jocund band,
with the merry, merry pipe, and the tabor, and the lute;
if i creep near yonder oak she will wave her fairy wand,
and to i the dance will cease, and the music all be mute.

o! have i but that purple flower who leave her charm can foil,
and know like say to draw the juice, and throw it on the wind,
i will be her slave no long, nor the traveller beguile,
and help all faithful lover, nor fear the fairy kind!

but soon the vapour of the wood will wander afar,
and the fickle moon will fade, and the star disappear,
then, cheerless will they be, though they fairy be,
if i, with my pale light, come not near!
