on the death of William iii, king of England. 

you mighty nine, suspend your sacred fire,
 strong grief like love can cold breast inspire;
 nor shall i want Castilian Waters here,
 for every line can boast a ardent tear. 
but if the artless sorrow of my breast,
 in number fail, my sigh shall speak the rest;
 with untuned lyre, and slacken nerve i sing,
 yet with a pious have, my humble tribute bring
 of grief immense, a equal theme of praise,
 but oh! what pen can worthy trophy raise. 
great William now our annal proud boast,
 who dawn glory joy the belgic coast;
 when at seneff, he stem the impetuous strife,
 and laurel flourish in the bloom of life. 
nor do his triumph end where they begin,
 heaven give fresh scene to act his glory in;
 ammon nor Cæsar fame, must here contend,
 their valour have a avaricious end,
 they fight to win the world, he to defend. 
britannia wrong his will aid demand,
 he hazard all, to save the sink land;
 not winter sea the generous prince restrain,
 nor numerous host on albion shine plain:
 no threaten danger terror can afford,
 when justice call for his avenge sword. 
bold he march to dare the oppress foe,
 nor conquest fear, when heaven direct the blow;
 fright commander, quit their guilty post,
 it be orange come, they know the field be lose. 
none dare approach the mighty victor face,
 but such as safe sue for his embrace;
 with bloom palm the regal seat obtain,
 he save those right his valour have regain. 
but soon hibernia insult foe,
 call forth the hero from his short repose;
 (not thirst of empire, mankind to enslave,
 nor fight so much to conquer, as to save:)
 lead by a tenderness his courage move,
 like mars chariot, draw by Venus dove. 
with pride great Neptune bear the royal freight,
 where the defenceless isle, impatient wait,
 and look from he, as heaven their nation fate. 
the undaunted warrior like the god of arm,
 shine through the field and every soldier warm. 
in vain the Boyne will victory delay,
 nor can its stream their generous heat allay;
 bold they plunge the bright propitious flood,
 and in the wave like arm tryton stand. 
the amphibious squadron charge upon their foe,
 nor in the liquid plain their ardor loose:
 but with unite force the fight pursue,
 till laurel load the dare monarch brow. 
soon as the land be safe his weapon cease,
 with his victorious hand, he seal their peace;
 mourn all you injure realm your helpless cause,
 no sword can succour you like kind nassaus,
 and that be for ever sheathe — no more can save,
 that mighty arm, lie useless in the grave. 

come widow belgia with sad Britain join,
 unite your tear and swell and gentle Boyne;
 she will rise in silver heap at nassau name,
 with pride her stream be conscious of his fame,
 and all her wonder bank with joy resound the same. 
but when your flow eye declare his death,
 she will no more her sport Waters heave;
 but sad sink into her mournful cell,
 in subterranean murmur have to tell,
 at neptune court how his great master fall,
 each nery strait her sea green tress tares,
 and swell the ocean with their flow tear:
 the tryton
