to the painter of a ill-drawn picture of cleone, the honourable mrs. Thynne. 

soon i will praise a cloud which light beguile,
 than thy rash hand which rob this face of smile;
 and do that sweet and please air controul,
 which to we paint the fair cleone soul. 
it be vain to boast of rule or labour art;
 i miss the look that captivate my heart,
 attract my love, and tender thought inspire;
 nor can my breast be warm by common fire;
 nor can ardelia love but where she first admire. 
like jupiter, thy head be sure in pain
 when this virago struggle in thy brain;
 and strange it be, thou have not make she wield
 a mortal dart, or penetrate shield,
 give that hand of disproportioned size
 the power, of which thou have disarm her eye:
 as if, like amazon, she must oppose,
 and into lover force her vanquish foe. 
have to THEANOR thus her form be show
 to gain her heart, he have not lose his own;
 nor, by the gentle band of human life,
 at once secure the mistress and the wife. 
for still cleone beauty be the same,
 and what first lighten, still uphold his flame. 
fain his compassion will thy work approve,
 be pity thou consistent with his love,
 or with the taste which Italy have wrought
 in his refine and daily heighten thought,
 where poetry, or paint find no place,
 unless perform with a superior grace. 
can but my wish some influence infuse,
 never shall the pencil, or the Sister-Muse
 be try by those who easy excuse:
 but strict censor shall of either judge,
 applaud the artist, and despise the drudge. 
then never will thy colour have debase
 cleone feature, and her charm deface:
 nor have my pen (more subject to their law)
 assay to vindicate her beauty cause. 
a rigid fear have keep we both in awe,
 nor i compose, nor thou presume to draw;
 but in cleone view with surprise
 that excellence, to which we never can rise,
 by less attempt we safe may have gain
 that humble praise which neither have obtain,
 since to thy shadow, or my rude verse,
 it be not give to show, or to rehearse
 what nature in cleone face have write,
 a soft endearment, and a cheerful wit,
 that all-subduing, that enliven air
 by which, a sympathize joy we share,
 for who forbear to smile, when smile on by the fair? 
