the wish: a elegy.

to Urania.

by THOMAS blacklock, d.  d. 

let other travel, with incessant pain,
 the wealth of earth and ocean to secure;
 then with fond hope caress the precious bane;
 in grandeur abject, and in affluence poor. 

but soon, too soon, in fancy timid eye,
 wild wave shall roll, and conflagration spread;
 while bright in arm, and of gigantic size,
 the fear-formed robber haunt the thorny bed. 

let i, in dreadless poverty retire,
 the real joy of life, unenvied, share:
 favour by love, and by the muse inspire,
 i will yield to wealth its jealousy and care. 

on rise ground, the prospect to command,
 untinge with smoke, where vernal breeze blow,
 in rural neatness let my cottage stand;
 here wave a wood, and there a river flow. 

oft from the neighbour hill and pasture round,
 let sheep with tender bleat salute my ear;
 nor fox insidious haunt the guiltless ground,
 nor man pursue the trade of murder near:

far hence, kind heaven! expel the savage train,
 inure to blood, and eager to destroy;
 who point steel, with recent slaughter stain,
 and place in groan and death their cruel joy. 

you power of social life and tender song! 
to you devote shall my field remain;
 here undisturbed the peaceful day prolong,
 nor own a smart but love delightful pain. 

for you, my tree shall wave their leafy shade;
 for you, my garden tinge the lenient air;
 for you, be autumn blush gift display,
 and all that nature yield of sweet or fair. 

but, o! if plaint which love and grief inspire,
 in heavenly breast can ever compassion find,
 grant i, ah! grant my heart supreme desire,
 and teach my dear Urania to be kind. 

for she, black sadness cloud my bright day;
 for she, in tear the midnight vigil roll;
 for she, cold horror melt my power away,
 and chill the live vigour of my soul. 

beneath her scorn each youthful ardor die,
 its joy, its wish, and its hope, expire! 
in vain the field of science tempt my eye;
 in vain for i the muse string the lyre. 

o! let she oft my humble dwelling grace,
 humble no more, if there she deign to shine;
 for heaven, unlimited by time or place,
 still wait on god-like worth and charm divine. 

amid the cool fragrance of the morn,
 how sweet with she through lonely field to stray! 
her charm the lovely landskip shall adorn,
 and add new glory to the rise day. 

with she, all nature shine in heighten bloom;
 the silver stream in sweet music flow;
 odour more rich the fan gale perfume;
 and deep tincture paint the spread rose. 

with she, the shade of night their horror lose,
 its deep silence charm if she be by;
 her voice the music of the dawn renew,
 its lambent radiance sparkle in her eye. 

how sweet, with she, in wisdom calm recess,
 to brighten soft desire with wit refine! 
kind nature law with sacred Ashley trace,
 and view the fair feature of the mind! 

or bear on Milton flight, as heaven sublime,
 view its full blaze in open prospect glow;
 bless the first pair in eden happy clime,
 or drop the human tear for endless woe. 

and when, in virtue, and in peace grow old,
 no art the languid lamp of life restore;
 her let i grasp with hand convulse and cold,
 till every nerve relax can hold no more. 

long, long on she my die eye suspend,
 till the last beam shall vibrate on my sight;
 then soar where only great joy attend,
 and bear her image to eternal light. 

fond man, ah! whither will thy fancy rove? 
it be thy to languish in unpitied smart;
 it be thy, alas! eternal scorn to prove,
 nor feel one gleam of comfort warm thy heart. 

but, if my fair this cruel law impose,
 please, to she will i all my soul resign;
 to walk beneath the burden of my woe,
 or sink in death, nor at my fate repine. 

yet when, with woe unmingled and sincere,
 to earth cold womb in silence i descend;
 let she, to grace my obsequy, appear,
 and with the weep throng her sorrow blend. 

ah! no, be all her hour with pleasure crown,
 and all her soul from every anguish free:
 shall my sad fate that gentle bosom wound,
 the joy of heaven will be no joy to i. 
