part of a letter to my sister at crux-easton, write from Cairo in Egypt, august 1734. 

by the same.

while you, my dear girl, in your paradise stray,
divert with innocent freedom the day,
i wander alone in a barbarous land,
half bake by the sun, half blind by the sand.
then your wood too and grotto so swim in my sight,
they give i no respite by day nor by night;
no soon asleep but I be dream of you;
i be just wake from one, — will to god it be true.

methinks i be now a fine gentleman grow,
and have get, lord know how, a estate of my own.
good-bye to plain Tom, i be raise a peg high;
some call i his worship, and other the squire.
it be a place, i remember, exact like Easton,
a scene for a emperor fancy to feast on.
there i build a fine house with great cost and great care,
(your ladyship have form many such in the air)
not of stucco, nor brick, but as good Portland stone
as Kent will desire to be work upon.
the apartment not small, nor monstrous great,
but chief for use, and a little for state;
so begilt, and becarve, and with ornament grace,
that every one say, i will a excellent taste.
here i live like a king, never hoard my pelf,
keep a coach for my sister, a nag for myself,
with something that be good when our highclear friend come,
and, spite of esquire Herbert, a fire in each room.
a canal make for profit as well as for pleasure,
that be about, let i see, two acre in measure;
both the eye to delight, and the table to crown
with a jack, or a perch, when my uncle come down.
a exceed great wood, that be be set a great while,
in length near a league, and in breadth near a mile.
there every dear girl her bright genius display,
in a thousand fine whimsy a thousand fine way.
o how charm the walk to my fancy appear!
what a number of temple and grotto be here!
my soul be transport to such a extreme,
that i leap up in rapture, — when lo! it be a dream;
then vex i chide the impertinent day
for drive so sweet a delusion away.
thus spectre arise, as by nurse-maid we be tell,
and hie to the place where they bury their gold:
there hover around until morning remain;
then sad return to their torment again.
