heroism.

there be a time when aetna silent fire
 sleep unperceived, the mountain yet entire,
 when conscious of no danger from below,
 she tower a cloud-captain pyramid of snow. 
no thunder shake with deep intestine sound
 the bloom grove that girdle she around,
 her unctuous olive and her purple vine,
 (unfelt the fury of those burst mine)
 the peasant hope, and not in vain, assure,
 in peace upon her slope side mature. 
when on a day, like that of the last doom,
 a conflagration labour in her womb,
 she teem and heave with a infernal birth,
 that shake the circle sea and solid earth. 
dark and voluminous the vapour rise,
 and hang their horror in the neighbour sky,
 while through the stygian veil that blot the day,
 in dazzle streak the vivid lightning play. 
but oh! what muse, and in what power of song,
 can trace the torrent as it burn along? 
havoc and devastation in the van,
 it march over the prostrate work of man,
 vine, olive, herbage, forest disappear,
 and all the charm of a sicilian year. 
revolve season, fruitless as they pass,
 see it a uninformed and idle mass,
 without a soil to invite the tiller care,
 or blade that may redeem it from despair. 
yet time at length (what will not time achieve?) 
clothes it with earth, and bid the produce live,
 once more the spiry myrtle crown the glade,
 and ruminate flock enjoy the shade. 
oh bliss precarious, and unsafe retreat,
 oh charm paradise of short live sweet! 
the self-same gale that waft the fragrance round,
 bring to the distant ear a sullen sound,
 again the mountain feel the imprison foe,
 again pour ruin on the vale below,
 ten thousand swain the waste scene deplore,
 that only future age can restore. 
you monarch, who the lure of honour draw,
 who write in blood the merit of your cause,
 who strike the blow, then plead your own defence,
 glory your aim, but justice your pretence;
 behold in aetna emblematic fire
 the mischief your ambitious pride inspire. 
fast by the stream that bound your just domain,
 and tell you where you have a right to reign,
 a nation dwell, not envious of your throne,
 studious of peace, their neighbour and their own. 
ill-fated race! how deep must they rue
 their only crime, vicinity to you! 
the trumpet sound, your legion swarm abroad,
 through the ripe harvest lie their destine road,
 at every step beneath their foot they tread
 the life of multitude, a nation bread;
 earth seem a garden in its lovely dress
 before they, and behind a wilderness;
 famine and pestilence, her firstborn son,
 attend to finish what the sword begin,
 and echo praise such as fiend may earn,
 and folly pay, resound at your return. 
a calm succeed — but plenty with her train
 of heart-felt joy, succeed not soon again,
 and year of pine indigence must show
 what scourge be the god that rule below. 
yet man, laborious man, by slow degree,
 (such be his thirst of opulence and ease)
 ply all the sinew of industrious toil,
 glean up the refuse of the general spoil,
 rebuild the towr that smoke upon the plain,
 and the sun gild the shine spire again. 
increase commerce and revive art
 renew the quarrel on the conqueror part,
 and the sad lesson must be learn once more;
 that wealth within be ruin at the door. 
what be you monarch, laureled hero, say,
 but aetna of the suffering world you sway? 
sweet nature strip of her embroider robe,
 deplore the waste region of her globe,
 and stand a witness at truth awful bar,
 to prove you there, destroyer as you be. 
oh place i in some heaven-protected isle,
 where peace and equity and freedom smile,
 where no volcano pour his fiery flood,
 no crest warrior dip his plume in blood,
 where power secure what industry have win,
 where to succeed be not to be undo,
 a land that distant tyrant hate in vain,
 in britain isle, beneath a George reign. 
