Eugenio and Eliza,

a tale.

found on fact.

the rise sun have tinge the east with gold,
 and scarce a cloud obscure his azure reign —
 (that sun, who fatal beam do first unfold
 the dreadful scene of naseby sanguine plain;

where Charles, misguided monarch, wise too late,
 see the last effort of his party fail;
 see rupert luckless triumph urge his fate,
 and Cromwell rise destiny prevail) —

when young Eliza leave her lonely shed,
 and wander pensive amid heap of slay,
 not by a base desire of plunder lead,
 but hope to sooth some die warrior pain. 

though mean her parent, and obscure her lot,
 each noble feeling to her heart be know;
 and, though the humble inmate of a cot,
 her form and mind have grace the proud throne. 

but hopeless passion over each open grace
 have cast a tender, melancholy air;
 Eliza love a youth of noble race,
 and from the first she languish in despair. 

twelve month have pass since over eugenio form
 with fond surprise her wonder eye have stray;
 but, while his charm her artless bosom warm,
 by he unnoted pass the bloom maid. 

from that sad hour a stranger to repose,
 she shun the wake, she shun the festive green;
 and still wherever affliction call she go,
 a pale attendant at each mournful scene. 

at every step with horror she recoil,
 while her moist eye the dreadful carnage view
 of hostile kindred upon kindred pile,
 and british field with british blood imbue. 

but as, advance over the dismal field,
 where devastation sadden all around,
 she view those lid in endless darkness seal,
 and hear of die groan the plaintive sound —

a form of grace superior draw her eye,
 bend to view the warrior face she stand;
 o fatal sight! her love Eugenio lie
 on earth extend, and deform with blood. 

strike at the view, awhile in silent grief
 she stand, nor yet a sigh confess her pain;
 nor yet her burst tear can bring relief,
 while her chill blood run cold through every vein. 

at length, down her cheek and snowy breast
 the pearly tear in quick succession run;
 and with a voice by sorrow half suppress,
 in break accent, thus the fair begin:

 "o thou, who lovely and belove in vain,
" unpitying fate have snatch in early bloom,
 "be this the meed thy patriot virtue gain? 
" dear than life, be this thy hapless doom? 

 "when last i see thou, over thy manly cheek
" health orient glow a mantling lustre cast;
 "enamour glory seem thy path to seek,
" fortune in thou her favourite child embrace. 

 "now cold on earth thou lie — no weep friend
" with pious tear receive thy part breath;
 "no kindred round thy bleed corpse attend,
" with grief like i to mourn thy early death. 

 "ah! what avail the virtue of thy youth,
" the mind that dare rebellion fury brave,
 "thy constant loyalty, thy matchless truth? 
" those very virtue sink thou to the grave. " 

kneel as thus she speak, his hand she press,
 and view his form with every charm replete;
 but what emotion fill her rapture breast
 when still she find his languid pulse beat! 

some neighbour peasant lead by chance that way,
 touch by the sorrow of the weep fair,
 with pity eye the faint youth survey,
 and to Eliza wellknown cottage bear. 

there, with a leech care, her hand apply
 some lenient herb to every rankle wound;
 herb, by the test of long experience try,
 of sovereign virtue in each trial find. 

while anxious love its lavish care supply,
 eugenio face resume a fresh hue;
 and on the maid he fix his open eye,
 while tear of joy her polish cheek bedew. 

the dawn of gratitude, and wonder join,
 with vary thought distract his labour breast;
 and, anxious to relieve his dubious mind,
 in falter word he thus the fair address:

 "o say, what friend, solicitous to save,
" procure for i your hospitable care? 
 "for, when at Naseby the last sigh i give,
" nor friendship nor humanity be there. " 

blush, the maid with down-cast look reply,
 "to heaven alone thy gratitude be due:
" that god, who angel round the good preside,
 "to thy relief my feeble succour draw. 

 "i find thou senseless amid a heap of slay;
" i bear thou here, and heaven thy life have spare:
 "that life restore, i ask nor thanks nor gain;
" a virtuous action be its own reward. " 

with mute surprise the attentive youth admire,
 amid scene so rude, a form so pass fair;
 but more he wonder, when, by heaven inspire,
 her word bespeak a guardian angel care,

and every day new beauty catch his view,
 and every hour new virtue charm his mind,
 till admiration into passion grow,
 by pure esteem and gratitude refine. 

in vain, to change the purpose of his heart,
 ambition frown contemptuous on the maid;
 pride urge he from her humble cot to part,
 and martial ardour call he from the shade. 

he see his country, in subjection lead,
 pay servile homage to a zealot nod,
 who stern claim his captive sovereign head,
 and think by anarchy to serve his god. 

he know his single effort will be vain,
 his prince from factious thousand to support,
 and scorn to mingle with the abject train
 who, lead by interest, swell a guilty court. 

since virtue cause no more his arm can claim,
 and hope of conquest can no long move,
 fix, he resolve to wed the beauteous dame,
 and consecrate his future life to love. 

fast by the cot a spread linden grow,
 who bough overshadow a fantastic seat,
 where the pale primrose and the violet blue
 breathe from the verdant turf a mingle sweet. 

there, with Eliza often by his side,
 Eugenio shun the scorch heat of noon;
 amid night stillness there he often hie,
 and solitary watch the silver moon. 

peruse there the philosophic page,
 untired the livelong day he will remain,
 or for the poet quit the grave sage,
 and rapture glance through fancy airy reign. 

beneath the branch of this silent shade,
 by hour of past tranquillity endear,
 he vow his passion to the blush maid,
 who timid love his loss each moment fear. 

untaught in the pernicious school of art,
 which curb the genuine feeling as they rise,
 she own the sentiment that fill a heart
 who conscious purity contemn disguise. 

the sacred rite perform, with festive state
 to his high dome Eugenio lead the fair:
 amid lofty wood, arise the ancient seat,
 who solid, grandeur time can not impair. 

there unperceived life current flow away,
 nor can old age their constant love destroy;
 and often they deplore, yet bless that day,
 to other source of grief, to they of joy. 

they live to see the artful Cromwell die,
 and from their transient power his offspring drive,
 and then behold the imperial dignity
 once more to the inglorious stuart give. 

Charles they survey, in luxury, and ease,
 and sensual pleasure, pass life ill-spent day;
 and bigot James a injure nation raise,
 then coward shun the battle dread array. 

next Nassau, crown by policy and arm,
 in early youth for matchless prudence know,
 unmoved in danger, fearless in alarm,
 with royal mary share the british throne. 

last anna prosperous reign in age they view,
 and Marlborough glorious from germania war —
 Marlborough, for council as for fight endue,
 who with his own spread England fame afar:

then, please their country triumph to behold,
 in youthful verdure while her laurel bloom,
 their age lid in death soft sleep they fold,
 and not unwilling sink into the tomb. 
