a dialogue between a poet and his servant.

by the late mr. Christ. PITT.

servant.

sir, — I have long wait in my turn to have
 a word with you — but i be your humble slave. 

p. 

what knave be that? my rascal! 

S. 

sir, it be i,
 no knave nor rascal, but your trusty Guy. 

p. 

well, as your wage still be due, i will bear
 your rude impertinence this time of year. 

S. 

some folk be drink one day, and some for ever,
 and some, like Wharton, but twelve year together. 
old evremond, renowned for wit and dirt,
 will change his living often than his shirt;
 roar with the rake of state a month; and come
 to starve another in his hole at home. 
so rove wild Buckingham the public jest,
 now some innholder, now a monarch guest;
 his life and politics of every shape,
 this hour a roman, and the next a ape. 
the gout in every limb from every vice
 poor clodio hire a boy to throw the dice. 
some wench for ever; and their sin on those,
 by custom, sit as easy as their clothes. 
some fly, like pendulum, from good to evil,
 and in that point be madder than the devil:
 for they —

p. 

to what will these vile maxim tend? 
and where, sweet sir, will your reflection end? 

S. 

in you. 

p. 

in i, you knave? make out your charge. 

S. 

you praise low-living, but you live at large. 
perhaps you scarce believe the rule you teach,
 or find it hard to practise what you preach. 
scarce have you pay one idle journey down,
 but, without business, you be again in town. 
if none invite you, sir, abroad to roam,
 then — lord, what pleasure it be to read at home;
 and sip your two half-pint, with great delight,
 of beer at noon, and muddle port at night. 
from encombe, John come thunder at the door,
 with "sir, my master beg you to come over,
"to pass these tedious hour, these winter night,
 "not that he dread invasion, rogue, or sprite."
strait for your two best wig aloud you call,
 this stiff in buckle, that not curl at all,
 "and where, you rascal, be the spur,"you cry;
 "and o! what blockhead lay the buskin by?"
on your old batter mare you will needs be go,
 (no matter whether on four leg or none)
 splash, plunge, and stumble, as you scour the heath;
 all swear at Morden it be on life or death:
 wild through Wareham street you scamper on,
 raise all the dog and voter in the town;
 then fly for six long dirty mile as bad,
 that Corfe and Kingston gentry think you mad. 
and all this furious ride be to prove
 your high respect, it seem, and eager love:
 and yet, that mighty honour to obtain,
 bank, Shaftesbury, Doddington may send in vain. 
before you go, we curse the noise you make,
 and bless the moment that you turn your back. 
as for myself, i own it to your face,
 i love good eat, and i take my glass:
 but sure it be strange, dear sir, that this shall be
 in you amusement, but a fault in i. 
all this be bare refine on a name,
 to make a difference where the fault be the same. 

my father sell i to your service here,
 for this fine livery, and four pound a year. 
a livery you shall wear as well as i,
 and this i will prove — but lay your cudgel by. 
you serve your passion — thus, without a jest,
 both be but fellow-servant at the best. 
yourself, good sir, be play by your desire,
 a mere tall puppet dance on the wire. 

p. 

who, at this rate of talk, can be free? 

S. 

the brave, wise, honest man, and only he:
 all else be slave alike, the world around,
 king on the throne, and beggar on the ground:
 he, sir, be proof to grandeur, pride, or pelf,
 and (great still) be master of himself:
 not to-and-fro by fear and faction hurl,
 but loose to all the interest of the world:
 and while that world turn round, entire and whole,
 he keep the sacred tenor of his soul;
 in every turn of fortune still the same,
 as gold unchanged, or bright from the flame:
 collect in himself, with godlike pride,
 he see the dart of envy glance aside;
 and, fix like Atlas, while the tempest blow,
 smile at the idle storm that roar below. 
one such you know, a layman, to your shame,
 and yet the honour of your blood and name. 
if you can such a character maintain,
 you too be free, and i be your slave again. 

but when in hemskirk picture you delight,
 more than myself, to see two drunkard fight;
 "fool, rogue, sot, blockhead,"or such name be i:
 "you be"a connoisseur, "or"deep divine. "
i be chide for love a luxurious bit,
 the sacred prize of learning, worth and wit:
 and yet some sell their land, these bit to buy;
 then, pray, who suffer most from luxury? 
i be chide, it be true; but then i pawn no plate,
 i seal no bond, i mortgage no estate. 

beside, high living, sir, must wear you out
 with surfeit, qualm, a fever, or the gout. 
by some new pleasure be you still engross,
 and when you save a hour, you think it lose. 
to sport, play, race, from your book you run,
 and like all company, except your own. 
you hunt, drink, sleep, or (idler still) you rhyme;
 why? — but to banish thought, and murder time. 
and yet that think, which you discharge in vain,
 like a foul-loaded piece, recoil again. 

p. 

Tom, fetch a cane, a whip, a club, a stone, —

S. 

for what? 

p. 

a sword, a pistol, or a gun:
 i will shoot the dog. 

S. 

lord! who will be a wit? 
he be in a mad, or in a rhyme fit. 

p. 

fly, fly, you rascal, for your spade and fork;
 for once i will set your lazy bone to work. 
fly, or i will send you back, without a groat,
 to the bleak mountain where you first be catch. 
