osric — the lion!

a romance.

swift roll the rhine billow, and water the plain,
 where Falkenstein castle majestic remains,
 their moss-covered turret still rear;
 oft love the gaunt wolf midst the ruin to prowl,
 what time from the battlement pour the lone owl
 her plaint in the passenger ear. 

no long resound through the vault of yond hall
 the song of the minstrel, and mirth of the ball;
 those pleasure for ever be flee;
 there now dwell the bat with her light-shunning brood;
 there raven and vulture now clamour for food,
 and all be dark, silent, and dread! 

ha! do thou not see by the moon tremble light,
 direct his step, where advance a knight,
 his eye big with vengeance and fate? 
it be osric — the lion, his nephew who lead,
 and swift up the crackle old stair-case proceed,
 gain the hall, and quick close the gate. 

now round he young carloman cast his eye,
 survey the sad scene with dismay and surprise,
 and fear steal the rose from his cheek;
 his spirit forsake he, his courage be fly;
 the hand of sir osric he clasp in his own,
 and while his voice falter he speak: —

 "dear uncle," he murmur, "why linger we here? 
it be late, and these chamber be damp and be drear;
 keen blow through the ruin the blast! 
oh! let we away and our journey pursue;
 fair blumenberg castle will rise on our view,
 soon as Falkenstein forest be past. 

 "why roll thus your eye-ball? why glare they so wild? 
oh! chide not my weakness, nor frown, that a child
 shall view these apartment with dread;
 for know, that full oft have i hear from my nurse,
 there still on this castle have rest a curse,
 since innocent blood here be shed. 

 "she say, too, bad spirit, and ghost all in white,
 here use to resort at the dead time of night,
 nor vanish till break of day;
 and still at their come be hear the deep tone
 of a bell — loud and awful — hark! hark! it be a groan! 
good uncle, oh! let we away!" 

 "peace, serpent!" thus osric — the lion, reply,
 while rage and malignity gloom in his eye;
 "thy journey and life here must close:
 thy castle proud turret no more shall thou see;
 no more betwixt blumenberg lordship and i
 shall thou stand, and my greatness oppose. 

 "my brother lie breathless on palestine plain,
 and though once remove, to his noble domain
 my right can no rival deny:
 then, stripling, prepare on my dagger to bleed;
 no succour be near, and thy fate be decree;
 commend thou to Jesus, and die!" 

thus say, he seize the boy by the arm,
 who grief rend the vault hall roof, while alarm
 his heart of all fortitude rob:
 his limb sink beneath he; distract with fear,
 he fall at his uncle foot, bath they with tear,
 and — "spare i! oh! spare i!" he sob. 

but ah! it be in vain that he strive to appease
 the miscreant; in vain do he cling round his knee,
 and sue in soft accent for life:
 unmoved by his sorrow — unmoved by his prayer,
 fierce osric have twist his hand in his hair,
 and aim at his bosom a knife. 

but ever the steel blush with blood, strange to tell! 
self-struck, do the tongue of the hollow-toned bell
 the presence of midnight declare:
 and while, with amazement, his hair bristle high,
 hear osric a voice, loud and terrible, cry,
 in sound heart appal — "forbear!" 

straight curse and shriek through the chamber resound,
 with hellish mirth mingle; the wall shake around;
 the groan roof threaten to fall;
 loud bellows the thunder; blue lightning still flash;
 the casement they clatter; chain rattle; door clash,
 and flame spread their wave through the hall. 

the clamour increase; the portal expand;
 over the pavement black marble now rush a band
 of daemon all drop with gore;
 in visage so grim, and so monstrous in height,
 that carloman scream, as they burst on his sight,
 and sink without sense on the floor. 

not so his fell uncle: he see that the throng
 impel, loud shriek, a female along,
 and well the sad spectre he know:
 the daemon with curse her step onward urge;
 her shoulder with whip form of serpent they scourge,
 and fast from her wound the blood flow. 

 "oh! welcome," she cry, and her voice speak despair;
 oh! welcome, sir osric, the torment to share,
 of which thou have make i the prey:
 twelve year have i languish thy come to see;
 ulrilda, who perish dishonour by thou,
 now call thou to anguish away! 

my ruin complete, thy love become hate;
 thy hand give the draught which consign i to fate;
 nor think i death lurk in the bowl;
 unfit for the grave, stain with guilt, swell with pride,
 unblest, unabsolve, unrepenting i die,
 and daemon straight seize on my soul! 

 "thou come, and with transport i feel my breast swell! 
full long i have suffer the torment of hell,
 and now shall its pleasure be mine! 
see, see, how the fiend be athirst for thy blood! 
twelve year have my pant heart furnish their food,
 come, wretch, let they feast upon thy!" 

she say, and the daemon their prey flock around;
 they dash he with horrible yell on the ground,
 and blood down his limb trickle fast:
 he eye from their socket with fury they tear;
 they feed on his entrails, all reek with gore,
 and his heart be ulrilda repast. 

but now the grey cock tell the come of day;
 the fiend with their victim straight vanish away,
 and carloman heart throb again:
 with terror recall the deed of the night,
 he rise, and from Falkenstein speed his flight,
 soon reach his paternal domain. 

since then all with horror the ruin behold;
 no shepherd, though stray be a lamb from his fold,
 no mother, though lose be her child,
 the fugitive dare in these chamber to seek,
 where fiend nightly revel, and guilty ghost shriek,
 in accent most fearful and wild! 

oh! shun they, you pilgrim, though late be the hour,
 though loud howl the tempest, and fast fall the shower,
 from Falkenstein castle be go! 
there still their say banquet hell denizen share;
 there osric — the lion, still rave in despair;
 breathe a prayer for his soul, and pass on! 
