the moral vision.

tyrannic winter iron reign be do,
 and the soft twin receive the radiant sun;
 the cheerful earth appear in vernal pride,
 and the clear wave do more serene glide:
 kind zephyr play around the wave tree,
 while open rose catch the welcome breeze. 

amid these scene beneath a maple shade,
 sit careless Mira on her elbow lay,
 while frolick fancy lead the usual train
 of gaudy phantom through her cheat brain:
 till slumber seize upon her thoughtful breast,
 and the still spirit sink in balmy rest:
 but while her eye have bid the world farewell,
 thus Mira dream, and thus her dream we tell;
 a seem nymph, like those of dian train,
 come swift trip over the flowery plain,
 who smile face be as the morning fair,
 a silver fillet tie her flaxen hair,
 a golden zone her lovely bosom bind,
 and her green robe hang careless on the ground. 
sleep, happy mortal, with a smile she cry,
 and turn on Mira her far-beaming eye. 
still over thy own aerial mountain stray,
 and in bright vision slumber out the day;
 with gaudy scene delude thy dazzle mind,
 yet thou must wake and leave they all behind:
 yes, thou shall drop from that enchant sky,
 and wake to wisdom with a weep eye,
 while in a mist the shine prospect end;
 then hear, o Mira, thy immortal friend. 
recall thy wander thought, and make they dwell
 in the small limit of their native cell. 
to thy own heart confine thy chief care,
 for Mira, know, thy joy be plant there:
 and as you manage and improve the soil,
 it will punish your neglect, or pay your toil;
 here let your view and your ambition rest,
 to reign the queen of a well-governed breast,
 this point secure, let heaven dispose the rest. 
yet you may ask for what your state require,
 but not the gewgaw your caprice desire:
 as thus, 'o keep i from the reach of pain,
'from meager famine and her mournful train:
'let not reproach assault my wound ear,
'nor let my soul behold a friend in tear:
'secure from noise, let my still moment run,
'and still be cheerful as the rise sun:
'or if a gloom my tremble heart invade,
'ah! may it vanish with the nightly shade
'through the craze wall: o may not reason fly? 
'but if it do then let its mansion die:
'let not remorse of guilt the certain pay,
'blot my clear sun nor stain its part ray:
'give i a lively but a guiltless mind,
'a body healthful and a soul resign. 

thus far, o Mira, thou may ask of heaven,
 how bless the mortal to who these be give:
 if such thy lot, let king enjoy their crown,
 their pageant state and arbitrary frown:
 who, though encircle by their shine slave,
 intrigue friend and well dissemble knave,
 be only wretched idol place on high,
 to bear the rage of a tempestuous sky:
 and while the storm around his temple blow,
 his fawn servant safe sneer below:
 but now the sun bring on the noon of day,
 rise, Mira, rise and shun the scorch ray:
 this say, no more appear the beauteous maid,
 and Mira wake find a lonely shade. 
