the war of inis-thona: a poem.

our youth be like the dream of the hunter on the hill of heath. he sleep in the mild beam of the sun; but he awake amid a storm; the red lightning fly around: and the tree shake their head to the wind. he look back with joy, on the day of the sun; and the pleasant dream of his rest!

when shall ossian youth return, or his ear delight in the sound of arm? when shall i, like Oscar, travel in the light of my steel? — come, with your stream, you hill of cona, and listen to the voice of Ossian! the song rise, like the sun, in my soul; and my heart feel the joy of other time.

i behold thy tower, o Selma! and the oak of thy shade wall: — thy stream sound in my ear; thy hero gather round. Fingal sit in the midst; and lean on the shield of trenmor: — his spear stand against the wall; he listen to the song of his bard. — the deed of his arm be hear; and the action of the king in his youth.

Oscar have return from the chace, and hear the hero praise. — he take the shield of branno from the wall; his eye be fill with tear. red be the cheek of youth. his voice be tremble, low. my spear shake its bright head in his hand: he speak to morven king.

Fingal! thou king of hero! Ossian, next to he in war! you have fight the battle in your youth; your name be renown in the song. — Oscar be like the mist of cona; i appear and vanish. — the bard will not know my name. — the hunter will not search in the heath for my tomb. let i fight, o hero, in the battle of inis-thona. distant be the land of my war! — you shall not hear of oscar fall. — some bard may find i there, and give my name to the song. — the daughter of the stranger shall see my tomb, and weep over the youth that come from afar. the bard shall say, at the feast, hear the song of Oscar from the distant land!

Oscar, reply the king of Morven; thou shall fight, son of my fame! — prepare my dark-bosomed ship to carry my hero to inis-thona. son of my son, regard our fame; — for thou be of the race of renown. let not the child of stranger say, feeble be the son of Morven! — be thou, in battle, like the roar storm: mild as the evening sun in peace. — tell, Oscar, to inis-thona king, that Fingal remember his youth; when we strive in the combat together in the day of agandecca.

they lift up the sound sail; the wind whistle through the thong of their mast. wave lash the oozy rock: the strength of ocean roar. — my son behold, from the wave, the land of grove. he rush into the echo bay of runa; and send his sword to annir king of spear.

the gray-haired hero rise, when he see the sword of Fingal. his eye be full of tear, and he remember the battle of their youth. twice they lift the spear before the lovely agandecca: hero stand far distant, as if two ghost contend.

but now, begin the king, i be old; the sword lie useless in my hall. thou who be of morven race! annir have be in the strife of spear; but he be pale and wither now, like the oak of lano. i have no son to meet thou with joy, or to carry thou to the hall of his father. argon be pale in the tomb, and ruro be no more. — my daughter be in the hall of stranger, and long to behold my tomb. — her spouse shake ten thousand spear; and come like cloud of death from lano. — come, to share the feast of annir, son of echo Morven.

three day they feast together; on the four annir hear the name of Oscar. — they rejoice in the shell; and pursue the boar of runa.

beside the fount of mossy stone, the weary hero rest. the tear steal in secret from annir: and he break the rise sigh. — here dark rest, the hero say, the child of my youth. — this stone be the tomb of ruro: that tree sound over the grave of argon. do you hear my voice, o my son, within your narrow house? or do you speak in these rustle leaf, when the wind of the desert rise?

king of inis-thona, say Oscar, how fall the child of youth? the wild boar often rush over their tomb, but he do not disturb the hunter. they pursue deer form of cloud, and bend their airy bow. — they still love the sport of their youth; and mount the wind with joy.

cormalo, reply the king, be chief of ten thousand spear; he dwell at the dark-rolling water of lano; which send forth the cloud of death. he come to runa echo hall, and seek the honour of the spear. the youth be lovely as the first beam of the sun; and few be they who can meet he in fight! — my hero yield to cormalo: and my daughter love the son of lano.

argon and ruro return from the chace; the tear of their pride descend: — they roll their silent eye on runa hero, because they yield to a stranger: three day they feast with cormalo: on the four my argon fight. — but who can fight with argon! — lano chief be overcome. his heart swell with the grief of pride, and he resolve, in secret, to behold the death of my son.

they go to the hill of runa, and pursue the dark-brown hind. the arrow of cormalo fly in secret; and my child fall. he come to the maid of his love; to inis-thona dark-haired maid. — they flee over the desert — and annir remain alone.

night come on and day appear; nor argon voice, nor ruro's come. at length their much-loved dog be see; the fleet and bound runar. he come into the hall and howl; and seem to look towards the place of their fall. — we follow he: we find they here: and lay they by this mossy stream. this be the haunt of annir, when the chace of the hind be over. i bend like the trunk of a age oak above they: and my tear for ever flow.

o ronnan! say the rise Oscar, ogar king of spear! call my hero to my side, the son of streamy Morven. today we go to lano water, that send forth the cloud of death. cormalo will not long rejoice: death be often at the point of our sword.

they come over the desert like stormy cloud, when the wind roll they over the heath: their edge be tinge with lightning: and the echo grove foresee the storm. the horn of oscar battle be hear; and lano shake over all its wave. the child of the lake convene around the sound shield of cormalo.

Oscar fight, as he be wont in battle. cormalo fell beneath his sword: and the son of the dismal lano flee to their secret vale. — Oscar bring the daughter of inis-thona to annir echo hall. the face of age be bright with joy; he bless the king of sword.

how great be the joy of Ossian, when he behold the distant sail of his son! it be like a cloud of light that rise in the east, when the traveller be sad in a land unknown; and dismal night, with her ghost, be sit around he.

we bring he, with song, to selma hall. Fingal order the feast of shell to be spread. a thousand bard raise the name of Oscar: and Morven answer to the noise. the daughter of toscar be there, and her voice be like the harp; when the distant sound come, in the evening, on the soft-rustling breeze of the vale.

o lay i, you that see the light, near some rock of my hill: let the thick hazel be around, let the rustle oak be near. green be the place of my rest; and let the sound of the distant torrent be hear. daughter of toscar, take the harp, and raise the lovely song of Selma; that sleep may overtake my soul in the midst of joy; that the dream of my youth may return, and the day of the mighty Fingal.

Selma! i behold thy tower, thy tree, and shade wall. i see the hero of Morven; and hear the song of bard. Oscar lift the sword of cormalo; and a thousand youth admire its stud thong. they look with wonder on my son; and admire the strength of his arm. they mark the joy of his father eye; they long for a equal fame.

and you shall have your fame, o son of streamy Morven. — my soul be often brighten with the song; and i remember the companion of my youth. — but sleep descend with the sound of the harp; and pleasant dream begin to rise. you son of the chace stand far distant, nor disturb my rest. the bard of other time converse now with his father, the chief of the day of old. — son of the chace, stand far distant; disturb not the dream of Ossian.

