the young rat and his dam, the cock and the cat. 

no caution of a matron, old and sage
 young Rattlehead to prudence can engage
 but forth the offspring of her bed will go,
 nor reason give, but that he will do so. 
much counsel be, at part, throw away,
 even all, that mother-rat to son can say;
 who follow he with utmost reach of sight,
 then, lose in tear, and in abandon plight,
 turn to her mournful cell, and bid the world good-night. 
but fortune, kind than her bode thought,
 in little time the vagrant homeward bring,
 raise in his mind, and mend in his dress,
 who the bel-air do every way confess,
 have learn to flower his Wigg, nor brush away
 the fall meal, that on his shoulder lie;
 and from a nutshell, wimble by a worm,
 take snuff, and can the government reform. 
the mother, weep from maternal love,
 to see he thus prodigious improve,
 expect mighty change too, within,
 and wisdom to avoid the cat, and gin. 
who do you chief note, sweetheart, quoth she,
 of all the stranger you abroad do see? 
who grace you most, or do your fancy take? 
the young rat then curse a noisy rake,
 that bar the best acquaintance he can make;
 and scar he so, he tremble every part;
 nor to describe he, scarce can have the heart
 high on his foot (quoth he) himself he bear,
 and terrible, in his own language, swear;
 a feather arm come out from either side,
 which loud he clap, and combatant defy,
 and to each leg a Bayonette be tie:
 and certain his head with wound be sore;
 for that, and both his cheek a sanguine colour wear. 
near he there lay the creature i admire,
 and for a friend by sympathy desire:
 he make, like we, as far as tail and foot,
 with coat of Furr in parallel do meet;
 yet seem of a more exalt race,
 though humble meekness beautify his face:
 a purr sound compose his gentle mind,
 while frequent slumber do his eye-lid bind;
 who soft, contract paw lie calm still,
 as if unused to prejudice, or kill. 
i pause a while, to meditate a speech,
 and now be step just within his reach;
 when that rude clown begin his hector cry,
 and make i for my life, and from the attempt to fly. 
indeed it be time, the shiver beldame say,
 to scour the plain, and be of life afraid. 
thou base, degenerate seed of injure rat,
 thou very fool (she cry) of all my brat;
 will thou have shake hand with hostile cat,
 and do not yet thy own, and country be foe,
 at this expense of time, and travel know? 
alas! that swear, stare, bully thing,
 that tear his throat, and bluster with his wing,
 be but some paltry, dunghill, craven cock,
 who serve the early household for a clock. 
and we his oat, and barley often steal,
 nor sear, he shall revenge the pilfer meal:
 while that demure, and seem harmless puss
 herself, and mew chit regales with we.
 if then, of useful sense thou have gain no more,
 than ere thou'dst past the threshold of my door;
 be here, my son, content to dress and dine,
 steep the list of beauty in thy wine,
 and neighbour vermin with false gloss outshine

among mankind a thousand fop we see,
 who in their ramble learn no more than thou;
 cross over the Alpes, and make the tour of France,
 to learn a paltry song, or antic dance;
 bring their noddles, and valize pack
 with mystery, from shop and tailor wreck
 but what may prejudice their native land;
 who troop be raise, or who fleet be man,
 never move their thought, nor do they understand
 thou, my dear Rattlehead, and such as these
 may keep at home, and brood on sloth and ease:
 while other, more adapt to the age,
 may vigorous in warlike feat engage,
 and live on foreign spoil, or die thin the stage. 
