the right honourable Edmund Burke.

why mourn the ingenuous moralist, who mind
science have store, and piety refine,
that fade chivalry display no more
her pomp and stately tournament of yore!
lo! when philosophy and truth advance,
scare at their frown, she drop her glitter lance;
round her rest castle the pale ivy crawl,
and sink and silent be her banner hall!

as when far off the golden evening sail,
and slow sink the fancy-painted vale,
with rich pavilion spread in long array;
so roll the enchanter radiant realm away;
so on the sight the part glory fade,
the gorgeous vision set in endless shade.
but shall the muse mind for this lament,
or mourn the wizard gothic fabric rend!
shall he, with fancy poor and pensive child,
gaze on his shadowy vale, and prospect wild,
with linger love, and sigh bid farewell
to the dim picture of his part spell!

no, Burke! thy heart, by juster feeling lead,
mourn for the spirit of high honour flee;
mourn that philosophy, abstract and cold,
wither shall smite life fancy-flowered mould;
and many a smile sympathy depart,
that grace the sternness of the manly heart.

nor shall the wise and virtuous scan severe
these fair illusion, even to nature dear. 
though now no more proud chivalry recall
her tourney bright, and peal festival;
though now on high her idle spear be hang,
though time her moulder harp have half unstring;
her mild influence shall she still impart,
to decorate, but not disguise, the heart;
to nurse the tender sympathy that play
in the short sunshine of life early way;
for female worth and meekness to inspire
homage and love, and temper rude desire;
nor seldom with sweet dream sad thought to cheer,
and half beguile affliction of her tear!

lo! this her boast; and still, o Burke! be thy
her glow hue that warm, yet temper shine;
while whisper bland, and fair dream, attend
thy evening path, till the last shade descend!
so may she soothe, with lofty wisdom aid,
thy muse leisure in the silent shade,
and bid poor fancy, her cold pinion wet,
life cloudy sky and beat shower forget.
but can her fair form, her sweet song,
sooth thou, assail by calumny and wrong!
even now thy foe with loud accent cry:
champion of unrelenting tyranny,
at freedom have thou aim the deadly blow,
and strive with impious arm to lay her altar low!

no, Burke! indignant at the voice we start:
we trust thy liberal view, thy generous heart;
we think of those who, naked, pale, and poor,
relieve and bless, have wander from thy door;
we see thou with unwearied step explore
each track of bloodshed on the farther shore
of injure Asia, and thy swell breast
harrow the oppressor, mourn for the oppress,

no, Burke! wherever injustice rear her head,
wherever with blood her idol grim be feed;
wherever fell cruelty, at her command,
with crimson banner march through the land,
and stride, like a giant, onward hie,
while man, a tread worm, look up, and die;
wherever pale murder in her train appear,
with reek axe, and garment wet with tear;
or, lower jealousy, unmoved as fate,
bar fast the prison-cage's iron gate
upon the bury sorrow and the cry
of he who there, lose and forget, lie; —
when minister like these, in fearful state,
upon a bloody tyrant bid wait,
thou too shall own (and justice lift her rod)
the cause of freedom be the cause of god!

fair spirit, who do rise in beauteous pride,
where proud oppression have thy arm defy!
when lead by virtue thou do firm advance,
and bathe in guilt warm blood thy burn lance;
when all thy form its awful port assume,
and in the tempest shake thy crimson plume,
i mark thy lofty mien, thy steady eye,
so fall thy foe! with tear of joy i cry.

but never may anarchy, with eye a-flame,
and mien distract, assume thy awful name;
her pale torch shed afar its hideous glare,
and show the blood-drop in her dabble hair;
the fiend of discord hear her hollow voice,
the spirit of the deathful storm rejoice:
as when the rise blast with mutter sweep
sound 'amid the branch of the forest deep,
the sad horizon lower, the part sun
be hide, strange murmur through the high wood run,
the falcon wheel away his mournful flight,
and leave the glen to solitude and night;
till soon the hurricane, in dismal shroud,
come fearful forth, and sound her conch aloud;
the oak majestic bow his hoary head,
and ruin round his ancient reign be spread:
so the dark fiend, rejoice in her might,
pour desolation and the storm of night;
before her dread career the good and just
fly far, or sink expire in the dust;
wide waste and mighty wreck around her lie,
and the earth tremble at her impious cry!

whether her temple, wet with human gore,
she thus may raise on gallia ravage shore,
belong to he alone, and his high will,
who bid the tempest of the world be still. 
with joy we turn to albion happy plain,
where ancient freedom hold her temperate reign;
where justice sit majestic on her throne;
where mercy turn her ear to every groan.
o Albion! fair isle, who verdant plain
spring beauteous from the blue and billowy main;
in peaceful pomp who glitter city rise,
and lift their crowd temple to the sky;
who navy on the broad brine awful roll;
who commerce glow beneath the distant pole;
who stream reflect full many a attic pile;
who velvet lawn in long luxuriance smile;
amid who wind coomb contentment dwell,
who vale rejoice to hear the sabbath bell;
who humble shed, that steady law protect,
the villager with woodbine bower have deck! 
sweet native land, who every haunt be dear,
who every gale be music to my ear;
amid who hill one poor retreat i seek,
where i may sometime hide a sadden thought,
and have wander far, and mark mankind
in their vain mask, may rest and safety find:
oh! still may freedom, with majestic mien,
pace thy rock and the green vale, be see;
around thy cliff, that glitter over the main,
may smile order wind her silver chain;
while from thy calm abode, and azure sky,
far off the fiend of discord murmur fly!

to he who firm thy injure cause have fight,
this humble offer, lo! the muse have bring;
nor heed thou, Burke, if, with avert eye,
scowl, cold envy may thy worth decry!

it be the lot of man: — the best oft mourn,
as sad they journey through this cloudy bourn:
if conscious genius stamp their choose breast,
and on the forehead show her seal impress,
perhaps they mourn, in bleak misfortune shade,
their age and care with penury repay;
their error deep scan, their worth forget,
or mark by hard injustice with a blot.
if high they soar, and keep their distant way,
and spread their ample pinion to the day,
malignant faction hear with hate their name,
and all her tongue be busy with their fame.

but it be enough to hold, as best we may,
our destine track, till set the close day;
whether with live lustre we adorn
our high sphere, like the radiance of the morn;
or whether silent in the shade we move,
cheer by the lonely star of pensive love;
or whether wild oppose storm we stem,
pant for virtue distant diadem;
it be the unshaken mind, the conscience pure,
that bid we firm act, meek endure;
it be this may shield we when the storm beat hard,
content, though poor, have we no other guard! 
