THE FEMINEAD:

OR FEMALE GENIUS.

WRITTEN IN THE YEAR MDCCLI.

BY JOHN DUNCOMBE, M. A.

SHall lordly man, the theme of every lay,
 Usurp the Muse's tributary bay? 
In kingly state on Pindus' summit sit,
 Tyrant of verse, and arbiter of wit? 
By Salic law the female right deny,
 And view their genius with regardless eye? 
Justice forbid! and every muse inspire
 To sing the glories of a sister-choir! 
Rise, rise, bold swain; and to the listening grove
 Resound the praises of the sex you love;
 Tell how, adorn'd with every charm, they shine,
 In mind and person equally divine,
 Till man, no more to female merit blind,
 Admire the person, but adore the mind. 

To these weak strains, O thou! the sex's friend
 And constant patron, Richardson! attend:
 Thou, who so oft with pleas'd, but anxious care,
 Hast watch'd the dawning genius of the fair,
 With wonted smiles wilt hear thy friend display
 The various graces of the female lay;
 Studious from Folly's yoke their minds to free,
 And aid the generous cause espous'd by thee. 

Long o'er the world did Prejudice maintain,
 By sounds like these, her undisputed reign:
 "Woman! she cried, to thee, indulgent Heaven
" Has all the charms of outward beauty given:
 "Be thine the boast, unrival'd, to enslave
" The great, the wise, the witty, and the brave;
 "Deck'd with the Paphian rose's damask glow,
" And the vale-lily's vegetable snow,
 "Be thine, to move majestic in the dance,
" To roll the eye, and aim the tender glance,
 "Or touch the strings, and breathe the melting song,
" Content to emulate that airy throng,
 "Who to the sun their painted plumes display,
" And gaily glitter on the hawthorn spray,
 "Or wildly warble in the beechen grove,
" Careless of aught but music, joy, and love. " 

Heavens! could such artful, slavish sounds beguile
 The free-born sons of Britain's polish'd isle? 
Could they, like fam'd Ulysses' dastard crew,
 Attentive listen, and enamour'd view,
 Nor drive the Syren to that dreary plain,
 In loathsome pomp, where eastern tyrants reign;
 Where each fair neck the yoke of slavery galls,
 Clos'd in a proud seraglio's gloomy walls,
 And taught, that levell'd with the brutal kind,
 Nor sense, nor souls to women are assign'd. 

Our British nymphs with happier omens rove,
 At freedom's call, thro' wisdom's sacred grove,
 And, as with lavish hand each sister grace
 Shapes the fair form, and regulates the face,
 Each sister muse, in blissful union join'd,
 Adorns, improves, and beautifies the mind. 
Ev'n now fond Fancy in our polish'd land
 Assembled shews a blooming, studious band:
 With various arts our reverence they engage,
 Some turn the tuneful, some the moral page;
 These, led by Contemplation, soar on high,
 And range the Heavens with philosophic eye;
 While those, surrounded by a vocal choir,
 The canvas tinge, or touch the warbling lyre. 
Here, like the stars 'mix'd radiance, they unite
 To dazzle and perplex our wandering sight:
 The muse each charmer singly shall survey,
 And tune to each her tributary lay. 
So when, in blended tints, with sweet surprize
 Assembled beauties strike our ravish'd eyes,
 Such as in Lely's melting colours shine,
 Or spring, great Kneller! from a hand like thine,
 On all with pleasing awe at once we gaze,
 And, lost in wonder, know not which to praise,
 But, singly view'd, each nymph delights us more,
 Disclosing graces unperceiv'd before. 

First let the muse with generous ardor try
 To chase the mist from dark opinion's eye:
 Nor mean we here to blame that father's care,
 Who guards from learned wives his booby heir,
 Since oft that heir with prudence has been known
 To dread a genius that transcends his own:
 The wise themselves should with discretion chuse,
 Since letter'd nymphs their knowledge may abuse,
 And husbands oft experience to their cost
 The prudent housewife in the scholar lost:
 But those incur deserv'd contempt, who prize
 Their own high talents, and their sex despise,
 With haughty mien each social bliss defeat,
 And sully all their learning with conceit:
 Of such the parent justly warns his son,
 And such the muse herself will bid him shun. 

But lives there one, whose unassuming mind,
 Tho' grac'd by nature, and by art refin'd,
 Pleas'd with domestic excellence, can spare
 Some hours from studious ease to social care,
 And with her pen that time alone employs
 Which others waste in visits, cards, and noise;
 From affectation free, tho' deeply read,
 "With wit well natur'd, and with books well bred?" 
With such (and such there are) each happy day
 Must fly improving, and improv'd away;
 Inconstancy might fix and settle there,
 And wisdom's voice approve the chosen fair. 

Nor need we now from our own Britain rove,
 In search of Genius, to the Lesbian grove,
 Tho' Sappho there her tuneful lyre has strung,
 And amorous griefs in sweetest accents sung,
 Since here, in Charles's days, amidst a train
 Of shameless bards, licentious and profane,
 The chaste Orinda rose; with purer light,
 Like modest Cynthia, beaming thro' the night:
 Fair Friendship's lustre, undisguis'd by art,
 Glows in her lines, and animates her heart;
 Friendship, that jewel, which, tho' all confess
 Its peerless value, yet how few possess! 
For her the never-dying myrtle weaves
 A verdant chaplet of her odorous leaves;
 If Cowley's or Roscommon's song can give
 Immortal fame, her praise shall ever live. 

Who can unmov'd near Winchelsea reveal
 Thy horrors, Spleen! which all, who paint, must feel? 
My praises would but wrong her sterling wit,
 Since Pope himself applauds what she has writ. 

But say, what matron now walks musing forth
 From the bleak mountains of her native North? 
While round her brows two sisters of the Nine
 Poetic wreaths with philosophic twine! 
Hail, Cockburne, hail! ev'n now from Reason's bowers
 Thy Locke delighted culls the choicest flowers
 To deck his great, successful champion's head,
 And Clarke expects thee in the laurel shade. 
Tho' long to dark, oblivious want a prey,
 Thy aged worth pass'd unperceiv'd away,
 Yet Scotland now shall ever boast thy fame,
 While England mourns thy undistinguish'd name,
 And views with wonder, in a female mind,
 Philosopher, divine, and poet join'd! 

The modest muse a veil with pity throws
 O'er vice's friends, and virtue's female foes;
 Abash'd she views the bold unblushing mien
 Of modern Manley, Centlivre, and Behn;
 And grieves to see one nobly born disgrace
 Her modest sex, and her illustrious race. 
Tho' harmony thro' all their numbers flow'd,
 And genuine wit its every grace bestow'd,
 Nor genuine wit, nor harmony, excuse
 The dangerous sallies of a wanton muse:
 Nor can such tuneful, but immoral, lays
 Expect the tribute of impartial praise:
 As soon might Philips, Pilkington, and V—
 Deserv'd applause for spotless virtue gain. 

But hark! what nymph, in Frome's embroider'd vale,
 With strains seraphic swells the vernal gale? 
With what sweet sounds the bordering forest rings? 
For sportive Echo catches, as she sings,
 Each falling accent, studious to prolong
 The warbled notes of Rowe's ecstatic song. 
Old Avon pleas'd his reedy forehead rears,
 And polish'd Orrery delighted hears. 
See with what transport she resigns her breath,
 Snatch'd by a sudden, but a wish'd-for death! 
Releas'd from earth, with smiles she soars on high
 Amidst her kindred spirits of the sky,
 Where faith and love those endless joys bestow,
 That warm'd her lays, and fill'd her hopes below. 

Nor can her noble friend escape unseen,
 Or from the muse her modest virtues screen;
 Here, sweetly blended, to our wondering eyes,
 The peeress, poetess, and Christian rise:
 And tho' the Nine her tuneful strains inspire,
 We less her genius, than her heart, admire,
 Pleas'd, 'midst the great, one truly good to see,
 And proud to tell that Somerset is she. 

By generous views one pceress more demands
 A grateful tribute from all female hands;
 One, who to shield them from the worst of foes,
 In their just cause dar'd Pope himself oppose. 
Their own dark forms deceit and envy wear,
 By Irwin touch'd with truth's celestial spear. 
By her disarm'd, ye witlings! now give o'er
 Your empty sneers, and shock the sex no more. 

Thus bold Camilla, when the Trojan chief
 Attack'd her country, flew to its relief;
 Beneath her lance the bravest warriors bled,
 And fear dismay'd the host which great Aeneas led. 

But ah! why heaves my breast this pensive sigh? 
Why starts this tear unbidden from my eye? 
What breast from sighs, what eye from tears refrains,
 When, sweetly-mournful, hapless Wright complains? 
And who but grieves to see her generous mind,
 For nobler views and worthier guests design'd,
 Admit the hateful form of black despair,
 Wan with the gloom of superstitious care? 
In pity-moving lays, with earnest cries,
 She call'd on Heaven to close her weary eyes,
 And, long on earth by heart-felt woes opprest,
 Was borne by friendly death to welcome rest. 

In nervous strains, lo! Madan's polish'd taste
 Has poetry's successive progress trac'd,
 From antient Greece, where first she fix'd her reign,
 To Italy, and Britain's happier plain. 
Praise well-bestow'd adorns her glowing lines,
 And manly strength with female softness joins. 
So female charms and manly virtues grace,
 By her example form'd, her blooming race,
 And, fram'd alike to please our ears and eyes,
 There new Cornelias and new Gracchi rise. 
O that you now, with genius at command,
 Would snatch the penc l from my artless hand,
 And give your sex's portraits, bold and true,
 In colours worthy of themselves and you! 

Now in ecstatic visions let me rove,
 By Cynthia's beams, thro' Brackley's glimmering grove,
 Where still each night, by startled shepherds seen,
 Young Leapor's form flies shadowy o'er the green. 
Those envied honours nature lov'd to pay
 The briar-bound turf, where erst her Shakespear lay,
 Now on her darling Mira she bestows;
 There o'er the hallow'd ground she fondly strows
 The choicest fragrance of the breathing spring,
 And bids each year her favourite linnet sing. 

Let cloister'd pedants, in an endless round,
 Tread the dull mazes of scholastic ground;
 Brackley unenvying views the glittering train
 Of learning's useless trappings idly vain;
 For, spite of all that vaunted learning's aid,
 Their fame is rivall'd by her rural maid. 

So, while in our Britannia's beechen sprays
 Sweet Philomela trills her mellow lays,
 We to the natives of the sultry line
 Their boasted race of parrots pleas'd resign:
 For tho' on citron boughs they proudly glow
 With all the colours of the watery bow,
 Yet thro' the grove harsh discord they prolong,
 Tho' rich in gaudy plumage, poor in song. 

Now bear me, Clio, to that Kentish strand,
 Whose rude o'erhanging cliffs and barren sand
 May challenge all the myrtle-blooming bowers
 Of fam'd Italia, when, at evening hours,
 Thy own Eliza muses on the shore,
 Serene, tho' billows beat, and tempests roar. 
Hail, Carter, hail! your favourite name inspires
 My raptur'd breast with sympathetic fires;
 Ev'n now I see your lov'd Ilyssus lead
 His mazy current thro' th' Athenian mead;
 With you I pierce thro' academic shades,
 And join in Attic bowers th' Aonian maids;
 Beneath the spreading plane with Plato rove,
 And hear his morals echo thro' the grove. 
Joy sparkles in the sage's looks, to find
 His genius glowing in a female mind;
 Newton admiring sees your searching eye
 Dart thro' his mystic page, and range the sky;
 By you his colours to your sex are shown,
 And Algarotti's name to Britain known. 
While, undisturb'd by pride, you calmly tread
 Thro' life's perplexing paths, by wisdom led;
 And, taught by her, your grateful muse repays
 Her heavenly teacher in nocturnal lays. 

So when Prometheus from th' Almighty Sire,
 As sings the fable, stole celestial fire,
 Swift thro' the clay the vital current ran,
 In look, in form, in speech resembling man;
 But in each eye a living lustre glow'd,
 That spoke the heavenly source from whence it flow'd. 
 "What magic powers in Celia's numbers dwell,
 "Which thus th' unpractis'd breast with ardor swell
" To emulate her praise, and tune that lyre
 "Which yet no bard was able to inspire! 
" With tears her suffering Virgin we attend,
 "And sympathize with father, lover, friend! 
" What sacred rapture in our bosom glows,
 "When at the shrine she offers up her vows! 
" Mild majesty and virtue's awful power
 "Adorn her fall, and grace her latest hour." 

Transport me now to those embroider'd meads,
 Where the slow Ouze his lazy current leads;
 There, while the stream soft-dimpling steals along,
 And from the groves the green-hair'd Dryads throng,
 Clio herself, or Ferrar tunes a lay,
 Sweet as the darkling Philomel of May. 
Haste, haste, ye Nine, and hear a sister sing
 The charms of Cynthia, and the joys of spring:
 See! night's pale goddess with a grateful beam
 Paints her lov'd image in the shadowy stream,
 While, round his votary, spring profusely showers

 "A snow of blossoms, and a wild of flowers." 
O happy nymph, tho' winter o'er thy head,
 Blind to that form, the snow of age shall shed;
 Tho' life's short spring and beauty's blossoms fade,
 Still shall thy reason flourish undecay'd;
 Time, tho' he steals the roseate bloom of youth,
 Shall spare the charms of virtue and of truth,
 And on thy mind new charms, new bloom bestow,
 Wisdom's best friend, and only beauty's foe. 

Nor shall thy much-lov'd Pennington remain
 Unsung, unhonour'd in my votive strain. 
See where the soft enchantress, wandering o'er
 The fairy ground that Philips trod before,
 Exalts her chymic wand, and swift behold
 The basest metals ripen into gold:
 Beneath her magic touch, with wondering eye,
 We view vile copper with pure sterling vie;
 Nor shall the farthing, sung by her, forbear
 To claim the praises of the smiling fair;
 Till chuck and marble shall no more employ
 The thoughtless leisure of the truant boy. 

Returning now to Thames's flowery side,
 See how his waves in still attention glide! 
And, hark! what songstress shakes her warbling throat? 
Is it the nightingale, or Delia's note? 
The balmy zephyrs, hovering o'er the fair,
 On their soft wings the vocal accents bear;
 Thro' Sunbury's low vale the strains rebound,
 Ev'n neighbouring Chertsey hears the chearful sound,
 And wondering sees her Cowley's laurel'd shade
 Transported listen to the tuneful maid. 
O may those nymphs, whose pleasing power she sings,
 Still o'er their suppliant wave their fostering wings! 
O long may Health and soft-ey'd Peace impart
 Bloom to her cheek, and rapture to her heart! 
Beneath her roof the red-breast shall prolong,
 Unchill'd by frosts, his tributary song;
 For her the lark shall wake the dappled morn,
 And linnet twitter from the blossom'd thorn. 
Sing on, sweet maid! thy Spenser smiles to see
 Kind Fancy shed her choicest gifts on thee,
 And bids his Edwards, on the laurel spray
 That shades his tomb, inscribe thy rural lay. 

With lovely mien Eugenia now appears,
 The muse's pupil from her tenderest years;
 Improving tasks her peaceful hours beguile,
 The sister arts on all her labours smile,
 And while the Nine their votary inspire,
 "One dips the pencil, and one strings the lyre." 
O may her life's clear current smoothly glide,
 Unruffled by misfortune's boisterous tide! 
So while the charmer leads her blameless days
 With that content which she so well displays,
 Her own Honoria we in her shall view,
 And think her allegoric vision true. 

Thus wandering wild among the golden grain
 That fruitful floats on Bansted's airy plain,
 Careless I sung, while summer's western gale
 Breath'd health and fragrance thro' the dusky vale;
 When from a neighbouring hawthorn, in whose shade
 Conceal'd she lay, up-rose th' Aonian maid:
 Pleas'd had she listen'd; and, with smiles, she cried,
 "Cease, friendly swain! be this thy praise and pride,
" That thou, of all the numerous tuneful throng,
 "First in our cause hast fram'd thy generous song. 
" And ye, our sister choir! proceed to tread
 "The flowery paths of fame, by science led! 
" Employ by turns the needle and the pen,
 "And in their favourite studies rival men! 
" May all our sex your glorious track pursue,
 "And keep your bright example still in view! 
" These lasting beauties will in youth engage,
 "And smooth the wrinkles of deelining age,
" Secure to bloom, unconscious of decay,
 "When all Corinna's roses fade away. 
" For ev'n when love's short triumph shall be o'er,
 "When youth shall please, and beauty charm no more,
" When man shall cease to slatter; when the eye
 "Shall cease to sparkle, and the heart to sigh,
" In that dread hour, when parent dust shall claim
 "The lifeless tribute of each kindred frame,
" Ev'n then shall wisdom for her chosen fair
 "The fragrant wreaths of virtuous fame prepare;
" Those wreaths which flourish in a happier clime. 
 "Beyond the reach of envy and of time;
" While here, th' immortalizing muse shall save
 "Your darling names from dark Oblivion's grave;
" Those names the praise and wonder shall engage
 "Of every polish'd, wise, and virtuous age;
" To latest times our annals shall adorn,
 "And save from folly thousands yet unborn." 
