the feminead:

or female genius.

write in the year mdccli.

by JOHN Duncombe, m. a. 

shall lordly man, the theme of every lay,
 usurp the muse tributary bay? 
in kingly state on pindus summit sit,
 tyrant of verse, and arbiter of wit? 
by salic law the female right deny,
 and view their genius with regardless eye? 
justice forbid! and every muse inspire
 to sing the glory of a sister-choir! 
rise, rise, bold swain; and to the listen grove
 resound the praise of the sex you love;
 tell how, adorn with every charm, they shine,
 in mind and person equal divine,
 till man, no more to female merit blind,
 admire the person, but adore the mind. 

to these weak strain, o thou! the sex friend
 and constant patron, Richardson! attend:
 thou, who so oft with please, but anxious care,
 have watch the dawn genius of the fair,
 with wonted smile will hear thy friend display
 the various grace of the female lie;
 studious from folly yoke their mind to free,
 and aid the generous cause espouse by thou. 

long over the world do prejudice maintain,
 by sound like these, her undisputed reign:
 "woman! she cry, to thou, indulgent heaven
" have all the charm of outward beauty give:
 "be thy the boast, unrivalled, to enslave
" the great, the wise, the witty, and the brave;
 "deck with the paphian rose damask glow,
" and the vale-lily vegetable snow,
 "be thy, to move majestic in the dance,
" to roll the eye, and aim the tender glance,
 "or touch the string, and breathe the melt song,
" content to emulate that airy throng,
 "who to the sun their paint plume display,
" and gay glitter on the hawthorn spray,
 "or wild warble in the beechen grove,
" careless of aught but music, joy, and love. " 

heaven! can such artful, slavish sound beguile
 the free-born son of britain polish isle? 
can they, like fame ulysses dastard crew,
 attentive listen, and enamour view,
 nor drive the siren to that dreary plain,
 in loathsome pomp, where eastern tyrant reign;
 where each fair neck the yoke of slavery gall,
 close in a proud seraglio gloomy wall,
 and teach, that level with the brutal kind,
 nor sense, nor soul to woman be assign. 

our british nymph with happy omen rove,
 at freedom call, through wisdom sacred grove,
 and, as with lavish hand each sister grace
 shape the fair form, and regulate the face,
 each sister muse, in blissful union join,
 adorn, improve, and beautify the mind. 
even now fond fancy in our polish land
 assemble show a bloom, studious band:
 with various art our reverence they engage,
 some turn the tuneful, some the moral page;
 these, lead by contemplation, soar on high,
 and range the heaven with philosophic eye;
 while those, surround by a vocal choir,
 the canvas tinge, or touch the warble lyre. 
here, like the star 'mixed radiance, they unite
 to dazzle and perplex our wander sight:
 the muse each charmer single shall survey,
 and tune to each her tributary lie. 
so when, in blend tint, with sweet surprise
 assemble beauty strike our ravish eye,
 such as in lely melt colour shine,
 or spring, great kneller! from a hand like thy,
 on all with please awe at once we gaze,
 and, lose in wonder, know not which to praise,
 but, single view, each nymph delight we more,
 disclose grace unperceived before. 

first let the muse with generous ardor try
 to chase the mist from dark opinion eye:
 nor mean we here to blame that father care,
 who guard from learned wife his booby heir,
 since oft that heir with prudence have be know
 to dread a genius that transcend his own:
 the wise themselves shall with discretion choose,
 since letter nymph their knowledge may abuse,
 and husband oft experience to their cost
 the prudent housewife in the scholar lose:
 but those incur deserve contempt, who prize
 their own high talent, and their sex despise,
 with haughty mien each social bliss defeat,
 and sully all their learning with conceit:
 of such the parent just warn his son,
 and such the muse herself will bid he shun. 

but life there one, who unassuming mind,
 though grace by nature, and by art refine,
 please with domestic excellence, can spare
 some hour from studious ease to social care,
 and with her pen that time alone employ
 which other waste in visit, card, and noise;
 from affectation free, though deep read,
 "with wit well nature, and with book well breed?" 
with such (and such there be) each happy day
 must fly improve, and improve away;
 inconstancy may fix and settle there,
 and wisdom voice approve the choose fair. 

nor need we now from our own Britain rove,
 in search of genius, to the lesbian grove,
 though Sappho there her tuneful lyre have string,
 and amorous grief in sweet accent sing,
 since here, in Charles day, amid a train
 of shameless bard, licentious and profane,
 the chaste orinda rise; with pure light,
 like modest Cynthia, beam through the night:
 fair friendship lustre, undisguised by art,
 glow in her line, and animate her heart;
 friendship, that jewel, which, though all confess
 its peerless value, yet how few possess! 
for she the never-dying myrtle weave
 a verdant chaplet of her odorous leaf;
 if Cowley or roscommon song can give
 immortal fame, her praise shall ever live. 

who can unmoved near Winchelsea reveal
 thy horror, spleen! which all, who paint, must feel? 
my praise will but wrong her sterling wit,
 since pope himself applaud what she have write. 

but say, what matron now walk muse forth
 from the bleak mountain of her native north? 
while round her brow two sister of the nine
 poetic wreath with philosophic twine! 
hail, Cockburne, hail! even now from reason bower
 thy Locke delight cull the choice flower
 to deck his great, successful champion head,
 and Clarke expect thou in the laurel shade. 
though long to dark, oblivious want a prey,
 thy age worth pass unperceived away,
 yet Scotland now shall ever boast thy fame,
 while England mourn thy undistinguished name,
 and view with wonder, in a female mind,
 philosopher, divine, and poet join! 

the modest muse a veil with pity throw
 over vice friend, and virtue female foe;
 abash she view the bold unblushing mien
 of modern Manley, centlivre, and behn;
 and grieve to see one noble bear disgrace
 her modest sex, and her illustrious race. 
though harmony through all their number flow,
 and genuine wit its every grace bestow,
 nor genuine wit, nor harmony, excuse
 the dangerous sally of a wanton muse:
 nor can such tuneful, but immoral, lay
 expect the tribute of impartial praise:
 as soon may Philips, Pilkington, and V—
 deserve applause for spotless virtue gain. 

but hark! what nymph, in frome embroider vale,
 with strain seraphic swell the vernal gale? 
with what sweet sound the border forest ring? 
for sportive echo catch, as she sing,
 each fall accent, studious to prolong
 the warble note of rowe ecstatic song. 
old Avon please his reedy forehead rear,
 and polish orrery delight hear. 
see with what transport she resign her breath,
 snatch by a sudden, but a wished-for death! 
release from earth, with smile she soar on high
 amid her kindred spirit of the sky,
 where faith and love those endless joy bestow,
 that warm her lay, and fill her hope below. 

nor can her noble friend escape unseen,
 or from the muse her modest virtue screen;
 here, sweet blend, to our wonder eye,
 the peeress, poetess, and christian rise:
 and though the nine her tuneful strain inspire,
 we less her genius, than her heart, admire,
 please, amid the great, one true good to see,
 and proud to tell that somerset be she. 

by generous view one pceress more demand
 a grateful tribute from all female hand;
 one, who to shield they from the worst of foe,
 in their just cause dare pope himself oppose. 
their own dark form deceit and envy wear,
 by Irwin touch with truth celestial spear. 
by she disarm, you witling! now give over
 your empty sneer, and shock the sex no more. 

thus bold Camilla, when the trojan chief
 attack her country, fly to its relief;
 beneath her lance the brave warrior bleed,
 and fear dismay the host which great Aeneas lead. 

but ah! why heave my breast this pensive sigh? 
why start this tear unbidden from my eye? 
what breast from sigh, what eye from tear refrain,
 when, sweetly-mournful, hapless Wright complain? 
and who but grieve to see her generous mind,
 for noble view and worthy guest design,
 admit the hateful form of black despair,
 wan with the gloom of superstitious care? 
in pity-moving lay, with earnest cry,
 she call on heaven to close her weary eye,
 and, long on earth by heart-felt woe oppress,
 be bear by friendly death to welcome rest. 

in nervous strain, lo! madan polish taste
 have poetry successive progress trace,
 from ancient Greece, where first she fix her reign,
 to Italy, and britain happy plain. 
praise well-bestowed adorn her glow line,
 and manly strength with female softness join. 
so female charm and manly virtue grace,
 by her example form, her bloom race,
 and, frame alike to please our ear and eye,
 there new Cornelias and new Gracchi rise. 
o that you now, with genius at command,
 will snatch the penc l from my artless hand,
 and give your sex portrait, bold and true,
 in colour worthy of themselves and you! 

now in ecstatic vision let i rove,
 by cynthia beam, through brackley glimmer grove,
 where still each night, by startle shepherd see,
 young leapor form fly shadowy over the green. 
those envy honour nature love to pay
 the briar-bound turf, where erst her Shakespear lie,
 now on her darling Mira she bestow;
 there over the hallow ground she fond strow
 the choice fragrance of the breathe spring,
 and bid each year her favourite linnet sing. 

let cloister pedant, in a endless round,
 tread the dull maze of scholastic ground;
 Brackley unenvying view the glitter train
 of learning useless trappings idle vain;
 for, spite of all that vaunt learning aid,
 their fame be rival by her rural maid. 

so, while in our britannia beechen spray
 sweet Philomela trill her mellow lay,
 we to the native of the sultry line
 their boast race of parrot please resign:
 for though on citron bough they proud glow
 with all the colour of the watery bow,
 yet through the grove harsh discord they prolong,
 though rich in gaudy plumage, poor in song. 

now bear i, Clio, to that kentish strand,
 who rude overhang cliff and barren sand
 may challenge all the myrtle-blooming bower
 of fame Italia, when, at evening hour,
 thy own Eliza muse on the shore,
 serene, though billow beat, and tempest roar. 
hail, Carter, hail! your favourite name inspire
 my rapture breast with sympathetic fire;
 even now i see your love Ilyssus lead
 his mazy current through the athenian mead;
 with you i pierce through academic shade,
 and join in attic bower the aonian maid;
 beneath the spread plane with Plato rove,
 and hear his moral echo through the grove. 
joy sparkle in the sage look, to find
 his genius glow in a female mind;
 Newton admire see your search eye
 dart through his mystic page, and range the sky;
 by you his colour to your sex be show,
 and algarotti name to Britain know. 
while, undisturbed by pride, you calm tread
 through life perplex path, by wisdom lead;
 and, teach by she, your grateful muse repay
 her heavenly teacher in nocturnal lay. 

so when Prometheus from the almighty sire,
 as sing the fable, steal celestial fire,
 swift through the clay the vital current run,
 in look, in form, in speech resemble man;
 but in each eye a live lustre glow,
 that speak the heavenly source from whence it flow. 
 "what magic power in celia number dwell,
 "which thus the unpractised breast with ardor swell
" to emulate her praise, and tune that lyre
 "which yet no bard be able to inspire! 
" with tear her suffer virgin we attend,
 "and sympathize with father, lover, friend! 
" what sacred rapture in our bosom glow,
 "when at the shrine she offer up her vow! 
" mild majesty and virtue awful power
 "adorn she fall, and grace her late hour." 

transport i now to those embroider mead,
 where the slow ouze his lazy current lead;
 there, while the stream soft-dimpling steal along,
 and from the grove the green-haired dryad throng,
 Clio herself, or ferrar tune a lay,
 sweet as the darkling philomel of may. 
haste, haste, you nine, and hear a sister sing
 the charm of Cynthia, and the joy of spring:
 see! night pale goddess with a grateful beam
 paint her love image in the shadowy stream,
 while, round his votary, spring profuse shower

 "a snow of blossom, and a wild of flower." 
o happy nymph, though winter over thy head,
 blind to that form, the snow of age shall shed;
 though life short spring and beauty blossom fade,
 still shall thy reason flourish undecayed;
 time, though he steal the roseate bloom of youth,
 shall spare the charm of virtue and of truth,
 and on thy mind new charm, new bloom bestow,
 wisdom best friend, and only beauty foe. 

nor shall thy much-loved Pennington remain
 unsung, unhonoured in my votive strain. 
see where the soft enchantress, wander over
 the fairy ground that Philips tread before,
 exalt her chemic wand, and swift behold
 the base metal ripen into gold:
 beneath her magic touch, with wonder eye,
 we view vile copper with pure sterling vie;
 nor shall the farthing, sing by she, forbear
 to claim the praise of the smile fair;
 till chuck and marble shall no more employ
 the thoughtless leisure of the truant boy. 

return now to thames flowery side,
 see how his wave in still attention glide! 
and, hark! what songstress shake her warble throat? 
be it the nightingale, or delia note? 
the balmy zephyr, hover over the fair,
 on their soft wing the vocal accent bear;
 through sunbury low vale the strain rebound,
 even neighbour Chertsey hear the cheerful sound,
 and wonder see she Cowley laureled shade
 transport listen to the tuneful maid. 
o may those nymph, who please power she sing,
 still over their suppliant wave their foster wing! 
o long may health and soft-eyed peace impart
 bloom to her cheek, and rapture to her heart! 
beneath her roof the red-breast shall prolong,
 unchilled by frost, his tributary song;
 for she the lark shall wake the dapple morn,
 and linnet twitter from the blossom thorn. 
sing on, sweet maid! thy Spenser smile to see
 kind fancy shed her choice gift on thou,
 and bid his Edwards, on the laurel spray
 that shade his tomb, inscribe thy rural lay. 

with lovely mien Eugenia now appear,
 the muse pupil from her tender year;
 improve task her peaceful hour beguile,
 the sister art on all her labour smile,
 and while the nine their votary inspire,
 "one dip the pencil, and one string the lyre." 
o may her life clear current smooth glide,
 unruffled by misfortune boisterous tide! 
so while the charmer lead her blameless day
 with that content which she so well display,
 her own Honoria we in she shall view,
 and think her allegoric vision true. 

thus wander wild among the golden grain
 that fruitful float on bansted airy plain,
 careless i sing, while summer western gale
 breathe health and fragrance through the dusky vale;
 when from a neighbour hawthorn, in who shade
 conceal she lie, uprise the aonian maid:
 please have she listen; and, with smile, she cry,
 "cease, friendly swain! be this thy praise and pride,
" that thou, of all the numerous tuneful throng,
 "first in our cause have frame thy generous song. 
" and you, our sister choir! proceed to tread
 "the flowery path of fame, by science lead! 
" employ by turn the needle and the pen,
 "and in their favourite study rival man! 
" may all our sex your glorious track pursue,
 "and keep your bright example still in view! 
" these last beauty will in youth engage,
 "and smooth the wrinkle of deeline age,
" secure to bloom, unconscious of decay,
 "when all corinna rose fade away. 
" for even when love be short triumph shall be over,
 "when youth shall please, and beauty charm no more,
" when man shall cease to flatter; when the eye
 "shall cease to sparkle, and the heart to sigh,
" in that dread hour, when parent dust shall claim
 "the lifeless tribute of each kindred frame,
" even then shall wisdom for her choose fair
 "the fragrant wreath of virtuous fame prepare;
" those wreath which flourish in a happy clime. 
 "beyond the reach of envy and of time;
" while here, the immortalise muse shall save
 "your darling name from dark oblivion grave;
" those name the praise and wonder shall engage
 "of every polish, wise, and virtuous age;
" to late time our annal shall adorn,
 "and save from folly thousand yet unborn." 
