honour.

a poem.

by the reverend dr. brown.

inscribe to the right Hon. the lord Visc. Lonsdale.

yes: all, my lord, usurp fair honour fame:
though false as various be the boast claim:
the ambitious miser swell his boundless store,
and dread that high scandal, to be poor;



his wise heir deride the dotard aim,
and bid profusion bribe he into fame.
oft honour, perch on the ribboned breast,
sneer at weak justice, and defy the arrest;
she dwell exult on the tongue of king;
she wake the muse to flight, and plume her wing;
the soldier view she in the shine blade;
the pedant amid the lumber in his head.
she to fall treason the disguise can lend,
and sheath her sword remorseless in a friend:
her throne fantastic pride, we often see
rear on the tomb of truth and honesty;
fop, templar, — courtier, slave, — cheat, patriot, — all
pretend to hear, and to obey the call.

where fix we then? — each boast thus his own,
say, do true honour dwell with all, or none? 

the truth, my lord, be clear: — though impious pride
be ever self-adored, self-deified;
though fool by passion or selflove betray,
fall down and worship what themselves have make;



still do the goddess, in her form divine,
over each grim idol eminent shine;
array in last majesty, be know
through every clime and age, unchanged, and one.

but how explore? — take reason for your guide,
discard selflove; set passion glass aside;
nor view she with the jaundiced eye of pride.
yet judge not rash from a partial view
of what be wrong or right, or false or true;
object too near deceive the observer eye;
examine those which at a distance lie. 
scarce be the structure harmony descry
'midst the tall column, and gay order pride;
but towards the destine point your sight remove,
and this shall lessen still, and that improve,
new beauty gain upon your wonder eye,
and the fair whole in just proportion rise.
thus honour true proportion best be see,
where the due length of age lie between:
this separate pride from greatness, show from worth,
detect false beauty, real grace call forth;
point out what merit praise, what merit blame,
sink in disgrace, or rise into fame.

come then, from past example let we prove
what raise hate, contempt, esteem, or love.

can greatness give true honour? can expense? 
can luxury? or can magnificence?

wild be the purpose, and the fruitless aim,
like a vile prostitute to bribe fair fame;
persuasive splendour vain tempt her ear,
and even all-potent gold be baffle here. 
you pyramid, that once can threat the sky,
aspire tower, and cloud-wrap wonder, rise!
to late age your founder pride proclaim;
record the tyrant greatness; tell his name;
no more: — the treacherous brick and moulder stone
be sink in dust: the boast title go:
pride trophy sweep by time be devour flood,
the inscription want, to tell where once they stand.
but can they rival nature, time defy,
yet what record but vice or vanity? 
he the true glory, though his name unknown,
who teach the arch to swell; to rise, the stone;
not his, who wild command fair art obey,
while folly dictate, or passion sway.

no: spite of greatness, pride and vice be see,
shameful in pomp, conspicuous mean.

in vain, o st—d—y, thy proud forest spread;
in vain each gild turret rear its head;
in vain thy lord command the stream to fall,
extend the view, and spread the smooth canal,
while guilt black train each conscious walk invade,
and cry of orphan haunt he in the shade.
mistaken man! by crime to hope for fame?
thy image glory lead to real shame:
be villainy self-hated? thus to raise
upbraid monument of soul disgrace?
succeed time, and age yet unborn,
shall view the guilty scene with honest scorn;
disdain each beauty thy proud folly plan,
and curse the labour of oppression hand. 

next, view the hero in the embattle field:
true honour fruit can conquest laurel yield?

he only honour, only love we find,
who fight not to destroy, but save mankind:
pelides fury may our wonder move,
but god-like Hector be the man we love. 
see William sword a tyrant pride disarm:
see Lewis tremble under marlb'ro arm:
say, which to human kind be friend or foe;
and who detest not these, and love not those? 
conquest unjust can never command applause;
it be not the victory charm you, but the cause:
not caesar self can feign the patriot part,
nor his false virtue hide his poison heart:
but round thy brow the will laurel twine,
who voice wake freedom in the savage mine!
yes: true glorious, only great be he,
who conquer, or who bleed for liberty.
"hero be much the same, the point agree,
"from macedonia madman to the Swede. 
like baleful comet flame in the sky,
at destine time the appoint scourge rise;
a while in stream lustre sweep along,
and fix in wonder gaze the admire throng;
but reason eye detect the spurious ray,
and the false blaze of glory die away.

now all the aërial cell of wit explore;
the mazy round of science travel over;
search all the deep recess of the mind,
and see, if there true honour sit enshrine. 



alas, nor wit nor science this can boast,
oft dash with error, oft in caprice lose!
transient as bright the short-lived bubble fly!
and mode of wit, and mode of science die.
see rab'lais once the idol of the age;
yet now neglect lie the smut page!
of once renowned des Cartes how low the fall, —
his glory with his whirlpool vanish all!
see folly, wit — and weakness, wisdom stain, —
and Villars witty — Bacon wise in vain! 
oft vice corrupt what sense and part refine,
and cloud the splendour of the bright line,
sully what Congreve, and what Dryden write, —
this, fashion slave; as that, the slave of wit.
in vain fair genius bid the laurel shoot,
the deadly worm thus eat at the root:
corrode thus, the green wreath decay,
and all the poet honour fall away;
quick as autumnal leaf, the laurel fade,
and drop on rochester and otway head. 



where then be find true honour, heavenly fair?
ask, Lonsdale, ask your heart — she dictate there.

yes: it be in virtue: — that alone can give
the last honour, and bid glory live:
on virtue basis only fame can rise,
to stand the storm of age, and reach the sky:
art, conquest, greatness, feel the stroke of fate,
shrink sudden, and betray the incumbent weight;
time with contempt the faithless prop survey,
"and bury madman in the heap they raise."

it be virtue only can the bard inspire,
and fill his rapture breast with last fire:
touch by the etherial ray each kindle line
beam strong: still virtue feed the flame divine;
wherever she tread she leave her footstep bright,
in radiant tract of never-dying light;
these shed the lustre over each sacred name,
give spenser clear, and shakespeare noble flame;
blaze to the sky in Milton ardent song,
and kindle the brisk-sallying fire of young;
these gild each humble verse in modest gay;
these give to swift the keen, soul-piercing ray;
mild through Addison chaste page they shine,
and glow and warm in pope immortal line.

nor less the sage must live by virtue aid;
truth must support he, or his glory fade;
and truth and virtue differ but in name:
like light and heat — distinguish, yet the same.

to truth and virtue the ascent be sure;
the wholesome stream imply the fountain pure;
to taste the spring we oft essay in vain:
deep lie the source, too short be reason chain;
but those the issue of pure truth we know,
which in clear strength through virtue channel flow:
error in vain attempt the foul disguise,
still taste in the bitter wave of vice;
draw from the spring of falsehood all confess
each baleful drop that poison happiness;
G—rd—n's thin shallows, tindal muddy page,
and Morgan gall, and woolston furious rage;
the envenom stream that flow from toland quill,
and the rank dregs of Hobbes and Mandeville.
detest name! yet sentence never to die;
snatch from oblivion grave by infamy!

insect-opinion, hatch by folly ray,
bask in the beam that winge they, for a day:
truth, phoenixlike immortal, though she die,
with strength renew shall from her ash rise.

see, how the lustre of the athenian sage
shine through the lengthen gloom of many a age! 
virtue alone so wide the beam can spread,
and throw the last glory round his head.
see Newton chase conjecture twilight ray,
and light up nature into certain day!
he wide creation trackless maze tread;
and in each atom find the rule god.
unrivalled pair! with truth and virtue fraught!
who live confirm whatever their reason teach!
who far-stretched view, and bright example join
at once to enlighten and persuade mankind! 
hail name revere! which time and truth proclaim
the first and fair in the list of fame.

king, statesman, patriot, thus to glory rise;
on virtue grow their fame, or soon it die;
but graft on the vigorous stock, it be see
brighten by age, and spring in endless green:
pride, folly, vice may blossom for a hour,
feed by court-sun-shine, and poetic shower;
but the pale tendril, nurse by flattery hand,
unwearied tendance, fresh supply demand;
by heat unnatural push to sudden growth,
they sicken at the inclement blast of truth;
shake by the weak breath that pass by,
their colour fade, they wither, droop, and die.
it be virtue only that shall grow with time,
live through each age, and spread through every clime.
see god-like patriot, generous, wise, and good,
stand in the breach, and stem corruption flood! 
see martyr-bishop at the stake expire,
smile on the faggot, and defy its fire! 
how great in exile Hyde and Tully shine!
how alfred virtue brighten all his throne!
from worth like this unbidden glory stream;
nor borrow blaze it ask, nor fortune beam;
affliction gloom but make it still more bright,
as the clear lamp shine clear in the night.

thus various honour various state adorn,
as different star with different glory burn;
their orb too wide, as their sphere be high;
yet all partake the some celestial fire. 

see then heaven endless bounty, and confess,
which give in virtue fame and happiness!
see mankind folly, who the boon despise,
and grasp at pain and infamy in vice!

not so the man who move by virtue law,
reveres himself — and gain, not seek applause;
who view concentre all to virtue tend;
who make true glory but his second end:
still sway by what be fit, and just, and true,
who give to all whatever to all be due;
when party mad sedition garb put on,
snatch the high praise, — and be of none:
while round and round the veer patriot roll,
unshaken point to truth, as to his pole;
contemn alike what faction praise or blame;
over rumour narrow orbit soar to fame:
unmoved while malice bark, or envy howl,
walk firm to virtue through the scoff of fool;
no minion flatter; gain no selfish end;
his own — his king — his country — mankind friend; —
he virtue crown with wreath that never decay;
and glory circle he with endless day.

such he who deep in virtue root his fame;
and such through age shall be Lonsdale name.
