to the Hon. WILMOT Vaughan, ESQ; in Wales.

by the same.

you distant realm that hold my friend
beneath a cold ungenial sky,

where labour grove with weight of vapour bend,
or rave wind over barren mountain fly;
restore he quick to London social clime,
restore he quick to friendship, love and joy;

be swift, you lazy steed of time,
you moment, all your speed employ.
behold november gloom arise,
pale sun with faint glory shine,

dark gather tempest blacken in the sky,
and shiver wood their sickly leaf resign.
be this a time on cambrian hill to roam,
to court disease in winter baleful reign,

to listen to the atlantic foam,
while rock repel the roar main,
while horror fill the region vast,
rheumatic torture eurus bring,

pregnant with ague fly the northern blast,
and cloud drop quartan from their flag wing.
do thou explore sabrina sountful source,
where huge plinlimmon hoary height ascend:

then downward mark her vagrant course,
till mix with cloud the landscape end?
do thou revere the hallow soil
where Druids old sepulchr lie;

or up cold snowden craggy summit toil,
and muse on ancient savage liberty?
ill suit such walk with bleak autumnal air,
say, can November yield the joy of may?

when Jove deform the blast year,
can wallia boast a cheerful day?
the town expect thou. — hark, around,
through every street of gay resort,

new chariot rattle with awaken sound,
and crowd the levee, and besiege the court.
the patriot, kindle as his war ensue,
now fire his soul with liberty and fame,

Marshals his threaten trope anew,
and give his hoard thunder aim.
now seat their absent lord deplore,
neglect villa empty stand,

capacious Gro'venor gather all its store,
and mighty London swallow up the land.
see sportive vanity her flight begin,
see new-blown folly plenteous harvest rise,

she mimic beauty die their skin,
and harlot roll their venal eye.
fashion be set, and fop return,
and young coquette in arm appear;

dream of conquest, how their bosom burn,
trick in the new fantastry of the year.
fly then away, nor scorn to bear a part
in this gay scene of folly ample spread:

folly well use refine the heart,
and pleasure clear the studious head;
by grateful interchange of mirth
the toil of study sweet grow,

as vary season recommend the earth,
nor do Apollo always bend his bow.
