the vision.

as late muse in a lonely shade,
for meditation and contentment make,
the murmur stream reechoe through the tree,
and verdant poplar, fan the gentle breeze,
all dwell serene within my tranquil breast,
and sweet retirement, lull my soul to rest:
delightful fancy lend her potent aid,
and scene of wonder, to my sense convey.
transport to a verdant bloom green,
where all be calm, and nature shine serene:
the daisy paint ground, perfume the air,
and sweet contentment, seem to banish care,
a group of lovely damsel catch my eye,
and each in youth and beauty strive to vie;
yet two shine more resplendent than the rest,
one in a purple, airy, flow vest;
her temple bind with flower of different hue,
the lily white, the violet azure blue,
her tender foot with glitter sandal bind,
trip light over the flowery paint ground.
her golden lock flow careless in the wind.
and her whole dress be loose and unconfined.
the other, clad in purity, and truth,
with all the bloom, radiant charm of youth,
white be her robe, bright auborn be her hair,
meek her deportment, and serene her air;
her look outvy the pure and untuned snow,
and wreath of laurel, bind her sacred brow,
her friend be wisdom, who with heavenly song,
with caution lead her mistress through the throng.
her breath with ambient sweet perfume the ground,
and calm serenity shine all around;
each strive by turn to sooth the giddy crowd,
court the humble, and implore the proud.
the first be pleasure (soft allure name,)
the other virtue, sure guide to fame.

strike with astonishment i gaze around,
when sudden i hear a heavenly sound,
a sound more sweet than the soft breath of love,
harmonious as the songster of the grove;
melodious as the pipe upon the plain,
the tuneful lyre, or philomela strain.
it be virtue voice, the pure seraphic maid,
in tender number these soft accent say.

"ah! follow i, fair nymph, to my pure cell,
"it be there content, and peace alone can dwell;
"it be there true happiness and joy you will find,
"a homely fair, but a reception kind:
"where innocence and love, delight to reign,
"free from dissimulation, care, and pain.
"there peace reside, there honour keep her court,
"there pity dwell, the muse there resort.
"beware of vice, her pleasure soon will cloy,
"and keen repentance, follow guilty joy.
"forsake the giddy, gay, unthinking crowd,
"forsake the covetous, the vain, and proud;
"by i be guide, i will lead the way,
"to blissful path of everlasting day.
"in this precarious life i will be thy friend,
"and celebrate thy name, even to time end;
"take my advice, it be i alone can prove,
"the heart-felt happiness of virtuous love:
"the real pleasure of a honest mind,
"in all my footstep you will sure find.

thus speak the nymph, — to heaven the music float,
and angel echo back the tuneful note.
transport, and amaze, i tremble cry,
"in thou alone i trust to be my guide!"
the goddess smile, and kind press my hand,
when i obedient to her wise command
follow her footstep, to that blissful seat,
where peace, humility, and love do meet:
to that pure cell where every earthly joy,
reign uncontrolled, unmixed, without a cloy.

the journey long, the fare be mean and coarse,
the road be rugged, and the task be worse;
our gentle guide be patience, hope, and truth,
(the best supporter of each virtuous youth)
each friend, by turn, soothe my adventurous heart,
and tale of truth, and honour do impart.
when, on a sudden, horror spread around,
and echo through the grove a hollow sound;
the cloud grow black, all nature seem to fade,
and sicken over the solemn lonely glade;
nought can be hear but silver fall flood,
and woe fraught murmur reign throughout the wood.
confusion strike my frame, when patience cry,
"fear not, fair nymph, in i alone confide;
"in a short time these dreadful storm shall cease,
"and i will crown your toil, with joy, and peace.
"ever you arrive where bliss eternal reign,
"you first must learn to scorn such trifle pain;
"the pure seraphic mind which virtue warm,
"must bare serene these tempestuous storm;
"the feel heart must many cross know,
"in virtue cause, — where fortune prove a foe:
"let not these trifle your soft breast alarm,
"patience will guide you free from every harm."
here cease the virgin, the prophetic sound,
and gleam of heavenly light shine all around;
the cloud disperse, the storm and tempest cease,
and every visionary care decrease.
the flower recover their delightful hue,
and nature shine in all her bloom anew;
no scent more fragrant do the rose exhale,
then those which fan the sweet ambrosial gale.
at a small distance stand the peaceful cell,
where innocence and harmony do dwell;
no pompous grandeur there adorn the grove,
no spiery turret rear their head above;
no gild column, no gay temple rise,
there no luxurious dome invade the sky;
alone for peace the humble cell be make,
and sweet contentment, reign within the shade:
a purling stream in soft meander glide,
the violet sweet, and daisy bloom beside:
fair honour reign supreme and void of care,
each heavenly blessing do inhabit there.
with meek humility, with truth divine,
and every virtue bow before the shrine.
love, the soft moulder of the pliant soul,
(who power our wish and our mind control;)
within these sacred shade serene move,
by virtue guide, and by heaven approve.
enrapture i behold those region bright,
and scene of wonder beam upon the sight;
harmonious songster i distinct hear,
and soft musician in the grove appear:
while thus i stand intent to see and hear,
a damsel voice address my pensive ear.
"like you a stranger to distress and woe,
"possess of all the gift the god bestow,
"of all the real blessing heaven can give,
"still my fond soul for other joy do grieve.
"once on a time by giddy fancy teach,
"for idle pleasure earnest i seek;
"no well-taught council can my foot restrain,
"but pleasure lure i to the flowery plain;
"that sure destruction to the youthful mind,
"to she my frail, my will heart incline.
"long time i reveal in luxurious joy,
"which every generous sentiment destroy.
"but ah! fair nymph, each pleasure quick die,
"where blacken vice, fair virtue place supply.
"such idle joy last but a fleet day,
"where vice triumphant reign with potent sway;
"short be the time these scene my soul possess,
"but endless be the pang within my breast.
"no time the sting of conscience can subdue,
"wherever i fly fresh grief my step pursue;
"conscious of past offence, my err breast,
"be tear with sad remorse, and rob of rest,
"i feel, i feel, the heave sigh renew,
"and sad remembrance on my soul intrude;
"still must my mind with heart feel grief abound,
"till virtue hand shall heal reflection wound.
"too late my blind eye perceive the road,
"which lead to this celestial, bless abode;
"happy be you, who youthful breast aspire,
"with genial warmth, to burn with pure fire.
"who in the tender, early day of youth,
"tread the unsullied path of sacred truth.
"then hail, fair nymph, hail sweet humility,
"each votary of our shade, shall honour thou.
"enjoy, henceforth, each blessing of the bless,
"may all thy future day be crown with rest. "
"farewell, "she cry, — then join the happy throng,
who to my listen ear address their song.
"welcome, welcome, to our cell,
"here content, and peace do dwell;
"every joy to charm the heart,
"all that wisdom can impart,
"all that can the bosom fire,
"all that virtue can desire;
"every bless from above,
"ease and plenty, joy and love;
"meek humility and rest,
"all the transport of the bless;
"join with we in sprightly song,
"dance among the happy throng;
"tune the cymbal, and the lyre,
"virtue do our soul inspire;
"prudence, be our matron wise,
"every folly we despise;
"here the grace keep their court,
"here the muse all resort;
"welcome to this happy cell,
"here content and peace do dwell.
here cease the tender, soft, allure throng,
their artless, sweet, prophetic, warmble song;
and i awake, alas! too soon to find,
it be only fancy that deceive my mind;
but what a change from scene of tranquil joy,
to momentary pleasure bear to cloy.
