a elegy on the death of a amiable young lady.

while other sing the hero glorious fate,
 and tune to warlike strain the sound lyre,
 their noble life, their fearless death relate,
 their gallant deed, which wake the muse fire;

 while british bard, to wolf immortal praise,
 rehearse his victory and fatal doom;
 and as his monument the sculptor raise,
 spread fresh garland on their warrior tomb:

let i, who humble muse have never aspire
 to such majestic, such exalt strain,
 by elegiac song be now inspire,
 and mourn a virgin snatch from these plain. 

sweet waste thou, as the open summer rose,
 too just a emblem of thou, lovely maid,
 which in the morning bud, at midday blow,
 but withereth by the chilly evening shade. 

calm and serene thou lead thy peaceful life,
 religion sacred task thy only boast;
 unknown to stormy passion, or to strife,
 thou live in every good, in friendship most. 

amid the joyful gaiety of youth,
 the christian dignity thou still preserve,
 tread all the path of piety and truth,
 nor in thy action nor thy precept swerve. 

snatch from this low, inhospitable clime,
 while fortune smile upon thy cheerful head,
 even in the pride and flower of youthful prime
 thou number lie, among the numerous dead. 

thy lovely sister, and thy age sire,
 in deep distress, thy hapless fate deplore;
 praise thy past life, and, while they praise, admire
 and wail their charm friend, alas! no more. 

no costly monument adorn thy tomb,
 no panegyric spread thy humble fame;
 nor verse, carve upon the sculpture dome,
 transmit to after time thy virtuous name. 

oft as the circle sun return the day
 on which thou mount to the realm of rest,
 unto thy lonely grave i will yearly hie,
 and bid the turf lie easy on thy breast. 

i will sprinkle flower of every rich dye,
 and deck thy grave with wreath of lively hue,
 then shed a tear, and breathe the heave sigh
 to sacred friendship; sure so much be due. 

farewell, my charmer, peace attend thy rest,
 thou, who in virtue do so much excel;
 for this i hail thou bless, — supreme bless. 
adieu, — adieu, — a long — a last farewell. 
