a pastoral. [young Damon gay, a faithful-hearted swain]

young Damon gay, a faithful-hearted swain,
 long seek fair daphne love, but seek in vain;
 he often tell she how sincere he love,
 as oft the nymph his ardent flame reprove;
 while yet his passion labour in his mind,
 he walk abroad his stray steed to find;
 just then fair Laura go across the green,
 long time this nymph fair daphne friend have be;
 the swain to meet she step across the way;
 she stop to hear what Damon have to say. 

Damon. 

say, friendly maid, why wander here alone? 
where be thy friend, the lovely Daphne go? 
ah! have some rival lead she to the grove? 
and may i never hope for daphne love? 

Laura. 

a shepherd favourite dog long lose have be,
 fair Daphne find he wander on the green;
 much do the shepherd-swain his loss deplore,
 the nymph be go the wanderer to restore. 

Damon. 

ah, wretched Damon! doom to love in vain,
 she love the dog, she love the shepherd-swain;
 oh Daphne! i will to death thy loss deplore,
 these lip shall never salute a virgin more. 

Laura. 

despair not, Damon, of fair daphne love,
 thy vow repeat, may her pity move;
 see, up yond hill ascend the maiden gay,
 thou may overtake she, Damon, haste away. 

she say, and Damon turn his eye around,
 and see the maid ascend the rise ground;
 swift be the foot of messenger, that bring
 glad news of conquest to their sovereign king;
 but up the steep more swift Damon come,
 love, urge by fear, have swift wing than fame. 
the lovely Daphne smile to see he run,
 and thus the swain in humble suit begin:

Damon. 

why Daphne here, from every friend apart? 
what on this hill can charm thy virgin heart? 
if down the other side thou will descend,
 my lovely maid, permit i to attend. 

Daphne. 

now spring with verdure every field adorn,
 and bird be sing on the bloomy thorn,
 can such thing fail to charm? but Damon say,
 how do you know that i be come this way? 

Damon. 

i walk abroad, my stray steed to see;
 but my fond heart be still pursue thou;
 they be my small, but thou my great care,
 o happy chance, that lead i to my fair. 

Daphne. 

a shepherd dog have long be go astray,
 i find he on the green the other day;
 this favourite dog, the swain do much lament,
 i will lead he home, and give the swain content. 

Damon. 

why in such haste! the fun, my fair one, see,
 be yet as high as yonder lofty tree;
 those verdant meadow, where fresh daisy grow,
 invite our step, my Daphne, shall we go? 
the maid consent, make no reply;
 what maid can such a small request deny? 
a crystal stream, in gentle murmur glide
 along the valley, and the mead divide;
 along the bank the verdant alder grow,
 their branch bend to the stream below;
 the tender leaf that hang on every spray,
 and hawthorn blossom show the month be may;
 flower, of various hue, bedeck the shade,
 and there yound Damon lead the tender maid:
 her slender waist no gaudy a ribbon bind,
 but damon arm do form a circle round;
 soft be the whisper of the western gale,
 but with more softness Damon tell his tale;
 the please tale the maid in silence hear,
 but in her heart the gentle swain prefer;
 thus over one meadow they be quick go,
 yet still by pleasant meadow tempt on,
 how soon the lover moment pass away,
 how soon, how, soon approach the close of day,
 the sun depart, and the plain grow damp,
 and rise Cynthia trim her silver lamp;
 no more the bird to charm the year aspire,
 and wander lover from the plain retire;
 the swain never think to go, his steed to find,
 the nymph forget to leave her dog behind. 
