essay on friendship.

to Artemisia. — it be to she we sing,
 for she once more we touch the sound string,
 it be not to cythera reign nor Cupid fire,
 but sacred friendship that our muse inspire. 
a theme that suit aemilia please tongue:
 so to the fair one i devote my song. 

the wise will seldom credit all they hear,
 though saucy wit shall tell they with a sneer,
 that women friendship, like a certain fly,
 be hatch in the morning and at evening die. 
it be true, our sex have be from early time
 a constant topic for satiric rhyme:
 nor without reason — since we be often find,
 or lose in passion, or in pleasure drown:
 and the fierce wind that bid the ocean roll,
 be less inconstant than a woman soul:
 yet some there be who keep the moderate way,
 can think a hour, and be calm a day:
 who never be know to start into a flame,
 turn pale or tremble at a lose game. 
run Chloe shape or delia feature down,
 or change complexion at celinda gown:
 but still serene, compassionate and kind,
 walk through life circuit with a equal mind. 

of all companion i will choose to shun
 such, who blunt truth be like a burst gun,
 who in a breath count all your folly over,
 and close their lecture with a mirthful roar:
 but reason here will prove the safe guide,
 extreme be dangerous place on either side. 
a friend too soft will hardly prove sincere;
 the wit inconstant, and the learnt severe. 

good-breeding, wit, and learning, all conspire
 to charm mankind and make the world admire:
 yet in a friend but serve a under part,
 the main ingredient be a honest heart:
 by this can ursula all our soul subdue
 which want, this, not sylvia charm, can do. 

now let the muse (who take no courtier fee)
 point to her friend — and future age see
 (if this shall live until future age be)
 one line devote to fidelia praise,
 the love companion of my early day:
 whouse harmless thought be sprightly as her eye,
 by nature cheerful, and by nature wise. 

to have they last, the social law decree;
 we choose our friendship in the same degree:
 what mighty pleasure, if we may presume,
 to strut with freedom in arvida room,
 or share the table what supreme delight? 
with some proud Dutchess or a scornful knight,
 to sit with formal and assent face? 
for who shall dare to contradict her grace? 

our free-born nature hate to be confine,
 where state and power check the speak mind;
 where heavy pomp and sullen form withhold
 that cheerful ease and sympathy of soul. 

but yet the soul whatever its partner do,
 must lift its head above the base crew. 
celestial friendship with its nice rule,
 frequent not dunghill nor the club of fool. 
it ask, to make this union soft and long,
 a mind susceptible, and judgement strong;
 and then a taste: but let that taste be give
 by mighty nature and the stamp of heaven:
 possess of these, the just tempere flame
 will glow incessant, and be still the same:
 not move by sorrow, sickness, or by age
 to sullen coldness or distemper rage. 
the soul unstained with envy or with pride,
 please with itself and all the world beside,
 unmoved can see gild chariot whirl by,
 or view the wretched with a melt eye,
 discern a fail and forgive it too:
 such, Artemisia, we may find in you. 

be seldom sour, or your friend will fly
 from the hang forehead and the scornful eye:
 nor, like Aurelia, in the morning kind,
 and soft as summer or the western wind:
 but round ere night her giddy passion wheel,
 she will clap the door against your part heel. 
a even temper will be sure to please,
 with cool reflection and a cheerful ease. 

but see armida unfrequented room,
 how vain spread with carpet and perfume:
 all shun she like the cocatrice beam,
 and for no other reason but her loathe extreme. 
today more holy than a cloister nun,
 almost a atheist by tomorrow sun:
 now speak to heaven with a lift eye:
 now to her footman, you be a rogue, and lie. 
o say, from what strange principle begin
 these odd compound of piety and sin? 
a sickly fair may some excuse find,
 (what grieve the body will affect the mind)
 but not the creature who have learn to screen
 their own ill-nature in the name of spleen. 
what the black mist afflict the ache skull,
 the spirit tremble and the heart be dull:
 have you from thence a licence to offend,
 affront a patron or abuse a friend? 
and ape the manner of a surly beast,
 because it be cloudy and the wind be in the east? 

but all have fail, not the best be free,
 or in a great or a less degree. 
what follow then? — forgive, or unforgiven
 expect no passage at the gate of heaven. 
kind nature give, in pity to mankind,
 this social virtue to the human mind:
 this give our pleasure a more easy flow,
 and help to blunt the edge of smart woe:
 the soul relief, with grief or care oppress,
 be to disclose they to a faithful breast;
 and then how lovely in a friend appear,
 the mournful sigh and sympathize tear. 
when change fortune with propitious ray,
 gild the brown evening or the smile day;
 the please companion share the welcome tide,
 and wrap in joy the happy minute glide. 

grave author differ — man of sense incline
 this way or that — opinion rare join:
 their thought will vary. why? because they be free,
 but most in this and only this agree;
 that our chief task be seldom to offend,
 and life great bless a well-chosen friend. 
