a epistle from a unfortunate gentleman to a young lady.

by the same.

these, the last line my tremble hand can write,
 these word, the last my die lip recite,
 read, and repent that your unkindness give
 a wretched lover a untimely grave! 
sink by despair from life enchant view,
 lose, ever lose to happiness and you! —
 no more these eye-lid shower incessant tear,
 no more my spirit sink with bode fear;
 no more your frown my sue passion meet,
 no more i fall submissive at your foot:
 with fruitless love this heart shall cease to burn,
 life empty dream shall nevermore return. 
think not, that labour to subdue your hate;
 my artful soul forebode a fancy fate;
 for ever yond sun descend his western way,
 cold shall i lie, a lifeless lump of clay! 

tire of my long encounter with disdain,
 peaceful my pulse, and ebb from its pain;
 each vital movement sink to decay,
 and my spend soul just languish away;
 ever my last breath yet hover to depart,
 i prompt my hand to pour out all my heart. 
the hand, oft raise compassion to implore;
 the heart, that burn with slight fire no more! 

relentless nymph! of nature be fair frame,
 unpitying soul, and woman but in name;
 angelic bloom the cold heart to win,
 without, allurement, but disdain within;
 regard the sound which seal my part breath
 ever the vain murmur shall be hush in death,
 let pity view what love disdain to save,
 and mourn a wretch send headlong to the grave. 

profuse of all a anxious lover care,
 to urge his suit, and win the listen fair;
 try every purpose to relieve my woe,
 my soul chide not, for innocent i go;
 save when soft pity bid my gentle mind
 shrink at your fate, and drop a tear behind. 

how oft and fruitless have i strive to move
 unfeeling beauty with the pang of love;
 as rose your breast with captivate grace,
 and heighten charm fly blush to your face;
 insult charm! that give a fierce wound,
 fond as i lie, and prostrate on the ground. 
heaven! with what scorn you strive my suit to meet,
 frown with your eye, and spurn i with your foot! 
to bleed love such hard return you give,
 as barbarous rock that dash the press wave. 
o can your look have turn my hapless fate,
 and frown my short-lived passion into hate;
 then have no scatter breeze my sorrow know,
 nor vale responsive have prolong the moan;
 then have those lip never learn their woeful tale,
 nor death yet clothe they in eternal pale. 

oft to the wood in frantic rage i slay
 to cool my bosom with the fall dew;
 oft in sad accent sigh each prompt ill,
 and teach wild oak to pity and to feel;
 till with despair my heart rekindle burn,
 and all the anguish of my soul return. 

then restless to the fragrant mead i hie,
 death in my face, distraction in my eye;
 there as recline along the verdant plain,
 my grief renew her heartwrung strain again,
 lo! pity Phoebus sink, with sorrow pale,
 and mournful night descend upon the tale! 

when tire, at length, my wrong no more complain,
 and sigh be stifle in obtuser pain;
 when the deep fountain of my eye be spend,
 and fierce anguish sink to discontent;
 slow i return, and prostrate on my bed
 bid the soft pillow lull my heavy head. 
but o! when downy sleep its court renew,
 and shade the soul with visionary view,
 illusive dream to fan my slumber fire,
 and wake the fever of intense desire,
 present your soft image to my sight,
 all warm with smile, and glow with delight;
 god! with what bliss i view thy darling charm,
 and strive to clasp thou melt in my arm! —
 but ah! the shade my empty grasp deceive;
 and as it flit, and my fond soul bereave,
 the transient slumber slip their airy chain,
 and give i back to all my woe again:
 there wrap in flood of grief i sigh forlorn,
 the constant greeting of unwelcome morn. 
but shall oblivion reassume she sway,
 and slumber once more steal my woe away;
 when the short flight of fancy intervene,
 your much-loved image fill out every scene. 
but now no more soft smile your face adorn,
 lo! over each feature brood destructive scorn. 
suppliant in tear i urge my suit again,
 sullen you stand, and view i with disdain;
 your ear exclude the story of my smart,
 your baleful eye dart anguish to my heart. 
i wake — glad nature hail return day,
 and the wild songster chant their mattin-lay;
 the sun in glory mount the crystal sky,
 and all creation be in smile but i. 
then, sink in death, my sense! — for in vain
 you strive to quench the frenzy of your pain;
 break, break, fond heart! — her hate thou can not tame,
 then take this certain triumph over thy flame. 
it be do! — the dread of future wrong be past —
 lo! brittle passion verges to its last! 
it be do! — vain life be illusive scene be over —
 disdainful beauty shake her chain no more. 
come, peaceful gloom, expand thy downy breast,
 and soothe, o soothe i to eternal rest! 
there hush my plaint, and gentle lull my woe,
 where one still stream of dull oblivion flow. 
no labour breast there heave with torture throw,
 no heart consume her daily hoard of woe;
 no dream of former pain the soul invade,
 calm she sleep, a sad unthinking shade! 

but ever from thought my struggle soul be free,
 one late tear she dedicate to thou. 
she view thou on the brink of vain despair,
 beat thy big breast, and rend thy flow hair. 
feel torture love her sable deluge roll,
 weigh down thy sense, and overbear thy soul. 
in vain your heart relent, in vain you weep,
 no lover wake from his eternal sleep. 
alas! i see thy frantic spirit rave,
 and thy last breath expire on my grave. 
be this the fortune of those high-prized charm? 
ah! spare they for some worthy lover arm. 
and may these bode never with truth agree,
 may grief and anguish be unknown to thou,
 may bitter memory never recount with pain,
 that ever you frown, or i admire in vain. 

no more — my spirit be prepare to fly,
 suppress my voice, and stiffen be my eye:
 death swim shadow intercept my view,
 vain world, and thou relentless nymph, adieu! 
