carthon: a poem.

a tale of the time of old! the deed of day of other year! — the murmur of thy stream, o lora, bring back the memory of the past. the sound of thy wood, garmallar, be lovely in my ear. do thou not behold, Malvina, a rock with its head of heath? three age fir bend from its face; green be the narrow plain at its foot; there the flower of the mountain grow, and shake its white head in the breeze. the thistle be there alone, and shade its age beard. two stone, half sink in the ground, show their head of moss. the deer of the mountain avoid the place, for he behold the grey ghost that guard it: for the mighty lie, o Malvina, in the narrow plain of the rock. a tale of the time of old! the deed of day of other year!

who come from the land of stranger, with his thousand around he? the sun-beam pour its bright stream before he; and his hair meet the wind of his hill. his face be settle from war. he be calm as the evening beam that look, from the cloud of the west, on cona silent vale. who be it but comhal son, the king of mighty deed! he behold his hill with joy, and bid a thousand voice rise. — you have flee over your field, you son of the distant land! the king of the world sit in his hall, and hear of his people flight. he lift his red eye of pride, and take his father sword. you have flee over your field, son of the distant land!

such be the word of the bard, when they come to selma hall. — a thousand light from the stranger land rise, in the midst of the people. the feast be spread around; and the night pass away in joy. — where be the noble clessámmor, say the fair-haired Fingal? where be the companion of my father, in the day of my joy? sullen and dark he pass his day in the vale of echo lora: but, behold, he come from the hill, like a steed in his strength, who find his companion in the breeze; and toss his bright mane in the wind. — bless be the soul of clessámmor, why so long from Selma?

return the chief, say clessámmor, in the midst of his fame? such be the renown of Comhal in the battle of his youth. often do we pass over carun to the land of the stranger: our sword return, not unstained with blood: nor do the king of the world rejoice. — why do i remember the battle of my youth? my hair be mix with grey. my hand forget to bend the bow: and i lift a light spear. o that my joy will return, as when i first behold the maid; the white bosome daughter of stranger, moina with the dark-blue eye!

tell, say the mighty Fingal, the tale of thy youthful day. sorrow, like a cloud on the sun, shade the soul of clessámmor. mournful be thy thought, alone, on the bank of the roar lora. let we hear the sorrow of thy youth, and the darkness of thy day.

it be in the day of peace, reply the great clessámmor, i come, in my bound ship, to balclutha wall of tower. the wind have roar behind my sail, and clutha stream receive my dark-bosomed vessel. three day i remain in reuthámir hall, and see that beam of light, his daughter. the joy of the shell go round, and the age hero give the fair. her breast be like foam on the wave, and her eye like star of light: her hair be dark as the raven wing: her soul be generous and mild. my love for moina be great: and my heart pour forth in joy.

the son of a stranger come; a chief who love the white-bosomed moina. his word be mighty in the hall, and he often half-unsheathed his sword. — where, he say, be the mighty Comhal, the restless wanderer of the heath? come he, with his host, to balclutha, since clessámmor be so bold?

my soul, i reply, o warrior! burn in a light of its own. i stand without fear in the midst of thousand, though the valiant be distant far. — stranger! thy word be mighty, for Clessammor be alone. but my sword tremble by my side, and long to glitter in my hand. — speak no more of Comhal, son of the wind clutha!

the strength of his pride arise. we fight; he fall beneath my sword. the bank of clutha hear his fall, and a thousand spear glitter around. i fight: the stranger prevail: i plunge into the stream of clutha. my white sail rise over the wave, and i bound on the dark-blue sea. — moina come to the shore, and roll the red eye of her tear: her dark hair fly on the wind; and i hear her cry. — often do i turn my ship! but the wind of the east prevail. nor clutha ever since have i see: nor moina of the dark brown hair. — she fall in balclutha: for i have see her ghost. i know she as she come through the dusky night, along the murmur of lora: she be like the new moon see through the gather mist: when the sky pour down its flaky snow, and the world be silent and dark.

raise, you bard, say the mighty Fingal, the praise of unhappy moina. call her ghost, with your song, to our hill; that she may rest with the fair of Morven, the sunbeam of other day, and the delight of hero of old. — i have see the wall of balclutha, but they be desolate. the fire have resound in the hall: and the voice of the people be hear no more. the stream of clutha be remove from its place, by the fall of the wall. — the thistle shake, there, its lonely head: the moss whistle to the wind. the fox look out, from the window, the rank grass of the wall wave round his head. — desolate be the dwelling of moina, silence be in the house of her father. — raise the song of mourning, o bard, over the land of stranger. they have but fall before we: for, one day, we must fall. — why do thou build the hall, son of the wing day? thou look from thy tower today; yet a few year, and the blast of the desert come; it howl in thy empty court, and whistle round thy half-worn shield. — and let the blast of the desert come! we shall be renown in our day. the mark of my arm shall be in the battle, and my name in the song of bard. — raise the song; send round the shell: and let joy be hear in my hall. — when thou, sun of heaven, shall fail! if thou shall fail, thou mighty light! if thy brightness be for a season, like Fingal; our fame shall survive thy beam.

such be the song of Fingal, in the day of his joy. his thousand bard lean forward from their seat, to hear the voice of the king. it be like the music of the harp on the gale of the spring. — lovely be thy thought, o Fingal! why have not Ossian the strength of thy soul? — but thou stand alone, my father; and who can equal the king of Morven?

the night pass away in the song, and morning return in joy; — the mountain show their grey head; and the blue face of ocean smile. — the white wave be see tumble round the distant rock; the grey mist rise, slow, from the lake. it come, in the figure of a age man, along the silent plain. its large limb do not move in step; for a ghost support it in mid air. it come towards selma hall, and dissolve in a shower of blood.

the king alone behold the terrible sight, and he foresee the death of the people. he come, in silence, to his hall; and take his father spear. — the mail rattle on his breast. the hero rise around. they look, in silence, on each other, mark the eye of Fingal. — they see the battle in his face: the death of army on his spear. — a thousand shield, at once, be place on their arm; and they draw a thousand sword. the hall of Selma brighten around. the clang of arm ascend. — the grey dog howl in their place. no word be among the mighty chief. — each mark the eye of the king; and half assume his spear.

son of Morven, begin the king, this be no time to fill the shell. the battle darken near we; and death hover over the land. some ghost, the friend of Fingal, have forewarn we of the foe. — the son of the stranger come from the darkly-rolling sea. for, from the water, come the sign of morven gloomy danger. — let each assume his heavy spear, and gird on his father sword. — let the dark helmet rise on every head; and the mail pour its lightning from every side. — the battle gather like a tempest, and soon shall you hear the roar of death.

the hero move on before his host, like a cloud before a ridge of green fire; when it pour on the sky of night, and mariner foresee a storm. on cona rise heath they stand: the white-bosomed maid behold they above like a grove; they foresee the death of their youth, and look towards the sea with fear. — the white wave deceive they for distant sail, and the tear be on their cheek.

the sun rise on the sea, and we behold a distant fleet. — like the mist of ocean they come: and pour their youth upon the coast. — the chief be among they, like the stag in the midst of the herd. — his shield be stud with gold, and stately stride the king of spear. — he move towards Selma; his thousand move behind.

go, with thy song of peace, say Fingal; go, Ullin, to the king of sword. tell he that we be mighty in battle; and that the ghost of our foe be many. — but renown be they who have feast in my hall! they show the arm of my father in a foreign land: the son of the stranger wonder, and bless the friend of morven race; for our name have be hear afar; the king of the world shake in the midst of their people.

Ullin go with his song. Fingal rest on his spear: he see the mighty foe in his armour: and he bless the stranger son.

how stately be thou, son of the sea! say the king of woody Morven. thy sword be a beam of might by thy side: thy spear be a fir that defy the storm. the vary face of the moon be not broad than thy shield. — ruddy be thy face of youth! soft the ringlet of thy hair! — but this tree may fall; and his memory be forget! — the daughter of the stranger will be sad, and look to the roll sea: — the child will say, "we see a ship; perhaps it be the king of balclutha."the tear start from their mother eye. her thought be of he that sleep in Morven.

such be the word of the king, when Ullin come to the mighty carthon: he throw down the spear before he; and raise the song of peace.

come to the feast of Fingal, carthon, from the roll sea! partake the feast of the king, or lift the spear of war. the ghost of our foe be many: but renown be the friend of Morven!

behold that field, o carthon; many a green hill rise there, with mossy stone and rustle grass: these be the tomb of fingal foe, the son of the roll sea.

do thou speak to the feeble in arm, say carthon, bard of the woody Morven? be my face pale for fear, son of the peaceful song? why, then, do thou think to darken my soul with the tale of those who fall? — my arm have fight in the battle; my renown be know afar. go to the feeble in arm, and bid they yield to Fingal. — have not i see the fall balclutha? and shall i feast with comhal son? Comhal! who throw his fire in the midst of my father hall! i be young, and know not the cause why the virgin weep. the column of smoke please my eye, when they rise above my wall; i often look back, with gladness, when my friend flee along the hill. — but when the year of my youth come on, i behold the moss of my fall wall: my sigh arise with the morning, and my tear descend with night. — shall i not fight, i say to my soul, against the child of my foe? and i will fight, o bard; i feel the strength of my soul.

his people gather around the hero, and draw, at once, their shine sword. he stand, in the midst, like a pillar of fire; the tear half-starting from his eye; for he think of the fall balclutha, and the crowd pride of his soul arise. sidelong he look up to the hill, where our hero shine in arm; the spear tremble in his hand: and, bend forward, he seem to threaten the king.

shall i, say Fingal to his soul, meet, at once, the king? shall i stop he, in the midst of his course, before his fame shall arise? but the bard, hereafter, may say, when he see the tomb of carthon; Fingal take his thousand, along with he, to battle, before the noble carthon fall. — no: — bard of the time to come! thou shall not lessen fingal fame. my hero will fight the youth, and Fingal behold the battle. if he overcome, i rush, in my strength, like the roar stream of cona.

who, of my hero, will meet the son of the roll sea? many be his warrior on the coast: and strong be his ashen spear!

cathul rise, in his strength, the son of the mighty lormar: three hundred youth attend the chief, the race of his native stream. feeble be his arm against carthon, he fall; and his hero flee.

Connal resume the battle, but he break his heavy spear: he lie bind on the field: and carthon pursue his people.

CLESSAMMOR! say the king of Morven, where be the spear of thy strength? will thou behold Connal bind; thy friend, at the stream of lora? rise, in the light of thy steel, thou friend of Comhal. let the youth of balclutha feel the strength of morven race.

he rise in the strength of his steel, shake his grizzly lock. he fit the shield to his side; and rush, in the pride of valour.

carthon stand, on that heathy rock, and see the hero approach. he love the terrible joy of his face: and his strength, in the lock of age. — shall i lift that spear, he say, that never strike, but once, a foe? or shall i, with the word of peace, preserve the warrior life? stately be his step of age! — lovely the remnant of his year. perhaps it be the love of moina; the father of carborne carthon. often have i hear, that he dwell at the echo stream of lora.

such be his word, when clessámmor come, and lift high his spear. the youth receive it on his shield, and speak the word of peace. — warrior of the age lock! be there no youth to lift the spear? have thou no son, to raise the shield before his father, and to meet the arm of youth? be the spouse of thy love no more? or weep she over the tomb of thy son? be thou of the king of man? what will be the fame of my sword if thou shall fall?

it will be great, thou son of pride! begin the tall clessámmor. i have be renown in battle; but i never tell my name to a foe. yield to i, son of the wave, and then thou shall know, that the mark of my sword be in many a field.

i never yield, king of spear! reply the noble pride of carthon: i have also fight in battle; and i behold my future fame. despise i not, thou chief of man; my arm, my spear be strong. retire among thy friend, and let young hero fight.

why do thou wound my soul, reply clessámmor with a tear? age do not tremble on my hand; i still can lift the sword. shall i fly in fingal sight; in the sight of he i love? son of the sea! i never flee: exalt thy point spear.

they fight, like two contend wind, that strive to roll the wave. carthon bid his spear to err; for he still think that the foe be the spouse of moina. — he break Clessammor beamy spear in twain: and seize his shine sword. but as carthon be bind the chief; the chief draw the dagger of his father. he see the foe uncovered side; and open, there, a wound.

Fingal see clessámmor low: he move in the sound of his steel. the host stand silent, in his presence; they turn their eye towards the hero. — he come, like the sullen noise of a storm, before the wind arise: the hunter hear it in the vale, and retire to the cave of the rock.

carthon stand in his place: the blood be rush down his side: he see the come down of the king; and his hope of fame arise; but pale be his cheek: his hair fly loose, his helmet shake on high: the force of carthon fail; but his soul be strong.

Fingal behold the hero blood; he stop the uplift spear. yield, king of sword! say comhal son; i behold thy blood. thou have be mighty in battle; and thy fame shall never fade.

art thou the king so far renown, reply the carborne carthon? be thou that light of death, that frighten the king of the world? — but why shall carthon ask? for he be like the stream of his desert; strong as a river, in his course: swift as the eagle of the sky. — o that i have seek with the king; that my same may be great in the song! that the hunter, behold my tomb, may say, he fight with the mighty Fingal. but carthon die unknown; he have pour out his force on the feeble.

but thou shall not die unknown, reply the king of woody Morven: my bard be many, o carthon, and their song descend to future time. the child of the year to come shall hear the fame of carthon; when they sit round the burn oak, and the night be spend in the song of old. the hunter, sit in the heath, shall hear the rustle blast; and, raise his eye, behold the rock where carthon fall. he shall turn to his son, and show the place where the mighty fight; "there the king of balclutha fight, like the strength of a thousand stream."

joy rise in carthon face: he lift his heavy eye. — he give his sword to Fingal, to lie within his hall, that the memory of balclutha king may remain on Morven. — the battle cease along the field, for the bard have sing the song of peace. the chief gather round the fall carthon, and hear his word, with sigh. silent they lean on their spear, while balclutha hero speak. his hair sigh in the wind, and his word be feeble.

king of Morven, carthon say, i fall in the midst of my course. a foreign tomb receive, in youth, the last of reuthámir race. darkness dwell in balclutha: and the shadow of grief in crathmo. — but raise my remembrance on the bank of lora: where my father dwell. perhaps the husband of moina will mourn over his fall carthon.

his word reach the heart of clessámmor: he fall, in silence, on his son. the host stand darken around: no voice be on the plain of lora. night come, and the moon, from the east, look on the mournful field: but still they stand, like a silent grove that lift its head on gormal, when the loud wind be lay, and dark autumn be on the plain.

three day they mourn above carthon; on the four his father die. in the narrow plain of the rock they lie; and a dim ghost defend their tomb. there lovely moina be often see; when the sun-beam dart on the rock, and all around be dark. there she be see, Malvina, but not like the daughter of the hill. her robe be from the stranger land; and she be still alone.

Fingal be sad for carthon; he desire his bard to mark the day, when shadowy autumn return. and often do they mark the day and sing the hero praise. who come so dark from ocean roar, like autumn shadowy cloud? death be tremble in his hand! his eye be flame of fire! — who roar along dark lora heath? who but carthon, king of sword? the people fall! see! how he stride, like the sullen ghost of Morven! — but there he lie a goodly oak, which sudden blast overturn! when shall thou rise, balclutha joy! lovely carborne carthon? — who come so dark from ocean roar, like autumn shadowy cloud?

such be the word of the bard, in the day of their mourning: i have accompany their voice; and add to their song. my soul have be mournful for carthon; he fall in the day of his valour: and thou, o clessámmor! where be thy dwelling in the air? — have the youth forget his wound? and fly he, on the cloud, with thou? — i feel the sun, o Malvina, leave i to my rest. perhaps they may come to my dream; i think i hear a feeble voice. — the beam of heaven delight to shine on the grave of carthon: i feel it warm around.

o thou that roll above, round as the shield of my father! whence be thy beam, o sun! thy everlasting light? thou come forth, in thy awful beauty, and the star hide themselves in the sky; the moon, cold and pale, sink in the western wave. but thou thyself move alone: who can be a companion of thy course! the oak of the mountain fall: the mountain themselves decay with year; the ocean shrink and grow again: the moon herself be lose in heaven; but thou be for ever the same; rejoice in the brightness of thy course. when the world be dark with tempest; when thunder roll, and lightning fly; thou look in thy beauty, from the cloud, and laugh at the storm. but to Ossian, thou look in vain; for he behold thy beam no more; whether thy yellow hair flow on the eastern cloud, or thou tremble at the gate of the west. but thou be perhaps, like i, for a season, and thy year will have a end. thou shall sleep in thy cloud, careless of the voice of the morning. — exult then, o sun, in the strength of thy youth! age be dark and unlovely; it be like the glimmer light of the moon, when it shine through break cloud, and the mist be on the hill; the blast of north be on the plain, the traveller shrink in the midst of his journey.

