the athenian answer.

ah! bright unknown! you know not what you ask! 
angel will bend beneath the unequal task. 
be that bless world disclose, it will seem so fair,
 who will not leap life barrier to be there? 
yet see a glimpse, all, heaven permit to see,
 and learn the rest from faith and ecstasy. 

the paradise of god, those happy seat which cost
 far more than that fair Eden we have lose;
 exceed luxuriant fancy rich dress,
 and beggar rhime and number self to express. 
— no, be we lose in that primaeval grove
 where father Adam with his new-born bride
 walk careless, walk and love, nor want, nor sin,
 nor jealous rage, nor curse torment hope
 their sacred verge approach can we pierce
 as the blind bard, with intellectual sight
 through those first happy mortal sylvan shade,
 thro'clust'r vine who swell purple grape
 with generous juice invite the bless pair
 to taste, nor fear to die; be all the spring
 that from some easy mountain mossy side
 or hoary rock run gentle murmur,
 a thousand flour upon the bend bank,
 a thousand bird upon the fragrant tree,
 and eve her self all smile join the choir,
 with blissful hymn of chaste and holy love
 be these and more unite to compose
 a poet heaven to the true heaven it will be
 a barren wilderness, nay worse, a world. 
— not reason self, a ray of the divine
 offspring, and friend of god, when manacle
 in sinful mortal mould, although it trace,
 no sister truth through each dedalean maze,
 and build on sense with well poise argument,
 not that can tell we what we there shall see,
 or have or know, or do, or ever be. 
nay though with noble faith more perfect glass,
 we look beyond the crystal starry world,
 we know but part, sink in our darksome self,
 and from life dungeon wish the glimmer light,
 coaster of heaven we beat along the shore,
 some creek and landmark find, but know no more. 
the inland country be undiscover d still,
 the glorious city of the eternal king,
 yet of celestial growth we bear away,
 some rich immortal fruit, joy, peace and love,
 knowledge and praise, vision and pure delight,
 river of bliss, ay-dwelling from the throne
 of the most high, exhaustless fund of light. 
there, there be heaven, it be he who make it so,
 the soul can hold no more, for god be all,
 he only equal its capacious grasp,
 he only over fill to space infinite,
 ah! who can follow? — that shall only those
 who with intrepid breast the world oppose. 
tear out the glitter snake, though never so close it twine,
 and part with mortal joy for joy divine. 
