Albert and Cecilia,

a norman tale.

found on fact.

a fair form than fiction ever feign;
 a bloom surpass far the open rise;
 eye where with softness animation reign;
 a heart that sympathise in other woe:

such be Cecilia — ere a father pride
 cloud the noontide of a morn so bright;
 condemn each feeling nature sanctify,
 and close each beauty in eternal night. 

the haughty Anselm, of his riches vain —
 vain of his ancestry and high estate —
 view unassuming merit with disdain,
 or think it only centre in the great,

each day, to win the young Cecilia smile,
 the neighbour baron to his castle throng,
 and boast their ancient sire, who warlike toil
 still crown the historian page, and poet song. 

but vain the boast of each contend peer —
 vain to win Cecilia smile they try;
 no voice but albert gain her pensive ear —
 no form but albert charm her down-cast eye. 

oft she forsake her father splendid hall,
 and hastes impatient to the wave shade;
 where Albert, while the tear of pity fall,
 unfold his hopeless passion to the maid. 

no sound title favour albert claim;
 fortune to he her gift do never impart:
 but kind nature give the lovely frame,
 and give (much more) the most unblemished heart. 

what hour of happiness the lover prove
 while in soft converse pass the livelong day;
 while each confess how ardent they love,
 and vow no time their passion shall allay! 

o sensibility! how true bless
 be the fond mind in thy sensation lose! 
more dear the pang that rend the feeling breast,
 than all that calm, dull apathy can boast. 

long do Cecilia nurse the rise flame,
 and albert tender vow in secret hear;
 nor yet have envy, or censorious fame,
 divulge the tale to anselm watchful ear. 

when, as mild evening over the vary sky
 disperse rich cloud of gold and purple hue;
 and pant flock along the meadow lie,
 cool by the freshness of the fall dew —

with cautious step Cecilia seek the bower,
 who shade encircle all her soul hold dear;
 while anxious Albert count the tedious hour,
 now cheere by hope, and now depress by fear:

but, when he see his love Cecilia nigh,
 each gloomy care forsake his bode breast;
 and gay delight beam sparkle from his eye,
 bless in her presence, in her kindness bless. 

the heart emotion in each face appear;
 the glow of transport brighten on each cheek —
 the glance of joy, the sympathetic tear,
 more than a thousand word, their passion speak. 

the youth enrapture kneel thank the maid;
 then both renew their vow of endless love:
 unhappy pair! your passion be betray —
 fatal to both those vow must short prove:

for, as it chance, in that ill-fated hour
 near the green arbour Anselm muse pass;
 hear their discourse, and, enter in the bower,
 the tremble lover sink confuse, aghast! 

 "degenerate girl!" the angry father cry,
 "who thus can stoop to this ignoble choice;
" and dare to wound a norman baron pride,
 "unmoved by duty tie, or honour voice! 

 "no more i own thou as my fortune heir;
" thy boast charm to i no joy impart:
 "for, shock by thy ingratitude, i tear
" parental fondness from this injure heart. 

 "and thou, presume youth! who dare aspire
" proud to join thy humble name with i,
 "take the detest object you desire — —
" thy love Cecilia shall be ever thy,

 "if to the summit of yond verdant hill,
" who lofty brow overlook this ample plain,
 "you bear the maid; nor rest a moment, till
" even to the top thy venturous step attain. " 

what mighty task will dare love refuse,
 the object of its fond pursuit to gain? 
who in delusion flatter mirror view
 and grasp at shadow it can never obtain. 

the youth undaunted clasp the tremble fair,
 nor think the dangerous trial to decline:
 "this happy hour," he cry, "end all my care,
" and make thou, dear Cecilia! ever mine. " 

with eager haste he pass the level green,
 and rapid he climb the steep ascent;
 while numerous vassal throng to view the scene,
 and prayer to heaven for their deliverance send. 

sad prophetic of impend woe,
 Cecilia bosom heave with many a sigh;
 and, while the tear of bitter anguish flow,
 she fix on Albert a attentive eye. 

 "alas!" she cry, and half suppress a tear,
 "yond fatal summit distant still i view." 
 "chase, my Cecilia!" he reply, "each fear;
" love shall his votary with new strength endue. " 

but Albert now no long can conceal
 his vigour lose: he climb the hill with pain;
 his faint limb a deathlike languor feel,
 and scarce his arm their lovely load sustain. 

 "speak, my Cecilia! tell i that you love;
" your voice can energetic force impart:
 "smile, and your lover shall triumphant prove." 
she force a smile, and press he to her heart. 

mute the spectator stand with anxious fear:
 when Albert falter every cheek turn pale;
 and smile of gladness on each face appear
 when love still strive where human effort fail. 

at length their heart with generous transport thrill,
 shout of applause from every side arise:
 Albert have gain the summit of the hill,
 and breathless fall beneath his lovely prize. 

Cecilia circle arm around he throw,
 her eye behold he with exult pride:
 she cry, "my Albert, i be thy alone;
" no human force can now our fate divide. " 

his clay-cold hand with fervency she press,
 she gaze enamour on his fade cheek;
 "say, do thou love like i, like i art bless? 
" confirm my happiness — o Albert, speak! " 

at length, essay in vain each tender care
 her lover slumber sense to restore,
 by disappointment pierce and chill despair,
 she sink, and cry — "my Albert be no more!" 

the fatal accent reach the listen crowd,
 sorrow the mournful tiding they relate;
 "Albert be dead!" they weep cry aloud —
 "Albert, who worth deserve a better fate. 

 "may curse light on that unfeeling heart
" which can the blossom of thy youth destroy! 
 "no comfort may his boast wealth impart,
" but keen repentance blast each rise joy! " 

such be the word that with discordant sound
 whisper remorse to anselm wound ear:
 he feel their force; he heave a sigh profound,
 and pity drop too late a fruitless tear. 

with hasty step he seek the fatal height,
 anxious his yet-loved daughter life to save;
 that injure daughter, once his sole delight,
 now by himself devote to the grave. 

mean time, awaken by Cecilia tear,
 and the sad accent of her pierce cry,
 his languid head the faint Albert rear,
 while death dim shadow darken over his eye. 

 "it be past, Cecilia! soon approach death
" shall steal thy form for ever from my view:
 "soon, soon shall i resign this mortal breath,
" and, dear far than life, bid thou adieu. 

 "o grant thy die albert last request:
" be our sad fate engrave upon my stone;
 "that, when the grave at length shall yield i rest,
" our love may be to future age know! 

 "and thou, dear source of all my grief and joy! 
" never let my image from thy thought depart:
 "when moulder time shall this weak frame destroy,
" still let i live in my Cecilia heart! " 

faint the last accent falter on his tongue;
 heavy and dim his close eyeball roll;
 angel of death around his spirit hang,
 and open heaven receive his part soul. 

Anselm just then, with pause step and slow,
 have climb the hill, and reach its airy brow;
 cold round his breast the rustle breeze blow,
 while bird of night sing plaintive from each bough. 

impress with secret horror, low he bend
 over the sad spot where poor Cecilia lie;
 around her form his tremble arm extend,
 with unknown pity fill and deep dismay. 

he feel her hand have lose its vital heat;
 he see her balmy lip no more be red;
 he find her icy breast no long beat;
 his only child, his dear Cecilia dead. 

the wretched father raise his eye to heaven,
 in which alone repent sin can trust;
 bewail his error, pray to be forgive,
 and own in all his way the almighty just. 

like lily crop by a untimely storm,
 fair even in death the hapless lover lie;
 love still appear to animate each form,
 and over each visage shed a brighten ray. 

to both one common tomb the father give;
 and, to preserve they in immortal fame,
 he raise a chapel over the sacred grave,
 which still of the two lover bear the name. 
