Solomon on the vanity of the world.

a poem in three book.

knowledge; the first book.

knowledge: the first book.

you son of man, with just regard attend,
 observe the preacher, and believe the friend,
 who serious Muse inspire he to explain,
 that all we act, and all we think be vain. 
that in this pilgrimage of seventy year,
 over rock of peril, and through vale of tear
 destine to march, our doubtful step we tend,
 tire with the toil, yet fearful of it be end.
 that from the womb we take our fatal share
 of folly, passion, labor, tumult, care;
 and at approach of death shall only know
 the truth, which from these pensive number flow,
 that we pursue false joy, and suffer real woe. 

happiness, object of that wake dream,
 which we call life, mistake; fugitive theme
 of my pursue verse, ideal shade,
 notional good, by fancy only make,
 and by tradition nurse, fallacious fire,
 who dance beam mislead our fond desire,
 cause of our care, and error of our mind:
 o! have thou ever be by heaven design
 to Adam, and his mortal race; the boon
 entire, have be reserve for Solomon:
 on i the partial lot have be bestow;
 and in my cup the golden draught have flow. 

but o! ever yet original man be make;
 ever the foundation of this earth be lay;
 it be, opponent to our search, ordain,
 that joy, still seek, shall never be attain. 
this, sad experience cite i to reveal;
 and what i dictate, be from what i feel. 

bear as i be, great David favourite son,
 dear to my people, on the hebrew throne
 sublime, my court with ophir treasure bless,
 my name extend to the farther east,
 my body clothe with every outward grace,
 strength in my limb, and beauty in my face,
 my shine thought with fruitful notion crown,
 quick my invention, and my judgement sound. 
arise (i commune with my self) arise;
 think, to be happy; to be great, be wise:
 content of spirit must from science flow;
 for it be a godlike attribute, to know. 

i say; and send my edict through the land:
 around my throne the letter rabbin stand,
 historic leaf revolve, long volume spread,
 the old discourse, as the young read:
 attend i hear, propose my doubt, and say;

the vegetable world, each plant, and tree,
 it be seed, it be name, it be nature, it be degree
 i be allow, as fame report, to know,
 from the fair cedar, on the craggy brow
 of Lebanon nod supreme tall,
 to creep moss, and hyssop on the wall:
 yet just and conscious to my self, i find
 a thousand doubt oppose the search mind. 

i know not why the beach delight the glade
 with bough extend, and a round shade;
 while tower fir in conic form arise,
 and with a point spear divide the sky:
 nor why again the change oak shall shed
 the yearly honour of his stately head;
 while the distinguish yew be ever see,
 unchanged his branch, and permanent his green. 
want the sun why do the caltha fade? 
why do the cypress flourish in the shade? 
the fig and date why love they to remain
 in middle station, and a even plain;
 while in the low marsh the gourd be find;
 and while the hill with olive-shade be crown? 
why do one climate, and one soil endue
 the blush Poppy with a crimson hue;
 yet leave the Lilly pale, and tinge the violet blue? 
why do the fond carnation love to shoot
 a various colour from one parent root;
 while the fantastic tulip strive to break
 in twofold beauty, and a part streak? 
the twine jasmine, and the blush rose,
 with lavish grace their morning scent disclose:
 the smell tub'rose and Junquele declare,
 the strong impulse of a evening air. 
whence have the tree (resolve i) or the flower
 a various instinct, or a different power? 
why shall one earth, one clime, one stream, one breath
 raise this to strength, and sicken that to death? 

whence do it happen, that the plant which well
 we name the sensitive, shall move and feel? 
whence know her leaf to answer her command,
 and with quick horror fly the neighbour hand? 

along the sunny bank, or watery Mead,
 ten thousand stalk their various blossom spread:
 peaceful and lowly in their native soil,
 they neither know to spin, nor care to toil;
 yet with confess magnificence deride
 our vile attire, and impotence of pride. 
the cowslip smile, in bright yellow dress,
 than that which veil the nubile virgin breast. 
a fair red stand blush in the rose,
 than that which on the bridegroom vestment flow. 
take but the humble Lilly of the field;
 and if our pride will to our reason yield,
 it must by sure comparison be show,
 that on the regal seat great David son,
 array in all his robe, and type of power,
 shine with less glory, than that simple flower. 

of Fishes next, my friend, i will inquire,
 how the mute race engender, or respire;
 from the small fry that glide on Jordan stream
 unmarked, a multitude without a name,
 to that leviathan, who over the sea
 immense roll onward his impetuous way,
 and mock the wind, and in the tempest play. 
how they in warlike band march great forth
 from freeze water, and the cold north,
 to southern clime direct their career,
 their station change with th'inverted year. 
how all with careful knowledge be endue,
 to choose their proper bed, and wave, and food:
 to guard their spawn, and educate their brood. 

of bird, how each accord to her kind
 proper material for her nest can find;
 and build a frame, which deep thought in man
 will or amend, or imitate in vain. 
how in small flight they know to try their young,
 and teach the callow child her parent song. 
why these frequent the plain, and those the wood. 
why every land have her specific brood. 
where the tall crane, or wind swallow go,
 fearful of gather wind, and fall snow:
 if into rock, or hollow tree they creep,
 in temporary death confine to sleep;
 or conscious of the come evil, fly
 to mild region, and a southern sky. 

of beast and creep insect shall we trace
 the wondrous nature, and the various race;
 or wild or tame, or friend to man or foe,
 of we, what they, or what of they we know? 

tell i, you studious, who pretend to see
 far into nature bosom, whence the bee
 be first inform her venturous flight to steer
 through tractless path, and a abyss of air. 
whence she avoid the slimy marsh, and know
 the fertile hill where sweet herbage grow,
 and honey-making flower their open bud disclose. 
how from the thicken mist, and set sun
 find she the labour of her day be do? 
who teach she against wind and rain to strive,
 to bring her burden to the certain hive,
 and through the liquid field again to pass
 duteous, and harken to the sound brass? 

and, o thou sluggard, tell i why the ant
 'midst summer plenty think of winter want:
 by constant journey careful to prepare
 her store; and bring home the Corny ear,
 by what instruction do she bite the grain,
 lest hide in earth, and take root again,
 it may elude the foresight of her care? 
distinct in either insect deed appear
 the mark of thought, contrivance, hope, and fear. 

fix thy corporeal, and internal eye
 on the young gnat, or new-engendered fly;
 on the vile worm, that yesterday begin
 to crawl; thy fellow-creature, abject man! 
like thou they breath, they move, they taste, they see,
 they show their passion by their act like thou:
 dart their sting, they previous declare
 design revenge, and fierce intent of war:
 lay their egg, they evident prove
 the genial power, and full effect of love. 
each then have organ to digest his food,
 one to beget, and one receive the brood:
 have limb and sinew, blood and heart, and brain,
 life, and her proper function to sustain;
 though the whole fabric small than a grain. 
what more can our penurious reason grant
 to the large whale, or castle elephant,
 to those enormous terror of the Nile,
 the crest snake, and long-tailed crocodile,
 than that all differ but in shape and name,
 each destine to a less, or large frame? 

for potent nature love a various act,
 prone to enlarge, or studious to contract:
 now form her work too small, now too immense,
 and scorn the measure of our feeble sense. 
the object spread too far, or raise too high,
 deny it be real image to the eye:
 too little, it elude the dazzle sight;
 become mix blackness, or unpart light. 
water and air the vary form confound;
 the strait look crooked, and the square grow round. 

thus while with fruitless hope, and weary pain,
 we seek great nature power, but seek in vain;
 safe sit the goddess in her dark retreat;
 around her, myriad of idea wait,
 and endless shape, which the mysterious queen
 can take or quit, can alter or retain:
 as from our lose pursuit she will to hide
 her close decree, and chasten human pride. 

untamed and fierce the tiger still remain:
 he tire his life in bite on his chain:
 for the kind gift of water, and of food,
 ungrateful, and return ill for good,
 he seek his keeper flesh, and thirst his blood:
 while the strong camel, and the generous horse,
 restrain and awe by man inferior force,
 do to the rider will their rage submit,
 and answer to the spur, and own the bit;
 stretch their glad mouth to meet the feeder hand,
 please with his weight, and proud of his command. 

again: the lonely fox roam far abroad,
 on secret rapin bend, and midnight fraud;
 now haunt the cliff, now traverse the lawn;
 and fly the hate neighborhood of man:
 while the kind spaniel, and the faithful hound,
 like that fox in shape and species find,
 refuse through these cliff and lawn to roam;
 pursue the note path, and covet home;
 do with kind joy domestic face meet;
 take what the glut child deny to eat;
 and die, lick his long-loved master foot. 

by what immediate cause they be incline,
 in many act, it be hard, i own, to find. 
i see in other, or i think i see,
 that strict their principle, and we agree. 
evil like we they shun, and covet good;
 abhor the poison, and receive the food. 
like we they love or hate: like we they know,
 to joy the friend, or grapple with the foe. 
with seem think their action they intend,
 and use the mean proportion to the end.
 then vain the philosopher aver,
 that reason guide our deed, and instinct they. 
how can we just different cause frame,
 when the effect entire be the same? 
instinct and reason how can we divide? 
it be the fool ignorance, and the pedant pride. 

with the same folly sure, man vaunt his sway;
 if the brute beast refuse to obey. 
for tell i, when the empty boaster word
 proclaim himself the universal lord;
 do he not tremble, lest the lion paw
 shall join his plea against the fancy law? 
will not the learned coward leave the chair;
 if in the school or porch shall appear
 the fierce hyoena, or the foam bear? 

the combatant too late the field decline;
 when now the sword be gird to his loin. 
when the swift vessel fly before the wind;
 too late the sailor view the land behind. 
and it be too late now back again to bring
 enquiry, raise and tower on the wing;
 forward she strive, averse to be withhold
 from noble object, and a large field. 

consider with i this ætherial space,
 yield to earth and sea the middle place. 
anxious i ask you, how the pensile ball
 shall never strive to rise, nor fear to fall. 
when i reflect, how the revolve sun
 do round our globe his crooked journey run;
 i doubt of many land, if they contain
 or herd of beast, or colony of man:
 if any nation pass their destine day
 beneath the neighbour sun directer ray:
 if any suffer on the polar coast,
 the rage of arctos, and eternal frost. 

may not the pleasure of omnipotence
 to each of these some secret good dispense? 
those who amid the torrid region live,
 may they not gale unknown to we receive;
 see daily shower rejoice the thirsty earth,
 and bless the flowery bud succeed birth? 
may they not pity we, condemn to bear
 the various heaven of a obliquer sphere;
 while by fix law, and with a just return,
 they feel twelve hour that shade, for twelve that burn;
 and praise the neighbour sun, who constant flame
 enlighten they with season still the same? 
and may not those, who distant lot be cast
 north beyond tartary extend waste,
 where through the plain of one continual day,
 six shine month pursue their even way;
 and six succeed urge their dusky flight,
 obscure with vapor and overwhelm in night;
 may not, i ask, the native of these clime
 (as annal may inform succeed time)
 to our quotidian change of heaven prefer
 their one vicissitude, and equal share
 of day and night, dispart through the year? 
may they not scorn our sun be repeat race,
 to narrow bound prescribe, and little space,
 hasten from morn, and headlong drive from noon,
 half of our daily toil yet scarce do? 
may they not just to our clime upbraid
 shortness of night, and penury of shade;
 that ever our weary limb be just bless
 with wholesome sleep, and necessary rest;
 another sun demand return of care,
 the remnant toil of yesterday to bear? 
while, when the solar beam salute their sight,
 bold and secure in half a year of light,
 uninterrupted voyage they take
 to the remote wood, and farther lake;
 manage the fish, and pursue the course
 with more extend nerve, and more continue force. 
and when decline day forsake their sky;
 when gather cloud speak gloomy winter nigh;
 with plenty for the come season bless,
 six solid month (a age) they live, release
 from all the labour, process, clamor, woe,
 which our sad scene of daily action know:
 they light the shine lamp, prepare the feast,
 and with full mirth receive the welcome guest;
 or tell their tender love (the only care
 which now they suffer) to the listen fair;
 and raise in pleasure, or repose in ease
 (grateful alternate of substantial peace)
 they bless the long nocturnal influence shed
 on the crown goblet, and the genial bed. 

in foreign isle which our discov'rer find,
 far from this length of continent disjoin,
 the rugged bear, or spot lynx brood;
 frighten the valley, and infest the wood:
 the hungry crocodile, and hiss snake
 lurk in the trouble stream and fenny break:
 and man untaught, and ravenous as the beast,
 do valley, wood, and brake, and stream infest. 
derive these man and animal their birth
 from trunk of oak, or pregnant womb of earth? 
whence then the old belief, that all begin
 in eden shade, and one create man? 
or grant, this progeny be waft over
 by coast boat from next adjacent shore:
 will those, from who we will suppose they spring,
 slaughter to harmless land, and poyson bring? 
will they on board or bear, or lynx take,
 feed the she-, and the brood snake? 
or can they think the new discover isle
 please to receive a pregnant crocodile? 

and since the savage lineage we must trace
 from Noah save, and his distinguish race;
 how shall their father happen to forget
 the art which Noah teach, the rule he set,
 to sow the glebe, to plant the generous vine,
 and load with grateful flame the holy shrine? 
while the great sire unhappy son be find,
 unpress their vintage, and untilled their ground,
 straggle over Dale and hill in quest of food,
 and rude of art, of virtue, and of god. 

how shall we next over earth and sea pursue
 the vary form of every thing we view;
 that all be change, though all be still the same,
 fluid the part, yet durable the frame? 
of those material, which have be confess
 the pristine spring, and parent of the rest,
 each become other. water stop give birth
 to grass and plant, and thicken into earth:
 diffuse it rise in a high sphere;
 dilate it be drop, and soften into air:
 those fine part of air again aspire;
 move into warmth, and brighten into fire:
 that fire once more by thick air overcome,
 and downward force, in earth capacious womb
 alter it be particle; be fire no more;
 but lie resplendent dust, and shine oar:
 or run through the mighty mother vein,
 change it be shape; put off it be old remains;
 with watery part it be lessen force divide;
 flow into wave, and rise into tide. 

dispart stream shall from their channel fly,
 and deep surcharge by sandy mountain lie,
 obscure sepulchr. by eat rain,
 and furious wind, down to the distant plain
 the hill, that hide his head above the sky,
 shall fall: the plain by slow degree shall rise
 high than erst have stand the summit-hill:
 for time must nature great behest fulfil. 

thus by a length of year, and change of fate,
 all thing be light or heavy, small or great:
 thus Jordan wave shall future cloud appear;
 and egypt pyramid refine to air. 
thus late age shall ask for pison flood;
 and traveller inquire, where Babel stand. 

now where we see these change often fall,
 sedate we pass they by, as natural:
 where to our eye more rare they appear,
 the pompous name of prodigy they bear:
 let active thought these close mæander trace:
 let human wit their dubious boundary place. 
be all thing miracle; or nothing such? 
and prove we not too little, or too much? 

for that a branch cut off, a wither rod
 shall at a word pronounce revive and bud:
 be this more strange, than that the mountain brow,
 stripe by December frost, and white with snow,
 shall push, in spring, ten thousand thousand bud;
 and boast return leaf, and bloom wood? 
that each successive night from open heaven
 the food of angel shall to man be give;
 be this more strange, than that with common bread
 our faint body every day be feed;
 than that each grain and seed consume in earth,
 raise it be store, and multiply it be birth;
 and from the handful, which the tiller sow,
 the labour field rejoice, and future harvest flow? 

then from whatever we can to sense produce
 common and plain, or wondrous and abstruse,
 from nature constant or eccentric law,
 the thoughtful soul this general influence draw,
 that a effect must presuppose a cause. 
and while she do her upward flight sustain,
 touch each link of the continue chain,
 at length she be oblige and force to see
 a first, a source, a life, a deity;
 what have for ever be, and must for ever be. 

this great existence thus by reason find,
 bless by all power, with all perfection crown;
 how can we bind or limit his decree,
 by what our ear have hear, or eye may see? 
say then: be all in heap of water lose,
 beyond the island, and the midland coast? 
or have that god, who give our world it be birth,
 sever those water by some other earth,
 country by future ploughshare to be tear,
 and city raise by nation yet unborn? 
ever the progressive course of restless age
 perform three thousand time it be annual stage;
 may not our power and learning be suppress;
 and art and empire learn to travel west? 

where, by the strength of this idea charm,
 lighten with glory, and with rapture warm,
 ascend my soul? what see she white and great
 amid subject sea? a isle, the seat
 of power and plenty; her imperial throne,
 for justice and for mercy seek and know;
 virtue sublime, great attribute of heaven,
 from thence to this distinguish nation give. 
yet farther west the western isle extend
 her happy fame; her arm fleet she send
 to climates fold yet from human eye;
 and land, which we imagine wave and sky. 
from pole to pole she hear her act resound,
 and rule a empire by no ocean bind;
 know her ship anchor, and her sail unfurled
 in other Indies, and a second world. 

long shall Britannia (that must be her name)
 be first in conquest, and preside in fame:
 long shall her favour monarchy engage
 the tooth of envy, and the force of age:
 revere and happy she shall long remain,
 of human thing least changeable, least vain. 
yet all must with the general doom comply;
 and this great glorious power, though last, must die. 

now let we leave this earth, and lift our eye
 to the large convex of yonder azure sky:
 behold it like a ample curtain spread,
 now streak and glow with the morning red;
 anon at noon in flame yellow bright,
 and choose sable for the peaceful night. 
ask reason now, whence light and shade be give,
 and whence this great variety of heaven:
 reason our guide, what can she more reply,
 than that the sun illuminate the sky;
 than that night rise from his absent ray,
 and his return lustre kindle day? 

but we expect the morning red in vain:
 it be hide in vapor, or obscure by rain. 
the noontyde yellow we in vain require:
 it be black in storm, or red in lightning fire. 
pitchy and dark the night sometime appear,
 friend to our woe, and parent of our fear:
 our joy and wonder sometime she excite,
 with star unnumbered, and eternal light. 
send forth, you wise, send forth your labour thought:
 let it return with empty notion fraught,
 of airy column every moment break,
 of circle whirlpool, and of sphere of smoke:
 yet this solution but once more afford
 new change of term, and scaffold of word:
 in other garb my question i receive;
 and take the doubt the very same i give. 

lo! as a giant strong the lusty sun
 multiply round in one great round do run,
 twofold his course, yet constant his career,
 change the day, and finish the year. 
again when his descend orb retire,
 and earth perceive the absence of his fire;
 the moon afford we her alternate ray,
 and with kind beam distribute faint day:
 yet keep the stage of her monthly race,
 various her beam, and changeable her face. 
each planet shine in his proper sphere,
 do with just speed his radiant voyage steer:
 each see his lamp with different lustre crown:
 each know his course with different period bind;
 and in his passage through the liquid space,
 nor hasten, nor retard his neighbor race. 
now shine these planet with substantial ray? 
do innate lustre gild their measure day? 
or do they (as your scheme, i think, have show)
 dart furtive beam, and glory not their own,
 all servant to that source of light, the sun? 

again i see ten thousand thousand star,
 nor cast in line, in circle, nor in square:
 (poor rule, with which our bound mind be fill,
 when we will plant, or cultivate, or build)
 but shine with such vast, such various light,
 as speak the hand, that form they, infinite:
 how mean the order and perfection seek
 in the best product of the human thought,
 compare to the great harmony that reign
 in what the spirit of the world ordain! 

now if the sun to earth transmit his ray,
 yet do not scorch we with too fierce a day;
 how small a portion of his power be give
 to orb more distant, and remot heaven? 
and of those star, which our imperfect eye
 have doom, and fix to one eternal sky,
 each by a native stock of honour great,
 may dart strong influence, and diffuse kind heat,
 it self a sun; and with transmissive light
 enliven world deny to human sight:
 around the circle of their ambient sky
 new moon may grow or wane, may set or rise;
 and other star may to those sun be earth;
 give their own element their proper birth;
 divide their clime, or elevate their pole;
 see their land flourish, and their ocean roll;
 yet these great orb thus radical bright,
 primitive fount, and origin of light,
 may each to other (as their different sphere
 make or their distance, or their height appear)
 be see a noble, or inferior star;
 and in that space, which we call air and sky,
 myriad of earth, and moon, and sun may lie
 unmeasured, and unknown by human eye. 

in vain we measure this amaze sphere,
 and find and fix it be centre here or there;
 while it be circumference, scorn to be bring
 even into fancy space, illude our vanquish thought. 

where then be all the radiant monster drive,
 with which your guess fill the frighten heaven? 
where will their fictious image remain? 
in paper scheme, and the chaldean brain. 

this problem yet, this offspring of a guess,
 let we for once a child of truth confess;
 that these fair star, these object of delight,
 and terror, to our search dazzle sight,
 be world immense, unnumbered, infinite. 
but do these world display their beam, or guide
 their orb, to serve thy use, to please thy pride? 
thy self but dust, thy stature but a span,
 a moment thy duration; foolish man! 
as well may the minute Emmet say,
 that Caucasus be raise, to pave his way:
 the snail, that lebanon extend wood
 be destine only for his walk, and food:
 the vile cockle, gape on the coast
 that round the ample sea, as well may boast,
 the craggy rock project above the sky,
 that he in safety at it be foot may lie;
 and the whole ocean confluent water swell,
 only to quench his thirst, or move and blanch his shell. 

a high flight the venturous goddess try,
 leave material world, and local sky:
 enquire, what be the being, where the space,
 that form and hold the angel ancient race. 
for rebel Lucifer with Michael fight:
 (i offer only what tradition teach:)
 embattle cherub against cherub rise;
 do shield to shield, and power to power oppose:
 heaven ring with triumph: hell be fill with woe. 
what be these form, of which your volume tell,
 how some fight great, and other recreant fell? 
these bind to bear a everlasting load,
 durance of chain, and banishment of god:
 by fatal turn their wretched strength to tire;
 to swim in sulphurous lake, or land on solid fire:
 while those exalt to primaeval light,
 excess of bless, and supreme delight,
 only perceive some little pause of joy
 in those great moment, when their god employ
 their ministry, to pour his threaten hate
 on the proud king, or the rebellious state:
 or to reverse jehovah high command,
 and speak the thunder fall from his hand,
 when to his duty the proud king return;
 and the rebellious state in ash mourn. 
how can good angel be in heaven confine;
 or view that presence, which no space can bind? 
be god above, beneath, or yonder, or here? 
he who make all, be he not every where? 
o how can wicked angel find a night
 so dark, to hide they from that pierce light,
 which form the eye, and give the power of sight? 

what mean i now of angel, when i hear
 firm body, spirit pure, or fluid air? 
spirit to action spiritual confine,
 friend to our thought, and kindred to our mind,
 shall only act and prompt we from within,
 nor by external eye be ever see. 
be it not therefore to our father know,
 that these have appetite, and limb, and bone? 
else how can Abram wash their weary foot;
 or Sarah please their taste with savoury meat? 
whence shall they fear? or why do lot engage
 to save their body from abusive rage? 
and how can Jacob, in a real fight,
 feel or resist the wrestle angel may? 
how can a form it be strength with matter try? 
or how a spirit touch a mortal thigh? 

now be they air condense, or gather ray? 
how guide they then our prayer, or keep our way,
 by strong blast still subject to be toss,
 by tempest scatter, and in whirlwind lose? 

have they again (as sacred song proclaim)
 substance real, and exist frame? 
how come it, since with they we joint share
 the great effect of one creator care;
 that while our body sicken, and decay,
 they be for ever healthy, young, and gay? 
why, while we struggle in this vale beneath,
 with want and sorrow, with disease and death;
 do they more bless perpetual life employ
 on song of pleasure, and in scene of joy? 

now when my mind have all this world survey,
 and find, that nothing by it self be make;
 when thought have raise it self by just degree,
 from valley crown with flower, and hill with tree;
 from smoke mineral, and from rise stream;
 from fatten Nilus, or victorious Thames;
 from all the live, that four-footed move
 along the shore, the meadow, or the grove;
 from all that can with Finns, or feather fly
 through the aërial, or the watery sky;
 from the poor reptile with a reason soul,
 that miserable master of the whole;
 from this great object of the body eye,
 this fair half-round, this ample azure sky,
 terrible large, and wonderful bright
 with star unnumbered, and unmeasured light;
 from essence unseen, celestial name,
 enlighten spirit, and ministerial flame,
 angel, dominion, potentate, and throne,
 all that in each degree the name of creature own:
 lift we our reason to that sovereign cause,
 who bless the whole with life, and bound it with law;
 who forth from nothing call this comely frame,
 his will and act, his word and work the same;
 to who a thousand year be but a day;
 who bad the light her genial beam display;
 and set the moon, and teach the sun his way:
 who wake time, his creature, from the source
 primæval, order his predestine course:
 himself, as in the hollow of his hand,
 hold, obedient to his high command,
 the deep abyss, the long continue store,
 where month, and day, and hour, and minute pour
 their float part, and thenceforth be no more. 
this Alpha and Omega, first and last,
 who like the Potter in a mould have cast
 the world great frame, command it to be
 such as the eye of sense and reason see;
 yet if he will, may change or spoil the whole;
 may take yonder beauteous, mystic, starry roll,
 and burn it, like a useless parchment scroll:
 may from it be basis in one moment pour
 this melt earth —
 like liquid metal, and like burn oar:
 who sole in power, at the begin say;
 let sea, and air, and earth, and heaven be make:
 and it be so — and when he shall ordain
 in other sort, have but to speak again,
 and they shall be no more: of this great theme,
 this glorious, hallow, everlasting name,
 this god, i will discourse —

the learned elder sit appal, amaze;
 and each with mutual look on other gaze. 
nor speech they meditate, nor answer frame:
 too plain, alas! their silence speak their shame:
 until one, in who a outward mien appear,
 and turn superior to the vulgar herd,
 begin; that human learning further reach
 be but to note the doctrine i can teach;
 that my to speak, and they be to obey:
 for i in knowledge more, than power do sway;
 and the astonish world in i behold
 Moses eclipse, and jesse son excel. 
humble a second bow, and take the word;
 foresee my name by future age adore. 
o live, say he, thou wise of the wise! 
as none have equal, none shall ever rise
 excel thou —

parent of wicked, bane of honest deed,
 pernicious flattery! thy malignant seed
 in a ill hour, and by a fatal hand
 sad diffuse over virtue Gleby land,
 with rise pride amid the corn appear,
 and choke the hope and harvest of the year. 

and now the whole perplex ignoble crowd
 mute to my question, in my praise loud,
 echo the word: whence thing arise, or how
 they thus exist, the aptest nothing know:
 what yet be not, but be ordain to be,
 all veil of doubt apart, the dull see. 

my prophet, and my sophist finish here
 their civil effort of the verbal war:
 not so my rabbin, and logician yield:
 retire still they combat: from the field
 of open arm unwilling they depart,
 and skulk behind the subterfuge of art.
 to speak one thing mix dialect they join;
 divide the simple, and the plain define;
 fix fancy law, and form imagine rule,
 term of their art, and jargon of their school,
 ill ground maxim by false gloss enlarge,
 and captious science against reason charge. 

soon their crude notion with each other fight:
 the adverse sect deny, what this have teach;
 and he at length the ample triumph gain,
 who contradict what the last maintain. 

o wretched impotence of human mind! 
we err still excuse for error find;
 and darkling grope, not know we be blind. 

vain man! since first thy blush sire essay
 his folly with connect leaf to shade;
 how do the crime of thy resemble race
 with like attempt that pristine error trace? 
too plain thy nakedness of soul espy,
 why do thou strive the conscious shame to hide
 by mask of eloquence, and veil of pride? 

with outward smile their flattery i receive;
 own my sick mind by their discourse relieve;
 but bent and inward to my self again
 perplex, these matter i revolve; in vain. 
my search still tire, my labour still renew,
 at length i ignorance, and knowledge view,
 impartial; both in equal balance lay:
 light fly the know scale; the doubtful heavy weigh. 

force by reflective reason i confess,
 that human science be uncertain guess. 
alas! we grasp at cloud, and beat the air,
 vex that spirit we intend to clear. 
can thought beyond the bound of matter climb? 
or who shall tell i, what be space or time? 
in vain we lift up our presumptuous eye
 to what our maker to their ken deny:
 the searcher follow fast; the object fast fly. 
the little which imperfect we find,
 seduce only the bewilder mind
 to fruitless search of something yet behind. 
various discussion tear our heat brain:
 opinion often turn; still doubt remain;
 and who indulge thought, increase pain. 

how narrow limit be to wisdom give? 
earth she survey: she thence will measure heaven:
 through mist obscure, now wing her tedious way;
 now wander dazzle with too bright a day;
 and from the summit of a pathless coast
 see infinite, and in that sight be lose. 

remember, that the curse desire to know,
 offspring of Adam, be thy source of woe. 
why will thou then renew the vain pursuit,
 and rash catch at the forbid fruit? 
with empty labour and elude strife
 seek, by knowledge, to attain to life;
 for ever from that fatal tree debar,
 which flame sword and angry cherub guard. 

pleasure: the second book.

pleasure: the second book.

try then, o man, the moment to deceive,
 that from the womb attend thou to the grave:
 for weary nature find some apter scheme:
 health be thy hope; and pleasure be thy theme:
 from the perplex and unequal way,
 where study bring thou; from the endless maze,
 which doubt persuade to run, forewarn recede,
 to the gay field, and flowery path, that lead
 to jocund mirth, soft joy, and careless ease:
 forsake what may instruct, for what may please:
 essay amuse art, and proud expense;
 and make thy reason subject to thy sense. 

i commune thus: the power of wealth i try,
 and all the various luxe of costly pride. 
artist and plan relieve my solemn hour:
 i found palace, and plant bower. 
bird, fish, beast of each exotic kind
 i to the limit of my court confine. 
to tree transfer i give a second birth;
 and bid a foreign shade grace judah earth. 
fishpond be make, where former forest grow;
 and hill be level to extend the view. 
river divert from their native course,
 and bind with chain of artificial force,
 from large cascade in please tumult roll;
 or rise through figure stone, or breathe gold. 
from further africa torment womb
 the marble bring erect the spacious dome;
 or form the pillar long-extended row,
 on which the plant grove, and pensile garden grow. 

the workman here obey the master call,
 to gild the turret, and to paint the wall;
 to mark the pavement there with various stone;
 and on the jasper step to rear the throne:
 the spread cedar, that a age have stand,
 supreme of tree, and mistress of the wood,
 cut down and carve, my shine roof adorn;
 and Lebanon his ruin honour mourn. 

a thousand artist show their cunning power,
 to raise the wonder of the ivory tower. 
a thousand maiden ply the purple loom,
 to weave the bed, and deck the regal room;
 until tyre confess she exhaust store,
 that on her coast the murex be no more;
 until from the parian isle, and lybia coast,
 the mountain grieve their hope of marble lose;
 and india wood return their just complaint,
 their brood decay, and want of elephant. 

my full design with vast expense achieve,
 i come, behold, admire, reflect, grieve. 
i chide the folly of my thoughtless have:
 for, the work perfect, the joy be past. 

to my new court sad thought do still repair
 and round my gild roof hang hover care. 
in vain on silken bed i seek repose;
 and restless oft from purple couch rise:
 vexatious thought still find my fly mind
 nor bind by limit, nor to place confine;
 haunt my night, and terrify my day;
 stalk through my garden, and pursue my way,
 nor shut from artful bower, nor lose in wind maze. 

yet take thy bent, my soul; another sense
 indulge; add music to magnificence:
 essay, if harmony may grief control;
 or power of sound prevail upon the soul. 
often our seer and poet have confess,
 that music force can tame the furious beast;
 can make the wolf, or foam boar restrain
 his rage; the lion drop his crest mane,
 attentive to the song: the lynx forget
 his wrath to man, and lick the minstrel foot. 
be we, alas! less savage yet than these? 
else music sure may human care appease. 

i speak my purpose; and the cheerful choir
 part their share of harmony: the lyre
 soften the timbrel noise: the trumpet sound
 provoke the dorian flute (both sweet find
 when mix:) the fife the viol note refine;
 and every strength with every grace be join. 
each morn they wake i with a sprightly lay:
 of open heaven they sing, and gladsome day. 
each evening their repeat skill express
 scene of repose, and image of rest:
 yet still in vain: for music gather thought:
 but how unequal the effect it bring? 
the soft idea of the cheerful note,
 light receive, be easy forget. 
the solemn violence of the grave sound
 know to strike deep, and leave a last wound. 

and now reflect, i with grief descry
 the sickly lust of the fantastic eye;
 how the weak organ be with see cloy,
 fly ever night what it at noon enjoy. 
and now (unhappy search of thought!) i find
 the fickle ear soon glut with the sound,
 condemn eternal change to pursue,
 tire with the last, and eager of the new. 

i bid the virgin and the youth advance,
 to temper music with the sprightly dance. 
in vain! too low the mimic-motion seem:
 what take our heart, must merit our esteem. 
nature, i think, perform too mean a part,
 form her movement to the rule of art;
 and vex i find, that the musician hand
 have over the dancer mind too great command. 

i drink; i like it not: it be rage; it be noise;
 a airy scene of transitory joy. 
in vain i trust, that the flow bowl
 will banish sorrow, and enlarge the soul. 
to the late revel, and protract feast
 wild dream succeed, and disorder rest;
 and as at dawn of morn fair reason light
 break through the fume and phantom of the night;
 what have be say, i ask my soul, what do;
 how flow our mirth, and whence the source begin? 
perhaps the jest that charm the sprightly croud,
 and make the jovial table laugh so loud,
 to some false notion owe it be poor pretence,
 to a ambiguous word be pervert sense,
 to a wild sonnet, or a wanton air,
 offence and torture to the sober ear. 
perhaps, alas! the please stream be bring
 from this man error, from another fault;
 from topic which good-nature will forget,
 and prudence mention with the last regret. 

add yet unnumbered ill, that lie unseen
 in the pernicious draught; the word obscene,
 or harsh, which once elance must ever fly
 irrevocable; the too prompt reply,
 seed of severe distrust, and fierce debate;
 what we shall shun, and what we ought to hate. 

add too the blood impoverish, and the course
 of health suppress, by wine continue force. 

unhappy man! who sorrow thus and rage
 to different ill alternate engage. 
who drink, alas! but to forget; nor see,
 that melancholy sloth, severe disease,
 memory confuse, and interrupt thought,
 death harbinger, lie latent in the draught:
 and in the flower that wreath the sparkle bowl,
 fall adder hiss, and poisonous serpent roll. 

remain there ought untried, that may remove
 sickness of mind, and heal the bosom? — love,
 love yet remain: indulge his genial fire,
 cherish fair hope, solicit young desire,
 and bold bid thy anxious soul explore
 this last great remedy mysterious power. 

why therefore hesitate my doubtful breast? 
why cease it one moment to be bless? 
fly swift, my friend; my servant, fly; employ
 your instant pain to bring your master joy. 
let all my wife and concubine be dress:
 let they to night attend the royal feast;
 all israel beauty, all the foreign fair,
 the gift of prince, or the spoil of war. 
before their monarch they shall single pass;
 and the most worthy shall obtain the grace. 

i say: the feast be serve: the bowl be crown;
 to the king pleasure go the mirthful round:
 the woman come: as custom will, they pass:
 on one (o that distinguish one!) i cast
 the favourite glance: o! yet my mind retain
 that fond begin of my infant pain. 
mature the virgin be of egypt race:
 grace shape her limb; and beauty deck her face:
 easy her motion seem, serene her air:
 full, though unzoned, her bosom rise: her hair
 untie, and ignorant of artful aid,
 down her shoulder loose lie display;
 and in the jetty curl ten thousand cupid play. 

fix on her charm, and please that i can love,
 aid i my friend, contribute to improve
 your monarch bliss, i say; fresh rose bring
 to strow my bed; until the impoverish spring
 confess her want; around my amorous head
 be drop myrrh, and liquid amber shed,
 until Arab have no more. from the soft lyre,
 sweet flute, and ten-stringed instrument, require
 sound of delight: and thou, fair nymph, draw nigh;
 thou, in who graceful form, and potent eye
 thy master joy long seek at length be find;
 and as thy brow, let my desire be crown;
 o favourite virgin, that have warm the breast,
 who sovereign dictate subjugate the east! 

i say; and sudden from the golden throne
 with a submissive step i haste down. 
the glow garland from my hair i take,
 love in my heart, obedience in my look;
 prepare to place it on her comely head:
 o favourite virgin! (yet again i say)
 receive the honour destine to thy brow;
 and o above thy fellow happy thou! 
their duty must thy sovereign word obey. 
rise up, my love; my fair one, come away. 

what pang, alas! what ecstasy of smart
 tear up my sense, and transfix my heart;
 when she with modest scorn the wreathe return,
 recline her beauteous neck, and inward mourn? 

force by my pride, i my concern suppress
 pretend drowsiness, and wish of rest;
 and sullen i forsake th'imperfect feast:
 order the eunuch, to who proper care
 our eastern grandeur give the imprison fair,
 to lead she forth to a distinguish bower,
 and bid she dress the bed, and wait the hour. 

restless i follow this obdurate maid:
 (swift be the step that love and anger tread:)
 approach her person, court her embrace,
 renew my flame, repeat my disgrace:
 by turn put on the suppliant and the lord;
 threaten this moment, and the next implore;
 offer again the unaccepted wreathe,
 and choice of happy love, or instant death. 

averse to all her amorous king desire,
 far as she may, she decent retire;
 and dart scorn, and sorrow from her eye,
 what mean, say she, king Solomon the wise? 

this wretched body tremble at your power:
 thus far can fortune: but she can no more. 
free to her self my potent mind remain;
 nor fear the victor rage, nor feel his chain. 

it be say, that thou can plausible dispute,
 supreme of seer, of angel, man, and brute;
 can plead, with subtle wit and fair discourse,
 of passion folly, and of reason force. 
that to the tribe attentive thou can show,
 whence their misfortune, or their blessing flow. 
that thou in science, as in power art great;
 and truth and honour on thy edict wait. 
where be that knowledge now, that regal thought,
 with just advice, and timely counsel fraught? 
where now, o judge of Israel, do it rove? 
what in one moment do thou offer? love —
 love? why it be joy or sorrow, peace or strife:
 it be all the colour of remain life:
 and human misery must begin or end,
 as he become a tyrant, or a friend. 
will David son, religious, just, and grave,
 to the first bridebed of the world receive
 a foreigner, a heathen, and a slave? 
or grant, thy passion have these name destroy;
 that love, like death, make all distinction void;
 yet in his empire over thy abject breast,
 his flame and torment only be express:
 he rage can in my smile alone relent;
 and all his joy solicit my consent. 

soft love, spontaneous tree, it be part root
 must from two heart with equal vigour shoot:
 while each delight, and delight, give
 the please ecstasy, which each receive:
 cherish with hope, and feed with joy it grow:
 it be cheerful bud their open bloom disclose;
 and round the happy soil diffusive odour flow. 
if angry fate that mutual care deny;
 the fade plant bewail it be due supply:
 wild with despair, or sick with grief, it die. 

by force beast act, and be by force restrain:
 the human mind by gentle mean be gain. 
thy useless strength, mistake king, employ:
 sate with rage, and ignorant of joy,
 thou shall not gain what i deny to yield;
 nor reap the harvest, though thou spoil the field. 
know, Solomon, thy poor extent of sway;
 contract thy brow, and Israel shall obey:
 but wilful love thou must with smile appease;
 approach his awful throne by just degree;
 and if thou will be happy, learn to please. 

not that those art can here successful prove:
 for i be destine to another love. 
beyond the cruel bound of thy command,
 to my dear equal, in my native land,
 my plight vow i give: i his receive:
 each swear with truth: with pleasure each believe. 
the mutual contract be to heaven convey:
 in equal scale the busy angel weigh
 it be solemn force, and clape their wing, and spread
 the last roll, record what we say. 

now in my heart behold thy poniard stain:
 take the sad life which i have long disdain:
 end, in a die virgin wretched fate,
 thy ill-starred passion, and my steadfast hate. 
for long as blood inform these circle vein;
 or fleet breath it be late power retain;
 hear i to egypt vengeful god declare,
 hate be my part: be thy, o king, despair. 

now strike, she say, and open bare her breast:
 stand it in judah chronicle confess,
 that David son, by impious passion move,
 smite a she-slave, and murder what he love. 

ashamed, confuse i start from the bed;
 and to my soul yet uncollected say:
 into thy self, fond Solomon, return;
 reflect again, and thou again shall mourn. 
when i through number year have pleasure seek;
 and in vain hope the wanton phantom catch;
 to mock my sense, and mortify my pride,
 it be in another power, and be deny. 
be i a king, great heaven! do life or death
 hang on the wrath, or mercy of my breath;
 while kneel i my servant smile implore;
 and one mad damsel dare dispute my power? 

to ravish she? that thought be soon depress,
 which must debase the monarch to the beast. 
to send her back? o whither, and to who? 
to land where Solomon must never come;
 to that insult rival happy arm,
 for who, disdain i, she keep her charm. 

fantastic tyrant of the amorous heart;
 how hard thy yoke! how cruel be thy dart! 
those escape thy anger, who refuse thy sway;
 and those be punish most, who most obey. 
see judah king revere thy great power:
 what can thou covet, or how triumph more? 
why then, o love, with a obdurate ear
 do this proud nymph reject a monarch prayer? 
why to some simple shepherd do she run,
 from the fond arm of David favourite son? 
why fly she from the glory of a court,
 where wealth and pleasure may thy reign support,
 to some poor cottage on the mountain brow,
 now bleak with wind, and cover now with snow,
 where pinch want must curb her warm desire,
 and household care suppress thy genial fire? 

too apt the afflict heathen prove
 the force, while they erect the shrine of love. 
his mystic form the artisan of Greece
 in wound stone, or melt gold express:
 and Cyprus to his godhead pay her vow:
 fast in his hand the idol hold his bow;
 a quiver by his side sustain a store
 of point dart; sad emblem of his power;
 a pair of wing he have, which he extend
 now to be go; which now again he bend
 prone to return, as best may serve his wanton end.
 entire thus i find the fiend portray,
 since first, alas! i see the beauteous maid:
 i feel he strike; and now i see he fly:
 curse daemon! o! for ever break lie
 those fatal shaft, by which i inward bleed! 
o! can my wish yet overtake thy speed! 
tire may thou pant, and hang thy flag wing;
 except thou turn thy course, resolve to bring
 the damsel back, and save the lovesick king. 

my soul thus struggle in the fatal net,
 unable to enjoy, or to forget;
 i reason much, alas! but more i love;
 send and recall, ordain and disapprove:
 until hopeless plunge in a abyss of grief,
 i from necessity receive relief:
 time gentle aid to assuage my pain;
 and wisdom take once more the slacken rein. 

but o how short my interval of woe! 
our grief how swift; our remedy how slow! 
another nymph (for so do heaven ordain,
 to change the manner, but renew the pain)
 another nymph, among the many fair,
 that make my soft hour their solemn care,
 before the rest affect still to stand;
 and watch my eye, prevent my command. 
Abra, she so be call, do soon have
 to grace my presence: Abra go the last:
 Abra be ready ever i call she name;
 and though i call another, Abra come. 

her equal first observe her grow zeal;
 and laugh gloss, that Abra serve so well. 
to i her action do unheeded dye,
 or be remark but with a common eye;
 until more apprise of what the rumor say,
 more i observe peculiar in the maid. 

the sun decline have shoot his western ray;
 when tire with business of the solemn day,
 i purpose to unbend the evening hour,
 and banquet private in the woman bower. 
i call, before i sit, to wash my hand:
 for so the precept of the law command. 
love have ordain, that it be abra turn
 to mix the sweet, and minister the urn. 

with awful homage, and submissive dread
 the maid approach, on my decline head
 to pour the oil: she tremble as she pour;
 with a unguarded look she now devour
 my near face: and now recall her eye,
 and heave, and strive to hide a sudden sigh. 
and whence, say i, can thou have dread, or pain? 
what can thy imagery of sorrow mean? 
seclude from the world, and all it be care,
 have thou to grieve or joy, to hope or fear? 
for sure, i add, sure thy little heart
 never feel love anger, or receive his dart. 

abash she blush, and with disorder speak:
 her rise shame adorn the word it break. 

if the great master will descend to hear
 the humble series of his handmaid care;
 o! while she tell it, let he not put on
 the look, that awe the nation from the throne:
 o! let not death severe in glory lie
 in the king frown, and terror of his eye. 

i to obey; thy part be to ordain:
 and though to mention, be to suffer pain;
 if the king smile, while i my woe recite;
 if weep i find favour in his sight;
 flow fast my tear, full rise his delight. 

o! witness earth beneath, and heaven above;
 for can i hide it? i be sick of love:
 if madness may the name of passion bear;
 or love be call, what be indeed despair. 

thou sovereign power, who secret will control
 the inward bent and motion of our soul! 
why have thou place such infinite degree
 between the cause and cure of my disease? 
the mighty object of that rage fire,
 in which unpitied Abra must expire,
 have he be bear some simple shepherd heir,
 the low herd, or fleecy sheep his care;
 at morn with he i over the hill have run,
 scornful of winter frost, and summer sun,
 still ask, where he make his flock to rest at noon. 
for he at night, the dear expect guest,
 i have with hasty joy prepare the feast;
 and from the cottage, over the distant plain,
 send forth my longing eye to meet the Swain;
 waver, impatient, toss by hope and fear;
 till he and joy together shall appear;
 and the love dog declare his master near. 
on my decline neck, and open breast,
 i shall have lull the lovely youth to rest;
 and from beneath his head, at dawn day,
 with soft care have steal my arm away;
 to rise, and from the fold release the sheep,
 fond of his flock, indulgent to his sleep. 

or if kind heaven propitious to my flame
 (for sure from heaven the faithful ardor come)
 have bless my life, and deck my natal hour
 with height of title, and extent of power:
 without a crime my passion have aspire,
 find the love prince, and tell what i desire. 

then i have come, prevent sheba queen,
 to see the comely of the son of man;
 to hear the charm poet amorous song,
 and gather honey fall from his tongue;
 to take the fragrant kiss of his mouth,
 sweet than breeze of her native south;
 liken his grace, his person, and his mien
 to all that great or beauteous i have see. 
serene and bright his eye, as solar beam
 reflect tempere light from crystal stream;
 ruddy as gold his cheek; his bosom fair
 as silver; the curl ringlet of his hair
 black as the raven wing; his lip more red,
 than eastern coral, or the scarlet thread;
 even his tooth, and white, like a young flock
 coeval, new shear, from the clear brook
 recent, and blanch on the sunny rock. 
ivory with saphir intersperse, explain
 how white his hand, how blue the manly vein. 
column of polish marble firm set
 on golden base, be his leg, and foot. 
his stature all majestic, all divine,
 strait as the palmtree, strong as be the pine. 
saffron and myrrh be on his garment shed:
 and everlasting sweet bloom round his head. 
what utter i? where be i? wretched maid! 
dye, Abra, dye: too plain have thou say
 thy soul desire to meet his high embrace,
 and blessing stamp upon thy future race;
 to bid attentive nation bless thy womb,
 with unborn monarch charge, and Solomons to come. 

here over her speech her flow eye prevail. 
o foolish maid! and o unhappy tale! 
my suffering heart for ever shall defy
 new wound, and danger from a future eye. 
o! yet my torture sense deep retain
 the wretched memory of my former pain,
 the dire affront, and my egyptian chain. 

as time, i say, may happy efface
 that cruel image of the king disgrace;
 imperial reason shall resume her seat;
 and Solomon once fall, again be great. 
betray by passion, as subdue in war,
 we wise shall exert a double care,
 nor ever ought a second time to err. 

this Abra then —
 i see she; it be humanity: it give
 some respite to the sorrow of my slave. 
her fond excess proclaim her passion true;
 and generous pity to that truth be due. 
well i entreat she, who well deserve;
 i call she often; for she always serve. 
use make her person easy to my sight;
 and ease insensible produce delight. 

whenever i reveal in the woman bower;
 (for first i seek she but at loose hour:)
 the apple she have gather smell most sweet:
 the cake she knead be the savoury meat:
 but fruit their odour lose, and meat their taste;
 if gentle Abra have not deck the feast. 
dishonour do the sparkle goblet stand,
 unless receive from gentle abra hand:
 and when the virgin form the evening choir,
 raise their voice to the master-lyre;
 too flat i think this voice, and that too shrill;
 one show too much, and one too little skill:
 nor can my soul approve the music tone;
 until all be hush, and Abra sing alone. 
fair she seem, distinguish from the rest;
 and better mein disclose, as better dress. 
a bright tiara round her forehead tie,
 to juster bound confine it be rise pride:
 the blush ruby on her snowy breast,
 render it be pant whiteness more confess:
 bracelet of pearl give roundness to her arm;
 and every gem augment every charm. 
her sense please, her beauty still improve;
 and she more lovely grow, as more belove. 

and now i can behold, avow, and blame
 the several folly of my former flame;
 will my heart for recompense to prove
 the certain joy that lie in prosperous love. 
for what, say i, from Abra can i fear,
 too humble to insult, too soft to be severe? 
the damsel have sole ambition be to please:
 with freedom i may like, and quit with ease:
 she sooth, but never can enthrall my mind:
 why may not peace and love for once be join? 

great heaven! how frail thy creature man be make! 
how by himself insensible betray! 
in our own strength unhappy secure,
 too little cautious of the adverse power;
 and by the blast of self-opinion move,
 we wish to charm, and seek to be belove. 
on pleasure flow brink we idle stray,
 master as yet of our return way:
 see no danger, we disarm our mind;
 and give our conduct to the wave and wind:
 then in the flowery Mead, or verdant shade
 to wanton dalliance negligent lay,
 we weave the chaplet, and we crown the bowl;
 and smile see the near water roll;
 until the strong gust of rage passion rise;
 until the dire tempest mingle earth and sky;
 and swift into the boundless ocean bear,
 our foolish confidence too late we mourn:
 round our devote head the billow beat;
 and from our trouble view the lessen land retreat. 

o mighty love! from thy unbounded power
 how shall the human bosom rest secure? 
how shall our thought avoid the various snare? 
or wisdom to our caution soul declare
 the different shape, thou please to employ,
 when bend to hurt, and certain to destroy? 

the haughty nymph in open beauty dress,
 to-day encounter our unguarded breast:
 she look with majesty, and move with state:
 unbent she soul, and in misfortune great,
 she scorn the world, and dare the rage of fate. 

here while we take stern manhood for our guide,
 and guard our conduct with become pride;
 charm with the courage in her action show,
 we praise her mind, the image of our own. 
she that can please, be certain to persuade:
 today belove, tomorrow be obey. 
we think we see through reason optic right;
 nor find, how beauty ray elude our sight:
 strike with her eye while we applaud her mind;
 and when we speak her great, we wish her kind. 

tomorrow, cruel power, thou arme the fair
 with flow sorrow, and dishevel hair:
 sad her complaint, and humble be her tale,
 her sigh explain where her accent fail. 
here generous softness warm the honest breast:
 we raise the sad, and succour the distress:
 and while our wish prepare the kind relief;
 while pity mitigate her rise grief:
 we sicken soon from her contagious care;
 grieve for her sorrow, groan for her despair;
 and against love too late those bosom arm,
 which tear can soften, and which sigh can warm. 

against this near cruel of foe,
 what shall with meditate, or force oppose? 
whence, feeble nature, shall we summon aid;
 if by our pity, and our pride betray? 
external remedy shall we hope to find,
 when the close fiend have gain our treacherous mind;
 insult there do reason power deride;
 and blind himself, conduct the dazzle guide? 

my conqueror now, my lovely Abra hold
 my freedom in her chain: my heart be fill
 with she, with her alone: in her alone
 it seek it be peace and joy: while she be go,
 it sigh, and grieve, impatient of her stay:
 return, she chase those sigh, that grief away:
 her absence make the night: her presence bring the day. 

the ball, the play, the mask by turn succeed. 
for she i make the song: the dance with she i lead. 
i court her various in each shape and dress,
 that luxury may form, or think express. 

today beneath the palmtree on the plain
 in deborah arm and habit Abra reign:
 the wreathe denote conquest guide her brow:
 and low, like barak, at her foot i bow. 
the mimic chorus sing her prosperous hand;
 as she have slay the foe, and save the land. 

tomorrow she approve a soft air;
 forsake the pomp and pageantry of war;
 the form of peaceful abigail assume;
 and from the village with the present come:
 the youthful band depose their glitter arm;
 receive her bounty, and recite her charm;
 while i assume my father step and mein,
 to meet with due regard my future queen. 

if haply abra will be now incline
 to range the wood, or chace the fly hind;
 soon as the sun awake, the sprightly court
 leave their repose, and hasten to the sport. 
in lessen royalty, and humble state,
 thy king, Jerusalem, descend to wait,
 until Abra come. she come: a milkwhite steed,
 mixture of persia, and arabia breed,
 sustain the nymph: her garment fly loose
 (as the sydonian maid, or thracian use)
 and half her knee, and half her breast appear,
 by art, like negligence, disclose, and bare. 
her left hand guide the hunt courser flight:
 a silver bow she carry in her right:
 and from the golden quiver at her side,
 rustle the ebon arrow feather pride. 
saphir and diamond on her front display
 a artificial moon increase ray. 
Diana, Huntress, mistress of the groves,
 the favourite Abra speak, and look, and move. 
her, as the present goddess, i obey:
 beneath her foot the captive game i lay. 
the mingle chorus sing diana fame:
 clarion and horn in loud peal proclaim
 her mystic praise: the vocal triumph bind
 against the hill: the hill reflect the sound. 

if tire this evening with the hunt wood,
 to the large fish-pool, or the glassy flood
 her mind tomorrow point; a thousand hand
 tonight employ, obey the king command. 
upon the watery beach a artful pile
 of plank be join, and form a move isle. 
a golden chariot in the mid be set;
 and silver cygnet seem to feel it be weight. 
Abra, bright queen, ascend her gaudy throne,
 in semblance of the græcian Venus know:
 Triton and sea-green naiad round her move;
 and sing in move strain the force of love:
 while as the approach pageant do appear;
 and echo croud speak mighty Venus near;
 i, her adorer, too devout stand
 fast on the utmost margin of the land,
 with arm and hope extend, to receive
 the fancy goddess rise from the wave. 

o subject reason! o imperious love! 
whither yet further will my folly rove? 
be it enough, that Abra shall be great
 in the wall palace, or the rural seat? 
that mask habit, and a borrow name
 contrive to hide my plenitude of shame? 
no, no: Jerusalem combine must see
 my open fault, and regal infamy. 
solemn a month be destine for the feast:
 Abra invite: the nation be the guest. 
to have the honour of each day sustain,
 the wood be traverse; and the lake be drain:
 arabia wild, and egypt be explore:
 the edible creation deck the board:
 hardly the phoenix escape —
 the man their lyre, the maid their voice raise,
 to sing my happiness, and abra praise. 
and slavish bard our mutual love rehearse
 in lie strain, and ignominious verse:
 while from the banquet lead forth the bride,
 who prudent love from public eye shall hide;
 i show she to the world, confess and know
 queen of my heart, and partner of my throne. 

and now her friend and flatterer fill the court:
 from dan, and from Beersheba they resort:
 they barter place, and dispose of Grants,
 whole province unequal to their want. 
they teach she to recede, or to debate;
 with toy of love to mix affair of state;
 by practise rule her empire to secure;
 and in my pleasure make my ruin sure. 
they give, and she transfer the curse advice,
 that monarch shall their inward soul disguise,
 dissemble, and command; be false, and wise;
 by ignominious art for servile end
 shall compliment their foe, and shun their friend. 
and now i leave the true and just support
 of legal prince, and of honest court,
 barzillai, and the fierce benaiah heir;
 who fire, great partner in my father care,
 salute their young king at Hebron crown,
 great by their toil, and glorious by their wound. 
and now, unhappy council, i prefer
 those who my folly only make i fear,
 old corah brood, and taunt shimei race;
 miscreant who owe their live to David grace;
 though they have spurn his rule, and curse he to his face. 

still abra power, my scandal still increase;
 justice submit to what Abra please:
 her will alone can settle or revoke;
 and law be fix by what she late speak. 

Israel neglect, Abra be my care:
 i only act, think, and live for she. 
i dare not reason with my wound heart. 
Abra possess; she be it be better part. 
o! have i now review the famous cause,
 which give my righteous youth so just applause;
 in vain on the dissemble mother tongue
 have cunning art, and sly persuasion hang;
 and real care in vain, and native love
 in the true parent pant breast have strive;
 while both deceive have see the destine child
 or slay, or save, as Abra frown or smile. 

unknowing to command, proud to obey,
 a lifeless king, a royal shade i lay. 
hear the injure orphan now complain:
 the widow cry address the throne in vain. 
cause unjudged disgrace the load file;
 and sleep law the king neglect revile. 
no more the elder throng around my throne,
 to hear my maxim, and reform their own. 
no more the young nobility be teach,
 how Moses govern, and how David fight. 
loose and undisciplined the soldier lie;
 or lose in drink, and game, the solid day:
 porch and Scholes, design for public good,
 uncovered, and with scaffold cumber stand,
 or nod, threaten ruin —
 half pillar want their expect height;
 and roof imperfect prejudice the sight. 
the artist grieve; the labour people droop:
 my father legacy, my country be hope,
 God temple lie unfinished —

the wise and grave deplore their monarch fate,
 and future mischief of a sink state. 
be this, the serious say, be this the man,
 who active soul through every science run? 
who by just rule and elevate skill
 prescribe the dubious bound of good and ill? 
who golden say, and immortal wit,
 on large phylactery expressive write,
 be to the forehead of the rabbin tie,
 our youth instruction, and our age pride? 
can not the wise his wild desire restrain? 
then be our hear, and his preach vain:
 what from his life and letter be we teach,
 but that his knowledge aggravate his fault? 

in light mood the humorous and the gay,
 as crown with rose at their feast they lie;
 send the full goblet, charge with abra name,
 and charm superior to their master fame:
 laugh some praise the king, who let they see,
 how apt luxe and empire may agree:
 some gloss, how love and wisdom be at strife;
 and bring my proverb to confront my life. 
however, friend, here be to the king, one cry:
 to he who be the king, the friend reply. 
the king, for judah, and for wisdom curse,
 to Abra yield: can i, or thou do worse? 
our loose live let chance or folly steer;
 if thus the prudent and determine err. 
let Dinah bind with flower her flow hair;
 and touch the lute, and sound the wanton air:
 let we the bliss without the sting receive,
 free, as we will, or to enjoy, or leave. 
pleasure on levity smooth surface flow:
 thought bring the weight, that sink the soul to woe. 
now be this maxim to the king convey,
 and add to the thousand he have make. 

sad, o reason, be thy power express,
 thou gloomy tyrant of the fright breast! 
and harsh the rule, which we from thou receive;
 if for our wisdom we our pleasure give;
 and more to think be only more to grieve. 
if judah king at thy tribunal try,
 forsake his joy to vindicate his pride;
 and change sorrow, i be only find
 loose from the chain of love, in thy more strict bind. 

but do i call thou tyrant, or complain,
 how hard thy law, how absolute thy reign? 
while thou, alas! art but a empty name,
 to no two man, who ever discourse, the same;
 the idle product of a trouble thought,
 in borrow shape, and airy colour wrought;
 a fancy line, and a reflect shade;
 a chain which man to fetter man have make,
 by artifice impose, by fear obey. 

yet, wretched name, or arbitrary thing,
 whence ever i thy cruel essence bring,
 i own thy influence; for i feel thy sting. 
reluctant i perceive thou in my soul,
 form to command, and destine to control. 
yes; thy insult dictate shall be hear:
 virtue for once shall be her own reward:
 yes; rebel Israel, this unhappy maid
 shall be dismiss: the crowd shall be obey:
 the king his passion, and his rule shall leave,
 no long abra, but the people slave. 
my coward soul shall bear it be wayward fate:
 i will, alas! be wretched, to be great;
 and sigh in royalty, and grieve in state. 

i say: resolve to plunge into my grief
 at once so far, as to expect relief
 from my despair alone —
 i choose to write the thing i dare not speak,
 to she i love; to she i must forsake. 
the harsh epistle labour much to prove,
 how inconsistent majesty, and love. 
i always shall, it say, esteem she well;
 but never see she more: it bid she feel
 no future pain for i; but instant wed
 a lover more proportion to her bed;
 and quiet dedicate her remnant life
 to the just duty of a humble wife. 

she read; and forth to i she wild run,
 to i, the ease of all her former pain. 
she kneel entreat, struggle, threaten, cry;
 and with alternate passion live, and die:
 until now deny the liberty to mourn,
 and by rude fury from my presence tear,
 this only object of my real care,
 cut off from hope, abandon to despair,
 in some few post fatal hour be hurl
 from wealth, from power, from love, and from the world. 

here tell i, if thou dare, my conscious soul,
 what different sorrow do within thou roll:
 what pang, what fire, what Racks do thou sustain,
 what sad vicissitude of smart pain? 
how oft from pomp and state do i remove,
 to feed despair, and cherish hopeless love? 
how oft, all day, recall i abra charm,
 her beauty press, and pant in my arm? 
how oft, with sigh, view every female face,
 where mimic fancy may her likeness trace? 
how oft desire to fly from israel throne,
 and live in shade with she and love alone? 
how oft, all night, pursue she in my dream,
 over flowery valley, and through crystal stream;
 and wake, view with grief the rise sun,
 and fond mourn the dear delusion go? 

when thus the gather storm of wretched love
 in my swell bosom, with long war have strive;
 at length they break their bound: at length their force
 bear down whatever meet it be strong course:
 lay all the civil bond of manhood waste;
 and scatter ruin as the torrent past. 

so from the hill, who hollow cave contain
 the congregate snow, and swell rain;
 until the full store their ancient bound disdain;
 precipitate the furious torrent flow:
 in vain will speed avoid, or strength oppose:
 town, forest, herd, and man promiscuous drown,
 with one great death deform the dreary ground;
 the echo woe from distant rock resound. 

and now what impious way my wish take;
 how they the monarch, and the man forsake;
 and how i follow a abandon will,
 through crooked path, and sad retreat of ill;
 how judah daughter now, now foreign slave,
 by turn my prostitute bed receive. 
through tribe of woman how i loose range
 impatient; like tonight, tomorrow change;
 and by the instinct of capricious lust,
 enjoy, disdain, be grateful, or unjust:
 o, be these scene from human eye conceal,
 in cloud of decent silence just veil! 
o, be the wanton image convey
 to black oblivion, and eternal shade! 
or let their sad epitome alone,
 and outward line to future age be know,
 enough to propagate the sure belief,
 that vice engender shame; and folly brood over grief. 

bury in sloth, and lose in ease i lay:
 the night i reveal; and i sleep the day. 
new heap of fuel damp my kindle fire;
 and daily change extinguish young desire. 
by its own force destroy, fruition cease;
 and always weary, i be never please. 
no long now do my neglect mind
 it be wonted store, and old idea find. 
fix judgement there no long do abide,
 to take the true, or set the false aside. 
no long do swift memory trace the cell,
 where spring wit, or young invention dwell. 
frequent debauch to habitude prevail:
 patience of toil, and love of virtue fail. 
by sad degree impair my vigor dye;
 till i command no long even in vice. 

the woman on my dotage build their sway:
 they ask; i grant: they threaten; i obey. 
in regal garment now i grave stride,
 I will by the persian damsel haughty pride. 
now with the loose syrian dance, and sing,
 in robe tuck up, opprobrious to the king. 

charm by their eye, their manner i acquire;
 and shape my foolishness to their desire. 
seduce and awe by the philistine dame,
 at dagon shrine i kindle impious flame. 
with the chaldean charm her rite prevail;
 and curl frankincense ascend to Baal. 
to each new harlot i new altar dress;
 and serve her god, who person i caress. 

where, my delude sense, be reason fly? 
where the high majesty of David throne? 
where all the maxim of eternal truth,
 with which the live god inform my youth? 
when with the lewd egyptian i adore
 vain idol, deity that never before
 in israel land have fix their dire abode,
 beastly divinity, and drove of god:
 Osiris, Apis, power that chew the cud,
 and dog Anubis, flatterer for his food:
 when in the woody hill forbid shade
 i carve the marble, and invoke it be aid:
 when in the fen to snake and fly, with zeal
 unworthy human thought, i prostrate fall;
 to shrub and plant my vile devotion pay;
 and set the beard Leek, to which i pray:
 when to all being sacred rite be give;
 forget the arbiter of earth and heaven. 

through these sad shade, this chaos in my soul,
 some seed of light at length begin to roll. 
the rise motion of a infant ray
 shoot glimmer through the cloud, and promise day. 
and now one moment able to reflect,
 i find the king abandon to neglect,
 see without awe, and serve without respect. 
i find my subject amicable join,
 to lessen their defect, by cite i. 
the priest with pity pray for David race;
 and leave his text, to dwell on my disgrace. 
the father, while he warn his err son,
 the sad example which he ought to shun,
 describe, and only name not, Solomon. 
each bard, each sire do to his pupil sing,
 a wise child better than a foolish king. 

into my self my reason eye i turn;
 and as i much reflect, much i mourn. 
a mighty king i be, a earthly god:
 nation obey my word, and wait my nod. 
i raise or sink, imprison or set free;
 and life or death depend on my decree. 
fond the idea, and the thought be vain:
 over judah king ten thousand tyrant reign. 
legion of lust, and various power of ill
 insult the master tributary will:
 and he, from who the nation shall receive
 justice, and freedom, lie himself a slave,
 torture by cruel change of wild desire,
 lash by mad rage, and scorch by brutal fire. 

o reason! once again to thou i call:
 accept my sorrow, and retrieve my fall. 
wisdom, thou say, from heaven receive her birth;
 her beam transmit to the subject earth. 
yet this great empress of the human soul
 do only with imagine power controul;
 if restless passion by rebellious sway
 compel the weak usurper to obey. 

o trouble, weak, and coward, as thou be! 
without thy poor advice the labour heart
 to worse extreme with swift step will run,
 not save by virtue, yet by vice undo. 

oft have i say, the praise of do well
 be to the ear, as ointment to the smell. 
now if some fly perchance, however small,
 into the alabaster urn shall fall;
 the odour of the sweet enclose will die;
 and stench corrupt (sad change!) their place supply. 
so the least fault, if mix with fair deed,
 of future ill become the fatal seed:
 into the balm of pure virtue cast,
 annoy all life with one contagious blast. 

lose Solomon! pursue this thought no more:
 of thy past error recollect the store:
 and silent weep, that while the deathless muse
 shall sing the just; shall over their head diffuse
 perfume with lavish hand; she shall proclaim
 thy crime alone; and to thy evil fame
 impartial, scatter damp, and poison on thy name. 

awake therefore, as who long have dream,
 much of my woman, and their god ashamed,
 from this abyss of exemplary vice
 resolve, as time may aid my thought, to rise;
 again i bid the mournful goddess write
 the fond pursuit of fugitive delight:
 bid she exalt her melancholy wing,
 and raise from earth, and save from passion, sing
 of human hope by cross event destroy,
 of useless wealth, and greatness unenjoyed,
 of lust and love, with their fantastic train,
 their wish, smile, and look deceitful all, and vain. 

power; the third book.

power; the third book.

come then, my soul: i call thou by that name,
 thou busy thing, from whence i know i be:
 for know that i be, i know thou be;
 since that must needs exist, which can impart. 
but how thou come to be, or whence thy spring:
 for various of thou priest and poet sing. 

hear thou submissive, but a lowly birth,
 some separate particle of fine earth,
 a plain effect, which nature must beget,
 as motion order, and as atom meet;
 companion of the body good or ill,
 from force of instinct more than choice of will;
 conscious of fear or valour, joy or pain,
 as the wild course of the blood ordain;
 who as degree of heat and cold prevail,
 in youth do flourish, and with age shall fail;
 until mingle with thy partner late breath
 thou fly, dissolve in air, and lose in death. 

or if thy great existence will aspire
 to cause more sublime; of heavenly fire
 be it thou a spark strike off, a separate ray,
 ordain to mingle with terrestrial clay;
 with it condemn for certain year to dwell,
 to grieve it be frailty, and it be pain to feel;
 to teach it good and ill, disgrace or fame;
 pale it with rage, or redden it with shame:
 to guide it be action with inform care,
 in peace to judge, to conquer in the war;
 render it agile, witty, valiant, sage,
 as fit the various course of human age;
 till as the earthly part decay and fall,
 the captive break her prison moulder wall;
 hover awhile upon the sad remains,
 which now the pile, or sepulchre contain;
 and thence with liberty unbounded fly,
 impatient to regain her native sky. 

whatever thou be, wherever ordain to go:
 (point which we rather may dispute, than know)
 come on, thou little inmate of this breast,
 which for thy sake from passion i divest:
 for these, thou say, raise all the stormy strife,
 which hinder thy repose, and trouble life. 
be the fair level of thy action lay,
 as temperance will, and prudence may persuade;
 be thy affection undisturbed and clear,
 guide to what may great or good appear;
 and try if life be worth the liver care. 

amass in man there just be behold
 what through the whole creation have excel:
 the life and growth of plant, of beast the sense,
 the angel forecast and intelligence:
 say from these glorious seed what harvest flow;
 recount our blessing, and compare our woe. 
in it be true light let clear reason see
 the man drag out to act, and force to be;
 helpless and naked on a woman knee
 to be expose or rear as she may please;
 feel her neglect, and pine from her disease. 
his tender eye by too direct a ray
 wound, and fly from unpractised day;
 his heart assault by invade air,
 and beat fervent to the vital war;
 to his young sense how various form appear;
 that strike his wonder, and excite his fear? 
by his distortion he reveal his pain;
 he by his tear, and by his sigh complain;
 until time and use assist the infant wretch,
 by break word, and rudiment of speech,
 his want in plain character to show,
 and paint more perfect figure of his woe. 
condemn to sacrifice his childish year
 to babble ignorance, and to empty fear;
 to pass the riper period of his age,
 act his part upon a crowd stage;
 to last toil expose, and endless care,
 to open danger, and to secret snare;
 to malice which the vengeful foe intend,
 and the more dangerous love of seem friend. 
his deed examine by the people will,
 prone to forget the good, and blame the ill:
 or sad censure in their curse debate,
 who in the scorner, or the judge seat
 dare to condemn the virtue which they hate. 
or will he rather leave this frantic scene;
 and tree and beast prefer to court and man? 
in the remote wood and lonely grott
 certain to meet that worst of evil, thought;
 different idea to his memory bring:
 some intricate, as be the pathless wood;
 impetuous some, as the descend flood:
 with anxious doubt, with rage passion tear,
 no sweet companion near with who to mourn;
 he hear the echo rock return his sigh;
 and from himself the fright hermit fly. 

thus, through what path soever of life we rove,
 rage company our hate, and grief our love:
 vex with the present moment heavy gloom,
 why seek we brightness from the year to come? 
disturb and break like a sick man sleep,
 our trouble thought to distant prospect leap;
 desirous still what fly we to overtake:
 for hope be but the dream of those that wake:
 but look back, we see the dreadful train
 of woe, anew which be we to sustain,
 we shall refuse to tread the path again. 
still add grief, still count from the first;
 judge the late evil still the worst;
 and sad find each progressive hour
 heighten their number, and augment their power;
 till by one countless sum of woe oppress,
 hoary with care, and ignorant of rest,
 we find the vital spring relax and wear:
 compel our common impotence to mourn,
 thus, through the round of age, to childhood we return;
 reflect find, that naked from the womb
 we yesterday come forth; that in the tomb
 naked again we must tomorrow lie,
 bear to lament, to labour, and to die. 

pass we the ill, which each man feel or dread,
 the weight or fall, or hang over our head;
 the bear, the lion, terror of the plain,
 the sheepfold scatter, and the shepherd slay;
 the frequent error of the pathless wood,
 the giddy precipice, and the dangerous flood:
 the noisome pest'lence, that in open war
 terrible, march through the midday air,
 and scatter death; the arrow that by night
 cut the dank mist, and fatal wing it be flight;
 the billow snow, and violence of the shower,
 that from the hill disperse their dreadful store,
 and over the vale collect ruin pour;
 the worm that gnaw the ripen fruit, sad guest,
 canker or locust hurtful to infest
 the blade; while husk elude the tiller care,
 and eminence of want distinguish the year. 

pass we the slow disease, and subtle pain,
 which our weak frame be destine to sustain;
 the cruel stone, with congregate war
 tear his bloody way; the cold catarrh,
 with frequent impulse, and continue strife,
 weaken the waste seat of irksome life;
 the gout fierce rack, the burn fever rage,
 the sad experience of decay; and age,
 her self the soar ill; while death, and ease,
 oft and in vain invoke, or to appease,
 or end the grief, with hasty wing recede
 from the vex patient, and the sickly bed. 

nought shall it profit, that the charm fair,
 angelic, soft work of heaven, draw near
 to the cold shake paralytic hand,
 senseless of beauty touch, or love command,
 nor long apt, or able to fulfil
 the dictate of it be feeble master will. 

nought shall the psaltry, and the harp avail,
 the please song, or well repeat tale,
 when the quick spirit their warm march forbear;
 and numb coldness have unbrace the ear. 

the verdant rise of the flowery hill,
 the vale enamel, and the crystal rill,
 the ocean roll, and the shelly shore,
 beautiful object, shall delight no more;
 when the lax sinew of the weaken eye
 in watery damp, or dim suffusion lie. 
day follow night; the cloud return again
 after the fall of the late rain:
 but to the aged-blind shall never return
 grateful vicissitude: he still must mourn
 the sun, and moon, and every starry light
 eclipse to he, and lose in everlasting night. 

behold where age wretched victim lie:
 see his head tremble, and his half-closed eye:
 frequent for breath his pant bosom heave:
 to break sleep his remnant sense he give;
 and only by his pain, awake find he live. 

loose by devour time the silver cord
 dissever lie: unhonoured from the board
 the crystal urn, when break, be throw by;
 and apter utensil their place supply. 
these thing and thou must share one equal lot;
 dye and be lose, corrupt and be forget;
 while still another, and another race
 shall now supply, and now give up the place. 
from earth all come, to earth must all return;
 frail as the cord, and brittle as the urn. 

but be the terror of these ill suppress:
 and view we man with health and vigor bless. 
home he return with the decline sun,
 his destine task of labour hardly do;
 go forth again with the ascend ray,
 again his travel for his bread to pay,
 and find the ill sufficient to the day. 
haply at night he do with horror shun
 a widow daughter, or a die son:
 his neighbor offspring he tomorrow see;
 and double feel his want in their increase:
 the next day, and the next he must attend
 his foe triumphant, or his bury friend. 
in every act and turn of life he feel
 public calamity, or household ill:
 the due reward to just desert refuse:
 the trust betray, the nuptial bed abuse:
 the judge corrupt, the long depend cause,
 and doubtful issue of misconstrue law:
 the crafty turn of a dishonest state,
 and violent will of the wrong-doing great:
 the venom tongue injurious to his fame,
 which nor can wisdom shun, nor fair advice reclaim. 

esteem we these, my friend, event and chance,
 produce as atom form their flutter dance? 
or high yet their essence may we draw
 from destine order, and eternal law? 
again, my muse, the cruel doubt repeat:
 spring they, i say, from accident, or fate? 
yet such, we find, they be, as can control
 the servile action of our waver soul;
 can fright, can alter, or can chain the will;
 their ill all build on life, that fundamental ill. 

o fatal search! in which the labour mind,
 still press with weight of woe, still hope to find
 a shadow of delight, a dream of peace,
 from year of pain, one moment of release;
 hope at least she may her self deceive,
 against experience will to believe,
 desirous to rejoice, condemn to grieve. 

happy the mortal man, who now at last
 have through this doleful vale of misery past;
 who to his destine stage have carry on
 the tedious load, and lay his burden down;
 who the cut brass, or wound marble show
 victor over life, and all her train of woe. 
he happy yet, who privilege by fate
 to short labour, and a light weight,
 receive but yesterday the gift of breath,
 order tomorrow to return to death. 
but o! beyond description happy he,
 who never must roll on life tumultuous sea;
 who with bless freedom from the general doom
 exempt, must never force the teem womb,
 nor see the sun, nor sink into the tomb. 

who breathe, must suffer; and who think, must mourn;
 and he alone be bless, who never be bear. 

 "yet in thy turn, thou frown preacher, hear:
" be not these general maxim too severe? 
 "say: can power secure it be owner bliss? 
" and be not wealth the potent sire of peace? 
 "be victor bless with fame, or king with ease? 

i tell thou, life be but one common care;
 and man be bear to suffer, and to fear. 

 "but be no rank, no station, no degree
" from this contagious taint of sorrow free? 

none, mortal, none: yet in a bold strain
 let i this melancholy truth maintain:
 but hence, you worldly, and profane, retire:
 for i adapt my voice, and raise my lyre
 to notion not by vulgar ear receive:
 you still must covet life, and be deceive:
 your very fear of death shall make you try
 to catch the shade of immortality;
 wish on earth to linger, and to save
 part of it be prey from the devour grave;
 to those who may survive you, to bequeathe
 something entire, in spite of time, and death;
 a fancy kind of be to retrieve,
 and in a book, or from a building live. 
false hope! vain labour! let some age fly:
 the dome shall moulder, and the volume dye:
 wretch, still teach, still will you think it strange,
 that all the part of this great fabric change;
 quit their old station, and primæval frame;
 and lose their shape, their essence, and their name? 

reduce the song: our hope, our joy be vain:
 our lot be sorrow; and our portion pain. 

what pause from woe, what hope of comfort bring
 the name of wise or great, of judge or king? 
what be a king? a man condemn to bear
 the public burden of the nation care;
 now crown some angry faction to appease;
 now fall a victim to the people ease:
 from the first bloom of his ill-taught youth,
 nourish in flattery, and estrange from truth:
 at home surround by a servile crowd,
 prompt to abuse, and in detraction loud:
 abroad begird with man, and sword, and spear;
 his very state acknowledge his fear:
 march amid a thousand guard, he show
 his secret terror of a thousand foe;
 in war however prudent, great, or brave,
 to blind event, and fickle chance a slave:
 seek to settle what for ever fly;
 sure of the toil, uncertain of the prize. 

but he return with conquest on his brow;
 bring up the triumph, and absolve the vow:
 the captive general to his Carr be tie:
 the joyful citizen tumultuous Tyde
 echo his glory, gratify his pride. 
what be this triumph? madness, shout, and noise,
 one great collection of the people voice. 
the wretch he bring back, in chain relate,
 what may tomorrow be the victor fate. 
the spoil and trophy bear before he, show
 national loss, and epidemic woe,
 various distress, which he and he may know. 
do he not mourn the valiant thousand slay;
 the hero, once the glory of the plain,
 leave in the conflict of the fatal day,
 or the wolve portion, or the vulture prey? 
do he not weep the laurel, which he wear,
 wet with the soldier blood, and widow tear? 

see, where he come, the darling of the war! 
see million crowd round the gild car! 
in the vast joy of this ecstatic hour,
 and full fruition of successful power,
 one moment and one thought may let he scan
 the various turn of life, and fickle state of man. 

be the dire image of sad distrust,
 and popular change, obscure amid the dust,
 that rise from the victor rapid wheel? 
can the loud Clarion, or shrill fife repel
 the inward cry of care? can nature voice
 plaintive be drown, or lessen in the noise;
 though shout as thunder loud afflict the air;
 stun the bird now release, and shake the ivory chair? 

yonder crowd (he may reflect) yonder joyful crowd,
 please with my honour, in my praise loud,
 (shall fleet victory to the vanquish go;
 shall she depress my arm, and raise the foe;)
 will for that foe with equal ardor wait
 at the high palace, or the crowd gate;
 with restless rage will pull my statue down;
 and cast the brass anew to his renown. 

o impotent desire of worldly sway! 
that i, who make the triumph of today,
 may of tomorrow pomp one part appear,
 ghastly with wound, and lifeless on the bier! 
then (vileness of mankind!) then of all these,
 who my dilate eye with labour see,
 will one, alas! repeat i good, or great? 
wash my pale body, or bewail my fate? 
or, march i chain behind the hostile Carr,
 the victor pastime, and the sport of war;
 will one, will one his pity sorrow lend,
 or be so poor, to own he be my friend? 

avail it then, o reason, to be wise? 
to see this cruel scene with quick eye? 
to know with more distinction to complain,
 and have superior sense in feel pain? 

let we revolve that roll with strict eye,
 where safe from time distinguish action lie;
 and judge if greatness be exempt from pain,
 or pleasure ever may with power remain. 

Adam, great type, for who the world be make,
 the fair bless to his arm convey,
 a charm wife; and air, and sea, and land,
 and all that move therein, to his command
 render obedient: say, my pensive muse,
 what do these golden promise produce? 
scarce taste life, he be of joy bereave:
 one day, i think, in paradise he live;
 destine the next his journey to pursue,
 where wound thorn, and curse thistle grow. 
ever yet he earn his bread, down his brow,
 incline to earth, his labour sweat must flow:
 he limb must ache, with daily toil oppress;
 ever long-wished night bring necessary rest:
 still view with regret his darling eve,
 he for her folly, and his own must grieve. 
bewail still afresh their hapless choice;
 his ear oft fright with the image voice
 of heaven, when first it thunder; oft his view
 aghast, as when the infant lightning fly;
 and the stern cherub stop the fatal road,
 arm with the flame of a avenge god. 
his young son on the pollute ground,
 first fruit of death, lie plaintiff of a wound
 give by a brother hand: he old birth
 fly, mark by heaven, a fugitive over earth. 
yet why these sorrow heap upon the sire,
 become nor man, nor angel to inquire. 

each age sin on; and guilt advance with time:
 the son still add to the father crime;
 until god arise, and great in anger say:
 lo! it repent i, that man be make. 
withdraw thy light, thou sun! be dark, you sky! 
and from your deep abyss, you water, rise! 

the fright angel hear the almighty lord;
 and over the earth from wrathful viol pour
 tempest and storm, obedient to his word. 
mean time, his providence to Noah give
 the guard of all, that he design to save. 
exempt from general doom the patriarch stand;
 contemn the wave, and triumph over the flood. 

the wind fall silent; and the wave decrease:
 the dove bring quiet, and the olive peace:
 yet still his heart do inward sorrow feel,
 which faith alone forbid he to reveal. 
if on the backward world his view be cast;
 it be death diffuse, and universal waste. 
present (sad prospect!) can he ought descry,
 but (what affect his melancholy eye)
 the beauty of the ancient fabric lose,
 in chain of craggy hill, or length of dreary coast? 
while to high heaven his pious breathe turn,
 weep he hope, and sacrifice mourn;
 when of god image only eight he find
 snatch from the watery grave, and save from nation drown;
 and of three son, the future hope of earth,
 the seed, whence empire must receive their birth,
 one he foresee exclude heavenly grace,
 and mark with curse, fatal to his race. 

Abraham, potent prince, the friend of god,
 of human ill must bear the destine load;
 by blood and battle must his power maintain,
 and slay the monarch, ever he rule the plain;
 must deal just portion of a servile life
 to a proud handmaid, and a peevish wife;
 must with the mother leave the weep son,
 in want to wander, and in wild to groan;
 must take his other child, his age hope
 to tremble moriam melancholy top,
 order to drench his knife in filial blood;
 destroy his heir, or disobey his god. 

Moses behold that god; but how behold? 
the deity in radiant beam conceal,
 and cloud in a deep abyss of light;
 while present, too severe for human sight,
 nor stay long than one swift-winged night. 
the follow day, and month, and year decree
 to fierce encounter, and to toilsome deed. 
his youth with want and hardship must engage:
 plot and rebellion must disturb his age. 
some corah still arise, some rebel slave,
 prompter to sink the state, than he to save:
 and Israel do his rage so far provoke,
 that what the godhead write, the prophet break. 
his voice scarce hear, his dictate scarce believe,
 in camp, in arm, in pilgrimage, he live;
 and die obedient to severe law,
 forbid to tread the promise land, he see. 

my father life be one long line of care,
 a scene of danger, and a state of war. 
alarm, expose, his childhood must engage
 the bear rough gripe, and foam lion rage. 
by various turn his threaten youth must fear
 goliah lift sword, and saul emit spear. 
forlorn he must, and persecute fly;
 climb the steep mountain, in the cavern lie;
 and often ask, and be refuse to die. 

for ever, from his manly toil, be know
 the weight of power, and anguish of a crown. 
what tongue can speak the restless monarch woe;
 when god, and Nathan be declare his foe? 
when every object his offence revile,
 the husband murder, and the wife defile,
 the parent sin impress upon the die child? 
what heart can think the grief which he sustain;
 when the king crime bring vengeance on the land;
 and the inexorable prophet voice
 give famine, plague, or war; and bid he fix his choice? 

he die; and oh! may no reflection shed
 it be poisonous venom on the royal dead:
 yet the unwilling truth must be express;
 which long have labour in this pensive breast:
 die he add to my weight of care:
 he make i to his crime undoubted heir:
 leave his unfinished murder to his son,
 and joab blood intail on judah crown. 

young as i be, i haste to fulfil
 the cruel dictate of my parent will. 
of his fair deed a distant view i take;
 but turn the tube upon his fault to look;
 forget his youth, spend in his country be cause,
 his care of right, his reverence to the law:
 but can with joy his year of folly trace,
 break and old in bathsheba embrace;
 can follow he, where ever he stray from good,
 and cite his sad example; while i tread
 path open to deceit, and track with blood. 
soon docile to the secret act of ill,
 with smile i can betray, with temper kill:
 soon in a brother can a rival view;
 watch all his act, and all his way pursue. 
in vain for life he to the altar flee:
 ambition and revenge have certain speed. 
even there, my soul, even there he shall have fall;
 but that my interest do my rage conceal. 
double my crime, i promise, and deceive;
 purpose to slay, while swear to forgive. 
treaty, persuasion, sigh, and tear be vain:
 with a mean lie curse vengeance i sustain;
 join fraud to force, and policy to power;
 until of the destine fugitive secure,
 in solemn state to parricide i rise;
 and, as god live, this day my brother die. 

be witness to my tear, celestial Muse! 
in vain i will forget, in vain excuse
 fraternal blood by my direction spill;
 in vain on joab head transfer the guilt:
 the deed be act by the subject hand;
 the sword be point by the king command. 
i be the murder: it be my alone;
 year of contrition must the crime atone:
 nor can my guilty soul expect relief,
 but from a long sincerity of grief. 

with a imperfect hand, and tremble heart,
 her love of truth superior to her art,
 already the reflect muse have trace
 the mournful figure of my action past. 
the pensive goddess have already teach,
 how vain be hope, and how vexatious thought;
 from grow childhood to decline age,
 how tedious every step, how gloomy every stage. 
this course of vanity almost complete,
 tire in the field of life, i hope retreat
 in the still shade of death: for dread and pain,
 and grief will find their shaft elance in vain,
 and their point break, retort from the head,
 safe in the grave, and free among the dead. 

yet tell i, fright reason! what be death? 
blood only stop, and interrupt breath? 
the utmost limit of a narrow span,
 and end of motion which with life begin? 
as smoke that rise from the kindle fire
 be see this moment, and the next expire:
 as empty cloud by rise wind be toss,
 their fleet form scarce soon find than lose:
 so vanish our state: so pass our day:
 so life but open now, and now decay:
 the cradle and the tomb, alas! so nigh;
 to live be scarce distinguish from to die. 

cure of the miser wish, and coward fear,
 death only show we, what we know be near. 
with courage therefore view the point hour;
 dread not death anger; but expect his power;
 nor nature law with fruitless sorrow mourn;
 but dye, o mortal man! for thou be bear. 

cautious through doubt; by want of courage, wise,
 to such advice, the reasoner still reply. 

yet measure all the long continue space,
 every successive day repeat race,
 since time first start from his pristin goal,
 until he have reach that hour, wherein my soul
 join to my body swell the womb; i be,
 (at least i think so) nothing: must i pass
 again to nothing, when this vital breath
 cease, consign i over to rest, and death? 
must the whole man, amaze thought! return
 to the cold marble, or contract urn? 
and never shall those particle agree,
 that be in life this individual he? 
but sever, must they join the general mass,
 through other form, and shape ordain to pass;
 nor thought nor image keep of what he be? 
do the great word that give he sense, ordain,
 that life shall never wake that sense again? 
and will no power his sink spirit save
 from the dark cave of death, and chamber of the grave? 

each evening i behold the set sun
 with downward speed into the ocean run:
 yet the same light (pass but some fleet hour)
 exert his vigor, and renew his power;
 start the bright race again: he constant flame
 rise and set, return still the same. 
i mark the various fury of the wind:
 these neither season guide, nor order bind:
 they now dilate, and now contract their force:
 various their speed, but endless be their course. 
from his first fountain and beginning Ouze,
 down to the sea each brook, and torrent flow:
 though sundry drop or leave, or swell the stream;
 the whole still run, with equal pace, the same. 
still other wave supply the rise urn;
 and the eternal flood no want of water mourn. 

why then must man obey the sad decree,
 which subject neither sun, nor wind, nor sea? 

a flower, that do with open morn arise,
 and flourish the day, at evening dye;
 a wing eastern blast, just skim over
 the ocean brow, and sink on the shore;
 a fire, who flame through crackle stubble fly;
 a meteor shoot from the summer sky;
 a bowl down the bend mountain roll;
 a bubble break, and a fable tell;
 a noontide shadow, and a midnight dream;
 be emblem, which with semblance apt proclaim
 our earthly course: but, o my soul! so fast
 must life run off; and death for ever last? 

this dark opinion, sure, be too confine:
 else whence this hope, and terror of the mind? 
do something still, and somewhere yet remain,
 reward or punishment, delight or pain? 
say: shall our relic second birth receive? 
sleep we to wake, and only die to live? 
when the sad wife have close her husband eye,
 and pierce the echo vault with doleful cry;
 lie the pale corpse not yet entire dead? 
the spirit only from the body flee,
 the gross part of heat and motion void,
 to be by fire, or worm, or time destroy;
 the soul, immortal substance, to remain,
 conscious of joy, and capable of pain? 
and if her act have be direct well,
 while with her friendly clay she deign to dwell;
 shall she with safety reach her pristine seat? 
find she rest endless, and her bliss complete? 
and while the bury man we idle mourn;
 do angel joy to see his better half return? 
but if she have deform this earthly life
 with murderous rapine, and seditious strife;
 amaze, repulse, and by those angel drive
 from the aetherial seat, and blissful heaven,
 in everlasting darkness must she lie,
 still more unhappy, that she can die? 

amid two sea on one small point of land
 weary, uncertain, and amaze we stand:
 on either side our thought incessant turn:
 forward we dread; and look back we mourn. 
lose the present in this dubious have;
 and lose our self betwixt the future, and the past. 

these cruel doubt contend in my breast,
 my reason stagger, and my hope oppress,
 once more i say: once more i will inquire,
 what be this little, agile, pervious fire,
 this flutter motion, which we call the mind? 
how do she act? and where be she confine? 
have we the power to guide she, as we please? 
whence then those evil, that obstruct our ease? 
we happiness pursue; we fly from pain;
 yet the pursuit, and yet the flight be vain:
 and, while poor nature labour to be bless,
 by day with pleasure, and by night with rest;
 some strong power elude our sickly will;
 dash our rise hope with certain ill;
 and make we with reflective trouble see,
 that all be destine, which we fancy free. 

that power superior then, which rule our mind,
 be his decree by human prayer incline. 
will he for sacrifice our sorrow ease? 
and can our tear reverse his firm decree? 
then let religion aid, where reason fail:
 throw load of incense in, to turn the scale;
 and let the silent sanctuary show,
 what from the babble Scholes we may not know,
 how man may shun, or bear his destine part of woe. 

what shall amend, or what absolve our fate? 
anxious we hover in a mediate state,
 betwixt infinity and nothing; bound,
 or boundless term, who doubtful sense confound
 unequal thought; while all we apprehend,
 be, that our hope must rise, our sorrow end;
 as our creator deign to be our friend. 

i say; — and instant bad the priest prepare
 the ritual sacrifice, and solemn prayer. 
select from vulgar herd, with garland gay,
 a hundred bull ascend the sacred way. 
the artful youth proceed to form the choir;
 they breath the flute, or strike the vocal wire. 
the maid in comely order next advance;
 they beat the tymbrel, and instruct the dance. 
follow the choose tribe from Levi spring,
 chant by just return the holy song. 
along the choir in solemn state they pass. 
— the anxious king come last. 
the sacred hymn perform, my promise vow
 i pay; and bow at the altar low,

father of heaven! i say, and judge of earth! 
who word call out this universe to birth;
 by who kind power and influence care
 the various creature move, and live, and be;
 but, cease once that care; withdraw that power;
 they move (alas!) and live, and be no more:
 omniscient master, omnipresent king,
 to thou, to thou, my last distress i bring. 

thou, that can still the rage of the sea,
 chain up the wind, and bid the tempest cease;
 redeem my shipwrecked soul from rage gust
 of cruel passion, and deceitful lust:
 from storm of rage, and dangerous rock of pride,
 let thy strong hand this little vessel guide
 (it be thy hand that make it) through the tide
 impetuous of this life: let thy command
 direct my course, and bring i safe to land. 

if, while this weary flesh draw fleet breath,
 not satisfy with life, afraid of death,
 it haply be thy will, that i shall know
 glimpse of delight, or pause from anxious woe;
 from now, from instant now, great sire, dispel
 the cloud that press my soul; from now reveal
 a gracious beam of light; from now inspire
 my tongue to sing, my hand to touch the lyre:
 my open thought to joyous prospect raise;
 and, for thy mercy, let i sing thy praise. 
or, if thy will ordain, i still shall wait
 some new hereaft, and a future state;
 permit i strength, my weight of woe to bear;
 and raise my mind superior to my care. 
let i, however unable to explain
 the secret lab'rynth of thy way to man,
 with humble zeal confess thy awful power;
 still weep hope, and wonder still adore. 
so in my conquest be thy may declare:
 and, for thy justice, be thy name revere. 

my prayer scarce end, a stupendous gloom
 darken the air; loud thunder shake the dome:
 to the beginning miracle succeed
 a awful silence, and religious dread. 
sudden break forth a more than common day:
 the sacred wood, which on the altar lie,
 untouched, unlighted glow —
 ambrosial odour, such as never flow
 from Arab Gum, or the sabaean rose,
 do round the air evolve scent diffuse:
 the holy ground be wet with heavenly dew:
 celestial music (such jessides lyre,
 such miriam timbrel will in vain require)
 strike to my thought through my admire ear,
 with ecstasy too fine, and pleasure hard to bear. 
and lo! what see my ravish eye? what feel
 my wonder soul? a open cloud reveal
 a heavenly form embody and array
 with robe of light. i hear: the angel say:

cease, man of woman bear, to hope relief
 from daily trouble, and continue grief. 
thy hope of joy deliver to the wind:
 suppress thy passion; and prepare thy mind. 
free and familiar with misfortune grow:
 be use to sorrow, and inure to woe. 
by weaken toil, and hoary age overcome,
 see thy decrease; and hasten to thy tomb. 
leave to thy child tumult, strife, and war,
 portion of toil, and legacy of care. 
send the successive ill through age down;
 and let each weep father tell his son,
 that deep strike, and more distinct grieve,
 he must augment the sorrow he receive. 

the child to who success thy hope be bind,
 ever thou be scarce inter, or he be crown;
 to lust of arbitrary sway incline,
 (that curse poyson to the prince mind!) 
shall from thy dictate and his duty rove,
 and lose his great defence, his people love. 
ill counsel, vanquish, fugitive, disgrace,
 shall mourn the fame of Jacob strength efface. 
shall sigh, the king diminish, and the crown
 with lessen ray descend to his son. 
shall see the wreath, his grandsire know to reap
 by active toil, and military sweat,
 pine incline their sickly leaf, and shed
 their fall honour from his giddy head. 
by arm, or prayer unable to assuage
 domestic horror, and intestine rage,
 shall from the victor, and the vanquish fear,
 from israel arrow, and from judah spear:
 shall cast his weary limb on Jordan flood,
 by brother arm disturb, and stain with kindred-blood. 

hence labour year shall weep their destine race
 charge with ill omen; sully with disgrace. 
time by necessity compel, shall go
 through scene of war, and epocha of woe. 
the empire lessen in a part stream,
 shall lose it be course —
 indulge thy tear: the heathen shall blaspheme:
 Judah shall fall, oppress by grief and shame;
 and man shall from her ruin know her fame. 

new ægypt yet, and second bond remain,
 a harsh Pharaoh, and a heavy chain. 
again obedient to a dire command,
 thy captive son shall leave the promise land. 
their name more low, their servitude more vile,
 shall, on euphrates bank, renew the grief of Nile. 

these point spire that wind the ambient sky
 inglorious change! shall in destruction lie
 low, level with the dust; their height unknown,
 or measure by their ruin. yonder throne,
 for last glory build, design the seat
 of king for ever bless, for ever great,
 remove by the invader barbarous hand,
 shall grace his triumph in a foreign land. 
the tyrant shall demand yonder sacred load
 of gold and vessel set apart to god,
 then by vile hand to common use debase;
 shall send they flow round his drunken feast,
 with sacrilegious taunt, and impious jest. 

twice fourteen age shall their way complete:
 empire by various turn shall rise and set;
 while thy abandon tribe shall only know
 a different master, and a change of woe:
 with down-cast eye-lid, and with look aghast,
 shall dread the future, or bewail the past. 

afflict Israel shall sit weep down,
 fast by the stream, where babel water run;
 their harp upon the neighbour willow hang,
 nor joyous hymn encourage their tongue,
 nor cheerful dance their foot; with toil oppress,
 their weary limb aspire but to rest. 
in the reflective stream the sigh bride,
 view her charm impair, abash shall hide
 her pensive head; and in her languid face
 the bridegroom shall foresee his sickly race:
 while ponderous fetter vex their close embrace. 
with irksome anguish then your priest shall mourn
 their long-neglected feast despair return,
 and sad oblivion of their solemn day. 
thenceforth their voice they shall only raise,
 loud to weep. by day your fright seer
 shall call for fountain to express their tear;
 and wish their eye be flood: by night from dream
 of open gulf, black storm, and rage flame,
 start amaze, shall to the people show
 emblem of heavenly wrath, and mystic type of woe. 

the captive, as their tyrant shall require,
 that they shall breath the song, and touch the lyre,
 shall say: can Jacob servile race rejoice,
 untune the music, and disuse the voice? 
what can we play? (they shall discourse) how sing
 in foreign land, and to a barbarous king? 
we and our father from our childhood breed
 to watch the cruel victor eye, to dread
 the arbitrary lash, to bend, to grieve;
 (outcast of mortal race!) can we conceive
 image of ought delightful, soft, or gay? 
alas! when we have toil the longsome day;
 the full bliss our heart aspire to know,
 be but some interval from active woe;
 in break rest, and startle sleep to mourn;
 until morn, the tyrant, and the scourge return. 
breed up in grief, can pleasure be our theme? 
our endless anguish do not nature claim? 
reason, and sorrow be to we the same. 
alas! with wild amazement we require,
 if idle folly be not pleasure sire:
 madness, we fancy, give a ill-timed birth
 to grin laughter, and to frantic mirth. 

this be the series of perpetual woe,
 which thou, alas! and thy be bear to know. 
illustrious wretch, repine not, nor reply:
 view not, what heaven ordain, with reason eye;
 too bright the object be: the distance be too high. 
the man who will resolve the work of fate,
 may limit number, and make crooked strait:
 stop thy enquiry then; and curb thy sense;
 nor let dust argue with omnipotence. 
it be god who must dispose, and man sustain,
 bear to endure, forbid to complain. 
thy sum of life must his decree fulfil:
 what derogate from his command, be ill;
 and that alone be good, which centre in his will. 

yet that thy labour sense may not droop,
 lose to delight, and destitute of hope;
 remark what i, god messenger, aver
 from he, who neither can deceive, nor err. 
the land at length redeem, shall cease to mourn;
 shall from her sad captivity return. 
Sion shall raise her long-dejected head;
 and in her court the law again be read. 
again the glorious temple shall arise,
 and with new lustre pierce the neighbour sky. 
the promise seat of empire shall again
 cover the mountain, and command the plain,
 and from thy race distinguish, one shall spring,
 great in act than victor, more than king
 in dignity and power, send down from heaven,
 to succour earth. to he, to he it be give,
 passion, and care, and anguish to destroy. 
through he soft peace, and plenitude of joy
 perpetual over the world redeem shall flow. 
no more may man inquire, nor angel know. 

now, Solomon, remember who thou be,
 act through thy remnant life the decent part. 
go forth: be strong: with patience, and with care
 perform, and suffer: to thy self severe,
 gracious to other, thy desire suppress,
 diffuse thy virtue, first of man, be best. 
thy sum of duty let two word contain;
 o may they grave in thy heart remain! 
be humble, and be just. the angel say:
 with upward speed his agile wing he spread;
 while on the holy ground i prostrate lay,
 by various doubt impel, or to obey,
 or to object: at length (my mournful look
 heavenward erect) determine, thus i speak:

supreme, alwise, eternal potentate! 
sole author, sole disposer of our fate! 
enthrone in light, and immortality,
 who no man full see, and none can see! 
original of being! power divine! 
since that i live, and that i think, be thy;
 benign creator, let thy plastic hand
 dispose it be own effect. let thy command
 restore, great father, thy instruct son;
 and in my act may thy great will be do. 
