the fakeer:

a tale.

by the same.

a fakeer (a religious well know in the east,
not much like a parson, still less like a priest)
with no cant, no sly jesuitical art,
field-preaching, hypocrisy, learning, or part;
by a happy refinement in mortification,
grow the oracle, saint, and the pope of his nation.
but what do he do this esteem to acquire?
do he torture his head or his bosom with fire?
be his neck in a portable pillory case?
do he fasten a chain to his leg or his waist?
no. his holiness rise to this sovereign pitch
by the merit of run long nail in his breech.

a wealthy young indian, approach the shrine,
thus in banter accost the prophetic divine.
this tribute accept for your interest with fo,
who with torture you serve, and who will you must know;
to your suppliant disclose his immortal decree;
tell i which of the heaven be allot for i.

fakeer.

let i first know your merit. 

indian.

i strive to be just:
to be true to my friend, to my wife, to my trust:
in religion i due observe every form:
with a heart to my country devote and warm:
i give to the poor, and i lend to the rich —

fakeer.

but how many nail do you run in your breech?

indian.

with submission i speak to your reverence tail;
but mine have no taste for a tenpenny nail.

fakeer.

well! i will pray to our prophet and get you prefer;
though no farther expect than to heaven the third.
with i in the thirty your seat to obtain,
you must qualify due with hunger and pain.

indian.

with you in the thirty! you impudent rogue!
can such wretch as you give to madness a vogue!
though the priesthood of fo on the vulgar impose,
by squint whole year at the end of their nose,
though with cruel device of mortification
they adore a vain idol of modern creation,
do the god of the heaven such a service direct?
can his mercy approve a self-punishing sect?
will his wisdom be worship with chain and with nail?
or ever look for his rite in your nose and tail?
come along to my house and these penance leave,
give your belly a feast, and your breech a reprieve.

this reason unhinge each fanatical notion;
and stagger our saint in his chair of promotion.
at length with reluctance he rise from his seat:
and resign his nail and his fame for retreat,
two week his new life he admire and enjoy:
the third he with plenty and quiet be cloy.
to live undistinguished to he be the pain,
a existence unnoticed he can not sustain.
in retirement he sigh for the fame-giving chair:
for the crowd to admire he, to reverence and stare:
no endearment of pleasure and ease can prevail;
he the saintship resume, and new lard his tail.

our fakeer represent all the votary of fame;
their idea, their mean, and their end be the same:
the sportsman, the buck; all the hero of vice,
with their gallantry, lewdness, the bottle and dice;
the poet, the critic, the metaphysician,
the courtier, the patriot, all politician;
the statesman begird with the importunate ring,
(i have almost complete my list with the king)
all labour alike to illustrate my tale;
all torture by choice with the invisible nail.
