sketch from Bowden hill after sickness.

how cheer be thy prospect, airy hill,
to he who, pale and languid, on thy brow
pause, respire, and bid hail again
the upland breeze, the comfortable sun,
and all the landscape hue! upon the point
of the descend steep i stand.
how rich,
how mantling in the gay and gorgeous tint
of summer! far beneath i, sweep on,
from field to field, from vale to culture vale,
the prospect spread its crowd beauty wide!
long line of sunshine, and of shadow, streak
the farther distance; where the pass light
alternate fall, 'amid undistinguished tree,
white dot of gleamy dome, and peep tower,
as from the painter instant touch, appear.

as thus the eye range from hill to hill,
here white with pass sunshine, there with tree
innumerable shade, cluster more,
as the long vale retire, the ample scene,
warm with new grace and beauty, seem to live.

live! all be animation! beauty! hope!
snatch from the dark and dreamless grave, so late,
shall i pass silent, now first issue forth,
to feel again thy fragrance, to respire
thy breath, to hail thy look, thy live look,
o nature!
let i the deep joy contrast,
which now the inmost heart like music fill,
with the sick chamber sorrow, oft from morn,
silent, till linger eve, save when the sound
of whisper steal, and bode breathe more low,
as friend approach the pillow: so awake
from deadly trance, the sick man lift his eye,
then in despondence close they on all,
all earth fond wish! oh, how change be now
his thought! he see rich nature glow round,
he feel her influence! languid with delight,
and while his eye be fill with transient fire,
he almost think he hear she gentle say,
live, live! o nature, thou, in the soft wind,
thou, in the soothe sound of summer leave,
when the still earth lie sultry; thou, methinks,
even now i hear bid welcome to thy vale
and wood again!
and i will welcome they,
and pour, as erst, the song of heartfelt praise.
from yonder line, where fade the farther hill
which bind the blue lap of the swell vale,
on who last line, see like a beacon, hang
thy tower, benevolent, accomplish Hoare,
to where i stand, how wide the interval!
yet instantaneous, to the hurry eye
display; though peep tower and village
thick scatter, 'amid the intermingle elm,
and town remote mark by hover smoke,
and grass-green pasture with their herd, and seat
of rural beauty, cottage and farm,
unnumbered as the hedgerow, lie between!

roam at large to where the grey sky bend,
the eye scarce know to rest, till back recall
by yonder ivy cloister in the plain,
who turret, peep pale above the shade,
smile in the venerable grace of year.
as the few thread of age silver hair,
just sprinkle over the forehead, lend a grace
of saint reverence, seemly, though compare
with bloom Mary tress like the morn;
so the grey weather-stained tower yet wear
a secret charm impressive, though oppose
to view in verdure flourish, the wood,
and scene of attic taste, that glitter near. 
o venerable pile, though now no more
the pensive passenger, at evening, hear
the slowly-chanted vesper; or the sound
of "miserere," die along the vale;
yet piety and honour age retire,
there hold their blameless sojourn, ere the bowl
be break, or the silver chord be loose.

nor can i pass, snatch from untimely fate,
without a secret prayer, that so my age,
when many a circle season have decline,
in charity and peace may wait its close.

yet still be with i, o delightful friend,
soothe companion of my vacant hour,
oh, still be with i, spirit of the muse!
not to subdue, or hold in moody spell,
the err sense, but to animate
and warm my heart, wherever the prospect smile,
with nature fair view; not to display
vain ostentation of a poet art,
but silent, and associate of my joy
or sorrow, to infuse a tenderness,
a thought, that seem to mingle, as i gaze,
with all the work of god. so cheer my path,
from youth to sober manhood, till the light
of evening smile upon the fade scene.

and though no peal clarion swell my fame,
when all my day be go; let i not pass,
like the forget cloud of yesterday,
nor unremembered by the fatherless
of the love village where my bone be lay.
