aminta.

a elegy.

by mr. Gerrard.

a overgrow wood my wander step invade,
 with surface mantle in untrodden snow;
 dire haunt, for none but savage monster make,
 where frost descend, and howl tempest blow. 

here, from the search of busy mortal stray,
 my woe-worn soul shall hug her gall chain:
 for sure, no forest boast too deep a shade,
 no haunt too wild for misery to remain. 

o my aminta! dear distract name! 
late all my comfort, all my fond delight;
 still writhe my soul beneath its torture flame,
 still thy pale image fill my ache sight! 

when shall vain memory slumber over her woe? 
when to oblivion be her tale resign? 
when shall this fatal form in death repose,
 like thy, fair victim, to the dust consign? 

again the accent falter on my tongue;
 again to tear the conscious tear succeed;
 from sharp reflection be the dagger spring,
 and nature, wound to the centre, bleed. 

you bitter sky! upon the tale descend —
 you blast! though rude your visit, lend a ear —
 around, the gentle oak, your branch bend,
 and, as you listen, drop a icy tear. 

it be when the step with conscious pleasure rove,
 where round the shade the circle woodbine throng;
 when Flora wanton over the enamel grove,
 and feather choirs indulge the amorous song. 

inspire by duteous love, i fond stray,
 two milkwhite dove officious to ensnare:
 beneath a silent thicket as they play,
 a grateful present for my soft fair. 

but ah! in smile no more they meet my sight,
 their ruffle head lay gasp on the ground:
 where (my dire emblem) a rapacious kite
 tear their soft limb, and strew their plume around. 

the tear of pity steal into my eye;
 while rude passion in their turn succeed;
 forbid the victim unrevenged to die,
 and doom the author of their wrong to bleed. 

with hasty step, enrage, i homeward run,
 (curse on my speed!) the unerring tube i bring:
 that fatal hour my date of woe begin,
 too sharp to tell — too horrible for thought —

disastrous deed! — irrevocable ill! —
 how shall i tell the anguish of my fate! 
teach i, remorseless monster, not to feel,
 instruct i, fiend and fury, to relate! 

wrathful behind the guilty shade i steal,
 i raise the tube — the clamorous wood resound —
 too late i see the idol of my soul,
 strike by my aim, fall shriek to the ground! 

no other bliss her soul allow but i;
 (hapless the pair that thus indulgent prove)
 she seek concealment from a shady tree,
 in amorous silence to observe her love. 

i run — but o! too soon i find it true! —
 from her stain breast life crimson stream apace —
 from her wan eye the sparkle lustre fly —
 the short-lived rose fade from her face! 

god! — can i bear that fond reproachful look,
 that strive her peerless innocence to plead! —
 but partial death awhile her tongue forsake,
 to save a wretch that doom himself to bleed. 

while i distract press she in my arm,
 and fond strive to imbibe her late breath;
 "o spare, rash love, she cry, thy fatal charm,
" nor seek cold shelter in the arm of death. 

 "content beneath thy err hand i die. 
" our fate grow envious of a bliss so true;
 "then urge not thy distress when low i lie,
" but in this breath receive my last adieu! "—

no more she speak, but droop her lily head! 
in death she sicken — breathless — haggard — pale —
 while all my inmost soul with horror bleed,
 and ask kind vengeance from the pass gale. 

where sleep your bolt, you linger lightning say? 
why rive you not this self-condemned breast? —
 or why, too passive earth, do thou delay,
 to stretch thy jaw, and crush i into rest? —

low in the dust the beauteous corpse i place,
 bedew and soft with many a fall tear;
 with sable yew the rise turf i grace,
 and bid the cypress mourn in silence near. 

oft as bright morn all-searching eye return,
 full to my view the fatal spot be bring;
 through sleepless night my haunt spirit mourn,
 no gloom can hide i from distract thought. 

when, spotless victim, shall my form decay? 
this guilty load, say, when shall i resign? 
when shall my spirit wing her cheerless way,
 and my cold corpse lie treasure up with thy? 
