a essay on hope.

to you who never the will verse refuse,
 thus sing a humble but a grateful muse:
 our theme be hope — but of a different kind,
 the bane or bless of the subject mind;
 this dawn joy that to the soul be give,
 as a short earnest of its future heaven:
 to blame be not the purpose of my song,
 but warn our sister not to place it wrong. 
shun trifle hope, that bid your fancy roll,
 the constant torment of a restless soul:
 for two pale handmaid be for ever near,
 sick disappointment and the secret tear:
 it be this that make the restless heart repine,
 beneath the treasure of a indian i
 much fortune give — yet, give we more, they cry,
 and some new prospect lure the dazzle eye:
 like wanton babe they reach at something more,
 and drop the gewgaw which they hold before. 

see the puff tradesman strut before his door,
 who birth be humble and who fortune poor;
 yet you may see his rove thought depend
 on some bold venture or some wealthy friend,
 till the lose bankrupt drop into the jaw
 of pale discredit and voracious law. 

the grave-faced student better learn than feed
 with store of logic in his ache head,
 see please picture in his bosom draw,
 the dean soft cushion and the bishop lawn:
 he dine with lord and take the high place,
 and wed a countess, cousin to his grace. 
but soon his heart the lose delusion mourn:
 and the proud prelate to a curate turn
 on some dark dome with thirty pound per-ann,
 he sip his liquour in a pewter Cann. 

young seizum, fate to distract the law,
 who talk of man and book he never see,
 now strut a counsellor, a sergeant now,
 while the quick turn elate his scornful brow. 
behold the judge in that command frown:
 see then: just then he stroke his ermine gown. 
Cecilia soft, who please feature shine
 bright in their wane, and beauteous in decline,
 still to her eye recall the scatter dart,
 still hope the conquest of a thousand heart. 
care stalk around: vexation hover nigh;
 her friend bewail she, and her child cry:
 her wound ear their hateful whine tire,
 who fancy dwell upon a wealthy esquire:
 wrap in soft vision on her couch she lie;
 knight, peer, and garter swim before her eye. 
she ride in triumph through her husband field,
 and hear the rattle of her chariot wheel,
 till her charm sense will contain no more;
 then fly the vision through its ivory door,

see Acamas with time be sad burden bow,
 guilt in his breast and wrinkle on his brow;
 yet point out cloe for his charm bride,
 and fain will tempt she to his freeze side:
 at chapel where soft grace and virtue call,
 and pale vice tremble at the sacred wall;
 where conscience warn the guilty wretch to pray,
 and beg a bless on his close day. 
the preacher read: but Acamas the while
 grin at his cloe with a ghastly smile. 
in their red orb his wait eye-ball roll,
 and charm cloe rush on his soul:
 but death will teach the silver-bearded fool
 some other lesson in his gloomy school. 

blank disappointment with its train attend
 in delia heart, if delia heart depend
 on silia tongue so apt hang with guile,
 on cynthio friendship or on clara smile:
 such courtly friend be like the showery bow,
 tinge with false lustre by reflection glow:
 like its faint ray they hardly last a hour,
 lose in a cloud or melt in a shower. 

if trifle hope have any room to plead,
 it be that where nature simple dictate lead:
 so the wet hind, who travel over the plain
 through the cold mire and afflict rain;
 though his low roof with trickle shower run,
 may hope next morn to see the cheerful sun:
 or when keen hunger at the evening tide
 drive home the shepherd to his rustic bride,
 his honest reason haply may not stray,
 though he shall dream of dumpling all the way. 

see sad Aemilia doom by fatal vow
 to the harsh usage of a tyrant spouse,
 to see his mistress in her woe rejoice,
 her fortune waste on his guilty choice,
 to bear reproach double on her ear,
 yet only answer with a silent tear. 
though patient wife must wait the fate good time;
 yet she, i think, may hope without a crime. 

but the grand hope that yield perpetual joy,
 no trifle give, no trifle can destroy;
 with mercy from the bless abode it come,
 its birth celestial and its end the same;
 that bid our day in one smooth tenor roll,
 its task to cheer and harmonise the soul. 
on smart want it pour a heal balm,
 make toil seem pleasant and affliction calm. 
