a epistle to the right honourable RICHARD earl of Burlington. 

it be strange, the miser shall his care employ
 to gain those riches he can never enjoy:
 be it less strange, the prodigal shall waste
 his wealth to purchase what he never can taste? 
not for himself he see, or hear, or eat;
 artist must choose his picture, music, meat:
 he buy for Topham drawing and design,
 for fountain statue, and for Curio coin,
 rare monkish manuscript for Hearne alone,
 and book for Mead, and rarity for Sloan. 
think we all these be for himself? no more
 than his fine wife (my lord) or fine whore. 

for what have virro paint, build, and plant? 
only to show how many taste he want. 
what bring sir shylock ill-got wealth to waste? 
some daemon whisper, "knight shall have a taste."
heaven visit with a taste the wealthy fool,
 and need no rod, but s—d with a rule. 
see sportive fate, to punish awkward pride,
 bid Babo build, and send he such a guide:
 a stand sermon! at each year expense,
 that never coxcomb reach magnificence. 

oft have have you hint to your brother peer,
 a certain truth, which many buy too dear:
 something there be, more needful than expense,
 and something previous even to taste — it be sense;
 good sense, which only be the gift of heaven,
 and though no science, fair worth the seven. 
a light, which in yourself you must perceive;
 Jones and le nôtre have it not to give. 

to build, to plant, whatever you intend,
 to rear the column, or the arch to bend,
 to swell the terras, or to sink the grot;
 in all, let nature never be forget. 
consult the genius of the place in all,
 that tell the water or to rise, or fall,
 or help the ambitious hill the heaven to scale,
 or scoop in circle theatre the vale,
 call in the country, catch open glade,
 join will wood, and vary shade from shade,
 now break, or now direct, the intend line;
 paint as you plant, and as you work, design. 

begin with sense, of every art the soul,
 part answer part, shall slide into a whole,
 spontaneous beauty all around advance,
 start, even from difficulty, strike, from chance;
 nature shall join you; time shall make it grow
 a work to wonder at — perhaps a stow. 

without it, proud Versailles! thy glory fall,
 and nero terrace desert their wall:
 the vast parterres a thousand hand shall make,
 lo! Bridgman come, and float they with a lake:
 or cut wide view through mountain to the plain,
 you will wish your hill, and shelter seat, again. 

behold villario ten-year toil complete,
 his quincunx darken, his espalier meet,
 the wood support the plain; the part unite,
 and strength of shade contend with strength of light;
 his bloomy bed a wave glow display,
 blush in bright diversity of day,
 with silver-quivering rill maeander over —
 — enjoy they, you! villario can no more,
 tire of the scene parterres and fountain yield,
 he find at last he better like a field. 

through his young wood how please Sabinus stray,
 or sit delight in the thicken shade,
 with annual joy the redden shoot to greet,
 and see the stretch branch long to meet! 
his son fine taste a opener vista love,
 foe to the dryad of his father groves,
 one boundless green or flourish carpet view,
 with all the mournful family of yew;
 the thrive plant ignoble broomstick make
 now sweep those ally they be bear to shade. 

yet hence the poor be clothe, the hungry feed;
 health to himself, and to his infant bread
 the labourer bear; what thy hard heart deny,
 thy charitable vanity supply. 
another age shall see the golden ear
 embrown thy slope, and nod on thy parterre,
 deep harvest bury all thy pride have plan,
 and laugh Ceres reassume the land. 

at timon villa let we pass a day,
 where all cry out, "what sum be throw away! 
so proud, so grand, of that stupendous air,
 soft and agreeable come never there. 
greatness, with Timon, dwell in such a draught
 as bring all Brobdignag before your thought:
 to compass this, his building be a town,
 his pond a ocean, his parterre a down;
 who but must laugh the master when he see? 
a puny insect, shiver at a breeze! 
lo! what huge heap of littleness around! 
the whole, a labour quarry above ground! 
two cupid squirt before: a lake behind
 improve the keenness of the northern wind. 
his garden next your admiration call,
 on every side you look, behold the wall! 
no please intricacy intervene,
 no artful wildness to perplex the scene:
 grove nod at grove, each ally have a brother,
 and half the platform just reflect the other. 
the suffering eye invert nature see,
 tree cut to statue, statue thick as tree,
 with here a fountain, never to be play,
 and there a summer-house, that know no shade. 
here Amphitrite sail through myrtle bower;
 then gladiator fight, or die, in flower;
 unwatered see the droop sea-horse mourn,
 and swallow roost in nilus dusty urn. 

behold! my lord advance over the green,
 smite with the mighty pleasure, to be see:
 but soft — by regular approach — not yet —
 first through the length of yond hot terras sweat,
 and when up ten steep slope you have drag your thigh,
 just at his study-door he will bless your eye. 

his study? with what author be it store? 
in book, not author, curious be my lord;
 to all their date back he turn you round,
 these aldus print, those du suëil have bind. 
lo some be vellom, and the rest as good
 for all his lordship know, but they be wood. 
for lock or Milton it be in vain to look,
 these shelf admit not any modern book. 

and now the chapel silver bell you hear,
 that summons you to all the pride of prayer:
 light quirk of music, break and uneven,
 make the soul dance upon a jig to heaven. 
on paint ceiling you devout stare,
 where sprawl the saint of verrio, or laguerre,
 on gild cloud in fair expansion lie,
 and bring all paradise before your eye. 
to rest, the cushion, and soft Dean invite,
 who never mention hell to ear polite. 

but hark! the chime clock to dinner call;
 a hundred footstep scrape the marble hall:
 the rich buffet well-coloured serpent grace,
 and gape Triton spew to wash your face. 
be this a dinner? this a genial room? 
no, it be a temple, and a hecatomb;
 a solemn sacrifice, perform in state,
 you drink by measure, and to minute eat. 
so quick retire each fly course, you will swear
 Sancho dread doctor and his wand be there:
 between each act the tremble salver ring,
 from soup to sweet-wine, and god bless the king. 
in plenty starve, tantalise in state,
 and complaisant help to all i hate,
 treat, caress, and tire, i take my leave,
 sick of his civil pride, from morn to eve;
 i curse such lavish cost, and little skill,
 and swear, no day be ever past so ill. 

in you, my lord, taste sanctify expense,
 for splendour borrow all her ray from sense. 
you show we, Rome be glorious, not profuse,
 and pompous building once be thing of use. 
just as they be, yet shall your noble rule
 fill half the land with imitate fool,
 who random drawing from your sheet shall take,
 and of one beauty many blunder make;
 load some vain church with old theatric state;
 turn arc of triumph to a garden-gate;
 reverse your ornament, and hang they all
 on some patch doghole ek with end of wall,
 then clap four slice of pilaster on it,
 and palace with bit of rustic, it be a front:
 shall call the wind through long arcade to roar,
 proud to catch cold at a venetian door;
 conscious they act a true Palladian part,
 and if they starve, they starve by rule of art. 

yet thou proceed; be fall art thy care,
 erect new wonder, and the old repair,
 Jones and Palladio to themselves restore,
 and be whatever Vitruvius be before:
 till king call forth the idea of thy mind,
 proud to accomplish what such hand design,
 bid harbor open, public way extend,
 and temple, worthy of the god, ascend;
 bid the broad arch the dangerous flood contain,
 the mole project break the roar main;
 back to his bound their subject sea command,
 and roll obedient river through the land:
 these honour, peace to happy Britain bring,
 these be imperial work, and worthy king. 
