the female reign:

a ode.

by mr. Cobb.

i 

what can the british senate give,
to make the name of ANNA live,
by future people to be sing,
the labour of each grateful tongue?
can faithful register, or rhyme,
in charm eloquence, or sprightly wit,
the wonder of her reign transmit
to the unborn child of succeed time?
can painters oil, or statuaries art,
eternity to she impart?
no! title statue be but empty thing,
inscribe to royal vanity,
the sacrifice of flattery
to lawless Neros, or bourbonian king.
true virtue to her kindred star aspire,
do all our pomp of stone and verse surpass,
and mingle with etherial fire,
no useless ornament require
from speak colour, or from breathe brass.

ii.

great of prince! where the wander sun
do over earth habitable region roll,
from the eastern barrier to the western goal,
and see thy race of glory run
with swiftness equal to his own:
thou on the bank of flandrian Scaldis sing
the jocund swain release from Gallic fear:
the english voice unused to hear,
thou the repeat bank, thou every valley ring.

iii.

the sword of heaven how pious ANNA wield,
and heavenly vengeance on the guilty deal,
let the twice fugitive bavarian tell;
who, from his airy hope of better state,
by lust of sway irregular great,
like a apostate angel fall:
who, by imperial favour raise,
i the high rank of glory blaze:
and have till now unrivaled shine,
more than a king content with his own;
but lucifer bold step he tread,
who dare assault the throne of god;
and for content realm of blissful light,
gain the sad privilege to be
the first in solid misery,
monarch of hell, and woe, and everlasting night.
corruption of the best be always worst;
and foul ambition like a evil wind,
blight the fair blossom of a noble mind;
and if a seraph fall, he be double curse.

iv.

have guile, and pride, and envy grow
in the black grove of Styx alone,
nor ever have on earth the baleful crop be sow:
the swain without amaze, have till
the flandrian glebe, a guiltless field:
nor have he wonder, when he find
the bone of hero in the ground:
no crimson stream have late swell
the dyle, the Danube, and the scheld.
but evil be of necessary growth,
to rouse the brave, and banish sloth;
and some be bear to win the star,
by sweat and blood, and worthy scar.
heroic virtue be by action see,
and vice serve to make it keen;
and as gigantic tyrant rise,
nassaus and Churchill leave the sky,
the earth-born monster to chastise.

v. 

if, heavenly Muse, you burn with a desire
to praise the man who all admire;
come from thy learn castalian spring,
and stretch aloft thy pegasean wing:
strike the loud pindaric string,
like the lark who soar and sing;
and as you sail the liquid sky,
cast on menapian field your weep eye:
for weep they sure must,
to see the bloody annual sacrifice;
to think how the neglect dust,
which with contempt be base tread,
be once the limb of captain, brave and just,
the mortal part of some great demi-god;
who for thrice fifty year of stubborn war,
with slaughter arm, the gun and sword,
have dig the mighty sepulchre,
and fall as martyr on record,
of tyranny avenge, and liberty restore.

vi.

see, where at audenard, with heap of slay,
the heroic man inspire brave,
mow across, bestrew the plain,
and with new tenant crowd the wealthy grave.
his mind unshaken at the frightful scene,
his look as cheerful serene,
the rout battle to pursue,
as once adorn the paphian queen,
when to her thracian paramour she fly.
the gather troop he ken from far,
and with a bridegroom passion and delight,
court the war, and glow for the fight,
the new Salmoneus meet the celtic thunderer.
ah, curse pride! infernal dream!
which drive he to this wild extreme,
that dust a deity shall seem;
be think, as through the wonder street he ride,
a man immortal, or a god:
with rattle brass, and trample horse,
shall counterfeit the inimitable force
of divine thunder: horrid crime!
but vengeance be the child of time,
and will too sure be repay
on his profane devote head,
who dare affront the power above,
and their eternal flame disgrace,
too fatal, brandish by the real Jove,
or Pallas, who assume and fill his awful place:

vii.

the british Pallas! who, as Homer do
for her love Diomede,
her hero mind with wisdom fill,
and heavenly courage in his heart instil.
hence through the thick squadron do he ride,
with anna angel by his side.
with what uncommon speed
he spur his foam, fiery steed,
and push on through midmost fire,
where france fortune, with her son, retire!
now here, now there, the sweep ruin fly;
 as when the Pleiades arise,
the southern wind afflict the sky,
then, mutter over the deep, buffet the unruly brine,
until cloud and water seem to join.
or as a dyke cut by malicious hand,
overflow the fertile Netherlands;
through the wide yawn, the impetuous sea,
lavish of his new liberty,
bestride the vale, and, with tumultuous noise,
bellows along the deluge plain
pernicious to the ripen grain;
far as the horizon he destroy:
the weep shepherd from a hill bewail the watery reign.

viii.

so rapid flow the unimprisoned stream!
so strong the force of mindelheim!
in vain the wood of audenard
will shield the Gaul, a fenceless guard.
as soon may whirlwind be withhold,
as marlb'rough footstep over the foam scheld.
in vain the torrent will oppose,
in vain arm bank, and host of foe:
the foe with coward-haste retire,
fly fast than the river flow,
and swift than our fire.
Vendosme from far upbraid their shame,
and plead his royal master fame.
"by condè mighty ghost," he cry,
"by Turenne, luxemburgh, and all
"those noble soul, who fall a sacrifice
"at lens, at Fleurus, and at Landen fight,
"stop, i conjure, your ignominious flight."
but fear be deaf to honour call.
each frown threat and soothe prayer
be lose in the regardless air:
as well he may
the billow of the ocean stay;
while Churchill like a drive wind,
or high springtide, pursue behind,
and with redouble speed urge their forward way.

ix.

nor less, Eugenius, thy important care,
thou second thunderbolt of war!
partner in danger and in fame,
the wind, with Marlborough, shall bear
to distant colony thy conquer name.
nor shall my muse forget to sing
from harmony what blessing spring:
to tell how death do envious repine,
to see a friendship so divine;
when in a ball destroy form she pass,
and mark thy threaten brow at last,
but dare not touch that sacred brain,
where europe mighty counsel reign;
for strait she bow her ghastly head,
she see the mark of heaven, and flee,
as cruel Brennus once, insult Gaul,
when he, at allia fatal flood,
have fill the plain with roman blood,
with conscious awe forsake the capitol,
where Jove, revenger of profaneness, stand.

x. 

but where the good and brave command,
what capitol, what bulwark can withstand?
virtue, approve of heaven, can pass
through wall, through tower, and gate of brass.
Lisle, like a mistress, have be court long,
by all the valiant and the young,
the fair progeny of vauban art;
till savoy warlike prince withstand
her frown terror, and through sea of blood
tear the bright darling from the old tyrant heart.
such Buda see he, when proud apti fall,
unhappy, valiant infidel!
who, vanquish by superior strength,
surrender up his haughty breath,
upon the breach measure his manly length,
and shun the bowstring by a noble death.

xi.

such harscam field behold he in his bloom,
when victory bespeak he for her own.
her favourite, immortal son,
and tell of better year revolve on the loom:
how he shall make the turkish crescent wane,
and choke Tibiscus with the slay;
while vizier lay beneath the lofty pile
of slaughter bassaus, who over bassaus roll;
and all his numerous act she tell,
from latian Carpi down to flandrian Lisle.

xii.

honour, with open arm, receive at last
the hero who through virtue temple past;
and shower down laurel from above,
on those who heaven and ANNA love.
and some, not spare, she throw
for the young eagle, who can try
the faith and judgement of the sky,
and dare the sun with steady eye;
for Hanover and prussia brow,
Eugenes in bloom, and future marlborough:
to Hanover, to brunswick second grace,
descendent from a long imperial race,
the muse direct her honourable flight,
and prophecy, from so serene a morn,
to what clear glory he be bear,
when blaze with a full meridian light,
he shall the british hemisphere adorn;
when Mars shall lay his batter target down,
and he, (since death will never spare
the good, the pious, and the fair)
in his ripe harvest of renown,
shall after his great father sit,
(if heaven so long a life permit)
and have swell the flow tide
of fame, which he in arm shall get,
the purchase of a honest sweat,
shall safe in stormy sea britannia vessel guide.

xiii.

britannia vessel, which in anna reign,
and prudent pilotry, enjoy
the tempest which the world destroy,
and ride triumphant over the subject main.
o may she soon a quiet harbour gain!
and sure the promise hour be come,
when in soft note the peaceful lyre
shall still the trumpet and the drum,
shall play what god and man desire,
and strike bellona music dumb:
when war, by parent curse, shall quit the field,
unbuckle his bright helmet, and, to rest
his weary limb, sit on his idle shield,
with scar of honour plough upon his breast.
but if the Gallic Pharaoh stubborn heart
grow fresh for punishment, and harden still;
prepare for the irrecoverable ill,
and force unwilling sky to act the last ungrateful part:
thy force, ANNA, like a flood, shall whelm
(if heaven do sceptre innocence maintain)
his famish desolate realm;
and all the son of pharamond in vain
(who with dishonest envy see
the sweet forbid fruit of distant liberty)
shall curse their salic law, and wish a female reign.

xiv.

a female reign like thy,
o ANNA, british heroine!
to thou afflict empire fly for aid,
wherever tyrannic standard be display,
from the wrong iber to the threaten Rhine.
thou, where the golden-sanded Tagus flow
beneath fair ulyssippo wall,
the fright lusitanian call;
thou they who drink the Seine, with those
who blow iberian field, implore,
to give the labour world repose,
and universal peace restore:
thou, Gallia; mournful to survive the fate
of her fall grandeur and depart state;
by sad experience teach to own,
that virtue be a noble way to rise,
a sure passage to the sky,
than pelion upon Ossa throw:
for they, who impious presume
to grasp at heaven, by Jove eternal doom,
a prey to thunder shall become;
or, send in aetna fiery cave to groan,
gain but a high fall, a mountain for their tomb.
