a night-piece on death.

by the blue taper tremble light,
 no more i waste the wakeful night,
 intent with endless view to pore
 the schoolman and the sage over:
 their book from wisdom wide stray,
 or point at best the long way. 
i will seek a ready path, and go
 where wisdom sure teach below. 

how deep yond azure die the sky! 
where orb of gold unnumbered lie,
 while through their rank in silver pride
 the nether crescent seem to glide. 
the slumber breeze forget to breathe,
 the lake be smooth and clear beneath,
 where once again the spangle show
 descend to meet our eye below. 
the ground which on the right aspire,
 in dimness from the view retire:
 the leave present a place of grave,
 who wall the silent water lave. 
that steeple guide thy doubtful sight
 among the livid gleam of night. 
there pass with melancholy state,
 by all the solemn heap of fate,
 and think, as softly-sad you tread
 above the venerable dead,
 time be, like thou they life possess,
 and time shall be, that thou shall rest. 

those grave, with bend osier bind,
 that nameless heave the crumble ground,
 quick to the glance thought disclose
 where toil and poverty repose. 

the flat smooth stone that bear a name,
 the chisel slender help to fame,
 (which ever our set of friend decay
 their frequent step may wear away.) 
a middle race of mortal own,
 man, half ambitious, all unknown. 

the marble tomb that rise on high,
 who dead in vault arch lie,
 who pillar swell with sculpture stone,
 arm, angel, epitaph and bone,
 these (all the poor remains of state)
 adorn the rich, or praise the great;
 who while on earth in fame they live,
 be senseless of the fame they give. 

ha! while i gaze, pale Cynthia fade,
 the burst earth unveil the shade! 
all slow, and wan, and wrap with shroud,
 they rise in visionary croud,
 and all with sober accent cry,
 think, mortal, what it be to die,

now from yond black and funeral yew,
 that bath the charnel house with dew,
 methinks i hear a voice begin;
 (you raven, cease your croak din,
 you toll clock, no time resound
 over the long lake and midnight ground)
 it send a peal of hollow groan,
 thus speak from among the bone. 

when man my scythe and dart supply,
 how great a king of fear be i! 
they view i like the last of thing:
 they make, and then they dread, my sting. 
fool! if you less provoke your fear,
 no more my spectre-form appear. 
death but a path that must be tread,
 if man will ever pass to god:
 a port of calm, a state of ease
 from the rough rage of swell sea. 

why then thy flow sable stole,
 deep pendent cypress, mourn pole,
 loose scarf to fall athwart thy weed,
 long pall, draw herse, cover steed,
 and plume of black, that as they tread,
 nod over the 'scutcheon of the dead? 

nor can the part body know,
 nor want the soul, these form of woe:
 as man who long in prison dwell,
 with lamp that glimmer round the cell,
 when ever their suffer year be run,
 spring forth to greet the glitter sun:
 such joy, though far transcend sense,
 have pious soul at part hence. 
on earth, and in the body place,
 a few, and evil year, they waste:
 but when their chain be cast aside,
 see the glad scene unfold wide,
 clap the glad wing and tower away,
 and mingle with the blaze of day. 
