A LETTER TO Monsieur Boileau Despreaux;

Occasion'd by the VICTORY at BLENHEIM, 1704.

Since hir'd for Life, thy Servile Muse must sing
 Successive Conquests, and a glorious King;
 Must of a Man Immortal vainly boast;
 And bring him Lawrels, whatsoe'er they cost:
 What Turn wilt Thou employ, what Colours lay
 On the Event of that Superior Day,
 In which one English Subject's prosp'rous Hand
 (So Jove did will; so Anna did command:)
 Broke the proud Column of thy Master's Praise,
 Which sixty Winters had conspir'd to raise? 

From the lost Field a hundred Standards brought
 Must be the Work of Chance, and Fortune's Fault:
 Bavaria's Stars must be accus'd, which shone,
 That fatal Day the mighty Work was done,
 With Rays oblique upon the Gallic Sun. 
Some Dæmon envying France mis-led the Fight:
 And Mars mistook, tho' Louis order'd right. 

When thy young Muse invok'd the tuneful Nine,
 To say how Louis did not pass the Rhine,
 What Work had We with Wageninghen, Arnheim,
 Places that could not be reduc'd to Rhime? 
And tho' the Poet made his last Efforts,
 Wurts — who could mention in Heroic — Wurts? 
But, tell me, hast thou reason to complain
 Of the rough Triumphs of the last Campaign? 
The Danube rescu'd, and the Empire sav'd,
 Say, is the Majesty of Verse retriev'd? 
And would it prejudice thy softer vein,
 To sing the Princes, Louis and Eugene? 
Is it too hard in happy Verse to place
 The Vans and Vanders of the Rhine and Maes? 
Her Warriors Anna sends from Tweed and Thames,
 That France may fall by more harmonious Names. 
Can'st thou not Hamilton or Lumly bear? 
Would Ingoldsby or Palmes offend thy Ear? 
And is there not a Sound in Marlbrô's Name,
 Which Thou and all thy Brethren ought to claim,
 Sacred to Verse, and sure of endless Fame? 

Cutts is in Meeter something harsh to read:
 Place me the Valiant Gouram in his stead:
 Let the Intention make the Number good:
 Let generous Sylvius speak for honest Wood. 
And tho' rough Churchill scarce in Verse will stand,
 So as to have one Rhime at his Command;
 With Ease the Bard reciting Blenheim's Plain,
 May close the Verse, rememb'ring but the Dane. 

I grant, old Friend, old Foe (for such We are
 Alternate, as the Chance of Peace and War)
 That we Poetic Folks, who must restrain
 Our measur'd Sayings in an equal Chain,
 Have Troubles utterly unknown to Those,
 Who let their Fancy loose in rambling Prose. 

For Instance now, how hard it is for Me
 To make my Matter and my Verse agree? 
In one great Day on Hochstet's fatal Plain
 French and Bavarians twenty thousand slain;
 Push'd thro' the Danube to the Shoars of Styx
 Squadrons eighteen, Battalions twenty six;
 Officers Captive made and private Men,
 Of these twelve hundred, of those thousands ten;
 Tents, Ammunition, Colours, Carriages,
 Cannons, and Kettle-Drums — sweet Numbers these. 
But is it thus You English Bards compose? 
With Runick Lays thus tag insipid Prose? 
And when you should your Heroes Deeds rehearse,
 Give us a Commissary's List in Verse? 

Why Faith, Depreaux, there's Sense in what You say:
 I told You where my Difficulty lay:
 So vast, so numerous were great Blenheim's Spoils;
 They scorn the Bounds of Verse, and mock the Muse's Toils. 
To make the rough Recital aptly chime,
 Or bring the Sum of Gallia's Loss to Rhime,
 'Tis mighty hard: What Poet would essay
 To count the Streamers of my Lord Mayor's Day? 
To number all the several Dishes drest
 By honest Lamb, last Coronation Feast? 
Or make Arithmetic and Epic meet;
 And Newton's Thoughts in Dryden's Stile repeat? 

O Poet, had it been Apollo's Will,
 That I had shar'd a Portion of thy Skill;
 Had this poor Breast receiv'd the Heav'nly Beam;
 Or could I hope my Verse might reach my Theam;
 Yet, Boileau, yet the lab'ring Muse should strive,
 Beneath the Shades of Marlbrô's Wreaths to live:
 Should call aspiring Gods to bless her Choice;
 And to their Fav'rite's Strain exalt her Voice,
 Arms and a Queen to Sing; Who, Great and Good,
 From peaceful Thames to Danube's wond'ring Flood
 Sent forth the Terror of her high Commands,
 To save the Nations from invading Hands,
 To prop fair Liberty's declining Cause,
 And fix the jarring World with equal Laws. 

The Queen should sit in Windsor's sacred Grove,
 Attended by the Gods of War, and Love:
 Both should with equal Zeal Her Smiles implore,
 To fix Her Joys, or to extend Her Pow'r. 

Sudden, the Nymphs and Tritons should appear;
 And as great Anna's Smiles dispel their Fear,
 With active Dance should Her Observance claim;
 With Vocal Shell should sound Her happy Name. 
Their Master Thames should leave the neighb'ring Shoar,
 By his strong Anchor known, and Silver Oar;
 Should lay his Ensigns at his Sov'raign's Feet,
 And Audience mild with humble Grace intreat. 

To Her, his dear Defence, He should complain,
 That whilst He blesses Her indulgent Reign;
 Whilst furthest Seas are by his Fleets survey'd,
 And on his happy Banks each India laid;
 His Breth'ren Maes, and Waal, and Rhine, and Saar
 Feel the hard Burthen of oppressive War;
 That Danube scarce retains his rightful Course
 Against two Rebel Armies neighb'ring Force;
 And All must weep sad Captives to the Sein,
 Unless unchain'd and freed by Britain's Queen. 

The valiant Sov'reign calls Her Gen'ral forth;
 Neither recites Her Bounty, nor His Worth:
 She tells Him, He must Europe's Fate redeem,
 And by That Labour merit Her Esteem:
 She bids Him wait Her to the Sacred Hall;
 Shows Him Prince Edward, and the conquer'd Gaul;
 Fixing the bloody Cross upon His Breast,
 Says, He must Dye, or succour the Distress'd:
 Placing the Saint an Emblem by His Side,
 She tells Him, Virtue arm'd must conquer lawless Pride. 

The Hero bows obedient, and retires:
 The Queen's Commands exalt the Warrior's Fires. 
His Steps are to the silent Woods inclin'd,
 The great Design revolving in his Mind:
 When to his Sight a Heav'nly Form appears:
 Her Hand a Palm, her Head a Lawrel wears. 

Me, She begins, the fairest Child of Jove,
 Below for ever sought, and bless'd above;
 Me, the bright Source of Wealth, and Power, and Fame;
 (Nor need I say, Victoria is my Name:)
 Me the great Father down to Thee has sent:
 He bids Me wait at Thy distinguish'd Tent,
 To execute what Anna's Wish would have:
 Her Subject Thou, I only am Her Slave. 

Dare then, Thou much belov'd by smiling Fate:
 For Anna's Sake, and in Her Name, be Great:
 Go forth, and be to distant Nations known,
 My future Fav'rite, and My darling Son. 
At Schellenberg I'll manifest sustain
 Thy glorious Cause; and spread my Wings again,
 Conspicuous o'er Thy Helm, in Blenheim's Plain. 

The Goddess said, nor would admit Reply;
 But cut the liquid Air, and gain'd the Sky. 

His high Commission is thro' Britain known;
 And thronging Armies to His Standard run. 
He marches thoughtful; and He speedy sails:
 (Bless Him, ye Seas! and prosper Him, ye Gales!) 
Belgia receives Him welcome to her Shores;
 And William's Death with lessen'd Grief deplores. 
His Presence only must retrieve That Loss:
 Marlbrô to Her must be what William was. 
So when great Atlas, from these low Aboads
 Recall'd, was gather'd to his Kindred-Gods;
 Alcides respited by prudent Fate,
 Sustain'd the Ball, nor droop'd beneath the Weight. 

Secret and Swift behold the Chief advance;
 Sees half the Empire join'd, and Friend to France:
 The British General dooms the Fight: His Sword
 Dreadful He draws: The Captains wait the Word. 
Anne and St. George, the charging Hero cries:
 Shrill Echo from the neighb'ring Wood replies
 Anne and St. George. — At That auspicious Sign
 The Standards move; the adverse Armies join. 
Of Eight great Hours, Time measures out the Sands;
 And Europe's Fate in doubtful Balance stands:
 The Ninth, Victoria comes: — o'er Marlbrô's Head
 Confess'd She sits: the Hostile Troops recede: —
 Triumphs the Goddess, from her Promise freed. 

The Eagle, by the British Lion's Might
 Unchain'd and Free, directs her upward Flight:
 Nor did She e'er with stronger Pinions soar
 From Tyber's Banks, than now from Danube's Shoar. 

Fir'd with the Thoughts which these Ideas raise,
 And great Ambition of my Country's Praise;
 The English Muse should like the Mantuan rise;
 Scornful of Earth and Clouds, should reach the Skies,
 With Wonder (tho' with Envy still) pursu'd by human Eyes. 

But We must change the Style. — Just now I said,
 I ne'er was Master of the tuneful Trade. 
Or the small Genius which my Youth could boast,
 In Prose and Business lies extinct and lost:
 Bless'd, if I may some younger Muse excite;
 Point out the Game, and animate the Flight:
 That from Marseilles to Calais France may know,
 As We have Conqu'rors, We have Poets too;
 And either Laurel does in Britain grow:
 That, tho' amongst our selves, with too much Heat,
 We sometimes wrangle, when We should debate;
 (A consequential Ill which Freedom draws;
 A bad Effect, but from a Noble Cause:)
 We can with universal Zeal advance,
 To curb the faithless Arrogance of France. 
Nor ever shall Britannia's Sons refuse
 To answer to thy Master, or thy Muse;
 Nor want just Subject for victorious Strains,
 While Marlbrô's Arm Eternal Laurel gains;
 And where old Spencer sung, a new Elisa reigns. 
