a letter to monsieur Boileau despreaux;

occasion by the victory at Blenheim, 1704. 

since hire for life, thy servile muse must sing
 successive conquest, and a glorious king;
 must of a man immortal vain boast;
 and bring he laurel, whatsoever they cost:
 what turn will thou employ, what colour lay
 on the event of that superior day,
 in which one english subject prosperous hand
 (so Jove do will; so Anna do command:)
 break the proud column of thy master praise,
 which sixty winter have conspire to raise? 

from the lose field a hundred standard bring
 must be the work of chance, and Fortune fault:
 bavaria star must be accuse, which shine,
 that fatal day the mighty work be do,
 with ray oblique upon the Gallic sun. 
some Dæmon envy France mislead the fight:
 and Mars mistake, though louis order right. 

when thy young muse invoke the tuneful nine,
 to say how louis do not pass the Rhine,
 what work have we with Wageninghen, Arnheim,
 place that can not be reduce to rhime? 
and though the poet make his last effort,
 Wurts — who can mention in heroic — Wurts? 
but, tell i, have thou reason to complain
 of the rough triumph of the last campaign? 
the Danube rescue, and the empire save,
 say, be the majesty of verse retrieve? 
and will it prejudice thy soft vein,
 to sing the prince, louis and Eugene? 
be it too hard in happy verse to place
 the van and vander of the Rhine and Maes? 
her warrior Anna send from Tweed and Thames,
 that France may fall by more harmonious name. 
can thou not Hamilton or Lumly bear? 
will Ingoldsby or palm offend thy ear? 
and be there not a sound in marlbrô name,
 which thou and all thy brother ought to claim,
 sacred to verse, and sure of endless fame? 

Cutts be in Meeter something harsh to read:
 place i the valiant Gouram in his stead:
 let the intention make the number good:
 let generous Sylvius speak for honest wood. 
and though rough Churchill scarce in verse will stand,
 so as to have one rhime at his command;
 with ease the bard recite blenheim plain,
 may close the verse, remember but the Dane. 

i grant, old friend, old foe (for such we be
 alternate, as the chance of peace and war)
 that we poetic folk, who must restrain
 our measure say in a equal chain,
 have trouble utter unknown to those,
 who let their fancy loose in ramble prose. 

for instance now, how hard it be for i
 to make my matter and my verse agree? 
in one great day on hochstet fatal plain
 french and bavarian twenty thousand slay;
 push through the Danube to the shore of Styx
 squadron eighteen, battalion twenty six;
 officer captive make and private man,
 of these twelve hundred, of those thousand ten;
 tent, ammunition, colour, carriage,
 cannon, and kettle-drum — sweet number these. 
but be it thus you english bard compose? 
with runick lay thus tag insipid prose? 
and when you shall your hero deed rehearse,
 give we a commissary list in verse? 

why faith, depreaux, there be sense in what you say:
 i tell you where my difficulty lie:
 so vast, so numerous be great blenheim spoil;
 they scorn the bound of verse, and mock the muse toil. 
to make the rough recital apt chime,
 or bring the sum of gallia loss to rhime,
 it be mighty hard: what poet will essay
 to count the streamer of my lord mayor day? 
to number all the several dish dress
 by honest lamb, last coronation feast? 
or make arithmetic and epic meet;
 and Newton thought in dryden stile repeat? 

o poet, have it be apollo will,
 that i have share a portion of thy skill;
 have this poor breast receive the heavenly beam;
 or can i hope my verse may reach my theam;
 yet, Boileau, yet the labour muse shall strive,
 beneath the shade of marlbrô wreath to live:
 shall call aspire god to bless her choice;
 and to their favourite strain exalt her voice,
 arm and a queen to sing; who, great and good,
 from peaceful Thames to danube wonder flood
 send forth the terror of her high command,
 to save the nation from invade hand,
 to prop fair liberty decline cause,
 and fix the jar world with equal law. 

the queen shall sit in windsor sacred grove,
 attend by the god of war, and love:
 both shall with equal zeal her smile implore,
 to fix her joy, or to extend her power. 

sudden, the nymph and Triton shall appear;
 and as great anna smile dispel their fear,
 with active dance shall her observance claim;
 with vocal shell shall sound her happy name. 
their master Thames shall leave the neighbour shore,
 by his strong anchor know, and silver oar;
 shall lay his ensign at his sovereign foot,
 and audience mild with humble grace entreat. 

to she, his dear defence, he shall complain,
 that while he bless her indulgent reign;
 while further sea be by his fleet survey,
 and on his happy bank each India lay;
 his brother Maes, and waal, and Rhine, and saar
 feel the hard burden of oppressive war;
 that Danube scarce retain his rightful course
 against two rebel army neighbour force;
 and all must weep sad captive to the sein,
 unless unchain and free by britain queen. 

the valiant sovereign call her general forth;
 neither recite her bounty, nor his worth:
 she tell he, he must europe fate redeem,
 and by that labour merit her esteem:
 she bid he wait she to the sacred hall;
 show he prince Edward, and the conquer Gaul;
 fix the bloody cross upon his breast,
 say, he must die, or succour the distress:
 place the saint a emblem by his side,
 she tell he, virtue arm must conquer lawless pride. 

the hero bow obedient, and retire:
 the queen command exalt the warrior fire. 
his step be to the silent wood incline,
 the great design revolve in his mind:
 when to his sight a heavenly form appear:
 her hand a palm, her head a laurel wear. 

i, she begin, the fair child of Jove,
 below for ever seek, and bless above;
 i, the bright source of wealth, and power, and fame;
 (nor need i say, Victoria be my name:)
 i the great father down to thou have send:
 he bid i wait at thy distinguish tent,
 to execute what anna wish will have:
 her subject thou, i only be her slave. 

dare then, thou much belove by smile fate:
 for anna sake, and in her name, be great:
 go forth, and be to distant nation know,
 my future favourite, and my darling son. 
at schellenberg i will manifest sustain
 thy glorious cause; and spread my wing again,
 conspicuous over thy helm, in blenheim plain. 

the goddess say, nor will admit reply;
 but cut the liquid air, and gain the sky. 

his high commission be through Britain know;
 and throng army to his standard run. 
he march thoughtful; and he speedy sail:
 (bless he, you sea! and prosper he, you gale!) 
belgia receive he welcome to her shore;
 and William death with lessen grief deplore. 
his presence only must retrieve that loss:
 marlbrô to her must be what William be. 
so when great Atlas, from these low abode
 recall, be gather to his kindred-god;
 alcides respit by prudent fate,
 sustain the ball, nor droop beneath the weight. 

Secret and swift behold the chief advance;
 see half the empire join, and friend to France:
 the british general doom the fight: he sword
 dreadful he draw: the captain wait the word. 
Anne and saint George, the charge hero cry:
 shrill echo from the neighbour wood reply
 Anne and saint George. — at that auspicious sign
 the standard move; the adverse army join. 
of eight great hour, time measure out the sand;
 and europe fate in doubtful balance stand:
 the nine, Victoria come: — over marlbrô head
 confess she sit: the hostile troop recede: —
 triumph the goddess, from her promise free. 

the eagle, by the british lion may
 unchained and free, direct her upward flight:
 nor do she ever with strong pinion soar
 from tiber bank, than now from danube shore. 

fire with the thought which these idea raise,
 and great ambition of my country be praise;
 the english muse shall like the mantuan rise;
 scornful of earth and cloud, shall reach the sky,
 with wonder (though with envy still) pursue by human eye. 

but we must change the style. — just now i say,
 i never be master of the tuneful trade. 
or the small genius which my youth can boast,
 in prose and business lie extinct and lose:
 bless, if i may some young muse excite;
 point out the game, and animate the flight:
 that from Marseilles to Calais France may know,
 as we have conqueror, we have poet too;
 and either laurel do in Britain grow:
 that, though among our self, with too much heat,
 we sometime wrangle, when we shall debate;
 (a consequential ill which freedom draw;
 a bad effect, but from a noble cause:)
 we can with universal zeal advance,
 to curb the faithless arrogance of France. 
nor ever shall britannia son refuse
 to answer to thy master, or thy muse;
 nor want just subject for victorious strain,
 while marlbrô arm eternal laurel gain;
 and where old spencer sing, a new Elisa reign. 
