on leave lehena,

in October, m Dcc lxxxviii.

dear field, where oft in infancy i stray,
 when every trifle charm the vacant mind! 
kind grove, that wrap i in your circle shade,
 when thoughtful science first my soul refine! 

say, must i bid this love recess adieu,
 once more to float on dissipation tide? 
where shall i meet with friend so safe, so true,
 to who i may my careless youth confide? 

where yond tall elm have form a dark retreat,
 how oft the shower of April do i shun! 
beneath the lime that overhang yond seat,
 how sweet my shelter from the summer sun! 

or when rude Boreas urge the chill blast,
 and desolation darken all the plain,
 muse i wander over the wintery waste,
 and know my charm more transient and more vain:

for soon again shall phœbus golden beam
 restore the meadow to their pristine bloom:
 but not his bright, not his warm gleam
 can wake my slumber ash from the tomb —

till the last trumpet with terrific sound
 shall call the tremble culprit to appear,
 where perfect justice shall my guilt confound,
 or endless mercy ease my anxious fear. 

whenever the inclement sky compel my stay
 within the wall of yond sequester dome,
 how very short appear each sullen day,
 while over the story page my eye do roam! 

or when, exchange book for free discourse,
 a parent word instruct as they please,
 while to her word her action give new force,
 my mind example more than precept raise. 

she teach i humble goodness to revere,
 to cheer the sad, to succour the forlorn;
 teach i to think bright virtue only fair,
 and senseless pride to treat with equal scorn. 

sometime the friendly sister too will come,
 their conduct blameless, and their soul sincere,
 add new pleasure to our peaceful home,
 for heaven-born friendship can each scene endear. 

but now no more Maria glad our eye,
 no more with she the verdant field we tread:
 medicine in vain its heal virtue try;
 our love Maria number with the dead! 

yet, Anna, cease this unavailing tear,
 utter no more that deep, heartrending sigh:
 Maria body waste upon the bier;
 Maria pure soul can never die. 

methinks, she view you now with tender care,
 she drop a tear of pity to your woe:
 ah! then, your saint sister quiet spare,
 who can no sorrow now but anna know. 

alas! while i indulge the pensive strain,
 Apollo sink into the lap of night:
 when he illumine next yond western plain,
 no more this lawn shall open to my sight. 

stay, envious Cynthia, suffer yet one view! 
tomorrow i these blissful mead forsake;
 from her moist veil she shake the silver dew,
 deaf to each feeble accent that i speak. 

then farewell each regret, rural scene,
 each rise tree my careful hand have nurse! 
long may your branch crown this happy green,
 when these frail limb lie moulder in the dust! 
