satyr against the muse.

by my abandon muse, i be not inspire,
 provoke by malice, and with rage i be fire. 
fly, fly, my muse from my distract breast,
 who ever have thou, must be with plague possess:
 fool that i be, ever to solicit you,
 who make not only poor, but wretched too. 
happy i live, for almost eight year time,
 curse be your skill, you teach i then to rhime:
 the jingle noise, shed its dark influence,
 on my then please, unwary innocence,
 i scarce have have one happy moment since. 
here all the spite and rage of womankind,
 can enough advance my threaten mind,
 let fury too, be in the consort join. 
passion, that common rage, i here refuse,
 call hell itself, to curse my torture muse;
 not the calm author of bless poetry,
 but the black succubus of misery:
 there let she sit, with her infernal chime,
 and put the shriek and groan of fiend in rhime. 
may their Parnassus, like Vesuvius burn,
 their laurel wither, or to cypriss turn;
 may stuff like hopkin rhyme, degrade their fame,
 and none but ballad-maker use their name:
 may they despise, sad and neglect sit,
 be never think upon by man of wit. 
may all the ill a fond imperious dame,
 wish the man that dare reject her flame,
 light upon he, that do commit the crime,
 of write any thing, in jingle rhime;
 nothing like that, to danger can expose,
 may none be happy, but what write in prose. 
curse on the whimsical, Romanick fool,
 that yield first, to his fantastic rule;
 that wit like morris-dancer must-advance,
 with Bell at foot, and in nice measure dance. 
let pregnant head, but think of poetry,
 and just before the brain-delivery;
 fancy shall make a prodigy of wit,
 which soon, as bear, shall run upon its foot:
 sure, it be some necromantick ordinance,
 that sense, beyond the circle may advance;
 be all the learned ancient courage dead,
 that wit, in fetter, be tame captive lead? 
have some oppose, when rhyme at first grow bold,
 then her defeat, not triumph have be tell? 
but now the plague be grow so populous,
 it be hard to stop the universal curse. 
doubtless, they be mistake who have tell
 spiteful pandora pregnant box do hold
 plurality of plague, she only hurl
 out verse alone, and that have damn the world. 
curse, in vain, on poet i bestow;
 i be sure, the great be, that they be so;
 fate, send worse if thou can, but rescue i
 from trifle torture wretched poetry. 
