the three wise sentence,

from the first book of Esdras chap. iii. and iv.

in gentle number fain my muse will sing
 of great Darius, persia royal king;
 that potent monarch, who imperial sway
 so many mighty kingdom do obey;
 from india coast, to ethiopia's land,
 all people do submit to his command. 

the king with feast, in most noble sort
 do entertain the prince of his court,
 till night come on, and all retire be,
 then to his chamber do to rest repair;
 where several noble youth strict watch do keep,
 to guard his sacred person in his sleep:
 among they three young man of virtuous mind,
 who heart to study wisdom be incline,
 have private, between themselves, agree
 to leave in write, for the king to read,
 what, in their judgment, do in strength excel
 all other thing, for they discern well
 their sovereign bounteous disposition so,
 what they can wish, he will on they bestow. 

the first of they, in write do declare,
 that nothing can for strength with wine compare;
 the second then his sentence in do bring,
 nothing for might, be equal with the king;
 with like assurance do the third decree
 woman do bear away the victory
 from all on earth; but yet he know full well
 great be the truth that do in heaven dwell. 

these paper seal, where secret convey
 beneath the pillow where Darius lay,
 until Aurora do her light display,
 and Phoebus rise, usher in the day;
 then they withdraw, and when the king do rise,
 his servant on the write cast their eye,
 and to his sacred majesty make know
 what in the night have by his guard be do. 
the king be please on hear the report
 how the brave youth have act in his court;
 and straightway do his royal mandate send,
 command all his prince to attend;
 all his wise man, and captain, he do call
 strait to assemble in the council-hall:
 the king himself in judgement take his place,
 and with his presence will the senate grace;
 his resolution do to they declare,
 impartial to end this nice affair. 

and now the several write being read,
 that with the great force they may proceed,
 the king command the young man in with speed,
 and bid they free speak their whole intent,
 what either of they by his sentence mean:
 then have leave, the first do silence break,
 and to this purpose he before they speak. 

most mighty power! do not wine exceed
 in strength? — it overcome all indeed:
 by free drink many be mislead;
 by wine the strong have be conquer:
 the needy orphan it will quick bring
 to be as gay and pleasant as the king;
 enslave he that heretofore be free;
 make servant think they have their liberty:
 the poor man and the rich alike be find,
 while mirth and jollity go free round;
 remembrance of all evil, past and go,
 sorrow and debt, no more be think upon
 when sparkle wine their heart begin to cheer,
 nor king, nor governor they seem to fear;
 they speak at large, each will be chief of all,
 till friend and brother at variance fall:
 draw sword sometime the power of wine attend,
 but when it be go, the quarrel at a end;
 their wrath forget, their mirth think on no more,
 each man be in the state he be before. 
the force and power of wine, consider well,
 must needs in strength all other thing excel,

he have speak, the second do begin
 thus to declare the power of the king. 

most noble lord! of all thing that be make,
 or ever on the earth a be have,
 man do excel in strength: to their command
 all thing be subject, both by sea and land:
 how strong then be the king, who regal sway
 all man on earth submissive obey! 
they yeild obedience to his princely will,
 and ready be his pleasure to fulfil;
 to his dominion, high and low submit,
 he over they bear rule as he think fit. 
if he in hostile manner draw his sword,
 whole arm legion strait attend his word;
 whatever he bid, they do with heart and hand,
 wall, tower, nor bulwark can before they stand:
 when into foreign land he do they send,
 they, in his quarrel, even their blood do spend,
 and fight till victory do on they attend;
 then with glad heart submissive they bring
 the choice spoil with homage to the king:
 while those who business be to till the ground,
 with who a sword or spear be seldom find,
 manure their land, their fruitful vineyard dress;
 they reap their corn, and luscious cluster press:
 and when the harvest do their toil reward,
 they bring their tribute to their sovereign lord. 
if any hapless wretch the king displease,
 his neighbour never dispute, but on he seize;
 if he bid spare, they spare; if he bid kill,
 they ready be his pleasure to fulfil;
 if city to destroy, or building burn,
 they into heap of ruin kingdom turn:
 if clemency within his breast take place,
 his people all adore his princely grace,
 and build, and plant, what late they do deface. 
whenever he please he lay he down to sleep,
 while arm band strict watch do round he keep;
 nor dare depart, nor their own business mind,
 but serve the king, as duty do they bind. 
then what can equal he for strength, i pray,
 who in such sort all man on earth obey? 

wise zorabable then appear in place,
 a royal youth of David kingly race,
 (much noble he than those that speak before,
 because he do the live god adore)
 and thus his mind and write do declare
 before they all, that fate in judgement there,

most worthy prince! i do free own
 the strength of king throughout the world be know;
 the force of wine all mortal know full well;
 yet neither of they do in may excel:
 woman alone must bear the prize away,
 who all mankind do honour and obey. 
and well they may, because from they do spring
 the poor and rich, the peasant and the king;
 the great hero that the world can know,
 to woman their original must owe;
 they nourish those that plant the fruitful vine,
 from whence you vain boast the power of wine:
 the glory and the praise of man they be,
 and make the garment which they daily wear:
 nay, without woman, man can be at all,
 but soon the species will to ruin fall. 
when man have gather gold, and treasure great
 of precious thing, and live in pomp and state,
 no true content their captive heart attain,
 unless they can a woman favour gain;
 her beauty to adore they be incline,
 her noble virtue do attract the mind,
 with gold and silver they will free part,
 to gain admission to a female heart;
 her rare perfection be so much admire,
 nought in the world can be like she desire;
 for if his native country lie at stake,
 the husband quit it for his spouse sake;
 his parent, friend, and kindred he do leave;
 unto his wife alone his heart do cleave:
 nought come amiss, he be happy if he find
 a consort virtuous, love, fair, and kind;
 a will homage he to she do pay;
 in toil and labour hard he spend the day,
 to gather wealth, that so he may provide
 treasure to bring unto his dear bride:
 another bold, with a sword in hand,
 will cross the sea, and wander on the land;
 no horrid danger can procure his stay,
 he brave dare a lion in the way;
 load with booty to his mistress fly,
 and at her foot present the golden prize. 
some man, for love of woman, oft we see
 have be reduce to utmost misery,
 and lose their sense, if they chance to find
 a beauteous female cruel and unkind. 
how oft have wretched mortal be mislead,
 with murderous hand their rival blood to shed? 
while some as desperate have seek for death,
 and by self-murder stop their vital breath! 
the king be strong, no people can deny
 the honour due to sovereign majesty:
 all stand in fear of he; his power be such,
 it be death to strike, no less than death to touch. 
this mighty monarch i do late spy
 in his chair of state, fair apame sit by;
 at his right hand this youthful beauty bright,
 appear like cynthia glitter ray of light;
 although he do the persian sceptre sway,
 this bloom lady take his crown away;
 the diadem that on his head be wear,
 her lovely brow and temple do adorn;
 nay furthermore, when she have do this thing,
 with she leave hand she strike this puissant king;
 yet no displeasure do in he arise,
 who be captive to her conquer eye:
 her radiant beauty do such beam display,
 from she he can not turn his eye away:
 if this illustrious lady deign to smile,
 oe'rcome with joy, the king will laugh the while;
 if ought displease she, then the king will try
 with gentle word the dame to pacify. 
what mortal strength with woman can compare,
 since crown head to they obedient be? 

the king and prince then begin to gaze,
 and look upon each other with amaze;
 for now they very plain do descry
 this noble prince will have the victory
 who, have pause, begin to speak again,
 not doubt but he shall acceptance gain. 

most noble counseller, assemble here! 
woman be strong, as i have make appear;
 the earth be large, wherein all creature dwell;
 the heaven stupendious do in height excel;
 the glorious sun do heat and light display,
 and with his beam give every region day:
 how great then he, by who divine command,
 all thing at first be make, earth, sea, and land! 
strong be the truth, who do create all thing;
 from that bless fountain all perfection spring:
 the heavenly host with reverence all adore,
 while man on earth with tremble fear implore
 almighty truth, which ever shall endure,
 when worldly pomp and splendour be no more. 

that king be wicked, all wise man agree;
 woman be so we know assure;
 when to excessive drink man incline,
 the worst of evil have be cause by wine:
 all man on earth of high and low degree,
 be subject unto sin and vanity;
 destruction do on wickedness attend,
 but mighty truth shall never know a end;
 not only strong, but good beyond compare;
 no wicked man with he accept be:
 no rich reward, no golden bribe can buy
 license from truth to act unfaithful:
 fraud or deceit in truth we never find;
 good man embrace it with a ready mind:
 whatever thing be virtuous, good, and great,
 in truth we find it perfect and complete:
 then praise be truth to all eternity,
 in who alone be strength and majesty! 

he have finish, the attentive crowd,
 with joyful acclamation shout aloud;
 the truth applaud, they, as one, agree
 this brave young prince shall have the victory:
 the king and council do his wisdom praise,
 affirm he have double win the bay. 
straightway the king Darius do declare
 that purple and fine linen he shall wear;
 that all his royal bounty may behold,
 command he shall eat and drink in gold;
 a regal chariot too he do decree,
 adorn with gold, at his command shall be;
 a massy chain of gold his neck do grace,
 and next unto himself assign his place:
 and to increase his honour, after all,
 command that they his cousin shall he call;
 and of his royal grace he do decree,
 what he will ask, perform it shall be:
 speak what thou will, it shall be do for thou. 
he be not long to seek what choice to make,
 but to the king with low submission speak. 

most mighty prince! i beg thou will pursue
 the thing that thou proposedst long ago. 
behold Jerusalem in ruin lay! 
perform the vow which thou thyself have make,
 when first thou do the persian sceptre wield,
 that thou the peerless city will rebuild;
 that glorious temple, which be once the praise
 of all the earth, thou vowdst again to raise;
 that goodly pile by edomite destroy,
 each goodly building now in ash lay,
 and all the holy vessel to restore,
 as Cyrus do design long time before;
 that then judea son may bless thy name,
 and babe unborn thy matchless grace proclaim. 
no other thing great prince! do i require;
 no earthly pomp or grandeur i desire:
 but if this one request thou grant to i,
 immortal honour thy reward will be. 

the king observe how he stand incline,
 to serve his country with a will mind,
 rise from his seat, and in that very place,
 before the council, do the prince embrace;
 grant his request, and do his letter send,
 command all his captain to attend,
 both he and he, that so they may convey
 they to their ancient land without delay:
 not only from all tribute set they free,
 but give much treasure to they liberal;
 the city build, the temple up do raise,
 for solemn worship, as in former day. 
this brave young man have his end obtain,
 and liberty, beyond his wish gain;
 with thankful heart, and joyful lip, do raise
 his voice to sing his great creator praise. 

to thou, great god! i render praise due,
 from who come victory, and wisdom too:
 thy worthless servant i myself do own,
 yet thou to i thy strength and may have show
 thy be the glory, now and evermore! 
i thankful thy gracious name adore;
 prostrate before thou will i glad lie,
 and praise thy name to all eternity. 
