Spectator VOL. the Fifth. Numb. 375. VERSIFIED.

A person who in London liv'd of late,
 By dire misfortue Sunk in his Estate,
 From good esteem reduc'd to low degree,
 His credit turn'd to Abject Poverty;
 No comfort left to Sweeten human life,
 But faithful counsels of a virtuous Wife,
 Who under Fortune's frowns wou'd often try
 All means to shew her love and constancy;
 While he with heavy heart wou'd oft lament,
 Her present Straits, her Ample Fortune Spent,
 With kind endearments and a chearful Air
 She ever Strove to free his mind from care. 
Her Eldest Daughter being (as 'tis Said)
 In bloom of Youth, a fair and comely Maid,
 Was sent unto a Country friend that She,
 The downfall of her Parents might not See. 
A Noble Lord of good Estate liv'd nigh,
 And on this lovely Beauty cast his Eye,
 The chaste behaviour of this Graceful Dame,
 Did daily add new vigour to his flame;
 He her addrest his lawful Bride to be,
 And to the same she did at length agree,
 Tho' basely he her ruin did design,
 And to betray her sought a lucky time:
 While both with diff'rent ends themselves amuse,
 From London came the most unwelcome News. 
Her tender Parents were depriv'd of all
 Their worldly Store; her Sorrows were not small
 At their dire Fate; When to compleat her woes,
 Her Lover doth his base design disclose. 
A Mistress he must have, he wants no Wife,
 Propos'd four Hundred Pounds a year for life
 At her command, and if she will comply,
 Her Father's debts he'll likewise satisfy:
 Thus like the Cursed Serpent tempting Eve,
 He laid a Golden Bait her to deceive. 
But here his hopes and promises were vain,
 The Fair one left him with a brave disdain,
 Such Virtue in her Spotless breast Did reign;
 Tho' their misfortune griev'd her tender heart,
 Her noble Soul abhors his treach'rous Part,
 To the designing Lord She bade Adieu,
 Nor wou'd Admit another Interview. 
Chagrin'd and vex'd the Spark resolv'd to try
 Another Plot for to way-lay her by,
 Dispatch'd a Messenger without delay,
 To hear what her perplexed Friends wou'd say,
 Hoping that their Indigence a means might be
 To gain his end by their Authority. 
By cruel Fate, her Father's forc'd from home,
 The Letter to her Mother's Hands did come,
 His flatt'ring lines she then perused o'er,
 His Vile proposals did afflict her more,
 Then all her sad disasters heretofore:
 She from his Servant her intent conceal'd,
 And to her Virtuous Child her mind reveal'd,
 To this effect. My dearest Girl, Said She,
 I've hear'd from one pretending love to thee,
 A Gentleman of wealth and high degree,
 By whose pretences we may plainly find,
 A wicked heart and base insulting mind,
 He takes advantage of our mean Estate,
 And Strives to make our Sorrows more compleat,
 He thinks our present wants to Satisfy,
 We will betray our Child to Infamy,
 Heaven forbid, that we so vile Shou'd be
 By Sin and Shame to Shift of poverty! 
The Power above some other way will find
 To ease our woe, or give us peace of mind
 Dear Child, my will already is resign'd! 
As Worldly grandeur to thyself and Friends;
 For Virtue's loss can never make amends;
 Therefore I charge thee take a Special care,
 Refuse the Bait, and So avoid the snare;
 Let not a foolish pity take a place
 Within thy breast, true Virtue to deface,
 Our case is not so bad as you may fear,
 From me in time you better News may hear;
 I have been interupted by a Friend
 And have already, better News to Send
 The Minute just now past, I have receiv'd
 A Debt long due by which I am reliev'd;
 For Sev'ral days before I freely own,
 All views of comfort and support were gone,
 What little I cou'd raise I did dispose
 To thy Dear Father, partner of my woes,
 Who at this present time is torn from me
 I hope he'll Soon regain his liberty;
 'Tis not to grieve thee I these things relate,
 Most patiently I bear my instant Fate,
 But with a Mother's tenderness intreat
 Thee not to make my Suff'rings yet more great,
 'Tis our Misfortune not our fault, that we
 Are at this time involv'd in Poverty,
 And Providence may yet us reinstate
 To the affluence we enjoy'd of late,
 Without accepting terms so vile and base;
 Heaven preserve, my Child, from Such disgrace! 
These lines she sent with care and Speed I hear,
 By his false Servant to her Daughter Dear
 Anxious for the Event, shaking with fear. 
He to his Master did the Same convey
 Such Snares were laid her virtue to betray. 
He open'd it, but much surpris'd to find
 A true Portraiture of a noble mind
 Whom pinching wants nor Golden Bribes cou'd move,
 To favour him in his illegal love:
 Reflecting on his Enterprise with Shame,
 Applauds her choice and found himself to blame,
 His reason prompts him, that it wou'd be in vain,
 Content or peace of mind thereby to gain;
 Reflecting clamly on his wretched case,
 Resolv'd thenceforth to quit attempts So base,
 The Letter seal'd with nicest art and care,
 To See his Love he doth himself prepare,
 And by it got admittance to the Fair. 
While She her Mother's Letter did peruse,
 Her lovely face, he with attention views:
 Her piercing Sorrows caus'd her eyes to flow,
 With pearly drops of Undissembled woe. 
The deep concern that in her breast took place,
 Heighten'd her charms, improv'd each blooming grace
 His stubborn heart relents amaz'd to See,
 Her deep distress and noble constancy. 
Reclaimed thus by Virtues charms alone,
 For all his former folly to attone,
 Assur'd her on his honour she shou'd find,
 In him, a Faithful friend and Husband kind;
 And to London he sent the Second time. 
Implores her Mother's pardon for his crime,
 Pleads his Misfortune that he did not know
 Their Family, and therefore us'd them So,
 Not only beg'd Excuse for what he had done,
 But wish'd to be accepted as a Son. 
This Letter by his Steward to her he Sent,
 And in Short time in Person thither went. 
Her happy Parents were to Wealth restor'd,
 By the Assistance of this Gen'rous Lord:
 Married Amanda was and liv'd a happy life,
 He a kind Husband, she a Virtuous Wife. 
