spectator vol. the five. Numb. 375.  versify.

a person who in London live of late,
 by dire misfortune sink in his estate,
 from good esteem reduce to low degree,
 his credit turn to abject poverty;
 no comfort leave to sweeten human life,
 but faithful counsel of a virtuous wife,
 who under Fortune frown will often try
 all mean to show her love and constancy;
 while he with heavy heart will oft lament,
 her present strait, her ample fortune spend,
 with kind endearment and a cheerful air
 she ever strive to free his mind from care. 
her old daughter be (as it be say)
 in bloom of youth, a fair and comely maid,
 be send unto a country friend that she,
 the downfall of her parent may not see. 
a noble lord of good estate live nigh,
 and on this lovely beauty cast his eye,
 the chaste behaviour of this graceful dame,
 do daily add new vigour to his flame;
 he she address his lawful bride to be,
 and to the same she do at length agree,
 though base he she ruin do design,
 and to betray she seek a lucky time:
 while both with different end themselves amuse,
 from London come the most unwelcome news. 
her tender parent be deprive of all
 their worldly store; her sorrow be not small
 at their dire fate; when to complete her woe,
 her lover do his base design disclose. 
a mistress he must have, he want no wife,
 propose four hundred pound a year for life
 at her command, and if she will comply,
 her father debt he will likewise satisfy:
 thus like the curse serpent tempt eve,
 he lay a golden bait she to deceive. 
but here his hope and promise be vain,
 the fair one leave he with a brave disdain,
 such virtue in her spotless breast do reign;
 though their misfortune grieve her tender heart,
 her noble soul abhor his treacherous part,
 to the design lord she bid adieu,
 nor will admit another interview. 
chagrined and vex the spark resolve to try
 another plot for to waylay she by,
 dispatch a messenger without delay,
 to hear what her perplex friend will say,
 hope that their indigence a mean may be
 to gain his end by their authority. 
by cruel fate, her father be force from home,
 the letter to her mother hand do come,
 his flatter line she then peruse over,
 his vile proposal do afflict she more,
 then all her sad disaster heretofore:
 she from his servant her intent conceal,
 and to her virtuous child her mind reveal,
 to this effect. my dear girl, say she,
 i have hear from one pretend love to thou,
 a gentleman of wealth and high degree,
 by who pretence we may plain find,
 a wicked heart and base insult mind,
 he take advantage of our mean estate,
 and strive to make our sorrow more complete,
 he think our present want to satisfy,
 we will betray our child to infamy,
 heaven forbid, that we so vile shall be
 by sin and shame to shift of poverty! 
the power above some other way will find
 to ease our woe, or give we peace of mind
 dear child, my will already be resign! 
as worldly grandeur to thyself and friend;
 for virtue loss can never make amends;
 therefore i charge thou take a special care,
 refuse the bait, and so avoid the snare;
 let not a foolish pity take a place
 within thy breast, true virtue to deface,
 our case be not so bad as you may fear,
 from i in time you better news may hear;
 i have be interrupt by a friend
 and have already, better news to send
 the minute just now past, i have receive
 a debt long due by which i be relieve;
 for several day before i free own,
 all view of comfort and support be go,
 what little i can raise i do dispose
 to thy dear father, partner of my woe,
 who at this present time be tear from i
 i hope he will soon regain his liberty;
 it be not to grieve thou i these thing relate,
 most patient i bear my instant fate,
 but with a mother tenderness entreat
 thou not to make my suffering yet more great,
 it be our misfortune not our fault, that we
 be at this time involve in poverty,
 and providence may yet we reinstate
 to the affluence we enjoy of late,
 without accept term so vile and base;
 heaven preserve, my child, from such disgrace! 
these line she send with care and speed i hear,
 by his false servant to her daughter dear
 anxious for the event, shake with fear. 
he to his master do the same convey
 such snare be lay she virtue to betray. 
he open it, but much surprise to find
 a true portraiture of a noble mind
 who pinch want nor golden bribe can move,
 to favour he in his illegal love:
 reflect on his enterprise with shame,
 applaud her choice and find himself to blame,
 his reason prompt he, that it will be in vain,
 content or peace of mind thereby to gain;
 reflect clam on his wretched case,
 resolve thenceforth to quit attempt so base,
 the letter seal with nice art and care,
 to see his love he do himself prepare,
 and by it get admittance to the fair. 
while she her mother letter do peruse,
 her lovely face, he with attention view:
 her pierce sorrow cause her eye to flow,
 with pearly drop of undissembled woe. 
the deep concern that in her breast take place,
 heighten her charm, improve each bloom grace
 his stubborn heart relent amaze to see,
 her deep distress and noble constancy. 
reclaim thus by virtue charm alone,
 for all his former folly to atone,
 assure she on his honour she shall find,
 in he, a faithful friend and husband kind;
 and to London he send the second time. 
implore her mother pardon for his crime,
 plead his misfortune that he do not know
 their family, and therefore use they so,
 not only beg excuse for what he have do,
 but wish to be accept as a son. 
this letter by his steward to she he send,
 and in short time in person thither go. 
her happy parent be to wealth restore,
 by the assistance of this generous lord:
 marry Amanda be and live a happy life,
 he a kind husband, she a virtuous wife. 
