[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night i. on life, death, and immortality.

humble inscribe to the right honourable Arthur Onslow, esq., speaker of the house of commons.

tire nature sweet restorer, balmy sleep! 
he, like the world, his ready visit pay
 where fortune smile; the wretched he forsake;
 swift on his downy pinion fly from woe,
 and light on lid unsullied with a tear. 

from short (as usual) and disturb repose
 i wake: how happy they who wake no more! 
yet that be vain, if dream infest the grave. 
i wake, emerge from a sea of dream
 tumultuous; where my wreck despond thought,
 from wave to wave of fancy misery,
 at random drive, her helm of reason lose:
 though now restore, it be only change of pain,
 (a bitter change!) severe for severe. 
the day too short for my distress; and night,
 even in the zenith of her dark domain,
 be sunshine to the colour of my fate. 

night, sable goddess! from her ebon throne,
 in rayless majesty, now stretch forth
 her leaden sceptre over a slumber world. 
silence, how dead! and darkness, how profound! 
nor eye, nor listen ear, a object find;
 creation sleep. it be as the general pulse
 of life stand still, and nature make a pause;
 a awful pause! prophetic of her end. 
and let her prophecy be soon fulfil:
 fate! drop the curtain; i can lose no more. 

silence and darkness! solemn sister! twin
 from ancient night, who nurse the tender thought
 to reason, and on reason build resolve,
 (that column of true majesty in man,)
 assist i: i will thank you in the grave;
 the grave your kingdom: there this frame shall fall
 a victim sacred to your dreary shrine. 
but what be you? —

thou, who do put to flight
 primeval silence, when the morning star,
 exult, shout over the rise ball; —
 o thou, who word from solid darkness strike
 that spark, the sun! strike wisdom from my soul;
 my soul, which fly to thou, her trust, her treasure,
 as miser to their gold, while other rest. 

through this opaque of nature and of soul,
 this double night, transmit one pity ray,
 to lighten and to cheer. o lead my mind,
 (a mind that fain will wander from its woe,)
 lead it through various scene of life and death;
 and from each scene the noble truth inspire. 
nor less inspire my conduct than my song:
 teach my best reason, reason; my best will
 teach rectitude; and fix my firm resolve
 wisdom to wed, and pay her long arrear:
 nor let the phial of thy vengeance, pour
 on this devote head, be pour in vain. 

the bell strike one. we take no note of time
 but from its loss. to give it then a tongue
 be wise in man. as if a angel speak,
 i feel the solemn sound. if hear aright,
 it be the knell of my depart hour. 
where be they? with the year beyond the flood. 
it be the signal that demand dispatch:
 how much be to be do! my hope and fear
 start up alarm, and over life narrow verge
 look down — on what? a fathomless abyss,
 a dread eternity! how sure mine! 
and can eternity belong to i,
 poor pensioner on the bounty of a hour? 

how poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
 how complicate, how wonderful be man! 
how pass wonder he who make he such! 
who centre in our make such strange extreme! 
from different nature marvellous mix,
 connexion exquisite of distant world! 
distinguish link in being endless chain! 
midway from nothing to the deity! 
a beam ethereal, sully and absorb! 
though sully and dishonour, still divine! 
dim miniature of greatness absolute! 
a heir of glory! a frail child of dust! 
helpless immortal! insect infinite! 
a worm! a god! — i tremble at myself,
 and in myself be lose! at home a stranger,
 thought wander up and down, surprise, aghast,
 and wonder at her own. how reason reel! 
o what a miracle to man be man,
 triumphant distress! what joy! what dread! 
alternate transport and alarm! 
what can preserve my life? or what destroy? 
a angel arm can snatch i from the grave;
 legion of angel can confine i there. 

it be past conjecture; all thing rise in proof:
 while over my limb sleep soft dominion spread,
 what though my soul fantastic measure tread
 over fairy field; or mourn along the gloom
 of pathless wood; or, down the craggy steep
 hurl headlong, swim with pain the mantle pool;
 or scale the cliff; or dance on hollow wind,
 with antic shape, wild native of the brain? 
her ceaseless flight, though devious, speak her nature
 of subtle essence than the tread clod;
 active, aërial, tower, unconfined,
 unfettered with her gross companion fall. 
even silent night proclaim my soul immortal:
 even silent night proclaim eternal day. 
for human weal, heaven husband all event;
 dull sleep instruct, nor sport vain dream in vain. 

why then their loss deplore that be not lose? 
why wander wretched thought their tomb around
 in infidel distress? be angel there? 
slumber, rake up in dust, ethereal fire? 
they live! they great live a life on earth
 unkindled, unconceived; and from a eye
 of tenderness let heavenly pity fall
 on i, more just number with the dead. 
this be the desert, this the solitude:
 how populous, how vital be the grave! 
this be creation melancholy vault,
 the vale funereal, the sad cypress-gloom;
 the land of apparition, empty shade! 
all, all on earth be shadow, all beyond
 be substance; the reverse be folly creed:
 how solid all, where change shall be no more! 

this be the bud of being, the dim dawn,
 the twilight of our day, the vestibule:
 life theatre as yet be shut, and death,
 strong death, alone can heave the massy bar,
 this gross impediment of clay remove,
 and make we embryo of existence free. 
from real life but little more remote
 be he, not yet a candidate for light,
 the future embryo, slumber in his sire. 
embryo we must be till we burst the shell,
 yond ambient azure shell, and spring to life,
 the life of god (o transport!) and of man. 

yet man (fool man!) here bury all his thought;
 inters celestial hope without one sigh;
 prisoner of earth, and pen beneath the moon,
 here pinion all his wish; winge by heaven
 to fly at infinite; and reach it there
 where seraph gather immortality,
 on life fair tree, fast by the throne of god. 
what golden joy ambrosial cluster glow
 in his full beam, and ripen for the just,
 where momentary age be no more! 
where time, and pain, and chance, and death expire! 
and be it in the flight of threescore year
 to push eternity from human thought,
 and smother soul immortal in the dust? 
a soul immortal, spend all her fire,
 waste her strength in strenuous idleness,
 throw into tumult, rapture, or alarm,
 at aught this scene can threaten, or indulge,
 resemble ocean into tempest wrought,
 to waft a feather, or to drown a fly. 

where fall this censure? it overwhelm myself. 
how be my heart incrust by the world! 
o how self-fettered be my grovel soul! 
how, like a worm, be i wrap round and round
 in silken thought, which reptile fancy spin,
 till darken reason lie quite cloud over
 with soft conceit of endless comfort here,
 nor yet put forth her wing to reach the sky! 

night vision may befriend (as sing above):
 our wake dream be fatal. how i dream
 of thing impossible! (can sleep do more?) 
of joy perpetual in perpetual change! 
of stable pleasure on the toss wave! 
eternal sunshine in the storm of life! 
how rich be my noontide trance hang
 with gorgeous tapestry of picture joy! 
joy behind joy, in endless perspective! 
till at death toll, who restless iron tongue
 call daily for his million at a meal,
 start i wake, and find myself undo. 
where now my frenzy pompous furniture? 
the cobwebbed cottage, with its ragged wall
 of moulder mud, be royalty to i! 
the spider most attenuate thread
 be cord, be cable, to man tender tie
 on earthly bliss; it break at every breeze. 

o you bless scene of permanent delight! 
full above measure! last beyond bound! 
a perpetuity of bliss be bliss. 
can you, so rich in rapture, fear a end,
 that ghastly thought will drink up all your joy,
 and quite unparadise the realm of light. 
safe be you lodge above these roll sphere;
 the baleful influence of who giddy dance
 shed sad vicissitude on all beneath. 
here teem with revolution every hour,
 and rare for the better; or the best
 more mortal than the common birth of fate. 
each moment have its sickle, emulous
 of time be enormous scythe, who ample sweep
 strike empire from the root; each moment play
 his little weapon in the narrow sphere
 of sweet domestic comfort, and cut down
 the fair bloom of sublunary bliss. 

bliss! sublunary bliss! — proud word, and vain! 
implicit treason to divine decree! 
a bold invasion of the right of heaven! 
i clasp the phantom, and i find they air. 
o have i weigh it ere my fond embrace,
 what dart of agony have miss my heart! 

death! great proprietor of all! it be thy
 to tread out empire, and to quench the star. 
the sun himself by thy permission shine;
 and, one day, thou shall pluck he from his sphere. 
amid such mighty plunder, why exhaust
 thy partial quiver on a mark so mean? 
why thy peculiar rancour wreak on i? 
insatiate archer! can not one suffice? 
thy shaft fly thrice; and thrice my peace be slay;
 and thrice, ere thrice yond moon have fill her horn. 
o Cynthia! why so pale? do thou lament
 thy wretched neighbour? grieve to see thy wheel
 of ceaseless change outwhirl in human life? 
how wane my borrow bliss! from Fortune smile,
 precarious courtesy! not virtue sure,
 self-given, solar ray of sound delight. 

in every vary posture, place, and hour,
 how widow every thought of every joy! 
thought, busy thought! too busy for my peace! 
through the dark postern of time long elapse,
 lead soft by the stillness of the night,
 lead like a murderer, (and such it prove!) 
stray (wretched rover!) over the please past;
 in quest of wretchedness perverse stray;
 and find all desert now; and meet the ghost
 of my depart joy; a numerous train! 
i rue the riches of my former fate;
 sweet comfort be blast cluster i lament;
 i tremble at the blessing once so dear;
 and every pleasure pain i to the heart. 

yet why complain? or why complain for one? 
hang out the sun his lustre but for i,
 the single man? be angel all beside? 
i mourn for million: it be the common lot;
 in this shape, or in that, have fate entail
 the mother throe on all of woman bear,
 not more the child, than sure heir, of pain. 

war, famine, pest, volcano, storm, and fire,
 intestine broil, oppression with her heart
 wrap up in triple brass, besiege mankind. 
God image, disinherit of day,
 here, plunge in mine, forget a sun be make. 
there, being, deathless as their haughty lord,
 be hammer to the gall oar for life;
 and plough the winter wave, and reap despair. 
some, for hard master, break under arm,
 in battle lop away, with half their limb,
 beg bitter bread through realm their valour save,
 if so the tyrant, or his minion, doom. 
want, and incurable disease, (fall pair!) 
on hopeless multitude remorseless seize
 at once, and make a refuge of the grave. 
how groan hospital eject their dead! 
what number groan for sad admission there! 
what number, once in Fortune lap high-fed,
 solicit the cold hand of charity! 
to shock we more, — solicit it in vain! 
you silken son of pleasure! since in pain
 you rue more modish visit, visit here,
 and breathe from your debauch: give, and reduce
 surfeit dominion over you: but so great
 your impudence, you blush at what be right. 

happy, do sorrow seize on such alone! 
not prudence can defend, or virtue save;
 disease invade the chaste temperance;
 and punishment the guiltless; and alarm,
 through thick shade, pursue the fond of peace. 
man caution often into danger turn,
 and his guard, fall, crush he to death. 
not happiness itself make good her name;
 our very wish give we not our wish. 
how distant oft the thing we dote on most
 from that for which we dote, felicity! 
the smoothe course of nature have its pain;
 and true friend, through error, wound our rest. 
without misfortune, what calamity! 
and what hostility, without a foe! 
nor be foe want to the best on earth. 
but endless be the list of human ill,
 and sigh may soon fail than cause to sigh. 

a part how small of the terraqueous globe
 be tenant by man! the rest a waste,
 rock, desert, freeze sea, and burn sand;
 wild haunt of monster, poison, sting, and death! 
such be earth melancholy map! but, far
 more sad! this earth be a true map of man. 
so bound be its haughty lord delight
 to woe wide empire; where deep trouble toss,
 loud sorrow howl, envenom passion bite,
 ravenous calamity our vital seize,
 and threaten fate wide open to devour. 

what then be i, who sorrow for myself? 
in age, in infancy, from other aid
 be all our hope; to teach we to be kind:
 that nature first, last lesson to mankind:
 the selfish heart deserve the pain it feel. 
more generous sorrow, while it sink, exalt;
 and conscious virtue mitigate the pang. 
nor virtue, more than prudence, bid i give
 swell thought a second channel; who divide,
 they weaken too, the torrent of their grief. 
take then, o world! thy much-indebted tear:
 how sad a sight be human happiness
 to those who thought can pierce beyond a hour! 
o thou, whatever thou be, who heart exult! 
will thou i shall congratulate thy fate? 
i know thou will; thy pride demand it from i. 
let thy pride pardon, what thy nature need,
 the salutary censure of a friend. 
thou happy wretch! by blindness be thou bless;
 by dotage dandle to perpetual smile. 
know, smiler, at thy peril be thou please;
 thy pleasure be the promise of thy pain. 
misfortune, like a creditor severe,
 but rise in demand for her delay;
 she make a scourge of past prosperity,
 to sting thou more, and double thy distress. 

Lorenzo, fortune make her court to thou. 
thy fond heart dance, while the siren sing. 
dear be thy welfare; think i not unkind;
 i will not damp, but to secure, thy joy. 
think not that fear be sacred to the storm:
 stand on thy guard against the smile of fate. 
be heaven tremendous in its frown? most sure;
 and in its favour formidable too:
 its favour here be trial, not reward;
 a call to duty, not discharge from care;
 and shall alarm we full as much as woe;
 awake we to their cause and consequence;
 [over our scan conduct give a jealous eye,]
 and make we tremble, weigh with our desert;
 awe nature tumult, and chastise her joy,
 lest, while we clasp, we kill they; nay, invert
 to worse than simple misery their charm. 
revolt joy, like foe in civil war,
 like bosom friendship to resentment sour,
 with rage envenom rise against our peace. 
beware what earth call happiness; beware
 all joy, but joy that never can expire. 
who build on less than a immortal base,
 fond as he seem, condemn his joy to death. 

i die with thou, Philander! thy last sigh
 dissolve the charm; the disenchant earth
 lose all her lustre. where her glitter tower? 
her golden mountain, where? all darken down
 to naked waste; a dreary vale of tear:
 the great magician dead! thou poor, pale piece
 of out-cast earth, in darkness! what a change
 from yesterday! thy darling hope so near,
 (long-laboured prize!) o how ambition flush
 thy glow cheek! ambition, true great,
 of virtuous praise. death subtle seed within,
 (sly, treacherous miner!) work in the dark,
 smile at thy well-concerted scheme, and beckon
 the worm to riot on that rose so red,
 unfaded ere it fall; one moment prey! 

man foresight be conditional wise;
 Lorenzo! wisdom into folly turn
 oft the first instant its idea fair
 to labour thought be bear. how dim our eye! 
the present moment terminate our sight;
 cloud, thick as those on doomsday, drown the next;
 we penetrate, we prophesy in vain. 
time be deal out by particle; and each,
 ere mingle with the stream sand of life,
 by fate inviolable oath be swear
 deep silence, "where eternity begin."

by nature law, what may be, may be now,
 there be no prerogative in human hour. 
in human heart what bold thought can rise
 than man presumption on tomorrow dawn? 
where be tomorrow? in another world. 
for number this be certain; the reverse
 be sure to none; and yet on this perhaps,
 this peradventure, infamous for lie,
 as on a rock of adamant we build
 our mountain-hope; spin out eternal scheme,
 as we the fatal sister can out-spin,
 and, big with life futurity, expire. 

not even Philander have bespeak his shroud. 
nor have he cause; a warn be deny:
 how many fall as sudden, not as safe! 
as sudden, though for year admonish home! 
of human ill the last extreme beware;
 beware, Lorenzo! a slow-sudden death. 
how dreadful that deliberate surprise! 
be wise today, it be madness to defer;
 next day the fatal precedent will plead;
 thus on, till wisdom be push out of life. 
procrastination be the thief of time;
 year after year it steal, till all be flee,
 and to the mercy of a moment leave
 the vast concern of a eternal scene. 
if not so frequent, will not this be strange? 
that it be so frequent, this be stranger still. 

of man miraculous mistake, this bear
 the palm, "that all man be about to live,"
 for ever on the brink of be bear. 
all pay themselves the compliment to think
 they one day shall not drivel; and their pride
 on this reversion take up ready praise,
 at least their own; their future self applaud;
 how excellent that life they never will lead! 
time lodge in their own hand be folly vail;
 that lodge in fate, to wisdom they consign;
 the thing they can but purpose they postpone. 
it be not in folly not to scorn a fool;
 and scarce in human wisdom to do more. 
all promise be poor dilatory man,
 and that through every stage: when young, indeed,
 in full content we sometime noble rest,
 unanxious for ourselves; and only wish,
 as duteous son, our father be more wise. 
at thirty, man suspect himself a fool;
 know it at forty, and reform his plan;
 at fifty, chide his infamous delay,
 push his prudent purpose to resolve;
 in all the magnanimity of thought
 resolve, and re-resolve; then die the same. 

and why? because he think himself immortal. 
all man think all man mortal but themselves;
 themselves, when some alarm shock of fate
 strike through their wound heart the sudden dread. 
but their heart wound, like the wound air,
 soon close; where pass the shaft, no trace be find. 
as from the wing no scar the sky retain,
 the part wave no furrow from the keel,
 so die in human heart the thought of death. 
even with the tender tear which nature shed
 over those we love, we drop it in their grave. 
can i forget Philander? that be strange. 
o my full heart! — but shall i give it vent,
 the long night, though long far, will fail,
 and the lark listen to my midnight song. 

the sprightly lark shrill matin wake the morn;
 grief sharp thorn hard press on my breast,
 i strive, with wakeful melody, to cheer
 the sullen gloom, sweet philomel! like thou,
 and call the star to listen: every star
 be deaf to i, enamour of thy lay. 
yet be not vain; there be who thy excel,
 and charm through distant age. wrap in shade,
 prisoner of darkness! to the silent hour,
 how often i repeat their rage divine,
 to lull my grief, and steal my heart from woe! 
i roll their rapture, but not catch their fire;
 dark, though not blind, like thou, Maeonides! 
or, Milton, thou! ah! can i reach your strain! 
or he who make Maeonides our own! 
man, too, he sing: immortal man i sing:
 oft burst my song beyond the bound of life;
 what now but immortality can please? 
o have he press his theme, pursue the track
 which open out of darkness into day;
 o have he mount on his wing of fire,
 soar where i sink, and sing immortal man;
 how have it bless mankind, and rescue i! 
