to Myrtilis. the new year offer.

long have i look my tablet over,
 and find I have much to thank you for,
 outstand debt beyond account;
 and new — who know to what amount? 
though small my wealth, not small my soul,
 come then, at once i will pay the whole. 

you power! i be rich, and will command
 the host of slave that round i stand;
 come, indian, quick disclose thy store,
 and hither bring Peruvian over;
 let yonder negro pierce the main,
 the choice, large pearl to gain;
 let all my slave their art combine
 to make the blush ruby mine,
 from eastern throne the diamond bear
 to sparkle at her breast and ear. 
swift, scythian, point the unerring dart
 that strike the ermine little heart,
 and search for choice fur the globe,
 to make my Myrtilis a robe. 

ah, no: yond indian will not go,
 no scythian deign to bend his bow. 
no sullen negro shoot the flood,
 how, slave! — or be i understand! 
all, all, my empty power disown,
 i turn, and find myself alone;
 it be fancy vain illusion all,
 nor moor nor scythian wait my call. 
call i command, can i consign? 
alas, what earthly thing be mine! 

come then, my muse, companion dear
 of poverty, and soul sincere,
 come dictate to my grateful mind
 a gift that may acceptance find;
 come, gentle Muse, and with thou bear
 a offer worthy thou and she;
 and though thy present be but poor,
 my Myrtilis will ask no more. 
a heart that scorn a shameful thing,
 with love and verse, be all i bring;
 of love and verse the gift receive,
 it be all thy servant have to give. 

if all whatever my verse have tell,
 golconda gem, and afric gold,
 if all be mine from pole to pole,
 how large her share who share my soul? 
but more than these may heaven impart;
 be thy the treasure of the heart;
 be calm, and glad thy future day
 with virtue peace, and virtue praise. 
let jealous pride, and sleepless care,
 and waste grief, and black despair,
 and languor chill, and anguish fall,
 for ever shun thy grove and cell;
 there only may the happy train
 of love, and joy, and peace, remain:
 may plenty, with exhaustless store,
 employ thy hand to feed the poor,
 and ever on thy honour head
 the prayer of gratitude be shed. 

a happy mother, may thou see
 thy smile virtuous progeny,
 who sportful trick, and airy play,
 fraternal love, and prattle gay,
 or wondrous tale, or joyful song,
 may lure the linger hour along;
 till death arrive, unfelt, unseen,
 with gentle pace, and placid mien,
 and waft thou to that happy shore
 where wish can have place no more. 
