a occasional prologue and epilogue to Othello,

while mercenary actor tread the stage,
 and hireling scribbler lash or lull the age,
 we by the task instruct, and entertain,
 without one thought of glory or of gain. 
virtue her own — from no external cause —
 she give, and she demand the self-applause:
 home to her breast she bring the heart-felt bay,
 heedless alike of profit, and of praise. 
this now perhaps be wrong — yet this we know,
 it be sense and truth a century ago:
 when Britain with transcendent glory crown,
 for high achievement, as for wit renowned;
 cull from each grow grace the pure part,
 and crop the flower from every bloom art. 
our noble youth will then embrace the task
 of comic humour, or the mystic masque. 
it be they encourage worth, and give to bard
 what now be spend in box and in card:
 good sense their pleasure — virtue still their guide,
 and english magnanimity — their pride. 
methinks i see with fancy magic eye,
 the shade of Shakespear, in yond azure sky. 
on you high cloud behold the bard advance,
 pierce all nature with a single glance:
 in various attitude around he stand
 the passion, wait for his dread command. 
first kneel love before his foot appear,
 and musical sigh melt in tear. 
near he fall jealousy with fury burn,
 and into storm the amorous breathe turn;
 then hope with heavenward look, and joy draw near,
 while palsy terror tremble in the rear. 

such shakespeare train of horror and delight,
 and such we hope to introduce tonight. 
but if, though just in thought, we fail in fact,
 and good intention ripen not to act,
 weigh our design, your censure still defer,
 when truth be in view it be glorious even to err. 

epilogue. speak by Desdemona.

true woman to the last — my peroration
 i come to speak in spite of suffocation;
 to show the present and the age to come,
 we may be choke, but never can be dumb. 
well now methinks i see you all run out,
 and haste away to lady bragwell rout;
 each modish sentiment to hear and weigh,
 of those who nothing think, and all thing say. 
prudella first in parody begin,
 (for nonsense and buffoonery be twin)
 "can beaux the court for theatre exchange? 
" i swear by heaven it be strange, it be pass strange;
 "and very whimsical, and mighty dull,
" and pitiful, and wondrous pitiful:
 "i wish i have not hear it — bless dame! 
whenever she speak her audience wish the same. 
next Neddy nice —" fie, o fie, good lack,
 "a nasty man to make his face all black." 
then lady Stiffneck show her pious rage,
 and wonder we shall act — upon a stage. 
 "why, ma'me, say coquetilla, a disgrace? 
" merit in any form may show her face:
 "in this dull age the male thing ought to play,
" to teach they what to do, and what to say. " 
in short, they all with different cavil cram we,
 and only be unanimous to damn we. 
but still there be a fair judicious few,
 who judge unbiased, and with candour view;
 who value honesty, though clad in buff,
 and wit, though dress in a old english ruff. 
behold they here — i beam sense descry,
 shoot from the live lustre of each eye. 
such meaning smile each bloom face adorn,
 as deck the pleasure-painted brow of morn;
 and show the person of each matchless fair,
 though rich to rapture, and above compare,
 be, even with all the skill of heaven design,
 but a imperfect image of their mind;
 while chastity unblemished and unbribed
 add a majestic mien that scorn to be describe:
 such, we will vaunt, and only such as these,
 it be our ambition, and our fame to please. 
