Kenrick.

translate from the saxon.

when winter yell through the leafless grove; when the black wave ride over the roar wind, and the dark-brown cloud hide the face of the sun; when the silver brook stand still, and snow environ the top of the lofty mountain; when the flower appear not in the blast field, and the bough of the leafless tree bend with the load of ice; when the howl of the wolf affright the dark glimmer light of the western sky; Kenrick, terrible as the tempest, young as the snake of the valley, strong as the mountain of the slay; his armour shine like the star in the dark night, when the moon be veil in sable, and the blast wind howl over the wide plain; his shield like the black rock, prepare himself for war.

ceolwolf of the high mountain, who view the first ray of the morning star, swift as the fly deer, strong as a young oak, fierce as a evening wolf, draw his sword; glitter like the blue vapour in the valley of Horso; terrible as the red lightning, burst from the dark-brown cloud: his swift bark ride over the foam wave, like the wind in the tempest; the arch fall at his blow, and he wrap the tower in flame; he follow Kenrick, like a wolf roam for prey.

centwin of the vale arise, he seize the massy spear; terrible be his voice, great be his strength; he hurl the rock into the sea, and break the strong oak of the forest. slow in the race as the minute of impatience. his spear, like the fury of a thunderbolt, sweep down whole army; his enemy melt before he, like the stone of hail at the approach of the sun.

awake, o eldulph! thou that sleep on the white mountain, with the fair of woman; no more pursue the dark-brown wolf; arise from the mossy bank of the fall water; let thy garment be stain in blood, and the stream of life discolour thy girdle; let thy flow hair be hide in a helmet, and thy beauteous countenance be writhe into terror.

egward, keeper of the bark, arise like the roar wave of the sea: pursue the black company of the enemy.

you saxon, who live in the air and glide over the star, act like yourself.

like the murmur voice of the Severn, swell with rain, the saxon move along; like a blaze star the sword of Kenrick shine among the briton; tenyan bleed at his foot; like the red lightning of heaven he burn up the rank of his enemy.

centwin rage like a wild boar. tatward sport in blood, army melt at his stroke. eldulph be a flame vapour, destruction sit upon his sword. ceolwolf be drench in gore, but fall like a rock before the sword of Mervin.

egward pursue the slayer of his friend; the blood of Mervin smoke on his hand.

like the rage of a tempest be the noise of the battle; like the roar of the torrent, gush from the brow of the lofty mountain.

the briton flee, like a black cloud drop hail, fly before the howl wind.

you virgin! arise and welcome back the pursuer; deck their brow with chaplet of jewel; spread the branch of the oak beneath their foot. Kenrick be return from the war, the clot gore hang terrible upon his crooked sword, like the noxious vapour on the black rock; his knee be red with the gore of the foe.

you son of the song, sound the instrument of music; you virgin, dance around he.

costan of the lake, arise, take thy harp from the willow, sing the praise of Kenrick, to the sweet sound of the white wave sink to the foundation of the black rock.

rejoice, o you saxon! Kenrick be victorious.

