a epistle to JOSEPH hill, ESQ.

dear JOSEPH — five and twenty year ago —
 alas! how time escape — it be even so —
 with frequent intercourse and always sweet
 and always friendly, we be will to cheat
 a tedious hour — and now we never meet. 
as some grave gentleman in Terence say,
 (it be therefore much the same in ancient day)
 good lack, we know not what tomorrow bring —
 strange fluctuation of all human thing! 
true. change will befall, and friend may part,
 but distance only can change the heart:
 and be i call to prove the assertion true,
 one proof shall serve, a reference to you. 

whence come it then, that in the wane of life,
 though nothing have occur to kindle strife,
 we find the friend we fancy we have win,
 though numerous once, reduce to few or none? 
can gold grow worthless that have stand the touch? 
no: gold they seem, but they be never such
 horatio servant once, with bow and cringe
 swing the parlour door upon its hinge,
 dread a negative, and overawe
 lest he shall trespass, beg to go abroad. 
go fellow! — whither? — turn short about —
 nay. stay at home; — you be always go out. 
it be but a step, sir, just at the street end —
 for what? — an please you sir, to see a friend. 
a friend? Horatio cry, and seem to start —
 yea marry shall thou, and with all my heart —
 and fetch my cloak, for though the night be raw
 i will see he too — the first i ever see. 
i know the man, and know his nature mild,
 and be his plaything often when a child,
 but somewhat at that moment pinch he close,
 else he be seldom bitter or morose. 
perhaps his confidence just then betray,
 his grief may prompt he with the speech he make,
 perhaps it be mere good-humour give it birth,
 the harmless play of pleasantry and mirth. 
however it be, his language in my mind
 bespeak at least a man that know mankind:
 but not to moralise too much, and strain
 to prove a evil of which all complain,
 (i hate long argument, verbose spin)
 one story more, dear hill, and i have do:
 once on a time, a emperor, a wise man,
 no matter where, in china or Japan,
 decree that whosoever shall offend
 against the well know duty of a friend,
 convict once, shall ever after wear
 but half a coat, and show his bosom bare. 
the punishment import this, no doubt,
 that all be nought within, and all find out. 
oh happy Britain! we have not to fear
 such hard and arbitrary measure here. 
else can a law like that which i relate,
 once have the sanction of our triple state,
 some few that i have know in day of old
 will run most dreadful risk of catch cold. 
while you, my friend, whatever wind shall blow,
 may traverse England safe to and fro,
 a honest man, close-buttoned to the chin,
 broad-cloth without, and a warm heart within. 
