Malvern Spa, 1757. 

inscribe to dr. wall.

by the reverend mr. very.

with bounteous hand the gracious king of heaven
his choice blessing to mankind have give,
while thoughtless they ungrateful despise
the rich profusion that salute their eye.
but wise be he who study every use
of common weed which common field produce.
the dock, the nettle, in each swell vein,
a heal balm for many a ill contain:
 even deadly nightshade, though with poison fraught,
at length be find a salutary draught.
the same creative power that first display
his wondrous work for our delight and aid;
his love to mortal man still gracious show,
in every stream that glide, and herb that grow.
at his command, Malvern, thy mountain rise,
and catch their dewy nectar from the sky;
at his command gush out thy crystal rill,
to cure the direful train of human ill.
on all alike their influence free shed,
as the bright orb that gild thy mountain head.
the wealthy squire, who gouty limb be lay
on bed of down, almost of down afraid,
at this balsamic spring may soon regain
his lavish health, and over the spacious plain
pursue the hare, or chace the miscreant fox
with wing speed over hill or craggy rock.
here to his comfort the poor helpless swain,
rack with the torture of rheumatic pain,
obtain relief without the nauseous pill,
or that more shock sight the doctor bill.
when cloudy mist obscure the visual ray,
and turn to dismal night the gladsome day;
the mournful wretch with pleasure here may find
a stream that heal the lame, and cure the blind.
the pamper cit, who high luxurious food
with acrimonious poison load his blood,
here polish once more his scaly skin,
and purify the vital stream within.
amaze truth! his wretched leprous heir,
who undeserved his father spot must wear,
emerge clean if in this fount he lave,
as the white syrian rose from Jordan wave.
the latent ulcer, and the cancer dire,
that waste our flesh with slow consume fire,
who subtle flame still spread from part to part,
and still elude the skilful surgeon art;
here check submit, their rage fury lay,
by stream from nature mystic engine play.
the stubborn evil, for who flux impure
blind bigotry at first devise a cure,
heal by these water need no more demand
the foolish witchcraft of a stuart hand;
and brunswick line may trust their royal cause
to reason, justice, liberty, and law.
shall all the virtue of this spa be tell,
its praise may be write in line of gold.
no more will poet their pierian spring,
but Malvern spa in lofty number sing;
no more Parnassus, but the Malvern climb,
to make their diction pure, their thought sublime.
even i at these fair fountain ease of pain,
to you, my friend, address one votive strain:
to you the naiad of this balmy well
reveal the wonder of her secret cell:
to you transfer the lay, who active mind,
like she own stream from earthly dregs resin,
explore a panacea for mankind.
