rhyme to the Hon. miss Lovelace; now lady HENRY Beauclerk.

on her attend miss Charlot Clayton in the small-pox.

o thou! to who the muse be just dear,
 in fancy elegant, in judgement clear,
 in who the virtue with the grace blend
 the faultless female, and the faithful friend;
 a while suspend the taste improve by art,
 and take the lay spontaneous from the heart. 

fantastic female! you who paint, and prate
 of self, or somewhat, or of god know what! 
who mimic every thing but what you shall,
 and even virtue, to be reckon good;
 alas! no varnish can that want supply,
 no specious talk conceal the act lie. 
while you on trifle waste the tedious day,
 and dress, or dream your useless hour away;
 or worse, indulge the very crime you blame,
 plot the dark scandal, or disperse the shame:
 she on her friend attend with pious care,
 sooth all her grief, and soften every fear;
 that high sense indulge, void of art,
 the virtuous feeling of a generous heart;
 and find selflove attain its noble end,
 when it transfer from self to serve a friend. 

how few for friendship nature have design! 
the unmelt temper, and the unmeaning mind,
 the crafty, selfish, dark, perfidious, see! 
o sacred friendship! all unworthy thou. 

where then shall she, who native manner start
 beyond the narrow bound of low-bred art,
 who soul be open, as her purpose clear,
 foe to evasion, as of heart sincere;
 not too familiar, nor yet too precise,
 with humour witty, with politeness wife;
 where find a friend to bear the equal part? 
say, Charlot, where? if not within thy heart. 

yet thou, who worth may sweet sound inspire,
 indulge these effort of a youthful lyre:
 no flatter purpose have the muse in view,
 though prompt to praise, wherever praise be due;
 averse to flatter, cautious to commend,
 hardly she sooth the frailty of a friend. 
but sick of the insipid senseless train,
 for thou she feel the animate strain:
 o be she sacred to the wife and good! 
nor prostitute her praise to the crowd;
 with who less please than pain, her lyre unstring,
 upon a neighbour willow useless hang;
 till gentle deed, and correspond love
 impel the sympathetic string to move
 to nature harmony; while artless lay,
 to she and Lovelace tune, grow music in their praise. 
