the grave of Howard.

spirit of death! who outstretch pennon dread
wave over the world beneath their shadow spread;
who dark speed on thy destine way,
mid shriek and cry, and sound of dire dismay;
spirit! behold thy victory! assume
a form more terrible, a ampler plume;
for he, who wander over the world alone,
listen to misery universal moan;
he who, sustain by virtue arm sublime,
tend the sick and poor from clime to clime,
low in the dust be lay, thy noble spoil!
and mercy cease from her awful toil!

it be where the pestilence at thy command
arise to desolate the sicken land,
when many a mingle cry and die prayer
resound to the listen midnight air,
when deep dismay hear not the frequent knell,
and the wan carcase fester as it fall:
it be there, with holy virtue awful mien,
amid the sad sight of that fearful scene,
calm he be find: the dew of death he dry;
he speak of comfort to the poor that cry;
he watch the fade eye, the flag breath,
ere yet the languid sense be lose in death;
and with that look protect angel wear,
hang over the dismal couch of pale despair!
friend of mankind! thy righteous task be over;
the heart that throb with pity beat no more.

around the limit of this roll sphere,
wherever the just and good thy tale shall hear,
a tear shall fall: alone, amid the gloom
of the still dungeon, his long sorrow tomb,
the captive, mourning, over his chain shall bend,
to think the cold earth hold his only friend!
he who with labour draw his waste breath
on the forsake silent bed of death,
remember thy last look and anxious eye,
shall gaze around, unvisited, and die.

friend of mankind, farewell! these tear we shed —
so nature dictate — over thy earthly bed;
yet we forget not, it be his high will,
who see thou virtue arduous task fulfil,
thy spirit from its toil at last shall rest: —
so will thy god, and what he will be best!

thou have encounter dark disease train,
thou have converse with poverty and pain,
thou have behold the dreary form of woe,
that through this mournful vale unfriended go;
and, pale with sympathy, have pause to hear
the sad plaint ever tell to human ear.
go then, the task fulfil, the trial over,
where sickness, want, and pain be know no more!
how awful do thy lonely track appear,
enlighten misery benight sphere!

as when a angel all-serene go forth
to still the rage tempest of the north,
the embattle cloud that hide the struggle day,
slow from his face retire in dark array;
on the black wave, like promontory hang,
a light, as of the orient morn, be fling,
till blue and level heave the silent brine,
and the new-lighted rock at distance shine;
even so do thou go forth with cheer eye —
before thy glance the shade of misery fly;
so do thou hush the tempest, still wide
of human woe the loud-lamenting tide.

nor shall the spirit of those deed expire,
as fade the feeble spark of vital fire,
but beam abroad, and cheer with lustre mild
humanity remote prospect wild,
till this frail orb shall from its sphere be hurl,
till final ruin hush the murmur world,
and all its sorrow, at the awful blast
of the archangel trump, be but as shadow past!

relentless time, that steal with silent tread,
shall tear away the trophy of the dead.
fame, on the pyramid aspire top,
with sigh shall her recording trumpet drop;
the feeble character of glory hand
shall perish, like the track upon the sand;
but not with these expire the sacred flame
of virtue, or the good man honour name.

Howard! it matter not, that far away
from albion peaceful shore thy bone decay:
he it may please, by who sustain hand
thy step be lead through many a distant land.
thy long and last abode shall there be find,
where many a savage nation prowl around:
that virtue from the hallow spot may rise,
and, point to the finish sacrifice,
teach to the rove Tartar savage clan
lesson of love, and high aim of man. 
the hoary chieftain, who thy tale shall hear,
pale on thy grave shall drop his falter spear;
the cold, unpitying Cossack thirst no more
to bathe his burn falchion deep in gore;
relentless to the cry of carnage speed,
or urge over gasp heap his pant steed!

nor vain the thought that fair hence may rise
new view of life, and wide charity.
far from the bleak riphean mountain hoar,
from the cold don, and wolga's wander shore,
from many a shady forest lengthen tract,
from many a dark-descending cataract,
succeed tribe shall come, and over the place,
where sleep the general friend of human race,
instruct their child what a debt they owe;
speak of the man who tread the path of woe;
then bid they to their native wood depart,
with new-born virtue stir in their heart.

when over the sound euxine stormy tide
in hostile pomp the Turk proud navy ride,
bend on the frontier of the imperial czar,
to pour the tempest of vindictive war;
if onward to those shore they haply steer,
where, Howard, thy cold dust repose near,
while over the wave the silken pennant stream,
and see far off the golden crescent gleam,
amid the pomp of war, the swell breast
shall feel a still unwonted awe impress,
and the relent pagan turn aside
to think — on yonder shore the christian die!

but thou, o briton! doom perhaps to roam
a exile many a year and far from home,
if ever fortune thy lone footstep lead
to the wild nieper bank, and whisper reed,
over howard grave thou shall impassion bend,
as if to hold sad converse with a friend.
whatever thy fate upon this various scene,
wherever thy weary pilgrimage have be,
there shall thou pause; and shut from thy heart
some vain regret that oft unbidden start,
think upon he to every lot resign,
who weep, who toil, and perish for mankind.

for i, who muse, Howard, on thy fate,
these pensive strain at evening meditate,
i thank thou for the lesson thou have teach
to mend my heart, or animate my thought.
i thank thou, Howard, for that awful view
of life which thou have draw, most sad, most true.
thou be no more! and the frail fade bloom
of this poor offer die upon thy tomb.
beyond the transient sound of earthly praise
thy virtue live, perhaps, in seraph lay!
i, bear in thought, to the wild nieper wave,
sigh to the reed that whisper over thy grave. 
