the advice.

i 

peace, busy soul, let distant thing alone,
 only the present time be thy own;
 leave to the god what shall hereafter be,
 forbear the search of dark futurity. 
if thou will at once more than one minute live,
 thou must design or dread or grieve;
 in turn back remembrance represent,
 black image of discontent. 
what happen to torment a year ago,
 although it real cease to do so? 
if thou will ruminate, it be still a woe. 
thus what be past will always present be,
 and in idea ever torture thou;
 on pleasure too if we reflect,
 they have the same unkind effect;
 we be as angry they be past,
 as at those grief which we compel to last:
 but tell i, partial soul, ah tell i why? 
thing of such contrariety,
 in thy revolve shall be the same to thou. 

ii.

one deep obliterate draught of Lethe take,
 blot all the torture record out;
 yet then thou will not be bless i doubt,
 but nice inquiry make. 
yes, the forbid book of fate,
 thou needs must pry into with curious eye,
 by'ts unintelligible line thy action state,
 where nothing plain unless the curse of be wise. 
now form great threaten monster in thy brain,
 then rack thy skill to have the phantom slay;
 in the safe present scene thou will not rest,
 but in remot thing be bless. 
this or that distant joy propose,
 and much of life extravagant lose,
 in search of what fate will elsewhere dispose. 
thy plot and forecast thou conceive in vain,
 link of the inevitable chain;
 short-sighted soul thou can not see,
 what shall to morrow be,
 yet will indulge thy fruitless curiosity. 
so some unlucky engineer
 do all the fit material compound,
 that be in art or nature find;
 will glorious fire-work prepare. 
(fancy he see his various comet rise,
 outshine and mount up to their radiant likeness in the sky;)
 think they will satisfy his pride and cost,
 but ah! he hope in vain. 
for almost finish ere he be aware,
 a spark by chance light in the train,
 and all with one affright blaze be inconfusion lose. 

iii.

since thou, my soul, must grieve or baffle be,
 for once be rule by i;
 no more reflect,
 no more with studious care project,
 nor look beyond thy present destiny. 
i charge thou never contrive no more,
 thou will fare no better than thou do before;
 with ixion mistake joy prepare,
 thy fond embrace for the delusive air;
 so often fool never hope to win at last,
 thy future doom stamp with thy past. 
then fate do seem with her own hand,
 to lead to the self-promised land;
 yet ever our weary step reach the long wish for ground,
 storm and darkness do surround,
 and the gay prospect can no more be find. 
though we by chance (a mighty chance indeed,)
 shall to our self propose what be decree:
 yet to my cost this truth i have learn,
 with passive ease we shall be unconcerned:
 for fate of our design no use will make,
 but her own mysterious method take. 
then why do we perplex our self in vain,
 for what we know not how to get, or whether we must gain? 

iv

then live to day, design nor fear no more,
 nor grieve upon a former score:
 what be once be go,
 and that which we expect may never come on. 
those who on yesterday and morrow live,
 neglect what heaven do real give;
 which only be the present day,
 and that in fleet moment post away;
 let i enjoy each minute then,
 not starve to day, to feast i know not when;
 since the full glass at the invite lip,
 from the too cautious hand may slip. 
give i you god my blessing now,
 on the expect man your future gift bestow. 
they who the present hour neglect,
 because a other better they expect:
 useful estate do pass away,
 for future pay;
 be always creditor to fate,
 and she too often pay too late;
 there be none but fool procrastinate. 
