a elegy, write on valentine morning.

by ****

hark, through the sacred silence of the night.
loud chanticleer do sound his clarion shrill,
hail with song the first pale gleam of light,
that float the dark brow of yond eastern hill.

bright star of morn, oh! leave not yet the wave,
to deck the dewy frontlet of the day,
nor thou, Aurora, quit tithonus cave,
nor drive retire darkness yet away,

ere these my rustic hand a garland twine,
ere yet my tongue indite a simple song,
for she i mean to hail my valentine,
sweet maiden, fair of the virgin throng.

sweet be the morn, and sweet the gentle breeze
that fan the fragrant bosom of the spring,
sweet chirp the lark, and sweet far than these
the gentle love-song gurgle turtle sing.

oh let the flower be fragrant as the morn,
and as the turtle song my ditty sweet:
those flower my weave chaplet must adorn,
that ditty must my wake charmer greet.

and thou, bless saint, who choral creature join
in one enliven symphony to hail,
oh be propitious, gentle valentine,
and let each holy tender sigh prevail.

oh give i to approach my sleep love,
and strew her pillow with the fresh flower,
no sigh unhallowed shall my bosom move,
nor step prophame polluto my true-love bower.

at sacred distance only will i gaze,
nor bid my unreproved eye refrain,
mean while my tongue shall chant her beauty praise,
and hail she sleep with the gentle strain.

"awake my fair, awake, for it be time;
hark, thousand songster rise from yonder grove,
and rise carol this sweet hour of prime,
each to his mate, a roundelay of love.

all nature sing the hymeneal song.
all nature follow, where the spring invite;
come forth my love, to we these joy belong,
we be the spring, and all her young delight.

for we she throw profuse forth her flower,
which in fresh chaplet joyful i will twine;
come forth my fair, oh do not lose these hour,
but wake, and be my faithful valentine.

full many a hour, all lonely have i sigh,
nor dare the secret of my love reveal,
full many a fond expedient have i try
my warm wish in silence to conceal.

and oft to far retire solitude
all mournful my slow step have i bend,
luxurious there indulge my muse mood,
and there alone have give my sorrow vent.

this day resolve i dare to plight my vow,
this day, long since the feast of love decree,
embolden will i speak my flame, nor thou
refuse to hear how sore my heart do bleed. "

yet if i shall behold my love awake,
ah frail resolve, ah whither will you fly?
full well i know i shall not silence break,
but strike with awe almost for fear shall die.

oh no, i will not trust a falter speech
in break phrase a awkward tale to tell,
a tale, who tenderness no tongue can reach,
nor soft melody can utter well.

but my meek eye, best herald to my heart,
i will compose to soft and downcast look,
and at one humble glance it shall impart
my love, nor fear the language be mistake.

for she shall read (apt scholar at this lore)
with what fond passion my true bosom glow,
how hopeless of return i still adore,
nor dare the boldness of my wish disclose.

shall she then smile, — yet ah! she smile on all,
her gentle temper pity all distress;
on every hill, each vale, the sunbeam fall,
each herb, and flower, each tree, and shrub they bless.

alike all nature grateful own the boon,
the universal ray to all be free;
like fond Endymion shall i hope the moon,
because among the rest she shine on i?

hope, vain presumer, keep, oh keep away:
even if my woe her gentle bosom move,
pity some look of kindness may display;
but each soft glance be not a look of love.

yet heavenly visitant, thou do not quit
those bower where angel sweet division sing,
nor deign thou on mortal shrine to sit
alone, for round thou ever on the wing,

glad choirs of love attend, and hover wait
thy mild command; of these thy bloom train
oh bid some sylph in morning dream relate,
ere yet my love awake, my secret pain.
