a receipt for write a novel.

will you a favourite novel make,
 try hard your reader heart to break,
 for who be please, if not torment? 
(novel for that be first invent). 
against nature, reason, sense, combine
 to carry on your bold design,
 and those ingredient i shall mention,
 compound with your own invention,
 i be sure will answer my intention. 
of love take first a due proportion —
 it serve to keep the heart in motion:
 of jealousy a powerful zest,
 of all torment passion best;
 of horror mix a copious share,
 and duel you must never spare;
 hysteric fit at least a score,
 or, if you find occasion, more;
 but faint fit you need not measure,
 the fair one have they at their pleasure;
 of sigh and groan take no account,
 but throw they in to vast amount;
 a frantic fever you may add,
 most author make their lover mad;
 rack well your hero nerve and heart,
 and let your heroine take her part;
 her fine blue eye be make to weep,
 nor shall she ever taste of sleep;
 ply she with terror day or night,
 and keep she always in a fright,
 but in a carriage when you get she,
 be sure you fair overset she;
 if she will break her bone — why let she:
 again, if ever she walk abroad,
 of course you bring some wicked lord,
 who with three ruffian snap his prey,
 and to a castle speed away;
 there close confine in haunt tower,
 you leave your captive in his power,
 till dead with horror and dismay,
 she scale the wall and fly away. 

now you contrive the lover meet,
 to set your reader heart a beat,
 but ere they have have a moment leisure,
 be sure to interrupt their pleasure;
 provide yourself with fresh alarm
 to tear they from each other arm;
 no matter by what fate they be part,
 so that you keep they broken-hearted. 

a cruel father some prepare
 to drag she by her flaxen hair;
 some raise a storm, and some a ghost,
 take either, which may please you most. 
but this you must with care observe,
 that when you have wind up every nerve
 with expectation, hope and fear,
 hero and heroine must disappear. 
some fill one book, some two without they,
 and never concern their head about they,
 this great rest the writer brain,
 for any story, that give pain,
 you now throw in — no matter what,
 however foreign to the plot,
 so it but serve to swell the book,
 you foist it in with desperate hook —
 a masquerade, a murder peer,
 his throat just cut from ear to ear —
 a rake turn hermit — a fond maid
 run mad, by some false loon betray —
 these store supply the female pen,
 which write they over and over again,
 and reader likewise may be find
 to circulate they round and round. 

now at your fable close devise
 some grand event to give surprise —
 suppose your hero know no mother —
 suppose he prove the heroine brother —
 this at one stroke dissolve each tie,
 far as from east to west they fly:
 at length when every woe expend,
 and your last volume' near end,
 clear the mistake, and introduce
 some tatt'le nurse to cut the noose,
 the spell be break — again they meet
 expire at each other foot;
 their friend lie breathless on the floor —
 you drop your pen; you can no more —
 and ere your reader can recover,
 they be marry — and your history over. 
