invocation

to horror.

far be remove each paint scene! 
what be to i the sapphire sky? 
what be to i the earth soft dye? 
or fragrant vale which sink between
 those velvet hill? yes, there i see —
 (why do those beauty burst on i?) 
pearl drop grove bow to the sun;
 seize his beam, bright river run
 that dart redouble day:
 hope you vain scene to catch the mind
 to torpid sorrow all resign,
 or bid my heart be gay? 
false be those hope! — i turn — i fly,
 where no enchantment meet the eye,
 or soft idea stray. 

horror! i call thou from the moulder tower,
 the murky church-yard, and forsake bower,
 where, amid unwholesome damp
 the vapoury gleamy lamp
 of ignes fatui show the thick-wove night,
 where morbid melancholy sit,
 and weep, and sing, and rave by fit,
 and to her bosom strain the fancy sprite. 

or, if amid the arctic gloom,
 thou toil at thy sable loom,
 form the hideous phantom of despair —
 instant thy grisly labour leave,
 with raven wing the concave cleave,
 where float, self-borne, the dense nocturnal air. 

oh! bear i to the impend cliff
 under who brow the dash skiff
 behold thou seat on thy rocky throne;
 there, amid the shriek wild wind roar,
 thy influence, horror, i will adore,
 and, at thy magic touch, congeal to stone. 

oh! hide the moon obtrusive orb,
 the gleam of every star absorb,
 and let creation be a moment thy! 
bid billow dash; let whirlwind roar,
 and the stern, rocky-pointed shore,
 the strand bark, back to the wave resign! 

then, while from yonder turbid cloud,
 thou roll thy thunder long, and loud,
 and lightning flash upon the deep below,
 let the expire seaman cry,
 the pilot agonize sigh
 mingle, and in the dreadful chorus flow! 

horror! far back thou date thy reign;
 ere king the historic page can stain
 with record black, or deed of lawless power;
 ere empire Alexander curse,
 or faction, madden caesar nurse,
 the fright world receive thy awful dower! 

who pen jehovah self inspire;
 he, who in eloquence attire,
 lead israel squadron over the earth,
 grand terrific, paint thy birth. 

the almighty, amid his fulgent seat on high,
 where glow seraph round his footstool fly,
 behold the wanton city of the plain,
 with act of deadly name his law disdain;
 he give the irrevocable sign,
 which mark to man the hate divine;
 and sudden from the start sky
 the angel of his wrath bid fly! 
then, horror! thou preside over the whole,
 and fill, and rapt, each self-accusing soul! 
thou do ascend to guide the burn shower —
 on thou the omnipotent bestow the hour! 

it be thy to scourge the sinful land,
 it be thy to toss the fiery brand;
 beneath thy glance the temple fall,
 and mountain crumble at thy yell. 
once more thou will triumph in a fiery storm;
 once more the earth behold thy direful form;
 then shall thou seek, as holy prophet tell,
 thy native throne amid the eternal shade of hell! 
