the bower of elegance.

address to a very accomplish woman.

the sultry sun have spread along the sky,
 then bid the gale his sacred presence fly,
 descend to earth, and wander by the stream,
 till they shall mark his last depart beam;
 or till some fleecy or benignant shower
 drop a fresh essence on the thirsty flower,
 moisten the eye of every open bud,
 and let they see their image in the flood;
 then dip their wing, and through the soften air
 waft the fresh sweet, and every perfume bear. 

such heat oppressive sicken through the sky,
 that pant flock beneath the hedge lie;
 the milky thorn, white as their coat, be see,
 tuft with top-knot of eye-loving green;
 the sun behind the fragrant hedge retire,
 and lend that coolness all so much desire;
 the shady walk tempt on my wander foot
 to a close grove, impervious to the heat,
 where every tree can wave a leafy fan,
 and breathe refreshment on exhaust man. 
the poplar tall over many a head will rise,
 resolve to meet the ardour of the sky;
 the tremble asp a whisper breeze will hear,
 and shake its every leaf with needless fear;
 the shelter lime their spread arm extend,
 bear to protect, and happy to defend;
 the stately oak look on, and firm stand
 the noble patron of the grow wood;
 the grow wood in spiry shrub arise,
 there cling the woodbine, there the sweet-briar blow. 
there melt the frutex, there the barberry reign —
 the red tide glow through transparent vein;
 with mountain-ash, to which the blackbird fly,
 and his red harvest for the winter eye,
 then perch on the dear provide spray,
 whistle his mate, and carol through the day. 

where soft moss her various kind have bring,
 and to cling close to a rock have teach;
 where many a shrub that taste have train to grow,
 from her fair hand all careless seem to throw;
 and, bend over the love-wrought mossy seat,
 lilac and rose fond make to meet;
 the modest jasmine, too, embrace the bower,
 fearful to show the world too gay a flower;
 the enamour eglantine her sweet defend,
 and warrior spear from every arm extend;
 the prickly spear the rifle finger feel
 no less acute than those of point steel;
 the myrtle to this guardian friend apply,
 cling to his arm, fast root by his side. 
at a small distance run a tinkle rill,
 that make sad murmur to the rocky hill,
 on which this happy bower so sweet be place,
 this bower so culture by the hand of taste. 

no wonder taste bestow her tender care,
 and teach the vine to curl around yond chair;
 for here a nymph at sultry noon will come,
 and call this bower her flowery dress room. 
the darling nymph from who soft art have spring,
 the name that soften on the roughen tongue;
 the win form where grace and ease agree
 to smooth the manner, and yet leave they free;
 where every polish that the mind ever take
 shine in the eye, and the soft accent wake;
 where sweet thought their own pure course pursue,
 vary the old, and ornament the new;
 while all the win way that sense can lend,
 melt in the look, and with the manner blend;
 a form as gentle as if sweetness strive
 to see how far she can succeed with love —
 to see how far the lily can prevail
 to gain the heart, when gay rose fail! 

this lovely form on the soft couch recline,
 screen from the sun, and shelter from the wind;
 save where the breeze a load of sweet will bring,
 and gentle move the jess'mine fragrant wing. 
a silken loom overhang with lilac stand,
 and often court her fair creative band. 
distract Dido over the canvas bend,
 Hastes to the pile, nor heed her weep friend;
 her search eye the lessen vessel see,
 swift as the gale, fly over the roll sea;
 but when her strain eye no speck can find,
 no sail stream out — though lengthen by the wind,
 her sword she grasp — she Anna rend her hair,
 look, sob, and tear prevent, yet form a prayer. 
when gaze long, you think at last you hear
 these move accent murmur in your ear —
 "be all this pomp, this sacrifice i see,
 all only to deceive unhappy i! 
which be the worst? do thou in death pretend
 to scorn thy sister, or delude thy friend? 
thy summon sister and thy friend have come,
 one sword have serve we both — one common tomb!" 
a soft-breathed lyre now die along the glade,
 amid its string the wander finger stray;
 the wander finger melody have find,
 and with a gentle touch wake every chord around. 

some crayon pencil art have teach to vie
 with the meek lustre of the live eye;
 the live eye she form hand can show,
 and sense and feeling in its pupil throw;
 a easy figure from her finger stray,
 and the heart languish for the mimic shade,
 but not the shade when elegance be by, —
 nought else can win, nought else can keep the eye! 

her sister taste some floweret teach to grow,
 some hide their head, and among the dark grass blow;
 some tall seem, and stalk with great state,
 and look like porter at the flowery gate;
 while some to meek simplicity incline,
 and such, sweet lily of the vale, be thy;
 thy be the lot, the happy lot to know,
 and on the breast of elegance to blow;
 taste place thou there, thy back ground dark and high
 form a sweet arbour for the rest eye;
 the rest eye thy purity can see,
 and think how much my L— resemble thou. 

yet all thing suit to the soften mind,
 require a scene we may not hope to find;
 if, when high polish, few thing delight,
 do then refinement with our good unite? 
when the bright diamond throw a sunlike glare,
 and every colour of the prism there,
 the lapidary eye in rapturous gaze
 mark the bright rainbow in its hundred ray;
 the humble peasant see its radiance stream,
 and much admire the variegate beam,
 but think his glassy bead as full of light,
 as fine vary, and as precious quite. 

have you not see refinement sicken over
 the languid heart that erst be gay before? 
how happy they when every day can roll
 a tide of pleasure to the very soul! 
who seek not by refinement small spin thread
 the mazy labyrinth of life to tread. 
that slender guide shall a rude breath destroy,
 the wanderer lose, though in the court of joy;
 though innocence herself shall lead the train,
 silent she will sit, and wit may flash in vain. 
how bless be they who elegance have bring
 to the true standard of reflect thought! 
who mind be still unfettered to enjoy,
 with who nought can the common charm destroy;
 the wish to please their handmaid still retain,
 nor see one wish to please solicit they in vain. 

now the bright sun slide down the slope sky,
 and slow-paced evening gain upon the eye. 
the fragrant breeze wave along the mead,
 whisper the grass, and tap the floweret head;
 the flock and herd now low along the plain,
 and the shrill pipe employ the leisure swain;
 the weary cart-horse stalk with equal pace,
 and over the ground drag on the loosen trace;
 the joyful cur run forth to meet his friend,
 and yelp and leap delight to attend;
 the little child haste to beg a ride,
 fearful, yet please, hang on, while daddy walk beside. 

sweet elegance arise and leave her bower,
 warn by the dewdrop on each nod flower;
 homeward she bend, and taste that home have make
 as sweet a dwelling as the jasmine shade. 
myrtle and orange bold light oppose,
 and thus the staircase in soft twilight glow;
 the playful sun look artful between,
 but soon despair to blindfold strong-eyed green. 
in this bless window two sweet cherub play,
 and many a feast and many a cap be make;
 at social life you see the darling aim,
 and all their fondness their dear child claim. 
now soft indulgence the kind mother show,
 now from her arm the naughty baby throw;
 the birchen rod, though but of two twig make,
 make both the mother and the child afraid. 
a christen dinner now prepare with haste,
 here bit of cake must turn again to paste;
 a harden crust a round of beef must prove,
 and that bit cheese may serve as a remove;
 while apple slice a dumpling well may seem,
 yond peach be curd, and yond drop water cream;
 the brimful glass on the salver stand,
 and the fair waiter help with cautious hand;
 with steady step, and serious, smileless face,
 she give to each with modest maiden grace. 

and now to school the fancy child go,
 miss Kitty learn to read, miss Jean to sow. 
that pocket-handkerchief be neat do,
 for that a prize of sweet, sweet fig be win. 
the dame be good, but then she will insist
 that shirt shall be unpicked about the wrist;
 with every stitch take back a tear descend,
 and slap be give for leave long thread-end. 
yond garter, too, have once three loop to show,
 and now you see the needle hold but two! 
for shame, miss Doll! go, in yond corner stand,
 or else the rod shall smart that dirty hand;
 a naughty thing! i know you can do better;
 and you miss pert, what set you in that titter? 
do mind your work, and let your sampler show
 how learning from the needle point may grow. 

now the tea kettle dangle over the fire,
 and acorn cup as china we admire;
 in due precedence round the doll be set,
 this drink tea now, that must not have it yet. 
order preside — mamma be copy still,
 be the guide now, as ever more she will. 

you happy parent, here observe your power,
 see how your precept regulate the hour;
 see how your manner round these cherub cling,
 your air, your word, your look, your every thing. 
mamma say so, be echo all around,
 mamma do so, be breathe in every sound,
 mamma bid i, and so i need not fear,
 and thus mamma the worship idol here! 
Mark well this lesson, since your form hand
 mould the soft mind, and can its power command,
 since now your action be not you alone,
 but every word be copy one by one;
 think to what consequence each thought may rise,
 your every word the vacant mind supply;
 even in their play the useful dictate give,
 for even in play they may be teach to live,
 may learn strict justice among their doll to deal,
 may learn forbearance, and may learn to feel,
 may learn to share their little precious store,
 and know no grudge though less one get more. 
o! may no voice in false persuasion tone
 bid they snatch all for fear it shall be go,
 and every part of narrow manner teach
 that little jealousy and self can reach! 
there be not one virtue future life shall bless,
 but this faint shadow may some way express,
 may prove the practice through the mimic scene,
 and be in life what here the child have be. 
