song of the evening hour.

last of the hour, that track the fade day,
i move along the realm of twilight air,
and hear, remote, the choral song decay
of sister-nymph, who dance around my car.

then, as i follow through the azure void,
his partial splendour from my strain eye
sink in the depth of space; my only guide
his faint ray dawn on the farther sky;

save that sweet linger strain of gay hour!
who close my voice prolong in die note,
while mortal on the green earth own its power,
as downward on the evening gale it float.

when fade along the west the sun last beam
as, weary, to the nether world he go,
and mountain-summit catch the purple gleam,
and slumber ocean faint and faint glow;

silent upon the globe broad shade i steal,
and over its dry turf shed the cool dew,
and every severe herb and floweret heal,
and all their fragrance on the air diffuse.

wherever i move, a tranquil pleasure reign;
over all the scene the dusky tint i send,
that forest wild and mountain, stretch plain
and people town, in soft confusion blend.

wide over the world i waft the freshen wind,
low breathe through the wood and twilight vale,
in whisper soft, that woo the pensive mind
of he who love my lonely step to hail.

his tender oaten reed i watch to hear,
steal its sweetness over some plain rill,
or soothe ocean wave, when storm be near,
or swell in the breeze from distant hill!

i wake the fairy elf, who shun the light:
when, from their blossom bed, they sly peep,
and spy my pale star, lead on the night, —
forth to their game and revelry they leap;

send all the prison sweet abroad in air,
that with they slumber in the floweret cell;
then to the shore and moon-light brook repair,
until the high lark their matin carol swell.

the wood-nymph hail my air and tempere shade,
with ditty soft and light sportive dance,
on river margin of some bowery glade,
and strew their fresh bud as my step advance. —

but swift i pass, and distant region trace,
for moonbeam silver all the eastern cloud,
and day last crimson vestige fade apace;
down the steep west i fly from midnight shroud.
