monody to the memory of a young lady.

by mr. Shaw.

yet do i live! o how shall i sustain
 this vast unutterable weight of woe? 
this worse than hunger, poverty, or pain,
 or all the complicate ill below —
 she, in who life my hope be treasure all,
 be go — for ever flee —
 my dear emma's dead;
 these eye, these tear-swollen eye behold she fall:
 ah no — she live on some far happy shore,
 she live — but (cruel thought!) she live for i no more. 

i, who the tedious absence of a day
 remove, will languish for my charmer sight,
 will chide the linger moment for delay,
 and fond blame the slow return of night;
 how, how shall i endure
 (o misery past a cure!) 
hour, day and year successive to roll,
 nor ever more behold the comfort of my soul? 

be she not all my fond wish can frame? 
do ever mind so much of heaven partake? 
do she not love i with the pure flame,
 and give up friend and fortune for my sake? 
though mild as evening sky,
 with downcast, stream eye,
 stand the stern frown of supercilious brow,
 deaf to their brutal threat, and faithful to her vow. 

come, then, some muse, the sad of the train,
 (no more your bard shall dwell on idle lay)
 teach i each move melancholy strain,
 and o discard the pageantry of phrase:
 ill suit the flower of speech with woe like mine! 
thus, haply, as i paint
 the source of my complaint,
 my soul may own the impassion line;
 a flood of tear may gush to my relief,
 and from my swell heart discharge this load of grief. 

forbear, my fond officious friend, forbear
 to wound my ear with the sad tale you tell;
 "how good she be, how gentle, and how fair!" 
in pity cease — alas! i know too well:
 how, in her sweet, expressive face
 beam forth the beauty of her mind,
 yet heighten by exterior grace
 of manner most engage, most refine:
 no piteous object can she see,
 but her soft bosom share the woe,
 while smile of affability
 endear whatever boon she may bestow. 
whatever the emotion of her heart,
 still shine conspicuous in her eye,
 stranger to every female art,
 alike to feign, or to disguise:
 and o the boast how rare! 
the secret in her faithful breast repose,
 she never with lawless tongue disclose,
 in sacred silence lodge inviolate there. 
o feeble word — unable to express
 her matchless virtue, or my own distress! 

relentless death! that, steel to human woe,
 with murderous hand deal havoc on mankind,
 why (cruel!) strike this deprecate blow,
 and leave such wretched multitude behind! 
hark! groan come winge on every breeze! 
the son of grief prefer their ardent vow;
 oppress with sorrow, want, or dire disease,
 and supplicate thy aid, as i do now:
 in vain — perverse, still on the unweeting head
 it be thy thy vengeful dart to shed;
 hope infant blossom to destroy,
 and drench in tear the face of joy. 
but oh! fell tyrant! yet expect the hour
 when virtue shall renounce thy power;
 when thou no more shall blot the face of day,
 nor mortal tremble at thy rigid sway. 
alas! the day — wherever i turn my eye,
 some sad memento of my loss appear;
 i fly the fatal house — suppress my sigh,
 resolve to dry my unavailing tear:
 but, ah! in vain — no change of time or place
 the memory can efface
 of all that sweetness, that enchant air,
 now lose; and nought remain but anguish and despair. 

where be the delegate of heaven, oh where! 
appoint virtue child safe to keep! 
have innocence or virtue be their care,
 she have not die, nor have i live to weep:
 move by my tear, and by her patience move,
 to see she force the endear smile,
 my sorrow to beguile,
 when torture keen rage she prove;
 sure they have ward that untimely dart,
 which break her thread of life, and rend a husband heart. 
how shall i ever forget that dreadful hour,
 when feel death resistless power,
 my hand she press, wet with her fall tear,
 and thus, in faulter accent, speak her fear! 
 "ah, my love lord, the transient scene be over,
" and we must part (alas!) to meet no more! 
 "but oh! if ever thy emma's name be dear,
" if ever thy vow have charm my ravish ear;
 "if, from thy love embrace my heart to gain,
" proud friend have frown, and fortune smile in vain,
 "if it have be my sole endeavour, still
" to act in all, obsequious to thy will;
 "to watch thy very smile, thy wish to know,
" then only true bless when thou be so:
 "if i have dote with that fond excess,
" nor love can add, nor fortune make it less;
 "if this I have do, and more — oh then be kind
" to the dear lovely babe i leave behind. 
 "when time my once-loved memory shall efface,
" some happy maid may take thy emma's place,
 "with envious eye thy partial fondness see,
" and hate it for the love thou bore to i:
 "my dear S—, forgive a woman fear,
" but one word more (i can bear thy tear)
 "promise — and i will trust thy faithful vow,
" (oft have i try, and ever sound thou true)
 "that to some distant spot thou will remove
" this fatal pledge of hapless emma's love,
 "where safe, thy blandishment it may partake,
" and oh! be tender for its mother sake. 
 "will thou? —
" i know thou will — sad silence speak assent,
 "and in that please hope thy Emma die content." 
i, who with more than manly strength have bear
 the various ill impose by cruel fate,
 sustain the firmness of my soul no more,
 but sink beneath the weight:
 just heaven (i cry) from memory early day
 no comfort have thy wretched suppliant know,
 misfortune still with unrelenting sway
 have claim i for her own. 
but o — in pity to my grief, restore
 this only source of bliss; i ask — i ask no more —
 vain hope — the irrevocable doom be past,
 even now she look — she sigh her last —
 vain i strive to stay her fleet breath,
 and, with rebellious heart, protest against her death. 

when the stern tyrant close her lovely eye,
 how do i rave, untaught to bear the blow! 
with impious wish to tear she from the sky;
 how curse my fate in bitterness of woe! 
but whither will this dreadful frenzy lead? 
fond man, forbear,
 thy fruitless sorrow spare,
 dare not to task what heaven high will decree;
 in humble reverence kiss the afflictive rod,
 and prostrate bow to a offend god. 

perhaps kind heaven in mercy deal the blow,
 some save truth thy rove soul to teach;
 to wean thy heart from grovel view below,
 and point out bliss beyond misfortune reach:
 to show that all the flatter scheme of joy,
 which tower hope so fond build in air,
 one fatal moment can destroy,
 and plunge the exult maniac in despair. 
then o! with pious fortitude sustain
 thy present loss — haply, thy future gain;
 nor let thy Emma die in vain;
 time shall administer its wonted balm,
 and hush this storm of grief to no unpleasing calm. 

thus the poor bird, by some disastrous fate
 catch and imprison in a lonely cage,
 tear from its native field, and dear mate,
 flutter awhile, and spend its little rage:
 but, find all its effort weak and vain,
 no more it pant and rage for the plain;
 mope awhile, in sullen mood
 droop the sweet mourner — but, ere long,
 prune its light wing, and peck its food,
 and meditate the song:
 serene sorrow, breathe its piteous case,
 and with its plaintive warble sadden all the place. 

forgive i, heaven — yet — yet the tear will flow,
 to think how soon my scene of bliss be past! 
my bud joy just promise to blow,
 all nip and wither by one envious blast! 
my hour, that laugh wont to fleet away,
 move heavy along;
 where be now the sprightly jest, the jocund song;
 time creep unconscious of delight:
 how shall i cheat the tedious day? 
and o — the joyless night! 
where shall i rest my weary head? 
how shall i find repose on a sad widow bed? 

come, theban drug, the wretch only aid,
 to my tear heart its former peace restore;
 thy votary wrap in thy lethean shade,
 awhile shall cease his sorrow to deplore:
 haply when lock in sleep embrace,
 again i shall behold my emma's face;
 again with transport hear
 her voice soft whisper in my ear;
 may steal once more a balmy kiss,
 and taste at least of visionary bliss. 

but ah! the unwelcome morn obtrude light
 will all my shadowy scheme of bliss depose,
 will tear the dear illusion from my sight,
 and wake i to the sense of all my woe:
 if to the verdant field i stray,
 alas! what pleasure now can these convey? 
her lovely form pursue wherever i go,
 and darken all the scene with woe. 
by nature lavish bounty cheere no more,
 sorrow i rove
 through valley, grot, and grove;
 nought can their beauty or my loss restore;
 no herb, no plant, can medicine my disease,
 and my sad sigh be bear on every pass breeze. 

sickness and sorrow hover round my bed,
 who now with anxious haste shall bring relief,
 with lenient hand support my droop head,
 assuage my pain, and mitigate my grief? 
shall worldly business call away,
 who now shall in my absence fond mourn,
 count every minute of the loiter day,
 impatient for my quick return? 
shall aught my bosom discompose,
 who now with sweet complacent air,
 shall smooth the rugged brow of care,
 and soften all my woe? 
too faithful memory — cease, o cease —
 how shall i ever regain my peace? 
(o to forget she) — but how vain each art,
 while every virtue live imprint on my heart. 

and thou, my little cherub, leave behind,
 to hear a father plaint, to share his woe,
 when reason dawn inform thy infant mind,
 and thy sweet-lisping tongue shall ask the cause,
 how oft with sorrow shall my eye run over,
 when, twine round my knee, i trace
 thy mother smile upon thy face? 
how oft to my full heart shall thou restore
 sad memory of my joy — ah now no more! 
by blessing once enjoy now more distress,
 more beggar by the riches once possess. 
my little darling! — dear to i grow
 by all the tear thou have cause — (o strange to hear!) 
buy with a life yet dear than thy own,
 thy cradle purchase with thy mother bier:
 who now shall seek with fond delight,
 thy infant step to guide aright? 
she, who with dote eye, will gaze
 on all thy little artless way,
 by all thy soft endearment bless,
 and clasp thou oft with transport to her breast,
 alas! be go — yet shall thou prove
 a father dear, tender love:
 and o! sweet senseless smiler (envy state!) 
as yet unconscious of thy hapless fate,
 when year thy judgement shall mature,
 and reason show those ill it can cure,
 will thou, a father grief to assuage,
 for virtue prove the phoenix of the earth? 
(like she, thy mother die to give thou birth)
 and be the comfort of my age! 
when sick and languish i lie,
 will thou my emma's wonted care supply? 
and oft, as, to thy listen ear,
 thy mother virtue and her fate i tell,
 say, will thou drop the tender tear,
 while on the mournful theme i dwell? 
then, fond steal to thy father side,
 whenever thou see the soft distress,
 which i will vain seek to hide,
 say, will thou strive to make it less? 
to sooth my sorrow all thy care employ,
 and in my cup of grief infuse one drop of joy? 
