[fragment] vi.

son of the noble Fingal, oscian, prince of man! what tear run down the cheek of age? what shade thy mighty soul?

memory, son of Alpin, memory wound the age. of former time be my thought; my thought be of the noble Fingal. the race of the king return into my mind, and wound i with remembrance.

one day, return from the sport of the mountain, from pursue the son of the hill, we cover this heath with our youth. Fingal the mighty be here, and oscur, my son, great in war. fair on our sight from the sea, at once, a virgin come. her breast be like the snow of one night. her cheek like the bud of the rose. mild be her blue roll eye: but sorrow be big in her heart.

Fingal renown in war! she cry, son of the king, preserve i! speak secure, reply the king, daughter of beauty, speak: our ear be open to all: our sword redress the injure. i fly from Ullin, she cry, from Ullin famous in war. i fly from the embrace of he who will debase my blood. cremor, the friend of man, be my father; cremor the prince of inverne.

fingal young son arise; Carryl expert in the bow; Fillan belove of the fair; and Fergus first in the race. — who from the farther lochlyn? who to the sea of molochasquir? who dare hurt the maid who the son of Fingal guard? daughter of beauty, rest secure; rest in peace, thou fair of woman.

far in the blue distance of the deep, some spot appear like the back of the ridge-wave. but soon the ship increase on our sight. the hand of Ullin draw she to land. the mountain tremble as he move. the hill shake at his step. dire rattle his armour around he. death and destruction be in his eye. his stature like the roe of Morven. he move in the lightning of steel.

our warrior fall before he, like the field before the reaper. fingal three son he bind. he plunge his sword into the fair-one breast. she fall as a wreath of snow before the sun in spring. her bosom heave in death; her soul come forth in blood.

oscur my son come down; the mighty in battle descend. his armour rattle as thunder; and the lightning of his eye be terrible. there, be the clash of sword; there, be the voice of steel. they strike and they thrust; they dig for death with their sword. but death be distant far, and delay to come. the sun begin to decline; and the cowherd think of home. then oscur keen steel find the heart of Ullin. he fall like a mountain-oak cover over with glister frost: he shine like a rock on the plain. — here the daughter of beauty lie; and here the brave of man. here one day end the fair and the valiant. here rest the pursuer and the pursue.

son of Alpin! the woe of the aged be many: their tear be for the past. this raise my sorrow, warrior; memory awake my grief. oscur my son be brave; but oscur be now no more. thou have hear my grief, o son of Alpin; forgive the tear of the age.

