a description of bath.

humble inscribe to her royal highness the princess Amelia. 

Amelia, beauteous princess, deign to view
 what the muse sing: to you the song be due;
 to you, in who with joy we see combine
 true royal greatness, and a humble mind. 
deign you, bright maid, to hear my artless lay;
 you will awe the snarl critic into praise. 
if goodness can this bold address forgive,
 nurse by your smile, my humble rhyme shall live. 

to sing the town, where balmy water flow,
 to which Amelia health the nation owe,
 my muse aspire; while conscious blush rise,
 and her weak pinion tremble, ere she fly;
 till, draw vigour from those live spring,
 she dare to raise her voice, and stretch her wing. 
not the fame spring, which give poetic fire,
 have noble virtue, or can more inspire. 
too weak my voice; but great Amelia name
 shall raise my number, and defend my fame. 

long ere the roman eagle hither fly,
 ere albion son their powerful virtue know;
 brute great descendant raise they first to fame,
 and, from their use, assign the town its name. 
Pallas he choose protectress of the stream,
 Pallas the city her protectress claim;
 thus he, who of man fall divine sing,
 tell from old record, write of gothic king. 
the roman well this ancient story know,
 minerva statue their devotion draw;
 of curious art her noble bust appear,
 safe from the ruin of a thousand year. 
these salutary stream alone can boast
 their virtue not in thrice five age lose. 
the float water, from their hide source,
 through the same strata keep unerring course;
 the flow sulphur meet dissolve steel,
 and heat in combat, till the water boil:
 unite then, enrich the heal stream,
 health to the sick they give, and to the water, fame. 

thus oft contend party rage and hate,
 malignant both, and push each other fate;
 at last, their fury spend, and cloy with blood,
 they join in friendship for the public good. 

hither foul Scurvy, odious to the sight;
 and vapour, which, in every form, affright;
 sharp colic, groan with a jaundice face;
 white leprosy, of old egyptian race;
 the shake palsy; rheumatism lame;
 and meager indigestion pine come;
 with many dreadful ail, without a name. 

fatal effect of luxury and ease! 
we drink our poison, and we eat disease;
 indulge our sense at our reason cost,
 till sense be pain, and reason hurt, or lose. 

not so, o temperance bland! when rule by thou,
 the brute obedient, and the man be free:
 soft be his slumber, balmy be his rest,
 his vein not boil from the midnight feast;
 touch by aurora rosy hand, he wake,
 peaceful and calm; and with the world partake
 the joyful dawn of return day,
 for which their grateful thanks the whole creation pay! 
all but the human brute; it be he alone
 who deed of darkness fly the rise sun. 

it be to thy rule, o temperance! we owe
 all pleasure which from health and strength can flow:
 vigour of body, purity of mind,
 unclouded reason, sentiment refine,
 unmixed, untainted joy, without remorse,
 th'intemp'rate sinner never-failing curse. 

our water wash those numerous ill away,
 and grant the tremble wretch a long day. 
o may return health more wisdom give! 
let death approach teach we how to live. 

if but one leper cure, make Jordan stream,
 in sacred write, a venerable theme,
 what honour to thy sovereign water due,
 where sick, by thousand, do their health renew? 

the mineral steam which from the bath arise,
 from noxious vapour clear the neighbour sky:
 when fever bear a epidemic sway,
 unpeopled town, sweep village away;
 while death abroad deal terror, and despair,
 the plague but gentle touch within their sphere. 

bless source of health, seat on rise ground,
 with friendly hill by nature guard round;
 from eastern blast, and sultry south secure;
 the air balsamic, and the soil be pure. 

what boundless prospect from yond tower height
 of hill, and plain, and valley strike the sight! 
town, river, villa, flock and herd appear,
 and all the various product of the year. 
thence view the pendant rock majestic shade,
 that speak the ruin conquer time have make:
 whether the egg be by the deluge break,
 or nature since have feel some other shock;
 ingenious Burnet, thine's a please scheme,
 a gay delusion, if it be a dream. 
the shatter rock and strata seem to say,
 nature be old, and tend to her decay:
 yet lovely in decay, and green in age,
 her beauty last she, to her late stage. 
wisdom immense contrive the wondrous ball,
 and form spring forth, obedient to his call. 
he fix her date, and bid the planet run
 her annual race around the central sun:
 he bid the season, day, and night return,
 till the pent fire which at the center burn,
 shall the whole globe to one huge cinder turn. 
then, like a phoenix, she again shall rise,
 and the new world be people from the sky;
 then vice, and all her train of ill shall cease,
 and truth shall reign with righteousness and peace. 

surround by the avon wind stream,
 beneath the hill, a people island seem;
 a ancient abbey in its center stand,
 the labour work of superstitious hand. 
when holy craft supreme do guide the helm,
 and gothic darkness overspread the realm;
 the artful priest amaze the gape croud,
 and sacred truth be veil in mystic cloud;
 when live saint for true devotion bleed;
 and rite profane be offer to the dead;
 when idol image devotion draw,
 and idol god be worship as the true;
 witness yond front; how impious design
 in stone to represent the eternal mind! 
witness the saint and angel on the wall! 
deaf to their votary prayer, and silent to their call.
 welcome, fair liberty, and light divine! 
yet wide spread your wing, and bright shine;
 dart lively beam on every british soul,
 and scatter slavish darkness to the pole. 
now for pure worship be the church design;
 o that the muse can say to that confine! 
even there, by meaning look, and cringe bow,
 the female idol her adorer know! 
fly hence, profane, nor taint this sacred place;
 mock not thy god, to flatter cælia face. 
this sacred pile inclose honour dust,
 and pompous monument secure the trust:
 there Montague, the noble prelate, lie,
 with pious hand up-lifted to the sky:
 a virgin here enjoy eternal fame,
 join on the marble with great dryden name. 

the spacious portico demand my song,
 where beaux, and bell appear, a shine throng! 
to take a cordial draught, and cheer the soul,
 like Homer god, when Nectar crown the bowl. 
correct the fabric, simple, neat, and plain,
 of parian, nor egyptian marble vain,
 but innocent white, it be proud to show,
 in neighbour hill what beauteous pillar grow. 

the bath adjoin form two ample square,
 around the wall the roman art appear;
 niche and arch there the bather find,
 a shelter from the rain, and bluster wind. 
Bladud himself sit guardian of the stream,
 who noble virtue give they royal name. 

not far from hence, a bath of gentle heat,
 the tender virgin find a safe retreat
 from sight indecent, and from speech lewd,
 which dare not there, with satyr-face, intrude. 
just in the midst a marble cross there stand,
 which popish mind with pious awe command,
 devoid itself of power to heal our woe,
 yet, deck with monumental crutch, show
 what mighty cure this wondrous pool have do,
 and these the trophy from disease win. 
the sailor thus, on foam billow toss,
 his ship, and shipmate in the tempest lose,
 do some kind God assist power implore,
 and when, by aid divine, he reach the shore,
 strait to the temple of the god he fly,
 his briny coat he think the temple due:
 and near the drop garment, on the wall
 he write, with grateful praise, the move tale. 

through yond high arch gate on either hand,
 in comely order, row of building stand;
 see square, and hospital, and temple rise,
 from whence let pure devotion pierce the sky. 
a fountain flow, which stately wall surround,
 and palace overspread the verdant ground. 
where herd be wont to drink the cool spring,
 and bird on bend branch use to sing. 

leave the west, i guide my view around,
 and mark the city venerable bind. 
where the remains of many a hundred year,
 in reverend ruin, on the wall appear,
 a fury head with snaky hair there stand;
 here Hercules attentive eye demand;
 and there a shepherd and his youthful dame;
 these monument, and more, be know to fame. 

hence view the grove; it form a verdant square,
 see the tree wanton in the eastern air;
 Aurora gild they with a temperate ray,
 and lofty building shade in noon of day. 
a obelisk do now its center grace,
 the late, proud, honour of the place. 
to future time this monument shall show,
 how much all briton, and all belgian owe,
 to spring which save from death the great Nassau. 
from he, and beauteous Anna, shall descend,
 hero like William, ready to defend
 fair liberty oppress, and trample law,
 or die with pleasure in the glorious cause. 
what less than this can prophecy divine,
 when William blood be mix with George line? 

nor think, o Nash, the muse forget thy praise,
 enough for thou this monument to raise:
 what great honour can thy pride receive,
 than that thy name with great Nassau shall live? 

where the smooth bowl be wont to skim the green,
 now stately room for pleasure change the scene;
 where music warble, and the dancer bind,
 while the high roof re-echo to the sound. 
there bloom virgin kindle amorous fire;
 and there the god of wit with verse inspire. 
the rattle dye enchant the miser heir,
 the hoard sum the shark gamester share:
 the important business of the fair, quadrille,
 employ those hour which dance can kill;
 or favourite ombre, sweet sing by pope,
 appal their cheek with fear, or redden they with hope. 
there miss soon learn the language of the eye,
 the witless beau look soft, and swear he die;
 and who can think so fine a lover lie? 
there pagan, Turk, the papist, and the Jew,
 and all mankind epitome you view. 
but fly, my muse, fly this enchant place,
 nor man, through all his pleasure, dare to trace. 

but see through yonder door a safe retreat;
 there rest secure, amid the wise, and great:
 hero of ancient, and of modern song,
 the bend shelf in comely order throng,
 hither, you nymph, attend the lead muse,
 with she the labour of the wise peruse;
 their maxim learn, their precept be your guide. 
think virtuous knowledge woman true pride:
 one hour thus spend, more solid joy shall give,
 than the gay idler know, or fool conceive:

now leave the terrace, and the extend scene
 of hill enclose, and meadow ever green,
 descend to walk, betwixt lime in adverse row,
 and view the gay parterre that ever blow. 
this fair pavilion view, around its base
 observe the sport of the scaly race. 
a cool recess, the muse choose seat,
 from croud, and empty noise, a bless retreat! 
the lovely landscape, and the silent stream,
 inspire the poet, and present the theme. 
round the green walk the river glide away,
 where 'midst espalier balmy zephyr play,
 and fan the leaf, and cool the scorch ray:
 view the brown shadow of yond pathless wood;
 and craggy hill, irregular and rude! 
where nature sport romantic: hence be see
 the new make road, and wonderful machine,
 self-moving downward from the mountain height,
 a rock its burden of a mountain weight. 

hail, mighty genius! bear for great design,
 the adorn your country, and to mend the time;
 virtue exemplar in degenerate day,
 all who love virtue, love to speak your praise:
 you chide the muse that dare your virtue own,
 and, veil with modesty, will live unknown;
 a honest muse, no prostitute for gain,
 interest may court she, but shall court in vain:
 but ever please to set true worth in view,
 you shall be see, and will, by all but you. 

prophetic here, the muse shall build thy seat,
 great like thy soul, in every part complete:
 on this fair eminence the fabric stand,
 the finish labour of a thousand hand;
 the hill, the Dale, the river, groves and field,
 vary the landscape, which thy prospect yield;
 whole vale of fruit-tree give our eye delight,
 yet scorn alone to gratify the sight;
 beneath the load the tender branch shall bend,
 and the rich juice regale its master friend. 
thy taste refine appear in yonder wood,
 not nature torture, but by art improve:
 where cover walk with open vista meet,
 a area here, and there a shady seat. 
a thousand sweet in mingle odour flow
 from bloom flower, which on the border grow. 
in numerous stream the murmur water thrill,
 unite all, obedient to thy will;
 till by thy art, in one canal combine,
 they through the wood in various maze wind;
 from thence the foam wave fall rapid down,
 in bold cascade, and lash the rugged stone. 
but here their fury lose, the calm scene
 delight the soft muse, and soul serene;
 a ample Bason, center of the place,
 in lymph transparent hold the scaly race;
 its glassy face, from every ruffle free,
 reflect the image of each neighbour tree;
 on which the feather choir, melodious, throng,
 by love inspire, unite in tuneful song;
 their tuneful song the echo wood resound,
 and fall water add a solemn sound,
 sure this the muse haunt; it be hallow ground! 
here can the muse for ever spend her day,
 and chant, in humble rhyme, the owner praise,
 how by his art, young Myra shall no more
 her strephon letter lose, with sigh deplore,
 unjust jealous of her faithful Swain,
 while he expect the kind return in vain. 
how from the mountain rocky side he draw
 a thousand shine palace to view:
 temple, and hospital in every land,
 from age to age, his monument shall stand. 
envy itself shall die, and fickle fame,
 when he be dead, do justice to his name. 
have i or pindar wing, or Homer fire;
 virgil true greatness, or soft Horace' lyre;
 can i, like tuneful pope, command the nine;
 do my verse flow, and as it flow, refine;
 thus will i sing; but o, with grief i find
 my feeble pen but faint paint my mind! 
myself unequal to the great design,
 the task to able poet i resign. 
