epistle of Horace.

book i 

epistle i 

S** who love indulge my labour past,
 mature my present, and shall bound my last! 
why  will you break the sabbath of my day? 
now sick alike of envy and of praise. 
public too long, ah let i hide my age! 
see modest  cibber now have leave the stage:
 our general now,  retire to their estate,
 hang their old trophy over the garden gate,
 in life cool evening satiate of applause,
 nor  fond of bleed, even in BR—'s cause. 

 a voice there be, that whisper in my ear,
 (it be reason voice, which sometime one can hear)
 "friend pope! be prudent, let your muse take breath,
"and never gallop Pegasus to death;
 "lest stiff, and stately, void of fire, and force,
"you limp, like Blackmore, on a lord mayor horse. ' 

farewell then  verse, and love, and every toy,
 the rhyme and rattle of the man or boy:
 what  right, what true, what fit, we just call,
 let this be all my care-for this be all:
 to lay this  harvest up, and hoard with haste
 what every day will want, and most, the last. 

but ask not, to what  doctor i apply? 
swear to no master, of no sect be i:
 as drive the  storm, at any door i knock,
 and house with montagne now, or now with lock. 
sometime a  patriot, active in debate,
 mix with the world, and battle for the state,
 free as young Lyttleton, her cause pursue,
 still true to virtue,  and as warm as true:
 sometime, with Aristippus, or saint Paul,
 indulge my candor, and grow all to all;
 back to my  native moderation slide,
 and win my way by yield to the tie. 

 long, as to he who work for debt, the day,
 long as the night to she who love be away;
 long as the year dull circle seem to run,
 when the brisk minor pant for twenty-one;
 so slow the  unprofitable moment roll,
 that lock up all the function of my soul;
 that keep i from myself; and still delay
 life instant business to a future day:
 that  task, which as we follow, or despise,
 the old be a fool, the young wise;
 which do, the poor can no want endure,
 and which not do, the rich must be poor. 

 late as it be, i put my self to school,
 and feel some  comfort, not to be a fool. 
 weak though i be of limb, and short of sight,
 far from a lynx, and not a giant quite,
 i will do what Mead and cheselden advise,
 to keep these limb, and to preserve these eye. 
not to  go back, be somewhat to advance,
 and man must walk at least before they dance. 

say, do thy  blood rebel, thy bosom move
 with wretched avarice, or as wretched love? 
know, there be word, and spell, which can control
 ( between the fit) this fever of the soul:
 know, there be rhyme, which ( fresh and fresh apply)
 will cure the arrant puppy of his pride. 
be  furious, envious, slothful, mad or drink,
  slave to a wife or vassal to a punk,
 a switz, a high-dutch, or a low-dutch  bear —
 all that we ask be but a patient ear. 

 it be the first virtue, vice to abhor;
 and the first wisdom to be fool no more. 
but to the world, no  bugbear be so great,
 as want of figure, and a small estate. 
to either India see the merchant fly,
 scar at the spectre of pale poverty! 
see he, with pain of body, pang of soul,
 burn through the tropic, freeze beneath the pole! 
will thou do nothing for a noble end,
 nothing, to make philosophy thy friend? 
to stop thy foolish view, thy long desire,
 and  ease thy heart of all that it admire? 

here, wisdom call:  "seek virtue first! be bold! 
"as gold to silver, virtue be to gold. "
there, London voice: "get money, money still! 
 "and then let virtue follow, if she will."
this, this the save doctrine, preach to all,
 from  low saint James up to high saint Paul;
 from he who  quill stand quiver at his ear,
 to he who notch stick at Westminster. 

Barnard in  spirit, sense, and truth abound. 
 "pray then what want he?"fourscore thousand pound,
 a pension, or such harness for a slave
 as bug now have, and Bestia fain will have. 
Barnard, thou be a  cit, with all thy worth;
 Bestia and bug, their honour, and so forth. 

yet every  child another song will sing,
 "virtue, brave boy! it be virtue make a king."
true, conscious honour be to feel no sin,
 he be arm without that be innocent within;
 be this thy  screen, and this thy wall of brass;
 compare to this, a minister a ass. 

 and say, to which shall our applause belong,
 this new court jargon, or the good old song? 
the modern language of corrupt peer,
 or what be speak at  Cressy and Poitiers? 

 who counsel best? who whisper, "be but great,
"with praise or infamy, leave that to fate;
 "get place and wealth, if possible, with grace;
"if not, by any mean get wealth and place. 
for what? to have a  box where eunuch sing,
 and foremost in the circle eye a king. 
or  he, who bid thou face with steady view
 proud fortune, and look shallow greatness through:
 and,  while he bid thou, set the example too? 
if  such a doctrine, in saint James air,
 shall chance to make the well-dress rabble stare;
 if honest S* take scandal at a spark,
 that less admire the  palace than the park;
 faith i shall give the answer  Reynard give,
 "i can like, dread sir! your royal cave;
"because i see by all the track about,
 "full many a beast go in, but none come out."
adieu to virtue if you be once a slave:
 send she to court, you send she to her grave. 

well, if a king a lion, at the least
 the  people be a many-headed beast:
 can they direct what measure to pursue,
 who know themselves so little what to do? 
alike in nothing but one lust of gold,
 just half the land will buy, and half be sell:
 their  country be wealth our mighty miser drain,
 or cross, to plunder province, the main:
 the rest, some farm the poor-box, some the pew;
 some keep assembly, and will keep the stew;
 some  with fat buck on childless dotard fawn;
 some win rich widow by their chine and brawn;
 while with the silent growth of ten per cent,
 in dirt and darkness  hundred stink content. 

of all these way, if each  pursue his own,
 satire be kind, and let the wretch alone. 
but show i one, who have it in his power
 to act consistent with himself a hour. 
sir job  sail forth, the evening bright and still,
 "no place on earth (he cry) like Greenwich hill!"
 up start a palace, lo! the obedient base
 slope at its foot, the wood its side embrace,
 the silver Thames reflect its marble face. 
now let some whimsy, or that  devil within
 which guide all those who know not what they mean
 but give the knight (or give his lady) spleen;
 "away, away! take all your scaffold down,
"for snug the word: my dear! we will live in town. "

at amorous flavio be the  stock throw? 
that very night he long to lie alone. 
 the fool who wife elope some thrice a quarter,
 for matrimonial solace die a martyr. 
do ever  Proteus, Merlin, any witch,
 transform themselves so strange as the rich? 
 "well, but the  poor — the poor have the same itch:
 they change their  weekly barber, weekly news,
 prefer a new japanner to their shoe,
 discharge their  garret, move their bed, and run
 (they know not whither) in a chaise and one;
 they  hire their sculler, and when once aboard,
 grow sick, and damn the climate — like a lord,

 you laugh, half beau half sloven if i stand,
 my wig all powder, and all snuff my band;
 you laugh, if coat and breech strange vary,
 white glove, and linen worthy lady mary! 
but when  no prelate lawn with hair-shirt line,
 be half so incoherent as my mind,
 when (each opinion with the next at strife,
 one  ebb and flow of folly all my life)
 i  plant, root up, i build, and then confound,
 turn round to square, and square again to round;
  you never change one muscle of your face,
 you think this madness but a common case,
 nor  once to chancery, nor to Hales apply;
 yet hang your lip, to see a seam awry! 
careless how ill i with myself agree;
 kind to my dress, my figure, not to i. 
be this my  guide, philosopher, and friend? 
this, he who love i, and who ought to mend? 
who ought to make i (what he can, or none,)
 that man divine who wisdom call her own,
 great without title, without fortune bless,
 rich  even when plunder,  honour while oppress,
 love  without youth, and follow without power,
 at home though exile,  free, though in the tower. 
in short, that reason, high, immortal thing,
 just  less than Jove, and  much above a king,
 nay half in heaven —  except (what be mighty odd)
 a fit of vapour cloud this demi-god. 
