the prophecy of famine.

 a scots pastoral.

when Cupid first instruct his dart to fly
 from the sly corner of some cook-maid eye,
 the stripling raw, just enter in his teen,
 receive the wound, and wonder what it mean;
 his heart, like drip, melt, and new desire
 within he stir, each time she stir the fire;
 tremble and blush he the fair one view,
 and fain will speak, but can — without a Muse. 

so, to the sacred mount he take his way,
 prune his young wing, and tune his infant lie,
 his oaten reed to rural ditty frame,
 to flock and rock, to hill and rill proclaim,
 in simple note, and all unpolished strain,
 the love of nymph, and eke the love of swain. 

clad, as your nymph be always clad of yore,
 in rustic weed — a cook-maid now no more —
 beneath a age oak lardella lie —
 green moss, her couch; her canopy, the sky. 
from aromatic shrub the roguish gale
 steal young perfume, and waft they through the vale. 
the youth, turn swain, and skill in rustic lay,
 fast by her side his amorous descant play. 
herd lowe, flock bleat, pie chatter, raven scream,
 and the full chorus die down the stream. 
the stream, with music freight, as they pass,
 present the fair lardella with a glass,
 and zephyr, to complete the lovesick plan,
 wave his light wing, and serve she for a fan. 

but when maturer judgement take the lead,
 these childish toy on reason altar bleed,
 form after some great man, who name breed awe,
 who every sentence fashion make a law,
 who on mere credit his vain trophy rear,
 and found his merit on our servile fear;
 then we discard the work of the heart,
 and nature banish by mechanic art. 
then, deep read, our read must be show;
 vain be that knowledge which remain unknown. 
then ostentation march to our aid,
 and letter pride stalk forth in full parade,
 beneath their care behold the work refine,
 point each sentence, polish every line. 
trifle be dignify, and teach to wear
 the robe of ancient with a modern air,
 nonsense with classic ornament be grace,
 and pass current with the stamp of taste. 

then the rude theocrite be ransack over,
 and courtly Maro call from mincio shore;
 sicilian muse on our mountain roam,
 easy and free as if they be at home;
 nymph, naiad, nereid, dryad, satyr, faun,
 sport in our flood, and trip it over our lawn;
 flower which once flourish fair in Greece and Rome,
 more fair revive in england mead to bloom;
 sky without cloud exotic sun adorn;
 and rose blush, but blush without a thorn;
 landscape, unknown to dowdy nature, rise,
 and new creation strike our wonder eye. 

for bard, like these, who neither sing nor say,
 grave without thought, and without feeling gay,
 who number in one even tenor flow,
 attune to pleasure, and attune to woe,
 who, if plain common-sense her visit pay,
 and mar one couplet in their happy lay,
 as at some ghost affright, start and stare,
 and ask the meaning of her come there;
 for bard like these a wreath shall Mason bring,
 line with the soft down from folly wing;
 in love pagoda, shall they ever doze,
 and gisbel kind rock they to repose;
 my lord, — to letter as to faith most true —
 at once their patron and example too —
 shall quaint fashion his love-laboured dream,
 sigh with sad wind, and weep with weep stream,
 curious in grief, (for real grief we know
 be curious to dress up the tale of woe)
 from the green umbrage of some druid seat,
 shall his own work in his own way repeat. 

i, who no muse of heavenly birth inspire,
 no judgement temper when rash genius fire,
 who boast no merit but mere knack of rhime,
 short gleam of sense, and satire out of time,
 who can follow where trim fancy lead
 by prattle stream over flower-empurpled mead;
 who often, but without success, have pray
 for apt alliteration artful aid,
 who will, but can, with a master skill
 coin fine new epithet, which mean no ill,
 i, thus uncouth, thus every way unfit
 for pace poesy, and amble wit,
 taste with contempt behold, nor deign to place
 among the low of her favour race. 

thou nature, be my goddess — to thy law
 myself i dedicate — hence slavish awe
 which bend to fashion, and obey the rule
 impose at first, and since observe by fool. 
hence those vile trick which mar fair nature hue,
 and bring the sober matron forth to view,
 with all that artificial tawdry glare,
 which virtue scorn, and none but strumpet wear. 
sick of those pomp, those vanity, that waste
 of toil, which critic now mistake for taste,
 of false refinement sick, and labour ease
 which art, too thin veil, forbid to please,
 by nature charm (inglorious truth!) subdue,
 however plain her dress, and behaviour rude,
 to northern clime my happy course i steer,
 clime where the goddess reign throughout the year,
 where, undisturbed by art rebellious plan,
 she rule the loyal laird, and faithful clan. 

to that rare soil, where virtue cluster grow,
 what mighty blessing do not ENGLAND owe,
 what waggon-load of courage, wit and sense,
 do each revolve day import from thence? 
to we she give, disinterest friend,
 faith without fraud and Stuarts without end. 
when we prosperity rich trappings wear,
 come not her generous son, and take a share,
 and if, by some disastrous turn of fate,
 change shall ensue, and ruin seize our state,
 shall we not find, safe in that hallow ground,
 such refuge, as the holy martyr find? 

nor less our debt in science, though deny
 by the weak slave of prejudice and pride. 
thence come the ramsay, name of worthy note,
 of who one paint, as well as other write;
 thence home, disband from the son of prayer,
 for love play, though no dull Dean be there;
 thence issue forth, at great macpherson call,
 that old, new, epic pastoral, Fingal;
 thence simple bard, by simple prudence teach,
 to this wise town by simple patron bring,
 in simple manner utter simple lay,
 and take, with simple pension, simple praise. 

waft i some muse to twede inspire stream,
 where all the little love and grace dream,
 where slow wind the dull water creep,
 and seem themselves to own the power of sleep,
where on the surface lead, like feather, swim;
 there let i bathe my yet unhallowed limb,
 as once a syrian bathe in jordan flood,
 wash off my native stain, correct that blood
 which mutiny at call of english pride,
 and, deaf to prudence, roll a patriot tide. 

from solemn thought, which overhang the brow
 of patriot care, when thing be — god know how;
 from nice trim point, where honour, slave to rule,
 in compliment to folly, play the fool;
 from those gay scene, where mirth exalt his power,
 and easy humour wing the laugh hour;
 from those soft better moment, when desire
 beat high, and all the world of man on fire,
 when mutual ardour of the melt fair
 more than repay we for whole year of care,
 at friendship summons will my Wilkes retreat,
 and see, once see before, that ancient seat,
 that ancient seat, where majesty display
 her ensign, long before the world be make? 

mean narrow maxim, which enslave mankind,
 never from its bias warp thy settle mind. 
not dupe by party, nor opinion slave,
 those faculty which bounteous nature give
 thy honest spirit into practice bring,
 nor court the smile, nor dread the frown of king. 
let rude licentious Englishman comply
 with tumult voice, and curse they know not why;
 unwilling to condemn, thy soul disdain,
 to wear vile faction arbitrary chain,
 and strict weigh, in apprehension clear,
 thing as they be, and not as they appear. 
with thou good-humour temper lively wit,
 enthrone with judgement, candour love to sit,
 and nature give thou, open to distress,
 a heart to pity, and a hand to bless. 

oft have i hear thou mourn the wretched lot
 of the poor, mean, despise, insult Scot,
 who, may calm reason credit idle tale,
 by rancour forge where prejudice prevail,
 or starve at home, or practise, through fear
 of starve, art which damn all conscience here. 
when scribbler, to the charge by interest lead,
 the fierce north-briton foam at their head,
 pour forth invective, deaf to candour call,
 and, injure by one alien, rail at all;
 on northern Pisgah when they take their stand,
 to mark the weakness of that holy land,
 with needless truth their libel to adorn,
 and hang a nation up to public scorn,
 thy generous soul condemn the frantic rage,
 and hate the faithful, but ill-natured, page. 

the scots be poor, cry surly english pride;
 true be the charge, nor by themselves deny. 
be they not then in strict reason clear,
 who wise come to mend their fortune here? 
if by low supple art successful grow,
 they sap our vigour to increase their own,
 if, mean in want, and insolent in power,
 they only fawn, more sure to devour,
 rouse by such wrong shall reason take alarm,
 and even the Muse for public safety arm;
 but if they own, ingenuous, virtue sway,
 and follow where true honour point the way,
 if they revere the hand by which they be feed,
 and bless the donor for their daily bread,
 or by vast debt of high import bind,
 be always humble, always grateful find,
 if they, direct by paul holy pen,
 become discreet all thing to all man,
 that all man may become all thing to they,
 envy may hate, but justice can condemn. 
 "into our place, state, and bed they creep:"
 they have sense to get, what we want sense to keep. 

once, be the hour accurse, accurse the place,
 i venture to blaspheme the choose race. 
into those trap, which man, call patriot, lay,
 by specious art unwary betray,
 mad i league against that sacred earth,
 vile parricide! which give a parent birth. 
but shall i mean error path pursue,
 when heavenly truth present her friendly clue? 
once plunge in ill, shall i go farther in? 
to make the oath, be rash; to keep it, sin. 
backward i tread the path i tread before,
 and calm reflection hate what passion swear. 
convert, (bless be the soul which know
 those pleasure which from true conversion flow,
 whether to reason, who now rule my breast,
 or to pure faith, like Lyttleton and west)
 past crime to expiate by my present aim,
 to raise new trophy to the scottish name,
 to make (what can the proud muse do more)
 even faction son her bright worth adore,
 to make her glory, stamp with honest rhime,
 in full tide roll down to late time. 

presumptuous wretch! and shall a muse like thy,
 a english muse, the mean of the nine,
 attempt a theme like this? can her weak strain
 expect indulgence from the mighty thane? 
shall he from toil of government retire,
 and for a moment fan the poet fire,
 shall he, of science the moral friend,
 each curious, each important search suspend,
 leave unassisted hill of herb to tell,
 and all the wonder of a cockle-shell,
 have the lord good grace before his eye,
 will not the home step forth, and gain the prize? 
or if this wreath of honour may adorn
 the humble brow of one in England bear,
 presumptuous still thy dare must appear;
 vain all thy tower hope, while i be here. 

thus speak a form, by silken smile, and tone
 dull and unvaried, for the laureate know,
 folly chief friend, decorum old son,
 in every party find, and yet of none. 
this airy substance, this substantial shade
 abash i hear, and with respect obey. 

from theme too lofty for a bard so mean
 discretion beckon to a humble scene. 
the restless fever of ambition lay,
 calm i retire, and seek the sylvan shade. 
now be the muse disrobe of all her pride,
 be all the glare of verse by truth supply,
 and if plain nature pour a simple strain,
 which BUTE may praise, and Ossian not disdain,
 Ossian, sublime, simple bard of all,
 who english infidel, Macpherson call,
 then round my head shall honour ensign wave,
 and pension mark i for a will slave. 

two boy, who birth beyond all question spring
 from great and glorious, though forget, king,
 shepherd of scottish lineage, bear and breed
 on the same bleak and barren mountain head,
 by niggard nature doom on the same rock
 to spin out life, and starve themselves and flock,
 fresh as the morning, which, enrobe in mist,
 the mountain top with usual dullness kiss,
 jockey and Sawney to their labour rise;
 soon clad i ween, where nature need no clothes,
 where, from their youth enure to winter sky,
 dress and her vain refinement they despise. 

jockey, who manly high-boned cheek to crown
 with freckle spot flame the golden down,
 with much art, can on the bagpipe play,
 even from the rise to the set day;
 Sawney as long without remorse can bawl
 home madrigal, and ditty from Fingal. 
oft at his strain, all natural though rude,
 the Highland lass forget her want of food,
 and, while she scratch her lover into rest,
 sink please, though hungry, on she sawney breast. 

far as the eye can reach, no tree be see,
 earth, clad in russet, scorn the lively green. 
the plague of locust they secure defy,
 for in three hour a grasshopper must die. 
no living thing, whatever its food, feast there,
 but the camaelion, who can feast on air. 
no bird, except as bird of passage fly,
 no bee be know to hum, no dove to coo.
 no stream as amber smooth, as amber clear,
 be see to glide, or hear to warble here,
 rebellion spring, which through the country run,
 furnish, with bitter draught, the steady clan. 
no flower embalm the air, but one white rose,
 which, on the tenth of June, by instinct blow,
 by instinct blow at morn, and, when the shade
 of drizzly eve prevail, by instinct fade. 

one, and but one poor solitary cave,
 too spare of her favour, nature give;
 that one alone (hard tax on scottish pride)
 shelter at once for man and beast supply. 
their snare without entangle brier spread,
 and thistle, arm against the invader head,
 stand in close rank all entrance to oppose,
 thistle now hold more precious than the rose. 
all creature, which, on nature early plan,
 be form to loath, and to be loathe by man,
 which owe their birth to nastiness and spite,
 deadly to touch, and hateful to the sight,
 creature, which, when admit in the ark,
 their saviour shun, and rankle in the dark,
 find place within; mark her noisome road
 with poison trail, here crawl the bloat toad;
 there web be spread of more than common size,
 and half-starved spider prey on half-starved fly;
 in quest of food, eft strive in vain to crawl;
 slug, pinch with hunger, smear the slimy wall;
 the cave around with hiss serpent ring;
 on the damp roof unhealthy vapour hang,
 and famine, by her child always know,
 as proud as poor, here fix her native throne. 

here, for the sullen sky be overcast,
 and summer shrink beneath a wintery blast,
 a native blast, which arm with hail and rain
 beat unrelenting on the naked swain,
 the boy for shelter make; behind the sheep,
 of which those shepherd every day take keep,
 sickly creep on, and, with complain rude,
 on nature seem to call, and bleat for food. 

jockey.

sith to this cave, by tempest, we be confine,
 and within ken our flock, under the wind,
 safe from the pelt of this perilous storm,
 be lay among yond thistle, dry and warm,
 what, Sawney, if by shepherd art we try
 to mock the rigour of this cruel sky? 
what if we tune some merry roundelay? 
well do thou sing, nor ill do jockey play. 

Sawney.

ah, jockey, ill advise thou, i wis,
 to think of song at such a time as this. 
soon shall herbage crown these barren rock,
 soon shall fleece cloth these ragged flock,
 soon shall want seize shepherd of the south,
 and we forget to live from hand to mouth,
 than Sawney, out of season, shall impart
 the song of gladness with a ache heart. 

jockey.

still have i know thou for a silly swain;
 of thing past help, what boot it to complain? 
nothing but mirth can conquer fortune spite;
 no sky be heavy, if the heart be light:
 patience be sorrow salve; what can be cure,
 so Donald right aread, must be endure. 

Sawney.

full silly swain, i wot, be jockey now;
 how do thou bear thy maggy falsehood? how,
 when with a foreign loon she steal away,
 do thou forswear thy pipe, and shepherd lay? 
where be thy boast wisdom then, when i
 apply those proverb, which you now apply? 

jockey.

o she be bonny! all the Highlands round
 be there a rival to my Maggy find! 
more precious (though that precious be to all)
 than the rare medicine, which we brimstone call,
 or that choice plant, so grateful to the nose,
 which in, i know not what, far country grow,
 be Maggy unto i; dear do i rue,
 a lass so fair shall ever prove untrue. 

Sawney.

whether with pipe or song to charm the ear,
 through all the land do Jamie find a peer? 
curse be that year by every honest Scot,
 and in the shepherd calendar forget,
 that fatal year, when Jamie, hapless swain,
 in evil hour forsake the peaceful plain,
 Jamie, when our young laird discreet flee,
 be seize, and hang till he be dead, dead, dead. 

jockey.

full sore may we all lament that day:
 for all be loser in the deadly fray. 
five brother have i, on the scottish plain,
 well do thou know, be none more hopeful swain;
 five brother there i lose, in manhood pride,
 two in the field, and three on gibbet die;
 ah! silly swain, to follow war alarm,
 ah! what have shepherd life to do with arm? 

Sawney.

mention it not — there see i stranger clad
 in all the honour of our ravish plaid,
 see the Ferrara too, our nation pride,
 unwilling grace the awkward victor side. 
there fell our choice youth, and from that day
 mote never Sawney tune the merry lay:
 bless those which fall! curse those which still survive,
 to mourn fifteen renew in forty-five. 

thus plain the boy, when from her throne of turf,
 with boil emboss, and overgrow with scurf,
 vile humour, which, in life corrupt well
 mix at the birth, not abstinence can quell,
 pale famine rear the head; her eager eye,
 where hunger even to madness seem to rise,
 speak aloud her throe and pang of heart,
 strain to get loose, and from their orb to start;
 her hollow cheek be each a deep-sunk cell,
 where wretchedness and horror love to dwell;
 with double row of useless tooth supply,
 her mouth, from ear to ear, extend wide,
 which, when for want of food her entrails pine,
 she open, and curse swallow nought but wind;
 all shrivel be her skin; and here and there,
 make their way by force, her bone lie bare;
 such filthy sight to hide from human view,
 over her foul limb a tatter plaid she throw. 

cease, cry the goddess, cease, despair swain,
 and from a parent hear what Jove ordain! 

pent in this barren corner of the isle,
 where partial fortune never deign to smile;
 like nature bastard, reap for our share
 what be reject by the lawful heir;
 unknown among the nation of the earth,
 or only know to raise contempt and mirth;
 long free, because the race of roman brave
 think it not worth their while to make we slave;
 then into bondage by that nation bring,
 who ruin we for age vain seek,
 who still with unslacked hate we view, and still,
 the power of mischief lose, retain the will;
 consider as the refuse of mankind,
 a mass till the last moment leave behind,
 which frugal nature doubt, as it lie,
 whether to stamp with life, or throw away;
 which, form in haste, be plant in this nook,
 but never enter in creation book;
 brand as traitor, who, for love of gold,
 will sell their god, as once their king they sell;
 long have we bear this mighty weight of ill,
 these vile injurious taunt, and bear they still,
 but time of happy note be now at hand,
 and the full promise of a better land:
 there, like the son of Israel, have tread,
 for the fix term of year ordain by god,
 a barren desert, we shall seize rich plain
 where milk with honey flow, and plenty reign. 
with some few native join, some pliant few,
 who worship interest, and our track pursue,
 there shall we, though the wretched people grieve,
 ravage at large, nor ask the owner leave. 

for we, the earth shall bring forth her increase;
 for we, the flock shall wear a golden fleece;
 fat beef shall yield we dainty not our own,
 and the grape bleed a nectar yet unknown;
 for our advantage shall their harvest grow,
 and scotsmman reap what they disdain to sow;
 for we, the sun shall climb the eastern hill;
 for we, the rain shall fall, the dew distil;
 when to our wish nature can rise,
 art shall be task to grant we fresh supply. 
his brawny arm shall drudge labour strain,
 and for our pleasure suffer daily pain;
 trade shall for we exert she utmost power,
 she, all the toil; and all the profit, we;
 for we, the oak shall from his native steep
 descend, and fearless travel through the deep,
 the sail of commerce for our use unfurled,
 shall waft the treasure of each distant world;
 for we, sublime height shall science reach,
 for we, their statesman plot, their churchman preach;
 their noble limb of counsel we will disjoined,
 and, mock, new one of our own appoint;
 devour war, imprison in the north,
 shall, at our call, in horrid pomp, break forth,
 and, when, his chariot wheel with thunder hang,
 fall discord bray with her brazen tongue,
 death in the van, with anger, hate, and fear,
 and desolation stalk in the rear,
 revenge, by justice guide, in his train,
 he drive impetuous over the tremble plain,
 shall, at our bid, quit his lawful prey,
 and to meek, gentle, generous peace give way. 

think not, my son, that this so bless estate
 stand at a distance on the roll of fate;
 already big with hope of future sway,
 even from this cave i scent my destine prey. 
think not, that this dominion over a race
 who former deed shall time be last annal grace,
 in the rough face of peril must be seek,
 and with the life of thousand dear buy;
 no — fool by cunning, by that happy art
 which laugh to scorn the blunder hero heart,
 into the snare shall our kind neighbour fall
 with open eye, and fond give we all. 

when Rome, to prop her sink empire, bear
 their choice levy to a foreign shore,
 what if we seize, like a destroy flood,
 their widow plain, and fill the realm with blood,
 give a unbounded loose to manly rage,
 and, scorn mercy, spare nor sex nor age;
 when, for our interest too mighty grow,
 monarch of warlike bent possess the throne,
 what if we strive division to foment,
 and spread the flame of civil discontent,
 assist those who against their king make head,
 and give the traitor refuge when they flee;
 when restless glory bad her son advance,
 and pitch her standard in the field of France,
 what if disdain oath, a empty sound,
 by which our nation never shall be bind,
 brave we teach unmuzzled war to roam
 through the weak land, and bring cheap laurel home;
 when the bold traitor league for the defence
 of law, religion, liberty, and sense,
 when they against their lawful monarch rise,
 and dare the lord anoint to oppose,
 what if we still revere the banish race,
 and strive the royal vagrant to replace? 
with fierce rebellion shake the unsettled state,
 and great dare, though cross by partial fate;
 these fact, which may, where wisdom hold the sway,
 awake the very stone to bar our way,
 there shall be nothing, nor one trace remain
 in the dull region of a english brain,
 bless with that faith, which mountain can remove,
 first they shall dupe, next saint, last martyr prove. 

already be this game of fate begin
 under the sanction of my darling son,
 that son, who nature royal as his name,
 be destine to redeem our race from shame. 
his boundless power, beyond example great,
 shall make the rough way smooth, the crooked straight,
 shall for our ease the rage flood restrain,
 and sink the mountain level to the plain. 
discord, who in a cavern under ground
 with massy fetter our late patriot bind,
 where her own flesh the furious hag may tear,
 and vent her curse to the vacant air,
 where, that she never may be hear of more,
 he planted-loyalty to guard the door,
 for better purpose shall our chief release,
 disguise she for a time, and call her peace. 

lure by that name, fine engine of deceit,
 shall the weak english help themselves to cheat;
 to win our love, with honour shall they grace
 the old adherent of the Stuart race,
 for point out, no matter by what name,
 Tory or jacobites be still the same;
 to sooth our rage, the temporise brood
 shall break the tie of truth and gratitude,
 against their saviour venom falsehood frame,
 and brand with calumny their william name;
 to win our grace, (rare argument of wit)
 to our untainted faith shall they commit,
 (our faith which, in extreme peril try,
 disdain, and still disdain, to change her side,)
 that sacred majesty they all approve,
 who most enjoy, and best deserve their love. 
