the retreat.

adieu to all the splendid gallantry,
 complaisant pleasure, modish gaiety;
 airy delight, imaginary joy,
 fashion, entertainment, wit and noise;
 to all the folly of my former state,
 all that be genteel, or popular, or great. 
i will move no long in this gaudy sphere,
 i have be gaze at enough, it be time to disappear. 
without concern, i will leave the glitter seat;
 no, not the soft sigh shall sound retreat,
 lest fate shall overhear, mistrust my flight,
 pursue i now, and so undo i quite. 
in these soft shade, i no misfortune fear,
 for she will never think to find i here;
 my joy, shall be by she no more betray,
 i will cheat she now, in this kind masquerade;
 while she in noise and crowd do search for i
 i will lie serene in safe obscurity. 
a silent village do more pleasure yield,
 or harmless sport of the delightful field;
 then all the pageant glory of a throne,
 luxurious pleasure of the wanton town. 
here be the copy of lose paradise,
 the pure and spotless quintessence of bliss:
 all the safe pastime mankind can enjoy,
 which innocence delight, but not destroy:
 here i be bless in these secure abode,
 as once in shade be the retire god:
 these silvan joy know no surprise strife,
 this be to live, while other spend a life:
 here be the summum bonum of the earth,
 here the renown poet have their birth;
 or hither, from the noisy world retire,
 here their great soul, with noble rapture fire. 
philosopher of old, in solitude,
 their own resist passion first subdue;
 then with good precept civilise the rude:
 they know a court or city will molest
 the calm conception of a studious breast. 
here the mautuan Swain gain all his bay
 to solitude his unmatched pen do raise,
 disserve trophy of immortal praise. 
how many monarch weary of their state,
 have quit their glory for a mean retreat;
 thought silent shade far happy than throne,
 that garland sit much easy than crown. 
then why the wonder world amaze at i,
 for leave fraud and infidelity? 
the poor mistaken world who place joy
 in splendid popularity and noise,
 when after all it be search it must conclude,
 it be in a friend, and well-chose solitude. 
