to mrs. marry barber, under the name of sapphira:

occasion by the encouragement she meet with in England, to publish her poem by subscription.

long have the warrior, and the lover fire,
 employ the poet, and ingross the lyre;
 and just too the world may long approve
 the praise of hero and of virtuous love;
 have tyrant not usurp the hero name,
 nor low desire debase the lover flame;
 if on those theme, all trifler have not write,
 guiltless of sense, or elegance, or wit. 

far different theme we in thy verse view;
 theme, in themselves, alike sublime, and new:
 thy tuneful labour all conspire to show
 the high bliss the mind can taste below;
 to ease those want, with which the wretched pine;
 and imitate beneficence divine:
 a theme, alas! forget by bard too long;
 and, but for thou, almost unknown to song. 

such wise reflection in thy lay be show,
 as flaccus muse, in all her pride, may own:
 so elegant, and so refine, thy praise,
 as grear mind, at once, may mend and please:
 no florid toy, in pompous number dress;
 but just thought, in pure stile, express:
 whenever thy muse design the heart to move,
 the melt reader must, with tear, approve;
 or when, more gay, her spritely satire bite,
 it be not to wound, but to instruct, she write. 

can —, or — from the tomb,
 which shade their ash till the final doom,
 the dire effect of vicious write view,
 how will they mourn to think what may ensue! 
blush at their work, for no one end design,
 but to embellish vice, and taint the mind! 
no more their dear-bought fame will raise their pride;
 but terror wait on talent misapply. 

not so sapphira: her unsullied strain
 shall never give her soul one conscious pain;
 to late time shall melt the harden breast,
 and raise her joy, by make other bless. 

these work, which modesty conceal in night,
 your candor, generous briton, bring to light;
 bear, by your arm, for liberty defence;
 bear, by your taste, the arbiter of sense:
 long may your taste, and long your empire stand,
 to honour, wit, and worth, from every land. 

oh! can my conscious muse but full trace
 the silent virtue which sapphira grace;
 how much her heart, from low desire refine;
 how much her work, the transcript of her mind;
 her tender care, and grief for the distress;
 her joy unfeigned, to see true merit bless;
 her soul so form for every social care;
 a friend so generous, ardent, and sincere;
 how will you triumph in yourself to find
 your favour show to so complete a mind;
 to find her breast with every grace inspire,
 who first you only for her lay admire. 
thus the great father of the hebrew state,
 who watch for weary stranger at his gate;
 the good he think confer on man unknown,
 he find to more exalt being show. 
