a ode to a gentleman,

on his pitch a tent in his garden.

by the same.

ah! friend, forbear, nor fright the field
with hostile scene of image war;
content still rove the bloom wild,
and shed her mild influence there:
ah! drive not the sweet wanderer from her seat,
nor with rude art profane her late best retreat.

be there not bower, and sylvan scene,
by nature kind luxuriance weave?
have romely lose the live green
which erst adorn her artless grove?
where through each hallow haunt the poet stray,
and meet the will muse, and people every shade.

but now no bard thy wood among,
shall wait the inspire muse call;
for though to mirth and festal song
thy choice devote the weave wall,
yet what avail that all be peace within,
if horror guard the gate, and scare we from the scene?

it be true of old the patriarch spread
his happy tent which know not war,
and change at will the trample mead
for fresh green and pure air;
but long have man forget such simple way,
truth unsuspecting harm! — the dream of ancient day.

even he, cut off from human kind,
(thy neighbour wretch) the child of care,
who to his native mine confine,
nor see the sun, nor breathe the air,
but amid the damp and darkness of earth womb
drag out laborious life, and scarce dread the tomb;

even he, shall some indulgent chance
transport he to thy sylvan reign,
will eye the float veil askance,
and hide he in his cave again,
while dire presage in every breeze that blow
hear shriek and clash arm, and all germania woe.

and doubt not thy pollute taste
a sudden vengeance shall pursue;
each fairy form we whilom trace
along the morn or evening dew,
nymph, satyr, faun, shall vindicate their grove,
rob of its genuine charm, and hospitable Jove.

i see, alarm with dew unblest,
keen frost, and noisome vapour drear,
already, from the bleak northeast,
the genius of the wood appear!
— far other office once his prime delight,
to nurse thy sapling tall, and heal the harm of night,

with ringlet quaint to curl thy shade,
to bid the insect tribe retire,
to guard thy walk and not invade —
o wherefore then provoke his ire?
alas! with prayer, with tear his rage repel,
while yet the redden shoot with embryo-blossom swell.

too late thou will weep, when blight deform
the fair produce of the year;
too late thou will weep, when every storm
shall loud thunder in thy ear,
"thus, thus the green-haired deity maintain
"their own eternal right, and nature injure reign. "
