a panegyric on ale.

by T. W*****

balm of my care, sweet solace of my toil,
hail, juice benignant! over the costly cup
of riot-stirring wine, unwholesome draught,
let pride loose son prolong the wasteful night:
my sober evening let the tankard bless,
with toast embrown, and fragrant nutmeg fraught,
while the rich draught with oft repeat whiff
tobacco mild improve: divine repast!
where no crude surfeit, or intemperate joy
of lawless Bacchus reign: but over my soul
a calm lethean creep: in drowsy trance
each thought subside, and sweet oblivion wrap
my peaceful brain, as if the magic rod
of leaden Morpheus over my eye have shed
its opiate influence. what though sore ill
oppress, dire want of chill-dispelling coal,
or cheerful candle, save the makeweight gleam
haply remain; heart-rejoicing ale
cheer the sad scene, and every want supply.

meantime not mindless of the daily task
of tutor sage, upon the learned leaf
of deep smiglecius much i meditate;
while ale inspire, and lend her kindred aid
the thought-perplexing labour to pursue,
sweet Helicon of logic! — but if friend
congenial call i from the toilsome page,
to pot-house i repair, the sacred haunt,
where, ale, thy votary in full resort
hold rite nocturnal. in capacious chair
of monumental oak, and antique mould,
that long have stand the rage of conquer time
inviolate, (not in more ample seat
smoke rosy justice, when the important cause,
whether of hen-roost or of mirthful rape,
in all the majesty of paunch, he try:)
studious of ease, and provident i place
my gladsome limb, while in repeat round
return replenish the successive cup,
and the brisk fire conspire to genial joy.
nor seldom to relieve the linger hour
in innocent delight, amusive put
on smooth jointstool in emblematic play
the vain vicissitude of fortune show.
nor reckon, name tremendous, i disturb,
nor, called-for, chill my breast with sudden fear,
while on the wonted door (expressive mark!)
the frequent penny stand describe to view
in snowy character, a graceful row.
hail tick! sure guardian of distress,
beneath thy shelter pennyless i quaff
the cheer cup: though much the poet friend
never yet attempt in poetic strain,
accept this humble tribute of my praise.
nor proctor thrice with vocal heel alarm
our joy secure, nor deign the lowly roof
of pot-house snug to visit: wise he
the splendid tavern haunt, or coffee-house
of James or juggins, where the grateful breath
of mild tobacco never diffuse its balm;
but the lewd spendthrift, false deem polite,
while steam around the fragrant indian bowl
oft damn the vulgar son of humble ale:
in vain — the proctor voice alarm their joy;
just fate os wanton pride, and vain excess!

nor less by day delightful be thy draught,
heart-easing ale, who sorrow-sothing sweet
oft i repeat in vacant afternoon,
when tatter stocking ask my mend hand
not unexperienced, while the tedious toil
slide unregarded. let the tender swain
each morn regale on nerve-relaxing tea,
companion meet of languor-loving nymph:
be my each morn with eager appetite
and hunger undissembled, to repair
to friendly buttery, there on smoke crust
and foam ale to banquet unrestrained,
material breakfast! thus in ancient time
our ancestor robust with liberal cup
usher the morn, unlike the languid son
of modern day; nor ever have the might
of briton brave decay, have thus they feed,
with english ale improve english worth.
with ale irriguous, undismayed i har
the frequent dun ascend my lofty dome
importunate: whether the plaintive voice
of laundress shrill awake my startle ear,
or taylor with obsequious bow advance;
or groom invade i with defy look
and fierce demeanour, who emaciate steed
have pant oft beneath my gore steel;
in vain they plead or threat; all-powerful ale
excuse new supply, and each descend
with joyless pace and debt-despairing look.
even sp—y with indignant bow retire,
stern of dun! and conquer quit the field.

why do the god such various blessing pour
on helpless mortal, from their grateful hand
so soon the short-lived bounty to recall?
thus while, improvident of future ill,
i quaff the luscious tankard unrestrained,
and thoughtless riot in ambrosial bliss,
sudden (dire fate of all thing excellent!)
the unpitying bursar cross affix hand
blast all my joy, and stop my glad career.
nor now the friendly pot-house long yield
a sure retreat when evening shade the sky,
nor Sheppard, rushless widow, now vouchsafe
the wonted trust, and winter tick no more.
thus Adam exile from the blissful scene
of Eden grieve, no more in hallow bower
on nectarine fruit to feast, fresh shade or vale
no more to visit, or vine-mantled grot;
but all forlorn the naked wilderness,
and unrejoice solitude to trace.
thus too the matchless bard, who lay resound
the splendid shilling praise, in nightly gloom
of lonesome garret pine for cheerful ale:
who step in verse miltonic i pursue,
mean follower! like he with honest love
of ale divine inspire, and love of song.
but long may bounteous heaven with watchful care
avert his hapless fate! enough for i,
that burn with congenial flame i dare
his guide step at distance to pursue,
and sing his favourite theme in kindred strain.
