Philemon. 

you bloom youth, possess of every grace,
 which can delight the eye, or please the ear,
 who boast a polish mind and faultless face,
 awhile the council of Philemon hear! 

let not pride lift the thoughtless head too high,
 temerity arch over the scornful brow,
 contemptuous glance arm the sparkle eye,
 or the high heart with self-complacence glow! 

alas! full soon the eve of life arrive,
 though pale disease train approach not nigh;
 short be the summer of the happy life,
 if no rude storm disturb the smile sky. 

this wretched body, bend to the earth,
 once, on the wing of health, alert and gay,
 shine forth the foremost in the train of mirth,
 and cloudless sky announce a beauteous day. 

my parent oft, with fond complacence view,
 the elegance of my external form;
 and think my mind with excellence endue,
 bright as my genius, as my fancy warm. 

there be a time, poor as i now appear,
 i admiration meet in every look;
 and, harsh as now my word may grate your ear,
 each tongue be silent when Philemon speak. 

once can this voice make every bosom thrill,
 as it pour forth the light or plaintive lay;
 and once these finger, with superior skill,
 upon the lute can eloquent play. 

by partial friendship soothe, by flattery fan,
 i learn with conscious grace the dance to lead,
 to guide the phaeton with careless hand,
 and rule with flow rein, the prance steed. 

sick with the glory of a trifler fame,
 by folly nurture, i be proud and vain;
 till chastisement in kind mercy come,
 though then her just decree i dare arraign. 

the form that seek so late the public view,
 that glow with transport, as the world admire,
 fill with false shame, from every eye withdraw,
 and to the shade of solitude retire. 

consume by fever, spiritless, forlorn,
 blast by apoplexy dreadful rage,
 my bleed heart by keen remembrance tear,
 i past my prime in premature old age. 

i hear my parent ill-suppressed sigh,
 and wish myself upon the peaceful bier;
 i see the anguish of their sleepless eye,
 the smile dissemble, and the secret tear. 

oft, with a kind of gratify woe,
 i recollect every former charm,
 and, with the spleen of a malicious foe,
 delight still to keep my sorrow warm. 

 "where be the lustre of the gladsome eye,
" the airy smile, the animate mien,
 "the round lip of lively crimson dye,
" so late envy, now no long see. 

 "i too have glory in my wave hair,
" no ringlet now remain to raise my pride;
 "nor can i now lie the white forebead bare,
" and push the too luxuriant lock aside. " 

thus, like a child, i sigh for pleasure past,
 and lose my hour in a delusive dream;
 but reason open my blind eye at last,
 and clear each mist by her refulgent beam. 

i see futurity before i spread,
 a scourge or sceptre offer to my view,
 alarm, from folly err maze flee,
 and to my god with humble reverence draw. 

i bow, submissive, at the holy shrine,
 his mercy with warm gratitude confess,
 which have reveal the spark of life divine,
 that slumber in my earth-enamoured breast. 

have i, as friendship and selflove desire,
 still suck delirium at the fane of praise,
 i may, my conscience lull and passion fire,
 have lose my soul in the bewitch blaze. 

dear rise train, let not my word offend! 
nor the pure dictate of my love despise;
 to one, late like yourself, attention lend,
 and, teach by his experience, be wise! 

ah! banish from your eye the fiend disdain;
 let fair simplicity supply its place;
 nor long let conceit the bosom stain;
 the child of weakness, follow by disgrace. 

shall time from you each glow beauty wrest,
 you will not then those self-reproach feel,
 which every eye awaken in my breast,
 and twenty winter scarce suffice to heel. 

nor will your friend observe each fade charm,
 since still your countenance its smile retain,
 and the same love companion, kind and warm,
 with unassuming manner, yet remain. 
