love elegy,

to HENRY.

then thou have learn the secret of my soul,
 officious friendship have its trust betray;
 no more i need the burst sigh control,
 nor summon pride my struggle soul to aid. 

but think not banish hope return again,
 think not i write thy thankless heart to move;
 the fade form that tell my tender pain
 may win thy pity, but it can thy love. 

nor can i move thou by soft win art,
 by manner teach to charm, or practise glance;
 artless as thy, my too too feel heart
 disdain the tutor eye, the fond advance. 

the cold coquette, to win her destine prey,
 may feign a passion which she never can feel;
 but i true passion soft command obey,
 and fain my tender feeling will conceal. 

in other eye, when fix on thy, i see
 that fondness paint which alone i know;
 think not, my Henry, they can love like i,
 more love i hide than they can ever bestow. 

while tender glance their emotion speak,
 and oft they heave and oft suppress the sigh;
 o turn to i, behold my pallid cheek
 shrink from thy, behold my downcast eye! 

while they by mirth, by wit, thy ear amuse,
 and by their eloquence thy plaudit seek;
 see i the fond contention still refuse,
 nor in thy presence, Henry, dare to speak. 

when ask to breathe the soul-enchanting song,
 see they overjoy exert their utmost art;
 while vain i will join the choral throng,
 lose be those tone which once can touch the heart. 

but, Henry, be thou in love language wise,
 vain will other more than Emma shine;
 beyond their sweet strain thy heart will prize
 one faint, one break, tender tone of i. 

o proof of passion, eloquent as vain! 
by thou unheeded, or perhaps unknown, .... 
but learn, the pang that prompt this pensive strain,
 ere long, disdainful youth, may be thy own. 

ah! no .... in hopeless love thou can not pine,
 thou never can woo the bright maid in vain;
 for thou love star midst cloudless sky will shine,
 and light thy graceful step to Hymen fane:

while i, as hope, and strength, and life recede,
 far, far from thou shall waste the languid day;
 bless, if the scroll that speak thy bliss i read,
 but far more bless to feel life power decay. 
