the first and second chapter of the first book of SAMUEL versify. 

o! that some heavenly seraph will inspire,
 and warm my soul with a immortal fire;
 the muse shall in celestial number sing,
 the praise of sion rock, and israel king,
 who do of old display his glorious grace,
 to abraham seed, and Jacob choose race. 
his mighty power, and outstretch hand,
 give they possession of a goodly land. 
no crown king do over they bear sway,
 judge, and governor, they do obey;
 his providence, and his peculiar care,
 renown captain do for they prepare. 
but so ungrateful israel son do prove,
 they oft abuse his grace, forget his love. 
until provoke by their iniquity,
 Philistines arm the rebel do chastise,
 yet of his tender mercy do provide,
 a faithful prophet and courageous guide;
 that may the people heart, and mind prepare. 
to worship he with reverential fear;
 and by his own example daily show
 they, how to put in practice what they know. 

a certain Levite, in those day we find,
 at Ramah live, which to mount Ephraim join;
 who have himself, and household set apart,
 to serve his maker with a will heart. 
two wife he have, the one a virtuous dame,
 descreet, and wise, and Hannah be her name;
 who fair, and lovely body do enshrine,
 a pious soul with quality divine,
 her virtue do her husband love insure,
 and from all people due respect procure,
 only her rival can not she endure. 
and what increase peninnah haughty pride,
 the lord have child unto she deny,
 the feast that be to Israelites enjoin,
 this Levite still observe with zealous mind:
 and do to shilo, every year repair,
 for god have fix his tabernacle there;
 to offer sacrifice be his design,
 and worship at the fix place and time:
 and when he this august assembly join,
 his love consort never stay behind. 
hophni and Phinehas, both as priest appear,
 the wicked offspring of a stock sincere;
 who vile example have pernicious be,
 in tempt abraham choose race to sin. 

Elkanah still, in these degenerate time,
 observe the law, lament the reign crime;
 frequent the feast, and with a honest mind,
 due portion to his family assign:
 but unto Hannah give the chief part,
 because her virtuous carriage gain his heart. 
this do peninnah spite, and rage inflame,
 with gall word, she urge the pious dame;
 as if neglect by the god of heaven,
 because he yet to she no child have give. 
year after year she do she thus upbraid,
 and what she can to grieve, and vex she say,
 who noble soul be soar far above,
 and follow way of peace and perfect love;
 to israel god alone, she do complain,
 of her ill-natured rival proud disdain,
 and to the heavenly throne herself address,
 with sigh and tear that can be express. 

entreat he that reign on high, that she,
 the happy mother of a son may be,
 and if she can that happiness obtain,
 she will resign he to the lord again;
 that all his life he shall at shilo spend
 and on the public worship still attend. 
while thus she do disclose her pain and grief
 to he, who able be to grant relief,
 no friend on earth be privy to her moan,
 unto pure omniscience she pray alone. 
her voice not hear, only her lip do move,
 which make old Ely sharp she reprove,
 as if the virtuous dame, at that divine
 and holy feast, have be oe'rcome with wine:
 but when with flow tear she let he know,
 she be oppress, and overwhelm with woe,
 the priest to comfort she himself address,
 pray israel god to grant she, her request. 

the day of solemn feast being spend,
 Elkanah with his wife to Ramah go,
 and ever the sun his annual race have run,
 the joyful mother do embrace a son;
 and as the gift of god this worthy dame
 do he receive, and SAMUEL call his name;
 ask of god, by which she do declare
 to all mankind, how great his mercy be. 
and with a grateful heart, in person she
 attend on he, in his infancy;
 with kind affection, and a parent joy,
 her pliant arm enfold the lovely boy. 

some year expire, and the child be grow,
 the pious matron with her little son
 lead by Elkanah, unto shilo go,
 and there to Ely do her son present:
 to he, and to the congregate tribe
 declare his goodness who over earth preside. 
there to his choose people do proclaim,
 the praise due to his eternal name,
 who hear her cry, and grant her request. 
her grateful tongue those joyful word express,
 my heart and soul do in the lord rejoice,
 who hear the sigh of his handmaid voice;
 my glory, and my strength he do appear,
 what cause have i the race of man to fear? 
i be exalt by the god of love,
 my mouth enlarge by he, who reign above,
 he make i over my enemy rejoice,
 in his salvation i exert my voice. 
most pure and holy be his mighty name,
 there be none beside he can perfection claim:
 and when in deep distress there be not one
 can be our refuge, but our god alone. 
o! lay your haughty arrogance aside,
 the god of Israel will correct your pride,
 he know our heart, the proud he do despise,
 but humble soul be precious in his eye;
 while those who glory in their strength and might,
 by his all conquer arm be put to flight. 
yet they, that in his truth and mercy trust,
 shall find a god both tender, kind, and just;
 she that be barren, his praise shall prolong
 who love fire my breast and joy swell my song. 
he be the lord supreme of life and death,
 when bring to dust he can restore our breath,
 from abject state can raise unto a throne,
 the earth with all its kingdom be his own,
 it be he protect his saint and will display,
 his sovereign grace to keep they in the way;
 but from his hand the slave of vice shall share
 woe, scene of death, horror, and despair,
 destruction shall his enemy attend,
 amaze thunder he from heaven will send;
 his judgment shall upon the earth appear
 that man may learn, almighty Jove to fear;
 the just shall live, uplift by his arm
 untouched by danger, and dreadless of harm. 

the worthy matron have pay her vow
 with rapture heart return unto her house. 
and israel god that reign enthrone on high,
 do bless she with a numerous progeny. 
SAMUEL prove, even in his infant day
 a miracle of God stupendous grace! 
while hophni and Phinehas both in sin grow bold,
 scorn to be by god, or man control;
 their country be curse, their father grief and shame
 against their house, the word to SAMUEL come,
 the judge and priest before he must appear,
 and from a bloom youth compel to hear
 sentence pronounce, most grievous and severe;
 no sacrifice can purge their guilt away
 their life and honour for their crime must pay. 

now israel chief and elder plain see,
 SAMUEL a prophet by the lord decree;
 and Jacob son approach with reverend awe
 while he pronounce God eternal law:
 he mission plain, his vision full and clear
 his word like oracle remember be
 when for their sin their foe do they invade,
 he to repentance do the tribe persuade:
 and by his prayer, and devotion true,
 bring thunder down, Philistines to subdue:
 and honour be by God express command,
 to choose a king to rule his choose land;
 yet in pathetic speech let they know
 the arbitrary way that Saul will go. 
and when that king the lord command have break,
 in spare Agag from his vengeful stroke,
 SAMUEL be send and to the monarch face,
 bold declare the lord will he displace. 
yet for his king most earnest do pray
 that god will turn his burn wrath away,
 until forbid. then god do he appoint,
 his own peculiar David to anoint,
 from who by God decree in time shall spring,
 the prince of peace, the everlasting king,
 that Jew and Gentile to one fold shall bring. 
