to David Polhill ESQ

a answer to a infamous satyr, call, advice to a painter, write chief against king WILLIAM iii. of glorious memory.

part i 

and must the hero that redeem our land
 here in the front of vice and scandal stand? 
the man of wondrous soul, that scorn his ease
 tempt the winter and the faithless sea,
 and pay a annual tribute of his life
 to guard his England from the irish knife
 and crush the french dragoon? must william name
 that bright star that gild the wing of fame,
 WILLIAM the brave, the pious, and the just
 adorn these gloomy scene of tyranny and lust? 

Polhill, my blood be a fire, my spirit flame;
 vengeance and darkness on the poet name:
 why smoke the sky not? why no thunder roll? 
nor kindle lightning blast his guilty soul? 
audacious wretch! to stab a monarch fame,
 and fire his subject with a rebel-flame,
 to call the painter to his black design
 to draw our guardian face in hellish line:
 painter beware! the monarch can be show
 under no shape but angel or his own,
 Gabriel or WILLIAM on the british throne. 

oh! can my thought but grasp the vast design,
 and word with infinite idea join,
 i'de rouse Apelles from his iron sleep,
 and bid he trace the warrior over the deep:
 trace he Apelles, over the belgian plain,
 fierce, how he climb the mountain of the slay
 scatter just vengeance through the red campaign. 
then dash the canvas with a fly stroke
 till it be lose in cloud of fire and smoke,
 and say, it be thus the conqueror through the squadron break. 
Mark he again emerge from the cloud
 far from his troop; there like a rock he stand
 his country single barrier in a sea of blood. 
calm he leave the pleasure of a throne,
 and his Maria weep; while alone
 he ward the fate of nation, and provoke his own:
 but heaven secure its champion; over the field
 paint hover angel; though they fly conceal,
 each intercept a death, and wear it on his shield. 

now, noble pencil; lead he to our isle,
 mark how the sky with joyful lustre smile,
 then imitate the glory; on the strand
 spread half the nation long till he land. 
wash off the blood, and take a peaceful taint,
 all red the warrior, white the ruler paint,
 abroad a hero, and at home a saint. 
throne he on high upon a shine seat,
 lust and profaneness die at his foot,
 while round his head the laurel and the olive meet,
 the crown of war and peace; and may they blow
 with flowery blessing ever on his brow. 
at his right hand pile all the english law
 in sacred volume; thence the monarch draw
 his wise and just command —
 rise you old sage of the british isle,
 on the fair tablet cast a reverend smile
 and bless the piece; these statute be your own,
 that sway the cottage, and direct the throne;
 people and prince be one in william name,
 their joy, their danger, and their law the same. 
let liberty and right with plume display
 clap their glad wing around their guardian head,
 religion over the rest her starry pinion spread. 
religion guard he; round the imperial queen,
 place wait virtue, each of heavenly mien;
 learn their bright air, and paint it from his eye,
 the just, the bold, the temperate, and the wise
 dwell in his look: majestic, but serene;
 sweet, with no fondness; cheerful, but not vain:
 bright without terror; great, without disdain. 
his soul inspire we what his lip command,
 and spread his brave example through the land,
 not so the former reign; —
 bend down his ear to each afflict cry,
 let beam of grace dart gentle from his eye;
 but the bright treasure of his sacred breast
 be too divine, too vast to be express,
 colour must fail where word and number faint,
 and leave the hero heart for thought alone to paint. 

part ii.

now Muse, pursue the satyrist again,
 wipe off the blotts of his envenom pen;
 hark, how he bid the servile painter draw
 in monstrous shape the patron of our law;
 at one slight dash he cancel every name
 from the white roll of honesty and fame:
 this scribble wretch mark all he meet for knave,
 shoot sudden bolt promiscuous at the base and brave,
 and with unpardonable malice shed
 poison and spite on undistinguished head. 
painter, forbear; or if thy bold hand
 dare to attempt the villain of the land,
 draw first this poet, like some baleful star
 with silent influence shed civil war;
 or factious trumpeter, who magic sound
 call off the subject to the hostile ground,
 and scatter hellish feud the nation round. 
these be the imp of hell, that curse tribe
 that first create the plague, and then the pain describe. 

draw next above, the great one of our isle,
 still from the good distinguish the vile;
 seat they in pomp, in grandeur, and command,
 feel the subject with a greedy hand:
 paint forth the knave that have the nation sell,
 and tinge their greedy look with sordid gold. 
Mark what a selfish faction undermine
 the pious monarch generous design,
 spoil their own native land as viper do,
 viper that tear their mother bowel through. 
let great nassaw beneath a careful crown
 mournful in majesty, look gentle down,
 mingle soft pity with a awful frown:
 he grieve to see how long in vain he strive
 to make we bless, how vain his labour prove
 to save the stubborn land he condescend to love. 
