carisbrook castle.

queen of inventive thought, thy dream
 have mark the colour of my fate;
 still lend thy light quiver beam,
 guide i through wild untrodden yet;
 lead i where dim the day of old
 their dark historic page unfold,
 thy power alone can time subdue,
 retrace his pathless way, and bring the past to view. 

on the gigantic phantom fly,
 his wave pinion bright appear,
 but over his track deep shadow rise,
 and darkness close on his rear. 
imperial realm, the world proud boast,
 in the oblivious shade be lose;
 pomp, wealth, and power he sweep away,
 the muse alone withstand his arbitrary sway. 

as through the deep uncertain gloom
 i watch the ruin of the past,
 search the pale record of the tomb,
 and mark faint trace while they last;
 in pensive muse oft i stray,
 when evening spread her mantle grey,
 and float in her train appear
 the shade of many a long depart year. 

methinks i pass the foam deep,
 where victus rear his verdant head;
 be still, you wind, you water, sleep,
 again those favour shore i tread,
 again his fertile field behold,
 wave in vegetable gold;
 again my eager step be bend
 to view the ruin tower and moulder battlement. 

nor shall thy charm my thought detain,
 Medina, on thy tuft side,
 thou green-haired daughter of the main,
 who urn receive the rush tide;
 over heath and hill, through wind dale,
 i seek the stream, i seek the vale,
 where over the hamlet humble bower,
 lone carisbrook, appear thy long-unguarded tower. 

slow up the hill, my footstep trace
 the peaceful bastion silent way,
 while on the ruin awful face
 still faint gleam depart day. 
methinks i pause, a secret dread
 howl in the blast around my head,
 and fearful i my path pursue,
 till nightfall gloomy shade obscure my ache view. 

beneath the rampart break side,
 hark, melancholy night-bird call! 
while distant echo faint chide,
 and darkness drop her sable pall. 
now in the portal way i stand,
 where fancy wave her potent wand,
 till form unknown, unnumbered rise,
 and age long forget swim before my eye. 

hark! sure i hear the loud rebound
 as open fly the iron gate,
 yond tower return the sullen sound,
 where high they frown in idle state;
 behold with haughty mien advance,
 high wave his plume, bright beam his lance,
 a arm knight, of royal race,
 from withgar ancient line the genius of the place. 

through his dim form yond tremble star
 gleam, as i see the spectre stand;
 pale shadow of the son of war,
 why do thou wave thy nerveless hand? 
again he beckon; i obey,
 and follow where he lead the way;
 up time-worn step with brier overgrow,
 i mount the lofty keep with force till now unknown. 

 "behold (he cry) those rise form
 of britain ancient son appear,
 amid age rude, and threaten storm,
 they raise a savage bulwark here,
 when bold to wage unequal war,
 the roman eagle come from far,
 and from his pierce eye-ball throw
 a light before unknown amid his vanquish foe. 

 "it be past with time, new power prevail,
 the wall in form embattle rise;
 behold the saxon case in mail,
 his sinewy arm, his giant size;
 a royal chief, he pant for fame,
 and give the fort his mighty name. 
vain be the warrior haughty boast,
 his tower be fall to dust, and even their name be lose. 

 "a sudden radiance beam around,
 new work arise amid war alarm,
 earl Baldwin brave keep his ground,
 a female cause his courage arm;
 while hope remain he court the fight,
 and prove a bold and loyal knight;
 the tyrant power at length prevail,
 nor maud imperial right, nor valour aught avail. 

 "no more the ponderous feudal yoke
 the crouch vassal shall sustain;
 now and for ever crush and break
 the petty tyrant gall chain;
 but ere the sun of freedom day
 dart forth its bright meridian ray,
 dark storm his genial power control,
 and will i close the deep ensanguine scroll. 

 "year follow year, slow roll on,
 like fleecy cloud before the wind,
 no dare deed of valour do,
 no record meet the search mind,
 till on this spot a monarch fate
 stain with disgrace britannia state;
 when civil discord shake her brand
 dark treason wield the ax, and faction fire the land. 

 "unhappy man, ill-fated prince! 
what star malignant mark thy birth? 
the virtue of thy soul evince
 worth to improve and grace the earth;
 but by mistaken maxim lead,
 thy fault be of opinion breed,
 and form by link unseen the chain
 of sad disastrous chance that close in blood thy reign. 

 "why do thou seek this luckless strand,
 where for thy life the toil be spread? 
hypocrisy rule over the land,
 good faith and gratitude be flee;
 yet still a loyal few remain,
 who heart allegiance true maintain:
 but fate forbid their hope to save,
 and lead thou through a maze of sorrow to the grave. 

 "here melancholy mark the day,
 and solitude with care combine,
 to give each sad reflection way
 that prey upon a feeling mind:
 flattery no more, in courtly guise,
 bid vain self-love's illusion rise,
 know to himself, the man remain,
 religious hope alone his sink soul sustain. 

 "when the fell ruffian band appear,
 to bear he over the briny wave,
 alas! no tempest interfere,
 no pity power arise to save;
 but yet he feel the kindly power
 of friendship in that try hour;
 and with a faithful subject leave
 a pledge of gratitude, of all thing else bereave. 

 "within these wall hard-hearted pride
 spurn at the monarch fall state,
 and tyranny the shaft will guide,
 that aggravate the ill of fate. 
a princess, in life early bloom,
 descend a captive to the tomb;
 with thorn her couch of death be strew,
 deny a parent care, unpitied, and alone. 

 "fair blossom of a hapless race! 
doom in a prison gloom to fall,
 death save thou from more foul disgrace,
 beneath his dark and sacred pall;
 in innocence and blameless youth,
 unsullied by the rancorous tooth
 of fiendlike malice, thy last hour
 be peace and heaven to his who thus abuse his power. 

 "sad monument of ruthless deed,
 a ruin shall these wall remain;
 no hero hence his phalanx lead,
 to guard the hill or scour the plain:
 but while the world be wrap in sleep,
 my visionary watch i keep,
 or guide some poet wander eye
 in time forget way through dim obscurity." 

he cease; while quick i draw my breath
 the gloomy spectre by i sweep;
 i shudder at the scene of death,
 and with indignant sorrow weep. 
sure dastard fear must have suppress
 the groan which heave a nation breast:
 it be we in happy time to prove
 the monarch safety in his people love. 

note.

