the modern fine gentleman.

write in the year 1746. 

by the same.

just break from school, pert, impudent, and raw;
expert in latin, more expert in taw,
his honour post over Italy and FRANCE,
measure saint Peter dome, and learn to dance.
thence have quick through various country fly,
glean all their folly, and expose his own,
he back return, a thing so strange all over,
as never age past produce before:
a monster of such complicate worth,
as no one single clime can ever bring forth:
half atheist, papist, gamester, bubble, rook,
half fiddler, coachman, dancer, groom, and cook.

next, because business now be all the vogue,
and who will be quite polite must be a rogue,
in parliament he purchase a seat,
to make the accomplish gentleman complete.
there safe in self-sufficient impudence,
without experience, honesty, or sense,
unknowing in her interest, trade, or law,
he vain undertake his country cause:
forth from his lip, prepare at all to rail,
torrent of nonsense burst; like bottle ale,
though shallow, muddy; brisk, though mighty dull;
fierce without strength; overflow, though not full.

now quite a frenchman in his garb and air,
his neck yok down with bag and solitaire,
the liberty of Britain he support,
and storm at place-man, minister, and court;
now in crop greasy hair, and leather breech,
he loud bellows out his patriot speech;
king, lord, and commons venture to abuse,
yet dare to show those ear he ought to lose.

from hence to White our virtuous Cato fly,
there sit with countenance erect, and wise,
and talk of game of whist, and pigtail pie;
play all the night, nor doubt each law to break,
himself unknowing have help to make;
tremble and anxious, stake his utmost groat,
peep over his card, and look as if he think:
next morn disown the loss of the night,
because the fool will fain be think a bite.

devote thus to politics, and card,
nor mirth, nor wine, nor woman he regard;
so far be every virtue from his heart,
that not a generous vice can claim a part;
nay, lest one human passion ever shall move
his soul to friendship, tenderness, or love,
to Figg and Broughton he commit his breast,
to steel it to the fashionable test.

thus poor in wealth, he labour to no end,
wretched alone, in crowd without a friend;
insensible to all that be good, or kind,
deaf to all merit, to all beauty blind;
for love too busy, and for wit too grave,
a harden, sober, proud, luxurious knave,
by little action strive to be great,
and proud to be, and to be think a cheat.

and yet in this so bad be his success,
that as his fame improve, his rent grow less;
on parchment wing his acre take their flight,
and his unpeopled grove admit the light;
with his estate his interest too be do,
his honest borough seek a warm sun.
for he, now cash and liquour flow no more,
his independent voter cease to roar:
and Britain soon must want the great defence
of all his honesty, and eloquence,
but that the generous youth more anxious grow
for public liberty, than for his own,
marry some jointured antiquate crone:
and bold, when his country be at stake,
brave the deep yawn gulph, like Curtius, for its sake.

quick again distress for want of coin,
he dig no long in the exhaust mine,
but seek preferment, as the last resort,
cringe each morn at levee, bow at court,
and, from the hand he hate, implore support:
the minister, well please at small expense
to silence so much rude impertinence,
with squeeze and whisper yield to his demand,
and on the venal list enrol he stand;
a ribbon and a pension buy the slave,
this bribe the fool about he, that the knave.
and now arrive at his meridian glory,
he sink apace, despise by Whig and Tory;
of independence now he talk no more,
nor shake the senate with his patriot roar;
but silent vote, and with court trappings hang,
eye his own glitter star, and hold his tongue.
in craft political a bankrupt make,
he stick to game, as the sure trade;
turn downright sharp, live by suck blood,
and grow, in short, the very thing he will:
hunt out young heir, who have their fortune spend,
and lend they ready cash at cent per cent,
lay wager on his own, and other life,
fight uncle, father, grandmother and wife,
till death at length, indignant to be make
the daily subject of his sport and trade,
veil with his sable hand the wretch eye,
and, groan for the bet he lose by it, he die.
