liberty.

part i 

o my lament TALBOT! while with thou
 the muse gay-roved the glad Hesperian round,
 and draw the inspire breath of ancient art;
 ah! little thought she her return verse
 shall sing our darling subject to thy shade. 
and do the mystic veil, from mortal beam,
 involve those eye where every virtue smile,
 and all the father be candid spirit shine? 
the light of reason, pure, without a cloud;
 full of the generous heart, the mild regard;
 unblemished honour, uncorrupted faith;
 and limpid truth, that look the very soul. 
but to the death of mighty nation turn
 my strain, be there absorb the private tear. 

muse, i lay; warm from the sacred walk,
 where at each step imagination burn:
 ten thousand wonder roll in my thought,
 as the great scene of deathless deed i tread,
 tread the bless ground by more than mortal tread,
 and see those sky that breathe the roman soul. 
mean time wide-scattered round, awful, and hoar,
 lie a vast monument once glorious Rome,
 the tomb of empire! ruin! that efface
 whatever, of finish, modern pomp can boast. 

of these idea full, repose sense
 in slumber sink; and fancy magic hand
 lead i anew over all the solemn scene,
 still in the mind pure eye more solemn dress. 
when strait, methinks, the fair majestic power
 of liberty appear. not, as of old,
 extend in her hand the cap, and rod,
 who slave-inlarging touch give double life:
 but her bright temple bind with british oak,
 and naval honour nod on her brow. 
sublime her port. loose over her shoulder flow
 her sea-green robe, with constellation gay. 
a island goddess now; and her high care
 the queen of isle, the mistress of the main. 
my heart beat filial transport at the sight;
 and, as she move to speak, the awaken muse
 listen intense. a while she look around,
 with mournful eye the wellknown ruin mark,
 and then, her sigh repress, thus begin. 

i be these wonder, all thou see be i;
 but ah how change! the fall poor remains
 of what exalt once the ausonian shore. 
look back through time; and from the gloom disclose,
 paint my word, behold the scatter scene. 
the great republic see! that glow sublime
 with the mix freedom of a thousand state;
 raise on the throne of king her curule chair,
 and by her fasces awe the subject world. 
see busy million swarm all the land,
 with city throng, and teem culture high:
 for on her free-born son then nature smile,
 and pour the plenty that belong to man. 
behold, the country cheere, villa rise,
 in lively prospect; by the secret lapse
 of brook now lose, and stream renowned in song:
 in umbria close vale, or on the brow
 of her brown hill that breathe the scent gale:
 on baia viny coast; where peaceful sea,
 fan by kind zephir, ever kiss the shore;
 and sun unclouded shine, and pure air:
 or in the spacious neighbourhood of Rome;
 far-shining upward to the Sabine hill,
 to anio roar, and tibur olive shade;
 to where preneste lift her airy brow;
 or downwards spread to the sunny shore,
 wave from the main, where Alba draw the breeze. 
see distant mountain leave their valley dry,
 and over the proud Arcade their tribute pour,
 to lave imperial Rome. for age lay
 deep, mercy, firm, diverge every way,
 from sea to sea, her public road behold:
 by various nation tread, and suppliant king;
 with legion flame, or with triumph green. 
full in the centre of these wondrous work,
 while tomb of hero consecrate the way,
 the pride of earth! Rome in her glory see! 
behold her demigod, in Senate meet;
 all head to counsel, and all heart to act:
 the commonweal inspire every tongue
 with fervent eloquence, unbribed, and bold;
 ere low corruption teach the servile herd
 to know a master voice. astonish, mark
 her Forum, earnest, popular, and loud,
 in tremble wonder hush, when the two sire,
 as they the private father great quell,
 stand up the public father of the state. 
see justice judge there in human shape. 
hark how with freedom voice it thunder high,
 or in soft murmur sink to tully tongue. 
her tribe, her census see; her generous troop,
 who pay be glory, and who best reward
 free for their country and for i to die;
 ere mercenary murder grow a trade. 
Mark, as the purple triumph wave along,
 the high pomp and low fall of life. 
her festive game, the school of hero, see;
 her circus, ardent with contend youth;
 her street, her temple, palace, and bath,
 full of fair form of beauty old bear,
 and of a race by plastic virtue mark. 
while sculpture live around, and asian hill
 lend their best store to heave the pillared dome:
 all that to roman grandeur the soft touch
 of grecian art can join. but language fail
 to paint this sun, this center of mankind;
 where every virtue, glory, treasure, art,
 attract strong, in heighten lustre meet. 

need i the contrast mark? unjoyous view! 
a land in all, in government, and art,
 in virtue, genius, heaven and earth reverse. 
who but these far-famed ruin to behold,
 proof of a people, who heroic aim
 soar far above the little selfish sphere
 of doubt modern life; who but inflame
 with classic zeal, the consecrate scene
 of man and deed to trace, the wonder, theme,
 and model of mankind; unhappy land! 
will trust thy wild, and city loose of sway? 

be these the vale, that once exult state
 in their warm bosom feed? the mountain these,
 on who high-blooming side my son of old
 i breed to glory? these deject town,
 sordid, and mean, where life can scarce subsist,
 the scene of ancient opulence, and pomp? 

come! by whatever sacred name disguise,
 oppression, come! and in thy work rejoice! 
see nature rich plain to putrid fen
 turn by thy rage. from their uncheerful bound
 see raze the enliven village, farm, and seat. 
first rural toil, by thy rapacious hand
 rob of his poor reward, resign the blow;
 and now he dare not turn the noxious glebe. 
it be thy entire. the lonely Swain himself,
 who love at large along the grassy down
 his flock to pasture, thy abhorrent fly. 
far as the sicken eye can sweep around,
 it be all one desert, desolate, and grey,
 graze by the sullen bufalo alone;
 and where the rank unventilated growth
 of rot age taint the pass gale. 
beneath the baleful blast the city pine,
 or sink infeeble, or infect burn. 
beneath it mourn the solitary road,
 roll in rude maze over the abandon waste;
 while ancient way, engulf, be see no more. 

such thy dire plain, thou self-destroyer! foe
 to humankind! thy mountain too, profuse
 where savage nature bloom, seem their sad plaint
 to raise against thy desolate rod. 
there on the breezy brow, where thrive state,
 and famous city once, to the please sun,
 far other scene of rise culture spread,
 pale shine thy ragged town. neglect round,
 each harvest pine; the livid, lean produce
 of heartless labour: while thy hate joy,
 not proper pleasure, lift the lazy hand. 
better to sink in sloth the woe of life,
 than wake their rage with unavailing toil. 
hence droop art almost to nature leave
 the rude, unguided year. thin wave the gift
 of yellow Ceres, thin the radiant blush
 of orchard redden in the warm ray. 
to weedy wildness run, no rural wealth,
 (such as dictator feed) the garden pour. 
crude the wild olive flow, and foul the vine;
 nor juice coecubian, nor Falernian, more
 stream life, and joy, save in the muse bowl. 
unseconded by art, the spin race
 draw the bright thread in vain, and idle toil. 
in vain, forlorn in wild, the citron blow;
 and flower plant perfume the desert gale. 
through the vile hedge the tender myrtle twine. 
inglorious droop the laurel, dead to song,
 and long a stranger to the hero brow. 

nor half thy triumph this: cast from brute field
 into the haunt of man thy ruthless eye. 
there buxom plenty never turn her horn;
 the grace and virtue of exterior life,
 no clean convenience reign; even sleep itself,
 least delicate of power, reluctant there
 lay on the bed impure his heavy head. 
thy horrid walk! dead, empty, unadorned,
 see street who echos never know the voice
 of cheerful hurry, commerce many-tongued,
 and be mechanic at his various task
 fervent employ. Mark the despond race,
 of occupation void, as void of hope;
 hope the glad ray, glance from eternal good,
 that life enliven, and exalt it be power,
 with view of fortune — madness all to they! 
by thou relentless seize their better joy,
 to the soft aid of cordial air they fly,
 a kind oblivion breathe over their woe,
 and love and music melt their soul away. 
from feeble justice see how rash revenge,
 tremble, the Ballance snatch; and her sword,
 fearful himself, to venal ruffian give. 
see where God altar nurse murder stand,
 with the red touch of dark assassin stain. 

but chief let Rome, the mighty city! speak
 the full-exerted genius of thy reign. 
behold she rise amid the lifeless waste,
 expire nature all corrupt round;
 while the lone tyber, through the desert shore,
 wind his waste store, and sullen sweep along. 
patch from my fragment, in unsolid pomp,
 mark how the temple glare; and, artful dress,
 amusive draw the superstitious train. 
Mark how the palace lift a lie front,
 conceal often, in magnific jail,
 proud want, a deep unanimated gloom! 
and often join to the drear abode
 of misery, who melancholy wall
 seem its voracious grandeur to reproach. 
within the city bound, the desert see. 
see the rank vine over subterranean roof,
 indecent, spread; beneath who fret gold
 it once exult flow. the people mark,
 matchless, while fire by i; to public good
 inexorable firm, just, generous, brave,
 afraid of nothing but unworthy life,
 elate with glory, a heroic soul
 know to the vulgar breast: behold they now
 a thin despair number, all subdue,
 the slave of slave, by superstition fool,
 by vice unmanned and a licentious rule,
 in guile ingenious, and in murder brave. 
such in one land, beneath the same fair clime,
 thy son, oppression, be; and such be mine. 

even with thy labour state, for who vain show
 delude thousand starve; all age-begrimed,
 tear rob and scatter in unnumbered sack,
 and by the tempest of two thousand year
 continual shake, let my ruin vie. 
these road that yet the roman hand assert,
 beyond the weak repair of modern toil;
 these fracture arch, that the chide stream
 no more delight hear; these rich remains
 of marble now unknown, where shine imbibe
 each parent ray; these massy column, hew
 from africk farther shore; one granite all,
 these Obelisks high-towering to the sky,
 mysterious mark with dark egyptian lore;
 these endless wonder that this sacred way
 illumine still, and consecrate to fame;
 these fountain, vase, urn, and statue, charge
 with the fine store of art-compleating Greece. 
from these too draw, i be thy every boast:
 thy buonarotis, thy palladios mine;
 and i the fair design, that raphael soul
 over the live canvas emanate breathe. 

what will you say, you conqueror of earth! 
you roman! can you raise the laureled head;
 can you the country see, with sea of blood,
 and the dread toil of age, win so dear;
 your pride, your triumph, your supreme delight! 
for who defence oft, in the doubtful hour,
 you rush with rapture down the gulph of fate,
 of death ambitious! till by awful deed,
 virtue, and courage, that amaze mankind,
 the queen of nation rise; possess of all
 that nature, art, and glory can bestow:
 what will you say, deep in the last abyss
 of slavery, vice, and unambitious want,
 thus to behold she sink? your crowd plain,
 void of their city; unadorned your hill;
 ungrace your lake; your port to ship unknown;
 your lawless flood, and your abandon stream;
 these can you know? these can you love again? 
thy tibur, Horace, can it now inspire
 content, poetic ease, and rural joy,
 soon burst into song: while through the groves
 of headlong Anio, dash to the vale,
 in many a torture stream, you muse along? 
yond wild retreat, where superstition dream,
 can, Tully, you your Tusculum believe? 
and can you deem yond naked hill, that form,
 fame in old song, the ship-forsaken bay,
 your formian shore? once the delight of earth,
 where art and nature, ever-smiling, join
 on the gay land to lavish all their store;
 how change, how vacant, Virgil, wide around,
 will now your Naples seem? disaster less
 by black Vesuvius thunder over the coast,
 his midnight earthquake, and his mine fire,
 than by despotic rage: that inward gnaw,
 a native foe; a foreign, tear without. 
first from your flatter caesar this begin;
 till houseless spread, at last, the siren plain,
 that the dire soul of Hannibal disarm;
 and wrap in weed the shore of Venus lie. 
there Baia see no more the joyous throng;
 her bank all beam with the pride of Rome:
 no generous vine now bask along the hill,
 where sport the breeze of the tyrrhene main:
 with bath and temple mix, no villa rise;
 nor, art-sustained amid reluctant wave,
 draw the cool murmur of the breathe deep:
 no spread port their sacred arm extend:
 no mighty mole the big intrusive storm,
 from the calm station, roll resound back. 
a almost total desolation sit,
 a dreary stillness, sadden over the coast;
 where, when soft sun and tepid winter rise,
 rejoice crowd inhale the balm of peace;
 where citied hill to hill reflect blaze;
 and where, with Ceres, bacchus wont to hold
 a genial strife: her youthful form, robust,
 even nature yield; by fire, and earthquake rent:
 whole stately city in the dark abrupt
 swallow at once, or vile in rubbish lay,
 a nest for serpent; from the red abyss
 new hill, explosive, throw; the lucrine lake
 a reedy pool; and all to cuma point,
 the sea recover his usurp domain,
 and pour triumphant over the bury dome. 

hence, Britain, learn; my best-established, last,
 and more than Greece, or Rome, my steady reign;
 the land where, king and people equal bind
 by guardian law, my full blessing flow;
 and where my jealous unsubmitting soul,
 the dread of tyrant! burn in every breast:
 learn hence, if such the miserable fate
 of a heroic race, the master once
 of humankind; what, when deprive of i,
 how grievous must be thy? in spite of clime,
 who sun-enlivened Aether wake the soul
 to high power; in spite of happy soil,
 that, but by labour slight aid impel,
 with treasure teem to thy cold clime unknown;
 if there despond fail the common art,
 and sustenance of life: can life itself,
 or, heart-consumed, a tyrant rot pomp,
 subsist with thou? against depress sky,
 join to full-spread oppression cloudy brow,
 how can thy spirit hold? where vigour find,
 force fruit to tear from their unnative soil? 
or every harvest store in thy port,
 profuse of all, to blow the dreadful wave? 

here pause the goddess. by the pause assure,
 in tremble accent thus i move my prayer. 
 "oh first, and most benevolent of power! 
" come from eternal splendor, here on earth,
 "against despotic pride, and rage, and lust,
" to shield mankind; to raise they to assert
 "the native right, and honour of their race. 
" teach i thy low subject, but in zeal
 "yield to none, the progress of thy reign,
" and with a strain from thou enrich the muse. 
 "for thy proud slave, alone; her patron thou,
" and great inspirer by! then will she joy,
 "though narrow life her lot, and private shade:
" and when her venal voice she barter vile,
 "or to thy open or thy secret foe;
" may never those sacred rapture touch she more,
 "by slavish heart unfelt! and may her song
" sink in oblivion with the nameless crew! 
 "vermin of state! to thy overflow light
" that owe their be, yet betray thy cause. " 

then, condescend kind, the heavenly power
 return. — "what here, suggest by the scene,
" i slight unfold, record, and sing at home,
 "in that bless isle, where (so we spirit move)
" with one quick effort of my will i be. 
 "there truth, unlicensed, walk; even king themselves
" invite she forth, the monarch of the free! 
 "by that best glory pierce, that god-like joy,
" that gay security, that pride of rule;
 "when man, not slave, when all-performing love,
" not sluggish hate, and faithless fear, obey. 
 "fix on my rock, there a indulgent race
" over briton wield the sceptre of the heart:
 "and, mix worth with worth, the royal pair
" to steady justice yield goodness join. 
 "nor set the prospect in this please view;
" while there, to finish what his sire begin,
 "a prince behold! for i who burn sincere,
" even with a subject zeal. he my great work
 "will parentlike sustain; and add give
" the touch, the grace and the muse owe. 
 "for britain glory swell his pant breast;
" and ancient art he emulous revolve:
 "his pride to let the smile heart abroad,
" through cloud of pomp, that but conceal the man;
 "to please his pleasure; bounty his delight;
" and all the soul of Titus dwell in he. " 

hail glorious theme! but how alas! shall verse,
 from the crude store of mortal language draw,
 how faint and tedious, sing, what, pierce deep,
 the goddess flash at once upon my soul. 
for, clear precision all, the tongue of god
 be harmony itself; to every ear
 familiar know, like light to every eye. 
mean time disclose age, as she speak,
 in dread succession pour their empire forth;
 scene after scene, the human drama spread;
 and still embody picture rush to sight. 
oh thou! to who the muse owe their flame;
 who bid beneath the pole Parnassus rise,
 and hippocrenè flow; with thy bold ease
 the strike force, the lightning of thy thought,
 and thy strong phrase, that rowl profound, and clear;
 oh gracious goddess! reinspire my song:
 while i, to noble than poetic fame
 aspire, thy command to briton bear. 
