a birthday offer to a young lady. from her lover.

by the same.

ere this short winter day be go,
 my MARY ANNE be twenty one. 
of day still short just a lent,
 patch up from different year, be spend,
 since her devote fair reckon
 the close of year the thirty-second. 

bend beneath the weight of year,
 full as infirm as he appear,
 what can a worn-out lover do,
 with twenty-one, at thirty-two? 
for such a frenzy no defence be —
 the girl have clear lose her sense. 

perhaps deceive by some fond notion,
 embrace in rapture of devotion,
 (i quote such fancy to expose they)
 she dream of bliss in abraham bosom;
 and choose a antique the rather,
 with better grace to call he father. 

perhaps — but fiction be suppress,
 while real joy expand my breast —
 my faithful flame her heart approve;
 and o! transport thought! she love. 

when soul, by impulse sympathetic,
 by intuition most prophetic,
 by feeling, which they can smother,
 leap at first glance to meet each other,
 when each itself in other trace,
 what matter for their different case? 
of kin, perhaps, in pre-existence,
 without dull reason slow assistance,
 they recollect the happy union,
 and long to recommence communion. 
i must confess that such attraction,
 for ease, convenience, satisfaction,
 be best if, on deliberation,
 it meet with reason approbation:
 not as of absolute dominion,
 to rule by dint of dark opinion;
 not as a lord of sovereign sway,
 who love must worship and obey;
 but mere as the herd inferior
 may judge the act of power superior;
 as my poor intellect, or thy,
 may scan authority divine —
 in short, i will have our simple love,
 not against reason, but above. 

two bird, suppose, of various feather,
 hang in one room by chance together,
 to air melodious tune their voice,
 while each the other ear rejoice:
 if, without half a note erroneous,
 the song be perfect harmonious,
 what matter for the form or age,
 of bill, of feather, and of cage? 

Dean swift, who talent live no more,
 his Stella sing at forty-four;
 and breathe a idle wish to split
 in twain her beauty, year, and wit —
 of half her charm he make a proffer
 for youth; but time disdain his offer. 
far happy i, who well can spare,
 of each accomplishment a share,
 yet leave a ample store of charm,
 to bring Elysium to my arm,
 be not reduce those charm to barter,
 and cry to heedless time for quarter —
 fly, sluggard, on thy swift wing,
 my charmer yield not all till spring! 

then, firm in constancy reliance,
 i bid thy cruel scythe defiance;
 deal when thou will the deadly blow,
 thou can but separate below,
 thy first can but for moment sever,
 thy second reunite for ever. 

perhaps, suspend mortal rage,
 by silent sap, and creep age,
 by subtle, secret, slow approach,
 as mildew on the blade encroach,
 thou hope, malignant fiend! to tame
 the ardour of love fierce flame —
 vain shall thou find thy keen blast,
 bliss once possess, thy power be past. 
can year, while sense remain, destroy
 the memory of transcendent joy? 
can year bright innocence impair? 
can year make virtue look less fair? 

but beauty, by thy influence curse,
 may sicken — tyrant, do thy worst! 
i know thy power, and be prepare
 to meet thy sharp dart unscared. 
though body, mind, thou can control,
 own thy survivor in the soul;
 who perfect bliss be not enjoy,
 till thou be utter destroy. 

even here, as health and beauty fail,
 while lily over the rose prevail,
 long ere thy menace ill can harm,
 though every hour shall steal a charm —
 long ere, by twenty star a day,
 the spangle heaven will wear away. 

unconscious of the gradual wane,
 as year their empire slow gain,
 while my idea, in the race,
 observe a due-proportioned pace,
 and limb grow cold, and sense falter,
 i shall perceive her person alter. 
when age her dimple cheek beguile,
 and wrinkle plant, instead of smile,
 though every Cupid he shall smother,
 i will think her handsome as their mother. 
when, steady to his barbarous plan,
 to spoil my lovely MARY ANNE,
 the savage unrelenting creature
 have rob her face of every feature,
 and, to conception mere common,
 my charmer seem a plain old woman,
 still in my heart she will hold her throne,
 still in my eye be twenty-one. 
