a description of one of the piece of tapestry at long-leat, make after the famous carton of Raphael; in which, elymas the sorcerer be miraculous strike blind by saint Paul before Sergius Paulus, the proconsul of Asia. 

inscribe to the honblehonble HENRY Thynne, under the name of THEANOR.

thus tapestry of old, the wall adorn,
 ere noble dame the artful shuttle scorn:
 Arachne, then, with Pallas do contest,
 and scarce the immortal work be judge the best. 
nor valorous action, then, in book be seek;
 but all the fame, that from the field be bring,
 employ the loom, where the kind consort wrought:
 while share in the toil, she share the fame,
 and with the hero mix she interweave name. 
no long, female to such praise aspire,
 and seldom now we right do admire. 
so much, all art be by the man engross,
 and our few talent unimproved or cross;
 even i, who on this subject will compose,
 which the fame urbin for his pencil choose,
 (and here, in tincture wool we now behold
 correct follow in each shade, and fold)
 shall prudent from the attempt withdraw,
 but inclination prove the strong law:
 and though the censure of the world pursue
 these hardy flight, while his design i view;
 my burden thought, which labour for a vent,
 urge i t'explain in verse, what by each face be mean. 

of Sergius first, upon his lofty seat,
 with due regard our observation treat;
 who, while he thence on elymas look down,
 contract his pensive brow into a frown,
 with look inquisitive he seek the cause
 why nature act not still by nature law. 
it be but a moment, since the sorcerer sight
 receive the day, and blaze infernal light:
 untouched, the optique in a moment fail,
 their fierce illumination quench, or veil;
 throughout the extension of his ample sway,
 no fact, like this, the roman can survey,
 who, with spread hand, invite mankind to gaze,
 and sympathize in the profound amaze. 
to share his wonder every one combine,
 by different aspect show, and different sign. 
a comely figure, near the consul place,
 with serious mildness and instruction grace,
 to other seem impart what he see,
 and show the wretch with reverential awe:
 while a more eager person next we find,
 view the visard with a sceptic mind;
 who his fix eye so near he do apply,
 we think, enliven beam may from they fly,
 to re-inkindle, by so just a aim,
 the radial spark, but late check and tame,
 as taper new put-out will catch approach flame. 
but dire surprise the enquiry do his succeed,
 while full conviction in his face we read,
 and he, who question, now deplore the deed. 

to sacred PAUL a young figure guide,
 with seem warmth, which still in youth preside;
 and point forward, elder man direct,
 in he, to note the cause of these effect,
 upon who brow do evident shine
 depute power, to inflict the wrath divine
 while sad and solemn, suit to their year,
 each venerable countenance appear,
 where, yet we see astonishment reveal,
 though by the age often it be conceal;
 who the emotion of their soul disguise,
 lest by admire they shall seem less wise. 

but to thy portrait, elymas, we come
 who blindness almost strike the poet dumb;
 and while she vain to describe thou seek,
 the pen but trace, where the pencil speak. 
of darkness to be feel, our scripture write,
 thou darken seem, as thou will feel the light;
 and with project limb, betray a dread,
 of unseen mischief, level at thy head. 
through all thy frame such stupefaction reign,
 as night it self be sink into thy vein:
 nor by the eye alone thy loss we find,
 each lineament help to proclaim thou blind. 
a artful dimness far diffuse we grant,
 and fail seem all part through one important want. 

oh! mighty Raphael, just sure renowned! 
since in thy work such excellence be find;
 no wonder, if with nature thou be at strife,
 who thus can paint the negative of life;
 and deprivation more expressive make,
 than the most perfect draught, which other take. 
while to this chief figure of the piece,
 all that surround it, heightening do increase:
 in some, amazement by extreme be show,
 who view his close lid, extend their own. 
nor can, by that, enough their thought express,
 which open mouth seem ready to confess. 

thus stand the lictor gaze on a deed,
 which do all humane chastisement exceed;
 enfeeble seem their instrument of smart,
 when keen word can swift ill impart. 

thou, Barnabas, though last, not least our care,
 seem equal employ in praise, and prayer,
 acknowledge the omnipotent decree,
 yet soft compassion in thy face we see:
 while lift hand implore a kind relief,
 though no impatience animate thy grief;
 but mild suspense and charity benign,
 do all the excess of thy look confine. 

thus far, our slow imagination go:
 will the more skill the anor his disclose;
 expand the scene, and open to our sight
 what to his nice judgement give delight;
 who soar mind do to perfection climb,
 nor own a relish, but for thing sublime:
 then, will the piece fresh beauty still present,
 nor length of time will leave the eye content:
 as moment, hour; as hour the day will seem,
 observe here, teach to observe by he. 
