the esquire and the parson.

a eclogue.

by S. J. ESQ.

by his hall chimney, where in rusty grate
 green faggot weep their own untimely fate,
 in elbow-chair the pensive esquire recline,
 revolve debt and tax in his mind:
 a pipe just fill, upon a table near
 lay by the London evening stain with beer,
 with half a bible, on who remnant tear
 each parish round be annual forswear. 
the gate now clap, as evening just grow dark,
 tray start, and with a growl prepare to bark;
 but soon discern with sagacious nose
 the well know savour of the parson toe,
 lay down his head, and sink in soft repose:
 the doctor enter, to the tankard run,
 take a good hearty pull, and thus begin:

parson.

why sit thou, thus forlorn and dull, my friend,
 now war rapacious reign be at a end? 
hark, how the distant bell inspire delight! 
see bonfire spangle over the veil of night! 

 esquire.

what be peace, alas! in foreign part to i? 
at home, nor peace, nor plenty can i see;
 joyless, i hear drum, bell, and fiddle sound,
 it be all the same — four shilling in the pound. 
my wheel, though old, be clog with a new tax;
 my oak, though young, must groan beneath the axe:
 my barn be half unthatched, untiled my house,
 lose by this fatal sickness all my cow:
 see, there be the bill my late damn lawsuit cost! 
long as the land contend for — and lose:
 even ormond head i can frequent no more,
 so short my pocket be, so long the score;
 at shop all round i owe for fifty thing. —
 this come of fetch hanoverian king. 

parson.

i must confess the time be bad indeed,
 no wonder; when we scarce believe our creed;
 when purblind reason deem the sure guide,
 and heaven-born faith at her tribunal try;
 when all church-power be think to make man slave,
 saint, martyr, father, all call fool, and knave. 

 esquire.

come, preach no more, but drink and hold your tongue:
 i be for the church: — but think the parson wrong. 

parson.

see there! free-thinking now so rank be grow,
 it spread infection through each country town;
 deistic scoff fly round at rural board,
 'squire, and their tenant too, profane as lord,
 vent impious joke on every sacred thing;

 esquire.

come, drink; —

parson.

— here be to you then, to church and king:

 esquire.

here be church and king, i hate the glass shall stand,
 though one take tithe, and other tax land. 

parson.

heaven with new plague will scourge this sinful nation,
 unless we soon repeal the toleration,
 and to the church restore the convocation:

 esquire.

plague we shall feel sufficient, on my word,
 starve by two house, priest-rid by a third. 
for better day we late have a chance,
 have not the honest plaid be trick by France. 

parson.

be not most gracious George our faith defender? 
you love the church, yet wish for the pretender! 

 esquire.

preferment, i suppose, be what you mean,
 turn Whig, and you, perhaps, may be a Dean:
 but you must first learn how to treat your better. 
what be here? sure some strange news, a boy with letter;
 o ho! here be one i see, from parson sly:
 "my reverend neighbour Squab be like to die,
" i hope, if heaven shall please to take he hence,
 "to ask the living will be no offence. 

parson.

have you not swear, that i shall Squab succeed? 
think how for this i teach your son to read;
 how oft discover puss on new-plowed land,
 how oft support you with friendly hand,
 when i can scarce go, nor can your worship stand. 

 esquire.

it be you, have you be honest, wise, or civil;
 now even go court the bishop — or the devil. 

parson.

if i mean any thing, now let i die,
 i be blunt, and can fawn and cant, not i,
 like that old presbyterian rascal sly. 
i be, you know; a right truehearted Tory,
 love a good glass, a merry song, or story. 

 esquire.

thou be a honest dog, that be truth indeed —
 talk no more nonsense then about the creed. 
i can, i think, deny thy first request;
 it be thy; but first a bumper to the best. 

parson.

most noble esquire, more generous than your wine,
 how pleas the condition you assign? 
give i the sparkle glass, and here, do you see,
 with joy i drink it on my bend knee:
 great queen! who govern this earthly ball,
 and make both king, and kingdom, rise and fall:
 who wondrous power in secret all thing rule,
 make fool of mighty peer, and peer of fool:
 dispense mitre, coronet, and star;
 involve far distant realm in bloody war,
 then bid the snaky tress cease to hiss,
 and give they peace again — nay, give we this:
 who health do health to all mankind impart,
 here be to thy much-loved health:

 esquire, rub his hand.

— with all my heart. 
