the observation. 

1. 

no state of life from trouble free,
grief mix with our vital breath:
as soon as we begin to be,
from the first moment of our birth,
we have some taste of misery:
with sigh and tear our fate we mourn,
as if our infant reason do presage
the approach ill of our maturer age,
and wish a quick return.
when soul be first to their close room confine,
nothing of their celestial make be see,
obscure earth do interpose between:
like taper hide in urn they shine.
the life of sense and growth we only see,
which beast enjoy as well as we:
but the active mind
which bear the image of the power divine,
can exert its energy:
the streiten intellect immure do lie,
shut up within a narrow place,
till nature do enlarge the space,
and by degree the organ fit,
for those great operation which be wrought by it.

2. 

thus for some year we live by sense,
happy in nothing but in innocence:
but when our feeble age be past,
and we to sprightly youth arrive,
the race of life we run so fast,
as if we think our strength will always last:
hurry by passion, and by fancy lead,
we all the various path of folly tread:
reason we slight, and her command despise,
in vain she call, in vain advise,
and every gentle method try:
against her kind endeavour still we strive,
and run where ever headstrong passion drive:
those ill we court, which we as plague shall shun,
and be by every false appearance win:
but wise thought when riper year inspire,
we at the folly of our youth admire;
and wonder how such childish thing as these
can mind endue with reason please;
yet while we proud our past action blame,
we do as foolish thing, though not the same;
our folly differ only in the dress and name.

3. 

selflove so croud the human breast,
that there be no room for any other guest;
by it inspire we all mankind despise,
and think our self the only good and wise:
fond thought! a thought that only can
become the vain part of the creation, man:
that haughty creature, who puff up with pride,
and fill with airy notion soar on high,
and think himself the glory of the sky,
where for a while in fancy flatter light
the enkindle vapour play,
much please with its imaginary ray;
till have waste its small stock of flame,
the heavy lump, the thing without a name,
fall headlong down from its exalt height
into oblivion everlasting night.
