a epistle to the right honourable the lord viscount Cornbury.

by — ESQ

while you, my lord, alas! amid a few,
with generous warmth your country be good pursue;
while to the centre all your wish tend,
accept the zeal that prompt a will friend.

other like you heaven hallow spark inspire,
who soon the blaze of selfish passion fire,
soon rude flame extinguish reason light,
while prejudice foul their jaundiced sight.

such through false optic every object prove,
and try the good and bad, by hate and love.
all-powerful mean each virtue to supply,
all-powerful mean each virtue to deny;
to Wyndham strength, and grace, and fire, and weight;
to Granville part, to save a sink state,
hence various judgment form the madden throng,
only in this alike, they all be wrong.
hence to false praise shall blame unjust succeed,
and cherub fall, and god unpitied bleed.

will you, my friend, not mix the pure flame,
nor lose the patriot in a base name;
nor factious rage mistake for public zeal,
nor private interest for the general weal?
by truth sure test let every deed be try,
and justice ever be the unerring guide.
her rule be plain, and easy be her way,
and yet how hard to find if once we stray!
all lose alike the maze perplex we tread,
however prompt, whether drive or lead;
whether false honour or ambition goad,
or sneak avarice wind the miry road,
or whether sway by passion not our own,
and the weak fear of be right alone.
alone in such a cause be base to fear,
though fool suspect, and knave design sneer.
sneer, villain, sneer! the avenge time be nigh,
when Balbo scourge shall weep the taunt lie;
when stopus foul with each impute crime,
shall dread false prose repay with honest rhyme.

it be not enough you scorn a private claim,
and to your country good direct your aim.
wrong be still wrong, however great the end,
though all the realm be brother, father, friend;
justice regard not these — where right prevail,
a nation be a atom in her scale.
heaven mean not all the good which man can gain,
but that which truth can earn, and right maintain.
however fair the tempt prize may be,
if guilt the price, it be not mean for thou.
succeed time may claim the just design,
or other mean, or other power than thy.

each part connect with the general plan,
the weal of Britain with the weal of man.
justice the scale of interest for the whole,
the same in Indies as beneath the pole;
sure rule by which heaven blessing to dispense,
unerring light of guide providence.
other may fail. — if wrong understand,
how fatal be the thirst of public good!
no heavy curse almighty vengeance bring,
nor plague, nor famine, nor the lust of king.
fire by this rage the frantic son of Rome,
the suffering world to death and bondage doom;
nation must sink to raise her cumbrous frame,
and million bleed to eternise her name.
but lo! her glory fade, her empire past,
she mad conquer but to fall the last.

nor will i here the patriot view reprove,
or damp the sacred flame of social love.
still may that portion of the eternal ray
sublime our sense, and animate our clay;
above low self exalt the immortal frame,
and emulate that heaven from whence it come.
oh! will it never be confine to place,
but beam extensive as the human race:
be, as it be design, the world great soul,
connect its part, and actuate the whole,
so each shall think himself a part alone,
and for a nation welfare stake his own!
yet farther still, though dear to the breast,
that nation think but part of all the rest.

for this let equal justice poise the ball,
her sway force unite we all to all;
of manner, worship, form, no difference know,
condemn our friend, and save our better foe.
confess the heavenly power! nor need you fear
let Britain suffer, while you follow she.

though prosperous crime some dare villain raise,
nor life short date my halt vengeance seize;
a nation can escape — the destine rage
pursue her ceaseless to some future age;
speed the sure ruin from the conqueror hand,
or spread corruption over a pine land.

ask hoary time, what nation be most bless?
for sage experience shall this truth attest:
"where freedom sleep secure from lawless wrath,
"where commerce shelter flow through public faith,
"where fell ambition light no foreign war,
"nor discord rage with intestine war;
"where justice reign." — immortal be that state,
if aught immortal here be give by fate.

such, lose Iberia! be those happy reign,
when liberty sit brood over thy plain.
the rich in plenteous peace their store enjoy,
by care unvexed, by luxury uncloyed.
hope soothe the poor with promise of gain,
and pay with future joy their present pain;
show the full bowl amid their sultry toil,
while those who prune the olive drink the oil;
by night of all the fruit of day possess,
labour soft-closed the eye, and sweeten rest.
such be thy state all gay in nature smile!
and such be now the state of britain isle.
hence over the ocean waste her sail unfurled,
wide waft the tribute of a will world.
hence trust nation treasure here their wealth,
safe from tyrannic force or legal stealth:
and hence the injure exile doom to roam,
shall find his country here and dear home.

still be this truth, this save truth confess,
Britain be great, because with freedom bless;
her prince be great, because her people free,
and power here spring from public liberty.
hail mighty monarch of the free and great!
firm on the basis of a prosperous state.
the wealth, the strength of happy million thy,
unite rise, unite shall decline.
for time will come, sad period of the brave,
when britain humble prince shall rule the slave;
when traffic vile shall stain the guilty throne,
and king shall buy our ruin and their own.

but long, o long the inglorious doom suspend!
what virtue gain may virtue still defend!
thrice sacred spirit, never may you cease,
but as you blaze in war, shine forth in peace!
dauntless with all the force of truth engage
the headlong tide of each corrupt age.
o ever wake around one favour throne,
nor let our guardian monarch wake alone!

though oft defeat and though oft betray,
number shall rise in sacred freedom aid.
far as her all-enlivening influence reign,
heroic ardour beat in generous vein.
now bid learn Greece barbarian might defy,
now the soft art of polish tyranny;
now to no stock, or sect, or place confine,
she take adopt son from human kind;
while denizen by her eternal law,
they all be briton who shall serve her cause.

lo! to the banner crowd a youthful band;
form for the glorious task by nature hand;
wisdom unclog by year, with toil unbought,
a zeal by vigour kindle, rule by thought.
such gift she to the happy few impart,
to judge head and to determine heart;
to head unfired by youth tumultuous rage,
to heart unnumb by the chill ice of age;
and while they both preserve a separate claim,
their passion reason, and their reason flame.

proceed brave youth! let other court renown
in hostile field, be you the olive crown:
and trust to fame, those hero bright shine
who save a nation, than who nation win.
nor let assume age restrain your flight,
fearful to tempt the yet unpractised height;
deceitful counsel lurk in hoary hair,
and the last dregs of life be sordid care.

object be clear proportion in degree,
to general use, or strong necessity,
nor be two thing so plain understand,
as the worst evil and the great good;
if rescue from the misty breath of school;
man will but feel without the help of rule.
so unbewilder in the crooked maze,
where guilt low skulk, and reptile cunning stray,
a nation interest, and a people right,
distinct shine in nature simple right,
and claim in he who fair act his part,
before a Lonsdale head, a Lonsdale heart.
but chief when snatch by heaven preserve hand,
from the fell contest of each hostile land,
a happy island to the encircle main
trust for a sure report and honest gain.

the just be heaven, earth be for heaven ordain,
form by its law, and by its law maintain.
these one true interest, one great system frame,
political and moral be the same.
guilt toil for gain at honour vast expense,
heaven throw the trifle in to innocence;
and fix happiness in hell despite,
the necessary consequence of right.

proceed, you deist! blindfold rage employ,
and prove the sacred truth you will destroy.
prove christian faith the wise scheme to bind,
in chain of cordial love, our jar kind;
and thence conclude it human, if you can,
the perfect produce of imperfect man!
while prostrate we adore that power divine,
who simple rule connect each great design;
bid social earth a type of heaven appear,
where justice taste those joy which wait she there.

but though self-interest follow virtue train!
yet selfish think not virtue end be gain!
old than time, ere interest have a name,
justice exist, and be still the same;
alike the creature and creator guide,
his rule to form, the law by which we be tie:
in reason light, eternal word, express,
stamp with his image in the creature breast.

thus speak the sage, who skill in nature law,
deep from effect high-traced the all-rule cause.
"before creation be, the almighty mind
"in time abyss the future world design;
"do the great system in its part survey,
"and fit the spring, and regulate their play;
"in meet gradation plane the harmonious round,
"these link by which depend part be bind.
"all these he know, ere yet the thing he make,
"in type which well the mimic world display.
"the type be real, since from they he draw
"the real form of whatsoever we view.
"make to their semblance, heaven and earth exist,
"but they unmake eternal subsist.
"for if create, we must sure suppose
"some other type whence their resemblance flow;
"while these on other equal depend,
"nor ever shall the long progression end.
"god ere it be, the future be see,
"or blindfold make his world, and give his law.
"but chance can never frame the vast design,
"where countless part in just order join.

"the type eternal just proportion teach,
"great or less, more or less perfect each.
"these ever present power omniscient see,
"on they he form his ever-made decree;
"nor can he better love what merit least,
"man than a angel, or than man a beast.
"hence reason, hence immortal order spring,
"knowledge and love adapt to the thing,
"and thence the unerring rule of justice flow,
"to act what order prompt, and reason show.

"what man in nature purity remain,
"by pain untroubled, and by sin unstained;
"fair image of the god, and close conjoin,
"by innate union with the heavenly mind;
"in the pure splendour of substantial light,
"the beam divine of reason bless his sight;
"seraphic order in its fount he view,
"see he love, and love he pursue;
"nor dare the body, passive slave, control
"the sovereign mandate of the rule soul.
"but soon by sin the sacred union break,
"man bow to earth beneath the heavy yoke.
"the darkling soul scarce feel a glimmer ray,
"shroud in sense from her immortal day.
"vengeance divine offend order arm,
"and clothes in terror her celestial charm.
"now gross object heaven-born soul possess,
"passion enslave, and servile care oppress.
"fraud, rapine, murder, guilt long horrid train,
"distract nature anarchy maintain.
"no more pure reason earthly mind can move,
"no more can order charm persuasive prove.
"but as the moon reflect borrow day,
"shed on our shadow world a feeble ray;
"some scatter beam of reason law contain,
"while order rule must be enforce by pain.
"hence death black scroll, dire torture hence be give;
"hence king, the necessary curse of heaven.
"and just the doom of a avenge god,
"who spurn his sceptre, feel the tyrant rod.
"blind by our fear we meet the ill we fly,
"in rule oppression, want in property. "

so speak the sage, and if not learn in vain,
if spotless truth in sacred book remain;
Dearly the child have pay the parent pride,
and ill have law the heavenly rule supply.
thus boast some leech with unavailing art,
to mend the taint lung and waste heart;
bid the loose spring with wonted vigour play,
and sprightly juice warm in cold decay.

or will imperious reason deign to own,
the world not make for sovereign man alone;
some thing there be for human use design,
and these in common deal to human kind.
to mortal want be give a power to use,
what to the immortal part just heaven may well refuse.
this faithful instinct in each breast implant,
all know their right, for all must feel their want.

but soon begin the rage of wild desire,
to thirst for more than use can over require.
ere sting by luxury unsated call,
and ere ambition mad grasp the ball,
vain restless man in busy search employ,
see somewhat still beyond the bliss enjoy,
press eager on; the lowly and the great,
alike their wish beyond their destine state;
alike condemn, whatever fortune grant,
to real poorness in fantastic want.

and now some sage high by other deem,
for virtue honour, and for part esteem;
call forth to judge where dubious claim be try,
convince with reason, and with counsel guide;
fix rule devise to sway the assent throng,
and mark distinct impress on right and wrong.

the simple precept subtle wile invade,
and statute as our crime increase be make,
these be at first unwritten, plain and few,
until swell by time the law vast volume grow;
and grow with these, to sway the unwieldy trust,
thousand we choose to keep the million just,
some place over other, other place over these,
thus government grow up by slow degree;
high the pile arise, and still more high,
when lo! the summit end in monarchy.
there place, a man in gorgeous pomp appear,
and far over earth his tower aspect rear;
while prostrate crowd his sacred smile implore,
and what their crime have form, their fear adore.
low from beneath they lift their servile eye,
and see the proud colossus touch the sky.

so at some mountain foot have child gaze,
while close to heaven they view the summit raise,
eager they mount, new region to explore,
but heaven be now as distant as before.
thus view the crowd a throne, while those who rise
claim not a near kindred to the sky;
earth be their parent, thither king shall bend,
from thence they rise, and not from heaven descend.
happy, have all the royal son of earth
thus spring, nor guilt have claim the monstrous birth.
where from the fire descend through the line,
rapine and fraud confer a right divine.

you mortal god, how vain be you proud?
if just your title, servant to the crowd;
if wide your sway, if large your treasure store,
these but increase your servitude the more;
a part be only you, the rest be they,
and nothing all your own, except your care.
shall man, by nature free, by nature make
to share the feast her bounteous hand display,
transfer these right? as well he may dispense
the beam of reason, or the nerve of sense;
with all his strength the monarch limb invest,
or pour his valour in the royal breast.

take the starve peasant taste, devour lord!
ere you deprive he of the genial board.
and if you will his liberty controul,
assume the various act of his soul!
so shall one man a people power enjoy,
thus indian deem of wretch they destroy.
thus in old tale the fable monster stand,
proud of a thousand eye, a thousand hand.
thus dream the sophist, who with subtle art
will prove the whole include in a part,
a people in their king; and from the throng,
transfer to he their right in nature wrong;
those sacred right in nature charter plain,
by want that claim they, and by power that gain.

though sophist err, yet stand confess thy claim,
and be the king and multitude the same,
who deed benevolent his title prove,
and royal selfishness, in public love;
nor, drain waste realm for sordid pelf,
o sceptre suicide! destroy thy self.

where fail this proof, in vain will we unite
the ruler interest with the people right.
frantic ambition have her separate claim,
the dropsy thirst of empire, wealth, or fame;
pride boundless hope, valour enthusiast rant,
with the long nameless train of fancy want.
urge on by these, all view the magic prize,
the prospect widen as they high rise;
for he who seek a limit command,
to he who wish devour air, sea, and land.
alike all foe to freedom holy cause,
for freedom tie unbounded will with law,
alike all foe to every public gain,
for public blessing loose the bondman chain.

ill-fated slave of arbitrary sway!
where trust power seduce to betray;
make private fail rage a general pest,
and taint even virtue in the social breast;
bid friendship plunder, charity undo
the blameless many, for the favour few.
till guilt high rear on crime protect crime,
fill the heap measure of predestine time.

far other, you, o wealthy, wise, and brave!
though subject, free; more freedom will enslave.
bless with a rule by long experience try,
unwarped by faction rage, or kingly pride;
bless with the mean, whenever this rule shall bend,
again to trace it to its glorious end;
and bless with proof, the proof be seal with blood,
whatever the form, the end be public good.

but yet admit the sire his right forego!
can he his child separate claim dispose?
whatever the parent give, whatever he give,
they who have right to life, have right to live.
and spite of man consent, or man decree,
a right to life, be right to liberty.

though for convenience frame the law shall shine,
pure emanation from the source divine;
such as can pierce the gloom of pagan night,
and untaught savage in wood enlight;
such as on scaffold can the guiltless save,
and torture on his throne the sceptre slave;
such as the offend wretch reluctant own,
and hail its beauty with his die groan:
in such fair law the will of heaven impress,
shine to all eye, and rule the conscious breast.
though torture cease, though night thick-mantling vail
from mortal ken the secret deed conceal;
reason and conscience shall awake within,
and light the shade, and loud proclaim the sin.

"but shall the universal voice combine,
"to cloth injustice in a robe divine? "
let the same breath divest the day of light,
to blazon forth the dusky face of night.
then shall the law of saint evil bind,
and human will subvert the all-rule mind;
that sacred fount whence lawful rule must spring,
and different from the robber mark the king.

yet vain will despotic will conclude,
that force may sway the err multitude,
justice, it be own, shall ever guide the free,
but power of wrong, in all, be liberty;
and for whatever purpose restrain,
a nation be enslave that may be chain.
heaven give to all a liberty of choice,
a people good require a people voice;
man sure guide, where different view agree,
from private hate, and private interest free.
fatal their change from such who rash fly,
to the hard grasp of guide tyranny;
soon shall they find, when will be arm with might,
injustice wield the sword, though draw for right.

blind to these truth who fond of boundless sway,
bid tremble slave implicit obey;
though by a long descent from Adam down
through sceptre heir, he boast his ancient crown,
great nature rebel forfeit every claim,
and load the tyrant with the usurper name;
while with each lawless act of proud command,
he stand proscribe by his own guilty hand.

bow, filmer, bow! to hell tremendous throne,
and bid thy fellow-damned suppress each groan!
there sit a king who power divine have give,
nor earth boast one so sure send from heaven.
and thou, bless martyr in fair freedom cause,
thou great asserter of thy country law;
vain oppression stop thy potent breath;
truth shine more powerful through the vail of death;
example move who precept can not save,
and lift axe wake each drowsy slave.

yet magistrate must rule, they be useful thing,
our guilt the vengeance, and avenger bring.
whatever more perfect heaven might first create,
a state well-governed, now, be nature state;
for law from reason spring, spontaneous fruit,
and reason sure be man first attribute.
let visionary schoolman toil in vain,
who seek in anarchy for nature reign;
wretched alike the slave of lawless will,
whether the savage, or the tyrant kill;
unjust alike all rule, where public choice
speak not through law a will people voice.
nor freedom suffer when the guilty fall,
it be nature doom, it be self-defence in all.

such now be man deprave that fear must sway,
to tread the path where duty point the way;
the wretch must suffer to forewarn the rest,
and some must fall to stop the spread pest.
alone the general welfare can demand
the bleed victim from the unwilling hand.

hence public pain — what to the crime be due,
o judge supreme! must be reserve for you.
to you alone, who all-pervading eye
deep in the breast can latent thought espy;
try every action by the know intent,
and to each crime adapt its punishment;
while man, mislead by err light, dispense
the doom of guilt to injure innocence;
or though repentance cleanse the moral stain,
inflict on crime atone avenge pain.
yet blameless they who act sincere their part,
faultless he err who can read the heart.

not such fierce flame the mad enthusiast zeal,
on error harmless to the general weal,
whether false notion wander far from truth,
or age retain the trace impress in youth.
while interest prompt the holy murder hand,
in sacred fire to light the unhallowed brand;
to draw destruction from heaven save page,
and bid sweet mercy breathe relentless rage.

accurse all such! and he with joy elate,
who baleful breath embitter certain fate;
who on the implore face malignant smile,
and sentence wretch wanton revile.
better, far better in the savage den,
let the rob lion judge over prostrate man:
better let power the lawless falchion draw,
than coward cruelty disgrace the law.

this well you know, oh! who righteous seat
give to the innocent a sure retreat;
severe just, and pious humane,
the wretch you punish, while you share his pain.
tear with the dreadful word of sentence flow,
nor do the rigid judge the man forgo.

so feel the breast humane, you true brave!
and such be thy, my friend, intent to save!
whether thy bounty pine want relieve,
or lenient pity sooth the heart that grieve;
whether thy pious hand due bound prescribe
to little tyrant, over the less tribe;
or whether noble warmth expand thy soul,
and huge leviathan unawed controul.

nor Britain only claim thy generous plan,
thy rule be justice, and thy care be man.
and may this truth thy fair example prove,
justice shall fan the flame of social love.
