ode on despair.

by the same.

save i! — what mean you grisly shade,
 her stony eye-ball stare wide;
 in soul, and tatter patch clad,
 with dirt, and gore, and venom die? 
a burn brand she whirl around,
 and stamp, and rave, and tear the ground,
 and mad rend her clot hair;
 while through her canker breast be see
 myriad of serpent breed within,
 the curse spawn of self consume care! —

it be thus, o poor enamour maid,
 the Stygian fiend approach the sea-girt tower,
 what time, in sad misfortune evil hour,
 the faithless lamp love cynosure decay. 
 "and why," the ghastly phantom cry,
 "will thou, delude hero, wait
" leander wish return, forbid by fate? 
 "see float on his watery bier he lie;
" pale be his cheek, where love be wont to play,
 "and close those radiant eye, that late outshine the day." 

the woe-foreboding voice she hear,
 and wish, tremble pray for morn —
 when lo! the bleed corpse appear,
 by savage rock all rude tear! 
where be you, nymph, o tell i where,
 daughter of Nereus, fresh and fair? 
and why, sweet silver-footed queen,
 will thou not leave thy coral cave,
 and sooth the rough remorseless wave,
 ere death have seize thy best, thy bold swain? —

with haggard eye, all-streaming blood,
 distract hero see her lover slay,
 and thrice indignant view the guilty main,
 and thrice accuse each merciless watery god. 
aye i in vain! — for "see, she cry,
" my dear leander beckon shade! 
 "and can thou live, o lose, o wretched maid? 
" shall envious fate so fond a pair divide? 
 "forbid it, love!" — then headlong from the tower
 deep in the ruthless flood she plunge to rise no more! 

with scene of woe, o curse power,
 how be thy greedy eye regale? 
how do thy heart exult of yore,
 when heaven vindictive rod assail
 the queen of art? — with giant-stride
 contagion stalk, and lo the bride,
 the virgin-bride unpitied die! 
clasp to his daughter throb breast,
 the father breathe his soul to rest,
 and sorrow son compose the widow mother eye? 

Scar'd by the daemon spot hand,
 the eagle scream, the famish vulture flee,
 the hungry wolf forsake the unburied dead,
 and pale disease shiver leave the land! 
what cry, and pierce shriek resound
 through every street, at every fane? 
yet ah! they weep, they weary heaven in vain! 
death and distraction stare on all around! 
the wretched few, who poisonous pestilence spare,
 of moody madness die, and heart-distracting fear. 

these be thy deed, o fell despair,
 thou tyrant of the torture soul,
 sister of pale-eyed grief, and care,
 at who command impetuous roll
 passion rough tide, and swell high
 burst through each dear, and sacred tie,
 and every please thought overwhelm;
 anon the crazy bark be bear,
 of wind, and wave, and rock the scorn,
 for reason shrink appal, and tremble quit the helm! 

o fly, thou first bear child of hell,
 to some far distant, dreary, doleful plain,
 where start fear, and agonize pain,
 and black remorse, and sullen sorrow dwell:
 where arm with poison, rack, and death,
 stern horror rear his Gorgon head;
 and writhe dreadful on the iron bed,
 the purple fury grind their canker tooth;
 while perch on stub of tree the shriek-owl sing,
 and scream deadly hoarse night-raven flap their wing! 

thither emboss with vary woe,
 misfortune pallid slave retire —
 hark, hark, he rave! — thy tablet show,
 charge with damn ghost, and sulphurous fire. 
oh mercy, heaven! — upstart stand
 his grisly hair; his nerveless hand
 shake; over his face the curdle blood,
 from his swell heart, with tiding fly:
 "give i another horse," he cry,
 "oh! bring the poison bowl, let loose life crimson flood!" 

sad, sacred wretch! — thou power divine,
 who god-like word from chaos dark and dread,
 bad discord fly, and light sweet-smiling spread
 her orient wing, control this breast of i! 
and still when gloomy thought prevail,
 oh short, and partial be their sway! 
and beam from thou, let pleasure gladsome ray
 the mournful progeny of grief dispel. 
so shall the chequer scene of life delight,
 as morning bright peer precede still by night. 
