ode to liberty.

by mr. Hudson.

the sable queen of shade retire,
 encircle with her fade fire;
 yok to her iron car, the dragon fly,
 with slow wing blacken many a league of sky. 
go, melancholy goddess, go,
 nurse of despondency and woe. 
it be time: the cock be shrill clarion call
 the dawn, and strike the prowl wolf with fear,
 and bid the phantom disappear,
 that glimmer amid yond moulder wall:
 they startle at the sound,
 and glide over the trackless ground,
 loath, to their marble mansion haste away. 
no more their livid lightning play:
 the terror of aërial tumult cease,
 hush to serenity and smile peace. 

for, lo! in heaven ambrosial bower,
 wake by the stationary hour,
 parent of day, the morn unveil her eye,
 and vermeil blush streak the orient sky:
 how nature triumph at the sight,
 renew in all her beauty bright! 
her fragrant grove their incense yield;
 the zephyr, from her humid store, diffuse
 the sweetness of mellifluous dew;
 and pleasure paint the lillied field. 
here, gild with splendid ray,
 the spire and lofty turret blaze;
 there the canal reflect a please gleam;
 while dance down the pebbly stream
 the silver radiance cheer the feather throng,
 wood, hill, and dale re-echo with their song. 

thus, like the morn, will fair freedom come,
 in majesty divine,
 with dawn glory to disperse the gloom
 of dire oppression; and illume the mind
 to darkness and despondency confine. 
arise, o liberty! it be thy
 the charm of nature to refine;
 with bloom hope and harmony to please,
 to crown with plenty, and to bless with ease,
 to light up awful virtue live ray,
 and pour the flood of intellectual day. 

place i in afric desert land,
 where thirst sit gape on the sand;
 if there auspicious freedom fix her seat,
 'midst burn blast, i will hail the rude retreat;
 soon shall the wild, more polish groan,
 admire new beauty, not her own:
 sage industry shall dig the well
 capacious, yawn many a fathom deep;
 while low herd, and bleat sheep,
 stand frequent in the cool cell:
 soon shall the mantling vine
 be teach around the palm to twine;
 and social art the strange naiad wake,
 that sleep beneath the distant lake,
 curious to view young commerce gay roam,
 and bring full harvest to his barren home. 

place i beneath the gelid zone,
 near winter adamantine throne,
 where farther ocean foam with icy roar
 along the bleak, inhospitable shore:
 if freedom to the smoky dome
 with fur-cloathed mortal deign to roam;
 through snowy waste the dome i will seek:
 what hinder to enjoy the freeze year! 
for property will there appear;
 and cheerful health, with rosy cheek,
 pursue the pant prey;
 or, mindful of the lengthen day,
 sit chant on the mountain crystal brow,
 where hang torrent shine below;
 nor will cimmerian sleep forget to bring
 safe slumber, wave at his downy wing. 

come then, celestial, let thy wish return
 this happy clime serene;
 this happy clime, if Rome thy absence mourn,
 no more with smile of pleasure entertain,
 nor baia grove, nor rich campania plain:
 heartless we view the splendid scene
 of turret, and the paint green;
 heartless the music of the grove we hear,
 as when, new harness out by wrath and fear,
 night chariot move in storm; and thunder hurl
 roll their broad terror round the groan world. 
