the choice.

if heaven the grateful liberty will give,
 that i may choose my method how to live;
 and all those hour propitious fate shall lend,
 in blissful ease, and satisfaction spend. 

near some fair town, i will have a private seat. 
build uniform, not little, nor too great:
 better if on a rise ground it stand;
 on this side field, on that a neighbour wood,
 it shall within, no other thing contain,
 but what be useful, necessary, plain:
 methinks it be nauseous, and i will never endure
 the needless pomp of gaudy furniture. 
a little garden, grateful to the eye,
 and a cool rivulet run murmur by:
 on who delicious bank a stately row
 of shady lime, or sycamore shall grow. 
at the end of which a silent study place,
 shall be with all the noble author grace. 
Horace, and Virgil, in who mighty line
 immortal wit, and solid learning shine. 
sharp Juvenal, and amorous Ovid too,
 who all the turn of love soft passion know;
 he that with judgement read his charm line
 in which strong art, with strong nature join,
 must grant his fancy do the best excel;
 his thought so tender, and express so well. 
with all those modern, man of steady sense,
 esteem for learning, and for eloquence. 
in some of these, as fancy shall advise,
 i will always take my morning exercise:
 for sure no minute bring we more content,
 than those in please, useful study spend. 

i will have a clear, and competent estate,
 that i may live gent, but not great. 
as much as i can moderate spend,
 a little more, sometime to oblige a friend. 
nor shall the son of poverty repine
 too much at fortune, they shall taste of i;
 and all that object of true pity be
 shall be relieve with what my want can spare. 
for that, our maker have too large give,
 shall be return, in gratitude to heaven. 
a frugal plenty shall my table spread;
 with healthy, not luxurious dish feed:
 enough to satisfy, and something more
 to feed the stranger, and the neighbour poor. 
strong meat indulge vice, and pamper food
 create disease, and inflame the blood. 
but what be sufficient to make nature strong,
 and the bright lamp of life continue long,
 i will free take, and as i do possess,
 the bounteous author of my plenty bless. 

i will have a little vault, but always store
 with the best wine, each vintage can afford. 
wine whet the wit, improve its native force,
 and give a pleasant flavour to discourse:
 by make all our spirit debonair,
 throw off the lees, the sediment of care. 
but as the great bless heaven lend,
 may be debauch, and serve ignoble end:
 so, but too oft, the grape refresh juice
 do many mischievous effect produce,
 my house shall not such rude disorder know,
 as from high drink consequent flow. 
nor will i use what be so kind give,
 to the dishonour of indulgent heaven. 
if any neighbour come, he shall be free,
 use with respect, and not uneasy be,
 in my retreat, or to himself or i. 
what freedom; prudence, and right reason give,
 all man may with impunity receive:
 but the least swerve from their rule too much;
 for what be forbid we, it be death to touch. 

that life may be more comfortable yet,
 and all my joy refine, sincere, and great;
 i will choose two friend, who company will be
 a great advance to my felicity. 
well bear, of humour suit to my own;
 discreet, and man, as well as book, have know. 
brave, generous, witty, and exact free
 from loose behaviour, or formality. 
airy, and prudent, merry, but not light;
 quick in discern, and in judge right. 
Secret they shall be, faithful to their trust;
 in reason cool, strong, temperate, and just. 
oblige, open, without huff, brave,
 brisk in gay talk, and in sober, grave. 
close in dispute, but not tenacious, try
 by solid reason, and let that decide. 
not prone to lust, revenge, or envious hate;
 nor busy meddler with intrigue of state. 
stranger to slander, and swear foe to spite:
 not quarrelsome, but stout enough to fight. 
loyal, and pious, friend to Cæsar, true
 as die martyr, to their maker too. 
in their society, i can not miss
 a permanent, sincere, substantial bliss. 

will bounteous heaven once more indulge, i will choose
 (for who will so much satisfaction loose,
 as witty nymph, in conversation, give,)
 near some oblige, modest fair to live;
 for there be that sweetness in a female mind,
 which in a man we can hope to find:
 that by a secret, but a powerful art,
 wind up the spring of life, and do impart
 fresh vital heat, to the transport heart. 

i will have her reason all her passion sway;
 easy in company, in private gay:
 coy to a fop, to the deserve free,
 still constant to her self, and just to i. 
a soul she shall have, for great action fit;
 prudence, and wisdom to direct her wit:
 courage to look bold danger in the face,
 no fear, but only to be proud, or base:
 quick to advise, by a emergence press,
 to give good counsel, or to take the best. 
i will have the expression of her thought be such,
 she may not seem reserve, nor talk too much;
 that show a want of judgement and of sense:
 more than enough be but impertinence. 
her conduct regular, her mirth refine,
 civil to stranger, to her neighbour kind. 
averse to vanity, revenge, and pride,
 in all the method of deceit untried. 
so faithful to her friend, and good to all,
 no censure may upon her action fall:
 then will even envy be compel to say,
 she go the least of womankind astray. 

to this fair creature i will sometime retire,
 her conversation will new joy inspire;
 give life a edge so keen, no surly care
 will venture to assault my soul, or dare
 near my retreat to hide one secret snare. 
but so divine, so noble a repast
 i will seldom, and with moderation, taste. 
for high cordial all their virtue loose,
 by a too frequent, and too bold a use:
 and what will cheer the spirit in distress;
 ruin our health, when take to excess. 

i will be concern in no litigious jar,
 belove by all, not vain popular,
 whatever assistance i have power to bring
 to oblige my country, or to serve my king,
 whenever they call, i will ready afford
 my tongue, my pen, my counsel, or my sword. 
law suit i will shun, with as much studious care,
 as i will den where hungry lion be:
 and rather put up injury; than by
 a plague to he, who will be a plague to i. 
i value quiet at a price too great,
 to give for my revenge so dear a rate:
 for what do we by all our bustle gain,
 but counterfeit delight, for real pain? 

if heaven a date of many year will give,
 thus i will in pleasure, ease, and plenty live. 
and as i near approach the verge of life,
 some kind relation, (for i will have no wife)
 shall take upon he all my worldly care,
 while i do for a better state prepare. 
then i will not be with any trouble vex;
 nor have the evening of my day perplex. 
but by a silent, and a peaceful death,
 without a sigh, resign my age breath:
 and when commit to the dust, i will have
 few tear, but friendly drop into my grave. 
then will my exit so propitious be;
 all man will wish to live, and die, like i. 
