a imitation of the tenth ode of the second book of Horace.

to the right Hon. the lord viscount Palmerston.

if we, my lord, with easy strife,
 will pass this fickle tide of life;
 we must not always rash sail
 with every light, inconstant gale;
 nor yet, at every surge that roar,
 too timorous, seek the craggy shore. 
the man who keep the golden mean,
 where rage storm be seldom see,
 avoid the dangerous rock and pool,
 that fright the wise, and swallow fool:
 he be never despise among the crowd,
 nor envy in the court;
 but steer between the base and proud,
 to gain the peaceful port. 
while lofty spire and Cedars fall,
 storm-beaten, to the plain,
 the lowly shrub, and humble wall,
 be proof to wind and rain;
 and lightning guiltless over the cottage fly;
 but smite ambitious hill, that, tower, threat the sky. 

the steady mind, that be true great,
 survey, unmoved, the turn of fate:
 if wealth and fame his pride increase,
 his fear their force controul;
 if adverse fortune will depress,
 hope elevate his soul:
 because he know, the power who bring
 the winter with its dreary wing,
 can make the vernal beauty grow,
 and turn our woe to bliss, or bliss to woe. 
if now on anxious care you feed,
 a feast of joy may soon succeed,
 to cheer your pensive mind. 
with time, our temper vary round,
 nothing immutable be find,
 but all to change incline. 
though pope with illness oft complain,
 pope be not always rack with pain;
 but, warm with phoebus fire,
 sometime he wake the sleep string,
 or bid the silent muse sing,
 and charm we with his lyre. 

our life, at best, a chequer scene
 of health and sickness, mirth and spleen:
 yet, since we all must stem this sea,
 where calm and tempest dwell;
 grieve not to steer the destine way,
 but strive to pass it well:
 if adverse storm begin to rave,
 serene view the foamy wave,
 collect in yourself, and resolute brave. 
or, if you find indulgent gale
 impel the bark too fast,
 wise contract the swell sail,
 and check their rapid haste;
 lest, in your swift career, the ship
 split on a rock, and sink beneath the deep. 
