[oppian have halieuticks  part i  of the nature of Fishes. in two book]

the first book of oppian halieutick.

i sing the native of the boundless main,
 and tell what kind the watery depth contain. 
thou, mighty prince, who farther shore obey,
 favour the bard, and hear the humble lay;
 while the muse show the liquid world below,
 where throng with busy shoal the water flow;
 their differ form and way of life relate;
 and sing their constant love, and constant hate;
 what various art the finny herd beguile,
 and each cold secret of the fisher toil. 
intrepid soul! who please rest despise,
 to whirl in eddy, and on flood to rise;
 who scorn the safety of the calm shore,
 drive through the work foam, and ply the labour oar. 
the abyss they fathom, search the doubtful way,
 and through obscure depth pursue the prey. 

through wilder forest, and through thorny brake,
 the huntsman toil the chafe boar overtake. 
HARDY he meet the bristly tusked foe,
 and distant dart, or strike the near blow. 
but on himself he not depend alone;
 assist dog first run the monster down. 
they to the secret den unerring guide,
 and open tell where the fierce sylvan hide. 
on the firm continent the assailant meet,
 and unmoved earth support their steady foot. 
from winter snow, and from autumnal heat
 the weary hunter have a kind retreat. 
in mossy cave beneath entwine tree
 he mock the come storm, and sit at ease. 
fresh fountain here with silver current glide,
 rush from the hill, and murmur at his side. 
stretch on the grass, he quaff the cool stream,
 or act his pleasure over in paint dream,
 the choice dainty unmixed nature yield,
 bend from the tree, or flourish from the field. 
while fruit the wood, and herb enrich the soil,
 the huntsman pleasure must exceed his toil. 

and those, who art the feather world ensnare,
 nor mighty pain endure, nor pensive care. 
the bird, when out of reach, be yet in sight,
 and hope in vain their safety from their flight. 
oft they be seize unthinking as they rest
 in harmless dream, and slumber in their nest. 
oft make a treacherous twig their fatal seat,
 while viscous lime retain the captive foot. 
to the draw net they have, and court their fate,
 till in the snare enclose they flutter grieve too late. 

but ah! continue doubt, return pain,
 and numerous danger wait the fish swain. 
fond hope with dream of fancy gain delight,
 and to new toil their restless mind invite. 
the fisher labour not on certain ground,
 but in a leaky boat be toss around. 
here fierce succeed wave tumultuous beat,
 roar by their side, and swift destruction threat. 
now murmur wind disturb the careful wight,
 now blacken cloud, and gather storm affright. 
they tremble, who secure from land behold
 contend wave in angry conflict roll. 
no shelter covert here the Swain befriend,
 when cloud condense in noisy stream descend. 
no tree from cold bleak wind, or fall sleet,
 nor shade secure from autumn sickly heat. 
here to the scent game no dog can guide;
 their native fish the circle eddy hide,
 and through the trackless deep unseen they sportive glide. 
beside loud threaten storm, and sudden wind,
 he meet vast whale, and monstrous nameless kind. 
the slender-woven net, vimineous well,
 the taper angle, line, and barb steel,
 be all the tool his constant toil employ;
 on arm like these the fish Swain rely. 

but fisher live although expose to harm,
 they have their pleasure, and the sea it be charm. 
long will the princely entertainment please,
 when on smooth pond, and artificial sea
 the royal pinnace bear at leisure ride;
 some skillful chief the stately fabric guide,
 while she her streamer spread, and in her owner pride. 
here various kind of dainty fish be breed,
 with constant meal in generous plenty feed. 
for a imperial treat, or choice repast,
 such as the royal pair may deign to taste. 
here you, dread prince, the water most approve
 that bear a sullen gloom, and slow move. 
thither the throng boat with pleasure have;
 you in the central depth the plummet cast. 
the will fish around ambitious wait,
 fly to the line, and fasten on the bait. 
while you with joy the grateful prey receive,
 and from the wound steel his jaw relieve. 
well please you see he gasp, and labour breath,
 and long in sportive pain his struggle body wreath. 

great Neptune, who command control the sea,
 can curb the tempest, and the wave appease,
 and all you ocean-god, that peaceful reign
 low in the depth of the unfathomed main,
 permit the muse to tell, what kind obey
 your watery power, and cut the liquid way. 
may the calm sea smile on the distant shore,
 while i discover all the hide store. 
and thou, o goddess, tune my artless tongue,
 to please the sovereign pair, and form the grateful song. 

but ah! how great the task! for who can know
 what creature swim in secret depth below? 
unnumbered shoal glide through the cold abyss
 unseen, and wanton in unenvied bliss. 
for who with all his skill can certain teach,
 how deep the sea, how far the water reach? 
foolish the attempt; none can the space define,
 the depth retire beneath, and mock the sink line. 
three hundred fathom sound be the most;
 such be the knowledge which our labour boast. 
to comprehend the whole we fruitless seek;
 our soul be finite, and our reason weak. 
and yet we guess the watery world exceed
 in numerous offspring, and in various breed. 
more kind may roll beneath in briny flood
 than graze the verdant field, or range the wood. 
but whether earth or sea in kind excel,
 the god, and sure the god alone, can tell. 
for human reach have certain limit set;
 man, who too curious search, themselves forget. 
we ought to know our bound, nor grasp at all,
 but curb the wish, and the mad thought recall. 

fish have no common rule of life assign,
 not to one place, or to one choice confine. 
the several kind pursue their proper good,
 different their dwelling, and unlike their food. 
some near the shore in humble pleasure bless
 approve the sand, and on their product feast. 
the flounce horse here restiff drive his way,
 and sole on sand their soft belly lay. 
Sea-Roach in ruddy shoal frequent the land,
 and puny black-tail range the shelve strand. 
the cloud mackrel choose the sandy ground,
 and with their speckle train the beach surround. 
flat folio here stretch on the shade sea,
 here spiny scad and fruitful carp increase. 
the broad-tail here, and dainty Mullet feed,
 frisk on the sand, or batten on the weed. 
close to the shore soft slender swath reside,
 and the gay Mormyl show his spot pride. 

but what these love the slimy offspring hate:
 the Cod, and Whiting kind, the prickly skate,
 the thornback-ray a arm, and hardy race,
 the poisonous Fire-Flaire, and the smooth plaise
 stretch on soft slime; in slime the sea-cow hide,
 and on the yield bed recline her side. 
the cramp-fish right name from numb pain,
 and wide-mouthed lizard sandy heap disdain. 
in gross filth they pass their wanton day,
 search the rich mud, and wreath through hide way. 

close to green shore the watery native feed,
 that hide in wrack, and bite the spiry weed. 
such food the cackrel and the goat approve,
 sea-wolf, and all the prickly species love. 
the ox-eyed race the slimy covert haunt,
 where silent Waters wash the grow plant. 

barbel to fresh channel be incline,
 barbel the just of the scaly kind. 
the slimy Conger, and bold army know
 in hardy fight the briny flood disown;
 near river stay, and shun the distant sea;
 the brackish taste and pungent salt displease. 
with they the grunter seek the fresh flood;
 mean be his pleasure, and unclean his food. 
sweet stream the tunnie young, and sea-wolf crave,
 and to the deep prefer the mingle wave. 
where wide-mouthed river force their rapid way,
 and their full tribute to the ocean pay;
 here with sweet draught the joyful tribe be bless,
 and the land-flood bring down a grateful feast. 
wash from each bank rich spoil be bear away;
 the fish wait, and seize the float prey. 

sea wolf within the river channel keep,
 affect no change, nor venture on the deep. 
or if they chance to roam, return again
 with fright have, and fly the hate main. 
different the conduct of the restless eel;
 he from his wonted hole will sly steal;
 the fresh stream, his native home, forsake,
 despise the little brook, or stand lake. 
curious to sport in depth unknown before,
 and search the hollow of the crooked shore,
 through secret track he glide, and slimy way,
 and wreath his snaky length through every wind maze. 

those dreadful rock, that rise tide restrain,
 and mock the foamy anger of the main,
 nor of one form, nor equal height appear;
 some to the cloud their darken summit rear. 
high steepy cliff despise the low sand,
 overlook the sea, and distant view command. 
on some thick bed of mossy verdure grow,
 sea-grass, and spread wrack be see below. 
here the sea-pearch and gawdy goldlin sport,
 gay rainbow-fish, and sable wrass resort. 
the gaper here, who jaw but seldom close,
 swim near the rock, where the rank herbage grow. 
they too, who like the mournful halcyon breed,
 and form a float nest of slimy weed. 
and he, unhappy in his hate name
 borrow from lawless love, and pathic shame. 

near sandy rise shelf, at ebb tide
 unfruitful rock display their craggy side. 
here basilisk and drowsy sand eel lie,
 here the gay Gurnard boast his rosy dye. 

where moisten cliff be all with herb overgrow,
 and the rank stalk lie mat on the stone,
 the sargo will the leafy covert praise,
 and here the dory spend his easy day. 
here sea-crow dwell, name from their dusky hue,
 and timorous shade-fish the blind haunt pursue. 
here scaro feed, the only kind that dare
 to form shrill sound, and strike the tremble air. 
to pensive silence doom no other fish
 can speak his want, or tell his secret wish. 
twice over their food the wanton scaro's eat,
 with pleasure the luxurious toil repeat. 
like sheep in grassy mead, or fatten cow
 they chew the cud, and on the taste refine. 

within those rock, where cling oyster dwell,
 and all the native of the wrinkle shell;
 vast hollow cave their vault roof extend,
 who warm retreat voracious bream commend. 
to rocky cell the wriggle lamprey steal,
 and mackrel here their speckle side conceal. 
here stretch at ease slow-dying oerve remain,
 who body long will stubborn life retain. 
repeat wound the torture wretch feel,
 yet dare the cruel hand, and cut steel. 
the part disjoin and mangle as they lie
 still pant, and move, and will at leisure die. 

some scorn the rock, no shallow water please,
 they fly the shore, and sound the low sea. 
sea-sheep and liver-fish be hide below,
 while far above the trouble surge flow. 
deep in the abyss they make their oozy bed,
 nor change sky, nor come tempest dread. 
fix to their choice, the dull unwieldy race
 lie in the depth, and keep one constant place. 
unmoved they stretch themselves, and longing wait,
 till some poor fish urge by unkind fate
 too near approach take his luckless way;
 they without labour seize the weak prey. 
with these we may the wary haddock join,
 who prudent know what danger to decline,
 the sickly autumn dread, and sultry day,
 when scorch Sirius dart his baneful ray. 
soon as the fever taint the blast air,
 they to some gloomy covert all repair;
 close in the darksome hole they moody grieve,
 nor sullen will the inmost shelter leave;
 till the dire star have spend his venom rage,
 till the brook fill, and all the heat assuage. 

a ruddy fish, of kin to barbel kind,
 on island rock uncommon pleasure find;
 Adonis call by those who will express
 the various beauty of his paint dress. 
who his fond choice and fickle temper know
 land-fish expressive name on he bestow. 
the inconstant wretch too curious leaf the deep,
 love the hard earth, and court forbid sleep. 
no other kind of those who gasp gills
 with humid breath repeat suction fill,
 can bear the sultry heat, and summer sky,
 bask in the sun, and wanton in the dry. 
when calm invite, and angry storm be cease,
 he drive the stream, and hasten to his rest. 
stretch on a rise rock he sun lie
 well-pleased, while easy slumber close his eye,
 though cautious fear a sound sleep deny;
 lest hostile bird shall, as they distant fly,
 observe stoop, and bear the prey on high. 
when feather pillager intent on food
 skim by the rock, or over the water brood;
 clear sky in vain their please warmth impart;
 the wretch soon from break slumber start. 
twine they leap, and antic posture show,
 bind from the rock, and have to dive below. 
to shun the danger will forgo their ease,
 and seek the shelter of the kind sea. 

in rock, or sand the glitter gilthead live,
 food and content from either place receive. 
Blewlings, fierce weaver, and the Ruff enjoy
 the rocky cave, when sandy shallows cloy. 
to either choice indifferent alike
 both kind of scorpion, and the slender pike,
 the horn gar, and sportive gudgeon range,
 and unconfined approve the alternate change. 
with they the sea-mouse rove of slender size,
 but on sharp tooth, and horny snout rely. 
no fear the furious little monster know,
 intrepid hast unequal strength to oppose. 
with innate courage fire, and martial rage
 the puny warrior dare with man engage. 
with mighty soul in narrow breast confine,
 he swim the champion of the scaly kind. 

some scorn the weedy rock, and sandy coast,
 less danger know, and great freedom boast;
 the peaceful water of the ocean seek
 but fly the straight, and shun the wind creek. 
far from the shore the nimble tunny race
 over the wide plain, and vast unmeasured space. 
the horsetail, and the sword-fish arm for war
 nor make the shallows nor the rock their care. 
in distant sea the spot cogniol play,
 at leisure roll, and cut the trackless way. 
through depth unknown the serpent curl pass,
 and twine resistless through the slimy mass. 
they hate the shore, who sacred honour claim,
 and to their beauty owe their awful name. 

he the deep sea prefer to noisy straight,
 who for the distant ship impatient wait,
 the friendly pilot-fish, who joyful view
 the well-rigged bark, and every sail pursue. 
around the wanton shoal in order move,
 and frisk gaze on he who steer above:
 eager press on, nor will be leave behind,
 though the full sail swell bloat with the wind. 
you will think the captive chain to every ship. 
and draw unwilling through the ruffle deep. 

as when some prince return from martial toil
 victorious, with a conquer nation spoil;
 or he, who at the olympick game have win
 the envy honour of the leafy crown;
 the swarm vulgar throng with gladsome noise,
 and on the triumph feed their dazzle eye;
 the champion to his home in crowd attend,
 and when the chief dismount, their march end. 

so they, while no approach shore displease,
 swim with the ship tumultuous over the sea. 
but when they conscious scent the come shore,
 averse they court the sailour look no more;
 avoid the near land, and hie again
 with equal have to the unbounded main. 
pilot observe the sign, and know the coast
 draw nigh, when they perceive their comrade lose. 
auspicious friend, the sailor darling fish,
 the ship good omen, and the steersman wish,
 lay careless on the deck, when you appear,
 the jolly crew no sudden danger fear;
 but wayward laugh, or vie in wanton tale:
 your presence give clear sky, and please gale. 
no rage tempest toss the sparkle sea;
 but unfurled sail expect the gentle breeze. 

far from the shore the wily sucker wait
 the come ship, but he the sailor hate. 
slender his shape, his length a cubit end;
 no beauteous spot the gloomy race commend;
 a eel-like cling kind, of dusky look;
 his jaw display tenacious row of hook. 
but in strange power the puny fish excel,
 beyond the boast art of magic spell. 
oft seaman tell, but few the tale believe,
 or own those truth they can well conceive. 
man think they know all nature secret law,
 her power define, and trace each hide cause. 
full of himself the sceptic overwise
 oft real fact, because unseen, deny. 
to strange effect, when prove, no credit give,
 feed his false doubt, and thus himself deceive. 
the sucking-fish beneath with secret chain
 cling to the keel the swift ship detain. 
the seaman run confuse, no labour spare,
 let fly the sheet, and hoist the topmost yard. 
the master bid they give her all the sail,
 to court the wind, and catch the come gale. 
but though the canvas belly with the blast,
 and boisterous wind bend down the crack mast,
 the bark stand firm root in the sea,
 and will unmoved nor wind, nor wave obey. 
still, as when calm have flat all the plain,
 and infant wave scarce wrinkle on the main. 
no ship in harbour moor so careless ride,
 when ruffle water tell the flow tide. 
appal the sailor stare, through strange surprise
 believe they dream, and rub their wake eye. 

as when unerring from the huntsman bow
 the feather death arrest the fly Doe;
 strike through the die beast fall sudden down,
 the part grow stiff, and all the motion go;
 such sudden force the float captive bind,
 though beat by wave, and urge by drive wind. 

pilchard, and shad in shoal together keep,
 the numerous fry disturb the mantling deep. 
no home they know, nor can confinement love,
 but fond of hourly change unsettled rove. 
now choose the rock, now seek the wide sea;
 no place can long the restless wanderer please. 
they soon grow weary when they once enjoy,
 and pleasure will, as soon as taste, cloy. 

near hide crag, and rock unseen below,
 where slow wave with silent current flow,
 the anthy lie conceal in close retreat,
 but oft must stray far from their mansion seat. 
voracious appetite command away,
 to range for food, and find the luckless prey. 
Anthies insatiate feel the gnaw grief,
 repeat luxury give no relief. 
though not for ravenous force by heaven design;
 for nature have disarm the toothless kind. 
four kind of anthy in the sea be breed:
 some gild the water with a shine red. 
a second sort be blanch with please white;
 a third of hue less grateful to the sight,
 a gloomy race, the blackish die retain,
 all swarth over, and tinge with sooty stain. 
what mark the other bear their name imply,
 call from the bend arch that shade their eye. 
in shelly armour wrap, the lobster seek
 safe shelter in some bay, or wind creek;
 to rocky chasm the dusky native cleave,
 tenacious hold, nor will the dwelling leave. 
nought like their home the constant lobster prize,
 and foreign shore, and sea unknown despise. 
though cruel hand the banish wretch expel,
 and force the captive from his native cell,
 he will, if free, return, with anxious care
 find the know rock, and to his home repair:
 no novel custom learn in different sea,
 but wonted food, and home-taught manner please. 
his long-deserted house the lobster own,
 and with close ardent claw indent the favourite stone. 
the love of country be not to man confine;
 the same propension sway the brutal mind. 
Fishes their native cave with transport view;
 they have their country, and their fondness too. 
no nation may with that bless clime compare,
 that give we first to breath the vital air. 
how dear the first acquaintance of our eye! 
how rich the soil! how beautiful the sky! 
the name of country fill the grateful mind
 with all that be tender, generous and kind. 
ah! wretched those, who force from what they love
 necessitous in vagrant exile rove;
 still restless must the kill grief renew,
 despise by all, or pity but by few. 

prawn, and the velvet-crab, though kin to these,
 be not so constant to their native sea. 
sometime the amphibious race the flood disown,
 nor be the guest to neighbour shore unknown. 
the Shelly crawler each return year,
 cast off their coat, and new-made armour wear. 
self-taught, when first the velvet-crab perceive
 their loosen shell will soon the body leave,
 they cram their paunch, and bloat strive to thrust
 from off their rise back the totter crust. 
but when their naked body lie expose,
 no long with the shelly fence enclose;
 they senseless seem, stretch on the sandy bed
 all pensive lie, and deem themselves as dead;
 nor cautious eat, left gorge food shall swell
 the tender flesh, and stop the grow shell. 
but when slow nature mould the viscous mass,
 and time begin to fix the harden case,
 the rise crust half-formed they joyous feel,
 and suck the sand; yet dread the hearty meal;
 till the firm finish work can safe endure
 the rude shock, and every part secure. 

so when the vein glow with a deep red,
 when pustule rise, or scarlet blotch spread;
 the prudent leech prescribe a wholesome fast,
 forbid the noxious pleasure of the taste. 
and when his skill perceive the slake heat,
 while the slow pulse with equal motion beat,
 he cautious fear to raise the sink flood,
 and give with spare hand the slender food. 
till perfect health restore her former grace,
 strength to the limb, and beauty to the face. 

the poisonous creeper, and the change preke
 the secret cavern of the ocean seek. 
but curious oft to neighbour shore repair,
 and taste the breeze of the cool air. 
the rustic often have with wonder see
 the climb preke browze on the leafy green. 

with these the wily Cuttle seek his food,
 who ink distain around the sable flood. 
kind yet unsung, of the testaceous breed,
 on sea-beat rock, or sandy hillock feed. 
here slender sheath, and juicy oyster hide,
 and the gay author of the purple pride. 
the cockle, spiral whirl, and hardy mouse,
 with Wilks of various shell, and quaint device. 
sea-urchin, who their native armour boast,
 all stick with spike, prefer the sandy coast. 
shall you with knife their prickly body wind,
 till the crude morsel pant upon the ground;
 you may even then, when motion seem no more,
 depart sense and fleet life restore. 
if in the sea the mangle part you cast,
 the conscious piece to their fellow have;
 again they apt join, their whole compose;
 move as before, nor life, nor vigour lose. 

the hermit-fish, unarmed by nature leave,
 helpless, and weak, grow strong by harmless theft. 
fearful they strowl, and look with pant wish
 for the cast crust of some new-covered fish;
 or such as empty lie, and deck the shore,
 who first and rightful owner be no more. 
they make glad seizure of the vacant room,
 and count the borrow shell their native home;
 screw their soft limb to fit the wind case,
 and bold herd with the crustaceous race. 
careless they enter the first empty cell;
 oft find the plait wilk indent shell;
 and oft the deep-dyed purple force by death
 to stranger-fish the paint home bequeathe. 
the wilk etch coat be most with pleasure wear,
 wide in extent, and yet but light bear. 
but when they grow more than fill the place,
 and find themselves hard-pinched in scanty space,
 compel they quit the roof they love before,
 and busy search around the pebbly shore,
 till a commodious roomy seat be find,
 such as the large cockle live own. 
oft cruel war contend hermit wage,
 and long for the dispute shell engage. 
the strong will the doubtful prize possess,
 power give he right, and all the claim confess. 

sail-fish in secret silent deep reside,
 in shape and nature to the preke ally;
 close in their concave shell their body wrap,
 avoid the wave, and every storm escape. 
but not to mirksome depth alone confine,
 when please calm have still the sigh wind,
 curious to know what sea above contain,
 they leave the dark recess of main;
 now wanton to the change surface have,
 view clear sky, and the pure welkin taste. 
but slow they cautious rise, and prudent fear
 the upper region of the watery sphere. 
backward they mount, and as the stream overflow,
 their convex shell to press flood oppose. 
conscious they know, that shall they forward move,
 overwhelm wave will sink they from above,
 fill the void space, and with the rush weight
 force down the inconstant to their former seat. 
when first arrive they feel the strong blast,
 they lie supine, and skim the liquid waste. 
the natural bark outdo all human art,
 when skilful floater play the sailor part. 
two foot they upward raise, and steady keep,
 these be the mast, and rig of the ship. 
a membrane stretch between supply the sail,
 bend from the mast, and swell before the gale. 
two other foot hang paddle on each side,
 and serve for oar to row, and helm to guide. 
it be thus they sail, please with the wanton game,
 the fish, the sailor, and the ship the same. 
but when the swimmer dread some danger near,
 the sportive pleasure yield to strong fear. 
no more they wanton drive before the blast,
 but strike the sail, and bring down all the mast. 
the roll wave their sink shell overflow,
 and dash they down again to sand below. 

you power! when man first fell the stately tree,
 and past to distant shore on waft sea:
 whether some god inspire the wondrous thought,
 or chance find out, or careful study seek;
 if humble guess may probable divine,
 and trace the improvement to the first design;
 some wight of pry search, who wonder stand,
 when soft gale have smooth the dimple flood,
 observe these careless swimmer float move,
 and how each blast the easy sailor drive;
 hence take the hint; hence form the imperfect draught;
 and ship-like fish the future seaman teach. 
then mortal try the shelve hull to slope,
 to raise the mast, and twist the strong rope,
 to fix the yard, let fly the crowd sail;
 sweep through the curl wave, and court auspicious gale. 

prodigious Fishes, of enormous size,
 with shiver fright pale mariner surprise. 
nature strange work, vast whale of differ form
 toss up the trouble flood, and be themselves a storm. 
uncouth the sight, when they in dreadful play
 discharge their nostril, and refund a sea;
 or angry lash the foam with hideous sound,
 and scatter all the watery dust around. 
fearless the fierce destructive monster roll,
 engulf the fish, and drive the fly shoal. 
in deep sea these live isle appear,
 and deep sea can scarce the pressure bear. 
their bulk will more than fill the shelvy straight,
 and fathome depth will yield beneath the weight. 

but some will dare approach the rise land,
 where tide run free, unchoke with cast-up sand;
 haunt the sea-marge, where hang cliff outbrave
 the bootless threaten of the growl wave. 
near highland coast the ravenous shoal appear,
 and inland frith the unwieldy monster bear. 
sea-lion here the sound water beat,
 fierce ram and panther break the tatter net. 
white shark, the fisher curse, force on their way,
 and ominous hyæna seize their prey. 
with they swift tunny drive, a swarthy brood,
 erect their prickly fin, and hunt for food. 
the monstrous balance-fish, of hideous shape,
 round jet land, and double every cape. 
while noisy fin-fish let their fountain fly,
 and spout the circle torrent to the sky. 
saw-fish well arm sweep by the wind shore,
 and all the inlets of the sea explore. 
and they who, though from rapin unreclaimed,
 from easy softness be but false name. 
sea-dog, who various tribe unnumbered boast,
 pirate around, and pillage all the coast. 
one sort, that keep the sea, be rank with whale,
 other deep hide, and press the slimy vale. 
of these the curse sea-hog one species make,
 call from black bristly prick, that shade their back. 
the morgay, monk, the smooth and prickly hound,
 and long-tailed fox strike deep the kill wound. 
their widen jaw a magazine disclose
 of point weapon range in numerous row. 
in shape agree, and in choice ally,
 they pad in troop, and the rich spoil divide. 

kind generous dolphin love the rocky shore,
 where break wave with fruitless anger roar. 
but though to sound shore they curious come,
 yet dolphin count the boundless sea their home. 
nay shall these favorite forsake the main,
 Neptune will grieve his melancholy reign. 
the calm still sea, when leave by they,
 will rueful frown, and all unjoyous seem. 
but when the darling frisk in wanton play,
 the Waters smile, and every wave look gay. 
Neptune his spousal to the dolphin owe,
 and envy honour on the race bestow. 
when the fair nereid, indiscreet coy,
 flee from the embrace, and scorn the proffer joy;
 the pensive god around the water 'seek,
 dive through the gulf, and search each darksome grot;
 in vain; the dolphin see, and can declare
 the secret haunt of the unwilling fair. 
they tell he where she bashful hide her charm;
 he find, and clasp she struggle in his arm.
 the dolphin hence with just ambition claim
 uncommon gift, and more than vulgar fame. 
no grateful meed the generous god deny
 to the glad finder of the royal bride. 

cetaceous kind will sometime leave the sea,
 and praise the distant verdure of the tree:
 pass over the bank, on sandy fallows rest,
 or seize the covert of some absent beast. 

thus the mail tortoise, and the wander eel
 oft to the neighbour beach will silent steal. 
and soft-haired beaver inauspicious roam,
 officious to declare impend doom. 
the fright swain stand listen on the vale,
 their limb all shudder, and their cheek turn pale;
 while luckless harbinger, with odious yell,
 too sure the fix resolve of fate foretell. 

so the grand whale will court the weedy strand,
 stretch out, and bask upon the wavy sand. 
sea-calf by night far from the water stray,
 and sometime dare to try the sunny day;
 glad to the unequal dusty ridge creep,
 and thoughtless on the breezy hillock sleep. 

bless Jove! who power must nature law enforce;
 from who abyss, and rich unemptied source
 divide stream of entity descend
 by who all being be, in who they centre end;
 whether by choice confine thy godhead stay,
 where blissful æther give eternal day,
 and far above fix on the empyreal throne,
 thou guide the world, and look propitious down;
 or art in every part a mundane soul,
 a energy diffuse, that actuate the whole;
 man strive in vain to know. —
 what cement do all-knowing goodness find,
 the jar principle of thing to bind,
 and reconcile their nature to partake
 each other form, and mutual change make? 
light æther well may scorn the creep stream,
 and subtle fire with earth ill-mated seem;
 but middle nature join the vast extreme. 
pure with less pure, and gross with gross meet,
 and thus the commerce of the whole complete. 
of nature chain how regular the link! 
matter by slow gradation downward sink;
 and intermediate change gentle pass
 from lightsome æther to the dull mass. 
or climb by the same step from lumpish clay
 to the bright liquid, and the finespun ray. 
dissolve earth in fluid moisture glide,
 and rock transform flow down in silver tide. 
dilate stream in vapoury column rise,
 and sweat sea will gild the distant sky. 
disperse cloud to noble form aspire
 refine to æther, or ferment to fire. 
thing only differ as condense, or rare. 
impure sky will thicken into air;
 air when too gross will fall drop increase,
 and hang in lucid pearl on weep tree. 
the gluey substance, that no long flow,
 stagnate to slime; and slimy matter grow
 to earthly mould; that harden turn to stone. 
so all be different, and yet all be one. 

the element, to flow themselves agree,
 each often will another offspring feed;
 and hence amphibious kind indifferent rove,
 design as pledge of their mutual love. 
the sea-born tribe will seek the distant Mead,
 and feather fowl on restless water breed. 
the ravenous eagle, and the noisy mew
 fearless through wave the scaly prey pursue. 
her nest the mournful halcyon trust to sea,
 nor build in crannied rock, or shade tree. 
fish too well-poized their finny wing display,
 dart from the main, and try the aerial way. 
sea-hawk, the swallow, and the wanton sleve
 their native stream for airy pastime leave. 
when ravenous foe pursue, they conscious rise,
 and court the kind protection of the sky. 
far on unfeathered wing the sleve be bear
 and soar high the distant water scorn. 
with strange surprise we view the dubious sight,
 of fish in shape, and yet of bird in flight. 
sea-swallows lower fly, regard the main,
 mount in their fear, but quick dive again. 
but cautious hawk, though winge, will near keep,
 and hover over the wavy surface sweep. 
they rince their moisten wing, as close they skim,
 both element enjoy, and fly swim. 

some form society, and friendly dwell,
 obey set law, and know the public weal. 
other, a giddy race, ungoverned strowl,
 the foam surface show the wander shoal,
 over all the trouble sea confuse spread,
 like bleat flock on sunny mountain feed. 
other be range, unlike the huddle drive;
 in equal file the moist battalion move. 
with firm platoon they stem the flow tide,
 and regular their watery march guide. 

some with one partner all their blessing share;
 the strict friendship centre in a pair. 
other, a pensive solitary kind,
 wander alone ill-natured pleasure find;
 full of themselves the sullen bliss commend,
 nor know the soft endearment of a friend. 
some keep one place, and there incurious lie,
 never roam abroad, but where they live they die. 

when winter stormy season be begin,
 and pierce cold mock the decline sun,
 vex by the wind the angry billow rise,
 and will revenge themselves upon the sky. 
dash flood loud echo from the plain shore,
 the tempest rattle, and the surge roar. 
such din the scaly native dread to hear,
 lurk in the sand, or to the cave repair;
 there tremble lie; or sink to depth below,
 where all the Mother-Waters silent flow;
 the distant threat of lower storm despise,
 nor fear the cloud change of the sky. 
the deep wave, and fierce wind that blow,
 can reach those depth, or raise the settle ooze;
 eternal calm protect the peaceful plain,
 while tempest rage, and water beat in vain. 
warm in old ocean lap they rest secure,
 while noisy storm and wintery cold endure;
 till strong ray the thaw frost subdue,
 and nature the decay world renew. 
when smile hour lead in the bloom year,
 and groves and mead in gay dress appear;
 while soothe Pleasaunce sit on all the sea;
 Fishes the kind summons will obey,
 throng to the shore, and bind in joyous play. 

so Citizens, when hostile troop confine,
 with wakeful fear, and tedious hunger pine. 
but when kind fate, or press want oblige
 the invest host to raise the fruitless siege,
 free from alarm the smile neighbour meet,
 all rank and age crowd the noisy street. 
the youth and virgin trip the joyful round,
 and guide their motion by direct sound. 
lover repeat the long-neglected bliss,
 and make amends for the suspend kiss. 

when please heat, and fragrant bloom inspire
 soft leer look, kind thought and gay desire,
 love run through all; the feather wanton play,
 seek out their mate, and bill on every spray. 
the savage kind a soft rage express,
 and gloat eye the secret flame confess. 
but none like Fishes feel the dear disease;
 for Venus double warm her native sea. 
Males unconcerned their please love repeat,
 while anxious she be the ripen birth complete. 
on sandy mound their press belly lay,
 and force the burden of the womb away. 
close join the complicate egg remain;
 to separate that heap be rack pain. 

complain no more, you fair, or partial fate,
 what sorrow on the teem bride await. 
the female-curse be not to earth confine,
 severe throw the fish womb unbind;
 Lucina be alike to all unkind. 

now when the vernal breeze have purge the air,
 to every shore the vigorous male repair;
 by fear compel, or appetite incline,
 to chace the weak, or fly the strong kind:
 nor will the amorous female stay behind. 
no fear or danger can the bliss prevent,
 when urge by love, and on the joy intent,
 they still importunate their suit renew,
 and obstinate kind extort their due. 
their body meet, the close embrace please,
 till mingle slime lie float on the sea:
 the she be gulp greedy down the tepid seed,
 and fruitful from the strange conception breed. 
hence the succeed colony increase,
 and new-spawned tribe replenish all the sea. 

but some no lawless liberty allow;
 who bride confine their private chamber know. 
in close retreat they guard the imprison fair,
 observe their haunt, and watch with jealous care,
 lest some false Leman shall invade their right,
 and wanton glory in the steal delight. 
all thing obey, when soft passion move,
 but fish feel the keen rage of love. 
they all the pang of jealous fury know,
 (that curse fiend will dive to world below,)
 feel selfish pride, distrust, and anxious pain,
 and all the plague that form love pompous train. 

as rival lover, that one flame confess,
 all bloom youth, who splendid fortune bless,
 still haunt the nymph, and tell the move tale;
 each hope his wealth or passion may prevail;
 thus sea-born rival round the she repair,
 and claim the sole enjoyment of the fair. 
they boast no wealth indeed to purchase love,
 no soft delude eloquence to move;
 but they have sharp tooth, and point jaw,
 to own their passion, and maintain their cause. 
long they dispute the prize in hardy fight,
 till joyful conquest give undoubted right. 
the vanquish wretch must hide in pensive shame,
 forgo his pleasure, and renounce his claim. 

some to successive choice of wife be kind,
 abhor the curse of one to one confine. 
thus the lewd Sargo's spend their wanton day,
 and dark-died wrass the lawless freedom praise. 

the beetle no promiscuous joy allow,
 true to his vow, and grateful to his spouse. 
no change he seek, nor leave his dusky fair;
 propitious HYMEN join the constant pair. 

strange the formation of the eely race,
 that know no sex, yet love the close embrace. 
their fold length they round each other twine,
 twist amorous knot, and slimy body join;
 till the close strife bring off a frothy juice,
 the seed that must the wriggle kind produce. 
regardless they their future offspring leave,
 but porous sand the spumy drop receive. 
that genial bed impregnate all the heap,
 and little eelet soon begin to creep. 
half-fish, half-slime they try their doubtful strength,
 and slow trail along their wormy length. 
what great effect from slender cause flow! 
Congers their bulk to these production owe:
 the form, which from the frothy drop begin,
 stretch out immense, and eddy all the main. 

just might female tortoise complain,
 to who enjoyment be the great pain. 
they dread the trial, and foreboding hate
 the grow passion of the cruel mate. 
he amorous pursue, they conscious fly
 joyless caress, and resolve deny. 
since partial heaven have thus restrain the bliss,
 the male they welcome with a close kiss,
 bite angry, and reluctant hate declare. 
the tortoise-courtship be a state of war. 
eager they fight, but with unlike design,
 male to obtain, and female to decline. 
the conflict last, till these by strength overcome
 all sorrow yield to the resistless doom. 
not like a bride, but pensive captive, lead
 to the loathe duty of a hate bed. 
the seal, and tortoise copulate behind
 like earthbred dog, and be not soon disjoin;
 but secret tie the passive couple bind. 

the preke amour our soft pity move,
 who certain natural death be only love. 
once, and but once, the niggard power allow
 the luckless pair congenial bliss to know. 
soon as the male have try the luscious joy,
 the soft repeat pleasure never cloy. 
excessive in desire he will give over,
 till strength and waste spirit be no more. 
when nature drain can grant no fresh supply,
 stretch on the sand all impotent he lie. 
the little shell-fish, late his usual prey,
 insult his doom, and all his wrong repay;
 their foe, so dreadful once, no long fear,
 and well revenge the live carcase tear. 
he passive lie, nor feel the power to move,
 but die grieve he too unsated love. 
nor long, when once enjoy, the female live,
 or future dolour of the birth survive. 
their egg lie all compact, and strait's the way,
 which must the cluster heap to life convey. 
now when ripe nature will the birth constrain,
 the teem bride feel her increase pain;
 nor long can the torture pressure bear,
 when fall egg the unequal passage tear. 
fate stint their life; that term they can pass,
 one roll year conclude the shorten space. 
ever the swift chariot of the gold-haired sun
 have tell the day, and all his circuit run,
 fond suicide the dear destruction prove
 of luckless marriage, and disastrous love. 

the Lamprey, glow with uncommon fire,
 the earthbred serpent purfle curl admire. 
he no less kind make amorous return,
 with equal love the grateful serpent burn. 
fix on the joy he bound shoot along,
 erect his azure crest, and dart his forky tongue. 
now his red eye-ball glow with double fire;
 proud he mount upon his fold spire,
 display his glossy coat, and speckle side,
 and meet in all his charm the watery bride. 
but lest he cautless might his consort harm,
 the gentle lover will himself disarm,
 spit out the venom mass, and careful hide
 in crannied rock, far from the wash tide;
 there leave the fury of his noxious tooth,
 and putrid bag, the poisonous fund of death. 
his mate he call with soft hiss sound;
 she joyful hear, and from the ocean bound. 
swift as the beard arrow have she fly,
 to own her love, and meet the serpent joy. 
at her approach, no more the lover bear
 odious delay, nor sound water fear. 
onward he move on shine volume roll,
 the foam all burn seem with wavy gold. 
at length with equal have the lover meet,
 and strange enjoyment slake their mutual heat. 
she with wide-gaping mouth the spouse invite,
 suck in his head, and feel unknown delight. 
when full fruition have assuage desire,
 well-pleased the bride will to she home retire. 
tire with the strife the serpent hie to land,
 and leave his print on all the furrow sand;
 with anxious fear seek the close private Cleft,
 where he in trust the important secret leave. 
from the stain rock he suck the poisonous heap,
 feel his return strength, and hiss leap;
 with brandish tongue the distant foe defy,
 and dart new lightning from his blood-shot eye. 
but if some Swain mean while observe spy
 where odious spume, and venom spittle lie,
 and while the serpent woo, from neighbour sea
 the cleanse water to the rock convey;
 the serpent come, and find his treasure go,
 look sorrow round, and blame the faithless stone;
 disarm no more his wonted pleasure take,
 curl in the grass, or hiss in the brake. 
he creep with shame a tawdry speckle worm,
 and pride no long in his beauteous form. 
on the same rock with head recline he lie,
 and, where he lose his arm, despair die. 

dolphin like man perform the nuptial debt,
 part of like form the vigorous joy repeat;
 hide, and contract unseen, till eager love,
 and conscious hope the powerful fancy move. 

thus the moist tribe the call of love obey,
 produce their like, and people all the sea. 
each know the time, by proper instinct draw,
 when nature bid eject the enliven spawn. 
some breed, when vernal day the sky renew,
 and wave each other but in sport pursue. 
when soft Favonius play in wanton gale,
 and please warmth no future storm exhale. 
other, when summer dart directer beam,
 and fill the taint air with sultry steam. 
some from their womb the ripen burden force,
 when weary titan take a short course,
 and from high mountain top the autumnal breeze
 let fall the waft seed on barren sea. 
some, when inclement winter rude blow,
 to chill cold their tender young expose. 

yearly their egg the pregnant female lay,
 one annual birth restore the vast decay. 
but twice sea-wolf the come sorrow mourn;
 again the joy, again the pang return. 
three yearly spawn the teem Mullet bless,
 renew the race, and give the large increase. 
the curl scorpion in each season know,
 the glad conception, and the wring throw. 
but carp all kind in numerous birth exceed,
 they still unwearied with their labour breed. 
with five successive spawn the carp abound
 ever the swift sun have trace his annual round. 

but no research the puzzle secret find,
 how whiting gender, and preserve their kind. 
they love, and propagate by way unknown,
 and baffle man their vain enquiry own. 

oviparous fish, who vernal labour ease,
 and give the fullgrown egg their ripe release,
 some in their wonted dwelling patient stay,
 prepare their bed, and wait the reckon day. 

other will not lucina call obey,
 till with long march they reach the euxine sea. 
there pleasant gulf uncommon sweetness boast,
 and salt o'er-pow'rd in fresh stream be lose. 
a thousand river-god on every side
 their lean urn all to the euxine guide. 
the hollow Bason be ingirt around
 with fruitful bank, and fence with rise ground. 
here all the pleasure of the sea they find,
 rich pasture, sandy mound, and gentle wind. 
Capes jet from the shore on either side
 elbow the flood, and part the swell tide. 
here private way, and dubious cavern please,
 and bend foreland shade the calm sea. 
return tide beflime the wind cave,
 and easy dimple smile in break wave. 
no ravenous kind, and fierce unwelcome guest
 thirst for blood, the watery road infest. 
no Whaly monster here destructive roll,
 no robber come that prey on weak shoal. 
no lobster on the little captive feast;
 nor crawl Preke those harmless shore molest. 
dolphin be find, but innocent tame
 these dolphin play, and murderous guilt disclaim. 
a species weak than the Whaly breed,
 peaceful they rove, and without slaughter feed. 
hence throng fish admire the kind retreat;
 from every distant sea the stranger meet. 
lead by one thought they feel the same desire,
 come at set time, and all at once retire. 
when instinct prompt, the she be with one design
 begin the march, and all their force join,
 pass the Propontis, and the thracian straight,
 and now the come birth impatient wait. 

so prudent crane, from egypt slimy bank,
 concert their flight, and form their airy rank;
 bleak Atlas leave, and æthiopia's snow,
 where puny pigmy bend their hostile bow. 
loud clangour sound the march; the flock on high
 spread their long wing, and brush the uncoloured sky. 
well-ranged they file along the trackless plain,
 and busy plume the whistle welkin fan. 

such noisy tumult stir the mantling sea,
 when breed fish joy at the vernal breeze;
 with fisk tail the circle eddy beat,
 have to the birth, and annual toil repeat. 
unwearied they pursue the toilsome race,
 till the calm euxine show his smile face. 
here their prolific spawn they teem lie,
 while friendly wind with sportive water play. 
sink wave supine on the smooth surface sleep,
 and warmth impregnate all the jellied heap. 
but when autumnal wind grow hoarse with cold,
 and the rouse billow be confuse roll;
 when gale, that whisper erst, begin to chide,
 when mountain rise, and yawn comb subside,
 so calm before, the euxine suffer most
 from wintery storm, and be incessant tost. 
insult wind it be shallow depth command,
 and boil flood turn up the work sand. 
dash on themselves the bandy surge roar,
 and tell the unpitied tale to every shore. 
the vapoury mountain blacken from afar,
 recruit the tempest, and maintain the war. 
Fishes alarm the change season mourn,
 and with their little fry in throng return. 
backward again their hasty course they steer,
 and the free open main to inland sea prefer. 

soft Fishes, who their pliant body wreath,
 in who no bone their branch prickle sheath;
 the bloodless crusty race, who crawl play,
 though no swell vein the purple life convey;
 the various finny tribe, that swift glide,
 array in silver scale, and spot pride;
 and slow testaceous kind, that constant dwell
 fix in the concave of the pearly shell,
 all breed alike, distil a mucous juice
 who bladd'ry heap the future young produce. 

eagle, sea-dog, and all the gristly race
 bring forth their like, no shapeless clot mass;
 retain the seed within till perfect grow,
 and nature have her just proportion show. 
from the full womb amphibious paddler creep,
 and little sea-calf bustle on the deep. 
so dolphin teem, who subject fish revere,
 and show the smile sea their infant-heir. 

all other kind, who parent-sea confine,
 dolphin excel; that race be all divine. 
dolphin be man, (tradition hand the tale)
 laborious swain breed on the Tuscan vale:
 transform by Bacchus, and by Neptune love,
 they all the pleasure of the deep improve. 
when new-made fish the God command obey,
 plunge in the wave, and untried fin display,
 no further change relent Bacchus wrought,
 nor have the dolphin all the man forget;
 the conscious soul retain her former thought. 
when painful throw, (for twin the dolphin bear)
 and finish time bring forth the princely pair,
 they round their parent frisk, sport by her side;
 oft in her mouth the little wanton hide. 
she glad receive, with watchful eye attend,
 direct their motion, and from harm defend;
 exult leap, and feel the mother joy,
 when with close kiss she hug the dandle boy. 
then suckle give to each the swell breast,
 by partial heaven with gift uncommon bless. 
the dolphin pap a luscious milk produce,
 hourly distend with secret juice. 
but when her young be grow to just encrease,
 and strong fin can wrestle with the sea,
 she to more useful art direct the way,
 and show to vault the wave, and chace the prey. 

what please wonder charm the sailor sight,
 when calm the dolphin to their sport invite? 
as jovial swain in tuneful measure tread,
 and leave their round pressure on the Mead;
 so they in circle dance, with wanton ease
 pursue each other round the furrow sea,
 with rapid force the curl stream divide,
 add to the wave, and drive the slow-paced tide. 
the parent dolphin, with suspicious care,
 of casual harm, and guilty flood beware,
 move cautious on behind, and guard the rear. 

so when blithe lamb their vernal revel keep,
 bind from the turf, and over the hillock leap;
 now harmless try to butt, then race away,
 now weary feed, and thus consume the day,
 mean while the thoughtful shepherd watch lie,
 lest sudden onset shall his flock surprise. 

as grave preceptor, who instructive care
 by wisdom dictate form the grow heir,
 when the glad pupil throng to sport incline,
 suspend the noble pleasure of the mind,
 with jealous eye the while their step observe,
 leave playful hour from steady virtue swerve;
 so parent dolphin on the care intent
 watch their gay young, and threaten ill prevent. 

sea-calf their offspring, like the dolphin, feast,
 and milky store distend the rise breast. 
when conseious they the approach time perceive,
 they fly the deep, and watery pasture leave. 
on the dry ground, far from the swell tide,
 bring forth their young, and on the shore abide,
 till twice six time they see the eastern gleam
 brighten the hill, and tremble on the stream. 
the thirteenth morn, soon as the early dawn
 hang out it be crimson fold, or spread it be lawn,
 no more the field and leafy covert please,
 each hug her own, and hast to roll sea,
 show he his better home, though sapless earth
 relieve the womb, and catch the fall birth. 

so the sad bride, who the long-reckoned day,
 and childbed pain confine to tedious stay,
 far from the love abode all pensive lie;
 enfeeble birth the wonted strength deny. 
but when just time have set the unjointed bone,
 new-strung the nerve, and strain their slacken tone,
 she warm enwrap the babe, nor brook delay,
 hurry along, and soon devour the way. 
at length the dame arrive; with weep joy
 clasp the dear child, and shake the please toy,
 talk idle fond, bid he admire his home,
 and gay amusement of each furnish room. 
the listen infant turn his little eye,
 and void of reason thought by smile look reply. 

good god! how tender be the parent love! 
their ravish heart what earn transport move! 
all kind that move in ocean, earth, or air
 alike the charm of piety revere. 
fond the savage lick her shapeless young,
 and smooth his ringlet with her scurfy tongue. 
the careful bird bring home the hourly feast,
 while unfledged chirper flicker in the nest. 
even ravenous fish defend their helpless fry,
 forewarn their danger, and their want supply. 

not man alone their lovely offspring prize
 sweet as their live, and dear than their eye;
 unreason soul the same propension move,
 man can claim no prerogative from love. 
one instinct run through all. —

hunter from far the roar challenge dread,
 when monarch-lion with majestic tread,
 their princely train through all the Forrest lead. 
the royal dam look round with proud disdain,
 lash her side, and curl her flow mane;
 no danger fear, but will to engage
 with chafe jaw she churn the frothy rage,
 redouble fire flash from her roll eye,
 clod scatter fly, and dusty column rise. 
roar she fright the herd, and shake the plain,
 mock the sling stone, and knap the spear in twain;
 still guard her young, the hunter motion thwart,
 and wrench from her side the reek dart. 
but when death hover over her swim eye,
 and clot on the ground life waste treasure lie,
 when doubtful stagger own the kill wound;
 regardless of her self she look around,
 over the dear cub her sink head recline,
 in death defend, nor at her fate repine. 
but dread to see the wretch a captive make,
 to hear he roar, and call in vain for aid,
 when close confine he strive with bootless rage,
 unsheath his claw, and beat the sound cage. 

with her blind whelp the snarl mother lie,
 uneasy grin, and fret at every noise;
 familiar once, but now with growl threat
 the fearful shepherd she unkind treat;
 nor lick the bounteous hand, (even love provoke)
 nor fisk the tail, or fawn at gentle stroke. 

when the lone cow repeat her daily moan,
 a soft compassion move the sturdy clown. 
from low vale the undulate air
 to every mountain tell the dam despair. 
oft pensive she review the once-loved place,
 where on the bank she press the yield grass,
 or the calm shelter of the cool wood,
 where with her calf she chew the grateful cud;
 then restless walk, and round the hedge again,
 look over the gate, and eye the wind lane. 

oft have the listen stream the osprey hear,
 when to the whisper reed the injure bird
 of egg unhatched, or callow young bereave,
 in ruthful cry have tell how much she grieve. 
the mother nightingale, when childless make,
 with mournful music fill the lonely glade. 
what pungent sorrow must the parent feel,
 when idle swain the downy songster steal? 
they thoughtless from the nest the brood convey;
 she in sad murmur pine the tedious day,
 at night the melancholy strain renew;
 harmonious plaint ungrateful man accuse. 
how passionate the swallow tell her wrong,
 when some fall serpent have devour her young,
 or churl pull down her nest? she sorrow fly,
 chatter aloud, and long repeat her fruitless cry. 

full of the tender thought, with anxious care
 the dolphin watch, and guard their infant pair,
 while they in nimble race the tail expand,
 insult the wave, and subject sea command. 
each parent fish her young in danger hide,
 nurture the fry, and in her likeness pride. 

but the sea-dog uncommon toil endure,
 while she her young from dread harm secure. 
within her womb the dam receive again
 the press burden, and renew her pain. 
to the know place, when strike with sudden fear,
 the whelp return, and will ungrateful tear
 those tender part; safe in the close retreat
 escape their danger, and their fear forget;
 again, when all be secure, the womb release,
 force out their way, and venture on the sea. 

the same fond care commend the thorny skate,
 when ravenous shoal the prey impatient wait. 
she distant water eye with kind distrust,
 know when all be safe, and when her fear be just. 
nor will her womb again her offspring hide;
 two spacious cavity, on either side
 below her gills, the tremble fry receive,
 when guilty sea the careful parent grieve. 
while the fierce foe unguarded shoal surprise,
 in safe recess the prickly darling lie,
 no danger fear, though roll water swell,
 and angry have of come monster tell. 

other, when ought disturb the ravage sea,
 and tremble young their conscious fear express,
 extend their jaw, and show the safe way;
 the fright straggler soon the call obey,
 within the concave roof uninjured rest,
 safe as the chirper in his mossy nest. 
thus the blew-shark secure from chase foe
 within their widen mouth their young enclose. 
beneath the circle arch they fearless hide,
 though bulky form drive on the rise tide. 
of all oviparous kind that throng the sea,
 who numerous shoal from spermy heap increase,
 the fond blew-shark in tender care surpass:
 with what concern they wait the teem mass! 
what anxious fear confess their secret love,
 lest the birth fail shall abortive prove! 
while most their egg to chance regardless leave,
 they watch their spawn, the slow formation grieve,
 nature faint progress in the work accuse,
 till ripen hour the vigorous life infuse. 
they near their foundling, like some careful nurse,
 observe their motion, and restrain their course,
 eye every wave, and show the doubtful way,
 teach where to hunt, and where to find the prey. 
when big with secret guilt the water heave,
 they in their mouth their shelter young receive. 
but when the wave at their own leisure roll,
 and no fierce robber drive the scatter shoal,
 again the parent point jaw compress
 by force expel they from their please rest. 

but void of all remorse the tunny feed
 on their own spawn, and gulp the enliven seed;
 with strange repast the cruel parent bless
 devour their egg, and praise the monstrous feast. 

some kind without the nuptial labour breed,
 nor own the common origine of seed. 
oyster self-bred in rocky cranny grow,
 nor to the painful birth their be owe. 
some spring spontaneous from the genial slime;
 no curious frame, or work of slow time
 nature on they bestow; but form in have
 in ready clay the mould be easy cast. 
in these no difference of sex appear,
 no male shed down the spawn, nor female bear. 

the spirling thus their idle live begin,
 no ancient lineage boast, or generous kin. 
when press by mighty Jove the swell cloud
 from their moist fleece pour the noisy flood,
 collect shower their fall force join,
 beat on the deep, and bubble up the brine. 
the wave dilute with the tasteless rain
 vex raise their foam, and stir the chafe main. 
soon new-creat shoal of spirling play,
 shine on the wave, and brighten all the sea. 
by unknown love, and way uncommon breed
 all over the sea the throng legion spread. 

as constant tide observe their state time,
 return current raise the trouble slime;
 that mix be in the roll water lose,
 waft afar, and on the billow toss,
 till purge wind the winnow ocean sweep,
 force on the draught, and form the worthless heap. 
to every shore the flood their load convey,
 and leave behind the refuse of the sea. 
on taint sand the mingle ordure lie,
 and wait the influence of warm sky. 
the loosen part, vex with the active heat,
 clog the dull air, and reeky moisture sweat;
 unwholesome scent breath from the vapoury store,
 and the gross steam creep slow round the shore. 
then from the teem filth, and putrid heap,
 like summer grub, the little slime-fish creep. 
devour by all the passive curse they own,
 oppress by every kind, but injure none. 
harmless they live, nor murderous hunger know,
 but to themselves their mutual pleasure owe;
 each other lick, and the close kiss repeat;
 thus love thrive, and praise the luscious treat. 
when they in throng a safe retirement seek,
 where point rock the rise surge break,
 or where calm water in their Bason sleep,
 while chalky cliff overlook the shade deep,
 the sea all gild over the shoal betray,
 and shine track inform their wander way. 

as when soft snow, bring down by western gale,
 silent descend and spread on all the vale;
 add to the plain, and on the mountain shine,
 while in change field the starve cattle pine;
 nature bear all one face, look cold bright,
 and mourn her lose variety in white,
 unlike themselves the object glare around,
 and with false ray the dazzle sight confound:
 so, where the shoal appear, the change stream
 lose their sky-blew, and shine with silver gleam. 

the second book of oppian halieutick.

thus have i sing, how scaly nation rove,
 what food they seek, what pasture they approve;
 how all the busy wanton of the sea
 soft love repeat, and form the new increase. 

but whence can man the wondrous secret know? 
to some kind power he must the bless owe,
 who to his view the hide depth expose,
 uncover all the abyss, and the vast scene disclose. 
for what great work have man unaided wrought? 
heaven give the mean, and heaven inspire the thought. 
do not assist influence from above
 with unseen force the passive agent move,
 the body can no more it be part command,
 nor stir the root foot, nor stretch the stiffen hand. 
without superior aid, the sleep eye
 will darken ever close, nor blithsome sky
 again behold; but when the guardian bid,
 joyous the orb unfold their open lid. 
the god do all; from heaven our action guide
 distant yet near, and over our will preside. 
we must the grand necessity obey,
 unwilling shall pursue the destine way. 
better we unreluctant do submit:
 the unruly colt may champ the frothy bit,
 restiff uprear the hoof, and prance around,
 race angry over the unequal ridgy ground:
 such headstrong fury but augment his pain,
 at length he must obey the turn rein. 
when heaven command, it be folly to deny;
 the god will govern, and the wise comply,
 nor strive to deviate from the allot course,
 lest manage after with ungentle force
 they hear the sound lash, and bleed feel
 the unjoyous pressure of the gall steel. 

to those indulgent power mankind below
 all gainful art, and useful science owe. 
the god, distinguish hence by awful name,
 declare their office, and assert their claim. 
and thus derive each sacred title show
 what gift on man each bounteous god bestow. 
Ceres describe the farmer annual toil,
 what artful rule improve the barren soil. 
she teach to yoke the unwilling ox, to sow
 the harrow ridge, to hold the bend plough;
 to guide the brighten share with steady hand,
 force up the turf, and break the fallow land. 
hence rise field their yellow harvest bear,
 and wavy autumn crown the ripen year. 
to shape the beam, the joyces firm join,
 stretch the wide roof, and the slope arch incline,
 to carve the pillar, and the dome to raise
 Pallas first teach, and Pallas claim the praise. 
she too the gainful secret do reveal,
 to draw the woof, and twirl the murmur wheel. 
man curious try, by her assistance lead,
 to fix the loom, and weave the thwart thread. 
the point spear, the breastplate's polish brass,
 the glitter sword, and helmet plume grace,
 with all the dreadful enginry of war,
 be Mars he choice, and fierce bellona care. 
Apollo, and the sacred nine inspire
 strain worthy they, and fan the poet fire. 
but subtle Hermes smooth the oily tongue
 to move the passion of the ravish throng. 
he teach athletic slight, and dusty toil,
 to ward the blow, and give the inglorious foil. 
Vulcan first teach to mould the stubborn mass,
 to form the sparkle steel, and flow brass. 

mankind with all their search can never know
 what native glide in liquid world below. 
those mirksome deep, and region far conceal
 that bless immortal power to man reveal,
 who cleave the earth, and wind furrow make,
 where river glide beneath the reedy shade;
 who distant bound to roll wave assign,
 and scatter fluid in one void confine,
 who lofty raise the rocky barrier round,
 and with the sandy brim encircle Waters crown. 
whether that god the name of Neptune bear,
 or Nereus better please, or Phorcys hear. 
whatever name the deity approve,
 may all agree, immortal power above,
 demon of earth, those that aerial fly,
 and drench their pinion in the liquid sky,
 and the green-god, that midst the water spread
 their sinewy arm, and shake their drop head,
 may all propitious guard the royal pair,
 thou, mighty prince, and the world grow heir. 
may they protect the nation, nor refuse
 to hear the song, and aid the aspire muse. 

no curb law restrain the greedy shoal,
 no sense of wrong the ungoverned wish control. 
over all the sea their food they ravenous seek,
 and strong kind feast on the injure weak. 
selfish alike each mind his private good,
 all in their turn pursue, and be pursue. 
some on mere force depend; they nimble sweep
 through part flood, and eddy all the deep. 
their wide jaw a magazine disclose
 of point tooth, that shine in double row. 
while some on store of venom juice confide,
 and in close cell the noxious treasure hide. 
other with sharpen spike be arm around,
 erect the spear, and strike the kill wound. 
weak puny form unequal war decline,
 by wily fraud they act, and close design. 
such prudence oft over thoughtless strength prevail;
 force may, but well lay cunning seldom fail. 

the power of latent charm the cramp-fish know,
 though soft their body, and their motion slow. 
unseen, foreboding chance of future prey,
 the crafty sluggard take their silent way. 
stretch from each side they point their magic wand,
 who icy touch the strong fin command;
 quick through the whole it shoot the rush pain,
 freeze the blood, and thrill in every vein;
 strike all that dare approach with strange surprise,
 stiffen the fin, and dim the maze eye. 
conscious of secret power, a gift divine,
 on sand, as dead, the cramp-fish lie supine,
 thus careless stretch a wide destruction make,
 and wander shoal without her labour take. 
fix sudden they the numb torpor feel;
 the part contract, the fluid all congeal. 
no more the busy messenger of sense
 motion around, and conscious life dispense;
 nor flow stream the circle heat diffuse,
 but the chill part forget their former use. 
while urge by please hope, to fresh repast
 the wily cramp-fish move with awkward have. 
oft, as the nimble swimmer heedless pride
 in active course, and curl stream divide,
 they lifeless stretch by sudden pain confine,
 and secret chain the fetter captive bind. 
no more they wanton dive, or giddy roam,
 vault on the sea, and vex the rise foam;
 dull rest they now, and fatal slumber love,
 nor backward can retreat, nor forward move. 

as when in dream imagine form appear,
 when dread sound we distant seem to hear,
 or shady ghost with silent horror rise,
 and spectre glare before the sleep eye,
 fearful of come ill we sweat lie,
 and will will from fancy danger fly:
 root we stand, the heart incessant beat,
 and hasty stroke the quick pulse repeat. 
labour to move we seem to strive in vain,
 while ponderous clog the struggle foot retain. 

with such a bind force the cramp-fish stay
 the swift fish, and strike with dizzy maze. 
one touch of she dam up the vital flood,
 contract the nerve, and clot the stagnate blood. 

hide in the slime the toad of form uncouth
 (that fish be all one vast extend mouth)
 her tender body wrap, on prey intent,
 and silent there concert the great event. 
what soft skin, and slow pace deny,
 wise foresight and successful fraud supply. 
within her jaw a fleshy fibre lie,
 who whiteness, grateful scent, and worm-like size
 attract the shoal, and charm their longing eye. 
she to allure oft shake the tempt bait;
 they eager press, and hurry on their fate. 
but as they near approach, with subtle art
 the wily toad contract the invite part;
 till giddy number thus decoy she draw
 within the circle of her widen jaw. 

the Fowler thus the feather race deceive,
 and strow beneath his snare the rifle sheaf. 
the busy flock peck up the scatter seed,
 nor midst their joy the fatal engine heed;
 till with loud clap the tilt cover fall,
 and the close pit the flutter prey enthrall. 

sea-toad with fox may for cunning vie,
 these too (as rustic tell) will feign to die. 
stretch at full length the mimic carcass lie,
 the tooth be set, and fix the close eye;
 the hypocrite low draw his silent breath,
 express well the leaden sleep of death. 
perch on her bough the wanton chirper mock
 the quiet harmless posture of the fox. 
to distant flock she sing the please tale;
 all glad descend, and hover over the vale,
 oft whet the bill, oft turn the busy head,
 and with vain pride insult the seem dead. 
he watch, as they move, with guilty eye,
 till nimble jaw the venturous bird surprise. 
his ravenous tooth the little songster tear;
 ah luckless wretch! thy death be too sincere. 
wide gape her breast, he suck the reek wound,
 while downy flake lie scatter on the ground. 

part apt form preserve the cuttle-fish
 from stormy rage, and hunger pine wish;
 long fibre numerous branch around his head,
 like twist hair, or line of finespun thread. 
with these the subtle Angler patient wait,
 the prey entangle, and her hunger fate. 
with these, when tempest rage, they twine fold
 the jet cliff, nor quit the safe hold. 
no ship in harbour moor so careless ride,
 less fear the drive storm, and beat tide. 

the little prawn, though arm with point spear,
 yet weak and slow, unequal combat fear. 
but by the sea-wolf ravenous force oppress,
 he with the mean of sweet revenge be bless. 
within his jaw enclose he furious bound,
 strike at the roof, and leave the kill wound. 
the careless wolf of tasteful prey possess
 regard no pain, but glutton on the feast. 
till soon through all the deadly gangrene spread,
 and putrid bane the fret ulcer feed. 
from rankle sore the gnaw pain increase;
 and now the wretch his destine end foresee,
 despair pine, and rack torture feel:
 no friendly hand the grow ulcer heal. 
oft have the wolf the beard squadron seek,
 and oft the luscious food too dear buy. 
no pity to the shelly race be show,
 it be therefore just their fate shall prove his own. 
they wind with pain, what they with pleasure fill,
 subdue their conqueror, and die kill. 

enwrap in soft slime the sea-cow dwell,
 who every sea-bred kind in breadth excel. 
to twice six cubit stretch their flat side
 press down the labour wave, and smooth the tide. 
unarmed their body, though with monstrous size
 and bulky form they strike the wonder eye. 
bear on the struggle flood that broad-backed ray
 unwieldy loll, and take up all the way. 
few be their tooth, unfit for martial toil,
 thin set, nor make to seize the doubtful spoil. 
but scheme well-laid they resolute pursue,
 and by superior fraud even man subdue. 
man be their choice food, and when possess
 of a fat corpse, they scorn the mean feast. 
they mark, when dare mortal plunge below,
 where pearl be hide, and coral branch grow;
 then hover over the place, and float at ease,
 stretch on the wave, and shade the cover sea. 
with patient hope unmoved their station keep,
 till from the secret chamber of the deep
 load with spoil the diver mount again,
 nor can the surface reach with all his pain. 
by wonted art he strive himself to raise,
 but over his head the unwelcome pressure stay. 
poise on the flood the ceiling hang above,
 no human force the vault roof can move. 
keep back from looked-for day the mortal grieve,
 in vain the press lid his shoulder heave;
 his weak trust the stubborn weight withstand,
 and backward sink he down to low sand. 
if he swim forward, and the surface leave,
 the subtle fish the vain attempt perceive;
 still hang aloof, and over his pensive head
 the shade unwished their gloomy covert spread. 
till weary arm their toilsome work refuse,
 but faint strike, and catch the yield ooze. 

as when the fall lid with quick surprise
 close in the trap confine the unwary mouse,
 immure they search the concave prison round,
 hurry despair, and impatient bind;
 as well they may the fruitless labour cease,
 no friendly gap afford a kind release;
 till wanton boy the tremble wretch relieve,
 free from confinement, but of life bereave. 

such be the toil, when venturous diverse meet
 the float roof, and push the press weight. 
stretch on the watery plain unmoved it lie,
 and open air, and lightsome day deny:
 till swallow wave a easy passage find,
 and in it be late breath life mingle with the wind. 
thus proud of her success the spread ray
 by stratagem obtain the noble prey. 

as in some mossy cave the fish Swain
 at leisure sit, and view the wavy main,
 oft he behold how crab their watch keep,
 and wait the motion of the shelly heap. 
oyster around on cliffy peak be hang,
 to rocky bed, and crannied jet cling. 
immure they lie close in the pearly shell,
 but can long their juicy store conceal;
 moisture they seek, and then no long hide
 loosen they gape, and heave the upper lid. 
the crab observe, and to the sandy mound,
 where polish stone the whirl eddy round,
 he busy creep along, with fork claw
 from the loose heap the flinty pebble draw. 
thus burden, silent to the oyster steal,
 and wedge fast the stone between the shell. 
divide thus no more the part be close,
 but all the luscious sweet must lie expose. 
by prosperous fraud he gain the envy meal,
 and drag the pant captive from his cell. 

the prickly star creep on with like deceit,
 to force the oyster from his close retreat. 
when gape lid their widen void display,
 the watchful star thrust in a point ray,
 of all its treasure spoil the rifle case;
 and empty shell the sandy hillock grace. 

in cloud depth below the Nacre hide,
 and through the silent path obscure glide;
 a stupid wretch, and void of thoughtful care,
 he form no bait, nor lay the tempt snare. 
but the dull sluggard boast a kind friend,
 who busy eye the come prey attend. 
one room contain they; and the partner dwell
 beneath the convex of one slope shell. 
deep in the watery vast the comrade rove,
 and mutual interest bind their constant love. 
that wise friend the lucky juncture tell,
 when in the circuit of his gape shell
 fish wander enter; then the beard guide
 warn the dull mate, and prick his tender side. 
he know the hint, nor at the treatment grieve,
 but hug the advantage, and the pain forgive. 
his close shell the Nacre sudden join. 
and betwixt the press side his prey confine. 
thus feed by mutual aid, the friendly pair
 divide their gain, and all the plunder share. 

man be not all with equal knowledge bless;
 man differ more from man, than man from beast. 
the prudent mind by studious labour teach
 wise scheme pursue, and fine the rude draught. 
while blockish mortal doze their hour away,
 or give to brutal joy the cheat day. 
like they the glide shoal, that gladsome rove
 over liquid field, and sea-green pasture love,
 be not with equal share of wit endow;
 heaven have unlike the partial gift bestow. 
some on the care of future life intent
 consult their welfare, and their ill prevent;
 while worthless number take their giddy way,
 cumber the sea, and only serve for prey. 

hear now the instructive song, you thoughtless wight,
 wed to sense, and fix on mean delight. 
the sea dull sleeper bid, that short-lived fish,
 in time to curb your yet unbounded wish. 
think on his conduct, and remark his fate,
 and in the insatiate fish the glutton hate. 
in sensual joy he squander life away,
 revel the night, and slumber out the day. 
fix backward on his head the roll eye
 look up, and may behold the distant sky;
 but the curse sluggard fly the cheerful ray,
 and in long slumber skreen the hate day. 
midst these his mouth it be spacious chasm display,
 and the lewd call of hunger wish obey. 
all the bright gladsome hour he sullen sleep,
 batten on sand, or hide in slimy heap;
 hence call the ocean-owl, like owl afraid
 of brighten sky, and fond of gloomy shade. 
when the brown dusk on slumber water brood,
 and midnight breeze rock the murmur flood,
 when darken billow sound with deep roar,
 rouse from repose he quit the weedy shore:
 hunger loud call bid wake from slothful ease,
 and search the unemptied store of plenteous sea. 
but the lewd wretch of ready meal possess
 unsated glut, when full begin the feast,
 feed on, in midst of plenty most accurse,
 till the cram paunch overfilled with pressure burst. 
overcharged with food the pamper glutton lie,
 motion and strength the unwieldy load deny;
 till death last pain to fatal treat succeed,
 and hover shade the darken eye overspread. 
if with kind hand you give the glutton meat,
 he ravenous feed, and will unwearied eat,
 till his swell maw with useless lumber stow
 burst at length discharge the nauseous load. 

like he luxurious man their vigour waste,
 the throat to tickle, and indulge the taste. 
but future pain the lawless joy beget,
 a train of ill succeed the transient sweet. 
while ill-timed feast and midnight revel please,
 continue meal improve the hide disease,
 to poyson turn the undigested food,
 and treasure up their ill in taint blood. 
from crude meat unactive vapour rise,
 the spirit clog, and cloud the languid eye. 
ridge of fat the manly form disgrace,
 and bloat vein enlarge the purple face. 
reason weak light from noisome fume retire,
 and too much fuel choke the smother fire. 
man too unwise let go the slacken rein,
 but they who think will lewd desire restrain,
 check the emotion, and the wish control,
 and shun the fate of the luxurious owl. 

foresight and art the prickly urchin boast,
 to keep the sea, and shun the rocky coast. 
when teem cloud the infant tempest form,
 and whisper wind concert the future storm,
 they careful fear, lest force to distant land
 they dash on rock, or bulge on rise sand. 
too light themselves their motion to control
 when the tenth billow over their fellow roll,
 they ballast seek, with busy eye explore
 the various pebble of the wind shore,
 choose out the stone, and with that steady weight
 fix on their back, the rage water meet. 
thus poise they careless keep their destine way,
 nor the rude shock of thwart flood obey. 

all fisher know the change prekes deceit
 how cling to rock, when come danger threat,
 new form they take, and wear a borrow dress,
 mock the true stone, and colour well express. 
now over their liken part the limner spread
 a mossy green, or streak with dusky red;
 on their soft skin now whitish marl imprint,
 or raise the cloud azure of the flint:
 as the rock look, they take a different stain,
 dapple with grey, or branch the livid vein. 
nor scaly foe, nor fisher curious eye
 perceive the cheat, or find the false disguise. 
thus they conceal the dread danger shun,
 by borrow shape obscure, and lose in seem stone. 
but when with near approach the weak prey
 invite, her wane colour all decay;
 no vizard then, or mimic form they seek;
 vigorous they quit the rock, and own the real preke. 

when wintery sky over the black ocean frown,
 and cloud hang low with ripen storm overgrow,
 close in the shelter of some vault cave
 the soft-skined prekes their porous body save. 
but force by want, while rough sea they dread,
 on their own foot necessitous be feed. 
but when return spring serene the sky,
 nature the grow part anew supply. 
again on breezy sand the roamer creep,
 twine to the rock, or paddle in the deep. 
doubtless the god, who will command the sea,
 who liquid world, and watery native please,
 have teach the fish by tedious want oppress
 life to preserve, and be himself the feast. 

thus, when the cloud their snowy burden drop,
 and rise heap improve the mountain top,
 when earth scarce feel the sun obliquer beam,
 and creep ice confine the lessen stream,
 the rough-clad bear decline the rigurous day,
 hide in his den, nor hunt abroad for prey:
 sullen he lay he down, with busy toil
 lick his large foot, and suck the fatten oil. 
thus feed with poor repast the savage life,
 till with fresh sap the wither plant revive,
 till lengthen day the band of winter loose,
 and warmth untwist the thread of soften snow. 
then he to wood return, with tender foot
 roam through the brake, and seek the wonted treat;
 slay beast devour, or climb the rift tree,
 and steal the labour of the painful bee. 

in war alternate, with embitter rage,
 the lobster, Lamprey, and the preke engage. 
mutual their fate, reciprocal the wound;
 by turn they kill, and scatter death around. 
each to the other be a grateful feast,
 successive they treat the unwelcome guest. 
antipathy entail; the future breed
 must to hereditary hate succeed. 

while sportive breeze fan the gentle wave,
 from the moist cranny, or the wind cave
 roam abroad for prey, the Lamprey see
 where sandy walk the lazy creeper please. 
rapt with glad hope she feed her wistful eye,
 and all her strength the finless glider try. 
conscious the preke the curl eddy fear,
 now from the rise beach he listen hear
 the roll flood, now shudder look around,
 when trouble wave with near murmur sound. 
the joyful Lamprey wind along the flood,
 and in glad thought enjoy the come food:
 bound she mount all eager on the chace;
 nor can the crawl preke too heavy pace
 escape her rage; he must unwilling try
 war doubtful chance, and with hard doom comply. 
bear on high wave the slippery foe command
 the near shore, and dart on yield sand. 
no time to fly, no hope of come aid,
 while murderous tooth his tender flesh invade. 
force to the fight, the preke despair strive,
 all posture show, and various scheme contrive. 
now on she back his twine tendril play,
 now grasp her side, or force their heedless way
 down her wide throat, now round her tail they fold,
 to force she back, and break the fasten hold. 
all part in vain be try; her slippery train
 elude his touch, and mock the fruitless pain. 

so when contend wrestler twine around
 in close embrace, and beat the trample ground,
 now wreath their oily limb, now firm stand,
 and grasp the adverse arm with dusty hand;
 their cautious foot incessant tread the round,
 meet in rude shock, and undistinguished sound;
 with various shift each other skill perplex,
 while sweat in briny stream flow down the cheek. 

like they the preke his supple member ply,
 but less indulgent fate success deny. 
piteous the scene, when mangle part employ
 remorseless tooth, and give the cruel joy. 
along the sand the pant piece reek,
 and even in death a shelter seem to seek. 

so when the stag breathe on the guilty heap,
 where hide from cold the wily serpent sleep,
 that wondrous spell will rouse the crest snake,
 force from the covert of the inmost brake. 
angry he come, high on his fold uprear
 his speckle form, and hide his secret fear. 
resolve the stag his fix design pursue,
 gripe fast the wretch, and give the kill bruise. 
the snake impatient wind his twist train,
 and knot wreath express the wring pain. 
now round the stag branch horn he curl twine,
 now on his neck the glossy circle shine. 
the stag unmoved the restless struggler tear,
 while greenish stain the droop floweret smear. 
scatter around the mangle gobbet fall,
 and wriggle over the blast herbage crawl. 

nor can the preke by usual art escape,
 and hide in borrow form the fishy shape. 
all be beside deceive; to her alone
 who most he dread his artifice be know;
 her curious thought the mimic secret learn,
 and paint show from real stone discern. 
with scornful smile the Lamprey seem to speak,
 and thus insult the colour-changing preke. 

 "vain trifler, can you hope by false disguise
" the elude my wish, and cheat observe eye? 
 "since you so well express the rocky hue,
" if you will be safe, take its hardness too. 
 "by potent charm the cleave stone divide,
" enter within and there secure hide;
 "or let the rock it be craggy summit bend,
" incline the roof, and skreen the liken friend. 
 "but since in change form you vain pride,
" learn wretch in mean cunning to confide. 

thus say, her spiral circle on she bear,
 and from the rock the preke relentless tear. 
he, though no more his wonted fraud deceive,
 hang to the cliff, nor will the jet leave. 
when other part be lose, the branch foot
 maintain their hold, and grasp the rocky seat. 

so when sack town to hostile fury yield,
 and mournful street with slaughter heap be fill,
 the rave mother strain with close embrace
 her darling babe, and hide his little face:
 the parent neck his cling arm enfold;
 fear give he strength, and knit the firm hold. 
nor can the plunderer rage with impious hand
 divide the pair, and loose their mutual band. 
the dame, midst the wild transport of despair,
 still clasp her weep babe, and mind her late care. 

with conquest flush new war the Lamprey breath,
 in proud state her silver volume wreath:
 but urge by partial hope, and vain conceit,
 in her last duel will the lobster meet. 
the well-armed lobster clad in dusky mail,
 nor fear her point tooth, nor wind tail. 
close by the cave, where in the silent shade
 the feast Lamprey sink her easy head,
 he shake his beard front, with scorn extend
 his wrinkle horn, and thus the challenge send. 

as, when two adverse host encamp delay
 the destine fight, and wait the come day,
 impatient of repose, some bold chief
 regret lose time, and feed his inward grief,
 brace his cuirass on, and grasp his arm;
 thus dreadful please, and with terror charm:
 erect he walk, and wave his plume crest,
 to action call, and blame inglorious rest. 
with taunt language, and disdainful eye
 the bold champion to the plain defy. 
while adverse troop the haughty menace hear,
 nor will the hostile youth such insult bear;
 with shame he redden, and with anger burn,
 accept the challenge, and the scorn return. 

so from her inmost cave, with proud disdain,
 the soft Sea-Lamprey spread her wavy train:
 enrage she come, dart sudden from her cell,
 seize the foe, and fix on the shell. 
but vain weary with successless toil
 from the hard crust the baffle tooth recoil. 
no entrance there the blunt weapon find,
 no pressure leave the indent Mark behind. 
at length provoke the beard lobster end
 unequal strife, his fork claw extend,
 pinch with rigid force her yield side,
 drive back the blood, and all the mass divide. 
the part all bruise in rack torture swell,
 and languid spot decline vigour tell. 
by cruel gripe the passive wretch compress
 twine up her tail, and rear her shine breast. 
no rest the lobster give, nor quit his hold;
 in vain her spiry wreath their circle fold. 
restless she move, nor can her pain conceal,
 cling to her foe, and hug the point shell. 
the pierce lancet prick each tender vein,
 and purple drop her beauteous yellow stain:
 she vain strive but augment her pain. 
over his rough back she twist the fatal round,
 tear her soft skin, and give her self the wound. 

as when the captive pard to bloody sight,
 and barbarous sport the gaze throng invite,
 the champion, who the gawdy sylvan dare,
 first by rude din the sullen beast prepare. 
grim he look, and with malicious leer
 grin at the crowd, and mock the shine spear. 
his unsheathed paw their point fang expose,
 and wrinkle lip exert their dreadful row. 
foolish he gape, and with wide mouth expect
 as the bold youth his well-aimed blow direct. 
while grin jaw their open void display,
 down the fling spear take swift it be destine way. 
the yawn beast a ready passage give,
 and sheathe within his throat the whizz steel receive. 

the imprudent Lamprey, urge by fierce despite,
 thus aid the foe, and try the fruitless bite. 
while shelly crust the dusky chief befriend,
 and from rude touch the tender part defend. 
mad with pain, and crush by meet claw,
 on the firm plate the fond Sea-Lamprey gnaw:
 nor fear the rise spike that close set
 over the hard shell their point terror threat:
 but twine her body round the sharpen row,
 and the deep mortal wound to heedless passion owe. 

such be the combat, when in lone retreat
 of silent wood the crest serpent meet
 the urchin secret track: by nature they
 the fierce impulse of mutual hate obey. 
approach war the urchin soon perceive,
 and hear the distant rustle of the leaf. 
close in her own embrace she shelter hide,
 contract her foot, and round her prickly side:
 from every part the thorny bristle rise;
 and thus enwrap, unmoved the urchin lie. 
the rush serpent fright the insect race,
 shake the low bough, and bend the spiry grass;
 scornful he seize midst the plat brake
 the round ball, and furious onset make;
 with angry jaw the ungrateful morsel chew,
 while the safe urchin mock his weak bruise. 
enrage the foe exert his utmost strength,
 draw in his train, and twine his shorten length. 
resolve he curl, and with a rough embrace
 squeeze the ball, and bind the prickly case. 
while oft the urchin turn, and roll give
 unnumbered wound; the torture serpent grieve. 
lose in his glossy slough, and speckle side,
 their sharpen top the pierce needle hide. 
black venom gore drop from the froth wound,
 hang on the droop herb, and stain the blast ground. 
rack the pain, but firm the serpent hold,
 and hide the urchin in his mazy fold. 
nor, fasten thus, can he uncurl again
 his twist spire, or stretch his lengthen train,
 ganch on the tenter of the prickly beast;
 till die both be from their pain release. 
but oft the urchin, by the serpent bruise,
 escape with hurt, and from the prison loose
 creep weaken over the bank with sickly pace,
 and his sore limb enwrap in rank grass:
 while fleshy trophy on his side be bear,
 and all his prickly back the gawdy spoil adorn. 

like be the event of the unkind embrace,
 when the Sea-Lamprey hug the shelly case;
 wound to her self by thoughtless rage she give,
 she die; and none the wilful murder grieve. 

but though firm mail the vigorous lobster shield,
 yet to the slow the tender preke he yield. 
beneath the rock, where eat eddy round
 the shelve cave, and plain in murmur sound,
 as void of care the beard lobster lie,
 the crawl preke hast to the destine prize. 
behind with wary step he soft creep,
 and on the sound armour sudden leap;
 spread all his knotty arm; they close entwine
 the dusky shell with painful pressure bind,
 with stubborn squeeze the torture part constrain,
 and with firm brace fix the round chain. 
his straighten jaw the throttle tie compress,
 damn up the way, and make the channel less. 
his mouth choke up not flit blast receive,
 nor to the airy stream the wonted passage give. 
life vehicle deny, the lobster die,
 and dizzy shade enwrap his horny eye. 
for Fishes too must yield to chill death,
 when ought shall stop the constant flux of breath. 
they too like earthbred animal respire;
 alternate gust maintain the vital fire. 

but long, ever spend with toil, the lobster strive,
 now vigorous shoot away, or sudden dive,
 ply his broad tail, and cut the roll flood,
 oft heave his back, and shake the press load;
 now weary stay, and weak effort try,
 now pant despair, and now burst die. 
the preke unmoved will never his station quit,
 nor press arm their close embrace remit. 
when stretch on sand the lobster breathless lie,
 then soon his fold chain the preke untie. 
and, like the busy infant at the breast,
 suck from the shelly pipe the luscious feast. 

as the curse wretch, in hardy mischief prove,
 untouched with pity, and with guilt unmoved,
 hide in the narrow turn of wind street,
 from late debauch the gay companion meet:
 he jocund stumble on, nor ought design,
 doze with the circle pledge of unmixed wine:
 unweening future doom he reel along,
 in falter accent hum a break song;
 fume cloud the brain, and sink the nod head,
 and doubtful foot in mazy figure tread. 
when sudden start from his guilty shade,
 the thief behind with hardy grasp invade,
 back pull he down, and give the gush wound;
 he groan fall, and die bite the ground. 
with have the villain, fearful of delay,
 strip the warm dead, and bear the spoil away. 

thus when the lobster, lull by murmur sea,
 cling to the rock recline in thoughtless ease,
 unseen the wily preke impetuous spring,
 and all his branch arm around the captive fling. 

these, of all kind that curl the wrinkle wave,
 that press the sand, or hide in drop cave,
 impartial foe, as if they kindness mean,
 by mutual hate each other wrong resent. 
successive death the fatal circle tread,
 attend the victor, and avenge the dead. 

of fish some with venom bane be store,
 their hate mouth the noxious secret hoard. 
the deadly juice drop in the wound part,
 enflame the whole, and mock the heal art.
 he most the fisher dread, in hideous form
 and name agree with that reptile worm,
 who side a double row of leg display,
 that print a thousand footstep on the clay. 
like he the sea-born monster over the main
 with numerous foot row on his wave train. 
one touch of these will angry blotch raise;
 the blister flesh it be redden Wales display. 
as when the wellknown weed with point leaf
 through unseen wound inject the sting grief,
 in spot around the scarlet venom spread,
 and rise pustule show their ruddy head;
 so touch by they, we feel the burn pain
 itch in the skin, and tingle in the vein. 

in gawdy show the various rainbow pride,
 but beauteous look a secret poyson hide,
 a dread foe to those who dive below,
 where on hard bed the porous sponge grow,
 from it be love moisture bear the heap away,
 and bring the rancid substance to the day. 
when the gay shoal perceive the pry guest,
 envious they throng, and all his search molest;
 with venom tooth encumber wretch surround,
 bite every part, and suck the please wound. 
though clog by whelm wave he flounce strive,
 fling round his arm, and back the wanton drive. 
oft strike they can forgo the tempt food,
 such be their ardent thirst of human blood. 

so when full ear scarce hold the ripen grains,
 and of rude gale the whisper field complain,
 when reaper pine with toil and sultry heat,
 the buzz squadron scent the grateful sweat;
 on every part they light, roam busy round,
 tickle the face, and raise the ruddy wound. 
the peasant fan they off, but they again
 wanton return, and strike the itch pain. 
bold impertinent the labourer vex,
 Buz round his eye, and bask upon his cheek;
 nor will the restless swarm their sport forgo,
 till dead they fall press by the quick blow;
 or cloy with pleasure wing their silent way,
 and shun the cool of the decline day. 

the crawl preke a deadly juice contain,
 inject poyson fire the wound vein. 
soft cuttle-fish, that stain the flow tide
 with inky stream, more dread moisture hide. 
nor small the wound like that the rainbow give;
 but rage pain the glow member grieve. 
from their curse mouth the drop fire distil,
 inflame the blood, and shed the spread ill. 

the prickly gudgeon, that alternate dwell. 
in sandy covert, or in rocky cell;
 fierce scorpion, who their wave volume wreath,
 or vault above, or glide unseen beneath;
 weaver, who march the timorous shoal obey,
 divide their rank, and humble give the way;
 the swallow-fish, that sport with equal ease
 or poise in air, or bear on gross sea;
 the ravenous sea-hog, and the prickly hound,
 who pierce bristle multiply the wound;
 all venom juice in hollow tube retain,
 and, as they prick, inject the flow bane. 

sharp poison dart the dread fire-flairs aid,
 and hardy sword-fish wield the threaten blade. 
nature and time the grow part produce,
 finish it be length, and teach the murderous use. 
nor burnish steel, nor plate of flame brass
 in solid work the fishy snout surpass. 
strike with it be point, the sound stone give way,
 and shatter rock their secret vein display. 
the fire-flair's tail it be venom shaft contain;
 nor time nor waste the poisonous treasure drain. 
murderous alike they ravage all the sea,
 first give the mortal wound, then seize the prey. 
in this they differ; when the sword-fish die,
 extinct with he the moulder weapon lie. 
despise and harmless now, the worthless bone
 no long boast the sword, but useless grow
 henceforth it be martial nature must disown. 
not so the fire-flair's dart; that still survive
 the die fish, and in it be venom live. 

man kill art have too industrious seek,
 and murderous science to perfection bring. 
for guilty hand design, the sooty trade
 on sound anvil shape the tempere blade. 
revengeful persian not with wound content
 mix curse herb, and deadly juice ferment. 
too curious search death hide store reveal,
 how fate in plant and poisonous powder dwell. 
but of all ill, that be from nature steal,
 that sea produce, or earth dark womb conceal,
 none equal that the ray-like fire-flair bear;
 no dread stroke, no kill wound like she. 
all thing must yield; the dire infection such,
 the solid flint will moulder at the touch. 
when rise shrub their spread branch shoot,
 pride in their leaf, or joy in ripen fruit,
 if with the fire-flair's spear the hand unkind
 but grate the root, or prick the tender rind,
 the leaf shrink in, and all the glory fade,
 rich sap no more be through the pipe convey;
 no kind supply flow round the porous stem,
 cast a bright green, and swell the smile gem,
 but kill juice all the fibre taint,
 and tarnish verdure tell the fatal want. 
dry stalk now rustle on the ground recline,
 where shade once tremble at the wanton wind. 

Circe, who all the secret poison know,
 or wash by sea, or nourish by the dew,
 midst all the deadly treasure of her art
 most value keep the fire-flair's venom dart. 
to it be long taper shaft the fishy spoil
 the goddess join, and fit for martial toil. 
on her love son, who in a conscious grot
 wander from Troy the grecian chief beget,
 Circe the prize, the fatal gift bestow,
 describe it be use, and the hide venom show. 
he seek his sire, till lead by doubtful fame
 to rocky coast of Ithaca he come. 
here on his father goat with youthful pride
 his fatal spear the wanton warrior try;
 around the plain contagious slaughter make,
 and on rank heap the beard victim lay. 
while careless he the please sport pursue,
 the fly herdsman tell the unwelcome news
 the chief incense recall his youthful have,
 to seize the robber, and prevent the waste. 
but with blind rage the parricide possess
 assault his sire, and wound his age breast. 
through boil vein the glow poison roll,
 and with dire pain expel the linger soul. 
thus he, who dare the danger of the main,
 while surge roll, and tempest rage in vain,
 his fate end in sea-bred venom find,
 and from the fire-flair's dart receive his mortal wound. 

vast tunny over the watery surface sweep,
 and the fierce sword-fish roll the calm deep. 
though swift their pace, though fate attend their stroke,
 a worthless fly the mighty fish provoke. 
when the curse dog begin the sultry day,
 and feverish vapour taint the kind ray,
 then fearless of the wave the ocean-breez
 brood on the water, and infest the sea. 
beneath the shelter fin the insect hide,
 and goad with poisonous sting the tender side. 
vex with the puny foe the tunny leap,
 flounce on the stream, and toss the mantling deep,
 ride over the foam sea, with torture rave,
 bind into air, and dash the smoke wave. 
oft with imprudent have they fly the main,
 and seek in death a kind release from pain,
 vault on some ship, or to the shore repair,
 and gasp away their hate live in air. 

so when from reek vale autumnal day
 sulphureous steam, and rank vapour raise,
 with circle tail, and wild distort eye
 through rustle brake the mad heifer fly,
 with sound hoof the heathy common beat,
 while far behind the hollow peasant sweat. 
Driv'n by the pain, when the fierce gad-bee strike,
 nor fence of twist hedge, nor slimy dike
 retain the beast; but over the shelve steep
 and clotty ridge she take the doubtful leap. 
nor breezy cave, nor mead invite she stay,
 though bank obstruct, and river cross the way. 
she ford the stream, and climb the rise mound;
 while distant hill with bellow cow resound. 

dolphin, by all the liquid realm revere,
 command the sea, and rule the float herd. 
the will tribe their native lord obey,
 confess his power, and own the rightful sway. 
they every kind in beauteous form excel;
 and awful look the trueborn monarch tell. 
none can in force with furious dolphin vie,
 or the strong fin with equal vigour ply. 
dolphin as swift their rapid course pursue,
 as the winge steel spring from the twang yew. 
fire sparkle in their eye, and gleam ray
 brighten the watery shade, and clear the gloomy way. 
when Fishes with vain hope their tremble head
 or wrap in slime, or roll in sandy bed,
 midst the dark shade they form a sudden day,
 and all the secret of the depth survey. 
when lion roar, the beast with terror hear,
 and by their silence own their passive fear. 
bird distant view, when eagle soar on high,
 and humble give the freedom of the sky. 
when flaggy wing the glare dragon bear
 in shine track, and taint the gild air,
 silent below the mean serpent creep,
 nor dare to hiss, but hide in weedy heap. 
and thus in power unrivalled dolphin reign
 over the unbounded empire of the main. 
while over the flood the wanton dolphin roll,
 all give the sea, and drive their mingle shoal. 
with fearful have their throng heap they raise,
 nor on their dread monarch steady gaze. 
passive they turn their eye; with servile fear
 his furious bound, and distant puffing hear. 
but when the sovereign hungry seek his prey,
 then fright number crowd the narrow sea. 
from the know tyrant all the mean slave
 throng to the frith, and nestle in the cave. 
he in crude feast his purple jaw embrue;
 from the mix heap will noble captive choose,
 let go the tasteless prey, and vulgar treat refuse. 

but hardy troop be find, and they alone
 that brave the dolphin, and his sway disown;
 with equal scorn the tyrant wrong repay,
 nor passive will the lawless force obey:
 army their name; no point spike they bear,
 nor wield the sword, nor dart the poisonous spear;
 but close-set tooth their vault mouth surround,
 that ready strike, and give the certain wound. 
with these fierce army, for the fight prepare,
 engage their monarch, nor his threat 'regard. 
when wanton dolphin from their fellow stray,
 and the lone wanderer take their private way,
 army observe, and spread the please news;
 none dread the danger, or the toil excuse:
 with firm consent the summons all obey,
 press to the charge, and throng the straighten way. 

so when the hope of fame, and hostile spoil
 to glorious hazard push the embattle file. 
resolve they move, and all the danger court,
 scale the high wall, and raze the batter fort:
 war to the true brave be only sport. 

awhile the dolphin, though unnumbered foe
 ally to one unite force oppose,
 nor royal birth, nor ancient fame forget;
 but mock the invader, and their onset meet:
 feed with revenge, and taste the double sweet
 of slaughter rebel, and of grateful treat. 
but when around the rally troop appear,
 rush in the front, and thicken in the rear,
 war doubtful toil the finny chief engage,
 rebellion worthy all the monarch rage. 
fearless of danger they at once surround
 the princely fish, and all the dolphin wound. 
with rage inveterate the restless shoal
 make at his head, and on his azure Jowls
 remorseless fasten; on his back they ride,
 hang on his gills, and tear his bleed side. 
some glide beneath, other behind he press,
 burden the tail, and all the fish distress. 
he labour puff, though weaken with his wound
 yet vigorous shoot, and all the ocean round. 
vex with disgrace, and sense of various pain
 he meditate revenge; with proud disdain
 now swift as sunny gleam the dolphin leap
 through fly mist, and over the surface sweep. 
like lightning now he gild the depth below,
 where silent wave, and stiller Waters flow. 
nor mirksom shade below, nor upper sea,
 remove the foe, nor give the sovereign ease. 
they still unmoved their fasten hold retain,
 drive with their guide, and round the trouble main. 
wherever he move, unwelcome they attend,
 and bear by he, with he as swift descend
 to low sea, as swift again pursue
 repeat track, and clear day review. 
thus join they all one monstrous fish appear,
 and to know shape no certain likeness bear. 
fisher amaze long fix their steady eye,
 while blend kind their real form disguise. 

as when the stagnate blood corrupt breed
 the putrid sore, and glow ulcer feed;
 the dusky leech drain the noisome food,
 and give new motion to the clot blood;
 curl up their back, and swell their bloat side,
 and by strong suction force the stream tide;
 but when the long continue pleasure cloy,
 senseless they fall, and dizzy with the joy. 
thus army hang around the dolphin twine,
 rivet their tooth, nor will the part resign. 
when feed the weary dolphin they release;
 disperse themselves, and drive along the sea. 
the royal fish, from hostile number free,
 resume his vigour, and exert his speed,
 furious he dash round the break wave,
 devour whole shoal and grind the gasp slave. 
the reek blood shine on the redden ooze,
 and blush wave their smile azure lose. 
flight or resistance now no long save,
 but in return they feel the wound they give. 

when prowl troop of wolf some wander deer
 in numerous concert hunt; she winge with fear
 skim over the Dale, and from the mountain bound;
 with bray plaint the vocal wood resound. 
the furious wolf with more than equal pace
 reach to the wound, and gain upon the chace;
 from her fat side the reek morsel tear,
 bear on the haunch, and flea the live deer. 
their harmless prey secure they destroy,
 and unavenged the guilty meal enjoy. 
void of remorse, and insolent with pride
 laugh at her groan, and all her pain deride. 
not so the dolphin foe unhurt retreat;
 a just revenge the dare rebel meet,
 their former insult of the monarch grieve,
 and pain for pain, and wound for wound receive. 

dolphin in death their royal birth regard,
 act like themselves, and for the hour prepare,
 their doom expect they intrepid wait,
 even then be careful to preserve their state;
 fate summons with indifference obey,
 but fly the depth, and leave the wide sea. 
lest mean fish the float carcase meet,
 and with rude scorn their lifeless sovereign treat. 
to wavy sand they silent retire,
 lie there unknown, and unobserved expire. 
on the moist bed recline their sickly head,
 where no base fish insult the royal dead;
 and hope that grateful man with pious hand
 will give his friend the burial of the sand:
 at least the water and return tide
 will in their wracky heap the princely relic hide. 
live they rule, and die leave the main;
 no base-bred foe their injure corpse profane. 
greatness of soul in late hour appear:
 careless of life the thoughtless hero fear,
 lest ought that be lessen, or that be mean at last
 a sully stain on former glory cast. 
and dolphin thus in death we must admire
 just to themselves; their conduct be entire. 
careful to assert their honour, and maintain
 their former port, the dolphin die reign. 

barbel, unlike the rest, be just and mild,
 no fish they harm, by they no sea be spoil. 
nor on their own, nor different kind they prey,
 but equal law of common right obey. 
undreaded they with guiltless pleasure feed
 on fatten slime, or bite the sea-grown weed. 
each lick his mate; by love the barbel live,
 and the dear kiss alternate pleasure give. 
the good and just be heaven peculiar care:
 all ravenous kind the sacred barbel spare;
 nor will though hungry seize the gentle fry,
 but give the look, and pity pass they by. 
honour just meed, and due reward attend
 the brave good man, who scorn the selfish end,
 will on no right by lawless power intrude,
 but to his own prefer the public good. 
even stormy sea the juster kind revere,
 and fish some respect to virtue bear. 

but all beside, voracious and unjust,
 obey their passion, and indulge their lust. 
when hunger call, they roam abroad for food,
 pursue the weak, by the strong pursue. 
all the night long they constant watch keep,
 nor one unguarded moment give to sleep. 
scaro alone their fold eye-lid close
 in grateful interval of soft repose. 
in some sequester cell remove from sight,
 they sleep away the danger of the night. 
the rest all wakeful dread the dire surprise;
 from midnight fear the god of slumber fly. 

fond we blame the rage of war fish,
 who urge by hunger must supply the wish;
 when cruel man, to who their ready food
 kind earth afford, yet thirst for human blood. 
peace, grieve by man, to bright region flee,
 and angry Mars contend nation lead. 
ambitious youth with thirst of glory fire
 the proud deformity of scar admire. 
power uncontrolled maintain the wrongful cause,
 nor fear the weak force of silent law. 
nor will ungoverned rage the temple spare;
 but even the god forget their wonted care. 
the hoary priest oft while he suppliant pray,
 on his own altar be a victim make. 
bold sacrilege lay hallow building waste,
 and in vile heap the sacred rubbish cast. 
in circle wreath to heaven their impious fire
 bold go up, and roll their guilty spire. 
statue deform lay headless on the ground,
 none know what god the dubious image own. 
at length soft peace look back; the trouble cease,
 and pity heaven give the kingdom rest. 
from good Æneas spring, the cesar come
 to sooth the world, and quench the spread flame. 
yet restless discord will unconquered strive
 the die spark of fury to revive. 
the proud iberian, and the warlike Gaul
 repine at ease, and hear bellona call. 
oft do the Rhine pollute current mourn,
 and wash the stain from his discolour urn.
 oft from his reed old Ister silent gaze,
 and see his bank by slaughter legion raise. 
till you, bless pair, so kind heaven decree,
 peace unallayed restore, and groan nation free. 
now settle peace brood on the smile vale,
 and steady justice hold the impartial scale. 
astrea come, the goddess come again,
 and from injurious rapin guard the plain. 
plenty around her various mantle spread,
 over flowery pasture, and unforage mead. 
the god of sleep, free from the noisy dread,
 on every bank incline his drowsy head. 
gay paint dream skim over the silent plain,
 and kind hover on the slumber Swain. 
the joyous sun smile on the calm day,
 and little love in every corner play. 
may the good god these halcyon day prolong,
 give rust to arm, and leisure to the song. 
may, through the round of long successive year,
 continue peace prevent our future fear. 
now suppliant right fear no disgustful frown
 or from the imperial sire, or royal son. 
now humble merit meet a just reward,
 nor will the court disdain the peaceful bard. 
may Jove, and those bright messenger of fate,
 that throng his throne, and on the godhead wait,
 may all indulgent guard the royal pair,
 the world be great monarch, and the bloom heir. 
our wish must succeed, our prayer be hear,
 if piety deserve a just reward. 
the heavenly power will look propitious down,
 by sure succession fix the establish throne,
 preserve the immortal sire, and aid the godlike son. 
