[OPPIAN's HALIEUTICKS  Part I. OF THE NATURE of FISHES. In Two Books]

THE FIRST BOOK OF OPPIAN's HALIEUTICKS.

I sing the Natives of the boundless Main,
 And tell what Kinds the wat'ry Depths contain. 
Thou, Mighty Prince, whom farthest Shores obey,
 Favour the Bard, and hear the humble Lay;
 While the Muse shows the liquid Worlds below,
 Where throng'd with busie Shoals the Waters flow;
 Their diff'ring Forms and Ways of Life relates;
 And sings their constant Loves, and constant Hates;
 What various Arts the finny Herds beguile,
 And each cold Secret of the Fishers Toil. 
Intrepid Souls! who pleasing Rest despise,
 To whirl in Eddies, and on Floods to rise;
 Who scorn the Safety of the calmer Shore,
 Drive thro' the working Foam, and ply the lab'ring Oar. 
Th' Abyss they fathom, search the doubtful Way,
 And through obscuring Depths pursue the Prey. 

Thro' wild'ring Forrests, and thro' thorny Brakes,
 The Huntsman's Toil the chafing Boar o'ertakes. 
Hardy he meets the bristly tusked Foe,
 And distant darts, or strikes the nearer Blow. 
But on himself he not depends alone;
 Assisting Dogs first run the Monster down. 
They to the secret Dens unerring guide,
 And op'ning tell where the fierce Sylvans hide. 
On the firm Continent th' Assailants meet,
 And unmov'd Earth supports their steady Feet. 
From Winter's Snow, and from Autumnal Heat
 The weary'd Hunter has a kind Retreat. 
In mossy Caves beneath entwining Trees
 He mocks the coming Storm, and sits at ease. 
Fresh Fountains here with silver Current glide,
 Rush from the Hills, and murmur at his Side. 
Stretcht on the Grass, he quaffs the cooling Streams,
 Or acts his Pleasures o'er in painted Dreams,
 The choicest Dainties unmixt Nature yields,
 Bend from the Trees, or flourish from the Fields. 
While Fruits the Woods, and Herbs enrich the Soil,
 The Huntsman's Pleasure must exceed his Toil. 

And Those, whose Arts the feather'd World ensnare,
 Nor mighty Pain endure, nor pensive Care. 
The Birds, when out of Reach, are yet in Sight,
 And hope in vain their Safety from their Flight. 
Oft they are seiz'd unthinking as they rest
 In harmless Dreams, and Slumber in their Nest. 
Oft make a treach'rous Twig their fatal Seat,
 While viscous Lime retains the captive Feet. 
To the drawn Net they hast, and court their Fate,
 Till in the Snare enclos'd they flutt'ring grieve too late. 

But ah! continu'd Doubts, returning Pains,
 And num'rous Dangers wait the Fishing Swains. 
Fond Hope with Dreams of fancy'd Gain delights,
 And to new Toils their restless Minds invites. 
The Fishers labour not on certain Ground,
 But in a leaky Boat are tost around. 
Here fierce succeeding Waves tumultuous beat,
 Roar by their Sides, and swift Destruction threat. 
Now murm'ring Winds disturb the careful Wight,
 Now black'ning Clouds, and gath'ring Storms affright. 
They tremble, who secure from Land behold
 Contending Waves in angry Conflict roll'd. 
No shelt'ring Coverts here the Swain befriend,
 When Clouds condens'd in noisy Streams descend. 
No Tree from cold bleak Winds, or falling Sleet,
 Nor Shade secures from Autumn's sickly Heat. 
Here to the scented Game no Dog can guide;
 Their native Fish the circling Eddies hide,
 And thro' the trackless Deep unseen they sportive glide. 
Besides loud threat'ning Storms, and sudden Winds,
 He meets vast Whales, and monstrous nameless Kinds. 
The slender-woven Net, vimineous Weel,
 The taper Angle, Line, and barbed Steel,
 Are all the Tools his constant Toil employs;
 On Arms like these the Fishing Swain relies. 

But Fishers live altho' expos'd to Harms,
 They have their Pleasures, and the Sea it's Charms. 
Long will the Princely Entertainment please,
 When on smooth Ponds, and artificial Seas
 The Royal Pinnace born at leisure rides;
 Some skillful Chief the stately Fabrick guides,
 While she her Streamers spreads, and in her Owner prides. 
Here various Kinds of dainty Fish are bred,
 With constant Meals in gen'rous Plenty fed. 
For an Imperial Treat, or choice Repast,
 Such as the Royal Pair may deign to tast. 
Here you, Dread Prince, the Waters most approve
 That bear a sullen Gloom, and slowly move. 
Thither the thronging Boats with Pleasure hast;
 You in the central Depth the Plummet cast. 
The willing Fish around ambitious wait,
 Fly to the Line, and fasten on the Bait. 
While You with Joy the grateful Prey receive,
 And from the wounding Steel his Jaw relieve. 
Well pleas'd You see him gasp, and lab'ring breath,
 And long in sportive Pain his struggling Body wreath. 

Great Neptune, whose Commands controll the Seas,
 Can curb the Tempests, and the Waves appease,
 And all ye Ocean-Gods, that peaceful reign
 Low in the Depths of the unfathom'd Main,
 Permit the Muse to tell, what Kinds obey
 Your wat'ry Pow'rs, and cut the liquid Way. 
May the calm Sea smile on the distant Shore,
 While I discover all the hidden Store. 
And Thou, O Goddess, tune my artless Tongue,
 To please the Sov'reign Pair, and form the grateful Song. 

But ah! how great the Task! for who can know
 What Creatures swim in secret Depths below? 
Unnumber'd Shoals glide thro' the cold Abyss
 Unseen, and wanton in unenvy'd Bliss. 
For who with all his Skill can certain teach,
 How deep the Sea, how far the Waters reach? 
Foolish th' Attempt; none can the Space define,
 The Depth retires beneath, and mocks the sinking Line. 
Three hundred Fathoms sounded are the most;
 Such is the Knowledge which our Labours boast. 
To comprehend the Whole we fruitless seek;
 Our Souls are finite, and our Reason weak. 
And yet we guess the Wat'ry World exceeds
 In num'rous Offspring, and in various Breeds. 
More Kinds may roll beneath in briny Floods
 Than graze the verdant Fields, or range the Woods. 
But whether Earth or Seas in Kinds excell,
 The Gods, and sure the Gods alone, can tell. 
For human Reach has certain Limits set;
 Men, who too curious search, themselves forget. 
We ought to know our Bounds, nor grasp at All,
 But curb the Wish, and the mad Thought recall. 

Fish have no common Rule of Life assign'd,
 Not to one Place, or to one Choice confin'd. 
The sev'ral Kinds pursue their proper Good,
 Diff'rent their Dwellings, and unlike their Food. 
Some near the Shore in humble Pleasures blest
 Approve the Sands, and on their Product feast. 
The flouncing Horse here restiff drives his Way,
 And Soles on Sands their softer Bellies lay. 
Sea-Roach in ruddy Shoals frequent the Land,
 And puny Black-Tails range the shelving Strand. 
The clouded Mackrels choose the sandy Ground,
 And with their speckled Train the Beach surround. 
Flat Folio's here stretch on the shaded Seas,
 Here spiny Scads and fruitful Carps encrease. 
The Broad-Tail here, and dainty Mullet feed,
 Frisk on the Sands, or batten on the Weed. 
Close to the shore soft slender Swaths reside,
 And the gay Mormyl shows his spotted Pride. 

But what these love the slimy Offspring hate:
 The Cod, and Whiting Kinds, the prickly Skate,
 The Thornback-Ray an arm'd, and hardy Race,
 The pois'nous Fire-Flaire, and the smoother Plaise
 Stretch on soft Slime; in Slime the Sea-Cow hides,
 And on the yielding Bed reclines her Sides. 
The Cramp-Fish rightly nam'd from numming Pain,
 And wide-mouth'd Lizards sandy Heaps disdain. 
In grosser Filth they pass their wanton Days,
 Search the rich Mud, and wreath thro' hidden Ways. 

Close to green Shores the wat'ry Natives feed,
 That hide in Wrack, and bite the spiry Weed. 
Such Food the Cackrels and the Goats approve,
 Sea-Wolves, and all the prickly Species love. 
The Ox-ey'd Race the slimy Coverts haunt,
 Where silent Waters wash the growing Plant. 

Barbels to fresher Channels are inclin'd,
 Barbels the justest of the scaly Kind. 
The slimy Conger, and bold Amies known
 In hardy Fight the briny Floods disown;
 Near Rivers stay, and shun the distant Seas;
 The brackish Tast and pungent Salts displease. 
With them the Grunter seeks the fresher Flood;
 Mean are his Pleasures, and unclean his Food. 
Sweet Streams the Tunnie's Young, and Sea-Wolf crave,
 And to the Deep prefer the mingled Wave. 
Where wide-mouth'd Rivers force their rapid Way,
 And their full Tribute to the Ocean pay;
 Here with sweet Draughts the joyful Tribes are blest,
 And the Land-Floods bring down a grateful Feast. 
Wash'd from each Bank rich Spoils are born away;
 The Fishes wait, and seize the floating Prey. 

Sea Wolves within the River's Channels keep,
 Affect no Change, nor venture on the Deep. 
Or if they chance to roam, return again
 With frighted Hast, and fly the hated Main. 
Diff'rent the Conduct of the restless Eel;
 He from his wonted Hole will slily Steal;
 The fresher Streams, his native Home, forsake,
 Despise the little Brook, or standing Lake. 
Curious to sport in Depths unknown before,
 And search the Hollows of the crooked shore,
 Thro' secret Tracks he glides, and slimy Ways,
 And wreaths his snaky Length thro' ev'ry winding Maze. 

Those dreadful Rocks, that rising Tides restrain,
 And mock the foamy Anger of the Main,
 Nor of one Form, nor equal Height appear;
 Some to the Clouds their dark'ning Summits rear. 
High steepy Cliffs despise the lower Sand,
 O'erlook the Seas, and distant Views command. 
On some thick Beds of mossy Verdure grow,
 Sea-Grass, and spreading Wrack are seen below. 
Here the Sea-Pearch and gawdy Goldlins sport,
 Gay Rainbow-Fish, and sable Wrass resort. 
The Gaper here, whose Jaws but seldom close,
 Swims near the Rocks, where the rank Herbage grows. 
They too, who like the mournful Halcyons breed,
 And form a floating Nest of slimy Weed. 
And He, unhappy in his hated Name
 Borrow'd from lawless Loves, and Pathick Shame. 

Near sandy rising Shelves, at ebbing Tides
 Unfruitful Rocks display their craggy sides. 
Here Basilisks and drowsy Sand Eels lie,
 Here the gay Gurnard boasts his rosie Dye. 

Where moisten'd Cliffs are all with Herbs o'ergrown,
 And the rank Stalks lie matted on the Stone,
 The Sargo will the leafy Covert praise,
 And here the Dory spends his easy Days. 
Here Sea-Crows dwell, nam'd from their dusky Hue,
 And tim'rous Shade-Fish the blind Haunts pursue. 
Here Scaro's feed, the only Kinds that dare
 To form shrill Sounds, and strike the trembling Air. 
To pensive Silence doom'd no other Fish
 Can speak his Wants, or tell his secret Wish. 
Twice o'er their Food the wanton Scaro's eat,
 With Pleasure the luxurious Toil repeat. 
Like Sheep in grassy Meads, or fat'ning Kine
 They chew the Cud, and on the Tast refine. 

Within those Rocks, where clinging Oysters dwell,
 And all the Natives of the wrinkled Shell;
 Vast hollow Caves their vaulted Roofs extend,
 Whose warm Retreat voracious Breams commend. 
To rocky Cells the wriggling Lampreys steal,
 And Mackrels here their speckled Sides conceal. 
Here stretcht at ease slow-dying Oerves remain,
 Whose Bodies long will stubborn Life retain. 
Repeated Wounds the tortur'd Wretches feel,
 Yet dare the cruel Hand, and cutting Steel. 
The Parts disjoyn'd and mangled as they lie
 Still pant, and move, and will at leisure die. 

Some scorn the Rocks, no shallow Waters please,
 They fly the Shore, and sound the lowest Seas. 
Sea-Sheep and Liver-Fish are hid below,
 While far above the troubled Surges flow. 
Deep in th' Abyss they make their oozy Bed,
 Nor changing Skies, nor coming Tempests dread. 
Fixt to their Choice, the dull unwieldy Race
 Lie in the Depths, and keep one constant Place. 
Unmov'd they stretch themselves, and longing wait,
 Till some poor Fish urg'd by unkinder Fate
 Too near approaching takes his luckless way;
 They without Labour seize the weaker Prey. 
With these we may the wary Haddocks joyn,
 Who prudent know what Dangers to decline,
 The sickly Autumn dread, and sultry Days,
 When scorching Sirius darts his baneful Rays. 
Soon as the Fever taints the blasted Air,
 They to some gloomy Covert all repair;
 Close in the darksome Hole they moody grieve,
 Nor sullen will the inmost Shelter leave;
 Till the dire Star has spent his venom'd Rage,
 Till the Brooks fill, and all the Heats asswage. 

A ruddy Fish, of kin to Barbel Kinds,
 On Island Rocks uncommon Pleasure finds;
 Adonis call'd by those who would express
 The various Beauties of his painted Dress. 
Who his fond Choice and fickle Temper know
 Land-Fish expressive Name on him bestow. 
Th' inconstant Wretch too curious leaves the Deep,
 Loves the hard Earth, and courts forbidden Sleep. 
No other Kind of those whose gasping Gills
 With humid Breath repeated Suction fills,
 Can bear the sultry Heat, and Summer Sky,
 Bask in the Sun, and wanton in the Dry. 
When Calms invite, and angry Storms are ceast,
 He drives the Stream, and hastens to his Rest. 
Stretcht on a rising Rock he sunning lies
 Well-pleas'd, while easy Slumbers close his Eyes,
 Tho' cautious Fear a sounder Sleep denies;
 Lest hostile Birds should, as they distant fly,
 Observing stoop, and bear the Prey on high. 
When feather'd Pillagers intent on Food
 Skim by the Rocks, or o'er the Waters brood;
 Clear Skies in vain their pleasing Warmth impart;
 The Wretches soon from broken Slumbers start. 
Twining they leap, and antick Postures show,
 Bound from the Rock, and hast to dive below. 
To shun the Danger will forgoe their Ease,
 And seek the Shelter of the kinder Seas. 

In Rocks, or Sands the glitt'ring Giltheads live,
 Food and Content from either Place receive. 
Blewlings, fierce Weavers, and the Ruff enjoy
 The rocky Caves, when sandy Shallows cloy. 
To either Choice indifferent alike
 Both Kinds of Scorpions, and the slender Pike,
 The horned Gar, and sportive Gudgeon range,
 And unconfin'd approve th' alternate Change. 
With them the Sea-Mouse roves of slender Size,
 But on sharp Teeth, and horny Snout relies. 
No Fear the furious little Monster knows,
 Intrepid hasts unequal Strength t' oppose. 
With innate Courage fir'd, and martial Rage
 The puny Warriour dares with Man engage. 
With mighty Soul in narrow Breast confin'd,
 He swims the Champion of the scaly Kind. 

Some scorn the weedy Rocks, and sandy Coast,
 Less Danger know, and greater Freedom boast;
 The peaceful Waters of the Ocean seek
 But fly the Straights, and shun the winding Creek. 
Far from the Shore the nimble Tunnies race
 O'er the wide Plain, and vast unmeasur'd Space. 
The Horsetail, and the Sword-Fish arm'd for War
 Nor make the Shallows nor the Rocks their Care. 
In distant Seas the spotted Cogniols play,
 At leisure roll, and cut the trackless Way. 
Thro' Depths unknown the Serpents curling pass,
 And twine resistless thro' the slimy Mass. 
They hate the Shore, who sacred Honours claim,
 And to their Beauty owe their awful Name. 

He the deep Seas prefers to noisy Straights,
 Who for the distant Ship impatient waits,
 The friendly Pilot-Fish, who joyful views
 The well-rigg'd Bark, and ev'ry Sail pursues. 
Around the wanton Shoals in Order move,
 And frisking gaze on him who steers above:
 Eager press on, nor will be left behind,
 Tho' the full Sails swell bloated with the Wind. 
You'ld think the Captives chain'd to ev'ry Ship. 
And drawn unwilling thro' the ruffling Deep. 

As when some Prince returns from martial Toil
 Victorious, with a conquer'd Nation's Spoil;
 Or He, who at th' Olympick Games has won
 The envy'd Honours of the leafy Crown;
 The swarming Vulgar throng with gladsome Noise,
 And on the Triumph feed their dazled Eyes;
 The Champion to his Home in Crowds attend,
 And when the Chief dismounts, their Marches end. 

So They, while no approaching Shores displease,
 Swim with the Ship tumultuous o'er the Seas. 
But when they conscious Scent the coming Shore,
 Averse they court the Sailour's look no more;
 Avoid the nearer Land, and hie again
 With equal Hast to the unbounded Main. 
Pilots observe the Sign, and know the Coast
 Draws nigh, when they perceive their Comrades loft. 
Auspicious Friends, the Sailor's darling Fish,
 The Ship's good Omen, and the Steersman's Wish,
 Laid careless on the Deck, when you appear,
 The jolly Crew no sudden Dangers fear;
 But wayward laugh, or vie in wanton Tales:
 Your Presence gives clear Skies, and pleasing Gales. 
No raging Tempests toss the sparkling Seas;
 But unfurl'd Sails expect the gentler Breeze. 

Far from the Shore the wily Sucker waits
 The coming Ship, but him the Sailor hates. 
Slender his Shape, his Length a Cubit ends;
 No beauteous Spot the gloomy Race commends;
 An Eel-like clinging Kind, of dusky Looks;
 His Jaws display tenacious Rows of Hooks. 
But in strange Pow'r the puny Fish excells,
 Beyond the boasted Art of Magick Spells. 
Oft Seamen tell, but few the Tale believe,
 Or own those Truths they cannot well conceive. 
Men think they know all Nature's secret Laws,
 Her Pow'rs define, and trace each hidden Cause. 
Full of himself the Sceptick over-wise
 Oft real Facts, because unseen, denies. 
To strange Effects, when prov'd, no Credit gives,
 Feeds his false Doubt, and thus himself deceives. 
The Sucking-Fish beneath with secret Chains
 Clung to the Keel the swiftest Ship detains. 
The Seamen run confus'd, no Labour's spar'd,
 Let fly the Sheets, and hoist the topmost Yard. 
The Master bids them give her all the Sails,
 To court the Winds, and catch the coming Gales. 
But tho' the Canvas bellies with the Blast,
 And boist'rous Winds bend down the cracking Mast,
 The Bark stands firmly rooted in the Sea,
 And will unmov'd nor Winds, nor Waves obey. 
Still, as when Calms have flatted all the Plain,
 And Infant Waves scarce wrinkle on the Main. 
No Ship in Harbour moor'd so careless rides,
 When ruffling Waters tell the flowing Tides. 
Appall'd the Sailors stare, thro' strange Surprize
 Believe they dream, and rub their waking Eyes. 

As when unerring from the Huntsman's Bow
 The feather'd Death arrests the flying Doe;
 Struck thro' the dying Beast falls sudden down,
 The Parts grow Stiff, and all the Motion's gone;
 Such sudden Force the floating Captive binds,
 Tho' beat by Waves, and urg'd by driving Winds. 

Pilchards, and Shads in Shoals together keep,
 The num'rous Fry disturbs the mantling Deep. 
No Home they know, nor can Confinement love,
 But fond of hourly Change unsettled rove. 
Now choose the Rocks, now seek the wider Seas;
 No Place can long the restless Wand'rers please. 
They soon grow weary when they once enjoy,
 And Pleasures will, as soon as tasted, cloy. 

Near hidden Crags, and Rocks unseen below,
 Where slower Waves with silent Current flow,
 The Anthies lie conceal'd in close Retreat,
 But oft must stray far from their Mansion Seat. 
Voracious Appetite commands away,
 To range for Food, and find the luckless Prey. 
Anthies insatiate feel the gnawing Grief,
 Repeated Luxury gives no Relief. 
Tho' not for rav'nous Force by Heav'n design'd;
 For Nature has disarm'd the toothless Kind. 
Four Kinds of Anthies in the Seas are bred:
 Some gild the Waters with a shining Red. 
A second Sort are blanch'd with pleasing White;
 A third of Hue less grateful to the Sight,
 A gloomy Race, the blackish Die retain,
 All swarthed o'er, and ting'd with sooty Stain. 
What Mark the others bear their Name implies,
 Call'd from the bending Arch that shades their Eyes. 
In shelly Armour wrapt, the Lobsters seek
 Safe Shelter in some Bay, or winding Creek;
 To rocky Chasms the dusky Natives cleave,
 Tenacious hold, nor will the dwelling leave. 
Nought like their Home the constant Lobsters prize,
 And forreign Shores, and Seas unknown despise. 
Tho' cruel Hand the banish'd Wretch expell,
 And force the Captive from his native Cell,
 He will, if freed, return, with anxious Care
 Find the known Rock, and to his Home repair:
 No novel Customs learns in diff'rent Seas,
 But wonted Food, and home-taught Manners please. 
His long-deserted House the Lobster owns,
 And with close ardent Claw indents the fav'rite Stones. 
The Love of Country's not to Man confin'd;
 The same Propensions sway the brutal Mind. 
Fishes their Native Caves with Transport view;
 They have their Countries, and their Fondness too. 
No Nation may with that blest Clime compare,
 That gave us first to breath the vital Air. 
How dear the first Acquaintance of our Eyes! 
How rich the Soil! how beautiful the Skies! 
The Name of Country fills the grateful Mind
 With all that's tender, generous and kind. 
Ah! wretched those, who forc'd from what they love
 Necessitous in vagrant Exile rove;
 Still restless must the killing Grief renew,
 Despis'd by All, or pity'd but by Few. 

Prawns, and the Velvet-Crab, tho' kin to these,
 Are not so constant to their native Seas. 
Sometimes th' Amphibious Race the Floods disown,
 Nor are the Guests to neighb'ring Shores unknown. 
The Shelly Crawlers each returning Year,
 Cast off their Coat, and new-made Armour wear. 
Self-taught, when first the Velvet-Crabs perceive
 Their loos'ning Shell will soon the Body leave,
 They cram their Paunch, and bloated strive to thrust
 From off their rising Back the tott'ring Crust. 
But when their naked Bodies lie expos'd,
 No longer with the shelly Fence enclos'd;
 They senseless seem, stretcht on the sandy Bed
 All pensive lie, and deem themselves as dead;
 Nor cautious eat, left gorging Food should swell
 The tender Flesh, and stop the growing Shell. 
But when slow Nature moulds the viscous Mass,
 And Time begins to fix the hard'ning Case,
 The rising Crust half-form'd they joyous feel,
 And suck the Sands; yet dread the hearty Meal;
 Till the firm finisht Work can safe endure
 The rudest Shock, and ev'ry Part secure. 

So when the Veins glow with a deeper Red,
 When Pustules rise, or scarlet Blotches spread;
 The prudent Leech prescribes a wholesome Fast,
 Forbids the noxious Pleasures of the Tast. 
And when his Skill perceives the slaking Heats,
 While the slow Pulse with equal Motion beats,
 He cautious fears to raise the sinking Flood,
 And gives with sparing Hand the slender Food. 
Till perfect Health restores her former Grace,
 Strength to the Limbs, and Beauty to the Face. 

The pois'nous Creeper, and the changing Preke
 The secret Caverns of the Ocean seek. 
But curious oft to neighb'ring Shores repair,
 And tast the Breezes of the cooler Air. 
The Rustic often hath with wonder seen
 The climbing Preke browze on the leafy Green. 

With these the wily Cuttle seeks his Food,
 Whose Ink distains around the sable Flood. 
Kinds yet unsung, of the Testaceous Breed,
 On Sea-beat Rocks, or sandy Hillocks feed. 
Here slender Sheaths, and juicy Oysters hide,
 And the gay Authors of the Purple Pride. 
The Cockle, spiral Whirle, and hardy Mice,
 With Wilks of various Shell, and quaint Device. 
Sea-Urchins, who their native Armour boast,
 All stuck with Spikes, prefer the sandy Coast. 
Should you with Knives their prickly Bodies wound,
 Till the crude Morsels pant upon the Ground;
 You may ev'n then, when Motion seems no more,
 Departing Sense and fleeting Life restore. 
If in the Sea the mangled Parts you cast,
 The conscious Pieces to their Fellows hast;
 Again they aptly joyn, their Whole compose;
 Move as before, nor Life, nor Vigour lose. 

The Hermit-Fish, unarm'd by Nature left,
 Helpless, and weak, grow strong by harmless Theft. 
Fearful they strowl, and look with panting Wish
 For the cast Crust of some new-cover'd Fish;
 Or such as empty lie, and deck the Shore,
 Whose first and rightful Owners are no more. 
They make glad Seizure of the vacant Room,
 And count the borrow'd Shell their native Home;
 Screw their soft Limbs to fit the winding Case,
 And boldly herd with the Crustaceous Race. 
Careless they enter the first empty Cell;
 Oft find the plaited Wilk's indented Shell;
 And oft the deep-dy'd Purple forc'd by Death
 To Stranger-Fish the painted Home bequeath. 
The Wilk's etch'd Coat is most with Pleasure worn,
 Wide in Extent, and yet but lightly born. 
But when they growing more than fill the Place,
 And find themselves hard-pinch'd in scanty Space,
 Compell'd they quit the Roof they lov'd before,
 And busy search around the pebbly Shore,
 Till a commodious roomy Seat be found,
 Such as the larger Cockles living own'd. 
Oft cruel Wars contending Hermits wage,
 And long for the disputed Shell engage. 
The strongest will the doubtful Prize possess,
 Pow'r gives him Right, and All the Claim confess. 

Sail-Fish in secret silent Deeps reside,
 In Shape and Nature to the Preke ally'd;
 Close in their concave Shells their Bodies wrap,
 Avoid the Waves, and ev'ry Storm escape. 
But not to mirksome Depths alone confin'd,
 When pleasing Calms have still'd the sighing Wind,
 Curious to know what Seas above contain,
 They leave the dark Recesses of Main;
 Now wanton to the changing Surface hast,
 View clearer Skies, and the pure Welkin tast. 
But slow they cautious rise, and prudent fear
 The upper Region of the wat'ry Sphere. 
Backward they mount, and as the Stream o'erflows,
 Their convex Shells to pressing Floods oppose. 
Conscious they know, that should they forward move,
 O'erwhelming Waves would sink them from above,
 Fill the void Space, and with the rushing Weight
 Force down th' Inconstants to their former Seat. 
When first arriv'd they feel the stronger Blast,
 They lie Supine, and skim the liquid Wast. 
The nat'ral Barks outdoe all human Art,
 When skilful Floaters play the Sailor's part. 
Two Feet they upward raise, and steady keep,
 These are the Masts, and Rigging of the Ship. 
A Membrane stretcht between supplies the Sail,
 Bends from the Masts, and swells before the Gale. 
Two other Feet hang paddling on each side,
 And serve for Oars to row, and Helm to guide. 
'Tis thus they sail, pleas'd with the wanton Game,
 The Fish, the Sailor, and the Ship the same. 
But when the Swimmers dread some Danger near,
 The sportive Pleasure yields to stronger Fear. 
No more they wanton drive before the Blasts,
 But strike the Sails, and bring down all the Masts. 
The rolling Waves their sinking Shells o'erflow,
 And dash them down again to Sands below. 

Ye Pow'rs! when Man first fell'd the stately Trees,
 And past to distant Shores on wafting Seas:
 Whether some God inspir'd the wond'rous Thought,
 Or Chance found out, or careful Study sought;
 If humble Guess may probably divine,
 And trace th' Improvement to the first Design;
 Some Wight of prying Search, who wond'ring Stood,
 When softer Gales had smooth'd the dimpled Flood,
 Observ'd these careless Swimmers floating move,
 And how each Blast the easy Sailor drove;
 Hence took the Hint; hence form'd th' imperfect Draught;
 And Ship-like Fish the future Sea-man taught. 
Then Mortals try'd the shelving Hull to slope,
 To raise the Mast, and twist the stronger Rope,
 To fix the Yards, let fly the crowded Sails;
 Sweep thro' the curling Waves, and court auspicious Gales. 

Prodigious Fishes, of enormous Size,
 With shiv'ring Fright pale Mariners surprize. 
Nature's strange Work, vast Whales of diff'ring Form
 Toss up the troubled Floods, and are themselves a Storm. 
Uncouth the Sight, when They in dreadful Play
 Discharge their Nostrils, and refund a Sea;
 Or angry lash the Foam with hideous Sound,
 And scatter all the wat'ry Dust around. 
Fearless the fierce destructive Monsters roll,
 Ingulph the Fish, and drive the flying Shoal. 
In deepest Seas these living Isles appear,
 And deepest Seas can scarce the Pressure bear. 
Their Bulk would more than fill the shelvy Straight,
 And fathom'd Depths would yield beneath the Weight. 

But some will dare approach the rising Lands,
 Where Tides run free, unchoak'd with cast-up Sands;
 Haunt the Sea-Marge, where hanging Cliffs out-brave
 The bootless Threat'nings of the growling Wave. 
Near high-land Coasts the rav'nous Shoals appear,
 And in-land Friths th' unwieldy Monsters bear. 
Sea-Lions here the sounding Waters beat,
 Fierce Rams and Panthers break the tatter'd Net. 
White Sharks, the Fisher's Curse, force on their Way,
 And ominous Hyæna's seize their Prey. 
With them swift Tunnies drive, a swarthy Brood,
 Erect their prickly Fins, and hunt for Food. 
The monstrous Balance-Fish, of hideous Shape,
 Rounds jetting Lands, and doubles ev'ry Cape. 
While noisy Fin-Fish let their Fountains fly,
 And spout the circling Torrents to the Sky. 
Saw-Fish well arm'd sweep by the winding Shore,
 And all the In-lets of the Seas explore. 
And They who, tho' from Rapin unreclaim'd,
 From easy Softness are but falsly nam'd. 
Sea-Dogs, who various Tribes unnumber'd boast,
 Pirate around, and pillage all the Coast. 
One Sort, that keeps the Seas, is rank'd with Whales,
 Others deep hide, and press the slimy Vales. 
Of these the curst Sea-Hogs one Species make,
 Call'd from black bristly Pricks, that shade their Back. 
The Morgay, Monk, the Smooth and Prickly Hound,
 And long-tail'd Fox strike deep the killing Wound. 
Their widen'd Jaws a Magazine disclose
 Of pointed Weapons rang'd in num'rous Rows. 
In Shape agreeing, and in Choice ally'd,
 They pad in Troops, and the rich Spoils divide. 

Kind gen'rous Dolphins love the rocky Shore,
 Where broken Waves with fruitless Anger roar. 
But tho' to sounding Shores they curious come,
 Yet Dolphins count the boundless Sea their Home. 
Nay should these Favorites forsake the Main,
 Neptune would grieve his melancholly Reign. 
The calmest stillest Seas, when left by them,
 Would rueful frown, and all unjoyous seem. 
But when the Darlings frisk in wanton Play,
 The Waters smile, and ev'ry Wave looks gay. 
Neptune his Spousals to the Dolphin owes,
 And envy'd Honours on the Race bestows. 
When the fair Nereid, indiscreetly coy,
 Fled from th' Embrace, and scorn'd the profer'd Joy;
 The pensive God around the Waters 'sought,
 Div'd thro' the Gulphs, and search'd each darksome Grot;
 In vain; the Dolphins saw, and could declare
 The secret Haunts of the unwilling Fair. 
They told him where She bashful hid her Charms;
 He found, and clasp'd her struggling in his Arms.
 The Dolphins hence with just Ambition claim
 Uncommon Gifts, and more than vulgar Fame. 
No grateful Meed the gen'rous God deny'd
 To the glad Finders of the Royal Bride. 

Cetaceous Kinds will sometimes leave the Seas,
 And praise the distant Verdure of the Trees:
 Pass o'er the Banks, on sandy Fallows rest,
 Or seize the Covert of some absent Beast. 

Thus the mail'd Tortoise, and the wand'ring Eel
 Oft to the neighb'ring Beach will silent steal. 
And soft-hair'd Beavers inauspicious roam,
 Officious to declare impending Doom. 
The frighted Swains stand list'ning on the Vale,
 Their Limbs all shudder, and their Cheeks turn pale;
 While luckless Harbingers, with odious Yell,
 Too sure the fixt Resolves of Fate foretell. 

So the Grand Whale will court the weedy Strand,
 Stretch out, and bask upon the wavy Sand. 
Sea-Calves by Night far from the Waters stray,
 And sometimes dare to try the sunny Day;
 Glad to th' unequal dusty Ridges creep,
 And thoughtless on the breezy Hillocks sleep. 

Blest Jove! whose Pow'r must Nature's Laws enforce;
 From whose Abyss, and rich unempty'd Source
 Divided Streams of Entity descend
 By whom all Beings are, in whom they cent'ring end;
 Whether by Choice confin'd thy Godhead stay,
 Where blissful Æther gives eternal Day,
 And far above fixt on th' empyreal Throne,
 Thou guid'st the World, and look'st propitious down;
 Or art in ev'ry Part a Mundane Soul,
 An Energy diffus'd, that actuates the Whole;
 Man strives in vain to know. —
 What Cement did All-knowing Goodness find,
 The jarring Principles of Things to bind,
 And reconcile their Natures to partake
 Each other's Forms, and mutual Changes make? 
Light Æther well may scorn the creeping Streams,
 And subtil Fire with Earth ill-mated seems;
 But middle Natures joyn the vast Extreams. 
Pure with less pure, and gross with grosser meet,
 And thus the Commerce of the Whole compleat. 
Of Nature's Chain how regular the Links! 
Matter by slow Gradations downward sinks;
 And intermediate Changes gently pass
 From lightsome Æther to the dullest Mass. 
Or climb by the same Steps from lumpish Clay
 To the bright Liquid, and the fine-spun Ray. 
Dissolving Earth in fluid Moisture glides,
 And Rocks transform'd flow down in silver Tides. 
Dilating Streams in vap'ry Columns rise,
 And sweating Seas will gild the distant Skies. 
Dispersing Clouds to nobler Forms aspire
 Refine to Æther, or ferment to Fire. 
Things only differ as condense, or rare. 
Impurer Skies will thicken into Air;
 Air when too gross will falling Drops increase,
 And hang in lucid Pearls on weeping Trees. 
The glewy Substance, that no longer flows,
 Stagnates to Slime; and slimy Matter grows
 To earthly Mould; that hard'ning turns to Stone. 
So All is diff'rent, and yet All is One. 

The Elements, to slow themselves agreed,
 Each often will another's Offspring feed;
 And hence Amphibious Kinds indiffrent rove,
 Design'd as Pledges of their mutual Love. 
The Sea-born Tribes will seek the distant Mead,
 And feather'd Fowls on restless Waters breed. 
The rav'nous Eagle, and the noisy Mew
 Fearless thro' Waves the scaly Prey pursue. 
Her Nest the mournful Halcyon trusts to Seas,
 Nor builds in cranny'd Rocks, or shading Trees. 
Fish too well-poiz'd their finny Wings display,
 Dart from the Main, and try th' aerial Way. 
Sea-Hawks, the Swallow, and the wanton Sleve
 Their native Streams for airy Pastime leave. 
When rav'nous Foes pursue, they conscious rise,
 And court the kind Protection of the Skies. 
Far on unfeather'd Wings the Sleves are born
 And soaring high the distant Waters scorn. 
With strange Surprize we view the dubious Sight,
 Of Fish in Shape, and yet of Birds in Flight. 
Sea-Swallows lower fly, regard the Main,
 Mount in their Fear, but quickly dive again. 
But cautious Hawks, tho' wing'd, will nearer keep,
 And hov'ring o'er the wavy Surface sweep. 
They rince their moisten'd Wings, as close they skim,
 Both Elements enjoy, and flying swim. 

Some form Societies, and friendly dwell,
 Obey set Laws, and know the publick Weal. 
Others, a giddy Race, ungovern'd strowl,
 The foaming Surface shows the wand'ring Shoal,
 O'er all the troubled Sea confus'dly spread,
 Like bleating Flocks on sunny Mountains fed. 
Others are rang'd, unlike the huddled Drove;
 In equal Files the moist Battalions move. 
With firm Platoons they stem the flowing Tide,
 And regular their wat'ry Marches guide. 

Some with one Partner all their Blessings share;
 The strictest Friendship centers in a Pair. 
Others, a pensive solitary Kind,
 Wand'ring alone ill-natur'd Pleasure find;
 Full of themselves the sullen Bliss commend,
 Nor know the soft Endearments of a Friend. 
Some keep one Place, and there incurious lie,
 Ne'er roam abroad, but where they live they die. 

When Winter's stormy Season is begun,
 And piercing Cold mocks the declining Sun,
 Vext by the Winds the angry Billows rise,
 And would revenge themselves upon the Skies. 
Dash'd Floods loud echo from the plaining Shore,
 The Tempest rattles, and the Surges roar. 
Such Din the Scaly Natives dread to hear,
 Lurk in the Sands, or to the Caves repair;
 There trembling lie; or sink to Depths below,
 Where all the Mother-Waters silent flow;
 The distant Threats of low'ring Storms despise,
 Nor fear the clouded Changes of the Skies. 
The deepest Waves, and fiercest Wind that blows,
 Can't reach those Depths, or raise the settled Ooze;
 Eternal Calms protect the peaceful Plain,
 While Tempests rage, and Waters beat in vain. 
Warm in old Ocean's Lap they rest secure,
 While noisy Storms and wintry Colds endure;
 Till stronger Rays the thawing Frost subdue,
 And Nature the decaying World renew. 
When smiling Hours lead in the blooming Year,
 And Groves and Meads in gayer Dress appear;
 While soothing Pleasaunce sits on all the Sea;
 Fishes the kinder Summons will obey,
 Throng to the Shore, and bound in joyous Play. 

So Citizens, when hostile Troops confine,
 With wakefull Fear, and tedious Hunger pine. 
But when kind Fate, or pressing Want oblige
 Th' investing Host to raise the fruitless Siege,
 Freed from Alarms the smiling Neighbours meet,
 All Ranks and Ages crowd the noisy Street. 
The Youths and Virgins trip the joyful Round,
 And guide their Motions by directing Sound. 
Lovers repeat the long-neglected Bliss,
 And make amends for the suspended Kiss. 

When pleasing Heat, and fragrant Blooms inspire
 Soft leering Looks, kind Thoughts and gay Desire,
 Love runs thro' All; the feather'd Wantons play,
 Seek out their Mates, and bill on ev'ry Spray. 
The savage Kinds a softer Rage express,
 And gloating Eyes the secret Flame confess. 
But none like Fishes feel the dear Disease;
 For Venus doubly warms her native Seas. 
Males unconcern'd their pleasing Loves repeat,
 While anxious She's the ripen'd Birth compleat. 
On sandy Mounds their pressing Bellies lay,
 And force the Burden of the Womb away. 
Close joyn'd the complicated Eggs remain;
 To separate that Heap is racking Pain. 

Complain no more, ye Fair, or partial Fate,
 What Sorrows on the teeming Bride await. 
The Female-Curse is not to Earth confin'd,
 Severest Throws the Fishes Wombs unbind;
 Lucina is alike to All unkind. 

Now when the vernal Breeze has purg'd the Air,
 To ev'ry Shore the vig'rous Males repair;
 By Fear compell'd, or Appetite inclin'd,
 To chace the weak, or fly the stronger Kind:
 Nor will the am'rous Females stay behind. 
No Fears or Dangers can the Bliss prevent,
 When urg'd by Love, and on the Joy intent,
 They still importunate their Suit renew,
 And obstinately kind extort their Due. 
Their Bodies meet, the close Embraces please,
 Till mingled Slime lies floating on the Seas:
 The She's gulp greedy down the tepid Seed,
 And fruitful from the strange Conception breed. 
Hence the succeeding Colonies increase,
 And new-spawn'd Tribes replenish all the Seas. 

But some no lawless Liberties allow;
 Whose Brides confin'd their private Chambers know. 
In close Retreat they guard th' imprison'd Fair,
 Observe their Haunt, and watch with jealous Care,
 Lest some false Leman should invade their Right,
 And wanton glory in the stol'n Delight. 
All Things obey, when softer Passions move,
 But Fishes feel the keenest Rage of Love. 
They all the Pangs of jealous Fury know,
 (That cursed Fiend will dive to Worlds below,)
 Feel selfish Pride, Distrust, and anxious Pain,
 And all the Plagues that form Love's pompous Train. 

As rival Lovers, that one Flame confess,
 All blooming Youths, whom splendid Fortunes bless,
 Still haunt the Nymph, and tell the moving Tale;
 Each hopes his Wealth or Passion may prevail;
 Thus Sea-born Rivals round the She repair,
 And claim the sole Enjoyment of the Fair. 
They boast no Wealth indeed to purchase Love,
 No soft deluding Eloquence to move;
 But they have sharpest Teeth, and pointed Jaws,
 To own their Passion, and maintain their Cause. 
Long they dispute the Prize in hardy Fight,
 Till joyful Conquest gives undoubted Right. 
The vanquisht Wretch must hide in pensive Shame,
 Forego his Pleasure, and renounce his Claim. 

Some to successive Choice of Wives are kind,
 Abhor the Curse of one to one confin'd. 
Thus the lewd Sargo's spend their wanton Days,
 And dark-dy'd Wrass the lawless Freedom praise. 

The Beetle no promiscuous Joys allows,
 True to his Vow, and grateful to his Spouse. 
No Change he seeks, nor leaves his dusky Fair;
 Propitious Hymen joyns the constant Pair. 

Strange the Formation of the Eely Race,
 That know no Sex, yet love the close Embrace. 
Their folded Lengths they round each other twine,
 Twist am'rous Knots, and slimy Bodies joyn;
 Till the close Strife brings off a frothy Juice,
 The Seed that must the wriggling Kind produce. 
Regardless They their future Offspring leave,
 But porous Sands the spumy Drops receive. 
That genial Bed impregnates all the Heap,
 And little Eelets soon begin to creep. 
Half-Fish, Half-Slime they try their doubtful strength,
 And slowly trail along their wormy Length. 
What great Effects from slender Causes flow! 
Congers their Bulk to these Productions owe:
 The Forms, which from the frothy Drop began,
 Stretch out immense, and eddy all the Main. 

Justly might Female Tortoises complain,
 To whom Enjoyment is the greatest Pain. 
They dread the Tryal, and foreboding hate
 The growing Passion of the cruel Mate. 
He amorous pursues, They conscious fly
 Joyless Caresses, and resolv'd deny. 
Since partial Heav'n has thus restrain'd the Bliss,
 The Males they welcome with a closer Kiss,
 Bite angry, and reluctant Hate declare. 
The Tortoise - Courtship is a State of War. 
Eager they fight, but with unlike Design,
 Males to obtain, and Females to decline. 
The conflict lasts, till these by Strength o'ercome
 All sorrowing yield to the resistless Doom. 
Not like a Bride, but pensive Captive, led
 To the loath'd Duties of an hated Bed. 
The Seal, and Tortoise copulate behind
 Like Earth-bred Dogs, and are not soon disjoyn'd;
 But secret Ties the passive Couple bind. 

The Preke's Amours our softest Pity move,
 Whose certain nat'ral Death is only Love. 
Once, and but once, the niggard Pow'rs allow
 The luckless Pair congenial Bliss to know. 
Soon as the Male has try'd the luscious Joy,
 The soft repeated Pleasures never cloy. 
Excessive in Desire he won't give o'er,
 Till strength and wasting Spirits be no more. 
When Nature drain'd can grant no fresh Supplies,
 Stretcht on the Sands all impotent he lies. 
The little Shell-Fish, late his usual Prey,
 Insult his Doom, and all his Wrongs repay;
 Their Foe, so dreadful once, no longer fear,
 And well reveng'd the living Carkass tear. 
He passive lies, nor feels the Pow'r to move,
 But dying grieves his too unsated Love. 
Nor long, when once enjoy'd, the Females live,
 Or future Dolours of the Birth survive. 
Their Eggs lie all compact, and strait's the Way,
 Which must the cluster'd Heaps to Life convey. 
Now when ripe Nature will the Birth constrain,
 The teeming Bride feels her increasing Pain;
 Nor longer can the tort'ring Pressure bear,
 When falling Eggs th' unequal Passage tear. 
Fate stints their Life; that Term they cannot pass,
 One rolling Year concludes the shorten'd Space. 
E'er the swift Chariot of the Gold-hair'd Sun
 Has told the Days, and all his Circuit run,
 Fond Suicides the dear Destruction prove
 Of luckless Marriage, and disastrous Love. 

The Lamprey, glowing with uncommon Fires,
 The Earth-bred Serpents purfled Curls admires. 
He no less kind makes amorous Returns,
 With equal Love the grateful Serpent burns. 
Fixt on the Joy he bounding shoots along,
 Erects his azure Crest, and darts his forky Tongue. 
Now his red Eye-balls glow with doubled Fires;
 Proudly he mounts upon his folded Spires,
 Displays his glossy Coat, and speckled Side,
 And meets in all his Charms the wat'ry Bride. 
But lest he cautless might his Consort harm,
 The gentle Lover will himself disarm,
 Spit out the venom'd Mass, and careful hide
 In cranny'd Rocks, far from the washing Tide;
 There leaves the Furies of his noxious Teeth,
 And putrid Bags, the pois'nous Fund of Death. 
His Mate he calls with softly hissing Sounds;
 She joyful hears, and from the Ocean bounds. 
Swift as the bearded Arrow's Hast she flies,
 To own her Love, and meet the Serpent's Joys. 
At her approach, no more the Lover bears
 Odious Delay, nor sounding Waters fears. 
Onward he moves on shining Volumes roll'd,
 The Foam all burning seems with wavy Gold. 
At length with equal Hast the Lovers meet,
 And strange Enjoyments slake their mutual Heat. 
She with wide-gaping Mouth the Spouse invites,
 Sucks in his Head, and feels unknown Delights. 
When full Fruition has asswag'd Desire,
 Well-pleas'd the Bride will to her Home retire. 
Tir'd with the Strife the Serpent hies to Land,
 And leaves his Prints on all the furrow'd Sand;
 With anxious Fear seeks the close private Cleft,
 Where he in Trust th' important Secret left. 
From the stain'd Rock he sucks the pois'nous Heaps,
 Feels his returning Strength, and hissing leaps;
 With brandish'd Tongue the distant Foe defies,
 And darts new Light'nings from his Blood-shot Eyes. 
But if some Swain mean while observing spies
 Where odious Spume, and venom'd Spittle lies,
 And while the Serpent wooes, from neighb'ring Seas
 The cleansing Waters to the Rock conveys;
 The Serpent comes, and finds his Treasure gone,
 Looks sorrowing round, and blames the faithless Stone;
 Disarm'd no more his wonted Pleasure takes,
 Curls in the Grass, or hisses in the Brakes. 
He creeps with Shame a tawdry speckled Worm,
 And prides no longer in his beauteous Form. 
On the same Rock with Head reclin'd he lies,
 And, where he lost his Arms, despairing dies. 

Dolphins like Men perform the nuptial Debt,
 Parts of like Form the vig'rous Joy repeat;
 Hide, and contract unseen, till eager Love,
 And conscious Hopes the pow'rful Fancy move. 

Thus the moist Tribes the Call of Love obey,
 Produce their Like, and people all the Sea. 
Each knows the Time, by proper Instinct drawn,
 When Nature bids eject th' enliven'd Spawn. 
Some breed, when vernal Days the Skies renew,
 And Waves each other but in Sport pursue. 
When soft Favonius plays in wanton Gales,
 And pleasing Warmth no future Storm exhales. 
Others, when Summer darts directer Beams,
 And fills the tainted Air with sultry Steams. 
Some from their Wombs the ripen'd Burden force,
 When weary'd Titan takes a shorter Course,
 And from high Mountain Tops th' Autumnal Breeze
 Lets fall the wafted Seeds on barren Seas. 
Some, when inclement Winter rudely blows,
 To chilling Cold their tender Young expose. 

Yearly their Eggs the pregnant Females lay,
 One annual Birth restores the vast Decay. 
But twice Sea-Wolves the coming Sorrow mourn;
 Again the Joys, again the Pangs return. 
Three yearly Spawns the teeming Mullet bless,
 Renew the Race, and give the large Increase. 
The curling Scorpion in each Season knows,
 The glad Conception, and the wringing Throws. 
But Carps all Kinds in num'rous Births exceed,
 They still unweary'd with their Labour breed. 
With five successive Spawns the Carps abound
 E'er the swift Sun has trac'd his annual Round. 

But no Research the puzzling Secret finds,
 How Whitings gender, and preserve their Kinds. 
They love, and propagate by Ways unknown,
 And baffled Men their vain Enquiries own. 

Oviparous Fish, whom vernal Labours ease,
 And give the full-grown Eggs their ripe Release,
 Some in their wonted Dwellings patient stay,
 Prepare their Beds, and wait the reckon'd Day. 

Others will not Lucina's Call obey,
 Till with long March they reach the Euxine Sea. 
There pleasant Gulphs uncommon Sweetness boast,
 And Salts o'er-pow'rd in fresher Streams are lost. 
A thousand River-Gods on ev'ry Side
 Their leaning Urns all to the Euxine guide. 
The hollow Bason is ingirt around
 With fruitful Banks, and fenc'd with rising Ground. 
Here all the Pleasures of the Sea they find,
 Rich Pastures, sandy Mounds, and gentle Wind. 
Capes jetting from the Shores on either Side
 Elbow the Floods, and part the swelling Tide. 
Here private Ways, and dubious Caverns please,
 And bending Fore-lands shade the calmer Seas. 
Returning Tides beflime the winding Caves,
 And easy Dimples smile in broken Waves. 
No rav'nous Kinds, and fierce unwelcome Guest
 Thirsting for Blood, the wat'ry Roads infest. 
No Whaly Monster here destructive rolls,
 No Robber comes that preys on weaker Shoals. 
No Lobster on the little Captive feasts;
 Nor crawling Preke those harmless Shores molests. 
Dolphins are found, but innocently tame
 These Dolphins play, and murd'rous Guilt disclaim. 
A Species weaker than the Whaly Breed,
 Peaceful they rove, and without Slaughter feed. 
Hence thronging Fish admire the kind Retreat;
 From ev'ry distant Sea the Strangers meet. 
Led by one Thought they feel the same Desire,
 Come at set Times, and all at once retire. 
When Instinct prompts, the She's with one Design
 Begin the March, and all their Forces joyn,
 Pass the Propontis, and the Thracian Straight,
 And now the coming Birth impatient wait. 

So prudent Cranes, from Egypt's slimy Banks,
 Concert their Flight, and form their airy Ranks;
 Bleak Atlas leave, and Æthiopia's Snows,
 Where puny Pigmies bend their hostile Bows. 
Loud Clangors sound the March; the Flocks on high
 Spread their long Wings, and brush th' uncolour'd Sky. 
Well-rang'd they file along the trackless Plain,
 And busy Plumes the whistling Welkin fan. 

Such noisy Tumults stir the mantling Seas,
 When breeding Fish joy at the vernal Breeze;
 With fisking Tails the circling Eddies beat,
 Hast to the Birth, and annual Toils repeat. 
Unweary'd they pursue the toilsome Race,
 Till the calm Euxine shows his smiling Face. 
Here their prolifick Spawn they teeming lay,
 While friendly Winds with sportive Waters play. 
Sunk Waves supine on the smooth Surface sleep,
 And Warmth impregnates all the jelly'd Heap. 
But when Autumnal Winds grow hoarse with Cold,
 And the rouz'd Billows are confus'dly roll'd;
 When Gales, that whisper'd erst, begin to chide,
 When Mountains rise, and yawning Combs subside,
 So calm before, the Euxine suffers most
 From wint'ry Storms, and is incessant tost. 
Insulting Winds it's shallow Depth command,
 And boiling Floods turn up the working Sand. 
Dash'd on themselves the bandy'd Surges roar,
 And tell th' unpity'd Tale to ev'ry Shore. 
The vap'ry Mountains blacken from afar,
 Recruit the Tempest, and maintain the War. 
Fishes alarm'd the changing Season mourn,
 And with their little Fry in Throngs return. 
Backward again their hasty Course they steer,
 And the free open Main to in-land Seas prefer. 

Soft Fishes, who their plyant Bodies wreath,
 In whom no Bones their branching Prickles sheath;
 The Bloodless Crusty Race, who crawling play,
 Tho' no swoln Veins the purple Life convey;
 The various Finny Tribes, that swifter glide,
 Array'd in silver Scales, and spotted Pride;
 And slow Testaceous Kinds, that constant dwell
 Fixt in the Concave of the pearly Shell,
 All breed alike, distill a mucous Juice
 Whose bladd'ry Heaps the future Young produce. 

Eagles, Sea-Dogs, and all the Gristly Race
 Bring forth their Like, no shapeless clotted Mass;
 Retain the Seed within till perfect grown,
 And Nature has her just Proportions shown. 
From the full Womb Amphibious Paddlers creep,
 And little Sea-Calves bustle on the Deep. 
So Dolphins teem, whom Subject Fish revere,
 And show the smiling Seas their Infant-Heir. 

All other Kinds, whom Parent-Seas confine,
 Dolphins excell; that Race is all divine. 
Dolphins were Men, (Tradition hands the Tale)
 Laborious Swains bred on the Tuscan Vale:
 Transform'd by Bacchus, and by Neptune lov'd,
 They all the Pleasures of the Deep improv'd. 
When new-made Fish the God's Command obey'd,
 Plung'd in the Waves, and untry'd Fins display'd,
 No further Change relenting Bacchus wrought,
 Nor have the Dolphins all the Man forgot;
 The conscious Soul retains her former Thought. 
When painful Throws, (for Twins the Dolphins bear)
 And finish'd Time brings forth the Princely Pair,
 They round their Parent frisk, sport by her Side;
 Oft in her Mouth the little Wantons hide. 
She glad receives, with watchful Eye attends,
 Directs their Motions, and from Harm defends;
 Exulting leaps, and feels the Mother's Joy,
 When with close Kiss she hugs the dandled Boy. 
Then suckling gives to each the swelling Breast,
 By partial Heav'n with Gifts uncommon blest. 
The Dolphins Paps a luscious Milk produce,
 Hourly distending with secreted Juice. 
But when her Young are grown to just Encrease,
 And stronger Fins can wrestle with the Seas,
 She to more useful Arts directs the Way,
 And shows to vault the Waves, and chace the Prey. 

What pleasing Wonders charm the Sailor's sight,
 When Calms the Dolphins to their Sports invite? 
As jovial Swains in tuneful Measure tread,
 And leave their rounding Pressures on the Mead;
 So They in circling Dance, with wanton Ease
 Pursue each other round the furrow'd Seas,
 With rapid Force the curling Streams divide,
 Add to the Waves, and drive the slow-pac'd Tide. 
The Parent Dolphins, with suspicious Care,
 Of casual Harms, and guilty Floods beware,
 Move cautious on behind, and guard the Rear. 

So when blith Lambs their vernal Revels keep,
 Bound from the Turf, and o'er the Hillocks leap;
 Now harmless try to butt, then race away,
 Now weary'd feed, and thus consume the Day,
 Mean while the thoughtful Shepherd watching lies,
 Lest sudden Onset should his Flock surprize. 

As grave Preceptors, whose instructive Care
 By Wisdom's Dictates forms the growing Heir,
 When the glad Pupil Throng to Sport inclin'd,
 Suspend the nobler Pleasures of the Mind,
 With jealous Eyes the while their Steps observe,
 Left playful Hours from steady Virtue swerve;
 So Parent Dolphins on the Care intent
 Watch their gay Young, and threaten'd Ills prevent. 

Sea-Calves their Offspring, like the Dolphins, feast,
 And milky Stores distend the rising Breast. 
When conseious they th' approaching Time perceive,
 They fly the Deep, and wat'ry Pastures leave. 
On the dry Ground, far from the swelling Tide,
 Bring forth their Young, and on the Shores abide,
 Till twice six times they see the Eastern Gleams
 Brighten the Hills, and tremble on the Streams. 
The thirteenth Morn, soon as the early Dawn
 Hangs out it's crimson Folds, or spreads it's Lawn,
 No more the Fields and leafy Coverts please,
 Each hugs her own, and hasts to rolling Seas,
 Shows him his better Home, tho' sapless Earth
 Reliev'd the Womb, and caught the falling Birth. 

So the sad Bride, whom the long-reckon'd Day,
 And child-bed Pains confine to tedious Stay,
 Far from the lov'd Abode all pensive lies;
 Enfeebling Birth the wonted Strength denies. 
But when just Time has set th' unjoynted Bones,
 New-strung the Nerves, and strain'd their slacken'd Tones,
 She warm enwraps the Babe, nor brooks Delay,
 Hurries along, and soon devours the Way. 
At length the Dame arrives; with weeping Joy
 Clasps the dear Child, and shakes the pleasing Toy,
 Talks idly fond, bids him admire his Home,
 And gay Amusements of each furnish'd Room. 
The list'ning Infant turns his little Eyes,
 And void of reas'ning Thought by smiling Looks replies. 

Good Gods! how tender is the Parent Love! 
Their ravisht Hearts what earning Transports move! 
All Kinds that move in Ocean, Earth, or Air
 Alike the Charms of Piety revere. 
Fondly the Savage licks her shapeless Young,
 And smooths his Ringlets with her scurfy Tongue. 
The careful Birds bring home the hourly Feast,
 While unfledg'd Chirpers flicker in the Nest. 
Ev'n rav'nous Fish defend their helpless Fry,
 Forewarn their Dangers, and their Wants supply. 

Not Men alone their lovely Offspring prize
 Sweet as their Lives, and dearer than their Eyes;
 Unreas'ning Souls the same Propensions move,
 Man can claim no Prerogative from Love. 
One Instinct runs thro' All. —

Hunters from far the roaring Challenge dread,
 When Monarch-Lions with majestick Tread,
 Their princely Train thro' all the Forrest lead. 
The Royal Dam looks round with proud Disdain,
 Lashes her Sides, and curls her flowing Mane;
 No Danger fears, but willing to engage
 With chafing Jaws she churns the frothy Rage,
 Redoubled Fires flash from her rolling Eyes,
 Clods scatter'd flie, and dusty Columns rise. 
Roaring She frights the Herd, and shakes the Plain,
 Mocks the slung Stone, and knaps the Spear in twain;
 Still guards her Young, the Hunter's Motion thwarts,
 And wrenches from her Sides the reeking Darts. 
But when Death hovers o'er her swimming Eyes,
 And clotted on the Ground Life's wasted Treasure lies,
 When doubtful Staggers own the killing Wound;
 Regardless of her self She looks around,
 O'er the dear Cub her sinking Head reclines,
 In Death defends, nor at her Fate repines. 
But dreads to see the Wretch a Captive made,
 To hear him roar, and call in vain for Aid,
 When close confin'd he strives with bootless Rage,
 Unsheaths his Claws, and beats the sounding Cage. 

With her blind Whelps the snarling Mother lies,
 Uneasy grins, and frets at ev'ry Noise;
 Familiar once, but now with growling Threats
 The fearful Shepherd She unkindly treats;
 Nor licks the bounteous Hand, (ev'n Love provokes)
 Nor fisks the Tail, or fawns at gentle Stroaks. 

When the lone Cow repeats her daily Moan,
 A soft Compassion moves the sturdy Clown. 
From lowing Vales the undulating Air
 To ev'ry Mountain tells the Dam's Despair. 
Oft pensive She reviews the once-lov'd Place,
 Where on the Bank She prest the yielding Grass,
 Or the calm Shelter of the cooler Wood,
 Where with her Calf She chew'd the grateful Cud;
 Then restless walks, and rounds the Hedge again,
 Looks o'er the Gate, and eyes the winding Lane. 

Oft have the list'ning Streams the Osprey heard,
 When to the whisp'ring Reeds the injur'd Bird
 Of Eggs unhatch'd, or callow Young bereav'd,
 In ruthful Cries has told how much She griev'd. 
The Mother Nightingale, when childless made,
 With mournful Musick fills the lonely Glade. 
What pungent Sorrows must the Parent feel,
 When idle Swains the downy Songsters steal? 
They thoughtless from the Nest the Brood convey;
 She in sad murm'ring pines the tedious Day,
 At Night the melancholly Strain renews;
 Harmonious Plaints ungrateful Man accuse. 
How passionate the Swallow tells her Wrong,
 When some fell Serpent has devour'd her Young,
 Or Churl pull'd down her Nest? She sorrowing flies,
 Chatters aloud, and long repeats her fruitless Cries. 

Full of the tender Thought, with anxious Care
 The Dolphins watch, and guard their Infant Pair,
 While they in nimble Race the Tail expand,
 Insult the Waves, and Subject Seas command. 
Each Parent Fish her Young in Danger hides,
 Nurtures the Fry, and in her Likeness prides. 

But the Sea-Dog uncommon Toil endures,
 While She her Young from dreaded Harm secures. 
Within her Womb the Dam receives again
 The pressing Burden, and renews her Pain. 
To the known Place, when struck with sudden Fear,
 The Whelps return, and will ungrateful tear
 Those tender Parts; safe in the close Retreat
 Escape their Dangers, and their Fears forget;
 Again, when all's secure, the Womb release,
 Force out their Way, and venture on the Seas. 

The same fond Care commends the thorny Skate,
 When rav'nous Shoals the Prey impatient wait. 
She distant Waters eyes with kind Distrust,
 Knows when all's safe, and when her Fears are just. 
Nor will her Womb again her Offspring hide;
 Two spacious Cavities, on either Side
 Below her Gills, the trembling Fry receive,
 When guilty Seas the careful Parent grieve. 
While the fierce Foes unguarded Shoals surprize,
 In safe Recess the prickly Darling lies,
 No Dangers fears, tho' rolling Waters swell,
 And angry Hast of coming Monsters tell. 

Others, when ought disturbs the ravag'd Seas,
 And trembling Young their conscious Fears express,
 Extend their Jaws, and show the safer Way;
 The frighted Stragglers soon the Call obey,
 Within the concave Roof uninjur'd rest,
 Safe as the Chirper in his mossy Nest. 
Thus the Blew-Sharks secure from chacing Foes
 Within their widen'd Mouths their Young enclose. 
Beneath the circling Arch they fearless hide,
 Tho' bulky Forms drive on the rising Tide. 
Of all Oviparous Kinds that throng the Seas,
 Whose num'rous Shoals from spermy Heaps increase,
 The fond Blew-Sharks in tender Care surpass:
 With what Concern they wait the teeming Mass! 
What anxious Fears confess their secret Love,
 Lest the Birth failing should abortive prove! 
While most their Eggs to Chance regardless leave,
 They watch their Spawn, the slow Formation grieve,
 Nature's faint Progress in the Work accuse,
 Till rip'ning Hours the vig'rous Life infuse. 
They near their Fondlings, like some careful Nurse,
 Observe their Motions, and restrain their Course,
 Eye ev'ry Wave, and show the doubtful Way,
 Teach where to hunt, and where to find the Prey. 
When big with secret Guilt the Waters heave,
 They in their Mouths their shelter'd Young receive. 
But when the Waves at their own Leisure roll,
 And no fierce Robber drives the scatter'd Shoal,
 Again the Parent's pointed Jaws comprest
 By Force expell them from their pleasing Rest. 

But void of all Remorse the Tunnies feed
 On their own Spawn, and gulp th' enliven'd Seed;
 With strange Repast the cruel Parents blest
 Devour their Eggs, and praise the monstrous Feast. 

Some Kinds without the nuptial Labours breed,
 Nor own the common Origine of Seed. 
Oysters self-bred in rocky Crannies grow,
 Nor to the painful Birth their Being owe. 
Some spring spontaneous from the genial Slime;
 No curious Frame, or work of slower Time
 Nature on them bestows; but form'd in Hast
 In ready Clay the Mould is easy cast. 
In these no Difference of Sex appears,
 No Male sheds down the Spawn, nor Female bears. 

The Spirlings thus their idle Lives begin,
 No ancient Lineage boast, or gen'rous Kin. 
When prest by mighty Jove the swelling Clouds
 From their moist Fleeces pour the noisy Floods,
 Collected Show'rs their falling Forces joyn,
 Beat on the Deep, and bubble up the Brine. 
The Waves diluted with the tastless Rain
 Vext raise their Foam, and stir the chafing Main. 
Soon new-created Shoals of Spirlings play,
 Shine on the Waves, and brighten all the Sea. 
By unknown Loves, and Ways uncommon bred
 All o'er the Seas the thronging Legions spread. 

As constant Tides observe their stated Time,
 Returning Currents raise the troubled Slime;
 That mixt is in the rolling Waters lost,
 Wafted afar, and on the Billows tost,
 Till purging Winds the winnow'd Ocean sweep,
 Force on the Draught, and form the worthless Heap. 
To ev'ry Shore the Floods their Load convey,
 And leave behind the Refuse of the Sea. 
On tainted Sands the mingled Ordure lies,
 And waits the Influence of warmer Skies. 
The loosen'd Parts, vext with the active Heat,
 Clog the dull Air, and reeky Moisture sweat;
 Unwholesome Scents breath from the vap'ry Store,
 And the gross Steams creep slowly round the Shore. 
Then from the teeming Filth, and putrid Heap,
 Like Summer Grubs, the little Slime-Fish creep. 
Devour'd by All the passive Curse they own,
 Opprest by ev'ry Kind, but injure none. 
Harmless they live, nor murd'rous Hunger know,
 But to themselves their mutual Pleasures owe;
 Each other lick, and the close Kiss repeat;
 Thus loving thrive, and praise the luscious Treat. 
When they in Throngs a safe Retirement seek,
 Where pointed Rocks the rising Surges break,
 Or where calm Waters in their Bason sleep,
 While chalky Cliffs o'erlook the shaded Deep,
 The Seas all gilded o'er the Shoal betray,
 And shining Tracks inform their wand'ring Way. 

As when soft Snows, brought down by Western Gales,
 Silent descend and spread on all the Vales;
 Add to the Plains, and on the Mountains shine,
 While in chang'd Fields the starving Cattle pine;
 Nature bears all one Face, looks coldly bright,
 And mourns her lost Variety in White,
 Unlike themselves the Objects glare around,
 And with false Rays the dazzled Sight confound:
 So, where the Shoal appears, the changing Streams
 Lose their Sky-blew, and shine with silver Gleams. 

THE SECOND BOOK OF OPPIAN's HALIEUTICKS.

Thus have I sung, how scaly Nations rove,
 What Food they seek, what Pastures they approve;
 How all the busy Wantons of the Seas
 Soft Loves repeat, and form the new Increase. 

But whence could Man the wond'rous Secret know? 
To some kind Pow'r he must the Blessing owe,
 Who to his View the hidden Depths expos'd,
 Uncover'd all th' Abyss, and the vast Scene disclos'd. 
For what great Work has Man unaided wrought? 
Heav'n gives the Means, and Heav'n inspires the Thought. 
Did not assisting Influence from above
 With unseen Force the passive Agents move,
 The Body could no more it's Parts command,
 Nor Stir the rooted Foot, nor stretch the stiffen'd Hand. 
Without superiour Aid, the sleeping Eyes
 Would darken'd ever close, nor blithsome Skies
 Again behold; but when the Guardian bids,
 Joyous the Orbs unfold their op'ning Lids. 
The Gods do all; from Heav'n our Actions guide
 Distant yet Near, and o'er our Wills preside. 
We must the grand Necessity obey,
 Unwilling shall pursue the destin'd Way. 
Better we unreluctant did submit:
 Th' unruly Colt may champ the frothy Bit,
 Restiff uprear the Hoof, and prance around,
 Race angry o'er th' unequal ridgy Ground:
 Such headstrong Fury but augments his Pain,
 At length he must obey the turning Rein. 
When Heav'n commands, 'tis Folly to deny;
 The Gods will govern, and the Wise comply,
 Nor strive to deviate from th' allotted Course,
 Lest manag'd after with ungentle Force
 They hear the sounding Lash, and bleeding feel
 Th' unjoyous Pressure of the galling Steel. 

To those indulgent Pow'rs Mankind below
 All gainful Arts, and useful Science owe. 
The Gods, distinguisht hence by awful Names,
 Declare their Office, and assert their Claims. 
And thus deriv'd each sacred Title shows
 What Gifts on Man each bounteous God bestows. 
Ceres describ'd the Farmer's annual Toil,
 What artful Rules improve the barren Soil. 
She taught to yoke th' unwilling Ox, to sow
 The harrow'd Ridge, to hold the bending Plough;
 To guide the brighten'd Share with steady Hands,
 Force up the Turf, and break the fallow'd Lands. 
Hence rising Fields their yellow Harvest bear,
 And wavy Autumn crowns the ripen'd Year. 
To shape the Beam, the Joyces firmly joyn,
 Stretch the wide Roof, and the slop'd Arch incline,
 To carve the Pillar, and the Dome to raise
 Pallas first taught, and Pallas claims the Praise. 
She too the gainful Secret did reveal,
 To draw the Woof, and twirl the murm'ring Wheel. 
Men curious try'd, by her Assistance led,
 To fix the Loom, and weave the thwarting Thread. 
The pointed Spear, the Breast-plate's polisht Brass,
 The glitt'ring Sword, and Helmet's plumed Grace,
 With all the dreadful Engin'ry of War,
 Are Mars his Choice, and fierce Bellona's Care. 
Apollo, and the sacred Nine inspire
 Strains worthy them, and fan the Poet's Fire. 
But subtle Hermes smooths the oily Tongue
 To move the Passions of the ravish'd Throng. 
He taught Athletic Slights, and dusty Toil,
 To ward the Blow, and give th' inglorious Foil. 
Vulcan first taught to mould the stubborn Mass,
 To form the sparkling Steel, and flowing Brass. 

Mankind with all their Search could never know
 What Natives glide in Liquid Worlds below. 
Those mirksome Deeps, and Regions far conceal'd
 That blest immortal Pow'r to Man reveal'd,
 Who cleft the Earth, and winding Furrows made,
 Where Rivers glide beneath the reedy Shade;
 Who distant Bounds to rolling Waves assign'd,
 And scatter'd Fluids in one Void confin'd,
 Who lofty rais'd the rocky Barriers round,
 And with the sandy Brim encircled Waters crown'd. 
Whether that God the Name of Neptune bears,
 Or Nereus better pleas'd, or Phorcys hears. 
Whatever Names the Deities approve,
 May all agree, Immortal Pow'rs above,
 Demons of Earth, Those that Aerial fly,
 And drench their Pinions in the liquid Sky,
 And the Green-Gods, that midst the Waters spread
 Their sinewy Arms, and shake their dropping Head,
 May all propitious guard the Royal Pair,
 Thee, Mighty Prince, and the World's growing Heir. 
May they protect the Nations, nor refuse
 To hear the Song, and aid th' aspiring Muse. 

No curbing Law restrains the greedy Shoals,
 No Sense of Wrong th' ungovern'd Wish controlls. 
O'er all the Seas their Food they rav'nous seek,
 And stronger Kinds feast on the injur'd weak. 
Selfish alike each minds his private Good,
 All in their Turns pursue, and are pursu'd. 
Some on meer Force depend; they nimble sweep
 Thro' parting Floods, and eddy all the Deep. 
Their wider Jaws a Magazine disclose
 Of pointed Teeth, that shine in double Rows. 
While some on Stores of venom'd Juice confide,
 And in close Cells the noxious Treasures hide. 
Others with sharpen'd Spikes are arm'd around,
 Erect the Spears, and strike the killing Wound. 
Weak puny Forms unequal War decline,
 By wily Fraud they act, and close Design. 
Such Prudence oft o'er thoughtless Strength prevails;
 Force may, but well laid Cunning seldome fails. 

The Pow'r of latent Charms the Cramp-Fish know,
 Tho' soft their Bodies, and their Motion slow. 
Unseen, foreboding Chance of future Prey,
 The crafty Sluggards take their silent Way. 
Stretcht from each Side they point their magick Wands,
 Whose icy Touch the strongest Fin commands;
 Quick thro' the whole it shoots the rushing Pain,
 Freezes the Blood, and thrills in ev'ry Vein;
 Strikes all that dare approach with strange Surprize,
 Stiffens the Fin, and dims the mazed Eyes. 
Conscious of secret Pow'r, a Gift divine,
 On Sands, as dead, the Cramp-Fish lies supine,
 Thus careless stretcht a wide Destruction makes,
 And wand'ring Shoals without her Labour takes. 
Fixt sudden they the numming Torpor feel;
 The Parts contract, the Fluids all congeal. 
No more the busy Messengers of Sense
 Motion around, and conscious Life dispense;
 Nor flowing Streams the circling Heat diffuse,
 But the chill'd parts forget their former Use. 
While urg'd by pleasing Hopes, to fresh Repast
 The wily Cramp-Fish moves with aukward Hast. 
Oft, as the nimble Swimmers heedless pride
 In active Course, and curling Streams divide,
 They lifeless stretch by sudden Pains confin'd,
 And secret Chains the fetter'd Captives bind. 
No more they wanton dive, or giddy roam,
 Vault on the Seas, and vex the rising Foam;
 Dull Rest they now, and fatal Slumbers love,
 Nor backward can retreat, nor forward move. 

As when in Dreams imagin'd Forms appear,
 When dreaded Sounds we distant seem to hear,
 Or shady Ghosts with silent Horrour rise,
 And Spectres glare before the sleeping Eyes,
 Fearful of coming Ills we sweating lie,
 And willing would from fancy'd Dangers fly:
 Rooted we stand, the Heart incessant beats,
 And hasty Strokes the quicker Pulse repeats. 
Lab'ring to move we seem to strive in vain,
 While pond'rous Clogs the struggling Feet retain. 

With such a binding Force the Cramp-Fish stays
 The swiftest Fish, and strikes with dizzy Maze. 
One Touch of her's dams up the vital Flood,
 Contracts the Nerves, and clots the stagnate Blood. 

Hid in the Slime the Toad of Form uncouth
 (That Fish is all one vast extended Mouth)
 Her tender Body wraps, on Prey intent,
 And silent there concerts the great Event. 
What softer Skin, and slower Pace deny,
 Wise Foresight and successful Frauds supply. 
Within her Jaws a fleshy Fibre lies,
 Whose Whiteness, grateful Scent, and Worm-like Size
 Attract the Shoals, and charm their longing Eyes. 
She to allure oft shakes the tempting Bait;
 They eager press, and hurry on their Fate. 
But as they near approach, with subtle Art
 The wily Toad contracts th' inviting Part;
 Till giddy Numbers thus decoy'd she draws
 Within the Circle of her widen'd Jaws. 

The Fowler thus the feather'd Race deceives,
 And strows beneath his Snare the rifled Sheaves. 
The busy Flocks peck up the scatter'd Seed,
 Nor midst their Joy the fatal Engine heed;
 Till with loud Clap the tilted Cover falls,
 And the close Pit the flutt'ring Prey enthralls. 

Sea-Toads with Foxes may for Cunning vie,
 These too (as Rusticks tell) will feign to die. 
Stretcht at full Length the mimick Carcass lies,
 The Teeth are set, and fixt the closing Eyes;
 The Hypocrite low draws his silent Breath,
 Expressing well the leaden Sleep of Death. 
Perch'd on her Bough the wanton Chirper mocks
 The quiet harmless Posture of the Fox. 
To distant Flocks she sings the pleasing Tale;
 All glad descend, and hover o'er the Vale,
 Oft whet the Bill, oft turn the busy Head,
 And with vain Pride insult the seeming dead. 
He watches, as they move, with guilty Eyes,
 Till nimble Jaws the vent'rous Bird surprize. 
His rav'nous Teeth the little Songster tear;
 Ah luckless Wretch! thy Death is too sincere. 
Wide gapes her Breast, he sucks the reeking Wound,
 While downy Flakes lie scatter'd on the Ground. 

Parts aptly form'd preserve the Cuttle-Fish
 From stormy Rage, and Hunger's pining Wish;
 Long Fibres num'rous branch around his Head,
 Like twisted Hairs, or Lines of fine-spun Thread. 
With these the subtle Angler patient waits,
 The Prey entangles, and her Hunger fates. 
With these, when Tempests rage, they twining fold
 The jetting Cliff, nor quit the safer Hold. 
No Ship in Harbour moor'd so careless rides,
 Less fears the driving Storms, and beating Tides. 

The little Prawn, tho' arm'd with pointed Spears,
 Yet weak and slow, unequal Combat fears. 
But by the Sea-Wolf's rav'nous Force opprest,
 He with the Means of sweet Revenge is blest. 
Within his Jaws enclos'd he furious bounds,
 Strikes at the Roof, and leaves the killing Wounds. 
The careless Wolf of tastful Prey possest
 Regards no Pain, but gluttons on the Feast. 
Till soon thro' all the deadly Gangrene spreads,
 And putrid Bane the fretting Ulcer feeds. 
From rankled Sores the gnawing Pains increase;
 And now the Wretch his destin'd End foresees,
 Despairing pines, and racking Torture feels:
 No friendly Hand the growing Ulcer heals. 
Oft has the Wolf the bearded Squadrons sought,
 And oft the luscious Food too dearly bought. 
No Pity to the shelly Race was shown,
 'Twas therefore just their Fate should prove his own. 
They wound with Pain, what they with Pleasure fill,
 Subdue their Conquerour, and dying kill. 

Enwrapt in softer Slime the Sea-Cow dwells,
 Who ev'ry Sea-bred Kind in Breadth excells. 
To twice six Cubits stretcht their flatted Sides
 Press down the lab'ring Waves, and smooth the Tides. 
Unarm'd their Body, tho' with monstrous Size
 And bulky Form they strike the wond'ring Eyes. 
Born on the struggling Floods that broad-back'd Ray
 Unwieldy lolls, and takes up all the Way. 
Few are their Teeth, unfit for martial Toil,
 Thin set, nor made to seize the doubtful Spoil. 
But Schemes well-laid they resolute pursue,
 And by superior Fraud ev'n Man subdue. 
Man is their choicest Food, and when possest
 Of a fat Corps, they scorn the meaner Feast. 
They mark, when daring Mortals plunge below,
 Where Pearls are hid, and Coral Branches grow;
 Then hover o'er the Place, and float at ease,
 Stretch on the Waves, and shade the cover'd Seas. 
With patient Hope unmov'd their Station keep,
 Till from the secret Chambers of the Deep
 Laden with Spoils the Diver mounts again,
 Nor can the Surface reach with all his Pain. 
By wonted Arts he strives himself to raise,
 But o'er his Head th' unwelcome Pressure stays. 
Poiz'd on the Floods the Cieling hangs above,
 No human Force the vaulted Roof can move. 
Kept back from look'd-for Day the Mortal grieves,
 In vain the pressing Lid his Shoulder heaves;
 His weaker Trust the stubborn Weight withstands,
 And backward sinks him down to lowest Sands. 
If he swims forward, and the Surface leaves,
 The subtle Fish the vain Attempt perceives;
 Still hangs aloof, and o'er his pensive Head
 The Shades unwish'd their gloomy Covert spread. 
Till weary'd Arms their toilsome Work refuse,
 But faintly strike, and catch the yielding Ooze. 

As when the falling Lid with quick Surprize
 Close in the Trap confines th' unwary Mice,
 Immur'd they search the concave Prison round,
 Hurry despairing, and impatient bound;
 As well they might the fruitless Labour cease,
 No friendly Gap affords a kind Release;
 Till wanton Boys the trembling Wretch relieve,
 Free from Confinement, but of Life bereave. 

Such is the Toil, when vent'rous Divers meet
 The floating Roof, and push the pressing Weight. 
Stretcht on the wat'ry Plain unmov'd it lies,
 And open Air, and lightsome Day denies:
 Till swallow'd Waves an easy Passage find,
 And in it's latest Breath Life mingles with the Wind. 
Thus proud of her Success the spreading Ray
 By Stratagem obtains the noblest Prey. 

As in some mossy Cave the Fishing Swain
 At Leisure sits, and views the wavy Main,
 Oft he beholds how Crabs their Watches keep,
 And wait the Motions of the shelly Heap. 
Oysters around on cliffy Peaks are hung,
 To rocky Beds, and cranny'd Jettings clung. 
Immur'd they lie close in the pearly Shell,
 But cannot long their juicy Stores conceal;
 Moisture they seek, and then no longer hid
 Loosen'd they gape, and heave the upper Lid. 
The Crab observes, and to the sandy Mounds,
 Where polish'd Stones the whirling Eddy rounds,
 He busy creeps along, with forked Claws
 From the loose Heap the flinty Pebble draws. 
Thus burden'd, silent to the Oyster steals,
 And wedges fast the Stone between the Shells. 
Divided thus no more the Parts are clos'd,
 But all the luscious Sweets must lie expos'd. 
By prosp'rous Fraud he gains the envy'd Meal,
 And drags the panting Captive from his Cell. 

The prickly Star creeps on with like Deceit,
 To force the Oyster from his close Retreat. 
When gaping Lids their widen'd Void display,
 The watchful Star thrusts in a pointed Ray,
 Of all its Treasure spoils the rifled Case;
 And empty Shells the sandy Hillocks grace. 

In clouded Depths below the Nacre hides,
 And thro' the silent Paths obscurely glides;
 A stupid Wretch, and void of thoughtful Care,
 He forms no Bait, nor lays the tempting Snare. 
But the dull Sluggard boasts a kinder Friend,
 Whose busy Eyes the coming Prey attend. 
One Room contains them; and the Partners dwell
 Beneath the Convex of one sloping Shell. 
Deep in the wat'ry Vast the Comrades rove,
 And mutual Int'rest binds their constant Love. 
That wiser Friend the lucky Juncture tells,
 When in the Circuit of his gaping Shells
 Fish wand'ring enter; then the bearded Guide
 Warns the dull Mate, and pricks his tender Side. 
He knows the Hint, nor at the Treatment grieves,
 But hugs th' Advantage, and the Pain forgives. 
His closing Shells the Nacre sudden joyns. 
And 'twixt the pressing Sides his Prey confines. 
Thus fed by mutual Aid, the friendly Pair
 Divide their Gains, and all the Plunder share. 

Men are not all with equal Knowledge blest;
 Man differs more from Man, than Man from Beast. 
The prudent Mind by studious Labour taught
 Wise Schemes pursues, and fines the ruder Draught. 
While blockish Mortals doze their Hours away,
 Or give to brutal Joys the cheated Day. 
Like them the gliding Shoals, that gladsome rove
 O'er liquid Fields, and Sea-green Pastures love,
 Are not with equal Shares of Wit endow'd;
 Heav'n has unlike the partial Gift bestow'd. 
Some on the Cares of future Life intent
 Consult their Welfare, and their Ills prevent;
 While worthless Numbers take their giddy Way,
 Cumber the Seas, and only serve for Prey. 

Hear now th' instructive Song, ye thoughtless Wights,
 Wedded to Sense, and fixt on mean Delights. 
The Sea's dull Sleeper bids, that shortliv'd Fish,
 In Time to curb your yet unbounded Wish. 
Think on his Conduct, and remark his Fate,
 And in th' insatiate Fish the Glutton hate. 
In sensual Joys he squanders Life away,
 Revels the Night, and slumbers out the Day. 
Fixt backward on his Head the rolling Eyes
 Look up, and might behold the distant Skies;
 But the curst Sluggard flies the chearful Ray,
 And in long Slumbers skreens the hated Day. 
Midst these his Mouth it's spacious Chasm displays,
 And the lewd Call of Hunger's Wish obeys. 
All the bright gladsome Hours he sullen Sleeps,
 Battens on Sands, or hides in slimy Heaps;
 Hence call'd the Ocean-Owl, like Owls afraid
 Of brighten'd Skies, and fond of gloomy Shade. 
When the brown Dusk on slumb'ring Waters broods,
 And midnight Breezes rock the murm'ring Floods,
 When darken'd Billows sound with deeper Roar,
 Rouz'd from Repose he quits the weedy Shore:
 Hunger's loud Call bids wake from slothful Ease,
 And search th' unempty'd Stores of plenteous Seas. 
But the lewd Wretch of ready Meals possest
 Unsated gluts, when full begins the Feast,
 Feeds on, in midst of Plenty most accurst,
 Till the cram'd Paunch o'er-fill'd with Pressure burst. 
O'er-charg'd with Food the pamper'd Glutton lies,
 Motion and Strength th' unwieldy Load denies;
 Till Death's last Pains to fatal Treats succeed,
 And hov'ring Shades the darken'd Eyes o'er-spread. 
If with kind Hand you give the Glutton Meat,
 He rav'nous feeds, and will unweary'd eat,
 Till his swoln Maw with useless Lumber stow'd
 Bursting at length discharge the nauseous Load. 

Like him luxurious Men their Vigour wast,
 The Throat to tickle, and indulge the Tast. 
But future Pain the lawless Joy begets,
 A Train of Ills succeeds the transient Sweets. 
While ill-tim'd Feasts and midnight Revels please,
 Continu'd Meals improve the hid Disease,
 To Poyson turn the undigested Food,
 And treasure up their Ills in tainted Blood. 
From cruder Meats unactive Vapours rise,
 The Spirits clog, and cloud the languid Eyes. 
Ridges of Fat the manly Form disgrace,
 And bloated Veins enlarge the purpled Face. 
Reason's weak Light from noisome Fumes retires,
 And too much Fewel choaks the smother'd Fires. 
Men too unwise let go the slacken'd Rein,
 But they who think will lewd Desires restrain,
 Check the Emotion, and the Wish control,
 And shun the Fate of the luxurious Owl. 

Foresight and Art the prickly Urchins boast,
 To keep the Seas, and shun the rocky Coast. 
When teeming Clouds the infant Tempest form,
 And whisp'ring Winds concert the future Storm,
 They careful fear, lest forc'd to distant Lands
 They dash on Rocks, or bulge on rising Sands. 
Too light themselves their Motions to control
 When the tenth Billows o'er their Fellows roll,
 They Ballast seek, with busy Eyes explore
 The various Pebbles of the winding Shore,
 Choose out the Stone, and with that steady Weight
 Fixt on their Backs, the raging Waters meet. 
Thus poiz'd they careless keep their destin'd Way,
 Nor the rude Shock of thwarting Floods obey. 

All Fishers know the changing Prekes Deceit
 How clung to Rocks, when coming Dangers threat,
 New Forms they take, and wear a borrow'd Dress,
 Mock the true Stone, and Colours well express. 
Now o'er their liken'd Parts the Limners spread
 A mossy Green, or streak with dusky Red;
 On their soft Skin now whitish Marl imprint,
 Or raise the clouded Azure of the Flint:
 As the Rock looks, they take a diff'rent Stain,
 Dapple with Grey, or branch the livid Vein. 
Nor scaly Foes, nor Fishers curious Eyes
 Perceive the Cheat, or find the false Disguise. 
Thus they conceal'd the dreaded Danger shun,
 By borrow'd Shapes obscur'd, and lost in seeming Stone. 
But when with near Approach the weaker Prey
 Invites, her waning Colours all decay;
 No Vizard then, or mimick Form they seek;
 Vig'rous they quit the Rock, and own the real Preke. 

When wint'ry Skies o'er the black Ocean frown,
 And Clouds hang low with ripen'd Storms o'ergrown,
 Close in the Shelter of some vaulted Cave
 The soft-skin'd Prekes their porous Bodies save. 
But forc'd by Want, while rougher Seas they dread,
 On their own Feet necessitous are fed. 
But when returning Spring serenes the Skies,
 Nature the growing Parts anew supplies. 
Again on breezy Sands the Roamers creep,
 Twine to the Rocks, or paddle in the Deep. 
Doubtless the God, whose Will commands the Seas,
 Whom liquid Worlds, and wat'ry Natives please,
 Had taught the Fish by tedious Wants opprest
 Life to preserve, and be himself the Feast. 

Thus, when the Clouds their snowy Burden drop,
 And rising Heaps improve the Mountain's Top,
 When Earth scarce feels the Sun's obliquer Beams,
 And creeping Ice confines the lessen'd Streams,
 The rough-clad Bear declines the rig'rous Day,
 Hides in his Den, nor hunts abroad for Prey:
 Sullen he lays him down, with busy Toil
 Licks his large Feet, and sucks the fat'ning Oil. 
Thus fed with poor Repast the Savage lives,
 Till with fresh Sap the wither'd Plant revives,
 Till lengthen'd Days the Bands of Winter loose,
 And Warmth untwists the Threads of soften'd Snows. 
Then he to Woods returns, with tender Feet
 Roams thro' the Brakes, and seeks the wonted Treat;
 Slain Beasts devours, or climbs the rifted Tree,
 And steals the Labours of the painful Bee. 

In Wars alternate, with embitter'd Rage,
 The Lobster, Lamprey, and the Preke engage. 
Mutual their Fate, reciprocal the Wound;
 By Turns they kill, and scatter Deaths around. 
Each to the other is a grateful Feast,
 Successively they treat th' unwelcome Guest. 
Antipathy's entail'd; the future Breed
 Must to hereditary Hate succeed. 

While sportive Breezes fan the gentler Wave,
 From the moist Crannies, or the winding Cave
 Roaming abroad for Prey, the Lamprey sees
 Where sandy Walks the lazy Creeper please. 
Rapt with glad Hopes she feeds her wistful Eyes,
 And all her Strength the finless Glider tries. 
Conscious the Preke the curling Eddy fears,
 Now from the rising Beach he list'ning hears
 The rolling Floods, now shudd'ring looks around,
 When troubled Waves with nearer Murmurs sound. 
The joyful Lamprey winds along the Flood,
 And in glad Thought enjoys the coming Food:
 Bounding she mounts all eager on the Chace;
 Nor can the crawling Preke's too heavy Pace
 Escape her Rage; He must unwilling try
 War's doubtful Chance, and with hard Doom comply. 
Born on high Waves the slipp'ry Foe commands
 The nearer Shore, and darts on yielding Sands. 
No Time to fly, no Hopes of coming Aid,
 While murd'rous Teeth his tender Flesh invade. 
Forc'd to the Fight, the Preke despairing strives,
 All Postures shows, and various Schemes contrives. 
Now on her Back his twining Tendrills play,
 Now grasp her Sides, or force their heedless Way
 Down her wide Throat, now round her Tail they fold,
 To force her back, and break the fasten'd hold. 
All Parts in vain are try'd; her slipp'ry Train
 Eludes his Touch, and mocks the fruitless Pain. 

So when contending Wrestlers twine around
 In close Embrace, and beat the trampled Ground,
 Now wreath their oily Limbs, now firmly stand,
 And grasp the adverse Arm with dusty Hand;
 Their cautious Feet incessant tread the Round,
 Meet in rude Shock, and undistinguish'd sound;
 With various Shifts each others Skill perplex,
 While Sweat in briny Streams flows down the Cheeks. 

Like them the Preke his supple Members plies,
 But less indulgent Fate Success denies. 
Piteous the Scene, when mangled Parts employ
 Remorseless Teeth, and give the cruel Joy. 
Along the Sands the panting Pieces reek,
 And ev'n in Death a Shelter seem to seek. 

So when the Stag breaths on the guilty Heaps,
 Where hid from Cold the wily Serpent sleeps,
 That wond'rous Spell will rouze the crested Snake,
 Forc'd from the Covert of the inmost Brake. 
Angry he comes, high on his Folds uprears
 His speckled Form, and hides his secret Fears. 
Resolv'd the Stag his fixt Design pursues,
 Gripes fast the Wretch, and gives the killing Bruise. 
The Snake impatient winds his twisted Train,
 And knotted Wreaths express the wringing Pain. 
Now round the Stag's branch'd Horns he curling twines,
 Now on his Neck the glossy Circle shines. 
The Stag unmov'd the restless Struggler tears,
 While greenish Stain the drooping Flow'ret smears. 
Scatter'd around the mangled Gobbets fall,
 And wriggling o'er the blasted Herbage crawl. 

Nor can the Preke by usual Arts escape,
 And hide in borrow'd Forms the Fishy Shape. 
All are besides deceiv'd; to her alone
 Whom most he dreads his Artifice is known;
 Her curious Thought the mimick Secret learns,
 And painted Show from real Stone discerns. 
With scornful Smile the Lamprey seems to speak,
 And thus insults the Colour-changing Preke. 

 "Vain Trifler, can you hope by false Disguise
" T' elude my Wish, and cheat observing Eyes? 
 "Since you so well express the rocky Hue,
" If you'd be safer, take its Hardness too. 
 "By potent Charms the cleaving Stone divide,
" Enter within and there securely hide;
 "Or let the Rock it's craggy Summit bend,
" Incline the Roof, and skreen the liken'd Friend. 
 "But since in changing Forms you vainly pride,
" Learn Wretch in meaner Cunning to confide. 

Thus said, her spiral Circles on she bears,
 And from the Rock the Preke relentless tears. 
He, tho' no more his wonted Frauds deceive,
 Hangs to the Cliff, nor will the Jetting leave. 
When other Parts are lost, the branching Feet
 Maintain their Hold, and grasp the rocky Seat. 

So when sack'd Towns to hostile Fury yield,
 And mournful Streets with slaughter'd Heaps are fill'd,
 The raving Mother strains with close Embrace
 Her darling Babe, and hides his little Face:
 The Parent's Neck his clinging Arms enfold;
 Fear gives him Strength, and knits the firmer Hold. 
Nor can the Plund'rers Rage with impious Hands
 Divide the Pair, and loose their mutual Bands. 
The Dame, midst the wild Transports of Despair,
 Still clasps her weeping Babe, and minds her latest Care. 

With Conquest flush'd new Wars the Lamprey breaths,
 In prouder State her silver Volumes wreaths:
 But urg'd by partial Hopes, and vain Conceit,
 In her last Duel will the Lobster meet. 
The well-arm'd Lobster clad in dusky Mail,
 Nor fears her pointed Teeth, nor winding Tail. 
Close by the Cave, where in the silent Shade
 The feasted Lamprey sinks her easy Head,
 He shakes his bearded Front, with Scorn extends
 His wrinkled Horns, and thus the Challenge sends. 

As, when two adverse Hosts encamp'd delay
 The destin'd Fight, and wait the coming Day,
 Impatient of Repose, some bolder Chief
 Regrets lost Time, and feeds his inward Grief,
 Braces his Cuirass on, and grasps his Arms;
 Thus dreadful pleases, and with Terrour charms:
 Erect he walks, and waves his plumed Crest,
 To Action calls, and blames inglorious Rest. 
With taunting Language, and disdainful Eyes
 The boldest Champion to the Plain defies. 
While adverse Troops the haughty Menace hear,
 Nor will the hostile Youth such Insult bear;
 With Shame he reddens, and with Anger burns,
 Accepts the Challenge, and the Scorn returns. 

So from her inmost Cave, with proud Disdain,
 The soft Sea-Lamprey spreads her wavy Train:
 Enrag'd she comes, darts sudden from her Cell,
 Seizes the Foe, and fixes on the Shell. 
But vainly weary'd with successless Toil
 From the hard Crust the baffled Teeth recoil. 
No Entrance there the blunted Weapons find,
 No Pressure leaves th' indented Mark behind. 
At length provok'd the bearded Lobster ends
 Unequal Strife, his forked Claw extends,
 Pinches with rigid Force her yielding Sides,
 Drives back the Blood, and all the Mass divides. 
The Parts all bruis'd in racking Torture swell,
 And languid Spots declining Vigour tell. 
By cruel Gripe the passive Wretch comprest
 Twines up her Tail, and rears her shining Breast. 
No Rest the Lobster gives, nor quits his hold;
 In vain her spiry Wreaths their Circles fold. 
Restless she moves, nor can her Pains conceal,
 Clings to her Foe, and hugs the pointed Shell. 
The piercing Lancets prick each tender Vein,
 And purple Drops her beauteous Yellow stain:
 She vainly striving but augments her Pain. 
O'er his rough Back she twists the fatal Round,
 Tears her soft Skin, and gives her self the Wound. 

As when the captive Pard to bloody Sights,
 And barb'rous Sports the gazing Throng invites,
 The Champion, who the gawdy Sylvan dares,
 First by rude Din the sullen Beast prepares. 
Grimly he looks, and with malicious Leer
 Grins at the Crowd, and mocks the shining Spear. 
His unsheath'd Paws their pointed Fangs expose,
 And wrinkled Lips exert their dreadful Rows. 
Foolish he gapes, and with wide Mouth expects
 As the bold Youth his well-aim'd Blow directs. 
While grinning Jaws their open Void display,
 Down the flung Spear takes swift it's destin'd Way. 
The yawning Beast a ready Passage gives,
 And sheath'd within his Throat the whizzing Steel receives. 

Th' imprudent Lamprey, urg'd by fierce Despite,
 Thus aids the Foe, and tries the fruitless Bite. 
While shelly Crusts the dusky Chief befriend,
 And from rude Touch the tender Parts defend. 
Madded with Pain, and crush'd by meeting Claws,
 On the firm Plate the fond Sea-Lamprey gnaws:
 Nor fears the rising Spikes that closely set
 O'er the hard Shell their pointed Terrours threat:
 But twines her Body round the sharpen'd Rows,
 And the deep mortal Wounds to heedless Passion owes. 

Such is the Combat, when in lone Retreats
 Of silent Woods the crested Serpent meets
 The Urchin's secret Track: by Nature they
 The fierce Impulse of mutual Hate obey. 
Approaching War the Urchin soon perceives,
 And hears the distant Rustle of the Leaves. 
Close in her own Embrace she shelter'd hides,
 Contracts her Feet, and rounds her prickly Sides:
 From ev'ry Part the thorny Bristles rise;
 And thus enwrapt, unmov'd the Urchin lies. 
The rushing Serpent frights the Insect Race,
 Shakes the low Boughs, and bends the spiry Grass;
 Scornful he seizes midst the platted Brakes
 The rounding Ball, and furious Onset makes;
 With angry Jaws th' ungrateful Morsel chews,
 While the safe Urchin mocks his weaker Bruise. 
Enrag'd the Foe exerts his utmost Strength,
 Draws in his Train, and twines his shorten'd Length. 
Resolv'd he curls, and with a rough Embrace
 Squeezes the Ball, and binds the prickly Case. 
While oft the Urchin turns, and rolling gives
 Unnumber'd Wounds; the tortur'd Serpent grieves. 
Lost in his glossy Slough, and speckled Side,
 Their sharpen'd Tops the piercing Needles hide. 
Black venom'd Gore drops from the frothing Wound,
 Hangs on the drooping Herb, and stains the blasted Ground. 
Racking the Pain, but firm the Serpent holds,
 And hides the Urchin in his mazy Folds. 
Nor, fasten'd thus, could he uncurl again
 His twisted Spires, or stretch his lengthen'd Train,
 Gaunch'd on the Tenters of the prickly Beast;
 Till dying both are from their Pains releast. 
But oft the Urchin, by the Serpent bruis'd,
 Escapes with Hurt, and from the Prison loos'd
 Creeps weaken'd o'er the Bank with sickly Pace,
 And his sore Limbs enwraps in ranker Grass:
 While fleshy Trophies on his Sides are born,
 And all his prickly Back the gawdy Spoils adorn. 

Like is th' Event of the unkind Embrace,
 When the Sea-Lamprey hugs the shelly Case;
 Wounds to her self by thoughtless Rage she gives,
 She dies; and none the wilful Murder grieves. 

But tho' firm Mail the vig'rous Lobster shields,
 Yet to the slow the tender Preke he yields. 
Beneath the Rock, where eating Eddies round
 The shelving Cave, and plain in murm'ring Sound,
 As void of Care the bearded Lobster lies,
 The crawling Preke hasts to the destin'd Prize. 
Behind with wary Steps he softly creeps,
 And on the sounding Armour sudden leaps;
 Spreads all his knotty Arms; they close entwin'd
 The dusky Shell with painful Pressure bind,
 With stubborn Squeeze the tortur'd Parts constrain,
 And with firm Braces fix the rounding Chain. 
His straighten'd Jaws the throttling Ties compress,
 Dam up the Way, and make the Channel less. 
His Mouth chok'd up no flitting Blast receives,
 Nor to the airy Stream the wonted Passage gives. 
Life's Vehicle deny'd, the Lobster dies,
 And dizzy Shades enwrap his horny Eyes. 
For Fishes too must yield to chilling Death,
 When ought shall stop the constant Flux of Breath. 
They too like Earth-bred Animals respire;
 Alternate Gusts maintain the vital Fire. 

But long, e're spent with Toil, the Lobster strives,
 Now vig'rous shoots away, or sudden dives,
 Plies his broad Tail, and cuts the rolling Flood,
 Oft heaves his Back, and shakes the pressing Load;
 Now weary'd stays, and weaker Efforts tries,
 Now pants despairing, and now bursting dies. 
The Preke unmov'd will ne'er his Station quit,
 Nor pressing Arms their close Embrace remit. 
When stretch'd on Sands the Lobster breathless lies,
 Then soon his folded Chains the Preke unties. 
And, like the busy Infant at the Breast,
 Sucks from the shelly Pipes the luscious Feast. 

As the curst Wretch, in hardy Mischief prov'd,
 Untouch'd with Pity, and with Guilt unmov'd,
 Hid in the narrow Turn of winding Streets,
 From late Debauch the gay Companion meets:
 He jocund stumbles on, nor ought designs,
 Doz'd with the circling Pledge of unmixt Wines:
 Unweening future Doom he reels along,
 In fault'ring Accents hums a broken Song;
 Fumes cloud the Brain, and sink the nodding Head,
 And doubtful Feet in mazy Figures tread. 
When sudden starting from his guilty Shades,
 The Thief behind with hardy Grasp invades,
 Back pulls him down, and gives the gushing Wound;
 He groaning falls, and dying bites the Ground. 
With Hast the Villain, fearful of Delay,
 Strips the warm Dead, and bears the Spoils away. 

Thus when the Lobster, lull'd by murm'ring Seas,
 Clings to the Rock reclin'd in thoughtless Ease,
 Unseen the wily Preke impetuous springs,
 And all his branching Arms around the Captive flings. 

These, of all Kinds that curl the wrinkled Waves,
 That press the Sands, or hide in dropping Caves,
 Impartial Foes, as if they Kindness meant,
 By mutual Hate each others Wrongs resent. 
Successive Deaths the fatal Circle tread,
 Attend the Victor, and avenge the Dead. 

Of Fishes some with venom'd Bane are stor'd,
 Their hated Mouths the noxious Secret hoard. 
The deadly Juice drops in the wounded Part,
 Enflames the whole, and mocks the healing Art.
 Him most the Fishers dread, in hideous Form
 And Name agreeing with that reptile Worm,
 Whose Sides a double Row of Legs display,
 That print a thousand Footsteps on the Clay. 
Like him the Sea-born Monster o'er the Main
 With num'rous Feet rows on his waving Train. 
One Touch of these will angry Blotches raise;
 The blister'd Flesh it's redd'ning Wales displays. 
As when the well-known Weed with pointed Leaf
 Thro' unseen Wounds injects the stinging Grief,
 In Spots around the scarlet Venom spreads,
 And rising Pustules show their ruddy Heads;
 So touch'd by them, we feel the burning Pains
 Itch in the Skin, and tingle in the Veins. 

In gawdy Show the various Rainbow prides,
 But beauteous Look a secret Poyson hides,
 A dreaded Foe to those who dive below,
 Where on hard Beds the porous Spunges grow,
 From it's lov'd Moisture bear the Heap away,
 And bring the rancid Substance to the Day. 
When the gay Shoals perceive the prying Guest,
 Envious they throng, and all his Search molest;
 With venom'd Teeth th'encumber'd Wretch surround,
 Bite ev'ry Part, and suck the pleasing Wound. 
Tho' clog'd by whelming Waves he flouncing strives,
 Flings round his Arms, and back the Wantons drives. 
Oft struck they can't forego the tempting Food,
 Such is their ardent Thirst of human Blood. 

So when full Ears scarce hold the ripen'd Grains,
 And of rude Gales the whisp'ring Field complains,
 When Reapers pine with Toil and sultry Heat,
 The buzzing Squadrons scent the grateful Sweat;
 On ev'ry Part they light, roam busy round,
 Tickle the Face, and raise the ruddy Wound. 
The Peasant fans them off, but they again
 Wanton return, and strike the itching Pain. 
Boldly impertinent the Lab'rer vex,
 Buz round his Eyes, and bask upon his Cheeks;
 Nor will the restless Swarms their Sport forego,
 Till dead they fall prest by the quicker Blow;
 Or cloy'd with Pleasure wing their silent Way,
 And shun the Cool of the declining Day. 

The crawling Preke a deadly Juice contains,
 Injected Poyson fires the wounded Veins. 
Soft Cuttle-Fish, that stain the flowing Tide
 With inky Streams, more dreaded Moisture hide. 
Nor small the Wound like that the Rainbow gives;
 But raging Pain the glowing Member grieves. 
From their curst Mouths the dropping Fires distill,
 Enflame the Blood, and shed the spreading Ill. 

The prickly Gudgeon, that alternate dwells. 
In sandy Coverts, or in rocky Cells;
 Fierce Scorpions, who their waving Volumes wreath,
 Or vault above, or glide unseen beneath;
 Weevers, whose March the tim'rous Shoals obey,
 Divide their Ranks, and humbly give the Way;
 The Swallow-Fish, that sports with equal Ease
 Or poiz'd in Air, or born on grosser Seas;
 The rav'nous Sea-Hog, and the prickly Hound,
 Whose piercing Bristles multiply the Wound;
 All venom'd Juice in hollow Tubes retain,
 And, as they prick, inject the flowing Bane. 

Sharp poison'd Darts the dreaded Fire-Flairs aid,
 And hardy Sword-Fish wield the threat'ning Blade. 
Nature and Time the growing Part produce,
 Finish it's Length, and teach the murd'rous Use. 
Nor burnish'd Steel, nor Plates of flaming Brass
 In solid Work the fishy Snout surpass. 
Struck with it's Point, the sounding Stone gives Way,
 And shatter'd Rocks their secret Veins display. 
The Fire-Flair's Tail it's venom'd Shaft contains;
 Nor Time nor Wast the pois'nous Treasure drains. 
Murd'rous alike they ravage all the Sea,
 First give the mortal Wound, then seize the Prey. 
In this they differ; when the Sword-Fish dies,
 Extinct with him the mould'ring Weapon lies. 
Despis'd and harmless now, the worthless Bone
 No longer boasts the Sword, but useless grown
 Henceforth it's martial Nature must disown. 
Not so the Fire-Flair's Dart; that still survives
 The dying Fish, and in it's Venom lives. 

Man killing Arts has too industrious sought,
 And murd'rous Science to Perfection brought. 
For guilty Hands design'd, the sooty Trade
 On sounding Anvils shapes the temper'd Blade. 
Revengeful Persians not with Wounds content
 Mix cursed Herbs, and deadly Juice ferment. 
Too curious Search Death's hidden Stores reveals,
 How Fate in Plants and pois'nous Powder dwells. 
But of all Ills, that Art from Nature steals,
 That Seas produce, or Earth's dark Womb conceals,
 None equal that the Ray-like Fire-Flair bears;
 No dreaded Stroke, no killing wound like hers. 
All Things must yield; the dire Infection's such,
 The solid Flint would moulder at the Touch. 
When rising Shrubs their spreading Branches shoot,
 Pride in their Leaves, or joy in rip'ning Fruit,
 If with the Fire-Flair's Spear the Hand unkind
 But grate the Root, or prick the tender Rind,
 The Leaves shrink in, and all the Glories fade,
 Rich Sap no more is thro' the Pipes convey'd;
 No kind Supplies flow round the porous Stem,
 Cast a bright Green, and swell the smiling Gem,
 But killing Juices all the Fibres taint,
 And tarnish'd Verdure tells the fatal Want. 
Dry Stalks now rustle on the Ground reclin'd,
 Where Shades once trembled at the wanton Wind. 

Circe, who all the secret Poisons knew,
 Or wash'd by Seas, or nourish'd by the Dew,
 Midst all the deadly Treasures of her Art
 Most valu'd kept the Fire-Flair's venom'd Dart. 
To it's long taper Shaft the fishy Spoil
 The Goddess joyns, and fits for martial Toil. 
On her lov'd Son, whom in a conscious Grot
 Wand'ring from Troy the Grecian Chief begot,
 Circe the Prize, the fatal Gift bestows,
 Describes it's Use, and the hid Venom shows. 
He sought his Sire, till led by doubtful Fame
 To rocky Coasts of Ithaca he came. 
Here on his Father's Goats with youthful Pride
 His fatal Spear the wanton Warrior try'd;
 Around the Plain contagious Slaughters made,
 And on rank Heaps the bearded Victims laid. 
While careless he the pleasing Sport pursues,
 The flying Herdsmen tell th' unwelcome News
 The Chief incens'd recalls his youthful Hast,
 To seize the Robber, and prevent the Wast. 
But with blind Rage the Parricide possest
 Assaults his Sire, and wounds his aged Breast. 
Thro' boiling Veins the glowing Poisons roll,
 And with dire Pains expell the ling'ring Soul. 
Thus He, who dar'd the Dangers of the Main,
 While Surges roll'd, and Tempests rag'd in vain,
 His fated End in Sea-bred Venom found,
 And from the Fire-Flair's Dart receiv'd his mortal Wound. 

Vast Tunnies o'er the watry Surface sweep,
 And the fierce Sword-Fish rolls the calmer Deep. 
Tho' swift their Pace, tho' Fate attends their Strokes,
 A worthless Fly the mighty Fish provokes. 
When the curst Dog begins the sultry Days,
 And fev'rish Vapours taint the kinder Rays,
 Then fearless of the Waves the Ocean-Breez
 Broods on the Waters, and infests the Seas. 
Beneath the shelt'ring Fin the Insects hide,
 And goad with pois'nous Sting the tender Side. 
Vext with the puny Foe the Tunnies leap,
 Flounce on the Stream, and toss the mantling Deep,
 Ride o'er the foaming Seas, with Torture rave,
 Bound into Air, and dash the smoking Wave. 
Oft with imprudent Hast they fly the Main,
 And seek in Death a kind Release from Pain,
 Vault on some Ship, or to the Shores repair,
 And gasp away their hated Lives in Air. 

So when from reeking Vales Autumnal Days
 Sulphureous Steams, and ranker Vapours raise,
 With circling Tail, and wild distorted Eyes
 Thro' rustling Brakes the madded Heifer flies,
 With sounding Hoof the heathy Common beats,
 While far behind the hollowing Peasant sweats. 
Driv'n by the Pain, when the fierce Gad-Bee strikes,
 Nor Fence of twisted Hedge, nor slimy Dikes
 Retain the Beast; but o'er the shelving Steep
 And clotty Ridge she takes the doubtful Leap. 
Nor breezy Caves, nor Meads invite her Stay,
 Tho' Banks obstruct, and Rivers cross the Way. 
She fords the Stream, and climbs the rising Mound;
 While distant Hills with bellowing Kine resound. 

Dolphins, by all the liquid Realms rever'd,
 Command the Seas, and rule the floating Herd. 
The willing Tribes their native Lord obey,
 Confess his Pow'r, and own the rightful Sway. 
They ev'ry Kind in beauteous Form excell;
 And awful Looks the true-born Monarch tell. 
None can in Force with furious Dolphins vie,
 Or the strong Fin with equal Vigour ply. 
Dolphins as swift their rapid Course pursue,
 As the wing'd Steel springs from the twanging Yew. 
Fires sparkle in their Eyes, and gleaming Rays
 Brighten the wat'ry Shade, and clear the gloomy Ways. 
When Fishes with vain Hopes their trembling Heads
 Or wrap in Slime, or roll in sandy Beds,
 Midst the dark Shade they form a sudden Day,
 And all the Secrets of the Depth survey. 
When Lions roar, the Beasts with Terrour hear,
 And by their Silence own their passive Fear. 
Birds distant view, when Eagles soar on high,
 And humbly give the Freedom of the Sky. 
When flaggy Wings the glaring Dragon bear
 In shining Tracks, and taint the gilded Air,
 Silent below the meaner Serpent creeps,
 Nor dares to hiss, but hides in weedy Heaps. 
And thus in Pow'r unrival'd Dolphins reign
 O'er the unbounded Empire of the Main. 
While o'er the Floods the wanton Dolphin rolls,
 All give the Sea, and drive their mingled Shoals. 
With fearful Hast their thronging Heaps they raise,
 Nor on their dreaded Monarch steady gaze. 
Passive they turn their Eyes; with servile Fear
 His furious Bounds, and distant Puffings hear. 
But when the Sov'rain hungry seeks his Prey,
 Then frighted Numbers crowd the narrow Sea. 
From the known Tyrant all the meaner Slaves
 Throng to the Friths, and nestle in the Caves. 
He in crude Feasts his purpled Jaws embrues;
 From the mixt Heaps will noblest Captives chuse,
 Let go the tastless Prey, and vulgar Treats refuse. 

But hardy Troops are found, and they alone
 That brave the Dolphin, and his Sway disown;
 With equal Scorn the Tyrant's Wrong repay,
 Nor passive will the lawless Force obey:
 Amies their Name; no pointed Spikes they bear,
 Nor wield the Sword, nor dart the pois'nous Spear;
 But close-set Teeth their vaulted Mouth surround,
 That ready strike, and give the certain Wound. 
With these fierce Amies, for the Fight prepar'd,
 Engage their Monarch, nor his Threats 'regard. 
When wanton Dolphins from their Fellows stray,
 And the lone Wand'rers take their private Way,
 Amies observe, and spread the pleasing News;
 None dread the Danger, or the Toil excuse:
 With firm Consent the Summons all obey,
 Press to the Charge, and throng the straighten'd Way. 

So when the Hopes of Fame, and hostile Spoils
 To glorious Hazard push th' embattled Files. 
Resolv'd they move, and all the Danger court,
 Scale the high Wall, and raze the batter'd Fort:
 War to the truly brave is only Sport. 

Awhile the Dolphin, tho' unnumber'd Foes
 Ally'd to One united Force oppose,
 Nor royal Birth, nor ancient Fame forgets;
 But mocks th' Invaders, and their Onset meets:
 Feeds with Revenge, and tasts the double Sweets
 Of slaughter'd Rebels, and of grateful Treats. 
But when around the rallying Troops appear,
 Rush in the Front, and thicken in the Rear,
 War's doubtful Toils the finny Chief engage,
 Rebellion worthy all the Monarch's Rage. 
Fearless of Danger they at once surround
 The Princely Fish, and all the Dolphin wound. 
With Rage inveterate the restless Shoals
 Make at his Head, and on his azure Jowls
 Remorseless fasten; on his Back they ride,
 Hang on his Gills, and tear his bleeding Side. 
Some glide beneath, others behind him press,
 Burden the Tail, and all the Fish distress. 
He lab'ring puffs, tho' weaken'd with his Wounds
 Yet vig'rous shoots, and all the Ocean rounds. 
Vext with Disgrace, and Sense of various Pain
 He meditates Revenge; with proud Disdain
 Now swift as sunny Gleams the Dolphin leaps
 Thro' flying Mists, and o'er the Surface sweeps. 
Like Lightning now he gilds the Depths below,
 Where silent Waves, and stiller Waters flow. 
Nor mirksom Shades below, nor upper Seas,
 Remove the Foes, nor give the Sov'rain Ease. 
They still unmov'd their fasten'd Hold retain,
 Drive with their Guide, and round the troubled Main. 
Where're he moves, unwelcome they attend,
 And born by him, with him as swift descend
 To lowest Seas, as swift again pursue
 Repeated Tracks, and clearer Day review. 
Thus joyn'd they all one monstrous Fish appear,
 And to known Shapes no certain Likeness bear. 
Fishers amaz'd long fix their steady Eyes,
 While blended Kinds their real Form disguise. 

As when the stagnate Blood corrupting breeds
 The putrid Sore, and glowing Ulcer feeds;
 The dusky Leeches drain the noisome Food,
 And give new Motion to the clotted Blood;
 Curl up their Backs, and swell their bloated Sides,
 And by strong Suction force the streaming Tides;
 But when the long continu'd Pleasures cloy,
 Senseless they fall, and dizzy with the Joy. 
Thus Amies hung around the Dolphin twine,
 Rivet their Teeth, nor will the Part resign. 
When fed the weary Dolphin they release;
 Disperse themselves, and drive along the Seas. 
The Royal Fish, from hostile Numbers freed,
 Resumes his Vigour, and exerts his Speed,
 Furious he dashes round the broken Waves,
 Devours whole Shoals and grinds the gasping Slaves. 
The reeking Blood shines on the redden'd Ooze,
 And blushing Waves their smiling Azure lose. 
Flight or Resistance now no longer save,
 But in Return they feel the Wounds they gave. 

When prowling Troops of Wolves some wand'ring Deer
 In num'rous Concert hunt; she wing'd with Fear
 Skims o'er the Dale, and from the Mountain bounds;
 With braying Plaints the vocal Wood resounds. 
The furious Wolves with more than equal Pace
 Reach to the Wound, and gain upon the Chace;
 From her fat Sides the reeking Morsels tear,
 Bear on the Haunch, and flea the living Deer. 
Their harmless Prey securely they destroy,
 And unaveng'd the guilty Meal enjoy. 
Void of Remorse, and insolent with Pride
 Laugh at her Groans, and all her Pains deride. 
Not so the Dolphin's Foes unhurt retreat;
 A just Revenge the daring Rebels meet,
 Their former Insults of the Monarch grieve,
 And Pains for Pains, and Wounds for Wounds receive. 

Dolphins in Death their royal Birth regard,
 Act like themselves, and for the Hour prepar'd,
 Their Doom expecting they intrepid wait,
 Ev'n then are careful to preserve their State;
 Fate's Summons with Indifference obey,
 But fly the Depths, and leave the wider Sea. 
Lest meaner Fish the floating Carkass meet,
 And with rude Scorn their lifeless Sov'rain treat. 
To wavy Sands they silently retire,
 Lie there unknown, and unobserv'd expire. 
On the moist Bed recline their sickly Head,
 Where no base Fish insults the royal Dead;
 And hope that grateful Man with pious Hand
 Will give his Friend the Burial of the Sand:
 At least the Waters and returning Tide
 Will in their wracky Heaps the princely Relicks hide. 
Living they rule, and dying leave the Main;
 No base-bred Foes their injur'd Corps profane. 
Greatness of Soul in latest Hours appears:
 Careless of Life the thoughtless Hero fears,
 Lest ought that's less'ning, or that's mean at last
 A sullying Stain on former Glories cast. 
And Dolphins thus in Death we must admire
 Just to themselves; their Conduct is entire. 
Careful t' assert their Honour, and maintain
 Their former Port, the Dolphins dying reign. 

Barbels, unlike the rest, are just and mild,
 No Fish they harm, by them no Seas are spoil'd. 
Nor on their own, nor diff'rent Kinds they prey,
 But equal Laws of common Right obey. 
Undreaded they with guiltless Pleasure feed
 On fat'ning Slime, or bite the sea-grown Weed. 
Each licks his Mate; by Love the Barbel lives,
 And the dear Kiss alternate Pleasure gives. 
The Good and Just are Heaven's peculiar Care:
 All rav'nous Kinds the sacred Barbel spare;
 Nor will tho' hungry seize the gentle Fry,
 But give the Look, and pitying pass them by. 
Honour's just Meed, and due Rewards attend
 The brave good Man, who scorns the selfish End,
 Will on no Rights by lawless Pow'r intrude,
 But to his own prefers the publick Good. 
Ev'n stormy Seas the juster Kinds revere,
 And Fishes some Respect to Virtue bear. 

But All besides, voracious and unjust,
 Obey their Passions, and indulge their Lust. 
When Hunger calls, they roam abroad for Food,
 Pursue the weaker, by the strong pursu'd. 
All the Night long they constant Watches keep,
 Nor one unguarded Moment give to Sleep. 
Scaro's alone their folded Eye-lids close
 In grateful Intervals of soft Repose. 
In some sequester'd Cell remov'd from Sight,
 They sleep away the Dangers of the Night. 
The rest all wakeful dread the dire Surprize;
 From midnight Fears the God of Slumber flies. 

Fondly we blame the Rage of warring Fish,
 Who urg'd by Hunger must supply the Wish;
 When cruel Men, to whom their ready Food
 Kind Earth affords, yet thirst for human Blood. 
Peace, griev'd by Man, to brighter Regions fled,
 And angry Mars contending Nations led. 
Ambitious Youths with Thirst of Glory fir'd
 The proud Deformity of Scars admir'd. 
Pow'r uncontroll'd maintain'd the wrongful Cause,
 Nor fear'd the weaker Force of silent Laws. 
Nor would ungovern'd Rage the Temples spare;
 But ev'n the Gods forgot their wonted Care. 
The hoary Priest oft while he suppliant pray'd,
 On his own Altar was a Victim made. 
Bold Sacrilege laid hallow'd Buildings wast,
 And in vile Heaps the sacred Rubbish cast. 
In circling Wreaths to Heav'n their impious Fires
 Boldly went up, and roll'd their guilty Spires. 
Statues deform'd lay headless on the Ground,
 None knew what God the dubious Image own'd. 
At length soft Peace look'd back; the Troubles ceast,
 And pitying Heaven gave the Kingdoms Rest. 
From good Æneas sprung, the Cesars came
 To sooth the World, and quench the spreading Flame. 
Yet restless Discord would unconquer'd strive
 The dying Sparks of Fury to revive. 
The proud Iberian, and the warlike Gaul
 Repin'd at Ease, and heard Bellona's Call. 
Oft did the Rhine polluted Currents mourn,
 And wash the Stains from his discolour'd Urn.
 Oft from his Reeds old Ister silent gaz'd,
 And saw his Banks by slaughter'd Legions rais'd. 
Till you, blest Pair, so kinder Heav'n decreed,
 Peace unallay'd restor'd, and groaning Nations freed. 
Now settled Peace broods on the smiling Vales,
 And steady Justice holds th' impartial Scales. 
Astrea comes, the Goddess comes again,
 And from injurious Rapin guards the Plain. 
Plenty around her various Mantle spreads,
 O'er flow'ry Pastures, and unforrag'd Meads. 
The God of Sleep, freed from the noisy Dread,
 On ev'ry Bank inclines his drowzy Head. 
Gay painted Dreams skim o'er the silent Plain,
 And kindly hover on the slumb'ring Swain. 
The joyous Sun smiles on the calmer Day,
 And little Loves in ev'ry Corner play. 
May the Good Gods these Halcyon Days prolong,
 Give Rust to Arms, and Leisure to the Song. 
May, thro' the Round of long successive Years,
 Continu'd Peace prevent our future Fears. 
Now suppliant Right fears no disgustful Frown
 Or from th' Imperial Sire, or Royal Son. 
Now humble Merit meets a just Reward,
 Nor will the Court disdain the peaceful Bard. 
May Jove, and those bright Messengers of Fate,
 That throng his Throne, and on the Godhead wait,
 May all indulgent guard the Royal Pair,
 The World's great Monarch, and the blooming Heir. 
Our Wishes must succeed, our Pray'rs are heard,
 If Piety deserves a just Reward. 
The Heav'nly Pow'rs will look propitious down,
 By sure Succession fix th' establish'd Throne,
 Preserve th' Immortal Sire, and aid the Godlike Son. 
