the vanity of human wish.

the tenth satire of Juvenal. imitate

by mr. SAMUEL Johnson.

let observation with extensive view,
survey mankind, from china to Peru;
remark each anxious toil, each eager strife,
and watch the busy scene of crowd life;
then say how hope and fear, desire and hate,
overspread with snare the cloud maze of fate,
where waver man, betray by venturous pride,
to tread the dreary path without a guide;
as treacherous phantom in the mist delude,
shun fancy ill, or chase airy good.
how rare reason guide the stubborn choice,
rule the bold hand, or prompt the suppliant voice,
how nation sink, by darling scheme oppress,
when vengeance listen to the fool request.
fate wing with every wish the afflictive dart,
each gift of nature, and each grace of art,
with fatal heat impetuous courage glow,
with fatal sweetness elocution flow,
impeachment stop the speaker powerful breath,
and restless fire precipitate on death.

but scarce observe the know and the bold,
fall in the general massacre of gold;
wide-wasting pest! that rage unconfined,
and crowd with crime the record of mankind;
for gold his sword the hireling ruffian draw,
for gold the hireling judge distort the law;
wealth heap on wealth, nor truth nor safety buy,
the danger gather as the treasure rise.

let history tell where rival king command,
and dubious title shake the mad land,
when statue glean the refuse of the sword,
how much more safe the vassal than the lord,
low skulk the hind beneath the rage of power,
and leave the wealthy traitor in the tower,
untouched his cottage, and his slumber sound,
though confiscation praetor hover round.

the needy traveller, serene and gay,
walk the wild heath, and sing his toil away.
do envy seize thou? crush the upbraid joy,
increase his riches and his peace destroy,
new fear in dire vicissitude invade,
the rustle brake alarm, and quiver shade,
nor light nor darkness bring his pain relief,
one show the plunder, and one hide the thief.

yet still one general cry the sky assail,
and gain and grandeur load the taint gale;
few know the toil statesman fear or care,
the insidious rival and the gape heir.

once more, Democritus, arise on earth,
with cheerful wisdom and instructive mirth,
see mot life in modern trappings dress,
and feed with vary fool the eternal jest:
thou who can laugh where want enchain caprice,
toil crush conceit, and man be of a piece;
where wealth unloved without a mourner die;
and scarce a sycophant be feed by pride;
where never be know the form of mock debate,
or see a new-made mayor unwieldy state;
where change of favourite make no change of law,
and senate hear before they judge a cause;
how will thou shake at britain modish tribe,
dart the quick taunt, and edge the pierce gibe?
attentive truth and nature to decry,
and pierce each scene with philosophic eye.
to thou be solemn toy or empty show,
the robe of pleasure and the veil of woe:
all aid the farce, and all thy mirth maintain,
who joy be causeless, or who grief be vain.

such be the scorn that fill the sage mind,
renew at every glance on humankind;
how just that scorn ere yet thy voice declare,
search every state, and canvas every prayer.

unnumbered suppliant crowd preferment gate;
athirst for wealth, and burn to be great;
delusive fortune hear the incessant call,
they mount, they shine, evaporate, and fall.
on every stage the foe of peace attend,
hate dog their flight, and insult mock their end.
love end with hope, the sink statesman door
pour in the morning worshipper no more;
for grow name the weekly scribbler lie,
to grow wealth the dedicator fly,
from every room descend the paint face,
that hang the bright Palladium of the place,
and smoke in kitchen, or in auction sell,
to better feature yield the frame of gold;
for now no more we trace in every line
heroic worth, benevolence divine:
the form distort justify the fall,
and detestation rid the indignant wall.

but will not Britain hear the last appeal,
sign her foe doom, or guard her favourite zeal;
though freedom son no more remonstrance ring,
degrade noble and control king;
our supple tribe repress their patriot throat,
and ask no question but the price of vote;
with weekly libel and septennial ale,
their wish be full to riot and to rail.

in full-blown dignity, see Wolsey stand,
law in his voice, and fortune in his hand:
to he the church, the realm, their power consign,
through he the ray of regal bounty shine,
still to new height his restless wish tower,
claim lead to claim, and power advance power;
until conquest unresisted cease to please,
and right submit, leave he none to seize.
at length his sovereign frown — the train of state
mark the keen glance, and watch the sign to hate.
whereve he turn he meet a stranger eye,
his suppliant scorn he, and his follower fly;
at once be lose the pride of awful state,
the golden canopy, the glitter plate,
the regal palace, the luxurious board,
the livery army, and the menial lord.
with age, with care, with malady oppress,
he seek the refuge of monastic rest.
grief aid disease, remember folly sting,
and his last sigh reproach the faith of king.

speak thou, who thought at humble peace repine,
shall wolsey wealth, with wolsey end be thy?
or live thou now, with safe pride content,
the wise justice on the bank of Trent?
for why do Wolsey near the steep of fate,
on weak foundation raise the enormous weight?
why but to sink beneath misfortune blow,
with loud ruin to the gulf below?

what give great Villiers to the assassin knife,
and fix disease on harley close life?
what murder Wentworth, and what exile Hyde,
by king protect, and to king ally?
what but their wish indulge in court to shine,
and power too great to keep, or to resign?

when first the college roll receive his name,
the young enthusiast quit his ease for fame;
through all his vein the fever of renown
spread from the strong contagion of the gown;
over bodley dome his future labour spread,
and Bacon mansion tremble over his head.
be these thy view? proceed illustrious youth,
and virtue guard thou to the throne of truth!
yet shall thy soul indulge the generous heat,
until captive science yield she last retreat;
shall reason guide thou with her bright ray,
and pour on misty doubt resistless day;
shall not false kindness lure to loose delight,
nor praise relax, nor difficulty fright;
shall tempt novelty thy cell refrain,
and sloth effuse her opiate fume in vain;
shall beauty blunt on fop her fatal dart,
nor claim the triumph of a letter heart;
shall no disease thy torpid vein invade,
nor melancholy phantom haunt thy shade;
yet hope not life from grief or danger free,
nor think the doom of man reverse for thou:
deign on the pass world to turn thy eye,
and pause awhile from letter, to be wise;
there mark what ill the scholar life assail,
toil, envy, want, the patron, and the jail.
see nation slow wise, and mean just,
to bury merit raise the tardy bust.
if dream yet flatter, once again attend,
here lydiat life, and galileo end.

nor deem, when learning her last prize bestow,
the glitter eminence exempt from woe;
see when the vulgar escape, despise or awe,
rebellion vengeful talon seize on Laud.
from mean mind, though small fine content
the plunder palace or sequester rent;
mark out by dangerous part he meet the shock,
and fatal learning lead he to the block:
around his tomb let art and genius weep,
but hear his death, you blockhead, hear and sleep.

the festal blaze, the triumphal show,
the ravish standard, and the captive foe,
the senate thanks, the gazette pompous tale,
with force resistless over the brave prevail.
such bribe the rapid greek over Asia whirl,
for such the steady roman shake the world;
for such in distant land the briton shine,
and stain with blood the Danube or the Rhine;
this power have praise, that virtue scarce can warm,
until fame supply the universal charm.
yet reason frown on war unequal game,
where waste nation raise a single name,
and mortgage state their grandsire wreath regret,
from age to age in everlasting debt;
wreath which at last the dear-bought right convey
to rust on medal, or on stone decay.

on what foundation stand the warrior pride,
how just his hope let swedish Charles decide;
a frame of adamant, a soul of fire,
no danger fright he, and no labour tire;
over love, over fear extend his wide domain,
unconquered lord of pleasure and of pain;
no joy to he pacific sceptre yield,
war sound the trump, he rush to the field;
behold surround king their power combine,
and one capitulate, and one resign;
peace court his hand, but spread her charm in vain;
"think nothing gain, he cry, till nought remain,
"on Moscow wall till gothic standard fly,
"and all be i beneath the polar sky."
the march begin in military state,
and nation on his eye suspend wait;
stern famine guard the solitary coast,
and winter barricade the realm of frost;
he come, not want and cold his course delay; —
hide, blush glory, hide pultowa day:
the vanquish hero leave his break band,
and show his misery in distant land;
condemn a needy supplicant to wait,
while lady interpose, and slave debate.
but do not chance at length her error mend?
do not subvert empire mark his end?
do rival monarch give the fatal wound?
or hostile million press he to the ground?
his fall be destine to a barren strand,
a petty fortress, and a dubious hand;
he leave the name, at which the world grow pale,
to point a moral, or adorn a tale.

all time their scene of pompous woe afford,
from persia tyrant to bavaria lord.
in gay hostility, and barbarous pride,
with half mankind embattle at his side,
great Xerxes come to seize the certain prey,
and starve exhaust region in his way;
attendant flattery count his myriad over,
until count myriad sooth his pride no more;
fresh praise be try until madness fire his mind,
the wave he lash, and enchain the wind;
new power be claim, new power be still bestow,
until rude resistance lop the spread god;
the dare greek deride the martial show,
and heap their valley with the gaudy foe;
the insult sea with humble thought he gain,
a single skiff to speed his flight remain;
the encumber oar scarce leave the dread coast
through purple billow and a float host.

the bold bavarian, in a luckless hour,
try the dread summit of cesarean power,
with unexpected legion burst away,
and see defenceless realm receive his sway;
short sway! fair Austria spread her mournful charm,
the queen, the beauty, set the world in arm;
from hill to hill the beacon rouse blaze
spread wide the hope of plunder and of praise;
the fierce croatian, and the wild hussar,
and all the son of ravage crowd the war;
the baffle prince in honour flatter bloom
of hasty greatness find the fatal doom,
his foe derision, and his subject blame,
and steal to death from anguish and from shame.

enlarge my life with multitude of day,
in health, in sickness, thus the suppliant pray;
hide from himself his state, and shun to know,
that life protract be protract woe.
time hover over, impatient to destroy,
and shut up all the passage of joy:
in vain their gift the bounteous season pour,
the fruit autumnal, and the vernal flower,
with listless eye the dotard view the store,
he view, and wonder that they please no more;
now pall the tasteless meat, and joyless wine,
and luxury with sigh her slave resign.
approach, you minstrel, try the soothe strain,
and yield the tuneful lenitive of pain:
no sound alas will touch the impervious ear,
though dance mountain witness Orpheus near,
nor lute nor lyre his feeble power attend,
nor sweet music of a virtuous friend,
but everlasting dictate crowd his tongue,
perverse grave or positive wrong.
the still return tale, and linger jest,
perplex the fawn niece and pamper guest,
while grow hope scarce awe the gather sneer,
and scarce a legacy can bribe to hear;
the watchful guest still hint the last offence,
the daughter petulance, the son expense,
improve his heady rage with treacherous skill,
and mould his passion until they make his will.

unnumbered malady his joint invade,
lay siege to life and press the dire blockade,
but unextinguished avarice still remain,
and dread loss aggravate his pain;
he turn, with anxious heart and cripple hand,
his bond of debt, and mortgage of land;
or view his coffer with suspicious eye,
unlock his gold, and count it until he die.

but grant, the virtue of a temperate prime
bless with a age exempt from scorn or crime;
a age that melt in unperceived decay,
and glide in modest innocence away;
who peaceful day benevolence endear,
who night congratulate conscience cheer;
the general favourite, as the general friend;
such age there be, and who can wish its end?

yet even on this her load misfortune fling,
to press the weary minute flag wing:
new sorrow rise as the day return,
a sister sicken, or a daughter mourn.
now kindred merit fill the sable bier,
now lacerate friendship claim a tear.
year chase year, decay pursue decay,
still drop some joy from wither life away;
new form arise, and different view engage,
superfluous lag the veteran on the stage,
until pity nature sign the last release,
and bid afflict worth retire to peace.

but few there be who hour like these await,
who set unclouded in the gulf of fate.
from Lydia monarch shall the search descend,
by Solon caution to regard his end,
in life last scene what prodigy surprise,
fear of the brave, and folly of the wise?
from marlb'rough eye the stream of dotage flow,
and swift expire a driveler and a show.

the teem mother, anxious for her race,
beg for each birth the fortune of a face:
yet Vane can tell what ill from beauty spring;
and Sedley curse the form that please a king.
you nymph of rosy lip and radiant eye,
who pleasure keep too busy to be wise,
who joy with soft variety invite,
by day the frolick, and the dance by night,
who frown with vanity, who smile with art,
and ask the late fashion of the heart,
what care, what rule your heedless charm shall save,
each nymph your rival, and each youth your slave?
against your fame with fondness hate combine,
the rival batter, and the lover mine.
with distant voice neglect virtue call,
less hear and less, the faint remonstrance fall;
tire with contempt, she quit the slippery reign,
and pride and prudence take her seat in vain.
in crowd at once, where none the pass defend,
the harmless freedom, and the private friend.
the guardian yield, by force superior ply;
by interest, prudence; and by flattery, pride.
now beauty fall betray, despise, distress,
and hiss infamy proclaim the rest.

where then shall hope and fear their object find?
must dull suspense corrupt the stagnant mind?
must helpless man, in ignorance sedate,
roll darkling down the torrent of his fate?
must no dislike alarm, no wish rise,
no cry attempt the mercy of the sky?
enquirer, cease, petition yet remain,
which heaven may hear, nor deem religion vain.
still raise for good the supplicate voice,
but leave to heaven the measure and the choice.
safe in his power, who eye discern afar
the secret ambush of a specious prayer.
implore his aid, in his decision rest,
secure whatever he give, he give the best.
yet when the sense of sacred presence fire,
and strong devotion to the sky aspire,
pour forth thy fervour for a healthful mind,
obedient passion, and a will resign;
for love, which scarce collective man can fill;
for patience sovereign over transmute ill;
for faith that pant for a happy seat,
count death kind nature signal of retreat:
these good for man the law of heaven ordain,
these goods he grant, who grant the power to gain;
with these celestial wisdom calm the mind,
and make the happiness she do not find.
