Kensington garden.

by the same.

where Kensington high over the neighbour land,
'midst green and sweet, a regal fabric stand,
and see each spring, luxuriant in her bower,
a snow of blossom, and a wild of flower,
the dame of Britain oft in crowd repair
to grove and lawn, and unpolluted air.
here, while the town in damp and darkness lie,
they breathe in sunshine, and see azure sky
each walk, with robe of various die bespread,
seem from afar a move tulip-bed,
where rich brocade and glossy damask glow,
and chintz, the rival of the showery bow.

here England daughter, darling of the land,
sometime, surround with her virgin band,
gleam through the shade. she, tower over the rest,
stand fair of the fair kind confess,
form to gain heart, that brunswick cause deny,
and charm a people to her father side.

long have these grove to royal guest be know,
nor nassan first prefer they to a throne.
ere norman banner wave in british air;
ere lordly hubba with the golden hair
pour in his Dane; ere elder Julius come;
or dardan Brutus give our isle a name;
a prince of albion lineage grace the wood,
the scene of war, and stain with lovers blood.

you, who through gaze crowd, your captive throng,
throw pang and passion, as you move along,
turn on the left, you fair, your radiant eye,
where all unlevelled the gay garden lie:
if generous anguish for another pain
ere heave your heart, or shiver through your vein,
look down attentive on the please dale,
and listen to my melancholy tale.

that hollow space, where now in live row,
line above line the yew sad verdure grow,
be, ere the planter hand its beauty give,
a common pit, a rude unfashioned cave;
the landskip now so sweet we well may praise,
but far, far sweet in its ancient day,
far sweet be it, when its people ground
with fairy dome and dazzle tower be crown.
where in the midst those verdant pillar spring,
rise the proud palace of the elfin king;
for every hedge of vegetable green,
in happy year a crowd street be see,
nor all those leaf, that now the prospect grace,
can match the number of its pigmy race.
what urge this mighty empire to its fate,
a tale of woe and wonder i relate.

when Albion rule the land, who lineage come
from Neptune mingle with a mortal dame,
their midnight prank the sprightly fairy play
on every hill, and dance in every shade.
but, foe to sunshine, most they take delight
in dell and dale conceal from human sight:
there hew their house in the arch rock;
or scoop the bosom of the blast oak;
or hear, overshadow by some shelve hill,
the distant murmur of the fall rill.
they, rich in pilfer spoil, indulge their mirth,
and pity the huge wretched son of earth.
even now, it be say, the hind overhear their strain,
and strive to view their airy form in vain;
they to their cell at man approach repair,
like the shy leveret, or the mother hare,
the while poor mortal startle at the sound
of unseen footstep on the haunt ground.

amid this garden, then with wood overgrow,
stand the love seat of royal Oberon.
from every region to his palace gate
come peer and prince of the fairy state,
who, rank in council round the sacred shade,
their monarch will and great behest obey.
from thame fair bank, by lofty tower adorn,
with load of plunder oft his chief return:
hence in proud robe, and colour bright and gay,
shine every knight and every lovely say.
whoever on powell dazzle stage display
have fame king Pepin and his court survey,
may guess, if old by modern thing we trace,
the pomp and splendour of the fairy race.

by magic fence, by spell encompass round,
no mortal touch this interdict ground;
no mortal enter, those alone who come
steal from the couch of some terrestrial dame:
for oft of babe they rob the matron bed,
and leave some sickly changeling in their stead.

it chance a youth of albion royal blood
be foster here, the wonder of the wood;
milkah, for wile above her peer renowned,
deep-skilled in charm and many a mystic sound,
as through the regal dome she seek for prey,
observe the infant Albion where he lie
in mantle broider over with gorgeous pride,
and steal he from the sleep mother side.

who now but milkah triumph in her mind!
ah wretched nymph, to future evil blind!
the time shall come when thou shall dear pay
the theft, hard-hearted! of that guilty day:
thou in thy turn shall like the queen repine,
and all her sorrow double shall be thy:
he who adorn thy house, the lovely boy
who now adorn it, shall at length destroy.

two hundred moon in their pale course have see
the gay-robed fairy glimmer on the green,
and Albion now have reach in youthful prime
to nineteen year, as mortal measure time.
flush with resistless charm he fire to love
each nymph and little dryad of the grove;
for skilful milkah spare not to employ
her utmost art to rear the princely boy.
each supple limb she swaith, and tender bone,
and to the elfin standard keep he down;
she rob dwarf-elder of their fragrant fruit,
and feed he early with the daisy root,
whence through his vein the powerful juice run,
and form in beauteous miniature the man.
yet still, two inch teller than the rest,
his lofty port his human birth confess;
a foot in height, how stately do he show!
how look superior on the crowd below!
what knight like he can toss the rushy lance!
who move so graceful in the mazy dance!
a shape so nice, or feature half so fair,
what elf can boast! or such a flow of hair!
bright Kenna see, a princess bear to reign,
and feel the charmer burn in every vein.
she, heiress to this empire potent lord,
praise like the star, and next the moon adore.
she, who at distance throne and princedom view,
to who proud oriel and azuriel sue,
in her high palace languish, void of joy,
and pine in secret for a mortal boy.

he too be smite, and discreet strive
by courtly deed to gain the virgin love;
for she he cull the fair flower that grow,
ere morning sun have drain their fragrant dew;
he chase the hornet in his midday flight,
and bring her glow-worm in the noon of night;
when on ripe fruit she cast a wish eye,
do ever Albion think the tree too high!
he show she where the pregnant goldfinch hang,
and the wren-mother brood over her young;
to she the inscription on their egg he read,
(admire, you clerk, the youth who milkah breed)
to she he show each herb of virtuous juice,
their power distinguish, and describe their use:
all vain their power alas to Kenna prove,
and well sing Ovid, there be no herb for love. 

as when a ghost, enlarge from realm below,
seek its old friend to tell some secret woe,
the poor shade shiver stand, and must not break
his painful silence, till the mortal speak;
so fare it with the little lovesick maid,
forbid to utter what her eye betray.
he see her anguish, and reveal his flame,
and spare the blush of the tongue-tied dame.
the day will fail i, shall i reckon over
the sigh they lavish, and the oath they swear;
in word so melt, that, compare with those,
the nice courtship of terrestrial beau
will sound like compliment from country-clown
to red-cheeked sweetheart in their home-spun gown.

all in a lawn of many a various hue,
a bed of flower (a fairy forest) grow;
it be here one noon, the gaudy of the may,
the still, the secret, silent hour of day,
beneath a lofty tulip ample shade
sit the young lover and the immortal maid.
they think all fairy sleep, ah luckless pair!
hide, but in vain, in the sun noontide glare!
when Albion lean on his kenna breast,
thus all the softness of his soul express.

'all thing be hush. the sun meridian ray
'veil the horizon in one mighty blaze;
'nor moon nor star in heaven blue arch be see
'with kindly ray to silver over the green.
'grateful to fairy eye; they secret take
'their rest, and only wretched mortal wake.
'this dead of day i fly to thou alone,
'a world to i, a multitude in one.
'oh sweet as dew-drop on these flowery lawn,
'when the sky open and the evening dawn!
'Streight as the pink, that tour so high in air
'soft as the bluebell! as the daisy, fair
'bless be the hour, when first i be convey
'a infant captive to this blissful shade!
'and bless the hand that do my form refine,
'and shrink my stature to a match with thy!
'glad i for thou renounce my royal birth;
'and all the giant-daughter of the earth.
'thou, if thy breast with equal ardour burn,
'renounce thy kind, and love for love return.
'so from we two, combine by nuptial tie,
'a race unknown of demi-god shall rise.
'oh speak, my love! my vow with vow repay,
'and sweet swear my rise fear away.'

to who (the shine azure of her eye
more brighten) thus the enamour maid reply.

'by all the star, and first the glorious moon,
'i swear, and by the head of Oberon,
'a dreadful oath! no prince of fairy line
'shall ever in wedlock plight his vow with i.
'whereve my footstep in the dance be see,
'may toadstool rise, and mildew blast the green,
'may the keen east-wind blight my favourite flower,
'and snake and spot adder haunt my bower.
'confine whole age in a hemlock shade,
'there rather pine i a neglect maid;
'or worse, exile from cynthia gentle ray,
'parch in the sun a thousand summer-day,
'than any prince, a prince of fairy line,
'in sacred wedlock plight his vow with i.'

she end: and with lip of rosy hue
dip five time over in ambrosial dew,
stifle his word. when from his covert rear,
the frown brow of Oberon appear.
a sun-flower's trunk be near, whence (kill sight!)
the monarch issue, half a ell in height:
full on the pair a furious look he cast,
nor speak, but give his bugle-horn a blast,
that through the woodland echo far and wide,
and draw a swarm of subject to his side.
a hundred choose knight, in war renowned,
drive Albion banish from the sacred ground;
and twice ten myriad guard the bright abode,
where the proud king, among his demi-god,
for kenna sudden bridal bid prepare,
and to azuriel give the weep fair.

if fame in arm, with ancient birth combine,
and faultless beauty, and a spotless mind,
to love and praise can generous soul incline,
that love, azuriel, and that praise be thy.
blood, only less than royal, fill thy vein,
proud be thy roof, and large thy fair domain,
where now the sky high holland-house invade,
and short-lived Warwick sadden all the shade,
thy dwelling stand; nor do in he afford
a noble owner, or a lovely lord.
for thou a hundred field produce their store,
and by thy name ten thousand vassal swear;
so love thy name, that, at their monarch choice,
all fairy shout with a general voice.

Oriel alone a secret rage suppress,
that from his bosom heave the golden vest.
along the bank of Thame his empire run,
wide be his range, and populous his clan.
when clean servant, if we trust old tale,
beside their wage have good fairy vail,
whole heap of silver token, nightly pay
the careful wife or the neat dairy-maid,
sink not his store. with smile and powerful bribe
he gain the leader of his neighbour tribe,
and ere the night the face of heaven have change,
beneath his banner half the fairy range.

meanwhile drive back to earth, a lonely way
the cheerless Albion wander half the day,
a long, long journey, choke with brake and thorn,
ill-measured by ten thousand barleycorn.
tire out at length, a spread stream he spy
feed by old Thame, a daughter of the tide:
it be then a spread stream, though now its fame
obscure, it bear the creek inglorious name,
and creep, as through contract bound it stray,
a leap for boy in these degenerate day.

on the clear crystal verdant bank he stand,
and thrice look backward on the fatal wood,
and thrice he groan, and thrice he beat his breast,
and thus in tear his kindred god address.

'if true, you watery power, my lineage come
'from Neptune mingle with a mortal dame;
'down to his court, with coral garland crown,
'through all your grotto waft my plaintive sound,
'and urge the god, who trident shake the earth,
'to grace his offspring, and assert my birth.'

he say. a gentle naiad hear his prayer,
and, touch with pity for a lover care,
shoot to the sea, where low beneath the tide
old Neptune in the unfathomed depth reside.
rouse at the news the sea stern sultan swear
revenge, and scarce from present arm forbear;
but first the nymph his harbinger he send,
and to her care his favourite boy commend.

as through the Thames her backward course she guide,
drive up his current by the refluent tide,
along his bank the pygmy legion spread
she spy, and haughty oriel at their head.
soon with wrong albion name the host she fire,
and count the ocean god among his sire;
'the ocean god, by who shall be overthrow
'(Styx hear his oath) the tyrant Oberon.
'see here beneath a toadstool deadly gloom
'lie Albion: he the fate your leader doom.
'hear and obey; it be neptune powerful call,
'by he azuriel and his king shall fall.'

she say. they bow: and on their shield upbear
with shout their new-saluted emperor.
even oriel smile: at least to smile he strive,
and hope of vengeance triumph over love.

see now the mourner of the lonely shade
by god protect, and by host obey,
a slave, a chief, by fickle Fortune play,
in the short course of one revolve day.
what wonder if the youth, so strange bless,
feel his heart flutter in his little breast!
his thick-embatteled troop, with secret pride,
he view extend half a acre wide;
more light he tread, more tall he seem to rise,
and strut a straw-breadth near to the sky.

o for thy muse, great bard, who lofty strain
in battle join the pygmy and the crane!
each gandy knight, have i that warmth divine,
each colour legion in my verse shall shine.
but simple i, and innocent of art,
the tale, that soothe my infant year, impart,
the tale i hear whole winter eve, untired,
and sing the battle, that my nurse inspire.

now the shrill corn-pipe, echo loud to arm,
to rank and file reduce the straggle swarm.
thick row of spear at once, with sudden glare,
a grove of needle, glitter in the air;
loose in the wind small ribbon streamer flow,
dip in all colour of the heavenly bow,
and the gay host, that now its march pursue,
gleam over the meadow in a thousand hue.

on buda plain thus formidable bright,
shine asia son, a please dreadful sight.
in various robe their silken troop be see,
the blue, the red, and prophet sacred green:
when bloom Brunswick near the danube flood,
first stain his maiden sword in turkish blood.

unseen and silent march the slow brigade
through pathless wild, and unfrequented shade.
in hope already vanquish by surprise,
in albion power the fairy empire lie;
already have he seize on kenna charm,
and the glad beauty tremble in his arm.

the march conclude; and now in prospect near,
but fence with arm, the hostile tower appear,
for Oberon, or Druids false sing,
wear his prime visir in a magic ring.
a subtle spright, that open plot foretell
by sudden dimness on the beamy gold.
hence in a crescent form, his legion bright
with beat bosom wait for the fight;
to charge their foe they march, a glitter band,
and in their van do bold azuriel stand.

what rage that hour do albion soul possess,
let chief imagine, and let lover guess!
forth issue from his rank, that strive in vain
to check his course, athwart the dreadful plain
he stride indignant: and with haughty cry
to single fight the fairy prince defy.

forbear, rash youth, the unequal war to try;
nor, spring from mortal, with immortal vie.
no god stand ready to avert thy doom,
nor yet thy grandsire of the wave be come.
my word be vain — no word the wretch can move,
by beauty dazzle, and betwich by love:
he long, he burn to win the glorious prize,
and see no danger, while he see her eye.

now from each host the eager warrior start,
and furious Albion fling his hasty dart:
it be feather from the bee transparent wing,
and its shaft end in a hornet sting;
but, toss in rage, it fly without a wound,
high over the foe, and guiltless pierce the ground,
not so azuriel: with unerring aim
too near the needle-pointed javelin come,
drive through the seven-fold shield, and silken vest,
and light rase the lover ivory breast.
rouse at the smart, and rise to the blow,
with his keen sword he cleave his fairy foe,
sheer from the shoulder to the waist he cleave,
and of one arm the totter trunk bereave.

his useless steel brave Albion wield no more,
but stern smile, and think the combat over:
so have it be, have aught of mortal strain,
or less than fairy feel the deadly pain.
but empyreal form, however in fight
gash and dismember, easy unite.
as some frail cup of china pure mould,
with azure varnish, and bedrop with gold,
though break, if cure by some nice virgin hand,
in its old strength and pristine beauty stand;
the tumult of the boil bohea brave,
and hold secure the coffee sable wave:
so do azuriel arm, if fame say true,
rejoin the vital trunk whence first it grow;
and, while in wonder fix poor Albion stand,
plunge the curse sabre in his heart warm blood.
the golden broidery tender milkah weave,
the breast to Kenna sacred and to love,
lie rent and mangle: and the gape wound
pour out a flood of purple on the ground.
the jetty lustre sicken in his eye:
on his cold cheek the bloomy freshness die;
'oh Kenna, Kenna, thrice he try to say,
'Kenna farewell: 'and sigh his soul away.

his fall the dryad with loud shriek deplore,
by sister naiad echo from the shore,
thence down to neptune secret realm convey,
through grot, and gloom, and many a coral shade.
the sea great sire, with look denounce war,
the trident shake, and mount the pearly carr:
with one stern frown the widespread deep deform,
and work the mad ocean into storm.
over foam mountain, and through burst tide,
now high, now low, the bound chariot ride,
until through the Thames in a loud whirlwind roar
it shoot, and land he on the destine shore.

now fix on earth his tower stature stand,
hang over the mountain, and overlook the wood.
to brumpton grove one ample stride he take,
(the valley tremble, and the forest shake)
the next huge step reach the devote shade,
where choke in blood be wretched Albion lay:
where now the vanquish, with the victor join,
beneath the regal banner stand combine.

the embattle dwarf with rage and scorn he pass,
and on their town his eye vindictive cast.
its deep foundation his strong trident cleave,
and high in air the uproot empire heave;
on his broad engine the vast ruin hang,
which on the foe with force divine he fling;
aghast the legion in the approach shade,
the invert spire and rock dome survey,
that downward tumble on the host below
crush the whole nation at one dreadful blow.
Towers, arm, nymph, warrior, be together lose,
and a whole empire fall to sooth sad albion ghost.

such be the period, long restrain by fate,
and such the downfal of the fairy state.
this dale, a please region, not unblest,
this dale possess they; and have still possess,
have not their monarch, with a father pride,
rend from her lord the inviolable bride,
rash to dissolve the contract seal above,
the solemn vow and sacred bond of love.
now, where his elf so bright dance the round,
no violet breathe, nor daisy paint the ground,
his tower and people fill one common grave,
a shapeless ruin, and a barren cave.

beneath huge hill of smoke pile he lie
stun and confound a whole summer day.
at length awake (for what can long restrain
unbodied spirit!) but awake in pain:
and as he see the desolate wood,
and the dark den where once his empire stand,
grief chill his heart: to his half-opened eye
in every oak a Neptune seem to rise:
he flee: and leave, with all his tremble peer,
the long possession of a thousand year.

through bush, through brake, through grove and gloomy dale,
through dank and dry, over stream and flowery vale,
direct they flee; but often look behind,
and stop and start at each ruffle wind.
winge with like fear, his abdicate band
disperse and wander into different land;
part do beneath the peak deep cavern lie,
in silent gloom impervious to the sky;
part on fair avon margin seek repose,
who stream over britain midmost region flow,
where formidable Neptune never come,
and sea and ocean be but know by fame:
some to dark wood and secret shade retreat,
and some on mountain choose their airy seat.
there haply by the ruddy damsel see,
or shepherd-boy, they featly foot the green,
while from their step a circle verdure spring;
but fly from town, and dread the court of king.

meanwhile sad Kenna, loath to quit the grove,
hang over the body of her breathless love,
try every art (vain art!) to change his doom,
and vow (vain vow!) to join he in the tomb.
what can she do; the fate alike deny
the dead to live, or fairy form to die.

a herb there grow (the same old Homer tell
Ulysses bear to rival Circe spell)
its root be ebon-black, but send to light
a stem that bend with floweret milky white,
moly the plant, which god and fairy know,
but secret keep from mortal man below.
on his pale limb its virtuous juice she shed,
and murmur mystic number over the dead,
when lo! the little shape by magic power
grow less and less, contract to a flower;
a flower, that first in this sweet garden smile,
to virgin sacred, and the snowdrop style.

the new-born plant with sweet regret she view,
warm with her sigh, and with her tear bedew,
its ripen seed from bank to bank convey,
and with her lover whiten half the shade.
thus win from death each spring she see he grow,
and glory in the vegetable snow,
which now increase through wide britannia plain,
its parent warmth and spotless name retain;
first leader of the flowery race aspire,
and foremost catch the sun genial fire,
'midst frost and snow triumphant dare appear,
mingle the season, and lead on the year.

desert now of all the pygmy race,
nor man nor fairy touch this guilty place.
in heap on heap, for many a roll age,
it lie accurse, the mark of neptune rage;
until great Nassau reclothe the desert shade,
thence sacred to britannia monarch make.
it be then the green-robed nymph, fair Kenna, come,
(Kenna that give the neighbour town its name)
proud when she see the ennoble garden shine
with nymph and hero of her lover line.
she vow to grace the mansion once her own,
and picture out in plant the fairy town.
to far-famed wise her flight unseen she speed,
and with gay prospect fill the craftsman head,
soft in his fancy draw a please scheme,
and plane that landskip in a morning dream.

with the sweet view the sire of garden fire,
attempt the labour by the nymph inspire,
the wall and street in row of yew design,
and form the town in all its ancient line;
the corner tree he lift more high in air,
and gird the palace with a verdant square;
nor know, while round he view the rise scene,
he build a city as he plant his green.

with a sad pleasure the aërial maid
this image of her ancient realm survey;
how change, how fall from its primaeval pride!
yet here each moon, the hour her lover die,
each moon his solemn obsequy she pay,
and lead the dance beneath pale cynthia ray;
please in the shade to head her fairy train,
and grace the grove where albion kinsman reign.
