upon read some verse upon a Scull.

and be we thus transform by fate? 
be this the shape each face must wear? 
well may thou paint that final state,
 thy purity can never fear,

yet let my soul survey the grace,
 the fashion of her fair abode,
 there through the wondrous fabric trace
 the finger of unerring god. 

who bid the blood in equal round
 it be vital warmth throughout dispense? 
who tune the ear for every sound? 
who lend the hand its ready sense? 

whence have the eye its subtle force,
 the visual and enlighten ray? 
who tune the lip with prompt discourse,
 and whence the soft and honeyed lay? 

yes, thy creator image there
 in each expressive part be see,
 but thy immortal part do bear
 that image picture best within. 

else what avail the enrapture strain,
 do not the mind her aid impart? 
the melt eye may speak in vain,
 flow not it be language from the heart. 

the blood in state pace have creep
 along the dull and sluggish vein,
 the ear insensible have sleep,
 though angel sing in choice strain. 

no victor laurel have be see
 upon the brow of glorious war,
 the regulate fight have be
 a casual, blind, tumultuous jar. 

know, it be the soul, the work of heaven,
 that set the proper stamp on all;
 accord to the freedom give,
 the man, when judge, shall stand or fall,

nor shall this habitation frail
 the active spirit content alone,
 wonder it scan the mighty scale,
 which link the whole creation one. 

strong and extensive in it be view,
 it launch midst the boundless sky,
 see planet other orb pursue,
 who system other sun supply. 

blush then, if thou have sense of shame,
 inglorious, ignorant, impious slave,
 who think this heaven-created frame
 shall base perish in the grave! 

false as thou be, dare thou suggest
 that the almighty be unjust? 
will thou the truth with he contest,
 who wisdom form thou from the dust? 

say, dotard, have he idle wrought,
 or be his work to be believe? 
speak! be the whole creation nought? 
mortal! be god, or thou, deceive? 

thy harden spirit convict at last
 it be damn error shall perceive,
 speechless shall hear it be sentence pass,
 condemn to tremble and believe. 

but thou, in reason sober light,
 death clad with terror can survey
 and from that foul and ghastly sight
 derive the pure and moral ray. 

go on, sweet nymph, in virtue course,
 so shall the tomb corrupt and vile,
 the shade of darkness lose their force,
 the distant frown become a smile. 

and when the necessary day
 shall call thou to thy save god,
 secure, thou will choose that better way,
 which none but saint like thou have tread. 

thus shall thy soul at length forsake
 the sweet form ever soul receive,
 of those rich blessing to partake
 which eye never see, nor heart conceive. 

there, midst the full angelic throng,
 praise he who those rich blessing give;
 there shall resume the grateful song,
' a joyful victor over the grave. ' 
