the invitation: to miss B—.

health to my friend, and long unbroken year,
 by storm unruffled and unstained by tear:
 winge by new joy may each white minute fly;
 spring on her cheek, and sunshine in her eye:
 over that dear breast, where love and pity spring,
 may peace eternal spread her downy wing:
 sweet beam hope her path illumine still,
 and fair idea all her fancy fill. 
from glitter scene which strike the dazzle sight
 with mimic grandeur and illusive light,
 from idle hurry, and tumultous noise,
 from hollow friendship, and from sickly joy,
 will Delia, at the muse call retire
 to the pure pleasure rural scene inspire? 
will she from crowd and busy city fly,
 where wreath of curl smoke involve the sky,
 to taste the grateful shade of spread tree,
 and drink the spirit of the mountain breeze? 

when winter hand the roughen year deform,
 and hollow wind foretell approach storm,
 then pleasure, like a bird of passage, fly
 to bright clime, and more indulgent sky;
 city and court allure her sprightly train,
 from the bleak mountain and the naked plain;
 and gold and gem with artificial blaze,
 supply the sickly sun decline ray:
 but soon return on the western gale
 she seek the bosom of the grassy vale;
 there, wrap in careless ease, attune the lyre
 to the wild warble of the woodland choir;
 the daisy turf her humble throne supply,
 and early primrose around her rise. 
we will follow where the smile goddess lead,
 through tangle forest or enamel mead;
 over pathless hill her airy form we will chase,
 in silent glade her fairy footstep trace:
 small pain there need her footstep to pursue,
 she can fly from friendship, and from you. 
now the glad earth her freeze zone unbind,
 and over her bosom breathe the western wind:
 already now the snowdrop dare appear,
 the first pale blossom of the unripened year;
 as flora breath, by some transform power,
 have change a icicle into a flower:
 its name, and hue, the scentless plant retain,
 and winter linger in its icy vein. 
to these succeed the violet dusky blue,
 and each inferior flower of faint hue;
 till riper month the perfect year disclose,
 and Flora cry exult, see my rose! 

the muse invite, my Delia haste away,
 and let we sweet waste the careless day. 
here gentle summit lift their airy brow;
 down the green slope here wind the labour blow;
 here bathe by frequent shower cool vale be see,
 clothe with fresh verdure, and eternal green;
 here smooth canal, across the extend plain,
 stretch their long arm, to join the distant main:
 the son of toil with many a weary stroke
 scoop the hard bosom of the solid rock;
 resistless through the stiff oppose clay
 with steady patience work their gradual way;
 compel the genius of the unwilling flood
 through the brown horror of the age wood;
 cross the lone waste the silver urn they pour,
 and cheer the barren heath or sullen moor:
 the traveller with please wonder see
 the white sail gleam through the dusky tree;
 and view the alter landscape with surprise,
 and doubt the magic scene which round he rise. 
now, like a flock of swan, above his head
 their weave wing the fly vessel spread;
 now meet stream in artful maze glide,
 while each unmingled pour a separate tide;
 now through the hide vein of earth they flow,
 and visit sulphurous mine and cave below;
 the ductile stream obey the guide hand,
 and social plenty circle round the land. 

but noble praise await our green retreat;
 the muse here have fix their sacred seat. 
Mark where its simple front yond mansion rear,
 the nursery of man for future year:
 here callow chief and embryo statesman lie,
 and unfledged poet short excursion try:
 while mersey gentle current, which too long
 by fame neglect, and unknown to song,
 between his rushy bank, (no poet theme)
 have creep inglorious, like a vulgar stream,
 reflect the ascend seat with conscious pride,
 and dare to emulate a classic tide. 
soft music breathe along each open shade,
 and sooth the dash of his rough cascade. 
with mystic line his sand be figure over,
 and circle trace upon the letter shore. 
beneath his willow rove the inquire youth,
 and court the fair majestic form of truth. 
here nature open all her secret spring,
 and heaven-born science plume her eagle wing:
 too long have bigot rage, with malice swell,
 crush her strong pinion, and her flight withhold;
 too long to check her ardent progress strive:
 so writhe the serpent round the bird of Jove;
 hang on her flight, restrain her tower wing,
 twist its dark fold, and point its venom sting. 
yet still (if aught aright the muse divine)
 her rise pride shall mock the vain design;
 on sound pinion yet aloft shall soar,
 and through the azure deep untraveled path explore. 
where science smile, the muse join the train;
 and gentle art and pure manner reign. 
you generous youth who love this studious shade,
 how rich a field be to your hope display! 
knowledge to you unlock the classic page;
 and virtue blossom for a better age. 
oh golden day! oh bright unvalued hour! 
what bliss (do you but know that bliss) be you? 
with rich store your glow bosom fraught,
 perception quick, and luxury of thought;
 the high design that heave the labour soul,
 pant for fame, impatient of controul;
 and fond enthusiastic thought, that feed
 on picture tale of vast heroic deed;
 and quick affection, kindle into flame
 at virtue, or their country be honour name;
 and spirit light to every joy in tune;
 and friendship ardent as a summer noon;
 and generous scorn of vice venal tribe;
 and proud disdain of inter sordid bribe;
 and conscious honour quick instinctive sense;
 and smile unforced; and easy confidence;
 and vivid fancy; and clear simple truth;
 and all the mental bloom of vernal youth. 

how bright the scene to fancy eye appear,
 through the long perspective of distant year,
 when this, this little group their country call
 from academic shade and learned hall,
 to fix her law, her spirit to sustain,
 and light up glory through her wide domain! 
their various taste in different art display,
 like tempere harmony of light and shade,
 with friendly union in one mass shall blend,
 and this adorn the state, and that defend. 
these the sequester shade shall cheap please,
 with learned labour, and inglorious ease:
 while those, impel by some resistless force,
 over sea and rock shall urge their venturous course;
 rich fruit mature by glow sun behold,
 and china grove of vegetable gold;
 from every land the various harvest spoil,
 and bear the tribute to their native soil:
 but tell each land (while every toil they share,
 firm to sustain, and resolute to dare,)
 man be the noble growth our realm supply,
 and soul be ripen in our northern sky. 

some pensive creep along the shelly shore;
 unfold the silky texture of a flower;
 with sharpen eye inspect a hornet sting,
 and all the wonder of a insect wing. 
some trace with curious search the hide cause
 of nature change, and her various law;
 untwist she beauteous web, disrobe her charm,
 and hunt she to her elemental form:
 or prove what hide power in herb be find
 to quench disease and staunch the burn wound;
 with cordial drop the faint head sustain,
 call back the flit soul, and still the throb of pain. 

the patriot passion this shall strong feel,
 ardent, and glow with undaunted zeal;
 with lip of fire shall plead his country cause,
 and vindicate the majesty of law. 
this clothe with britain thunder, spread alarm
 through the wide earth, and shake the pole with arm. 
that to the sound lyre his deed rehearse,
 enshrine his name in some immortal verse,
 to long posterity his praise consign,
 and pay a life of hardship by a line. 
while other, consecrate to high aim,
 who hallow bosom glow with pure flame,
 love in their heart, persuasion in their tongue,
 with word of peace shall charm the listen throng,
 draw the dread veil that wrap the eternal throne,
 and launch our soul into the bright unknown. 

here cease my song. such arduous theme require
 a master pencil, and a poet fire:
 unequal far such bright design to paint,
 too weak her colour, and her line too faint,
 my droop muse fold up her flutter wing,
 and hide her head in the green lap of spring. 
