present to the king, at his arrival in holland, after the discovery of the conspiracy 1696. 

you careful angel, who eternal fate
 ordain, on earth and human act to wait;
 who turn with secret power this restless ball,
 and bid predestine empire rise and fall:
 your sacred aid religious monarch own;
 when first they merit, then ascend the throne:
 but tyrant dread you, lest your just decree
 transfer the power, and set the people free:
 see rescue Britain at your altar bow:
 and hear her hymn your happy care avow:
 that still her axe and her rod support
 the judge frown, and grace the awful court:
 that law with all her pompous terror stand,
 to wrest the dagger from the traitor hand;
 and rigid justice read the fatal word;
 poise the Ballance first, then draw the sword. 

Britain her safety to your guidance own,
 that she can separate parricide from son;
 that, impious rage disarm, she live and reign,
 her freedom keep by he, who break her chain. 

and thou, great minister, above the rest
 of guardian spirit, be thou for ever bless:
 thou, who of old be send to israel court,
 with secret aid great David strong support;
 to mock the frantic rage of cruel Saul;
 and strike the useless javelin to the wall. 
thy late care over William temple hold,
 on boyn propitious bank, the heavenly shield;
 when power divine do sovereign right declare;
 and cannon mark, who they be bid to spare. 

still, bless angel, be thy care the same;
 be William life untouched, as be his fame:
 let he own thy, as Britain own his hand:
 save thou the king, as he have save the land. 

we angel form in pious monarch view:
 we reverence William; for he act like you;
 like you, commission to chastise and bless,
 he must avenge the world, and give it peace. 

indulgent fate our potent prayer receive;
 and still Britannia smile, and William live:
 the hero dear to earth, by heaven belove,
 by trouble must be vex, by danger prove:
 he foe must aid to make his fame complete,
 and fix his throne secure on their defeat. 

so, though with sudden rage the tempest come;
 though the wind roar; and though the water foam;
 imperial Britain on the sea look down,
 and smile see her rebel subject frown:
 strike her cliff the storm confirm her power:
 the wave but whiten her triumphant shore:
 in vain they will advance, in vain retreat:
 break they dash, and perish at her foot. 

for William still new wonder shall be show:
 the power that rescue, shall preserve the throne. 
safe on his darling britain joyful sea,
 behold, the monarch plough his liquid way:
 he fleet in thunder through the world declare,
 who empire they obey, who arm they bear. 
bless by aspire wind he find the strand
 blacken with crowd; he see the nation stand
 bless his safety, proud of his command. 
in various tongue he hear the captain dwell
 on their great leader praise: by turn they tell,
 and listen, each with emulous glory fire,
 how William conquer, and how France retire;
 how belgia free the hero arm confess,
 but tremble for the courage which she bless. 

o louis, from this great example know,
 to be at once a hero, and a foe:
 by sound trumpet, hear, and ratl' drum,
 when William to the open vengeance come:
 and see the soldier plead the monarch right,
 head his troop, and foremost in the fight. 

hence then, close ambush and perfidious war,
 down to your native seat of night repair. 
and thou, Bellona, weep thy cruel pride
 restrain, behind the victor chariot tie
 in brazen knot, and everlasting chain. 
(so europe peace, so William fate ordain.) 
while on the ivory chair, in happy state
 he sit, secure in innocence, and great
 in regal clemency; and view beneath
 avert dart of rage, and pointless arm of death. 
