a funeral poem on Thomas gunston ESQ

present to the right honourable the lady Abney lady mayoress of London. 

to the dear memory of my honour friend Thomas gunston ESQ who die November 11. 1700.  when he have just finish his seat at Newington. 

of blast hope and of short wither joy
 sing heavenly Muse. try thy ethereal voice
 in funeral number and a doleful song;
 gunston the just, the generous, and the young,
 gunston the friend be dead. o empty name
 of earthly bliss! it be all a airy dream,
 all a vain thought! our soar fancy rise
 on treacherous wing; and hope that touch the sky
 drag but a long ruin through the downward air,
 and plunge the fall joy but deep in despair. 

how do our soul stand flatter and prepare
 to shout he welcome to the seat he rear! 
there the dear man shall see his hope complete,
 smile and taste every lawful sweet
 that peace and plenty bring, while numerous year
 roll happy circle round the joyful sphere:
 revolve sun shall still renew his strength,
 and draw the uncommon thread to a unusual length. 
but hasty fate thrust her dread shears between,
 cut the young life off, and shut up the scene.
 thus airy pleasure dance in our sight
 and spread fair image of gay delight
 the allure our soul, till just within our arm
 the vision die, and all the paint charm
 flee quick away from the pursue sight,
 till they be lose in shade, and mingle with the night. 
Muse, stretch thy wing and thy sad journey bend
 to the fair fabric that thy die friend
 build nameless: it will suggest a thousand thing
 mournful and soft as my Urania sing. 

how do he lay the deep foundation strong,
 mark the bound, and rear the wall along
 solid and last; there a numerous train
 of happy gunston might in pleasure reign
 while nation perish and long age run,
 nation unborn, and age unbegun:
 not time it self shall waste the bless estate,
 nor the tenth race rebuild the ancient seat:
 how fond our fancy be! the founder die
 childless: he sister weep, and close his eye,
 and wait upon his Herse with never-ceasing cry. 
lofty and slow it move unto the tomb,
 while weighty sorrow nod on every plume;
 a thousand groan his dear remains convey
 to his cold lodging in a bed of clay,
 his country sacred tear well-watering all the way. 
see the dull wheel roll on the sable load,
 but no dear son to tread the mournful road,
 and fond kind drop his young sorrow there,
 the father urn bedew with a filial tear. 
o have he leave we one behind to play
 wanton about the paint hall, and say
 "this be my father, with impatient joy
 in my fond arm i'de clasp the smile boy,
 and call he my young friend: but awful fate
 design the mighty stroke as last as it be great. 

and must this building then, this costly frame
 stand here for stranger? must some unknown name
 possess these room, the labour of my friend? 
why be these wall raise for this hapless end? 
why these apartment all adorn so gay? 
why his rich fancy lavish thus away? 
Muse, view the painting, how the hover light
 play over the colour in a wanton flight,
 and mingle shade wrought in by soft degree
 give a sweet foil to all the charm piece;
 but night, eternal night hang black around
 the dismal chamber of the hollow ground,
 and solid shade unmingled round his bed
 stand hideous: earthy fog embrace his head,
 and noisome vapour glide along his face
 rise perpetual. Muse, forsake the place,
 flee the raw damp of the unwholesome clay,
 look to his airy spacious hall, and say
 how have he change it for a loathsome cave,
 confine and crowd in a narrow grave! 

the unhappy house look desolate and mourn,
 and every door groan doleful as it turn;
 the pillar languish, and each lofty wall
 stately in grief, lament the master fall
 in drop of briny dew; the fabric bear
 his faint resemblance and renew my tear. 
solid and square it rise from below;
 a noble air without a gaudy show
 reign through the model, and adorn the whole,
 manly and plain just like the builder soul. 

o how i love to view the stately frame,
 that dear memorial of the best-loved name! 
then can i wish for some prodigious cave
 vast as his seat, and silent as his grave,
 where the tall shade stretch to the hideous roof,
 forbid the day, and guard the sunbeam off;
 thither, my will foot, shall you be draw
 at the grey twilight, and the early dawn;
 there sweet sad shall my soft minute roll,
 numbring the sorrow of my droop soul. 
but these be airy thought! substantial grief
 grow by those object that shall yield relief;
 fond of my woe i heave my eye around,
 my grief from every prospect court a wound;
 view the green garden, view the smile sky,
 still my heart sink, and still my care arise;
 my wander foot round the dear mansion rove,
 and there to sooth my sorrow i indulge my love. 

oft have i lay the awful Calvin by,
 and the sweet Cowley, with impatient eye
 to see those wall, pay the sad visit there,
 and drop the tribute of a hourly tear:
 still i behold some melancholy scene,
 with many a pensive thought, and many a sigh between. 
two day ago we take the evening air,
 i, and my grief, and my Urania there;
 say, my Urania, how the western sun
 break from black cloud, and in full glory shine
 gild the roof, then drop into the sea,
 and sudden night devour the sweet remains of day
 thus the dear youth just rear his shine head
 from obscure shade of life, and sink among the dead. 
the rise sun adorn with all his light
 smile on these wall again: but endless night
 reign uncontrolled where the dear gunston lie,
 he be set for ever, and must never rise. 
then why these beam, unseasonable star,
 these lightsome smile descend from afar
 to greet a mourn house? in vain the day
 break through the window with a joyful ray,
 and mark a shine path along the floor
 bound the evening and the morning hour;
 in vain it bound they: while vast emptiness
 and hollow silence reign through all the place,
 nor heed the cheerful change of nature face. 
yet nature wheel will on without controul,
 the sun will rise, the tuneful sphere will roll,
 and the two nightly bear walk round and watch the pole. 

see while i spèak, high on her sable wheel
 old night come roll up the eastern hill:
 troop of dark cloud prepare her way; behold,
 how their brown pinion edge with evening gold
 spread shadow over the house, and glide away
 slow pursue the decline day;
 over the broad roof they fly their circuit still,
 thus day before they do, and day to come they will;
 but the black cloud that shadows over his eye
 hang there immoveable, and never fly:
 fain will i bid the envious gloom be go,
 ah fruitless wish! how be his curtain draw
 for a long evening that despair the dawn! 

Muse, view the turret: just beneath the sky
 lonesome it stand, and fix both my eye
 as it will ask a tear. o sacred seat,
 sacred to friendship! o divine retreat! 
here do i hope my happy hour to employ,
 and feed beforehand on the promise joy,
 when weary of the noisy town, my friend
 from mortal care retire shall ascend
 and lead i thither. we alone will sit,
 free and secure of all intrude foot:
 our thought shall stretch their long wing and rise,
 nor bound their soar by the low sky:
 our tongue shall aim at everlasting theme,
 and speak what mortal dare, of all the name
 of boundless joy and glory, throne, and seat
 build high in heaven for soul: we will trace the street
 of golden pavement, walk each happy field,
 and climb and taste the fruit the spicy mountain yield:
 then will we swear to keep the sacred road,
 and walk right upward to the bless abode:
 we will charge our part spirit there to meet,
 there hand in hand approach the almighty seat,
and bend our head adore at our maker foot. 
thus shall we mount on bold adventurous wing,
 in high discourse, and dwell on heavenly thing,
 while the please hour in sweet succession move,
 and minute measure as they be above
 by ever-circling joy, and ever-shining love. 

anon our thought shall lower their lofty flight,
 sink by degree, and take a please sight
 a large round prospect of the spread plain,
 the wealthy river, and his wind train,
 the smoky city, and the Busie man. 
how we shall smile to see degenerate worm
 lavish their live, and fight for airy form
 of paint honour, dream of empty sound,
 till envy rise, and shoot a secret wound
 at swell glory; strait the bubble break,
 and the scene vanish as the man awake:
 then the tall title insolent and proud
 sink to the dust, and mingle with the crowd. 

man be a restless thing: still vain and wild,
 live beyond sixty, nor outgrow the child:
 his hurry lust still break the sacred bind,
 to seek new pleasure on forbid ground,
 and buy they all too dear. unthinking fool,
 for a short die joy to sell a deathless soul! 
it be but a grain of sweetness they can sow,
 and reap the long sad harvest of immortal woe. 

another tribe toil in a different strife,
 and banish all the lawful sweet of life
 to sweat and dig for gold, to hoard the oar,
 hide the dear dust yet dark than before,
 and never dare to use a grain of all the store. 

happy the man that know the value just
 of earthly thing, nor be enslave to dust. 
it be a rich gift the sky but rare send
 to favourite soul. then happy thou, my friend,
 for thou have learn to manage and command
 the wealth that heaven bestow with liberal hand:
 hence this fair structure rise; and hence this seat
 make to invite my not unwilling foot;
 in vain it be make! for we shall never meet,
 and smile, and love, and bless each other here,
 the envious tomb forbid thy face to appear,
 detain thou gvnston from my longing eye,
 and all my hope lie bury where my gvnston lie. 

come hither all the tender soul that know
 the height of fondness and the depth of woe,
 young mother, who your darling babe have find
 untimely murder with a ghastly wound;
 you fright nymph, who on the bridal bed,
 clasp in your arm your lover cold and dead,
 come; in the pomp of all your wild despair
 with flow eyelid and disorder hair,
 death in your look; come mingle grief with i,
 and drown your little stream in my unbounded sea. 

you sacred mourner of a noble mould
 bear for a friend, who dear embrace hold
 beyond all nature tie; you that have know
 two happy soul make intimate one,
 and feel a part stroke, it be you must tell
 the smart, the twinge, and the rack i feel:
 this soul of i that dreadful wound have bear,
 off from its side its dear half be tear,
 the rest lie bleed, and but life to mourn. 
oh infinite distress! such rage grief
 shall command pity, and despair relief. 
passion methinks shall rise from all my groan,
 give sense to rock, and sympathy to stone. 

you dusky wood and echo hill around
 repeat my cry with a perpetual sound:
 be all you flowery vale with thorn overgrow,
 assist my sorrow, and declare your own,
 alas! your lord be dead. the humble plain
 must never receive his courteous foot again:
 mourn you gay smile meadow, and be see
 in wintery robe instead of youthful green:
 and bid the brook that still run warble by
 move silent on, and weep his useless channel dry. 
hither methinks the low herd shall come,
 and moan turtle murmur over his tomb:
 the oak shall wither, and the curl vine
 weep his young life out, while his arm untwine
 their amorous fold, and mix his bleed soul with i. 
you stately elm in your long order mourn,
 strip off your pride to dress your master urn:
 here gentle drop your leaf instead of tear;
 you elm, the reverend growth of ancient year,
 stand tall and naked to the bluster rage
 of the mad wind; thus it become your age
 to show your sorrow. often you have see
 our head recline upon the rise green;
 beneath your sacred shade diffuse we lie,
 here friendship reign with a unbounded sway:
 hither our soul their constant offering bring,
 the burden of the breast, and labour of the thought;
 our open bosom on the conscious ground
 spread all the sorrow, all the joy we find,
 and mingle every care; nor be it know
 which of the pain or pleasure be our own;
 then with a equal hand and honest soul
 we share the heap; yet both possess the whole,
 and all the passion there through both our bosom roll. 
by turn we comfort, and by turn complain,
 and bear and ease by turn the sympathy of pain. 

friendship! mysterious thing, what magic power
 support thy sway, and charm these mind of we? 
bind to thy foot we boast our birthright still,
 and dream of freedom when we have lose our will,
 and change away our soul: at thy command
 we snatch new misery from a foreign hand
 to call they we, and thoughtless of our ease
 plague the dear self that we be bear to please. 
thou tyranness of mind, who cruel throne
 heap on poor mortal sorrow not their own;
 as though our mother nature can no more
 find woe sufficient for each son she bear,
 friendship divide the share, and lengthen out the store. 
yet be we fond of thy imperious reign,
 proud of the slavery, wanton in our pain,
 and chide the courteous hand when death dissolve the chain. 

vertue, forgive the thought! the rave muse
 wild and despair know not what she do,
 grow mad in grief, and in her savage hour
 affront the name she love and she adore. 
she be thy votaress too; and at thy shrine
 o sacred friendship! offer song divine
 while gunston live, and both our soul be thy. 
here to these shade at solemn hour we come
 to pay devotion with a mutual flame,
 and roll in pleasure, while the evening breeze
 fan the leaf gentle, sport through the tree,
 and the decline sun with slope wheel
 roll down the golden day behind the western hill. 

mourn you young garden, you unfinished gate,
 you green enclosure and you grow sweet,
 lament, for you our midnight hour have know,
 and watch we walk by the silent moon
 in conference divine, while heavenly fire
 kindle our breast do all our thought inspire
 with joy almost immortal; then our zeal
 blaze and burn high to reach the ethereal hill,
 and love refine like that above the pole
 throw both our arm round one another soul
 in rapture and embrace. oh forbear,
 forbear, my song! this be too much to hear,
 too dreadful to repeat; such joy as these
 flee from the earth for ever! 

oh for a general grief! let all thing share
 our woe that know our love. the neighbour air
 let it be load with immortal sigh,
 and tell the gale, that every breath that fly
 over these field shall murmur and complain,
 and kiss the fade grass, and propagate the pain.
 weep all you building, and you groves around
 for ever weep, this be a endless wound
 vast and incurable. you building know
 his silver tongue, you groves have hear it too:
 at that dear sound no more shall you rejoice,
 and i no more must hear the charm voice,
 woe to my droop soul! that heavenly breath
 that can speak life lie now congeal in death;
 while on his fold lip all cold and pale
 eternal chain and heavy silence dwell. 

yet my fond hope will hear he speak again;
 once more at least, one gentle word; and then
 gunston aloud i call: in vain i cry
 gunston aloud; for he must never reply. 
in vain i mourn, and drop these funeral tear,
 death and the grave have neither eye nor ear:
 wander i tune my sorrow to the groves,
 and vent my swell grief, and tell the wind our love;
 while the dear youth sleep fast and hear they not;
 he have forget i: in the lonesome vault
 mindless of Watts and friendship there he lie
 deaf and unthinking clay. 

but whither be i lead? this artless grief
 hurry the muse on obstinate and deaf
 to all the nice rule, and bear she down
 from the tall fabric to the neighbour ground:
 the please hour and the dear moment pass
 in these sweet field revive on my taste
 snatch i away resistless with impetuous have. 
spread thy strong pinion once again my song,
 and reach the turret thou have leave so long:
 over the wide roof its lofty head it rear,
 wait for our converse; but only hear
 the noisy tumult of the realm on high;
 the wind salute it whistle as they fly,
 or jar round the window; rattle shower
 lash the fair side, above loud thunder roar,
 but still the master sleep; nor hear the voice
 of sacred friendship, nor the tempest noise:
 a iron slumber sit on every sense,
 in vain the heavenly thunder strice to rouse it thence. 

one labour more, my muse, the golden sphere
 seem to demand: see through the dusky air
 downward it shine upon the rise moon,
 and as she labour up to reach her noon,
 the ball pursue her orb with stream light,
 and shoot a golden dày on the pale queen of night:
 but not one beam can reach the darksome grave,
 or pierce the solid gloom that fill the cave
 where gunston dwell in death. my wake eye
 see the last midnight reign over the sky,
 and old Bootes drive his shine Carr
 through the midheaven: behold the glitter sphere
 bright as a burn meteor bear on high,
 or some new comet glare through the sky
 it flame and mingle with the large star;
 in vain (say i) the golden comet glare,
 in vain it stand; while with a dismal fall
 he sink beneath the ground that raise the lofty ball. 

now let i call the joyful day to mind;
 it be a fair morning; and the bluster wind
 sleep in its peaceful cavern, while he come
 gaze and please to see the noble frame
 crown with that shine orb. "stand there, he cry,
" thou little emblem of the boundless sky
 "whither my soul with fiery passion tend;
 the emblem stand; and tell survive friend
 of the bright palace and the golden throne
 where the dear gunston better part be go:
 he eager thought bend on their shine way
 let the clay drop to mingle with the clay;
 but his great soul beyond the star be flee:
 then why, my heart, why shall we mourn he dead? 
strange, my thought, you let this cozen grief
 with a false name impose on your belief:
 it see the flesh sink down with close eye
 to the cold earth, and cry, it be gunston die:
 mistaken grief! to call the flesh the friend! 
the heavenly court see the bright youth ascend,
 fly to embrace he with immortal love,
 and sing his welcome to the seat above. 
the building firm, and all the mansion bright,
 the roof high-vaulted with aethereal light:
 beauty and strength on the tall bulwark sit
 in heavenly diamond: and for every gate
 on golden hinge a broad ruby turn,
 guard off the foe, and as it move it burn. 
million of glory reign through every part;
 infinite power and uncreated art
 stand here display, and to the stranger show
 how it outshine the noble seat below;
 the stranger just look down, and smile upon they too. 

come, my Urania, leave the doleful strain,
 let heavenly note resume their joy again;
 in everlasting number sing, and say,
 "gunston the friend live still, and wipe our tear away. 
