ode ix. to sleep.

thou silent power, who balmy sway
 charm every anxious thought away;
 in who divine oblivion drown,
 fatigue and toil pain grow mild,
 love be with sweet success beguile
 and sad remorse forget her secret wound;
 o whither have thou fly, indulgent god? 
god of kind shadow, and of heal dew,
 over who do thou extend thy magic rod? 
around what peaceful couch thy opiate air diffuse? 

lo, midnight from her starry reign
 look awful down on earth and main. 
the tuneful bird lie hush in sleep,
 with all that crop the verdant food,
 with all that skim the crystal flood,
 or haunt the cayern of the rocky steep. 
no rush wind disturb the tuft bower;
 no wakeful sound the moonlight valley know,
 save where the brook its liquid murmur pour,
 and lull the wave scene to more profound repose. 

o let not i thus watch alone! 
o hear my solitavy moan! 
descend, propitious, on my eye;
 not from the couch that bear a crown,
 not from the statesman thorny down,
 or where the miser and his treasure lie:
 bring not the shape that break the murder rest;
 nor those the hireling soldier burn to see,
 nor those that haunt the tyrant gloomy breast:
 far be their guilty night, and far their dream from i! 

nor yet those awful joy present,
 for chief and hero only mean:
 the figure brass, the choral song,
 the rescue people glad applause,
 the listen senate, and the law
 bend on the dictate of timoleon tongue,
 be scene too grand for fortune private way;
 and though they shine to youth ingenuous view,
 the sober gainful art of modern day,
 to such romantic thought have bid a long adieu. 

bless be my fate! i need not pray
 that lovesick dream be keep away:
 no female charm, of fancy bear,
 nor damask cheek, nor spaikle eye,
 with i the band of sleep untie,
 or steal by minute half the saunter morn. 
nor yet the courtier hope, the give smile,
 (a light phantom and a base chain)
 bid wealth and place the severe night beguile,
 to gall my wake hour with more vexatious pain. 

but, Morpheus, on thy dewy wing
 such fair auspicious vision bring,
 as soothe great Milton injure age,
 when in prophetic dream he see
 the tribe unborn with pious awe. 
imbibe each virtue from his heavenly page:
 or such as mead benignant fancy know,
 when health kind treasure, by his art explore,
 have save the infant from a orphan woe,
 or to the tremble fire his age hope restore. 
