a ode on the death of mr. Dryden. 

i 

as when plebeans at a monarch death,
 (which seem profane by sigh from vulgar breath;)
 with saucy grief pity the helpless fate
 of what they fear, almost adore of late. 
so i the mean that do ever aspire,
 to own herself of the muse empire;
 who scarce can my tribute pay,
 to acknowledge their imperial sway. 
with arrogant, yet conscious grief, presume,
 to shed a tear on their vicegerents awful tomb:
 ah! who will have think that seem deathless man,
 with every art and grace endow;
 shall have a life, but of the usual span,
 and shrink into a common shroud. 
but his unequalled worth can never dy,
 nothing can ever his matchless laurel blast,
 though albion self shall be destroy and waste;
 and in forget ruin lie. 
the echo trump of fame his glory will re-reherse,
 to all the wonder universe,
 till it join sound with the tremendous last. 

ii.

sure poet be not make of common earth,
 or he at least may boast a noble birth;
 each atom with soft number be inspire,
 and flow fancy with one last rapture fire:
 although the mighty secret not disclose,
 he sure be like Thebes with artful tune compose. 
the voice of the sweet melodious nine,
 in consort join apollo form lyre,
 do thousand pure particle inspire;
 with tuneful measure harmony divine. 
at the sacred command sound,
 with animation pass vulgar soul,
 the know will atom come,
 none the creative strain control;
 but by energy of air divine compound,
 the almost omniscient frame. 
and for a soul which scarce be want here,
 in all the pre-exist magazine,
 not one be see;
 worthy in thy allot glory to appear. 
no great apollo self, with his own ray,
 (for nothing less can the bright form improve,)
 infuse celestial sapience from above;
 to qualify thou for immortal bay. 

iii.

Apollo once before a sacred structure bless,
 where all the inquisitive world do come,
 for a ambiguous doom;
 and splendid pomp amaze the curious guest. 
yet with less glory do at delphos shine,
 when floor of marble, roof of gold,
 do his oraculous godhead hold;
 then in thy live shrine,
 there fetter with a sacerdotal yoke,
 unchecked in thou, the god have always speak. 
in thou no less magnificent appear,
 nor with less splender do his power exert,
 then when above a sovereign sway he bear;
 in learning poetry, and every godlike art.
 but oh! the deity be silence now,
 no more celestial cadence from thy tongue will flow,
 and all the less fane with grief expire,
 all gasp severe,
 with faint groan deplore,
 great Dryden be no more;
 and with decline fire
 sing their own requiem in thy Obsequie. 
farewell to inspiration now,
 all sacred ecstasy of wit,
 the soft excellence,
 of melt word and rapture sense,
 you will no more with divine sweetness flow;
 but poetry submit
 to the bold enthusiastic rage
 of a desert and malicious age. 

iv.

only the pythagorean faith we doubt,
 else if thy great soul shall transmigrate be,
 it may be parcel out
 and stock each age with laureate till eternity. 
ah! where be thy harmonious spirit now? 
teach soft number to the sphere,
 or make some star with great lustre glow,
 or roam in the extend space thy long eternity of year. 
no, toth sacred soft shade thou be go,
 the soul of poet needs must thither fly;
 (i be sure they lover live how ever they die.) 
but thou so many laurel here have win,
 as plant a new elizium of thy own. 
triumphant sit beneath the immortal shade,
 of ever bloom wreath which less than those will fade,
 that be below for soft lover make. 
therefore the mantuan Swain need not retreat,
 but keep his ancient regal seat;
 which else at thy approach he will resign,
 for well he know wit sacred throne be thy:
 see he with thanks salute thy skilful hand,
 which so successful have teach;
 his long fame work the language of our land,
 with art in every line, and grace in every thought. 
none their intrinsic value can deny,
 the well place pride of ancient Rome,
 polish by thou be now our boast become;
 sparkle with all the glory of true poetry;
 receive from all a just and happy doom. 
Orpheus and all the tuneful poet there,
 with joy new date celebrate thy fame,
 in a eternal soft celestial air;
 for all the honour thou have do the so long slight name. 

v. 

and we who thou have leave behind,
 be all employ about thou too;
 although thy worth too great a theme we find,
 at least our gratitude in grief we show. 
our best encomium but profane thy name,
 unless successful congreves artful line;
 that only rival of so great a fame,
 can justice do to thy. 
my well mean trophy blush i must rear,
 unkind Melpomene afford no aid,
 though i so often beg and pray,
 my soft voice she will not hear. 
among the mighty man she be busy now,
 it be they i find best charm immortal female too;
 though she will not teach how i shall number keep,
 my admiration in heroick dress,
 or in a soft ode my grief express,
 it be my own fault be woman, if i fail to weep. 
since this great man insatiate fate obey,
 how be wit empire lessen and decay? 
it scarce a province now appear,
 come then let we join our tear;
 cease not till a ocean flow,
 twine round the muse plate, till it a island grow,
 there let we possess her constant joy,
 spite, poverty and noise. 
though bound safe with a castalian sea,
 they never must hope their isle the fortunate will be. 
