elegy.

write in the hot weather, July mdcclvii.

by the same.

three hour from noon the pass shadow show,
 the sultry breeze glide faint over the plain,
 the dazzle aether fierce and fierce glow,
 and human nature scarce its rage sustain. 

now still and vacant be the dusty street,
 and still and vacant where yond field extend,
 save where those swain, oppress with toil and heat,
 the grassy harvest of the mead attend. 

lose be the lively aspect of the ground,
 low be the spring, the reedy ditch dry;
 no verdant spot in all the vale be find,
 save what yond stream unfailing store supply,

where be the flower that make the garden gay? 
where be their beauty, where their fragrance sle? 
their stem relax, fast fall their leaf away,
 they fade and mingle with their dusty bed:

all but the native of the torrid zone,
 what afric wild, or peru field display,
 please with a clime that imitate their own,
 they lovely bloom beneath the parch ray. 

where be wild nature heart-reviving song,
 that fill in genial spring the verdant bower? 
silent in gloomy wood the feather throng
 pine through this long, long course of sultry hour. 

where be the dream of bliss by summer bring? 
the walk along the rivulet-watered vale? 
the field with verdure clad, with fragrance fraught,
 the sun mild-beaming, and the fan gale? 

the weary soul imagination cheer,
 her please colour paint the future gay;
 time pass on, the truth itself appear,
 the please colour instant fade away:

in different season different joy we place,
 and these shall spring supply, and summer these;
 yet frequent storm the bloom of spring deface,
 and summer scarce bring a day to please. 

o for some secret shady cool recess! 
some gothic dome overhang with darksome tree,
 where thick damp wall this rage heat repress;
 where the long isle invite the lazy breeze:

but why these plaint? — amid his waste of sand,
 far more than this the wander Arab feel;
 far more the indian in columbus land,
 while Phoebus over he roll his fiery wheel:

far more the sensible of mind sustain,
 rack with the poignant pang of fear or shame:
 the hopeless lover, bind in beauty chain,
 and he, who envy rob of hard-earned same:

he, who a father or a mother mourn,
 or lovely consort lose in early bloom,
 he, who the dread rage of fever burn,
 or slow disease lead linger to the tomb. —

lest man shall sink beneath the present pain;
 lest man shall triumph in the present joy;
 for he the unvary "law of heaven ordain,"
 hope in his ill, and to his bliss alloy. 

fierce and oppressive be the sun we share,
 yet not unuseful to our humid soil;
 hence shall our fruit a rich flavour bear,
 hence shall our plain with riper harvest smile:

reflect and be content — for mankind good
 heaven give the due degree of drought or rain;
 tomorrow ceaseless shower may swell the flood,
 nor soon yond sun rise blaze fierce again:

even now behold the grateful change at hand,
 hark, in the east loud bluster gale arise;
 wide and more wide the darken cloud expand,
 and distant lightning flash along the sky:

o in the awful concert of the storm,
 while hail and rain, and wind and thunder join! 
let the great ruler praise my song inform,
 let wonder, reverence, gratitude be i. 
