on the death of queen ANNE, and the accession of king GEORGE to the crown of Great Britain, etc. 

with a exhortation to all briton to unity.

those british bard appear to i to have sink
below the majesty of british verse,
who mortal painter have vouchsafe to invoke
the assist they in their great design, to paint
britannia woe, when royal ANNE expire,
what mortal painter can suffice? descend,
Urania, child of memory and Jove! 
o goddess of celestial imagery,
queen of immortal colour, deathless stroke,
and grace that can charm the rude mind.
speak, thou paint with so divine a skill,
that god and man be ravish with the draught.
and when thou dictate to thy godlike son;
thy influence make the pen immortal draught
victorious over the pencil die toil.
goddess, descend then, and inspire my song,
that it with native majesty may rise
high, as the sacred spring from which it flow,
that i may, painting, sing britannia woe,
in such a move, such a melt strain,
that with concern the listen world may hear,
and in the doleful, deathless chorus join:
and for the great pomp of pierce woe,
Muse, show Britannia to her mournful lyre,
lament all the virtue of her queen,
all the great action of her wondrous reign,
in which the terror of the british arm
be carry to germania horrid Alps;
their fame beyond the ocean farther wave.
then let she wring her late victorious arm,
and rend the laurel from her sacred hair;
Muse, paint her woe, accompany with care,
and black mistrust, and with torment fear,
fear of false friend, fear of her factious son,
paint she in direful'st consternation, Muse,
in dismall expectation of the approach
of vile and murderous idolatry,
of shameful slavery and endless woe.

but short, o goddess, be the mournful draught,
and short the lamentation of the song:
for lo! the wondrous hand of god appear.
now, Muse, begin a new and noble strain,
thy colour vary, and thy shadow change,
or let thy draught, like holbin, be all light!
draw what no mortal painter ever can draw,
and show Britannia pass in a hour,
from fear to hope, to joy, to ecstasy,
the immortal ecstasy, from kill woe.
for lo! the wondrous hand of god appear,
britannia noble son, that have, until now,
be for whole age into faction rend,
all in a moment, by a secret force,
resistless seek their common country be good:
unanimous heart and hand they join,
unanimous, with a noble fire
their rightful king, the royal GEORGE, proclaim.
hark how the air with shout of joy resound,
with acclamation of bless multitude!
hark how aloud with one accord they cry,
in imitation of their god-like chief,
long live the royal GEORGE, long may he live,
and happy may he reign! bless he, you power,
shower down your choice blessing on his head,
blessing as numberless as those he bring
to happy britain isle! waft he, you wind;
you billow, gentle in his passage rise,
and gentle, in obeisance to he, fall.
let the calm ocean recognize it be lord,
and land he safe on the longing shore.
but who can ever the impatient long paint
of briton, all on fire to see their king!
see how, at his approach, their eye, voice, hand,
the unruly transport of their joy declare!
a entertainment worthy majesty,
and far more please to the monarch soul,
than all the pompous pageantry of state,
and vain magnificence of die show.
the low obeisance, and the prostrate bow,
that, on all hand, obsequious be pay;
for these may flow from traitor and from foc;
but these the loyal subject humble love,
and cordial joy declare. and, lo! he come,
and with he bring britannia other hope,
britannia other hope, the other dread of Gaul. 
Britannia seem to see, with ravish eye,
her godlike Edward, and his conquer son,
after three century, return from heaven,
to execute the vast design of fate.
hark how the air sound with redouble shout,
and all the welkin ring with vast acclaim!
while the shrill trumpet, with their silver sound,
inspire a martial and heroic joy;
and our deep cannon formidable roar,
the ruler of the world vicegerent thunder,
bear the transport tiding to the sky,
where angel loud hallelujah sing,
and all the spirit of the bless rejoice;
chief the soul of the triumphant slay,
who die to compass this auspicious day,
in Blenheim and ramellia deathless field;
with godlike William at their head once more;
for he, who die, to great Marlborough care,
consign themhere, himself command they there
he man and angel in transport joy,
surpass to behold this sacred day,
William each action, and his every thought.
all the long labour of his anxious day,
and all the restless slumber of his night,
be destine to secure this sacred day,
his daily image, and his nightly dream:
for this great William live, and reign, and die.
but whither, Muse, do thou transport rove?
immortal child of memory and Jove,
return to his vicegerent here below,
and to the king thy eye and thought confine,
on who the eye of god and man be fix:
behold he well with thy immortal eye,
that thou may paint he to the gaze world,
paint he with native majesty adorn,
but heighten with a thousand great exploit,
perform upon pannonia wonder plain,
where he for twenty year victorious fight
against the foe of all the christian world:
even then the great defender of the faith,
and champion of the almighty, under he
spotless religion will be still secure,
in spite of all the attack of Rome and hell.
Muse, paint no terror on his regal brow;
but love and majesty together blend;
and let he look a king resolve to rule
over his subject heart: even god himself,
the almighty ruler of the universe,
remain unsatisfied with all his power,
unless he have the heart of those he rule.
terrestrial ruler, his vicegerent call,
if they over senseless matter only reign,
be but dramatic king; to rule over soul,
over intelligent, immortal being,
be true dominion, true imperial sway.
Muse, paint the king, a monarch, not by half,
but let he reign over all his subject heart.
a king who reign by party, be a king
only of half his subject; and the lord,
who have the affection of the other half,
be true king of that. let royal GEORGE
possess they all; let he deserve they all
by his just, gentle, and impartial sway.
and that the king may rule over all our heart,
grant he, thou god of concord and of love,
grant he the glory to unite those heart,
heal our division, and our faction calm.
and as thy great create power at first,
from war element compose the world;
so from our jar faction, may the king
form a harmonious and a glorious state,
that Britain, like thy heaven, serene within,
may send its lightning and its thunder forth,
affright and punish a offend world.
daughter of Jove, mother of harmony,
exhort thy britain to fraternal love;
it be our division that have make we weak,
and to the nation scandalous vile:
but mutual love will make we once more strong,
with neighbour nation will retrieve our fame,
and place the Ballance of the christian power
in royal george formidable arm.
unite then, britain, join both heart and hand;
the barbarous distinction of vile name
for ever be remove; be briton all,
and look with indignation and disdain
on the vile artifice, that have power
to divide those who heaven and nature mean,
when it disjoin we from the rest of man,
shall be within our self for ever one.
the true britannick Tory, and church Whig,
name that debase the majesty of verse,
odious distinction, mean but the same thing.
a king by law from do harm restrain,
but boundless in his power of do good;
over all person, over all thing supreme,
except superior and imperial law.
a people free, and rule by law they make,
proud to be subject, scorn to be slave.
a church in its own excellence secure,
abhor violence, abhor blood,
and mean mistrust, and vain fantastic fear,
rely firm on establish law,
and promise divine, which have decree,
that all the rage of earth, and rage of hell,
against its sacred power shall never prevail.
the true britannick Tory, and church Whig,
mean nought but this, and therefore shall be friend.
and the dissenter from establish rite,
the sober, scrupulous, conscientious man,
in principle political the same:
with both the other, since they then all three
in interest and principle be one,
let they be three by barbarous term no more,
but by asfection one, and one by name:
let they all three be to each other true,
as to the original compact they be just,
and to their country be constitution true.
let the dissenter venerate the church,
and let the church breathe nought but heavenly love
towards those who differ from her sacred rite,
as sure know nothing can create
danger to she, but want of love divine.

for those who quarrel with our country be law,
and with our frame of government; for those
who will be too much bind, or too much free;
those let we now endeavour to reclaim,
since they be bear our brother and our friend.

then let the few, of old republic fond,
know, that our manner profligate vile,
can never consist with democratic sway;
that they require the curb of regal power,
though just we tyrannic rule disdain.

you wretch who desire unbounded sway,
will you be govern well, or govern ill?
what fool, what brute, will not be govern well?
the aesopian frog, when they desire a king,
one active and beneficent require;
and all the sound bog, who instinct teach
the right which nature give, with one accord
depose the lumpish, useless, lifeless log,
and croak to heaven for help from the devour crane. 

now view the earth from London to Japan,
take a survey of its most boundless lord,
let it be sultan, Sophy, czar, Mogul:
whoever govern well, he rule by law,
by write or eternal law he rule;
the law promulgate in human heart.
even the great ruler of the universe,
govern by write or eternal law;
and none he favour, and chastise none,
but for observe or transgress law;
but in hereditary realm, how few
be qualify to rule by reason law?
perhaps not four in ten successive king,
the rest must govern then by state rule,
or they must govern ill.
whoever in realm hereditary then,
declare for boundless power and boundless king,
they for ill government in term declare,
and be to all their fellow subject foe,
and traitor to their king; for state law,
which alone make the safety of the rule,
make the sole firm security of king;
and never prince, in kingdom rule by law,
while law prevail, by free-born subject fall.
but thousand, where unbounded power prevail,
have fall by their own nonresisting slave;
while feeble principle, to nature power
give way, and passive cant doctrine fail,
as roman and as turkish record tell;
where slave upon unbounded lord depend,
upon those slave the unbounded lord depend,
let he then, who for boundless power declare,
either recant, or own himself a foe
to prince, to people, and to human kind;
and if he dare to own himself that foe,
let he by prince, by people, and mankind,
a universal outlaw be proclaim,
and like devote noxious creature use.
but if, repent, he desire a king,
a king the just executor of law,
instead of a unjust and baleful tyrant,
the bloody executioner of will;
by that desire he royal GEORGE demand:
for none of all our regal race, but he,
dare rule by write or eternal law,
for one in romish superstition breed,
and discipline to barbarous tyranny,
will scorn all bound, and make his power his law.

but royal GEORGE, even in his native realm,
where he be less restrain by write law;
yet there with justice and with mercy rule;
his comprehensive reason be his law.
to his hereditary subject dear,
the common tender father of they all,
who his departure for Britannia see,
with the same grief, and the same horror strike,
that wretch, leave on greenland horrid strand,
see the departure of the lord of day,
the exhaustless source of warmth, and life, and light.
with joy, you briton, under such a king.
unite and grow indissoluble firm
to the two ancient kingdom of our isle.
James give one monarch, Anna give one law;
for GEORGE the happy union be reserve,
the union of affection and of heart;
that union make both king and people bless,
make he the great, most renowned of king,
and we a people worthy such a king.

goddess, to who it be give by fate and Jove,
to bring back what be past, the present to record,
the future to foresee, and to unite
whatever have be, and be, and what shall be.
let thy loud briton, see with ravish soul,
what wondrous blessing will on Britain flow,
under the king unite to itself,
while he with justice and with mercy rule,
with plenty we and liberty obey.
that union in the king will place a power,
a formidable but a legal power,
on which our western tyrant will look pale,
and all his subject look with cheerful hue:
for he with the same awful, bounteous voice,
with which he set, to each proud tyrant, bar,
and say, as god do to the ocean wave,
here fix thy bound, here stop thy aspire course;
will make fair liberty immortal here,
will make his subject bless, secure, renowned.

woe to that guilty tyrant, who shall then
provoke he to resume the dreadful sword,
to lead his briton and he german forth
to meet bright victory on belgian plain,
where they have oft the radiant goddess meet,
where oft the radiant goddess have be please
to bless and crown the union of their arm.
what vengeance will that impious tyrant urge?
what hideous and amaze ruin draw
on his accurse and devote head?
in vain he shall new fortress erect,
(as giant mountain upon mountain hurl)
to threat religion and assail the sky:
the king, like Jove, shall crumble they to dust
with his avenge thunder; and his son,
as once he do on audenard wonder plain,
shall, like the god of war, among they rush,
while dread before he and amazement march,
and slaughter and destruction stalk behind.
what numerous triumph shall we then behold
upon the land, upon the astonish main?
again great Marlborough to the german Alps,
with old victorious squadron shall be send;
the german Alps shall tremble at his march,
and from their summit shake the eternal snow. 
another deathless Blenheim shall be fight,
and in its field another emperor save;
another glorious ramellies succeed,
and fifty fort and province entire,
which perfidy, and fraud, and impious gold,
can scarce in fifty guilty year acquire,
shall in one hour before the conqueror fall.
Orford once more great Neptune shall affright,
and make he apprehend, as at la Hogue,
that Jove descend in celestial fire,
the exhaust and to devour his watery realm.
our impious foe shall from all sea be drive;
nor shall the ocean, which confine the world,
britannia fame and victory confine.
both shall to new astonish world extend,
the imperial montezuma golden coast,
and atabalipa more precious shore:
and both the aetherial Andes shall ascend,
where on the sky the ambitious earth confine;
britannia victory, and fame, like they,
shall reach the star, and terminate in heaven.
our ship shall over the atlantic ocean range,
from Florida to the far southern cape,
where the two sea their name and wave confound
in triumph the pacific billow plough,
from California to rich chili shore;
shall captivate the vessel of both flood,
their fort demolish, and their town destroy,
ravage their carthagene and Porto bell,
and Panama, and royal Lima spoil;
confound the hope of the aspire Gaul,
and teach the proud Castilian humble thought;
return with the vast treasure of the west,
and bring home riches to amaze the world.

dreadful, alas! shall spread that war, and wide,
infect sea and land with purple die.
but short shall be its transitory rage,
and it shall end in victory and fame,
eternal fame to Britain and her king.
and then a glorious everlasting peace,
crown with domestic quiet shall succeed,
and brood over Britain with her downy wing,
to hatch felicity and plenty here.
then the wise conduct of the best of king
will shine, and then his godlike bounty flow.
the rich with flow plenty will overwhelm,
employ and nourish our yet numerous poor;
our manufacture will increase and raise;
our commerce will improve, and will extend,
and to our side incline the ponderous scale;
while he, the ocean undisputed lord,
will call divine astrea from the sky,
and causeher sacred law to be observe
as strict on the rude, tempestuous main,
as they be observe on calm britannia shore,
as they be observe in her own native heaven.
the number of his subject he will augment,
diminish much by three devour war;
extend our culture, and improve our soil;
will make the ocean, now the world great waste,
it self a fertile and a bounteous soil,
while his bold briton plough the furrow deep,
and reap a plentiful and live harvest.

at home the rich shall jocund sit down
in the cool shade of his own branch vine,
and with its juice make his poor brother glad.

but when this glorious long continue peace
shall advance commerce to its utmost height,
base poverty, and base passion then
for ever shall be banish from our isle.
the riches of the earth, the joy of heaven
shall overflow britannia blissful plain;
the eastern and the western world shall vie
which shall add most to our increase store.
the merchant shall in sparkle ruby drink,
and under golden canopy shall sleep,
and balmy shall his slumber be and long;
the happy shepherd, with his rural Crook,
shall the dumb kingdom under he survey,
and while his heart distend with pride and joy,
shall see his wanton and his fatten flock,
the source of all his country be wealth and power.
under their ponderous fleece proud pant,
while numberless, and cover all the plain,
to the shrill music of his jocund pipe,
under his ravish eye they still increase,
and hourly multiply. the whistle hind
shall sow the faithful glebe with sanguine hope,
large interest to extort for what he lend,
and for mild season and a gentle reign,
shall praise aloud the goodness of the king,
and the indulgent clemency of heaven.
fair liberty shall, like the british oak,
the long live oak, grow tall, and branch spread,
and virtue under liberty grow strong.
for ever property shall be secure,
the public credit be forever fix.
the busy briton, like industrious bee,
shall drive the idle drone from forth their hive,
and idleness be deem the source of every vice.
pernicious luxury shall be restrain
by wholesome and by sumptuary law,
that none his patrimonial land may waste,
and so by dire necessity be urge
to sell his country, and his king betray.
unmanly custom and contagious vice,
and fraud beyond the ocean shall be drive;
and faith, and every virtue dwell secure.
devotion to the heaven of heaven shall soar
upon the flame wing of charity,
and fall again in blessing on mankind.
while vile mistrust, and vain fantastic fear,
and envy, hatred, malice, rage, revenge,
shall take their flight to tyrant court abroad,
or take their flight to hell, and plague the damn.
no passion but the heaven-born passion love,
among britannia happy son shall reign.
no passion here but love shall reign and joy,
the lawful and the charm child of love.

each noble art shall flourish, as in day
of great Augustus, or great Alexander. 

goddess, to thou a temple we will erect,
and annual honour shall be pay: to thou
peace owe its noble ornament: to thou
distinguish merit owe its chief reward,
and virtue self its immortality.
thy tuneful son their rapture shall employ
to celebrate the blessing, and the joy,
of this renowned and everlasting peace.
thy noble son their transport shall employ,
vertue and public spirit to advance;
and great and public action to record,
and to reward with everlasting fame;
the extol the god-like patriot to the sky;
to fix on traitor a eternal brand;
and on the venal, vile, accurse pen,
that with their lie intoxicate the crowd,
and make the beast run dangerous mad;
while from immortal merit they detract
heroic victory, heroic deed,
to which its happiness, their country owe
its safety, spirit, strength, and high renown.
on these a brand eternal shall be fix,
eternal laurel on our hero head.
a different hero to each god-like bard,
and a peculiar province shall be give;
but their heroic transport all shall join,
redouble all their rapture and their flame,
to celebrate the king auspicious reign,
and his immortal name to extend as far,
as his high conduct brave, and just, and wise,
will fair britannia happiness extend.
