a epistle from a Swiss officer to his friend at Rome.

from horrid mountain ever hide in snow,
and barren land, and dreary plain below;
to you, dear sir, my best regard i send,
the weak reasoner, as the true friend.
your argument, that vain strive to please,
your art, your country, and your palace;
what sign of roman grandeur still remain —
much you have say; and much have say in vain.
fine pageant these for slave, to please the eye;
and put the neat dress on misery!

breed up to slavery and dissemble pain,
unhappy man! you trifle with your chain:
but shall your friend with your desire comply,
and sell himself to Rome and slavery;
he can not wear his trammel with that art,
or hide the noble anguish of his heart:
you will soon repent the livery that you give;
for, trust i, i shall make a awkward slave.

false you blame our barren rock and plain,
happy in freedom and laborious swain;
our peasant cheerful to the field repair,
and can enjoy the labour of the year;
while you, beneath some tree, with mournful eye,
see for his haughty lord he harvest rise:
then silent sigh; but stop his slavish breath:
he silent sigh: for shall he speak, it be death.
hence from our field the lazy grain we call,
too much for want, for luxury too small:
while all campania rich invite soil
scarce know the ploughshare, or the reaper toil.

in arm we breed our youth. to dart from far,
and aim aright the thunder of the war;
to whirl the falchion, and direct the blow;
to ward the stroke, or bear upon the foe.
early in hardship through the wood they fly,
nor feel the pierce frost, or wintery sky;
some prowl wolf or foamy boar to meet,
and stretch the pant savage at their foot:
inure by this, they seek a noble war,
and show a honest pride in every scar;
with joy the danger and the blood partake,
while every wound be for their country sake.
but you, soft warrior, force into the field,
or faint strike, or impotent yield;
for well this universal truth you know,
who fight for tyrant be his country foe.

i envy not your art, the roman school,
improve, perhaps, but to enslave your soul.
may you to stone, or nerve or beauty give,
and teach the soften marble how to live;
may you the passion in your colour trace,
and work up every piece with every grace;
in air and attitude be wondrous wise,
and know the art to please, or to surprise;
in music soft sound consume the day,
sound that will melt the warrior soul away:
vain effort these, a honest fame to raise;
your painter, and your eunuch, be your praise:
grant we more real goods, you heavenly power!
virtue, and arm, and liberty be we.

weak be your offer to the free and brave;
no bribe can purchase i to be a slave.
hear i, you rock, you mountain, and you plain,
the happy bound of our helvetian swain!
in thou, my country, will i fix my seat;
nor envy the poor wretch, that will be great:
my life and arm i dedicate to thou; —
for, know, it be my interest to be free.
