to Stella;

on a visit to mrs. Montagu.

unequal, lose to the aspire claim,
 i neither ask, nor own the immortal name
 of friend; ah, no! its ardour be too great,
 my soul too narrow, and too low my state;
 Stella! soar on, to noble object true,
 pour out your soul with your love Montagu;
 but, ah! shall either have a thought to spare,
 slight, trivial, neither worth a smile or tear,
 let it be i; — when glow rapture rise,
 and each, aspire, seek her native sky;
 when fancy wake the soul to ecstasy,
 and the rapt mind be touch with deity,
 quick let i from the hallow spot retire,
 where sacred genius light his awful fire. 

crush as i be, by Fortune adverse power,
 i hail the joy which wait thy happy hour;
 to hear the music of her matchless tongue,
 on which the nameless sweet of wit be hang;
 what bliss the friendship of the wise to share,
 of soul superior, and of virtue rare! 
where genius in familiar converse sit,
 crown real worth, and blast pretend wit;
 where great idea, feed by fancy, glow,
 and soul-expanding note in rapture flow;
 where point thought in polish diction dress,
 with every grace assault the yield breast;
 o, power of genius! even the miser heart,
 in the sweet transport, bear a transient part;
 he thrill, unconscious whence his pleasure come,
 who never have dream of rapture but at home;
 but, ah! the slight impression quick die,
 or on the noxious surface float lie;
 the momentary virtue never be bring
 to frame one bounteous deed, one generous thought,
 his harden spirit only know to shun
 the lore of wisdom, and the genial sun
 of warm humanity; ah! joyless breast,
 which never hail a self-rewarding guest! 
then fly, cold wretch, to thy congenial cell,
 and quit the haunt where sweet sensation dwell. 

how have your bounty cheere my humble state,
 and change the colour of my gloomy fate! 
still shall your image sooth my pensive soul,
 when slow-paced moment, big with mischief, roll;
 still shall i, eager, wait your wish return,
 from that bright fair who deck a shakespeare urn
 with deathless glory; every ardent prayer
 which gratitude can waft from soul sincere,
 each warm return to generous bounty due,
 shall warm my heart for you and Montagu. 
bless pair! o, have not soul like you be give,
 the stupid atheist well may doubt a heaven;
 convince, he now desert his gloomy stand,
 own mind the noble proof of a create hand. 

galen conversion, by external wrought,
 drop far beneath sublimity of thought;
 but can he those superior wonder find,
 which form and actuate your noble mind,
 how will the heathen, strike with vast surprise,
 atom deny, while spirit fill his eye. 
