to Della Crusca. 

oh stay, oh stay! thy rash speed check,
 not yet ascend the fly deck;
 nor europe hemisphere forsake,
 nor from thy nation pleasure take
 a bliss so exquisite and chaste —
 a feast so dear to polish taste,
 as that thy lyre correct fling,
 as that they feel when Della Crusca sing. 
alas! thou be go, and to my strain eye
 thy bark seem buoyant on the distant sky; —
 see! in the cloud its mast it proud lave,
 scorn the aid of ocean humble wave:
 well may it soar and bear aloft the prize
 who verse immortal link he to the sky;
 well may it scorn rough neptune rocky way,
 which bear the genius of the god of day! 

and now, Matilda, bind thy lyre
 with cypress wreathe! the lambent fire
 thou kindled at his fervid ray
 can gleam no more; — thy future day
 lose to the muse and to taste,
 each torpid hour will joyless waste. 
in vain each morning now will glow —
 in vain soft maia music flow,
 and to my pillow force its way,
 and on my waken sense play. 
her note my waken sense fill,
 and conscious slumber own the trill;
 but when at length remembrance bid
 the filmy slumber quit my lid,
 say "the world its wit have bring,
" its various point, its well-turned thought,
 "but Della Crusca lend no ray" —
 oh what be morning — what be may? 

yet hold! some solace yet remain,
 and pensive joy await my pain. 
i too must leave this laureled coast
 which all, that Rome adorn, can boast;
 but not like thou, for grecian shore; —
 ah no! my humble prow explore
 the sea unsung, which lie between
 dover proud cliff, and France serene. 
thou will skim the egean brilliant tide,
 i, over the british channel glide;
 thou, all enthusiast! fond trace
 the isle where phaon beauteous face
 give birth to sappho glorious art —
 illume she name, but tear her heart:
 thy Sappho seek the shore vicine,
 where England lovely great-souled queen
 sublime kneel, and snatch from blush fate
 the godlike victim of her Edward hate. 
thou, at aonia sacred foot
 will due pour libation meet;
 i, roam over gallia's sportive plain
 where thoughtless pleasure ever reign. 

but it be not sportive gallia's plain,
 though pleasure there for ever reign,
 which promise the boast bliss —
 no, bard belove! the hope be this,
 that there thy footstep i may tread,
 press the same turf where sink thy head;
 sip the quick stream thy thirst have slake,
 and greet the dawn where thou have wake —
 fancy her wave of mazy gold
 never with such rich refulgence roll;
 and when her tint of various dye
 burst from the pallid sickly sky,
 there rush in violet, there in green,
 here in soft red imbue the scene;
 then lose themselves by grow bright,
 until swallow up in one vast flood of light —
 thus shall i say, he see her ray,
 thus be he rouse to adore and praise! 

oh sympathy, of birth divine,
 descend, and round my heart-string twine! 
touch the fine nerve whenever i breathe
 where Della Crusca drop his wreath! 
lead i the sacred way of Rome,
 lead i to kneel at virgil tomb,
 where he endure marble round
 with fresh-wove laurel graceful bind. 
then guide where still with sweet note,
 than flow from petrarch tuneful throat,
 on laura grave he pour the lay
 amid the sigh of sink day:
 then point where on the sod his tear
 fall from its crystal source so clear,
 that there my mingle tear may sink,
 and the same dust its moisture drink! 

thus die swan be say to sing,
 and their last breath in number fling. 
over the dear liquid shine plain,
 which nurse their joy, and nurse their pain. 
like they my muse pine fast away,
 and this her last, her close day. 
when one bless word her lip have seal,
 in last silence she will be veil. 
expire, still her note' the same,
 she murmur Della crusca name! —
 the sacred word! you hear it speak; —
 her book be close — her lyre be break! 
