address to the muse.

you tuneful sister of the lyre,
 who dream and fantasy inspire,
 who over poesy preside,
 and on a lofty hill abide
 above the ken of mortal sight,
 fain will i sing of you, can i address you right. 

thus know, your power of old be sing,
 and temple with your praise ring;
 and when the song of battle rise,
 or kindle wine, or lovers woe,
 the poet spirit inly burn,
 and still to you his upcast eye be turn. 

the youth, all wrap in vision bright,
 behold your robe of flow white;
 and know your form benign grand, —
 a awful but a lovely band;
 and feel your inspiration strong
 and warm pour his rapid lie along. 

the age bard all heavenward glow,
 and hail you daughter of a god. 
though to his dimmer eye be see
 nor graceful form nor heavenly mien,
 full well he feel that you be near,
 and hear you in the breeze that raise his hoary hair. 

you lighten up the valley bloom,
 and give the forest deep gloom;
 the mountain peak sublime stand,
 and grand rose the mighty flood;
 for then religion lend her aid,
 and over the mind of man your sacred empire spread. 

though roll age now be past,
 and altar low and temple waste;
 though rite and oracle be over,
 and god and hero rule no more,
 your fade honour still remain,
 and still your votary call, a long and motley train. 

they seek you not on hill or plain,
 nor court you in the sacred fane;
 nor meet you in the midday dream,
 upon the bank of hallow stream;
 yet still for inspiration sue,
 and still each lift his fervent prayer to you. 

he woo you not in woodland gloom,
 but in the close and shelve room,
 and seek you in the dusty nook,
 and meet you in the letter book:
 full well he know you by your name,
 and still with poet faith your presence claim. 

now youthful poet, pen in hand,
 all by the side of blot stand,
 in reverie deep which none may break,
 sit rub of his beardless cheek,
 and well his inspiration know,
 even by the dewy drop that trickle over his nose. 

the tuneful sage, of riper fame,
 perceive you not in heat frame;
 but at conclusion of his verse,
 which still his mutter lip rehearse,
 oft wave his hand in grateful pride,
 and own the heavenly power that do his fancy guide. 

o lovely sister! be it true
 that they be all inspire by you,
 and write by inward magic charm,
 and high enthusiasm warm? 
we dare not question heavenly lay,
 and well, i wot, they give you all the praise. 

o lovely sister! well it show
 how wide and far your bounty flow. 
then why from i withhold your beam? 
unvisited of vision dream,
 whenever i aim at height sublime,
 still downward be i call to seek some stubborn rhyme. 

no hasty lightning break my gloom,
 nor flash thought unsought for come,
 nor fancy wake in time of need:
 i labour much with little speed,
 and, when my study task be do,
 too well alas! i mark it for my own. 

yet, shall you never smile on i,
 and rugged still my verse be,
 unplease to the tuneful train,
 who only prize a flow strain,
 and still the learned scorn my lay,
 i will lift my heart to you and sing your praise. 

your vary ministry of grace,
 your honour name and godlike race,
 your sacred cave where fountain flow
 they will rehearse, who better know;
 i praise you not with grecian lyre,
 nor hail you daughter of a heathen sire. 

you be the spirit who preside
 in earth and air and ocean wide;
 in rush flood and crackle fire,
 in horror dread and tumult dire;
 in still calm and stormy wind,
 and rule the answer change in the human mind. 

high on the tempest-beaten hill,
 your misty shape you shift at will;
 the wild fantastic cloud you form;
 your voice be in the midnight storm,
 while in the dark and lonely hour
 oft start the bold heart, and own your secret power. 

when lightning cease on the waste,
 and when the battle broil be past,
 when scene of strife and blood be over,
 and groan of death be hear no more,
 you then renew each sound and form,
 like after echo of the overpass storm. 

the shine day and nightly shade,
 the cheerful plain and sunny glade;
 the homeward kine, the child play,
 the busy hamlet close day,
 give pleasure to the peasant heart,
 who lack the gift his feeling to impart. 

oft when the moon look from on high,
 and black around the shadow lie,
 and bright the sparkle water gleam,
 and rush rustle by the stream,
 voice and fairy form be know
 by simple folk who wander late alone. 

you kindle up the inward glow,
 you strengthen every outward show;
 you overleap the strong bar,
 and join what nature sunder far,
 and visit oft in fancy wild,
 the breast of learned sage and simple child. 

from he who wear a monarch crown
 to the unlettered simple clown,
 all in some fitful, lonely hour
 have feel, unsought, your secret power,
 and love your inward vision well;
 you add but to the bard the art to tell. 

you mighty spirit of the song,
 to who the poet prayer belong,
 my lowly bosom to inspire
 and kindle with your sacred fire,
 your wild and dizzy height to brave,
 be boon alas! too great for i to crave. 

but o, such sense of nature bring! 
as they who feel and never sing
 wear on their heart; it will avail
 with simple word to tell my tale;
 and still content will i be,
 though great inspiration never fall to i. 
