the fable of phaeton paraphrase from ovid metamorphosis.

with swell thought fix on his great intent,
 now phaeton have climb the sun ascent;
 and to his radiant father palace come;
 who heavenly seat look blazon all with flame:
 on stately pedestal erect high
 above the convex of the utmost sky:
 its glorious front, dazzle, yet please the sight,
 with vigorous sally of aethereal light. 
the entrance, all divine deck, be wrought,
 beyond the invention of a humane thought;
 with various figure exquisite and bold,
 as the amaze novelty they tell. 
here awful Neptune rise from the deep,
 around the peaceful billow seem to sleep:
 here dreadful whale the bluster Triton stride,
 and raise a silver tempest as they glide:
 in mighty shell the lovely nereid swim,
 and blewish god the lofty billow climb. 

wide from the shore a pleasant scene of land,
 with careless beauty do it self expand:
 here mountain, valley, spring, and sacred groves,
 flock, herd, unpolished shepherd, and their love;
 the dryad, satyr, silver god, and fawn,
 have here their rural palace and lawn. 

above all this, appear the bless abode,
 and gay-pavilion of the immortal god:
 upon a painted-zodiack bright shine
 with glitter emrald Sols refulgent throne:
 here sit in purple the bright god of day,
 (who phaeton now tremble to survey:)
 smooth be his cheek, most lovely eye, his brow
 adorn with ray, and his own sacred bough:
 around, the day, the month, and year attend,
 while, at his foot, the crooked age bend:
 the beauteous spring (more gay than all the rest,)
 stand smile by, clad in a flowery vest:
 summer, with ear of corn, her temple bind,
 and autumn with luxuriant cluster crown:
 in order next old hoary-winter stand;
 his aspect horrid, and congeal his blood. 

surround thus with majesty and state,
 bold phaeton illustrious father sit:
 the god his venturous offspring now espy;
 amaze! demand, what urge his enterprise? 
and what great embassy can bring he to the sky? 
monarch of light, the doubtful youth return,
 who absence life it self and nature mourn:
 most splendid ruler of the welcome day,
 serene spring of all that be fair and gay —
 if bold i may speak — if ever — if ever
 the thought of love and Clymene be dear;
 — then grant a certain sign, that may on earth
 resolve the question grandeur of my birth,

my best-lov'd-son, great Phoebus make reply,
 (and back he cast the radiant energy
 of his thick beam) my phaeton draw nigh:
 and doubt no long my paternal right;
 for, by my Clymene, by the intense delight
 that give thou birth, so — now choose a sign,
 and by the dark infernal lake it be thy. 

straight the ambitious youth demand the sway
 of his hot steed, and chariot of the day. 

amaze, the lucent deity shake his head,
 revolve his tremendous oath, and say;

unthinking phaeton what do thou ask? 
not Iove himself dare undertake the task:
 though not a god in the blew-arch more great,
 yet even he will decline our flame seat. 
can thou, a mortal, then supply my throne? 
Curb my fierce steed, and pass the intemperate zone? 
so hard and difficult, the ascent of day
 scarce with fresh horse vanquish i the way:
 with horror, on the distant earth at noon,
 we from the zenith dismal height look down
 the steep descent; from thence we swift roll:
 nor here our headlong courser brook control. 
even lovely Thetis see my fall with dread,
 though every night she expect i to her bed. 
beside, thou will meet a thousand rugged jar
 from the encounter motion of the star;
 scarce our immortal effort stem their force:
 betwixt the bull sharp horn then lie thy course,
 by sagitarius, and the scorpion claw,
 the ghastly crab, and leo dreadful jaw. 
expect no groves, nor flowery mansion there,
 nor god, nor nymph; but monster every where,
 then let a father be timely care persuade,
 and yet retract the dangerous choice thou have make
 be wise, and urge no more this fatal sign;
 alas, my grief, too sad, speak thou Mine.  
of all the earth, or sea rich bosom hide,
 or treasure which in upper air abide;
 ask what thou will, or dare (beside) to wish;
 do, phaeton, ask any thing but this;
 and, by my former sacred oath, it be thy. 

but the hot youth, fix on his rash design,
 with such a enterprise, the more inflame
 his anxious father oath, now bold claim,
 who force to yield. the nimble hour soon bring
 his chariot forth in hot vesuvio wrought,
 by crafty Vulcan, and the Cyclops art,
 who will show immortal skill in every part:
 the wheel, and axletree, the pure gold,
 bright as those lucid tract in which they roll:
 the harness all emboss with Crysolites,
 and twinkle spark of wondrous colour light. 

but now Aurora from her eastern bed,
 have, over the expanse her dewy mantle spread,
 the sickly moon the hemisphere resign;
 and, with her wane, Lucifer decline. 
the dawning grow more fair and ruddy still,
 and Sol officious now against his will:
 with sacred compound his fierce orb always,
 then crown the joyful hero with his ray:
 with tender speech caution thus the while,
 let not presumption thy fond thought beguile ,
to give my hot unruly steed their course,
 but use the reins, with utmost care and force,
 along a beat, broad, and oblique way,
 far from the pole, now lie the road of day. 
avoid the altar, and the hiss snake,
 both opposite, betwixt they keep the track;
 observe a careful distance from the sky,
 lest thou affront the awful deity;
 nor near the earth approach, the mean be best;
 to destiny with hope i leave the rest. 
for, lo the pale commandress of the night
 resign her empire to the expect light. 
take up the reins; or yet, or yet be wise,
 and graspa more proportion enterprise:

but phaeton, as resolute as great,
 undaunted, leap into the blaze seat;
 please with his glorious charge, nor doubt his skill
 to manage it, he mount the olympick hill. 
aloud the immortal steed begin to neigh,
 and strike their fiery hoof, and make new day;
 as through she cloud they cut their sparkle way:
 and find now the reel chariot fraught
 with nothing congruous to celestial weight;
 unruly grow, and heedless of the rein,
 its feeble check, and tremble guide disdain;
 and, all disorder, careless of their way,
 through path unknown to Sol himself, they stray:
 now near the fair triones, who, in vain,
 implore more temperate quarter in the main
 with heat revive, see the fierce serpent roll,
 though fix his station near the freeze pole. 
Bootes sweat, and drive his lazy team
 a nimble pace; untried before by they,
 as much distress, unhappy phaeton
 from great Olympus arch top look down:
 black horror now, and aggravate fear,
 through all his conscious thought triumphant be:
 he curse his pride, conspicuous seat, and birth,
 and covet the obscure place on earth;
 to be the son of Meropes, safe below,
 unknown to god and man, will please he now;
 so, all confuse, the hopeless pilot rave,
 and yield, at last, to the relentless wave. 
what can he do? much of the glow east
 be yet unconquered; more he dread the west,
 that dangerous fall; nor one clear track can fine
 in heaven; nor call his horse name to mind:
 who now near where the dreadful scorpion lie,
 hurryd the shatter chariot of the day:
 proud of the reins, which from his tremble hand
 now faint drop, no obstacle withstand
 their furious course; but through the blaze sky
 they foam, and rave, and all disorder fly. 
now upward, to the star, a path they rend,
 then down again the frightful steep descend:
 below, her own Diana from afar,
 with wonder, view her radiant brother car:
 the exhale earth down to its centre dry,
 want juice, her faint product to supply:
 assault with the too prevail ray,
 in fatal flame, whole town and mountain blaze:
 high Athos, oete, and the pin'y top
 of pleasant Ida into cinder drop:
 old Tmolus, the cicillian mount, and high
 Parnassus, smoke up to the darken sky:
 vesuvio roar, more fierce its entrails glow;
 nor work the Cyclops at their anvil now. 
steep Othrys, Cynthus, Erix, Mimas, flame
 nor rhodopean snow the fierce fire can tame. 

cauoasus fry, Dindyma chap, and burn
 her kindle grove; fair Aphrodites mourn. 
the airy Alps, and gloomy appenine,
 with Ossa, in the conflagration shine:
 surround thus with smoke, and wrathful fire,
 unhappy phaeton almost expire:
 despair within, and terror all without,
 by furious steed, at pleasure, hurl about;
 gasp, and saint, still hurry round, nor more,
 though prop by fate, a mortal can have bear:
 they say, the ethiopian now with heat
 adust, and scorch, diffuse a sable sweat;
 and all the waste fountain sad ring
 of some fair nais, mourn for her spring. 
nor from the Mightyer stream the flame recoil,
 for in its channel ancient Tana'is boil. 
Xanthus, who wave again that fate must know;
 Maeander, who wild water, circle flow. 

Melas, Eurotas, Ister, and the fair
 Euphrates, torrent, half exhaust be. 
Orontes, Phasis, and the cool stream
 of sperchius now like boil chaldron steam;
 Alpheus, Ganges, and the flow gold,
 that in the rich Pactolus channel roll:
 the muse mourn; their swan, who, as they die
 in charm note, breath their own elegy:
 deep, in his utmost subterranean bed,
 great Nilus hide his undiscovered head. 
earth crack, to hell descend the hate beam,
 and plague the howl ghost with worse extreme:
 the exhaust ocean leave a field of sand;
 nor do vex Neptune one cool wave command. 
he have lose his share of the grand monarchy,
 and vain lift his fork trident high. 
the lovely sister melt upon the rock,
 while age Doris tares her silver lock:
 the phocoe dye; the dolphin vain dive
 in scald stream, to keep themselves alive. 
as much the goddess of the earth distress,
 with tremble lip the king of god address;

if thou the groan world destruction mean,
 (incense Iove) why sleep thy thunder then? 
if thou the cause of this calamity;
 or if it be some less potent god then thou:
 where be all thy goodness, all thy gentle care
 for mortal now-that shall these ill repair? 
have i for this thy sacred victim feed
 in hecatomb, to thy high altar lead? 
those altar, which with thy bright temple smoke,
 while Iove, in vain, the gasping-priest invoke:
 and lo the mighty pole begin to fume;
 and, where have thy starry seat shall they consume? 
tire Atlas sweat, of his load complain,
 and scarce the burn axletree sustain:
 but, faint here, she stop, and shrink her head
 below the gloomy lodging of the dead. 
Iove call the god (with he, who dare son,
 too fond of glory, have this mischief do:)
 to view the dreadful flame; then mount on high,
 the losty turret that command the sky;
 from whence he use to shade the sultry air,
 and with kind shower the parch earth to cheer:
 but throw his floodgate open now in vain,
 and press the light transparent cloud for rain:
 at which incense, his ruddy thunder glow,
 nor dare the god of beam himself oppose. 
see the winge vengeance now, see where it break,
 on the rash cause of those lament wreck;
 and send the bold usurper breathless down
 to the scorch earth from his affect throne:

so strike the gallic tyrant, that have hurl
 as guilty flame through the complain world. 
so awful Iove, so strike he from his seat,
 and all his aim, and all his hope defeat. 
