to mr. pope.

to praise, yet still with due respect to praise,
 a bard triumphant in immortal bay,
 the learnt to show, the sensible commend,
 yet still preserve the province of the friend,
 what life, what vigour, must the line require? 
what music tune they? what affection fire? 

o may thy genius in my bosom shine! 
thou shall not fail of number worthy thy,
 the bright ancient might at once agree
 to sing within my lay, and sing of thou. 

Horace himself will own thou do excel
 in candid art to play the critic well. 
Ovid himself may wish to sing the dame
 who Windsor forest see a glide stream,
 on silver foot, with annual osier crown,
 she run for ever through poetic ground. 

how flame the glory of Belinda hair,
 make by thy muse the envy of the fair;
 less shine the tress egypt princess wear,
 which sweet Callimachus so sing before. 
here courtly trifle set the world at odds,
 bell be with beau, and whim descend for god,
 the new machine in name of ridicule,
 mock the grave frenzy of the chemic fool. 
but know, you fair, a point conceal with art,
 the sylph and gnome be but a woman heart:
 the grace stand in sight; a satyr train
 peep over their head, and laugh behind the scene. 

in fame fair temple, over the bold wit
 enshrine on high the sacred Virgil sit,
 and sit in measure, such as virgil muse
 to place thou near he may be fond to choose. 
how may he tune the alternate reed with thou,
 perhaps a Strephon thou, a Daphnis he,
 while some old Damon over the vulgar wise
 think he deserve, and thou deserv'sf the prize. 
rapt with the thought my fancy seek the plain,
 and turn i shepherd while i hear the strain. 
indulgent nurse of every tender gale,
 parent of flowret, old Arcadia hail! 
here in the cool my limb at ease i spread,
 here let thy poplar whisper over my head,
 still slide thy water soft among the tree,
 thy aspin quiver in a breathe breeze,
 smile all thy valley in eternal spring,
 be hush, you wind! while pope and Virgil sing. 

in english lay, and all sublime great,
 thy Homer warm with all his ancient heat,
 he shine in council, thunder in the fight,
 and flame with every sense of great delight. 
long have that poet reign, and long unknown,
 like monarch sparkle on a distant throne;
 in all the majesty of greek retire,
 himself unknown, his mighty name admire,
 his language fail, wrap he round with night,
 thy raise by thou, recall the work to light. 
so wealthy mine, that age long before
 feed the large realm around with golden oar,
 when choke by sink bank, no more appear,
 and shepherd only say, the mine be here:
 shall some rich youth (if nature warm his heart,
 and all his project stand inform with art)
 here clear the cave, there open the lead vein;
 the mine detect flame with gold again. 

how vast, how copious be thy new design! 
how every music vary in thy line! 
still as i read, i feel my bosom beat,
 and rise in rapture by another heat. 
thus in the wood, when summer dress the day,
 when Windsor lend we tuneful hour of ease,
 our ear the lark, the thrush, the turtle bless,
 and Philomela sweet over the rest:
 the shade resound with song — o soft tread! 
while a whole season warble round my head. 

this to my friend — and when a friend inspire
 my silent harp its master hand require,
 shake off the dust, and make these rock resound,
 for fortune place i in unfertile ground;
 far from the joy that with my soul agree,
 from wit, from learning, — far, oh far from thou! 
here moss-grown tree expand the small leaf,
 here half an acre corn be half a sheaf,
 here hill with naked head the tempest meet,
 rock at their side, and torrent at their foot,
 or lazy lake unconscious of a flood,
 who dull brown naiad ever sleep in mud. 

yet here content can dwell, and learned ease,
 a friend delight i, and a author please,
 even here i sing, while pope supply the theme,
 show my own love, though not increase his fame. 
