the last song of camoens. 

the morning shine on Tagus' rocky side,
and air of summer swell the yellow tide,
when, rise from his melancholy bed,
and faint, and feeble by Antonio lead,
poor camoens, subdue by want and woe,
along the wind margin wander slow,
his harp, that once can each warm feeling move
of patriot glory or of tender love,
his sole and sable friend (while a faint tone
rise from the wire) place by a mossy stone.

how beautiful the sun ascend shine
from ridge to ridge, along the purple vine!
how pure the azure of the open sky!
how resonant the near rock reply
to call of early mariner! and, hark!
the distant whistle from yond part bark,
that down the channel as serene she stray,
her grey sail mingle with the morning haze,
bind to explore, over ocean stormy reign,
new land that lurk amid the lonely main!

a transient fervour touch the old man breast;
he raise his eye, so long by care depress,
and while they shine with momentary fire,
ardent he strike the long-forgotten lyre.
from Tagus' yellow-sanded shore,
over the billow, as they roar,
over the blue sea, waste and wide,
our bark throw back the burn tide,
by northern breeze cheery bear,
on to the kingdom of the morn.
blanco, who cold shadow vast
chill the western wave, be past!
huge Bojador, frown high,
thy dismal terror we defy!
but who may violate the sleep
and silence of the sultry deep;
where, beneath the intenser sun,
hot shower descend, red lightning run;
while all the pale expanse beneath
lie burn wide, without a breath;
and at midday from the mast,
no shadow on the deck be cast!
night by night, still see the same,
strange light along the cordage flame,
perhaps, the spirit of the good,
that wander this forsake flood
sing to the sea, as slow we float,
a solemn and a holy note!
spectre of the southern main,
thou bar our onward way in vain,
wrap the terror of thy form,
in the thunder roll storm! 
fearless over the indignant tide,
on to the east our galley ride.
triumph! for the toil be over —
we kiss the far-sought indian shore!
glitter to the orient ray,
the banner of the cross display!
do my heart exult bind?
alas, forlorn, i gaze around:
feeble, poor, and old, i stand,
a stranger in my native land!
my sable slave (ah, no! my only friend,
who step upon my rugged path attend)
see, but with tenderness that fear to speak,
the tear that trickle down my age cheek!
my harp be silent, — famine shrink my eye, —
"give i a little food for charity!" 
