the hermit.

far in a wild, unknown to public view,
 from youth to age a reverend hermit grow;
 the moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
 his food the fruit, his drink the crystal well:
 remote from man, with god he pass the day,
 prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise. 

a life so sacred, such serene repose,
 seem heaven it self, until one suggestion rise;
 that vice shall triumph, virtue vice obey,
 this spring some doubt of providence sway:
 he hope no more a certain prospect boast,
 and all the tenor of his soul be lose:
 so when a smooth expanse receive impress
 calm nature image on its watery breast,
 down bend the bank, the tree depend grow,
 and sky beneath with answer colour glow:
 but if a stone the gentle scene divide,
 swift ruffle circle curl on every side,
 and glimmer fragment of a break sun,
 bank, tree, and sky, in thick disorder run. 

to clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,
 to find if book, or swain, report it right;
 (for yet by swain alone the world he know,
 who foot come wander over the nightly dew)
 he quit his cell; the pilgrim-staff he bear,
 and fix the scallop in his hat before;
 then with the sun a rise journey go,
 sedate to think, and watch each event. 

the morn be waste in the pathless grass,
 and long and lonesome be the wild to pass;
 but when the southern sun have warm the day,
 a youth come post over a cross way;
 his raiment decent, his complexion fair,
 and soft in graceful ringlet wave his hair. 
then near approach, father hail! he cry,
 and hail, my son, the reverend sire reply;
 word follow word, from question answer flow
 and talk of various kind deceive the road;
 until each with other please, and loath to part,
 while in their age they differ; join in heart:
 thus stand a age elm in ivy bind,
 thus youthful ivy clasp a elm around. 

now sink the sun; the close hour of day
 come onward, mantle over with sober grey;
 nature in silence bid the world repose:
 when near the road a stately palace rise:
 there by the moon through rank of tree they pass,
 who verdure crown their slope side of grass. 
it chance the noble master of the dome,
 still make his house the wander stranger home:
 yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
 prove the vain flourish of expensive ease. 
the pair arrive: the livery servant wait;
 their lord receive they at the pompous gate. 
the table groan with costly pile of food,
 and all be more than hospitable good. 
then lead to rest, the day long toil they drown,
 deep sink in sleep, and silk, and heap of down. 

at length it be morn, and at the dawn of day,
 along the wide canal the zephyr play;
 fresh over the gay parterres the breeze creep,
 and shake the neighbour wood to banish sleep. 
up rise the guest, obedient to the call,
 'a early banquet deck the splendid hall;
 rich luscious wine a golden goblet grace,
 which the kind master force the guest to taste. 
then please and thankful, from the porch they go,
 and, but the landlord, none have cause of woe;
 his cup be vanish; for in secret guise
 the young guest purloin the glitter prize. 

as one who 'spys a serpent in his way,
 glistn and bask in the summer ray,
 disorder stop to shun the danger near,
 then walk with faintness on, and look with fear:
 so seem the sire; when far upon the road,
 the shine spoil his wiley partner show. 
he stop with silence, walk with tremble heart,
 and much he wish, but dare not ask to part:
 murmur he lift his eye, and think it hard,
 that generous action meet a base reward. 

while thus they pass, the sun his glory shroud,
 the change sky hang out their sable cloud;
 a sound in air presage approach rain,
 and beast to covert scud a cross the plain. 
warn by the sign, the wander pair retreat,
 to seek for shelter at a neighbour seat. 
it be build with turret, on a rise ground,
 and strong, and large, and unimproved around;
 its owner temper, timorous and severe,
 unkind and gripe, cause a desert there. 

as near the miser heavy door they draw,
 fierce rise gust with sudden fury blow;
 the nimble lightning mix with shower begin,
 and over their head loud-rolling thunder run. 
here long they knock, but knock or call in vain,
 drive by the wind, and batter by the rain. 
at length some pity warm the master breast,
 (it be then, his threshold first receive a guest)
 slow creak turn the door with jealous care,
 and half he welcome in the shiver pair;
 one frugal faggot light the naked wall,
 and nature fervor through their limb recall:
 bread of the course sort, with eager wine,
 (each hardly grant) serve they both to dine;
 and when the tempest first appear to cease,
 a ready warn bid they part in peace. 

with still remark the ponder hermit view
 in one so rich, a life so poor and rude;
 and why shall such, (within himself he cry,)
 lock the lose wealth a thousand want beside? 
but what new mark of wonder soon take place,
 in every settle feature of his face! 
when from his vest the young companion bear
 that cup, the generous landlord own before,
 and pay profuse with the precious bowl
 the stint kindness of this churlish soul. 

but now the cloud in airy tumult fly,
 the sun emerge open a azure sky;
 a fresh green the smell leaf display,
 and glitter as they tremble, cheer the day:
 the weather court they from the poor retreat,
 and the glad master bolt the wary gate. 

while hence they walk, the pilgrim bosom wrought,
 with all the travel of uncertain thought;
 his partner act without their cause appear,
 it be there a vice, and seem a madness here:
 detest that, and pity this he go,
 lose and confound with the various show. 

now night dim shade again involve the sky;
 again the wanderer want a place to lie,
 again they search, and find a lodging nigh. 
the soil improve around, the mansion neat,
 and neither poor low, nor idle great:
 it seem to speak its master turn of mind,
 content, and not for praise, but virtue kind. 

hither the Walkers turn with weary foot
 then bless the mansion, and the master greet:
 their greeting fair bestow, with modest guise,
 the courteous master hear, and thus reply:

without a vain, without a grudge heart,
 to he who give we all, i yield a part;
 from he you come, for he accept it here,
 a frank and sober, more than costly cheer. 
he speak, and bid the welcome table spread,
 then talk of virtue till the time of bed,
 when the grave household round his hall repair,
 warn by a bell, and close the hour with prayer. 

at length the world renew by calm repose
 be strong for toil, the dapple morn arise;
 before the pilgrim part, the young creep,
 near the close cradle where a infant sleep,
 and writhe his neck: the landlord be little pride,
o strange return! grow black, and gasp, and die. 
horror of horror! what! his only son! 
how look our hermit when the fact be do? 
not hell, though hell black jaw in sunder part,
 and breathe blue fire, can more assault his heart. 

confuse, and strike with silence at the deed,
 he fly, but tremble sail to fly with speed. 
his step the youth pursue; the country lie
 perplex with road, a servant show the way:
 a river cross the path; the passage over
 be nice to find; the servant tread before;
 long arm of oak a open bridge supply,
 and deep the wave beneath the bend glide. 
the youth, who seem to watch a time to sin,
 approach the careless guide, and thrust he in;
 plunge he fall, and rise lift his head,
 then flash turn, and sink among the dead. 

wild, sparkle rage inflame the father eye,
 he burst the band of fear, and mad cry,
 detest wretch — but scarce his speech begin,
 when the strange partner seem no long man:
 his youthful face grow more serene sweet;
 his robe turn white, and flow upon his foot;
 fair round of radiant point invest his hair;
 celestial odour breathe through purple air;
 and wing, who colour glitter on the day,
 wide at his back their gradual plume display. 
the form etherial burst upon his sight,
 and move in all the majesty of light. 

though loud at first the pilgrim passion grow,
 sudden he gaze, and wist not what to do;
 surprise in secret chain his word suspend,
 and in a calm his settle temper end. 
but silence here the beauteous angel break,
 (the voice of music ravish as he speak) 

thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
 in sweet memorial rise before the throne:
 these charm, success in our bright region find,
 and force a angel down, to calm thy mind;
 for this commission, i forsake the sky,
 nay, cease to kneel — thy fellow servant i. 

then know the truth of government divine,
 and let these scruple be no long thy. 

the maker just claim that world he make,
 in this the right of providence be lay;
 its sacred majesty through all depend
 on use second mean to work his end:
 it be thus, withdraw in state from human eye,
 the power exert his attribute on high,
 your action use, not control your will,
 and bid the doubt son of man be still. 

what strange event can strike with more surprise,
 than those which latelystrook thy wonder eye? 
yet teach by these, confess the almighty just,
 and where you can unriddle, learn to trust! 

the great, vain man, who fare on costly food,
 who life be too luxurious to be good;
 who make his ivory stand with goblet shine,
 and force his guest to morning draught of wine,
 have, with the cup, the graceless custom lose,
 and still he welcome, but with less of cost. 

the mean, suspicious wretch, who bolt door,
 never move in duty to the wander poor;
 with he i leave the cup, to teach his mind
 that heaven can bless, if mortal will be kind. 
conscious of want worth, he view the bowl,
 and feel compassion touch his grateful soul. 
thus artist melt the sullen oar of lead,
 with heap coal of fire upon its head;
 in the kind warmth the metal learn to glow,
 and loose from dross, the silver run below. 

long have our pious friend in virtue tread,
 but now the child half-weaned his heart from god;
 (child of his age) for he he live in pain,
 and measure back his step to earth again. 
to what excess have his dotage run? 
but god, to save the father, take the son. 
to all but thou, in fit he seem to go,
 (and it be my ministry to deal the blow)
 the poor fond parent humble in the dust,
 now own in tear the punishment be just. 

but how have all his fortune feel a wrack,
 have that false servant speed in safety back? 
this night his treasure heap he mean to steal,
 and what a fund of charity will fail! 

thus heaven instruct thy mind: this trial over,
 depart in peace, resign, and sin no more. 

on sound pinion here the youth withdraw,
 the sage stand wonder as the seraph fly. 
thus look Elisha, when to mount on high,
 his master take the chariot of the sky;
 the fiery pomp ascend leave the view;
 the prophet gaze, and wish to follow too. 

the bend hermit here a prayer begin,
 lord! as in heaven, on earth thy will be do. 
then glad turn, seek his ancient place,
 and pass a life of piety and peace. 
