[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night iii. narcissa.

humble inscribe to her grace the duchess of Portland. 

from dream, where thought in fancy maze run mad,
 to reason, that heaven-lighted lamp in man,
 once more i wake; and at the destine hour,
 punctual as lover to the moment swear,
 i keep my assignation with my woe. 

o, lose to virtue, lose to manly thought,
 lose to the noble sally of the soul,
 who think it solitude to be alone! 
communion sweet! communion large and high! 
our reason, guardian angel, and our god!
 then near these, when other most remote;
 and all, ere long, shall be remote but these. 
how dreadful then to meet they all alone,
 a stranger, unacknowledged, unapproved! 
now woo they, wed they, bind they to thy breast:
 to win thy wish, creation have no more. 
or if we wish a four, it be a friend —
 but friend how mortal! dangerous the desire. 

take Phoebus to yourself, you bask bard! 
inebriate at fair Fortune fountain-head,
 and reel through the wilderness of joy;
 where sense run savage, break from reason chain,
 and sing false peace, till smother by the pall. 
my fortune be unlike, unlike my song,
 unlike the deity my song invoke. 
i to day soft-eyed sister pay my court,
 (endymion rival!) and her aid implore;
 now first implore in succour to the muse. 

thou who do late borrow cynthia form,
 and modest forgo thy own! o thou
 who do thyself, at midnight hour, inspire! 
say, why not Cynthia, patroness of song? 
as thou she crescent, she thy character,
 assume: still more a goddess by the change. 

be there demur wit, who dare dispute
 this revolution in the world inspire? 
yet train pierian! to the lunar sphere,
 in silent hour, address your ardent call
 for aid immortal; less she brother right. 
she, with the sphere harmonious, nightly lead
 the mazy dance, and hear their matchless strain;
 a strain for god, deny to mortal ear. 
transmit it hear, thou silver queen of heaven! 
what title, or what name, endear thou most? 
 "Cynthia,""Cyllene,""Phoebe?"— or do hear,
 with high gust, "fair Portland of the sky?"
be that the soft enchantment call thou down,
 more powerful than of old circean charm? 
come; but from heavenly banquet with thou bring
 the soul of song, and whisper in my ear
 the theft divine; or in propitious dream
 (for dream be thy) transfuse it through the breast
 of thy first votary — but not thy last,
 if, like thy namesake, thou be ever kind. 

and kind thou will be, kind on such a theme;
 a theme so like thou, a quite lunar theme,
 soft, modest, melancholy, female, fair! 
a theme that rise all pale, and tell my soul
 it be night; on her fond hope perpetual night;
 a night which strike a damp, a deadly damp
 than that which smite i from philander tomb. 
narcissa follow, ere his tomb be close. 
woe cluster; rare be solitary woe;
 they love a train; they tread each other heel:
 her death invade his mournful right, and claim
 the grief that start from my lid for he;
 seize the faithless, alienate tear,
 or share it ere it fall. so frequent death,
 sorrow he more than cause, he confound;
 for human sigh his rival stroke contend,
 and make distress distraction. o Philander! 
what be thy fate? a double fate to i;
 portent and pain! a menace and a blow! 
like the black raven hover over my peace,
 not less a bird of omen than of prey. 
it call narcissa long before her hour;
 it call her tender soul by break of bliss,
 from the first blossom, from the bud of joy;
 those few our noxious fate unblasted leaf
 in this inclement clime of human life. 

sweet harmonist! and beautiful as sweet! 
and young as beautiful! and soft as young! 
and gay as soft! and innocent as gay! 
and happy (if aught happy here) as good! 
for fortune fond have build her nest on high,
 like bird quite exquisite of note and plume,
 transfix by fate, (who love a lofty mark,)
 how from the summit of the grove she fall,
 and leave it unharmonious! all its charm
 extinguish in the wonder of her song! 
her song still vibrate in my ravish ear,
 still melt there, and with voluptuous pain
 (o to forget she!) thrill through my heart! 

song, beauty, youth, love, virtue, joy! this group
 of bright idea, flower of paradise,
 as yet unforfeit, in one blaze we bind,
 kneel, and present it to the sky; as all
 we guess of heaven: and these be all her own. 
and she be i; and i be — be most bless —
 gay title of the deep misery! 
as body grow more ponderous rob of life;
 good lose weigh more in grief, than gain in joy. 
like blossom tree overturn by vernal storm,
 lovely in death the beauteous ruin lie;
 and if in death still lovely, lovely there;
 far lovely! pity swell the tide of love. 
and will not the severe excuse a sigh? 
scorn the proud man that be ashamed to weep;
 our tear indulge indeed deserve our shame. 
you that ever lose a angel, pity i! 

soon as the lustre languish in her eye,
 dawn a dimmer day on human sight;
 and on her cheek, the residence of spring,
 pale omen sit, and scatter fear around
 on all that see; (and who will cease to gaze,
 that once have see?) with haste, parental haste,
 i fly, i snatch she from the rigid north,
 her native bed, on which bleak Boreas blow,
 and bear she near to the sun: the sun
 (as if the sun can envy) check his beam,
 deny his wonted succour; nor with more
 regret behold her droop than the bell
 of lily! fair lily, not so fair! 

queen lily! and you paint populace
 who dwell in field, and lead ambrosial life;
 in morn and evening dew your beauty bathe,
 and drink the sun; which give your cheek to glow,
 and outblush (mine except) every fair! 
you glad grow, ambitious of her hand
 which often crop your odour, incense meet
 to thought so pure! you lovely fugitive! 
coeval race with man! for man you smile;
 why not smile at he too? you share indeed
 his sudden pass, but not his constant pain. 

so man be make, nought minister delight
 but what his glow passion can engage;
 and glow passion bend on aught below
 must, soon or late, with anguish turn the scale;
 and anguish, after rapture, how severe! 
rapture? bold man, who tempt the wrath divine,
 by pluck fruit deny to mortal taste,
 while here, presume on the right of heaven! 
for transport do thou call on every hour,
 Lorenzo? at thy friend expense be wise:
 Lean not on earth; it will pierce thou to the heart;
 a break reed at best; but oft a spear;
 on its sharp point peace bleed, and hope expire. 

turn, hopeless thought! turn from she: — thought, repel,
 resent rally, and wake every woe. 
snatch ere thy prime, and in thy bridal hour! 
and when kind fortune, with thy lover, smile! 
and when high-flavoured thy fresh open joy! 
and when blind man pronounce thy bliss complete! 
and on a foreign shore, where stranger weep! 
stranger to thou, and, more surprise still,
 stranger to kindness, weep; their eye let fall
 inhuman tear; strange tear, that trickle down
 from marble heart! obdurate tenderness! 
a tenderness that call they more severe,
 in spite of nature soft persuasion steel. 
while nature melt, superstition rave:
 that mourn the dead; and this deny a grave. 

their sigh incense; sigh foreign to the will! 
their will, the tiger-sucked, outraged the storm. 
for, o the curse ungodliness of zeal! 
while sinful flesh relent, spirit nurse
 in blind infallibility embrace,
 the saint spirit petrify the breast;
 deny the charity of dust to spread
 over dust! a charity their dog enjoy. 
what can i do? what succour, what resource? 
with pious sacrilege a grave i steal;
 with impious piety that grave i wrong;
 short in my duty; coward in my grief! 
more like her murderer than friend, i creep
 with soft-suspended step, and, muffle deep
 in midnight darkness, whisper my last sigh. 
i whisper what shall echo through their realm;
 nor write her name, who tomb shall pierce the sky. 
presumptuous fear! how dare i dread her foe,
 while nature loud dictate i obey? 
(pardon necessity, bless shade!) of grief
 and indignation rival burst i pour;
 half execration mingle with my prayer;
 kindle at man, while i his god adore;
 sore grudge the savage land her sacred dust;
 stamp the curse soil; and with humanity
 (deny narcissa) wish they all a grave. 

glow my resentment into guilt? what guilt
 can equal violation of the dead? 
the dead how sacred! sacred be the dust
 of this heaven-laboured form, erect, divine! 
this heaven-assumed majestic robe of earth
 he deign to wear, who hang the vast expanse
 with azure bright, and clothe the sun in gold. 
when every passion sleep that can offend;
 when strike we every motive that can melt;
 when man can wreak his rancour uncontrolled,
 that strong curb on insult and ill-will;
 then, spleen to dust? the dust of innocence? 
a angel dust? — this Lucifer transcend:
 when he contend for the patriarch bone,
 it be not the strife of malice, but of pride;
 the strife of pontiff pride, not pontiff gall. 

far less than this be shock in a race
 most wretched but from stream of mutual love;
 and uncreated but for love divine;
 and, but for love divine, this moment lose,
 by fate resorb, and sink in endless night. 
man hard of heart to man! of horrid thing
 most horrid! amid stupendous, high strange! 
yet oft his courtesy be smooth wrong;
 pride brandish the favour he confer,
 and contumelious his humanity:
 what then his vengeance? hear it not, you star! 
and thou, pale moon, turn pale at the sound;
 man be to man the forest, sure ill.. 
a previous blast foretell the rise storm;
 overwhelm turret threaten ere they fall;
 volcano bellow ere they disembogue;
 earth tremble ere her yawn jaw devour;
 and smoke betray the wide-consuming fire:
 ruin from man be most conceal when near,
 and send the dreadful tiding in the blow. 
be this the flight of fancy? will it be! 
heaven sovereign save all being, but himself,
 that hideous sight, a naked human heart. 

fire be the muse? and let the muse be fire:
 who not inflame, when what he speak he feel,
 and in the nerve most tender, — in his friend? 
shame to mankind! Philander have his foe:
 he feel the truth i sing, and i in he:
 but he, nor i, feel more. past ill, narcissa,
 be sink in thou, thou recent wound of heart! 
which bleed with other care, with other pang;
 pang numerous, as the numerous ill that swarm
 over thy distinguish fate, and, cluster there
 thick as the locust on the land of Nile,
 make death more deadly, and more dark the grave. 
reflect, (if not forget my touch tale,)
 how be each circumstance with aspic arm! 
a aspic each; and all a hydra-woe. 
what strong herculean virtue can suffice? —
 or be it virtue to be conquer here? 
this hoary cheek a train of tear bedew;
 and each tear mourn its own distinct distress;
 and each distress, distinct mourn, demand
 of grief still more, as heighten by the whole. 
a grief like this proprietor exclude:
 not friend alone such obsequy deplore;
 they make mankind the mourner; carry sigh
 far as the fatal fame can wing her way;
 and turn the gay thought of gay age
 down their right channel, through the vale of death. 

the vale of death! that hush cimmerian vale,
 where darkness, brood over unfinished fate,
 with raven wing incumbent, wait the day
 (dread day!) that interdict all future change! 
that subterranean world, that land of ruin! 
fit walk, Lorenzo, for proud human thought! 
there let my thought expatiate; and explore
 balsamic truth, and heal sentiment,
 of all most want and most welcome here. 
for gay lorenzo sake, and for thy own,
 my soul, "the fruit of die friend survey;
 expose the vain of life; weigh life and death;
 give death his eulogy; thy fear subdue;
 and labour that first palm of noble mind,
 a manly scorn of terror from the tomb."

this harvest reap from thy narcissa grave. 
as poet feign from ajax stream blood
 arise, with grief inscribe, a mournful flower;
 let wisdom blossom from my mortal wound. 
and first, of die friend; what fruit from these? 
it bring we more than triple aid; a aid
 to chase our thoughtlessness, fear, pride, and guilt. 

our die friend come over we like a cloud,
 to damp our brainless ardour, and abate
 that glare of life which often blind the wise. 
our die friend be pioneer, to smooth
 our rugged pass to death; to break those bar
 of terror and abhorrence nature throw
 cross our obstruct way; and thus to make
 welcome, as safe, our port from every storm. 
each friend by fate snatch from we be a plume
 pluck from the wing of human vanity,
 which make we stoop from our aerial height,
 and, damp with omen of our own decease,
 on droop pinion of ambition lower,
 just skim earth surface, ere we break it up,
 over putrid pride to scratch a little dust,
 and save the world a nuisance. smite friend
 be angel send on errand full of love;
 for we they languish, and for we they die:
 and shall they languish, shall they die, in vain? 
ungrateful, shall we grieve their hover shade,
 which wait the revolution in our heart? 
shall we disdain their silent, soft address;
 their posthumous advice, and pious prayer? 
senseless, as herd that graze their hallow grave,
 tread under foot their agony and groan,
 frustrate their anguish, and destroy their death? 

Lorenzo! no; the thought of death indulge;
 give it its wholesome empire! let it reign,
 that kind chastiser of thy soul in joy! 
its reign will spread thy glorious conquest far,
 and still the tumult of thy ruffle breast:
 auspicious era! golden day, begin! 
the thought of death shall, like a god, inspire. 
and why not think on death? be life the theme
 of every thought, and wish of every hour,
 and song of every joy? surprise truth! 
the beat spaniel fondness not so strange. 
to wave the numerous ill that seize on life
 as their own property, their lawful prey;
 ere man have measure half his weary stage,
 his luxury have leave he no reserve,
 no maiden relish, unbroach delight;
 on cold-served repetition he subsist,
 and in the tasteless present chew the past;
 disgust chew, and scarce can swallow down. 
like lavish ancestor, his early year
 have disinherit his future hour,
 which starve on orts, and glean their former field. 

live ever here, Lorenzo? — shock thought! 
so shock, they who wish disown it too;
 disown from shame what they from folly crave,
 live ever in the womb, nor see the light? 
for what live ever here? — with labour step
 to tread our former footstep? pace the round
 eternal? to climb life wear, heavy wheel,
 which draw up nothing new? to beat, and beat
 the beat track? to bid each wretched day
 the former mock? to surfeit on the same,
 and yawn our joy? or thank a misery
 for change, though sad? to see what we have see? 
hear, till unheard, the same old slabber tale? 
to taste the taste, and at each return
 less tasteful? over our palate to decant
 another vintage? strain a flatter year,
 through load vessel, and a lase tone? 
crazy machine, to grind earth waste fruit! 
ill-ground, and worse-concocted! load, not life! 
the rational foul kennel of excess! 
still stream thoroughfare of dull debauch! 
tremble each gulp, lest death shall snatch the bowl. 

such of our fine one be the wish refine! 
so will they have it. elegant desire! 
why not invite the bellow stall and wild? 
but such example may their riot awe. 
through want of virtue, that be, want of thought,
 (though on bright thought they father all their flight,)
 to what be they reduce? to love and hate
 the same vain world; to censure and espouse
 this paint shrew of life, who call they fool
 each moment of each day; to flatter bad
 through dread of worse; to cling to this rude rock,
 barren, to they, of good, and sharp with ill,
 and hourly blacken with impend storm,
 and infamous for wreck of human hope, —
 scare at the gloomy gulf, that yawn beneath. 
such be their triumph, such their pang of joy! 

it be time, high time, to shift this dismal scene. 
this hug, this hideous state, what art can cure? 
one only; but that one, what all may reach, —
 virtue. she (wonder-working goddess!) charm
 that rock to bloom; and tame the paint shrew;
 and, what will more surprise, Lorenzo! give
 to life sick, nauseous iteration, change;
 and straighten nature circle to a line. 
believe thou this, Lorenzo? lend a ear,
 a patient ear, thou will blush to disbelieve. 

a languid, leaden iteration reign,
 and ever must, over those who joy be joy
 of sight, smell, taste; the cuckoo-season sing
 the same dull note to such as nothing prize
 but what those season, from the teem earth,
 to dote sense indulge. but noble mind,
 which relish fruit unripened by the sun,
 make their day various; various as the dye
 on the dove neck, which wanton in his ray. 
on mind of dove-like innocence possess,
 on lighten mind, that bask in virtue beam,
 nothing hang tedious; nothing old revolve
 in that for which they long, for which they live. 
their glorious effort, winge with heavenly hope,
 each rise morning see still high rise;
 each bounteous dawn its novelty present,
 to worth mature, new strength, lustre, fame;
 while nature circle, like a chariot-wheel
 roll beneath their elevate aim,
 make their fair prospect fair every hour;
 advance virtue in a line to bliss;
 virtue, which christian motive best inspire! 
and bliss, which christian scheme alone insure! 

and shall we then, for virtue sake, commence
 apostate, and turn infidel for joy? 
a truth it be few doubt, but few trust,
 "he sin against this life who slight the next."
what be this life? how few their favourite know! 
fond in the dark, and blind in our embrace,
 by passionate love life we make
 love life unlovely, hug she to death. 
we give to time eternity regard;
 and, dream, take our passage for our port. 
life have no value as a end, but mean;
 a end deplorable, a mean divine! 
when it be our all, it be nothing; worse than nought;
 a nest of pain: when hold as nothing, much. 
like some fair humourist, life be most enjoy
 when court least; most worth, when disesteem:
 then it be the seat of comfort, rich in peace;
 in prospect rich far; important, awful! 
not to be mention but with shout of praise! 
not to be think on but with tide of joy! 
the mighty basis of eternal bliss! 

where now the barren rock, the paint shrew? 
where now, Lorenzo, life eternal round? 
have i not make my triple promise good? 
vain be the world; but only to the vain. 
to what compare we then this vary scene,
 who worth ambiguous rise, and decline,
 wax, and wane? (in all propitious, night
 assist i here.) compare it to the moon;
 dark in herself, and indigent; but rich
 in borrow lustre from a high sphere. 
when gross guilt interpose, labour earth,
 overshadow, mourn a deep eclipse of joy;
 her joy, at bright, pallid to that font
 of full effulgent glory, whence they flow. 

nor be that glory distant. o, Lorenzo! 
a good man and a angel! these between
 how thin the barrier! what divide their fate? 
perhaps a moment, or perhaps a year:
 or if a age, it be a moment still;
 a moment, or eternity forget. 
then be what once they be who now be god;
 be what Philander be, and claim the sky. 
start timid nature at the gloomy pass? 
 "the soft transition"call it; and be cheere:
 such it be often, and why not to thou? 
to hope the best be pious, brave, and wise;
 and may itself procure what it presume,
 life be much flatter, death be much traduce;
 compare the rival, and the kind crown. 
 "strange competition!"— true, Lorenzo! strange! 
so little life can cast into the scale. 

life make the soul dependent on the dust;
 death give her wing to mount above the sphere. 
through chink, style organ, dim life peep at light;
 death burst they involve cloud, and all be day;
 all eye, all ear, the disembody power. 
death have feign evil nature shall not feel
 life, ill substantial, wisdom can shun. 
be not the mighty mind, that son of heaven,
 by tyrant life dethrone, imprison, pain? 
by death enlarge, ennoble, deify? 
death but entomb the body; life, the soul. 

 "be death then guiltless? how he mark his way
 with dreadful waste of what deserve to shine, —
 art, genius, fortune, elevate power! 
with various lustre these light up the world,
 which death put out, and darken human race."
i grant, Lorenzo, this indictment just:
 the sage, peer, potentate, king, conqueror, —
 death humble these; more barbarous life, the man. 
life be the triumph of our moulder clay;
 death, of the spirit infinite, divine. 
death have no dread but what frail life impart;
 nor life true joy but what kind death improve. 
no bliss have life to boast, till death can give
 far great; life be a debtor to the grave, —
 dark lattice, let in eternal day. 

Lorenzo! blush at fondness for a life
 which send celestial soul on errand vile,
 to cate for the sense; and serve at board,
 where every ranger of the wild, perhaps
 each reptile, just claim our upper hand. 
luxurious feast! a soul, a soul immortal,
 in all the dainty of a brute bemir! 
Lorenzo! blush at terror for a death
 which give thou to repose in festive bower,
 where nectar sparkle, angel minister,
 and more than angel share, and raise, and crown,
 and eternise the birth, bloom, burst of bliss. 
what need i more? o death, the palm be thy. 

then welcome, death, thy dread harbinger,
 age and disease: disease, though long my guest, —
 that pluck my nerve, those tender string of life;
 which, pluck a little more, will toll the bell
 that call my few friend to my funeral;
 where feeble nature drop, perhaps, a tear,
 while reason and religion, better teach,
 congratulate the dead, and crown his tomb
 with wreath triumphant. death be victory;
 it bind in chain the rage ill of life:
 lust and ambition, wrath and avarice,
 drag at his chariot-wheel, applaud his power. 
that ill corrosive, care importunate,
 be not immortal too, o death! be thy. 
our day of dissolution! — name it right;
 it be our great pay-day; it be our harvest, rich
 and ripe. what, though the sickle, sometime keen,
 just scar we as we reap the golden grain? 
more than thy balm, o Gilead, heal the wound. 
birth feeble cry, and death deep dismal groan,
 be slender tribute low-taxed nature pay
 for mighty gain: the gain of each, a life! 
but o, the last the former so transcend,
 life die, compare; life live beyond the grave. 

and feel i, death, no joy from thought of thou? 
death, the great counsellor, who man inspire
 with every noble thought, and fair deed! 
death, the deliverer, who rescue man! 
death, the rewarder, who the rescue crown! 
death, that absolve my birth; a curse without it! 
rich death, that realize all my care,
 toil, virtue, hope; without it, a chimera! 
death, of all pain the period, not of joy! 
joy source and subject still subsist unhurt, —
 one in my soul, and one in her great sire;
 though the four wind be war for my dust. 
yes, and from wind, and wave, and central night,
 though prison there, my dust too i reclaim,
 (to dust when drop proud nature proud sphere,)
 and live entire. death be the crown of life:
 be death deny, poor man will live in vain;
 be death deny, to live will not be life;
 be death deny, even fool will wish to die. 
death wound to cure: we fall; we rise; we reign! 
spring from our fetter; fasten in the sky,
 where bloom Eden withereth in our sight:
 death give we more than be in Eden lose. 
this king of terror be the prince of peace. 
when shall i die to vanity, pain, death? 
when shall i die? — when shall i live for ever? 
