the country parson.

i 

between the smooth descent of yonder hill,
deep in the vale with tuft tree beset;
who antique root be wash with brawl rill,
who leafy arm the summer rage defeat,
there stand a country parson calm retreat.
view well the silent shade with sober eye,
and wonder at the courtier swell luxury.

ii.

see to his garden pale where close ally
a decent church the neighbour glebe command;
who steeple stock with bell, (the country pride)
who beam be wreathe about with virgin band,
weave on the bridal day by virgin hand.
the surplice clean, and chancel new white,
that with the good man neatness all must be delight.

iii.

his house stand near, (this church young brother)
who furniture show housewifely, and neat;
a little garden run from one to the other,
stately in use, exclude useless state,
in which a yew tree stand of ancient date:
and near it rosemary climb up the wall;
or else imperfect be the rite of funeral.

iv.

he live near in gentle neighbourhood
a heartsome friend, replete with bounteous love,
who generous wine long time have cork stand,
(not to avoid the taste but to improve;)
with he the good man moment soft move:
nor yet complete, if i shall leave untold
the dame who of his joy sweet partnership do hold.

v. 

well know i when to govern, when obey,
verse in the right and law of womanhood;
nor have she too much wisdom to be gay,
nor have she so much wit to be overloud:
nor have she so much beauty to be proud;
but cheerful sense and decent mirth impart
the sweet domestic joy of a well-natured heart.

vi.

eight year have heaven possess they of a boy,
who love a sister young by a year;
and as they prank about, with silent joy
they sit and smile upon the prattle pair,
(who two sweet rose on one stalk appear)
and think upon themselves once fair and young,
before soft Cupid golden bow become unstring.

vii.

each sun arise fresh with sweet content,
and lead they on a course of new delight;
with the same joy the summer day be spend,
and over a cheerful fire their winter night.
such be their joy who spend their life aright:
though season change, no sense of change they know,
but with a equal eye view all thing here below.

viii.

when the amorous earth be woo with smile weather,
to wear the verdant mantle of the spring;
forth walk the little family together
to see the wood, and hear its native sing;
the flower sweet odour to their sense bring:
the world appear in blossom, far and near
joyful they view the purple promise of the year.

ix.

summer behold the good man near his bride,
in sweet contentment smoke in his chair;
he view the flock nibble the mountain side,
and every tenth he reckon to his share.
now to the hay field walk the happy pair,
and with such kindness greet the country folk,
the parson bush be place upon the big cock.

x. 

the promise fruit now fill the teem soil,
and certain plenty all his doubt relieve;
the peach he plant pay his honest toil,
the farmer bring he home his yellow sheaf,
and his stuff barn the will tax receive.
his servant to his load orchard high,
to lay in liquid store for future jollity.

xi.

when icy band the stiffen wave enfold,
still be the parson with contentment crown;
the cheerful blaze chase the chilly cold,
in circle cup all winter thought be drown,
and no ill nature send the laugh around;
or he, in study pen, think what to say,
may touch, yet not offend the squire next sabbath day.

xii.

thus, still in age the same, he journey on,
till envious fate overtake he on the road;
for the calm pleasure of the holy man
claim not the madness of a youthful blood.
for many winter thus serene stand,
strong in its smooth decline, the sturdy oak,
till come from heaven the unfeared and unresisted stroke.
