to a lady before marriage.

by the late ingenious mr. tickel. not publish in his work.

oh! form by nature, and refine by art,
 with charm to win, and sense to fix the heart! 
by thousand seek, Clotilda, can thou free
 thy crowd of captive, and descend to i? 
content in shade obscure to waste thy life,
 a hide beauty, and a country-wife. 
o! listen while thy summer be my theme,
 ah! sooth thy partner in his wake dream! 
in some small hamlet on the lonely plain,
 where Thames, through meadow, roll his mazy train;
 or where high Windsor, thick with green array,
 wave his old oak, and spread his ample shade,
 fancy have figure out our calm retreat;
 already round the visionary seat
 our lime begin to shoot, our flower to spring,
 the brook to murmur, and the bird to sing. 
where do thou lie, thou thinly-peopled green? 
thou nameless lawn, and village yet unseen? 
where son, content with their native ground,
 never travel further than ten furlong round;
 and the tan peasant, and his ruddy bride,
 be bear together, and together die. 
where early lark best tell though morning-light,
 and only philomel disturb the night,
 'midst garden here my humble pile shall rise,
 with sweet surround of ten thousand die;
 all savage where the embroider garden end,
 the haunt of echo shall my wood ascend;
 and oh! if heaven the ambitious thought approve,
 a rill shall warble cross the gloomy grove,
 a little rill, over pebbly bed convey,
 gush down the steep, and glitter through the glade. 
what cheer scent those border bank exhale! 
how loud that heifer swallow from yonder vale! 
that thrush, how shrill! his note so clear, so high,
 he drown each feather minstrel of the sky. 
here let i trace, beneath the purple morn,
 the deepmouthed beagle, and the sprightly horn;
 or lure the trout with well-dissembled fly,
 or fetch the flutter partridge from the sky,
 nor shall thy hand disdain to crop the vine,
 the downy peach, or flavour nectarine;
 or rob the beehive of its golden hoard,
 and bear the unbought luxuriance to thy board. 
sometime my book by day shall kill the hour,
 while from thy needle rise the silken flower,
 and, thou by turn to ease my feeble sight,
 resume the volume, and deceive the night. 
oh! when i mark thy twinkle eye oppress,
 soft whisper, let i warn my love to rest;
 then watch thou, charm, while sleep lock every sense,
 and to sweet heaven commend thy innocence. 
thus reign our father over the rural fold,
 wise, hale, and honest, in the day of old;
 till court arise, where substance pay for show,
 and specious joy be buy with real woe. 
see flavia pendant, large, well spread, and right,
 the ear that wear they hear a fool each night:
 mark how the embroider colonel sneak away,
 to shun the wither dame that make he gay;
 that knave, to gain a title, lose his fame;
 that raise his credit by a daughter shame;
 this coxcomb ribbon cost he half his land,
 and oak, unnumbered, buy that fool a wand. 
fond man, as all his sorrow be too few,
 acquire strange want that nature never know. 
by midnight-lamp he emulate the day,
 and sleep perverse, the cheerful sun away;
 from goblet, high emboss, his wine must glide,
 round his close sight the gorgeous curtain slide;
 fruit, ere their time, to grace his pomp must rise,
 and three untasted course glut his eye. 
for this be nature gentle call withstand,
 the voice of conscience, and the bond of blood;
 this wisdom thy reward for every pain,
 and this gay glory all thy mighty gain. 
fair phantom woo and scorn from age to age,
 since bard begin to laugh, or priest to rage. 
and yet, just curse on man aspire kind,
 prone to ambition, to example blind,
 our child child shall our step pursue,
 and the same error be for ever new. 
mean while, in hope a guiltless country swain,
 my reed with warble cheer the imagine plain. 
hail humble shade, where truth and silence dwell! 
thou noisy town, and faithless court farewell! 
farewell ambition, once my darling flame! 
the thirst of lucre, and the charm of fame! 
in life by-road, that wind through path unknown,
 my day, though number, shall be all my own. 
here shall they end, (o may they twice begin),
 and all be white the fate intend to spin. 
