critic and snowdrop

to the publisher of the Pennsylvania magazine

critic.

prologue to magazine! the man be mad
no magazine a prologue ever have.
but let we hear what new and mighty thing
your wonder-working magic fancy bring.

snowdrop.

bit by the muse in a unlucky hour,
i’ve leave myself at home, and turn’d a flow’r;
and thus disguis’d come forth to tell my tale,
a plain white snow drop gather from the vale,
i come to sing that summer be at hand,
the summer time of wit, you’ll understand:
and that this garden of our magazine
will soon exhibit such a please scene,
that even critic shall admire the show
if their good grace will give we time to grow.
beneath the surface of the parent earth,
we’ve various seed just struggle into birth,
plant, fruit, and flow’rs, and all the smile race,
that can the orchard or the garden grace,
our number, sir, so vast and endless be,
that when in full complexion we appear,
each eye, each hand, shall pluck what suit its taste,
and every palate shall enjoy a feast.
the rose and lily shall address the fair,
and whisper sweet out — my dear take care.
with sterling worth the plant of sense shall rise
and teach the curious to philosophise;
the keen-ey’d wit shall claim the scent briar,
and sober cit the solid grain admire;
while gen’rous juice sparkle from the vine
shall warm the audience, until they cry — divine:
and when the scene of one gay month be o’er,
shall clap their hand, and shout — encore, encore.

critic.

all this be mighty fine! but prithee when
the frost return, how fight you then your man?

snowdrop.

I’ll tell you, sir.  — we’ll garnish out the scene
with stately row of hardy evergreens,
tree that will bear the frost; and deck their top
with everlasting flow’rs, like diamond drop.
we’ll draw, and paint, and carve, with so much skill,
that wonder wit shall cry — divine still!

critic.

better and better yet! but now, suppose
some critic wight in mighty verse or prose,
shall draw his grey goose weapon, dip in gall.
and mow you down, plant, flow’rs, tree, and all.

snowdrop.

why, then we’ll die like flower of sweet perfume,
and yield a fragrance even in the tomb.
