to Reuben. 

midst the proud fervor of the day,
 while the sun dart a torrid ray,
 the humble daisy sink its head,
 and faint upon its lowly bed;
 but when moist eve have quench his fire,
 and tread the field in cool attire,
 the daisy spread again her bloom,
 and offer up her mild perfume. 

thus your resuscitate praise,
 breathe life upon my die lay. 
Reynolds admire! flattery so sweet
 with blush vanity i meet,
 but bard polite! how hard the task
 which with such elegance you ask. 
when Dido bad eneas tell
 the woe he know to paint so well —
 do he not tell the queen, she tear
 his close wound, and draw fresh gore,
 from stab that time have almost heal? —
 such, Reuben, such, the thorn conceal,
 within your verses flowery spell,
 which barbarous! dare my pen compel. 

yet how describe the various god,
 whom proteus self a heavy clod? 
differ in each differ heart,
 scorn to play a constant part. 
a tiger! — tyrant! — such be he,
 who paint with bandeau you see,
 with downy wing, and childish face,
 as though of the bless cherub race —
 but oh! a serpent in disguise,
 and as the lynx, his pierce eye! 
a rage fire, a deadly pain,
 that gentle heart-string most will strain;
 a fever, tempest, madness he —
 of all life ill — a dread epitome! 

ha! do thou fear, and will thou run? 
the little monster try to shun? 
and will thou, Reuben, too succeed —
 and shall thy bosom never bleed;
 never his poison rankle dart
 quiver within thy tender heart? 
oh, hapless man! — oh, wretched fate! 
fly to love altar ere too late,
 and deprecate the doom accurse,
 or bid that heart with sorrow burst. 
welcome the deadly fiery pain,
 that gentle heart-string most will strain —
 madness be his — but it be replete
 with all that make life blessing sweet; —
 a tyrant he, but oh! his chain
 be rich than a empire gain! 
sweet, the delirium which by love be spread,
 whatever the path his rapture votary tread! 
he paint the mist which hang upon the eve,
 with colour dear than the sun can give;
 it be he who lend the nightingale its trill,
 when her rich pipe the empyrean fill,
 oh, it be the softness in his heart
 which make the lover in her song take part,
 and faint upon each touch pause,
 and lengthen out each add clause,
 till rapt attention, strain too high,
 roll down its gush tear, and breathe its gentle sigh. 

charm to love be morning hour,
 when, from her crystal roseate tower,
 she see the goddess health pursue
 the skim breeze through field of dew:
 charm, the flame hour of noon,
 when the sink linnet fade tune,
 allure he to the beechy grove —
 or when some crage grotesque alcove
 sound in his ear its tinkle rill,
 and tempt he to its moss grow sill;
 most charm when on his trance mind
 be whisper in the pass wind,
 the name of she, who name be bliss;
 or when he all unseen can kiss
 the fringe bank where late she lie,
 hide from the imperious day. 

oh, you rapt glade, which glister Luna deck,
 who stretch shadow her refulgence check! 
oh, you soft flood, that hang upon the peak
 of lofty rock, and bind in wanton freak,
 where thirsty mead your rush streamlet crave,
 and crowd their flower around to drink your wave —
 what be you all, shall love withhold the dart,
 which wake nice feeling in the torpid heart? 
where be the heart, that will such feeling fly,
 or fear the enchant, madden cup to try? 

must i speak more of love? the boundless theme
 may run beyond the edge of life short dream:
 he spell be blessing — witchery so sublime
 they triumph over distress, and fate, and time. 
will ask the joy of love? — oh! change the prayer,
 thou little know his power, to fasten there! 
let the mean bosom crave its love return,
 thy shall with more distinguish ardour burn:
 to know the passion — yes, be that thy strain,
 invoke the god of the mysterious pain! 
whatever thy nature — gentle, fiery, rough —
 to love — learn but to love — and thou have bliss enough! 
