on exodus iii. 14.  i be that i be. a ode.

write in 1688, as a exercise at saint John college, Cambridge. 

i 

man! foolish man! 
scarce know thou how thy self begin:
 scarce have thou thought enough to prove thou be:
 yet steel with study boldness, thou dare try
 to send thy doubt reason dazzle eye
 through the mysterious gulph of vast immensity. 
much thou can there discern, much thence impart. 
vain wretch! suppress thy know pride:
 mortify thy learned lust:
 vain be thy thought; while thou thy self be dust. 

ii.

let wit her sail, her oar let wisdom lend:
 the helm let politic experience guide:
 yet cease to hope thy short-lived bark shall ride
 down spread fate unnavigable tide. 
what, though still it farther tend? 
still it be farther from it be end;
 and, in the bosom of that boundless sea,
 still find it be error lengthen with it be way. 

iii.

with dare pride and insolent delight
 your doubt resolve you boast, your labour crown;
 and, EYPHKA! your god, forsooth, be find
 incomprehensible and infinite. 
but be he therefore find? vain searcher! no:
 let your imperfect definition show,
 that nothing you, the weak definer, know. 

iv.

say, why shall the collect main
 it self within it self contain? 
why to its cavern shall it sometime creep,
 and with delight silence sleep
 on the love bosom of it be parent deep? 
why shall it be numerous Waters stay
 in comely discipline, and fair array,
 until wind and tide exert their high command? 
then prompt and ready to obey,
 why do the rise surge spread
 their open rank over earth submissive head,
 march through different path to different land? 

v. 

why do the constant sun
 with measure step his radiant journey run? 
why do he order the diurnal hour
 to leave earth other part, and rise in we? 
why do he wake the correspondent moon,
 and fill her will lamp with liquid light,
 command she with delegate power
 to beautify the world, and bless the night? 
why do each animate star
 love the just limit of it be proper sphere? 
why do each consent sign
 with prudent harmony combine
 in turn to move, and subsequent appear
 to gird the globe, and regulate the year? 

vi.

man do with dangerous curiosity
 these unfathomed wonder try:
 with fancy rule and arbitrary law
 matter and motion he restrain;
 and study line, and fictious circle draw:
 then with imagine sovereignty
 lord of his new hypothesis he reign. 
he reign? how long? until some usurper rise:
 and he too, mighty thoughtful, mighty wise,
 study new line, and other circle feign. 
from this last toil again what knowledge flow? 
just as much, perhaps, as show,
 that all his predecessor rule
 be empty cant, all jargon of the school;
 that he on tother ruin rear his throne;
 and show his friend mistake, and thence confirm his own. 

vii.

on earth, in air, amid the sea and sky,
 mountainous heap of wonder rise;
 who tower strength will never submit
 to reason battery, or the mine of wit:
 yet still inquire, still mistake man,
 each hour repulse, each hour dare onward press;
 and level at god his wander guess
 (that feeble engine of his reason war,
 which guide his doubt, and combat his despair)
 law to his maker the learn wretch can give;
 can bound that nature, and prescribe that will,
 who pregnant word do either ocean fill;
 can tell we whence all being be, and how they move and live. 
through either ocean (foolish man!) 
that pregnant word send forth again,
 may to a world extend each atom there;
 for every drop call forth a sea, a heaven for every star. 

viii.

let cunning earth her fruitful wonder hide;
 and only lift thy stagger reason up
 to tremble calvary astonish top:
 then mock thy knowledge, and confound thy pride,
 explain how perfection suffer pain;
 almighty languish; and eternal die:
 how by her patient victor death be slay;
 and earth profane, yet bless with deicide. 
then down with all thy boast volume, down:
 only reserve the sacred one:
 low, reverent low,
 make thy stubborn knowledge bow;
 weep out thy reason, and thy body eye;
 deject thy self, that thou may rise;
 to look to heaven, be blind to all below. 

ix.

then faith, for reason glimmer light, shall give
 her immortal perspective;
 and grace presence nature loss retrieve:
 then thy enliven soul shall see,
 that all the volume of philosophy,
 with all their comment, never can invent
 so politic a instrument,
 to reach the heaven of heaven, the high abode,
 where Moses place his mysterious god,
 as be that ladder which old Jacob rear,
 when light divine have human darkness clear;
 and his enlarge idea find the road,
 which faith have dictate, and angel tread. 
