a epistle to mr. pope.

from Rome, 1730. 

by the same.

immortal bard! for who each muse have weave
the fair garland of the aonian grove;
preserve, our droop genius to restore,
when ADDISON and Congreve be no more.
after so many star extinct in night
the darken age last remain light!
to thou from latian realm this verse be write,
inspire by memory of ancient wit;
for now no more these clime their influence boast,
fall be their glory, and their virtue lose;
from tyrant and from priest the muse fly,
daughter of reason and of liberty:
nor baioe now, nor umbria plain they love,
nor on the bank of Var, or Mincius rove;
to thames flowery border they retire,
and kindle in thy breast the roman fire.
so in the shade, where cheere with summer ray
melodious linnet warble sprightly lay,
soon as the fade, fall leaf complain
of gloomy winter unauspicious reign,
no tuneful voice be hear of joy or love,
but mournful silence sadden all the grove.

unhappy Italy! who alter state
have feel the worst severity of fate:
not that barbarian hand she fasces break,
and bow her haughty neck beneath their yoke;
not that her palace to earth be throw,
her city desert, and her field unsown;
but that her ancient spirit be decay,
that sacred wisdom from her bound be flee,
that there the source of science flow no more,
whence its rich stream supply the world before.

illustrious name! that once in Latium shine,
bear to instruct and to command mankind;
chief, by who virtue mighty Rome be raise,
and poet, who those chief sublime praise!
oft i the trace you have leave explore,
your ash visit, and your urn adore;
oft kiss, with lip devout, some moulder stone,
with ivy venerable shade overgrow;
those hallow ruin better please to see
than all the pomp of modern luxury.

as late on virgil tomb fresh flower i strow,
while with the inspire muse my bosom glow,
crown with eternal bay my ravish eye
behold the poet awful form arise;
stranger, he say, who pious hand have pay
these grateful rite to my attentive shade,
when thou shall breathe thy happy native air,
to pope this message from his master bear:

'great bard, who number i myself inspire,
to who i give my own harmonious lyre,
if high exalt on the throne of wit,
near i and Homer thou aspire to sit,
no more let mean satire dim the ray
that flow majestic from thy noble bay;
in all the flowery path of Pindus stray,
but shun that thorny, that unplease way;
nor when each soft engage muse be thy,
address the least attractive of the nine.

of thou more worthy be the task, to raise
a last column to thy country be praise;
to sing the land, which yet alone can boast
that liberty corrupt Rome have lose;
where science in the arm of peace be lay,
and plant her palm beside the olive shade.
such be the theme for which my lyre i string,
such be the people who exploit i sing;
brave, yet refine, for arm and art renowned,
with different bay by Mars and Phoebus crown;
dauntless opposer of tyrannic sway,
but please a mild Augustus to obey.

if these command submissive thou receive,
immortal and unblamed thy name shall live;
envy to black Cocytus shall retire,
and howl with fury in torment fire;
approve time shall consecrate thy lay,
and join the patriot to the poet praise.'
