to mr. R—, on his benevolent scheme for rescue poor child from vice and misery, by promote SUNDAY school.

o, R—! my timid soul will fain aspire
 to rapture such as thy; to the pure zeal
 which fire thy soul in bless religion cause. 
say, can i catch one saint, one glimmer spark,
 to warm my cheerless bosom? will the flame
 which ever seed thy fervency of soul,
 illumine i? ah, no! on i it be lose;
 my faculty, my poverty of thought,
 will ever disappoint the grand design,
 and render great commission all abortive. 

vain be the hope to save a ruin world! 
even jesus suffering never convince the whole;
 then shall a atom the fix axis move,
 and win a world from hell? thou great dare,
 yet limit thy power; stand forth, you few! 
you who will give a lustre to your name,
 and prove the grand impression of Jehovah;
 who weep, like R—, the glory of your god,
 deface, demolish, beauty tread in dust;
 leave not the wreck desert on the beach,
 where ignorance, vice, and loud-mouthed reprobation,
 exult yell, and wring the melt soul:
 o! freeze, to hear the hoaryheaded sinner,
 with ceaseless profanation, taint the air;
 grow old in dark stupidity, he tread,
 fearless, though feeble; on the verge of fate
 sin leave he not; and innate flame of vice
 still fierce burn; the fact exist in will:
 the last remain of life present a gloom
 which fright the shrink soul; lo! back she start,
 strike with dire horror, loath to hear the sound,
 the dreadful summons of offend heaven —
 she linger — the strong blast to atom rend
 the frame which hold she. — o! you better soul,
 you noble few, who slumber in your race,
 though well begin, and forward with hope,
 say, will you see a fellow-spirit lose,
 thus swallow in the ever-yawning gulf,
 that fright the mental eye, and even appal
 the man who firm stand, nor lend your aid
 to save he, as a soul once mean for heaven? 
o, think! the come hour will soon be you;
 let not a form which bear your maker image
 defeat the end of being: know it be you,
 in heavenly tint to dip the infant soul;
 to raise the new idea, lift it high,
 even to jehovah throne: the ductile mind,
 pliant as wax, shall wear the mould you give;
 sharp gratitude you have call to life, shall cut,
 in cipher deep, the now expand heart;
 and, even beyond the chamber of the grave,
 the joyous spirit shall your record bear,
 to meet your eye when tremble world expire. 
what then shall live, or stand in that dread hour,
 but act like these, when pant spirit call
 for every little test to aid their plea? 
may you resound, support in the blast
 by grateful infant, and by ripen man,
 to who you give perfection. angel smile,
 and song of glory shake the vault of heaven. 

not to the vain i lift my poor appeal,
 who never yet have dare to own a soul,
 or name a deity with heart-felt joy;
 it be to the mind who feel like generous R—,
 who heart can mourn, who manly eye can melt,
 at the dread thought of human soul destroy. 

what pen, though dip in horror deep dye,
 can just paint the poor unlettered tribe,
 assemble in a group? the florid youth,
 robust, impetuous, ardent in his strength,
 lively and bound as the skip roe,
 the blush of beauty blow on his cheek;
 within, a strong epitome of hell;

there vice rage, and passion wild roar;
 strong appetite, which never know restraint,
 scream for indulgence, till the soul distract,
 seize in haste the draught of poison mix
 when sin begin, and ruin nature fall;
 the dire infusion strong grow by time;
 and still ferment, sin on sin arise,
 in order horrible. thus ever lose,
 the poor benight soul never hope to light
 on gilead sovereign balm, its worth not know,
 or long misuse; ah! hapless, hapless state,
 where immortality itself be sick,
 and hope annihilation. dreadful thought! 
poor miserable refuge! poor still
 the soul who hope to find it. o, befriend,
 ere it be too late, the tender, bud mind,
 now choke by ignorance; cherish the spark,
 the particle of godhead, which impel
 to good if nourish, if overwhelm must die! 

you sacred few, who shudder at the sound
 of blasphemy, breathe from the tender lip
 who lisp accent innocence shall guide,
 who heart shall white-robed purity adorn:
 o, think, how lose the beauteous reprobate
 of twelve or fourteen year, nurse up in sin;
 on who sweet form her bounteous maker smile,
 and give as the grand stroke of fair creation:
 her passion soft and gentle; pure her thought,
 her soul so angel-like, it speak perfection;
 eye form to bend the stubborn breast of man
 to more than human softness; accent mild
 to charm his ear, and sooth his sullen soul,
 when pant in the iron grasp of woe! 
o, she be mean so perfect, fair, and good,
 that angel with unusual ardour gaze,
 bless the fair form, and hail the joyous hour! 
but ah! down, down she sink, for ever lose,
 for ever tarnish, blast in the bud;
 the early falsehood point the flow tongue,
 the artful leer deform the eager eye;
 the smile oft practise, deep to deceive;
 each soft allurement heaven so frank give,
 all, all, devote to eternal shame:
 charm in sin, too oft she meet her fate,
 so early, that the most obdurate weep,
 and give that pity she be form to raise. 

awake, you rich, that sleep! awake to save! 
and infant, yet unborn, in choral song,
 shall bless the hand which form a social father,
 a father on who lip instruction hang,
 who snatch from the burn flame the brand! 

the poor illiterate, chill by freeze want,
 within who wall pale penury still sit,
 with icy hand impress every meal,
 can divide his slender hard-earned mite
 betwixt his bodily and mental want;
 the soul must go — for hunger loud plead,
 and nature will be answer; thus his race,
 envelop, grope, sink in vulgar toil;
 to eat and sleep include the soul best wish;
 and mean deceit, and treacherous, low-phrased guile,
 fill the vast space for better purpose give. 

oppress like you, so amram son once feel,
 overburden with a gross inconstant race;
 fain will you to their promise Canaan guide
 these wretched wanderer, lead they to their rest,
 as nurse father bear the suck babe;
 fain will you to the shelter hive allure,
 and fix the swarm where endless pleasure flow. 

take off, great god! some portion of thy spirit,
 too much for one weak form; overpower he sink,
 yet glory in the flame; and faint thus,
 will lift a world to heaven. omniscient power! 
bring forward yet thy seventy elect! 
bid they to thy great mandate fix their seal,
 and loud sound — "you choose, aid my people;
 guide they, i charge you, through the dreary wild,
 support the faint, and tell the lazy-blind,
 who, mole-like, never see, nor ever wish it;
 o, tell they, it be in mercy you be give;
 that unto you i give extensive soul,
 great faculty, and ample mean, to save
 soul i think worth create. then rejoice,
 that you be thus commission; open fair
 to you the path of glory, while their soul
 wander in darkness, and despair to find
 salvation without help. to you i give
 the mean; then answer well your sacred charge."

you heaven-attempting soul, where virtue lie
 listless, inactive, wait but the call
 of great Jehovah, listen to his voice,
 a voice never hear in vain; hark! hark! it sound
 from misery low shed; the accent soft,
 the humble sigh, the infant early tear,
 the husband stifle, sympathetic groan,
 the mother feeling, more than ever feel,
 though bear in silence and in pensive mood. 
these be all shade in which the godhead see;
 well feel those woe where great religion sit
 on the house-top, and shed her heavenly dew
 on the poor group; — be it you to fix she there. 
in dress like this, omniscience soft try
 your friendly door, and thus disguise, oft meet
 the stern repulse, and virtue-killing frown. 
