the genealogy of Christ, as it be represent on the east window of Winchester COLL. chapel,

write at Winton school by dr. Lowth, lord bishop of OXFORD.

at once to raise our reverence and delight,
 to elevate the mind, and please the sight,
 to pour in virtue at the attentive eye,
 and waft the soul on wing of ecstasy;
 for this the painter art with nature vie,
 and bid the visionary saint arise;
 who view the sacred form in thought aspire,
 catch pure zeal, and as he gaze, fire;
 feel the same ardour to his breast convey,
 be what he see, and emulate the shade. 

thy stroke, great artist, so sublime appear,
 they check our pleasure with a awful fear;
 while, through the mortal line, the god you trace,
 author himself, and heir of jesse race;
 in rapture we admire thy bold design,
 and, as the subject, own the hand divine. 
while through thy work the rise day shall stream,
 so long shall last thy honour, praise, and name. 
and may thy labour to the muse impart
 some emanation from her sister art,
 to animate the verse, and bid it shine
 in colour easy, bright, and strong, as thy. 

supine on earth a awful figure lie,
 while soft slumber seem to seal his eye;
 the hoary sire heaven guardian care demand,
 and at his foot the watchful angel stand. 
the form august and large, the mien divine
 betray the founder of messiah line. 
lo! from his loin the promise stem ascend,
 and high to heaven its sacred bough extend:
 each limb productive of some hero spring,
 and bloom luxuriant with a race of king. 
the eternal plant wide spread its arm around,
 and with the mighty branch the mystic top be crown. 

and lo! the glory of the illustrious line
 at their first dawn with ripen splendor shine,
 in David all express; the good, the great,
 the king, the hero, and the man complete. 
serene he fit, and sweep the golden lyre,
 and blend the prophet with the poet fire. 
see! with what art he strike the vocal string,
 the god, his theme, inspire what he sing! 
hark, — or our ear delude we — from his tongue
 sweet flow, or seem to flow, some heavenly song. 
o! can thy art arrest the fleet sound,
 and paint the voice in magic number bind;
 can the warm sun, as erst when Memnon play,
 wake with his rise beam the vocal shade:
 then may he draw the attentive angel down,
 bend to hear the lay, so sweet, so like their own. 
on either side the monarch offspring shine,
 and some adorn, and some disgrace their line. 
here Ammon glory; proud, incestuous lord! 
this hand sustain the robe, and that the sword. 
frown and fierce, with haughty stride he tower,
 and on his horrid brow defiance lower. 
there Absalom the ravish sceptre sway,
 and his steal honour all his shame display:
 the base usurper youth! who join in one
 the rebel subject, and the ungrateful son. 

amid the royal race, see Nathan stand:
 fervent he seem to speak, and lift his hand;
 his look the emotion of his soul disclose,
 and eloquence from every gesture flow. 
such, and so stern he come, ordain to bring
 the ungrateful mandate to the guilty king:
 when, at his dreadful voice, a sudden smart
 shot through the tremble monarch conscious heart;
 from his own lip condemn; severe decree! 
have his god prove so stern a judge as he. 
but man with frailty be ally by birth;
 consummate purity never dwell on earth:
 through all the soul though virtue hold the rein,
 beat at the heart, and spring at every vein:
 yet ever from the clear source have run
 some gross allay, some tincture of the man. 

but who be he — deep muse — in his mind,
 he seem to weigh in reason scale, mankind;
 fix contemplation hold his steady eye —
 i know the sage; the wise of the wise. 
bless with all man can wish, or prince obtain,
 yet his great heart pronounce those blessing vain. 
and lo! bright glitter in his sacred hand,
 in miniature the glorious temple stand. 
effulgent frame! stupendous to behold! 
gold the strong valve, the roof of burnish gold. 
the wander ark, in that bright dome enshrine,
 spread the strong light, eternal, unconfined! 
above the unutterable glory play
 presence divine! and the full-streaming ray
 pour through reluctant crowd intolerable blaze. 

but stern oppression rend reboam reign;
 see the gay prince, injurious, proud, and vain! 
the imperial sceptre totter in his hand,
 and proud rebellion triumph in the land. 
curse with corruption ever-fruitful spring,
 a beardless senate, and a haughty king. 

there Asa, good and great, the sceptre bear,
 justice attend his peace, success his war:
 while virtue be his sword, and heaven his shield,
 without controul the warrior sweep the field;
 load with spoil, triumphant he return,
 and half her swarthy son sad ethiopia mourn. 
but since thy flag piety decay,
 and barter God defence for human aid;
 see their fair laurel wither on thy brow,
 nor herb, nor healthful art avail thou now,
 nor be heaven change, apostate prince, but thou. 
no mean atonement do this lapse require;
 but see the son, you must forgive the sire:
 he, the just prince — with every virtue bless,
 he reign, and goodness all the man possess,
 around his throne, fair happiness and peace
 smooth every brow, and smile in every face. 
as when along the burn waste he stray,
 where no pure stream in bubble maze play,
 where drought incumbent on the thirsty ground,
 long since have breathe her scorch blast around;
 the prophet call, the obedient flood repair
 to the parch field, for josaphat be there. 
the new-sprung wave, in many a gurgle vein,
 trickle luxurious through the suck plain;
 fresh honour the revive field adorn,
 and over the desert plenty pour her horn. 
so, from the throne his influence he shed,
 and bid the virtue raise their languid head:
 wherever he go, attend truth prevail,
 oppression fly, and justice lift her scale. 
see, on his arm, the royal eagle stand,
 great type of conquest and supreme command;
 the exult bird distinguish triumph bring,
 and greet the monarch with expand wing. 
fierce moab son prevent the impend blow,
 rush on themselves, and shall without the foe. 
the pious hero vanquish heaven by prayer;
 his faith a army, and his vow a war. 
thou too, Ozias, fate indulgent bless,
 and thy day shine, in fair action dress;
 till that rash hand; by some blind frenzy sway,
 unclean, the sacred office dare invade. 
quick over thy limb the surfy venom run,
 and hoary filth besprinkle all the man. 

transmissive worth adorn the pious son,
 the father virtue with the father throne. 
lo! there he stand: he who the rage subdue
 of ammon son, and drench his sword in blood,
 and do thou, Ahaz, judah scourge, disgrace,
 with thy base front, the glory of thy race? 
see the vile king his iron sceptre bear —
 his only praise attend the pious heir;
 he, in who soul the virtue all conspire,
 the best good son, from the most wicked sire. 
and lo! in hezekiah golden reign,
 long-exiled piety return again;
 again, in genuine purity she shine,
 and with her presence gild the long-neglected shrine. 
ill-starred do proud assyria impious lord
 bid heaven to arm, and vaunt his dreadful sword;
 his own vain threat the insult king overthrow,
 but breathe new courage on the generous foe,
 the avenge angel, by divine command,
 the fiery sword full-blazing in his hand,
 lean down from heaven: amid the storm he ride,
 march pestilence before he; as he tread,
 pale desolation bathe his step in blood. 
thick wrap in night, through the proud host he pass,
 dispense death, and drive the furious blast;
 nor bid destruction give her revel over,
 till the gorge sword be drink with human gore. 
but what avail thou, pious prince, in vain
 thy sceptre rescue, and the assyrian slay? 
even now the soul maintain her late strife,
 and death chill grasp congeal the find of life. 
yet see, kind heaven renew thy brittle thread,
 and roll full fifteen summer over thy head;
 lo! the recede sun repeat his way,
 and, like thy life, prolong the fall day. 
though nature her invert course forgo,
 the day forget to rest, the time to flow,
 yet shall jehovah servant stand secure,
 his mercy fix, eternal shall endure;
 on they her ever-healing ray shall shine;
 more mild, and bright, and sure, o sun! than thy. 

at length, the long-expected prince behold,
 the last good king; in ancient day foretell,
 when Bethel altar speak his future fame,
 rend to its base, at good josiah name. 
bless, happy prince! over who lament urn,
 in plaintive song, all judah daughter mourn;
 for who sad sion soft sorrow flow,
 and Jeremiah pour his sweet melodious woe. 

but now fall Sion, once the fair and great,
 sit deep in dust, abandon, desolate;
 bleed her sad heart, and ever stream her eye,
 and anguish tear she, with convulsive sigh. 
the mournful captive spread her hand in vain,
 her hand, that rankle with the servile chain;
 till he, great chief! in heaven appoint time. 
lead back her child to their native clime. 
fair liberty revive with all her joy,
 and bid her envy wall secure rise. 
and thou, great hallow dome, in ruin spread,
 again shall lift sublime thy sacred head. 
but ah! with weep eye, the ancient view
 a faint resemblance of the old in you. 
no more the effulgent glory of thy god
 speak awful answer from the mystic cloud:
 no more thy altar blaze with fire divine,
 and heaven have leave thy solitary shrine. 
yet, in thy court, hereafter shall thou see
 presence immediate of the deity,
 the light himself reveal, the god confess in thou. 

and now at length the fate term of year
 the world desire have bring, and lo! the god appear. 
the heavenly babe the virgin mother bear. 
and her fond look confess the parent care,
 the please burden on her breast she lay,
 hang over his charm, and with a smile survey. 
the infant smile, to her fond bosom press,
 and wanton, sportive, on the mother breast. 
a radiant glory speak he all divine,
 and in the child the beam of godhead shine. 

but now alas! far other view disclose
 the black comprehensive scene of woe. 
see where man voluntary sacrifice
 bow his meek head, and god eternal die! 
fix to the cross, his heal arm be bind,
 while copious mercy stream from every wound. 
Mark the blood-drop that life exhaust roll,
 and the strong pang that rend the stubborn soul! 
as all death torture, with severe delay,
 exult and riot in the noble prey,
 and can thou, stupid man, those sorrow see,
 nor share the anguish which he bear for thou? 
thy sin, for which his sacred flesh be tear,
 point every nail, and sharpen every thorn;
 can thou? — while nature smart in every wound,
 and each pang cleave the sympathetic ground! 
lo! the black sun, his chariot backward drive,
 blot out the day, and perish from heaven:
 earth, tremble from her entrails, bear a part,
 and the rend rock upbraid man stubborn heart. 

the yawn grave reveal his gloomy reign,
 and the cold clay-clad dead start into life again. 

and thou, o tomb, once more shall wide display
 thy satiate jaw, and give up all thy prey. 
thou, groan earth, shall heave, absorb in flame,
 as the last pang convulse thy labour frame;
 when the same god unshrouded thou shall see,
 wrap in full blaze of power and majesty,
 ride on the cloud; while, as his chariot fly,
 the bright effusion stream through all the sky. 
then shall the proud dissolve mountain glow,
 and yield rock in fiery river flow:
 the melt doluge round the globe shall roar,
 and all man art and labour be no more. 
then shall the splendor of the enliven glass
 sink undistinguished in the burn mass. 
and o! till earth, and sea, and heaven decay,
 never may that fair creation fade away;
 may wind and storm those beauteous colour spare,
 still may they bloom, as permanent as fair,
 all the vain rage of waste time repel,
 and his tribunal see, who cross they paint so well. 
