verse humble present to the king at his arrival in holland:

after the discovery of the late horrid conspiracy against his most sacred person.

you careful angel who eternal fate
 ordain on earth and humane act to wait;
 who turn with secret power this restless ball;
 and bid determine empire rise and fall:
 your sacred aid religious prince own
 when first they merit, then ascend the throne:
 but tyrant dread you, lest your just decree
 transfer the power, and set the people free. 
see rescue Britain, at your altar bow,
 and hear her hymn your happy care avow. 
that yet her axe and her rod support
 her judge hand, and grace her awful court,
 where law with all her pompous terror stand
 to wrest the dagger from the traitor hand,
 where rigid justice read the fatal word,
 poise the Ballance first, then draw the sword. 

to your bless guidance she she safety own,
 that she can separate parricide from son,
 and bold give those criminal their doom,
 who will, like Nero, rip their parent womb:
 that, death and hell disarm, she live and reign,
 her freedom keep by he who break her chain. 

and thou, bless guardian, destine to defend
 that sacred life on which all we depend:
 thou sure, who charge of old be israel court,
 when send from heaven great David strong support,
 thy arm unseen elude cruel Saul,
 and strike the useless javelin to the wall. 
thy late care over William temple hold
 on boyn propitious bank the heavenly shield,
 when Europe pale betwixt two army stand,
 and tremble Britain doubt to be good,
 till miracle do William right declare,
 and cannon mark who they be bid to spare. 

still, bless angel, be thy care the same,
 be William life untouched as be his fame:
 let he own thy as Britain own his hand;
 and save the king, as he have save the land. 

we angel form in pious monarch view,
 we reverence WILLIAM, for he act like you;
 like you commission to chastise and bless,
 he must avenge the world, and give it peace. 

our prayer be hear, new miracle be show,
 the power that rescue will preserve the throne:
 the hero dear to earth, by heaven belove,
 by trouble must be vex, by danger prove;
 his foe must contribute to make he great,
 and fix his glory sure on their defeat. 

so though with sudden rage the tempest come,
 though the wind roar, and though the water foam,
 fair Britain on the angry sea look down,
 and smile see her rebel subject frown;
 heaven in assault her confirm her power,
 the wave but whiten her triumphant shore;
 in vain they will advance, in vain retreat,
 break they dash and perish at her foot. 

it be do, once more through britain joyful sea
 her glorious monarch plough his prosperous way,
 arm with those fleet who have in thunder say
 to distant world, who empire they obey:
 he land, and see unite nation stand,
 their part of glory deal by his command,
 their glow breast with fresh idea fire,
 how WILLIAM conquer, and how FRANCE retire,
 when fix as fate he stand in namur field,
 till rock and flood and fire be teach to yield,
 till Flanders free the hero arm confess,
 but tremble for the courage which she bless. 

he come; pale Gallia dread his arm afar,
 and bend on parricide refuse war,
 but 'well she know his vengeance n'er will tread
 those path of horror which her guilt have lead. 
the trumpet sound shall tell the arm foe
 when WILLIAM meditate the noble blow,
 before the foremost troop in open fight
 the hero arm shall prove the monarch right. 

it be do, and Europe free must own his hand,
 while THAMES shall flow, or britain empire stand. 
