Kimbolton park.

by the mr. H—.

thy park, Kimbolton! and surround shade,
 for rural love and contemplation make,
 invite my song. you sylvan! haunt your bower! 
waft round your sweet! and open all your flower! 

and thou, who shut not to the suppliant prayer,
 nor to the aid-imploring voice thy ear,
 do thou, o Manchester! protect the song;
 the muse care do to the learn belong:
 grateful alike Muse, subject, author, bow,
 and hail the source whence all their pleasure flow. 
these plain that annual pour their sweet for thou,
 (thanks to thy bounty) yield a part to i:
 and ease, fair virtue, and the poet friend,
 through your indulgence, on my step attend. 

impervious to the sun most potent ray
 yond lofty elm their arch head display;
 from far the traveller see their summit rise,
 scarce half distinguish from the neighbour sky;
 but oft survey as he onward go,
 green and fair still the object grow;
 till underneath their shade, at ease recline,
 he leave the labour of the day behind;
 soft breeze cool he from surround bower,
 and nature bland her gay profusion pour. 

so they who dauntless blow the dangerous main,
 (what will not dare man attempt for gain?) 
at early dawn, from top-mast-head espy
 a rise vapour in the border sky;
 ere day mid course, that vapour oft they find
 a royal navy, hover in the wind:
 yard, sail, and streamer crowd the whisper air,
 and all the glory of the deep appear. 

nor less impervious that extend shade
 by reverend oak, the growth of age, make;
 save where wide avenue that shade divide,
 and show the woodland in its utmost pride. 
here let the huntsman wind the echo horn,
 cheer his swift steed, and wake the rosy morn;
 let dog and man in noisy concert join,
 and sportsman call the harmony divine:
 the muse delight not, fond of pensive ease,
 in dissipation, or pursuit like these. 

and thou, sweet thrush! prolong thy amorous tale,
 let thy love-burthened song delight the vale! 
no leaden death i bring, no toil for thou,
 sing on, and soothe thy feather progeny. 
come! peaceful precept! of the samian sage,
 unbend the bow, and curb a iron age! 
whatever law short-sighted man may make,
 who can give, can have no power to take:
 he, and he only, who can life bestow,
 may call his blessing from the realm below. 

let shaggy bear, that prowl moscovia shore,
 stain their fierce claw, or dip their tongue in gore;
 this do not equal human beast of prey,
 what they for hunger, we for pleasure slay:

nor be this thirst of blood to man confine;
 see s a savage of the fair kind! 
pardon i, you! who noble tear can flow
 for aught that suffer misery below;
 who shrink to rob the insect of its hour,
 or bruise its offspring in the open flower:
 your form, your fear be by great heaven design
 at once to charm and humanise mankind. 

when nature fair from her creator spring,
 and wonder angel hallelujah sing,
 the sylvan scene, bless seat! to man be give,
 the rich bounty of indulgent heaven. 

to peace then sacred be the shady grove! 
be there no murmur hear — but those of love:
 love, flee from noise and city, haunt the glade,
 the fall fountain, and the silent shade,
 inspire each warble songster in the bower,
 breathe in each gale, and blossom in each flower. 
when every object thus their charm combine,
 what bosom can resist the power divine? 
too feeble that, which now the muse inspire,
 and, with her own, admit still warm fire. 
here, here i feel the soft infection rise,
 pant at the breast, and languish in the eye,
 when Mira to my humble cot be lead,
 love will victim, to a husband bed;
 and now still feel, in smooth channel, run
 those stream, that rapid passion first begin:
 esteem, affection, friendship never decline:
 nor be her virtue less for be i. 

let Rome her fetter monk to cell withdraw,
 and force she own against great nature law:
 drag bloom virgin useless from mankind,
 and give to lust, what be for love design:
 it be mine to tread on albion blissful shore,
 where sinful celibacy bind no more. 

now sultry Phoebus, far from thetis bed
 dart his fierce ray resistless over my head. 
slow through you walk oft-winding let i rove,
 and wander deep within the silent grove! 
or, if too potent there his beam invade,
 o! let i tread those lime more cool shade! 
that shade which shall your kind protection gain,
 and brown himself provoke the axe in vain. 

in mild clime, and bless with cloudless sky,
 let slender dome on hill unsheltered rise,
 where constant season glad the neighbour plain,
 and Phoebus hold, not phaeton, the reins. 
but where loud wave oft vex the sea-girt shore,
 and sudden tempest, unexpected, roar:
 where rough December, envious of her power,
 from gentle may oft pluck the tender flower:
 where clear morn to cloudy noon give way,
 and stormy eve exclude the hopeful day:
 where over the vast atlantic vapour roll,
 or freeze fog dark issue from the pole,
 there the firm building ask the planter aid,
 "from storm a shelter, and from heat a shade." 

in garden great the improvement of the age,
 clip yew, cut out in magog, quit the stage;
 half murder holly meet with one wound more,
 and clasp ivy leave the load door. 
but yet the axe may drive the edge too far:
 brown not with nature, yet with clime may war:
 use or convenience oft put in their claim,
 "and rise to fault good judge dare not blame;"
 nor can true taste and elegance reside
 where order and gradation be deny. 

by wall immure, or lose within a wood
 the cloister mansion of our father stand:
 they seek protection from the dogstar heat,
 and hear, though feel not, the rude tempest beat:
 but damp pervade oft the gloomy hall,
 and green-grown mould deface the escutcheoned wall. 
fond of extreme (and wise sure than they!) 
we drive wall, tree, damp, arm, and all away:
 yield still too far to every thing that be new,
 nor dare to keep the golden mean in view. 

but see! the sun the steep of heaven descend,
 and yond kind cloud her golden curtain lend:
 let i, you walk! your flowery maze pursue,
 and on one plain the world whole tribute view. 
that tribute, commerce, which we owe to thou,
 as thou we owe to godlike liberty. 
here spicy shrub, the growth of Afric, bloom,
 and ancient Asia breathe her sweet perfume:
 columbean wild their late treasure yield,
 and british rose crown the flowery field. 

author of good! how be thy blessing shed! 
on man, on thereby man, much honour head! 
from glow India to the freeze pole,
 thy providence supply, protect the whole:
 nor be thy gift at random throw abroad,
 or undistinguished careless bestow;
 for, while the whole in general blessing share,
 each part partake thy more peculiar care:
 yond spread fig, that first from India come,
 stretch broad her leaf to cool the sun-burnt dame:
 soft cypress rise on the paphian plain,
 to soothe the grief of some forsake swain:
 in cold norwegia lofty pine arise,
 a kind protection from the northern sky:
 and various realm this one grand truth declare,
 who feel the extreme of nature, feel her care:
 even winter stern, and angry tempest bring
 their secret treasure to the fruitful spring;
 pour foster store into the weary earth,
 and call more gay revive nature forth. 

hail! youthful season! health-restoring power! 
that cheer the waste, and clothe the roseate bower,
 that bid gay nature all her sweet display,
 and on benight nation pour the day:
 for thou the rose bloom, the violet spread,
 and yellow cowslip rear their bend head:
 brisk through the thicket trip the spot fawn,
 and sportive lamb bind wanton on the lawn:
 those oak, the future sovereign of the sea,
 stretch wide their bough, and clothe their head for thou. 

bloom fresh, you sacred guardian of our isle! 
war rage be over, and peace now deign to smile:
 here stand the graceful monarch of the wood,
 nor unprovoked attempt the swell flood:
 remain secure as erst when Druids make
 their song divine beneath your reverend shade:
 but soon as jar nation, faithless grow,
 enrich with trade and commerce not their own,
 shall base strive those honour to obtain
 by mean art, which courage seek in vain,
 then, then indignant quit the fertile shore,
 and bid the deep assist your thunder roar. 

when hapless England feel a tyrant sway,
 and that fierce tyrant fall to lust a prey,
 here, fill with grief, a injure princess flee
 from short-lived grandeur, and divide bed:
 oppression spread her horror over the plain,
 and all thy sweet, Kimbolton! bloom in vain. 

for not the fragrant breath of rosy morn,
 nor tuneful lark on rise pinion bear,
 nor all the verdure of the bloom spire,
 can to the break heart lose pleasure bring. 

in England then the son of freedom sleep,
 and droop virtue over their ash weep:
 in vain for right the royal stranger cry,
 that right his slave enjoy her lord deny:
 yond inmost grove oft hear her mournful tale,
 her sorrow spread along this silent vale;
 till fate in pity call she to the shore,
 where lust and tyranny oppress no more. 

thrice happy change! where royal virtue grieve,
 the age and the orphan be relieve;
 and thankful widow crowd the open door,
 where weep majesty complain before. 

o briton! (if to pagan power you bow)
 be smile liberty adore by you! 
where mad oppression wave her iron wand,
 there truth and justice quit the waste land:
 but where the people feel a father sway,
 (as Rome feel once, and Britain feel today)
 there justice equal with the sovereign reign,
 and peace and plenty glad the smile plain. 
when they, who govern with the govern join,
 and, without faction, all their force combine;
 not the loud cannon, nor the ocean roar,
 that beat with angry wave the sound shore,
 can crush contend host, or awe they more. 

those laurel, Granby! that adorn thy brow,
 far from the muddy fount of faction grow;
 fair union gentle rear the parent tree,
 that stretch so wide her bough for Hawke and thou. 

and thus unite, subject of my lay! 
thy son, Kimbolton! claim the patriot praise,
 who leave their field to guard the the threaten shore,
 ere Eliot fight and thurot be no more. 
and though no annal to their race shall tell,
 what number vanquish by their valour fall;
 the soul resolve that wait firm the foe,
 and in his bosom brave the impend blow,
 or conquer for his native field, or bleed,
 though no green laurel shade his honour head. 

but lo! my muse! the humid drop descend,
 and part shepherd to the hamlet tend,
 o! quit the task those beauty to display,
 that fair spring with each return day! 

so Reynolds thus, presume on his art,
 to trace those charm, my lord! that win your heart,
 see soft smile whenever he lift his eye,
 that bid he throw his baffle pencil by. 
