extempore verse upon a trial of skill between the two great master of defence, monsieur Figg and Sutton.

by dr. Byrom.

i 

long be the great Figg, by the prize-fighting swain,
sole monarch acknowledge of marybone plain:
to the town, far and near, do his valour extend,
and swim down the river from Thame to Gravesend;
where live mr. Sutton, pipemaker by trade,
who hear that Figg be think such a stout blade,
resolve to put in for a share of his fame,
and so send to challenge the champion of Thame.

ii.

with alternate advantage two trial have pass,
when they fight out the rubber on Wednesday last.
to see such a contest the house be so full
there hardly be room leave to thrust in your skull.
with a prelude of cudgel we first be salute,
and two or three shoulder most handsome flute;
till weary at last with inferior disaster,
all the company cry, come, the master, the master.

iii.

whereupon the bold Sutton first mount the stage,
make his honour as usual, and yearn to engage;
then Figg, with a visage so fierce, yet sedate,
come, and enter the list, with his fresh-shaven pate;
their arm be encircle with armiger too,
with a red ribbon sutton, and figg with a blue.
thus adorn the two hero, betwixt shoulder, and elbow,
shake hand, and go to it, and the word it be bilboe.

iv.

sure such a concern in the eye of spectator,
be never yet see in our amphitheatre.
our commons and peer from their several place,
to half a inch distance all point their face;
while the ray of old Phoebus, that shoot through the sky-light,
seem to make on the stage a new kind of twilight;
and the god without doubt, if one can but have see they,
be peep there through to do justice between they.

v. 

Figg strike the first stroke, and with such a vast fury,
that he break his huge weapon in twain, i assure you;
and if his brave rival this blow have not ward,
his head from his shoulder have quite be discard.
Figg arm he again, and they take the other tilt,
and then sutton blade run away from its hilt;
the weapon be fright, but as for the man,
in truth they never mind, but at it again.

vi.

such a force in their blow, you will have think it a wonder
every stroke they receive do not cleave they asunder.
yet so great be their courage, so equal their skill,
that they both seem as safe as a thief in a mill;
while in doubtful attention dame victory stand,
and which side to take can not tell for her blood,
but remain like the ass, betwixt the bundle of hay,
without ever stir a inch either way.

vii.

till Jove to the god signify his intention
in a speech that he make they too tedious to mention;
but the upshot on it be, that at that very bout,
from a wound in figg side the hot blood spout out;
her ladyship then seem to think the case plain,
but Figg step forth with a sullen disdain,
show the gash, and appeal to the company round,
if his own break sword have not give he the wound.

viii.

that bruise, and wound a man spirit shall touch,
with danger so little, with honour so much!
well, they both take a dram, and return to the battle,
and with a fresh fury they make the sword rattle;
while sutton right arm be observe to bleed,
by a touch from his rival; so Jove have decree;
just enough for to show that his blood be not icor,
but make up, like figg, of the common red-liquor.

ix.

again they both rush with as equal a fire on,
until the company cry, hold, enough of cold iron,
to the quarter-staff now, lad. so first have dram it,
they take to their wood, and in faith never shame it.
the first bout they have be so fair, and so handsome,
that to make a fair bargain, be worth a king ransom;
and Sutton such bang on his neighbour impart,
will have make any fibre but figg to have smart.

x. 

then after that bout they go on to another —
but the matter must end on some fashion, or other;
so Jove tell the god he have make a decree,
that Figg shall hit Sutton a stroke on the knee.
though Sutton disable as soon as he hit he
will still have fight on, but Jove will not permit he;
it be his fate, not his fault, that constrain he to yield,
and thus the great Figg become lord of the field.
