the nun.

a elegy.

with each perfection dawn on her mind,
 all beauty treasure open on her cheek,
 each flatter hope subdue, each wish resign,
 do gay Ophelia this lone mansion seek. 

say, gentle maid, what prompt thou to forsake
 the path, thy birth and fortune strew with flower? 
through nature kind endear tie to break,
 and waste in cloister wall thy pensive hour? 

let sober thought restrain thy err zeal,
 that guide thy footstep to the vestal gate,
 lest thy soft heart (this friendship bid reveal)
 like my unblest shall mourn like i too late. 

do some angelic lonely-whispering voice,
 some sacred impulse, or some dream divine,
 approve the dictate of thy early choice? —
 approach with confidence the awful shrine. 

there kneel at yond altar marble base
 (while stream of rapture from thy eyelid steal,
 and smile heaven illume thy soul with grace)
 pronounce the vow, thou never can repeal. 

yet if mislead by false-entitled friend,
 who say — "that peace with all her comely train,
"from starry region to this clime descend,
 "smooth every frown, and soften every pain:

 "that vestal tread contentment flowery lawn,
"approve of innocence, by health care:
 "that rob in colour bright, by fancy draw,
"celestial hope sit smile at their breast; "

suspect their siren song and artful style,
 their please sound some treacherous thought conceal! 
full oft do pride with saint voice beguile,
 and sordid interest wear the mask of zeal. 

a tyrant abbess here perchance may reign,
 who, fond of power, affect the imperial nod,
 look down disdainful on her female train,
 and rule the cloister with a iron rod. 

reflection sicken at the life-long tie,
 back-glancing memory act her busy part,
 its charm the world unfold to fancy eye,
 and shed allurement on the wishful heart. 

lo! discord enter at the sacred porch,
 rage in her frown, and terror on her crest:
 even at the hallow lamp she light her torch,
 and hold it flame to each virgin breast. 

but since the legend of monastic bliss
 by fraud be fable, and by youth believe,
 unbought experience learn from my distress,
 oh! mark my lot, and be no more deceive. 

three lustre scarce with hasty wing be flee,
 when i be tear from every weep friend,
 a thoughtless victim to the temple lead,
 and (blush you parent) by a father hand. 

yet then what solemn scene deceive my choice! 
the peal organ animate sound,
 the choral virgins captivate voice,
 the blaze altar, and the priest around:

the train of youth array in pure white,
 who scatter myrtle as i pass along;
 the thousand lamp that pour a flood of light,
 the kiss of peace from all the vestal throng:

the golden censer toss with graceful hand,
 who fragrant breath arabian odour shed:
 of meek-eyed novice the circle band,
 with bloom chaplet weave around their head. 

— my willing soul be catch in rapture flame,
 while sacred ardor glow in every vein:
 methinks applaud angel sing my name,
 and heaven unsullied glory gild the fane. 

this temporary transport soon expire,
 my droop heart confess a dreadful void:
 ever since, alas! abandon, uninspired,
 i tread this dome to misery ally. 

no waken joy inform my sullen breast,
 through open sky no radiant seraph smile,
 no saint descend to sooth my soul to rest,
 no dream of bliss the dreary night beguile. 

here haggard discontent still haunt my view;
 the somber genius reign in every place,
 array each virtue in the dark hue,
 chill every prayer, and cancel every grace. 

i meet she ever in the cheerless cell,
 the gloomy grotto and unsocial wood;
 i hear she ever in the midnight bell,
 the hollow gale, and hoarse resound flood. 

this cause a mother tender tear to flow,
 (the sad remembrance time shall never erase)
 when have seal the irrevocable vow,
 i hasten to receive her last embrace. 

full-well she then presage my wretched fate,
 the unhappy moment of each future day:
 when lock within this terror-sheding grate,
 my joy-deserted soul will pine away. 

yet never do her maternal voice unfold
 this cloister scene in all its horror dress;
 nor do she then my tremble step withhold
 when here i enter a reluctant guest. 

ah! can she view her only child betray,
 and let submission over her love prevail? 
the unfeeling priest why do she not upbraid? 
forbid the vow, and rend the hover veil? 

alas! she may not — her relentless lord
 have seal her lip, and chide she stream tear,
 so anguish in her breast conceal its hoard,
 and all the mother sink in dumb despair. 

but thou who own a father sacred name,
 what act impel thou to this ruthless deed? 
what crime have forfeit my filial claim? 
and give (oh blast thought) thy heart to bleed? 

if then thy injure child deserve thy care,
 oh haste and bear she from this lonesome gloom! 
in vain — no word can sooth his rigid ear;
 and gallia law have rivet my doom. 

you cloister fair — you censure-breathing saint,
 suppress your taunt, and learn at length to spare,
 though amid these holy wall i vent my plaint,
 and give to sorrow what be due to prayer. 

i flee not to this mansion deep recess,
 to veil the blush of a guilty shame,
 the tenor of a ill-spent life redress,
 and snatch from infamy a sink name. 

yet let i to my fate submissive bow;
 from fatal symptom if i right conceive,
 this stream Ophelia have not long to flow,
 this voice to murmur, and this breast to heave. 

ah! when extend on the untimely bier
 to yonder vault this form shall be convey,
 thou will not refuse to shed one grateful tear,
 and breathe the requiem to my fleet shade. 

with pious footstep join the sable train,
 as through the lengthen oil they take their way;
 a glimmer taper let thy hand sustain,
 thy soothe voice attune the funeral lie:

behold the minister who late give
 the sacred veil, in garb of mournful hue,
 (more friendly office) bend over my grave,
 and sprinkle my remains with hallow dew:

as over the corpse he strew the rattle dust,
 the stern heart will raise compassion sigh:
 even then no long to his child unjust,
 the tear may trickle from a father eye. 
