euphelia,

a elegy.

as roam a pilgrim over the mountain drear,
 on who lone verge the foam billow roar,
 the wail of hopeless sorrow pierce his ear,
 and swell at distance on the sound shore. 

the mourner breathe her deep complaint to night,
 her moan she mingle with the rapid blast,
 that bare her bosom in its waste flight,
 and over the earth her scatter tress cast,

 "you wind," she cry, "still heave the labour deep,
 the mountain shake, the howl forest rend;
 still dash the shiver fragment from the steep,
 nor for a wretch like i the storm suspend. 

 "ah, wherefore wish the rise storm to spare? 
ah, why implore the rage wind to save? 
what refuge can the breast, where live despair,
 desire but death? — what shelter but the grave? 

 "to i congenial be the gloom of night,
 the savage howl that infest the air;
 i unappalled can view the fatal light
 that issue from the point lightning glare. 

 "and yet erewhile, if night her shadow throw
 over the know woodland of my native vale,
 fancy in vision wild the landscape draw,
 and swell with bode sound the whisper gale. 

 "but deep despair have arm my timid soul,
 and agony have numb the throb of fear;
 teach a weak heart its terror to control,
 and more to court than shun the danger near. 

 "yet can i welcome the return of light,
 its glimmer beam may guide my search eye;
 the sacred spot may then emerge from night
 on which a lover bleed relic lie. 

 "for sure it be here, as late a shepherd stray,
 bewilder, over the mountain dreary bind,
 close to the point cliff he see he lay,
 where heave the water of the deep around. 

 "alas, no long can his heart endure
 the woe that heart be doom for i to prove;
 he seek for death — for death the only cure
 that fate have not refuse to hopeless love! 

 "my sire, unjust while passion swell his breast,
 from the love Alfred his euphelia tear;
 mock the keen sorrow that my soul oppress,
 and bid i — vain bid i, love no more. 

 "he tell i love be like yond trouble deep,
 who restless billow never know repose,
 be wild dash upon the rocky steep,
 and tremble to the slight breeze that blow! 

 "from those rude scene remote her gentle balm,
 dear to the suffering spirit, peace apply;
 peace! it be the oblivious lake detest calm,
 who dull, slow water never fall or rise. 

 "ah, what avail a parent stern command,
 the force of conquer passion to subdue? 
ah, wherefore seek to rend with cruel hand
 the tie enchant love so fond draw? 

 "yet i can see my alfred fix despair,
 and, awe by filial fear, conceal my woe! 
my coward heart can separation bear,
 and check the struggle anguish as it rise! 

 "it be guilt the barbarous mandate to obey,
 which bid no part sigh my bosom move! 
victim of duty unrelenting sway,
 i seem a traitor, while a slave to love! 

 "let she who seal a lover fate, endure
 the sharp pressure of deserve distress;
 it be add perfidy to seek a cure,
 and, stain with falsehood, wish to suffer less. 

 "for wretch doom in other grief to pine,
 oft will benignant hope her ray impart;
 and pity oft from her celestial shrine
 drop a warm tear upon the faint heart:

 "but over the last gloom of love despair,
 can hope bright ray its cheer vision shed? 
can pity sooth the woe that breast must bear
 which vain love, and vain mourn the dead? 

 "no! linger still, and still prolong, the moan
 shall never pause until heave my late breath;
 till memory distract pang be fly,
 and all my sorrow shall be hush in death. 

and death be pity come, who hand shall tear
 from this afflict heart the sense of pain;
 my faint limb refuse their load to bear,
 and life no long will my form sustain. 

 "yet once do health enliven glow adorn,
 and pleasure shed for i her lovely ray,
 pure as the gentle star that gild the morn,
 and constant as the equal light of day. 

 "now, those lose pleasure trace by memory, seem
 like yond illusive meteor glance light,
 that over the darkness throw its instant gleam,
 then sink, and vanish in the depth of night. 

 "my native vale, and thou, delightful bower! 
scene to my hopeless love for ever dear! 
sweet vale, for who the morning wake her flower,
 fresh bower, for who the evening pour her tear:

 "i ask no more to see your beauty rise;
 you rock and mountain, on who rugged breast
 my Alfred, murder by euphelia, lie,
 in your deep solitude, i come to rest! 

 "and sure the dawn ray that light the steep,
 and slow wander over the purple wave,
 will show i where his sacred relic sleep,
 will lead his mourner to her destine grave!" —

over the high precipice unmoved she bend,
 a fearful path the beam of morning show;
 the pilgrim reach with toil the rude ascent,
 and see she brood over the deep below. 

 "euphelia, stay!" he cry, "thy Alfred call —
 o, stay — in desperation yet more dear! —
 i come!" — in vain the tender accent fall,
 alas, it reach not her distract ear. 

 "ah what avail," she say, "that morning rise,
 with fruitless pain i seek his moulder clay;
 vain search! to fill the measure of my woe,
 the foam surge have wash his corpse away. 

 "this cruel agony why long bear? 
death, death alone, can all my pang remove —
 kind death will banish from my heart despair,
 and when i live again — i live to love." 

she say, and plunge into the awful deep! 
he see she meet the fury of the wave,
 he frantic see! and, dart to the steep,
 with desperate anguish, seek her watery grave. 

he clasp her die form, he share her sigh,
 he check the billow rush on her breast;
 she feel his dear embrace! — her close eye
 be fix on Alfred, and her death be bless! 
