a letter to the right honourable the lady Russel.

write at her ladyship desire, on the conversation at breakfast.

at my low cottage, on a cheerful morn,
 when slant beam do every scene adorn;
 by goodness prompt, native of their breast,
 sir harry and my lady be my guest. 
my treat be homely, and my table small,
 my cloth and dish clean, and that be all:
 for thus it suit to my low estate,
 it be insolent to imitate the great. 
humorous our talk, and innocent gay;
 our subject various; manner, man, and play,
 and love, and wedlock; this our favourite theme,
 and each to their own fancy form the scheme:
 "maid! say sir harry, come, it be time to wed;
" by sympathy choose C— to be your head. 
 "two body so exact pair! it be plain
" heaven make the match, and destine he the man." 
my lady offer i her farmer son. 
sir harry positive for C— alone. 
soon i accept, either be my choice;
" most vote shall carry it. — i be a neutral voice. 
 "so i may wed, i be not exceed nice;
" my humble wish, sir, no high rise,
 "than that the man be honest, free from vice;
" improve by learning both of book and man;
 "his genius witness by his wellknown pen;
" true to his country, and fair virtue cause;
 "unawed, unbribed, by power or by applause;
" from superstition and profaneness free;
 "his fortune equal to himself and i. 
" this praise to C— his friend allow be due;
 "and part, dear farmer, i believe of you." 

the P—, absent, can not speak his mind;
 but the young farmer, complaisant and kind,
 bow, smile, and drink my health. a omen fair! 
but, ah! a young and fair maid be there;
 i fear my rival charm, i fear her art,
 each serve to move, and both to win his heart. 

thus far in mirth. — but now for steady truth;
 i be climb above the scale of fickle youth. 
from pain of love i be perfect at ease,
 my person nature never form to please. 
friendship the sweet joy in human life,
 it be that i wish — and not to be a wife. 

thus, madam, your command i have obey
 in artless line: of censure not afraid:
 your goodness will accept my humble lay;
 content with this, i seek no better praise. 
rough as the road on which i give they birth,
 dull as the cloud morn, or barren heath. 
vain i wish, oh can i tune my song
 sweet as your name, and as your virtue strong! 
with pleasure i will the grateful theme pursue,
 but, i despair — and humble bid, adieu. 
