the character of the christ-cross row, by a critic, to mrs. —

great d draw near — the duchess sure be come,
open the door of the withdrawing-room:
her daughter deck most dainty i see,
the dowager grow a perfect double d.  
i enter next and with her eve appear.
not like yond dowager depress with year:
what ease and elegance her person grace,
bright beam as the evening-star her face.
queen Esther next — how fair even after death;
then one faint glimpse of queen Elizabeth;
no more, our Esthers now be nought but hetty,
elizabeth all dwindle into Betties.
in vain you think to find they under i,
they be all divert into h and b.
F follow fast the fair — and in his rear
see folly, fashion, foppery straight appear,
all with fantastic clue, fantastic clothes,
with fan and flounce, fringe and furbelow.
here Grub-street goose presume to joke and jeer,
all, all but grannam Osborne gazetteer.
high heave his hugeness h: methinks we see
Henry the eighth most monstrous majesty.
but why on such mock grandeur shall we dwell?
h mount to heaven and h descend to hell.
as h the hebrew find, so i the Jew:
see Isaac, Joseph, Jacob pass in view.
the wall of old Jerusalem appear,
see Israel and all Judah throng there. [...]
P poke his head out, yet have not a pain:
like Punch he peep, but soon pop in again.
please with his prank, the pisgy call he puck,
mortal he love to prick and pinch and pluck.
now a pert prig, he perk upon your face;
now peer, pore, ponder with profound grimace;
now a proud prince, in pompous purple dress,
and now a player, a peer, a pimp or priest,
a pea, a pin, in a perpetual round,
now seem a penny, and now show a pound.
like perch or pike in pond you see he come;
he in plantation hang like pear or plum,
pippin or peach, then perch on the spray,
in form of parrot, pie or popinjay.
P, proteus-like, all trick, all shape can show,
the pleasant person in the christ-cross row. [...]
as k a king, q represent a queen,
and seem small difference the sound between.
k as a man with hoarse accent speak;
in shrill note q like a female squeak.
behold, k strut as may a king become;
q draw her train along the drawing-room.
slow follow all the quality of state:
queer Queensberry only do refuse to wait. [...]
thus great r reign in town, while different far,
rest in retirement little rural r;
remote from city live in lone retreat,
with rook and rabbit-burrow round his seat.
s sail the swan slow down the silver stream. [...]
so, big with wedding, waddle w,
and bring all womankind before your view:
a wench, a wife, a widow and a w[hor]e,
with woe behind and wantonness before.
