a elegy write among the ruin of a abbey.

by mr. jerningham.

where sigh the zephyr to you lonely tree,
 a solemn grove its leafy mantle spread:
 where bend you moulder turret over the sea,
 a venerable dome once rear its head. 

the solemn grove, the venerable dome,
 be erst frequent by a numerous train,
 even chaste as they who dian mountain roam,
 but not subject to her gentle reign:

far other goddess do this train obey,
 far other temple, other altar raise,
 far other meaning breathe their choral lay,
 far other incense on their altar blaze:

veil superstition wake her magic sound,
 bad albion son forsake the splendid court,
 forsake amusement variegate round,
 and to her sable standard here resort:

alas! obsequious to her stern command,
 a sullen-pensive brotherhood they come,
 refuse to trace the path by nature plan,
 and raze from glory page their ancient name. 

nor these alone be find incloister here,
 here also dwell the simple-minded swain,
 who, wrap in sloth, dream out the lazy year,
 while industry sit weep on the plain! 

the many temple rise fair to view,
 which tower superstition call she own,
 with hand unerring radiant truth overthrow,
 and snatch the impostor from her tinseled throne. 

on yond dust-levelled spire the crafty maid,
 with indignation brood in her breast,
 sit gloomy. — her votary all be flee,
 her lamp extinguish, and her rite suppress:

within her hand a vacant string she hold,
 that once connect many a hallow bead:
 the blot scroll the other hand unfold,
 contain the maxim of her slight creed. 

couch at her foot, behold a moulder shrine,
 (of various relic once the dread abode)
 where run the spider over his treacherous line,
 where lurk the beetle, and the loathso i toad:

on darkness wing now sail the midnight hour,
 when for the grateful sound of choral prayer,
 the shriek owl from you dispart tower,
 with note of horror wake her tremble ear. 

of human grandeur mark the fleet day,
 how frail each purpose, and each wish how vain! 
the strong-built dome, the cloister fane decay,
 and ruin hover round the desert scene. 

the path that lead to yonder shatter pile
 be now perplex with many a sordid brier:
 no crowd be see within the sacred isle,
 the sabbath mourn its long-deserted choir. 

the golden crozier blend with the dust
 in horrid fold the serpent clasp around:
 the powerful image, and the saint bust,
 desamed, unhallowed, press the weedy ground. 

not distant far, her gold encircle tower
 the inviolable dame majestic rear,
 on who dread altar breathe some hide power,
 by terror guard, and by king revere:

to which asylum even the assassin come,
 (his hand audacious still imbrue with gore)
 the boon of full impunity to claim,
 while feeble justice weep her baffle lore. 

so truth at once dissolve the mental chain,
 and banish error from the enlighten shore;
 so close at length the busy-acted scene,
 the curtain drop, and folly mask be over. 

the gladsome Ceres raise her droop head,
 (while yellow harvest gilt the smile plain)
 behold a youthful band around her spread,
 with sickle arm to reap the beard grain. 

the warrior then beneath the trail vest,
 the peaceful cessock, or the drowsy cowl,
 no long quench the flame within his breast,
 or lull the purpose of his dare soul:

but rush undaunted to the doubtful war,
 pursue where glory lead the radiant way,
 till Neptune rise on his coral car,
 resign his watery world to britain sway. 

the virgin fair by venal guardian doom,
 by error prompt, or subdue by force,
 no more in cloister drear their day consume:
 like floweret strew around the senseless corpse. 

triumphant HYMEN hail the blissful hour,
 and see a white-robed social train approach,
 for who the pleasure dress the happy bower,
 and scatter rose over the destine couch. 

still other blessing from this change appear;
 no injure family do then behold
 on loiter monk its native wealth confer,
 nor spacious altar cover with its gold. 

full many tread that crooked path to fame,
 yet from her hand receive no last meed,
 she from her annal rend their fade name,
 and give to infamy the worthless deed:

but vengeance some pursue with dire disgrace,
 pursue beyond the circle of its sphere,
 even to the cementery dark recess,
 nor spare they sleep on the peaceful bier. 

beside the spread of that sombrous yew,
 where yawn with hideous chasm the vault cave,
 present to the fix astonish view
 the profanation of a rifle grave:

the large-endowing Rufus lie inurn,
 with many a sculputured image on his shrine,
 that smite with sorrow over his ash mourn,
 the sister-grace, and the tuneful nine. 

imprint on tradition story leaf
 be find (to this sepulchral spot confine)
 a terror-breathing tale that win belief,
 and oft repeat by the neighbour hind! 

from where yond mountain shade the dreary plain,
 attract by the scent of human blood,
 a troop of wolf voracious scour amain,
 and at this charnel-vault require their food. 

when, horrid to relate! they burst the tomb,
 and swift descend to the deep shade,
 uptear the shroud tenant from its womb,
 and over the mangle corpse relentless prey. 

the paly star with dim reluctant light,
 like taper glimmer on their orgy foul,
 while glide spectre scream with wild affright,
 reechoed loud by their tremendous howl! 

ah! what avail the solemn-moving hearse? 
the sable mantle car, the funeral throng? 
grave on his monument the soothe verse? 
the priest, the torch, and the choral song? 

misjudge wretch! while thou with hand profuse
 thy treasure on this mansion do entail,
 and pour down riches on the vow recluse,
 thy orphan babe partake a scanty meal. 

thy widow fair, her cheek bedew with tear,
 approach with suppliant knee the cloister-gate,
 there oft disclose in vain her poignant care,
 return still to weep her hapless fate. 
