the warrior return.

the warrior return.

sir WALTER return from the far holy land,
 and a blood-tinctured falchion he bear;
 but such precious blood as now darken his sword
 have never distain it before. 

fast flutter his heart as his own castle tower
 he see on the mountain green height;
 "my wife, and my son!" he exclaim, while his tear
 obscure for some moment his sight. 

for terror now whisper, the wife he have leave
 full fifteen long twelvemonth before,
 the child he have clasp in his farewell embrace,
 may both, then, alas! be not more. 

then, sigh, he think of his editha tear
 as his steed bear he far from her sight,
 and her accent of love, while she fervent cry,
 "great god! guard his life in the fight!" 

and then he remember, in language half form
 how his child strive to bid he adieu;
 while scarce he now can believe, as a man,
 that infant may soon meet his view. 

but shall he not live! .... to escape from that fear,
 he eager spur his bold steed:
 nor stop he again, till his own castle moat
 forbid on the way to proceed. 

it be day-break: yet still past the window he see
 busy form light trip to and fro:
 bless sight! that she live, "he exclaim with smile,
" those symptom of housewifery show:

 "for, stranger to sloth, and on business intent,
 the dawn call she forth from her bed;
 and see, through the castle, all busy appear,
 by she to their duty still lead." 

that instant the knight by the warder be see,
 for far flame the cross on his breast;
 and while loud blow the horn, now a smile, now a tear,
 sir walter mix feeling express. 

it be i, my love vassal! "the warrior exclaim, .... 
the voice reach his editha ear;
 who, breathless and speechless, soon rush to his arm,
 her transport betray by tear. 

 "and do thou still love i?" he utter, when first
 a silence so rapturous he break;
 she try to reply, but in vain .... while her sob
 a volume of tenderness speak. 

behold how i be change! how i be scar! "he exclaim,
" each charm that i boast be over: ".... 
" thou have bleed for thy god, "she reply," and each scar
 endear thou, my warrior, the more. " 

 "but where be my child?" he cry, pale with alarm,
 "thou name not my Alfred .... my boy!" ........ 
 "and come he not with you?" she say; .... "then some woe
 embitters our beverage of joy." 

 "what mean thou, my love?" ....... " when to manhood he grow,
 and hear of his father great name,
 'o let i', he cry, 'to the holy land go,
 to share my sire danger, and fame. 

 "'perchance my young arm, by the cause nerve with strength,
 may lower the pagan proud crest:
 and the brave christian knight, in reward of my zeal,
 may bind the red cross on my breast,' .... 

 "'and think thou,' i say, 'with the son i can part,
 till the father be safe in my arm? 
no .... hope not i will add to the fear of the wife
 the mother be as poignant alarm.' 

 "i cease .... and his head on my bosom recline,
 while his golden hair shade his cheek;
 when, part his ringlet, i see the big tear
 his heart disappointment bespeak. 

the sight overcome i: 'most love,' i exclaim,
 'go, share in thy father renown! 
thy mother will glad, to dry up thy tear,
 endure a increase of her own.' 

 "he kiss i ... he thank i .... i arm he myself,
 and gird his pure sword on his side;
 so lovely he look, that the mother fond fear
 be lose in the mother fond pride." 

 "he go then? ... how long have my warrior be go?" 
 "a twelvemonth, my Walter, and more." 
indeed! .... then he scarce can reach the far land
 until the last battle be over. " 

 "i tell he, my Walter, what armour be you,
 and what the device on your shield,
 in hope of your meeting. " .... " alas!" he return:
 "my armour i change on the field! 

 "a friend who i love from the dawn of youth,
 for conquest and courage renown,
 fall, fight beside i, and thus he exclaim,
 while life issue fast from the wound:

 "'and must i then die ere the flag of the cross
 wave proud over Saracen tower? 
but grant i, love Walter, this die request,
 for victory must sure be we:

 "'my armour well try, and my falchion, my shield,
 in memory of i deign to wear! 
it will sooth i to know, when the victory come on,
 that something of i will be there!' 

 "i grant his wish, and his arm i assume,
 while yet he the action can see,
 and mark with delight that his last close look
 be fix with fond pleasure on i. 

 "yet now, this remembrance so dear to my heart
 be cloud by anxious regret;
 since, but for this change on the field of the fight,
 the father and son will have meet!" 

 "but if he have fight, and have fall, my love!" .... 
 "suppress," cry the knight with a frown,
 "a fear so ill-founded; .... if Alfred have die,
 he will have fall a child of renown." 

yet vain he strive by the father proud hope
 to conquer the father fond fear;
 he fear for the life of his boy, though with smile
 he answer his editha tear. 

and more and more force grow the smile on his lip,
 his brow more overcloud with thought;
 at length he exclaim, "from the field of renown
 one mournful memorial I have bring. 

 "i grieve that i win it! .... a Saracen chief
 fall bleed before i in fight,
 when lo! as i claim he my prisoner and prize,
 a warrior dispute my right. 

 "'I be new to the battle,' he cry, 'and this prize
 will wreathe my young brow with renown,
 nor will i the conquest resign but with life: .... 
that chief by this arm be overthrow.' 

 "his dare enrage i, ... for i seem the stroke
 which lay the proud Saracen low; .... 
beside, from his bosom depend no cross,
 his right to such dare to show." 

 "but sure, my Walter, the dare bespeak
 a soul noble eager for fame:
 so many your laurel, that one you can spare, ....
 o tell i you grant his claim!" 

 "no, Editha, no! .... martial pride steel my heart,
 the youth i to combat defy;
 he fight like a hero! but vain he fight, ... 
beneath my strong falchion he die." 

 "o ill-fated youth! how i bleed for his fate! 
perhaps that his mother, like i
 have arm he, and bless he, and pray for his life,
 as i pray, my Alfred, for thou! .... 

 "but never again shall he gladden her eye,
 and haste her fond blessing to crave! 
o Walter! i tremble lest you in return
 be doom to the sorrow you give! 

 "say, do not the cross, when your victim he fall,
 lie heavy and cold on your breast; .... 
that symbol of he full of meekness and love,
 who deed mercy only express?" 

yes .... pity, shame, penitence seize on my soul;
 so sweet too his voice be in tone! 
methinks as he lie, and in agony groan,
 his accent resemble thy own. 

 "his casque i unlace, and i chafe his cold brow,
 and fain every wound will have heal;
 so young, and so lovely he seem, that i weep
 as by he i tender kneel. 

 "he see my distress, and his last die grasp
 forgiveness and kindness express;
 and then, with a look i shall never forget,
 he breathe his last sigh on my breast." 

 "but what be this memorial?" with cheek deadly pale
 his Editha falter cry: ... 
 "this scarf from his bosom!" .... he utter no more,
 for Editha sink by his side. 

ah then in her danger, her pale look of death,
 he forget all the laurel he will win. 
o father accurse! "she exclaim," in that youth
 you slaughter your Alfred .... your son! " 
