the campaign, a poem, to his grace the duke of Marlborough. 

while croud of prince your desert proclaim,
 proud in their number to enrol your name;
 while emperor to you commit their cause,
 and anna praise crown the vast applause,
 accept, great leader, what the muse indite,
 that in ambitious verse record your fight,
 fire and transport with a theme so new:
 ten thousand wonder open to my view
 shine forth at once, siege and storm appear,
 and war and conquest fill the important year,
 river of blood i see, and hill of slay;
 an Iliad rise out of one campaign. 

the haughty Gaul behold, with tower pride,
 his ancient bound enlarge on every side,
 pirene lofty barrier be subdue,
 and in the midst of his wide empire stand;
 ausonia state, the victor to restrain,
 oppose their appenines and Alpes in vain,
 nor find themselves, with strength of rock immure,
 behind their everlasting hill secure;
 the rise Danube its long race begin,
 and half its course through the new conquest run;
 amaze and anxious for her sovereign fate,
 Germania tremble through a hundred state;
 great Leopold himself be seize with fear,
 he gaze around, but see no succour near,
 he gaze, and half abandon to despair
 his hope on heaven, and confidence in prayer. 

to britain queen the nation turn their eye,
 on her resolve the western world rely,
 confide still, amid its dire alarm,
 in anna council, and in Churchill arm:
 thrice happy Brittain, from the kingdom rend,
 to sit the guardian of the continent! 
that see her brave son advance so high,
 and flourish so near her prince eye;
 thy favourite grow not up by Fortune sport,
 or from the crime, or folly of a court;
 on the firm basis of desert they rise,
 from long try faith, and friendship holy tie:
 their sovereign well-distinguished smile they share,
 her ornament in peace, her strength in war,
 the nation thank they with a public voice,
 by shower of blessing heaven approve their choice;
 envy it self be dumb, in wonder lose,
 and faction strive who shall applaud they most. 

soon as soft vernal breeze warm the sky
 brittania colour in the zephyr fly,
 her chief already have his march begin,
 cross the province himself have win,
 till the Moselle appear from afar
 retard the progress of the move war:
 delightful stream, have nature bid she fall
 in distant clime, far from the perjure Gaul;
 but now a purchase to the sword she lie,
 her harvest for uncertain owner rise,
 each vineyard doubtful of its master grow,
 and to the victor bowl each vintage flow:
 the discontent shade of slaughter host
 that wander on her bank, her hero ghost
 hope, when they see brittania arm appear,
 the vengeance due to their great death be near. 

our god-like leader, ever the stream he pass,
 the mighty scheme of all his labour cast,
 form the wondrous year within his thought;
 his bosom glow with Battels yet unsought:
 the long laborious march he first survey,
 and join the distant Danube to the maese,
 between who flood such pathless forest grow,
 such mountain rise, so many river flow:
 the toil look lovely in the hero eye,
 and danger serve but to enhance the prize. 

big with the fate of Europe he renew
 his dreadful course, and the proud foe pursue:
 amid the sultry gale his temple beat,
 infect by the burn scorpion heat,
 until on the border of the main he find
 defensive shadow, and refresh wind:
 our british youth, with inborn freedom bold,
 unnumbered scene of servitude behold,
 nation of slave, with tyranny debase,
 (their maker image more than half deface)
 hourly instruct, as they urge their toil,
 to prize their queen, and love their native soil. 

still to the rise sun they take their way
 through cloud of dust, and gain upon the day. 
when now the Neckar on its friendly coast
 with cool stream revive the faint host,
 that cheerful its labour pass forget,
 the midnight watch, and the noonday heat. 

over prostrate town and palace they pass,
 (now cover over with weed, and hide in grass)
 breathe revenge; while anger and disdain
 fire every breast, and boil in every vein:
 here shatter wall, like break rock, from far
 rise up in hideous view, the guilt of war,
 while here the vine over hill of ruin climb,
 industrious to conceal great bourbon crime. 

at length the fame of England hero draw
 Eugenio to the glorious interview;
 great soul by instinct to each other turn,
 demand alliance, and in friendship burn;
 a sudden friendship, while with stretch out ray
 they meet each other, mingle blaze with blaze. 
polish in court, and harden in the field,
 renown for conquest, and in council skill,
 their courage dwell not in a trouble flood
 of mount spirit, and ferment blood;
 lodge in the soul, with virtue overrule,
 inflame by reason, and by reason cool,
 in hour of peace content to be unknown,
 and only in the field of battle show:
 to soul like these, in mutual friendship join,
 heaven dare entrust the cause of human kind. 

brittania graceful son appear in arm,
 her harass troop the hero presence warm,
 while the high hill and river all around
 with thunder peal of british shout resound:
 double their speed they march with fresh delight,
 eager for glory, and require the fight. 
so the stanch hound the tremble deer pursue,
 and smell his footstep in the taint dew,
 the tedious track unravel by degree:
 but when the scent come warm in every breeze,
 fire at the near approach, he shoot away
 on his full stretch, and bear upon his prey. 

the march conclude, the various realm be past,
 the immortal schellenberg appear at last:
 like hill the aspire rampart rise on high,
 like valley at their foot the trench lie,
 battery on battery guard each fatal pass,
 threaten destruction; row of hollow brass,
 tube behind tube, the dreadful entrance keep,
 while in their womb ten thousand thunder sleep:
 great Churchill own, charm with the glorious sight,
 his march overpay by such a promise fight. 

the western sun now shoot a feeble ray,
 and faint scatter the remains of day,
 evening approach, but oh what host of foe
 be never to behold that evening close! 
thicken their rank, and wedge in firm array,
 the close compact briton win their way;
 in vain the cannon their throng war deface
 with track of death, and lay the battle waste,
 still press forward to the fight, they break
 through flame of sulphur, and a night of smoke,
 until slaughter legion fill the trench below,
 and bear their fierce avenger to the foe. 

high on the work the mingle host engage,
 the battle kindle into tenfold rage
 with shower of bullet and with storm of fire
 burns in full fury, heap on heap expire,
 whole nation trample into dirt, and bruise,
 in one promiscuous carnage lie confuse. 

how many generous briton meet their doom,
 new to the field, and hero in the bloom! 
the illustrious youth, that leave their native shore
 to march where briton never march before,
 (o fatal love of fame! o glorious heat
 only destructive to the brave and great!) 
after such toil overcome, such danger past,
 stretch on bavarian rampart breathe their last. 
but hold, my muse, may no complaint appear,
 nor blot the day with a ungrateful tear:
 while marlbrô live britannia star dispense,
 a friendly light, and shine in innocence. 
plunge through sea of blood his fiery steed
 where ever his friend retire, or foe succeed;
 those he support, these drive to sudden flight,
 and turn the various fortune of the fight. 

forbear, great man, renown in arm, forbear
 to brave the thick terror of the war,
 nor hazard thus, confuse in croud of foe,
 britannia safety, and the world repose;
 let nation anxious for thy life abate
 this scorn of danger, and contempt of fate:
 thou live not for thy self; thy queen demand
 conquest and peace from thy victorious hand;
 kingdom and empire in thy fortune join,
 and europe destiny depend on thy. 

at length the long-disputed pass they gain,
 by crowd army fortify in vain;
 the war break in, the fierce bavarian yield,
 and see their camp with british legion fill. 
so belgian mound bear on their shatter side
 the sea whole weight, increase with swell tide,
 but if the rush wave a passage find,
 enrage by watery moon, and war wind,
 the tremble peasant see his country round
 cover with tempest, and in ocean drown. 

the few survive foe, disperse in flight,
 (refuse of sword, and glean of a fight)
 in every ruffle wind the victor hear,
 and marlbrô form in every shadow fear,
 until the dark Cope of night with kind embrace
 befriend the rout, and cover their disgrace. 

to donnawert, with unresisted force,
 the gay victorious army bend its course;
 the growth of meadow, and the pride of field,
 whatever spoil bavaria summer yield,
 (the danube great increase) Britannia share,
 the food of army, and support of war:
 with magazine of death, destructive ball,
 and cannon doom to batter landau wall,
 the victor find each hide cavern store,
 and turn their fury on their guilty lord. 

delude prince! how be thy greatness cross,
 and all the gaudy dream of empire lose,
 that proud set thou on a fancy throne,
 and make imaginary realm thy own! 
thy troop, that now behind the Danube join,
 shall short seek for shelter from the Rhine,
 nor find it there: surround with alarm,
 thou hop'est the assistance of the Gallic arm;
 the Gallic arm in safety shall advance,
 and crowd thy standard with the power of France,
 while to console thy doom, th'aspiring Gaul
 share thy destruction, and adorn thy fall. 

unbounded courage and compassion join,
 temper each other in the victor mind,
 alternate proclaim he good and great,
 and make the hero and the man complete. 
long do he strive the obdurate foe to gain
 by proffer grace, but long he strive in vain,
 until fire at length he think it vain to spare
 his rise wrath, and give a loose to war. 
in vengeance rouse the soldier fill his hand
 with sword and fire, and ravage the land,
 a thousand village to ash turn,
 in crackle flame a thousand harvest burn,
 to the thick wood the woolly flock retreat,
 and mix with bellow herd confuse bleat;
 their tremble lord the common shade partake,
 and cry of infant sound in every brake:
 the listen soldier fix in sorrow stand,
 loath to obey his leader just command;
 the leader grieve, by generous pity sway,
 to see his just command so well obey. 

but now the trumpet terrible from far
 in shrill clangour animate the war,
 confederate drum in full consort beat,
 and echo hill the loud alarm repeat:
 gallia proud standard, to bavaria join,
 unfurl their gild lily in the wind,
 the dare prince his blast hope renew,
 and while the thick embattle host he view
 stretch out in deep array, and dreadful length,
 his heart dilate, and glory in his strength. 

the fatal day its mighty course begin
 that the grieve world have long desire in vain:
 state that their new captivity bemoan,
 army of martyr that in exile groan,
 sigh from the depth of gloomy dungeon hear,
 and prayer in bitterness of soul prefer,
 europe loud cry, that providence assail,
 and anna ardent vow at length prevail;
 the day be come when heaven design to show
 his care and conduct of the world below. 

behold in awful march and dread array
 the long extend squadron shape their way! 
death, in approach terrible, impart
 a anxious horror to the brave heart,
 yet do their beat breast demand the strife,
 and thirst of glory quell the love of life;
 the british soul low image disclaim,
 the heat of vengeance and desire of fame
 overlook the foe, advantage by his post,
 lessen his number, and contract his host:
 though fen and flood possess the middle space,
 that unprovoked they will have fear to pass,
 nor fen nor flood can stop britannia band,
 when her proud foe range on their border stand. 

but o, my muse, what number will thou find
 to sing the furious troop in battle join! 
methinks i hear the drum tumultuous sound
 the victor shout and die groan confound,
 the dreadful burst of cannon rend the sky,
 and all the thunder of the battle rise. 
it be then great marlbrô mighty soul be prove,
 that, in the shock of charge host unmoved,
 amid confusion, horror, and despair,
 examine all the dreadful scene of war;
 in peaceful thought the field of death survey,
 to faint squadron send the timely aid,
 inspire repulse battalion to engage,
 and teach the doubtful battle where to rage. 
so when a angel by divine command
 with rise tempest shake a guilty land,
 such as of late over pale Britannia past,
 calm and serene he drive the furious blast;
 and, please the almighty order to perform,
 ride in the whirlwind, and direct the storm. 

but see the haughty houshold-troop advance! 
the dread of Europe, and the pride of France. 
the war be whole art each private soldier know,
 and with a general love of conquest glow;
 proud he march on, and void of fear
 laugh at the shake of the british spear;
 vain insolence! with native freedom brave
 the mean briton scorn the high slave,
 contempt and fury fire their soul by turn,
 each nation glory in each warrior burn,
 each fight, as in his arm the important day
 and all the fate of his great monarch lie:
 a thousand glorious action, that may claim
 triumphant laurel, and immortal fame,
 confuse in croud of glorious action lie,
 and troop of hero undistinguished die. 
o dormer, how can i behold thy fate,
 and not the wonder of thy youth relate! 
how can i see the gay, the brave, the young,
 fall in the cloud of war, and lie unsung! 
in joy of conquest he resign his breath,
 and, fill with England glory, smile in death. 

the rout begin, the Gallic squadron run,
 and rush in croud to meet the fate they shun,
 thousand of fiery steed with wound transfix
 float in gore, with their drown master mix,
 mid heap of break spear and standard lie,
 and in the danube bloody whirlpool die. 
troop of bold youth, bear on the distant soan,
 or sound border of the rapid Rhone,
 or where the sein she flowery field divide,
 or where the Loire through wind vineyard glide;
 in heap the roll billow sweep away,
 and into scythian sea their bloat corpse convey. 
from bleinheim tower the Gaul, with wild affright,
 behold the various havoc of the fight;
 his wave banner, that so oft have stand
 plant in field of death, and stream of blood,
 so use the guard enemy to reach,
 and rise triumphant in the fatal breach,
 or pierce the break foe remote line,
 the hardy veteran with tear resign. 

unfortunate Tallard! oh who can name
 the pang of rage, of sorrow, and of shame,
 that with mix tumult in thy bosom swell! 
when first thou see thy brave troop repel,
 thy only son pierce with a deadly wound,
 choke in his blood, and gasp on the ground,
 thy self in bondage by the victor keep! 
the chief, the father, and the captive weep. 
a english muse be touch with generous woe,
 and in the unhappy man forget the foe. 
great distress! thy loud complaint forbear,
 blame not the turn of fate, and chance of war;
 give thy brave foe their due, nor blush to own,
 the fatal field by such great leader win,
 the field whence fame Eugenio bear away
 only the second honour of the day. 

with flood of gore that from the vanquish fall
 the marsh stagnate, and the river swell. 
mountain of slay lie heap upon the ground,
 or amid the roar of the Danube drown;
 a captive host the conqueror detain
 in painful bondage, and inglorious chain;
 even those who escape the fetter and the sword,
 nor seek the fortune of a happy lord,
 their rage king dishonour, to complete
 marlbrô great work, and finish the defeat. 

from memminghen high dome, and ausburg wall,
 the distant battle drive the insult Gauls,
 free by the terror of the victor name
 the rescue state his great protection claim;
 while ulme the approach of her deliverer wait,
 and long to open her obsequious gate. 

the hero breast still swell with great design,
 in every thought the tower genius shine:
 if to the foe his dreadful course he bend,
 over the wide continent his march extend;
 if siege in his labour thought be form,
 camp be assault, and a army storm;
 if to the fight his active soul be bend,
 the fate of Europe turn on its event. 
what distant land, what region can afford
 a action worthy his victorious sword;
 where will he next the fly Gaul defeat,
 to make the series of his toil complete? 

where the swell Rhine rush with all its force
 divide the hostile nation in its course,
 while each contract its bound, or wide grow,
 enlarge or straiten as the river flow,
 on gallia side a mighty bulwark stand,
 that all the wide extend plain command;
 twice, since the war be kindle, have it try
 the victor rage, and twice have change its side;
 as oft whole army, with the prize overjoy,
 have the long summer on its wall employ. 
hither our mighty chief his arm direct,
 hence future triumph from the war expect;
 and, though the dogstar have its course begin,
 carry his arm still near to the sun:
 fix on the glorious action, he forget
 the change of season, and increase of heat:
 no toil be painful that can danger show,
 no clime unlovely that contain a foe. 

the rove Gaul, to his own bound restrain,
 learn to encamp within his native land,
 but soon as the victorious host he spy,
 from hill to hill, from stream to stream he fly:
 such dire impression in his heart remain
 of marlbrô sword, and hockstet fatal plain:
 in vain britannia mighty chief beset
 their shady covert, and obscure retreat;
 they fly the conqueror approach fame,
 that bear the force of army in his name. 

austria young monarch, who imperial sway
 sceptre and throne be destine to obey,
 who boast ancestry so high extend
 that in the pagan god his lineage end,
 come from afar, in gratitude to own
 the great supporter of his father throne:
 what tide of glory to his bosom run,
 clasp in the embrace of the god-like man? 
how be his eye with please wonder fix
 to see such fire with so much sweetness mix,
 such easy greatness, such a graceful port,
 so turn and finish for the camp or court! 

Achilles thus be form with every grace,
 and Nireus shine but in the second place;
 thus the great father of almighty Rome
 (his feature flush with a immortal bloom
 that cytherea fragrant breath bestow)
 in all the charm of his bright mother glow. 

the royal youth by marlbrô presence charm,
 teach by his counsel, by his action warm,
 on Landau with redouble fury fall,
 discharge all his thunder on its wall,
 over mine and cave of death provoke the eight,
 and learn to conquer in the hero sight. 

the british chief, for mighty toil renowned,
 increase in title, and with conquest crown,
 to belgian coast his tedious march renew,
 and the long wind of the Rhine pursue,
 clear its border from usurp foe,
 and bless by rescue nation as he go. 
Treves fear no more, free from its dire alarm,
 and traerbach feel the terror of his arm,
 seat on rock her proud foundation shake,
 while marlbrô press to the dire attack,
 plant all his battery, bid his cannon roar,
 and show how Landau may have fall before. 
Scar'd at his near approach, great louis fear
 vengeance reserve for his decline year,
 forget his thirst of universal sway,
 and scarce can teach his subject to obey;
 his arm he find on vain attempt employ,
 the ambition project of his race destroy,
 the work of age sink in one campaign,
 and live of million sacrifice in vain. 

such be the effect of anna royal care:
 by she, Britannia, great in foreign war,
 range through nation, wheresoever disjoin,
 without the wonted aid of sea and wind. 
by she the unfettered ister state be free,
 and taste the sweet of english liberty. 
but who can tell the joy of those that lie
 within the constant influence of her eye! 
while in diffusive shower her bounty fall
 like heaven indulgence, and descend on all,
 secure the happy, succour the distress,
 make every subject glad, and a whole people bless. 

thus will i fain britannia war rehearse,
 in the smooth record of a faithful verse;
 that, if such number can over time prevail,
 may tell posterity the wondrous tale. 
when action, unadorned, be faint and weak,
 city and country must be teach to speak;
 god may descend in faction from the sky,
 and river from their oozy bed arise;
 fiction may deck the truth with spurious ray,
 and round the hero cast a borrow blaze. 
marlbrô exploit appear divine bright,
 and proud shine in their own native light;
 raise of themselves, their genuine charm they boast,
 and those who paint they true praise they most. 
