ode occasion by read mr. West translation of Pindar.

by the same.

i 1. 

Albion exult! thy son a voice divine have hear,
the man of Thebes have in thy vale appear!
hark! with fresh rage and undiminished fire,
the sweet enthusiast smite the british lyre;
the sound that echo on alphéus stream,
reach the delight ear of listen Thames;
lo! swift across the dusty plain
great theron foam courser strain!
what mortal tongue ever roll along
such full impetuous tide of nervous song?

i 2. 

the fearful, frigid lay of cold and creep art,
nor touch, nor can transport the unfeeling heart;
Pindar, our inmost bosom pierce, warm
with glory love, and eager thirst of arm:
when freedom speak in his majestic strain,
the patriot-passion beat in every vein:
we long to sit with hero old,
'amid grove of vegetable gold,
 where Cadmus and Achilles dwell,
and still of dare deed and danger tell.

i 3. 

away, enervate bard, away,
who spin the courtly, silken lay,
 as wreath for some vain louis head,
or mourn some soft Adonis dead:
no more your polish lyric boast,
in british pindar strength overwhelm and lose:
as well may you compare
the glimmer of a waxen flame,
(emblem of verse correct tame)
 to his own aetna sulphur-spouting cave,
when to heaven vault the fiery deluge rave,
when cloud and burn rock dart through the trouble air.

ii. 1. 

in roar cataract down Andes channel steep
mark how enormous orellana sweep!
monarch of mighty flood! supreme strong,
foam from cliff to cliff he whirl along,
swell with a hundred hills collect snow:
thence over nameless region wide flow,
round fragrant isle, and citron-grove,
where still the naked indian rove,
and safe build his leafy bower,
from slavery far, and curse iberian power;

ii. 2. 

so rapid Pindar flow. — o parent of the lyre,
let i for ever thy sweet son admire!
o ancient Greece, but chief the bard who lay
the matchless tale of Troy divine emblaze;
and next Euripides, soft pity priest,
who melt in useful woe the bleed breast;
and he, who paint the incestuous king,
who soul amaze and horror wring;
teach i to taste their charm refine,
the rich banquet of the enrapture mind:

ii. 3. 

for the bless man, the muse child,
on who auspicious birth she smile,
who soul she form of pure fire,
for who she tune a golden lyre,
seek not in fight field renown:
no widow midnight shriek, nor burn town,
the peaceful poet please;
nor ceaseless toil for sordid gain,
nor purple pomp, nor wide domain,
nor heap of wealth, nor power, nor statesman scheme,
nor all deceive ambition feverish dream,
lure his content heart from the sweet vale of ease.
