panegyrical verse, on the forty-five cliffite

for the Lewes journal.

in ancient time, when briton’s bold,
no foreign despot’s chain cou’d hold;
when, prodigal of life and blood,
they rush’d, impetuous, from the wood,
(their native wood, where freedom stray’d,
secure, and of no force afraid)
to meet, to rout the crest foe,
ambition, in the vale below.
then prowess meet her due reward,
and ev’ry hero have his bard;
return from th’embattled plain,
his soul be cheer’d with Hoel’s strain;
the praise of sweet Llewellyn’s lyre,
cou’d warm the old, the young cou’d fire.
and dwell, in our degen’rate time,
no builder of the pow’rful rhime,
to crown with praise the glorious few,
who, to themselves and freedom true,
bright honour’s shine tract pursue;
scorn to be lead in silken string,
the dupe of minister and king.
such spirit late thy son inspir’d,
o cliff! with british ardor fir’d,
when, leagu’d in friendly, firm array,
to Chichester they bend their way,
to shield the fav’rite son of fame,
and crush a sneak minion’s aim.
lo! where the glitt’ring car proceed,
the sprightly cavalry succeed,
advance to the hautboy’s measure,
each face illum’d with heart-felt pleasure;
not with the coward, joyless pace,
the sullen mien of vassal base,
who, lead by some parochial god,
and tremble at his awful nod,
be teach, like parrot, from their throat,
to speak, or scarce to speak their vote.
this noble tribe no tyrant’s law,
no bribe can to subjection awe,
free as the native air they draw;
nay, free far, for well i ween,
dank vapour clog their wat’ry scene.
proceed, brave son! to view your state,
fair damsel, crowd to the gate,
their tender wish with you send,
if aught their wish can befriend.
thrice happy you, who glorious deed
already meet so high a need;
this with more joy shall strike the heart,
than flute or fiddle can impart.
propitious may the omen stand,
which fix’d the quota of your band,
the omen quaint, which you derive
from Freedom’s number, forty five;
mindful of he, who patriot tongue
through Britain’s isle so oft’ have ring,
who with a senate’s mighty rage,
a more than ten year’s war cou’d wage;
who dun let loose, who durance vile,
who duel, and each base guile
have fail’d to crush, or to control
the native ardor of his soul;
who now, victorious o’er his ill,
the praetor’s chair triumphant fill.
may equal honour grace the chief
to who your force bear relief.
he (smile conscience by his side)
shall bold stem Corruption’s tide.
what, though’ his thought, rough from the mine,
no flow’ry figure’s aid refine;
though’ his speech boast no tinsel’d art;
his sense be manly, sound his heart.
keen as the shine blade he wear,
he dare to think, to speak he dare,
the thunder of his tongue to wield,
brave in the senate, as the field.
sweet be the note, that to my ear
thy honest wish crown’d shou’d bear;
sweet, if sharer in the same.
the name of lennox add come:
thy colleague in the soldier’s toil,
oft’ have thou see he reap the spoil;
and late his glow cheek confess,
how civic praise cheer’d his breast.
blush then, you ministerial foe,
who dare bright worth like this oppose:
go ransack all the coast around
where’er a placeman’s to be find;
each harbour and each creek explore
to add one royal voter more:
and if (for yet, i fear, disgrace
fair Freedom’s isle that hateful race)
there be a man, who grov’ling soul
each mean motive can control,
who from the sordid love of pelf,
will sell his country,  — sell himself;
display before his dazzle eye
(i blame you not) the glitt’ring prize.
or if promotion can incite
that wretch to vote, that black be white,
let hope, bright hope’s all-cheering ray
on his imagination play.  —
but give, you god, that’ avenge stroke;
may his neck feel the gall yoke.  —
go on then, be each engine try,
be threat, be promise apply.
but spare, o! spare who favour bind,
nor deep wind the gen’rous mind.
hard fate, i ween, severe his case,
who to be grateful must be base,
and on the rack of obligation
stretch’d, give his voice to damn the nation.
better to prostitute his daughter,
than of his liberty make slaughter.
enough of this: the devious muse
her panegyric strain renew.
then hail, you cliffite! hail again!
and thrice, all hail! accept the strain,
that faint speak your high renown:
may (long as hill your suburb crown,
long as old ouse, with circle wave,
your garden and your wall shall lave)
down time’s late stream your praise flow,
and gather vigour as they go;
may distant son reflect their sire,
and glow alike with patriot fire.
