a lady in the character of a nymph.

to the corsican warrior at shakespeare jubilee. 

o warrior! whence thy rustic arm and dress? 
a exile ah! and Corsica thy place:
 yes, stay, and on these flowery bank to dwell,
 with shakespeare soul, who freedom love so well. 
though i have nought but tear i can give thou,
 yet soon i hope thou better day shall see. 
yes; sure a time when briton son shall rise;
 see their white canvas spread over thy sea;
 when they shall bold soon thy right assert. 
but here, in peace, o! warrior, end the night! 
i shrink at war! how many hero slay,
 of friend and kindred, on some distant plain! 
i shrink at war! how many nymph like i,
 to soothe their grief by moon-light night you will see
 by avon stream, and as it silent glide,
 bathe their white bosom, or to hide their head! 
but let no tear the general joy, to night,
 no, not a sigh, the general joy to blight. 

to the bride. part i

mute my lyre to barbarous sound,
 sullen look, or pine care,
 cruel envy blast breath,
 mean design or falser friendship. 

strike aloud a noble theme,
 generous Caesar, virtuous Cato,
 wild ambition yet restrain,
 rigid air but damp the soul. 

sweet, melodious, gentle Lyda,
 to her mournful tale reply,
 vibrate soft in last sorrow,
 the forgive bosom show. 

do his eye then steal thy fancy,
 hide the blush and the neglect,
 generous nymph, do music touch thou? 
thou be happy if he be so. 

gay Delia steal the rose,
 and the lyre be new string,
 chaster air, they yet may charm he,
 and the modest brow regard. 

plaintive note, and rural fancy,
 faithless Phillis, Shenstone mourn,
 fairy scene have catch the echo,
 erst in happy time reply. 

choice spirit, now assemble,
 be it grey who strike the lyre? 
sweet aeolian air that tremble,
 or the solemn dirge to hear. 

to the bride. part ii

tune my lyre — to happy time,
 sweet Jean, to swell the note;
 happy swain, then prize thy treasure,
 youth and innocence to meet. 

join the song, and join the dance,
 smooth flow, or brisk air;
 scorn the nymph of fickle passion,
 who to riches give the hand. 

gentle heart that feel the blessing,
 if the modest blush can show,
 thy sweet bride in beauty bloom,
 friendship to your love unite. 
