of active and retire life. 

a epistle to H. C. ESQ;

by William Melmoth, ESQ;

first print in the year mdccxxxv.

yes, you condemn those sage too refine,
that grave lecture ere they know mankind;
who while ambition fierce fire they blame,
will damp each useful spark that kindle fame.

it be in false estimate the folly lie;
the passion blameless, when the judgement wise.

in vain philosopher with warmth contest,
life secret shade, or open walk be best:
each have its separate joy, and each its use:
this call the patriot forth, and that the muse.
hence not alike to all the species, heaven
a equal thirst of public fame have give:
patrius it form to shine in action great;
while decio talent best adorn retreat.
if where pierian maid delight to dwell,
the haunt of silence, and the peaceful cell,
have, fair Astraea! be thy Talbot choice,
can listen crowd now hang upon his voice?
and thou, bless maid, may long have weep in vain
the distant glory of a second reign,
in exile doom yet age to complain.

be high ambition still the power confess
that rule with equal sway in every breast,
say where the glory of the sacred nine?
where Homer verse sublime, or, Milton, thy?
nor thou, sweet bard! who "turn the tuneful art,
"from sound to sense, from fancy to the heart. "
thy lay instructive to the world have give,
nor great justify the law of heaven.

let satire blast with every mark of hate,
the vain aspirer, or dishonest great,
who love of wealth, or wild ambition sway
push forward, still regardless of the way;
high and more high who aim with restless pride,
where neither reason, nor fair virtue guide:
and he, the wretch, who labour on with pain,
for the low lucre of a useless gain,
(wise but to get, and active but to save)
may scorn deserve still follow to the grave.
but he who fond to raise a splendid name,
on life ambitious height will fix his fame,
in active art, or venturous arm will shine,
yet shun the path which virtue bid decline;
who dignify his wealth by generous use,
to raise the oppress, or merit to produce —
shall reason voice impartial ever condemn
the glorious purpose of so wise a aim?

where virtue regulate this just desire,
it be dangerous folly to suppress its fire.
say, whence can fame supply, (its force unknown)
her roll illustrious of fair renown?
what laurel prompt the hero useful rage?
what prize the patriot weighty toil engage?
each public passion bind to endless frost,
each deed of social worth for ever lose.
o! may the muse inspire the love of praise,
raise the bright passion, but with judgement raise!
for this she oft have tune her sacred voice,
call forth the patriot, and approve his choice;
bid he the steep ascent to honour take,
nor till the summit gain, her path forsake.

yet not success alone true fame attend;
he too shall reach it who but well intend.
see amid the vanquish virtuous, Falkland lie;
his generous effort vain, and vain his sigh;
yet true to merit faithful record tell,
to distant age how the patriot fall:
bless youth! insure the sweet voice of praise,
who live approve in pope unrivalled lay.

grave precept fleet notion may impart,
but bright example best instruct the heart:
then look on patrius, let his conduct show
from active life what various blessing flow.
in he a just ambition stand confess;
it warm, but not inflame, his equal breast.
see he in senate act the patriot part,
truth on his lip, the public at his heart;
there neither fear can awe, nor hope control,
the honest purpose of his steady soul.
no mean attachment ever seduce his tongue
to gild the cause his heart suspect wrong;
but deaf to envy, faction, spleen, his voice
join here or there, as reason guide his choice.
to one great point his faithful labor tend,
and all his toil in britain interest end.
to he each neighbour safe refer his claim,
the right he settle, and abate the flame.
nor art nor worth to patrius sue in vain,
nor unrelieved the injure ever complain.
for he the hand unseen, be prayer prefer,
and grateful vow in distant temple hear;
like nature blessing to no part confine,
his well-poised bounty reach all mankind,
that insolence of wealth, the pomp of state
which crowd the mansion of the vain great,
fly far the limit of his modest gate.
just what be elegant useful there;
of aught beyond he scorn the unworthy care;
nor will, for all the trim that pride can show,
one single act of social aid forgo;
for this he labour to improve his store,
for this he wish to enlarge his power;
this be his life great purpose, end, and aim:
such true ambition be, and worthy fame.

how different rapax spend his worthless hour!
with treasure indigent, a slave with power:
large sum overlook, still intent on more,
he waste, not enjoy, his tasteless store.
his grow greatness raise his hope the high.
and fan his restless pride increase fire,
it be thus amid prosperity he pine;
for what can fill the false-ambitious mind?
with all the honour that his prince can give,
with all the wealth his avarice can receive,
'midst outward opulence, but inward care,
reproach and want be all he leave his heir.

it be true, the patriot well deserve his fame,
and from his country just applause may claim.
but what avail it to the world beside,
that Brutus brave stab, or Curtius die?
while tully merit, unconfined to place,
diffuse blessing down through all our race;
remote time his learned labor reach,
and Rome great moralist even now shall teach.

averse to public noise, ambition strife,
and all the splendid ill of busy life,
through latent path, unmarked by vulgar eye,
be there who wish to pass unheeded by?
who calm retirement sacred pleasure move,
the hour contemplative, or friend they love;
yet not by spleen, or superstition lead,
forbear ambition giddy height to tread;
who not inglorious spend their peaceful day,
while science, lovely star! direct their way?
flow there not something good from such as these?
no useful product from the man of ease?
and shall the muse no social merit boast?
be all her vigil to the public lose?
though noisy pride may scorn her silent toil,
fair be the fruit which bless her happy soil:
there every plant of useful produce grow,
there science spring, and thence instruction flow;
there true philosophy erect her school,
there plan her problem, and there form her rule;
there every seed of every art begin,
and all that ease life, and brighten man.

it be hence great Newton, mighty genius! soar,
and all creation wondrous range explore.
far as the almighty stretch his utmost line,
he pierce in thought, and view the vast design.
too long have dark age seek in vain
the secret scheme of nature to explain;
too long have truth escape each sage's eye,
or faint shine through vain philosophy.
each shapely offspring of her feeble thought,
a dark veil over genuine science bring;
still stubborn fact overthrow their fruitless toil;
for truth and fiction who shall reconcile?
but britain son a sure guide pursue;
tread safe the maze, since Newton give the clue.
whereve he turn true science rear her head,
while far before she puzzle ignorance flee:
from each bless truth these noble end he draw,
use to mankind, and to their god applause.
teach by his rule secure the merchant ride,
when threaten sea roll high their dreadful tide;
and either India speed her precious store,
'midst various danger safe to britain shore.
long as those orb he weigh shall shed their ray,
his truth shall guide we, and shall last his praise.

yet if so just the fame, the use so great,
system to poise, and sphere to regulate;
to teach the secret well-adapted force,
that steer of countless orb the unvaried course;
far bright honour wait the noble part,
to balance manner, and conduct the heart.
order without we, what import it see,
if all be restless anarchy within?
fire by this thought great Ashley, generous sage,
plane in sweet leisure his instructive page.
not orb he weigh, but mark, with happy skill,
the scope of action and the poise of will:
in fair proportion here describe we trace
each mental beauty, and each moral grace;
each useful passion teach, its tone design
in the nice concord of a well-tuned mind.
do mean selflove contract each social aim?
here public transport shall thy soul inflame.
virtue and deity supreme fair,
too oft delineate with look severe,
resume their native smile and grace here:
soothe into love relent foe admire,
and warm rapture every friend inspire.

such be the fruit which from retirement spring;
these blessing ease and learned leisure bring.

yet of the various task mankind employ,
it be sure the hard, leisure to enjoy.
for one who know to taste this godlike bliss,
what countless swarm of vain pretender miss?
though each dull plod thing, to ape the wise,
ridiculous grave, for leisure sigh,
(his boast wish from busy scene to run)
grant he that leisure, and the fool undo.
the god, to curse poor demea, hear his vow,
and business now no more contract his brow:
nor real care, it be true, perplex his breast,
but thousand fancy ill his peace molest:
the slight trifle solid sorrow prove,
and the long linger wheel of life scarce seem to move.

useless in business, yet unfit for ease,
nor skill to mend mankind, nor form to please,
such spurious animal of worthless race
live but the public burden and disgrace:
like mean attendant on life stage be see,
draw forth to fill, but not conduct the scene.

the mind not teach to think, no useful store
to fix reflection, dread the vacant hour.
turn on its self its numerous want be see,
and all the mighty void that lie within
yet can wisdom stamp our joy complete;
it be conscious virtue crown the bless retreat.
who feel not that, the private path must shun.
and fly to public view to escape his own;
in life gay scene uneasy thought suppress,
and lull each anxious care in dream of peace.
'midst foreign object not employ to roam,
thought, sad active, still corrode at home:
a serious moment break the false repose,
and guilt in all its naked horror show.

he who will know retirement joy refine
the fair recess must seek with cheerful mind:
no cynic pride, no bigot heat brain,
no frustrate hope, nor love fantastic pain,
with he must enter the sequester cell,
who mean with please solitude to dwell;
but equal passion let his bosom rule,
a judgement candid, and a temper cool,
enlarge with knowledge, and in conscience clear,
above life empty hope, and death vain fear.
such he must be who great live alone;
such portio be, in crowd scene unknown.
for public life with every talent bear,
portio far off retire with decent scorn;
though without business never unemployed,
and life, as more at leisure, more enjoy:
for who like he can various science taste,
his mind shall never want a endless feast,
in his bless evening walk may thou, may i,
oft friendly join in sweet society;
our life like his in one smooth current flow,
nor swell with tempest, nor too calm slow,
while he like some great sage of Rome or Greece,
shall calm each rise doubt and speak we peace,
correct each thought, each wayward wish controul,
and stamp with every virtue all the soul.

ah! how unlike be umbrio gloomy scene,
estrange from all the cheerful way of man!
there superstition work her baneful power,
and darken all the melancholy hour.
unnumbered fear corrode and haunt his breast,
with all that whim or ignorance can suggest.
in vain for he kind nature pour her sweet;
the visionary saint no joy admit,
but seek with pious spleen fantastic woe,
and for heaven sake heaven offer good forego.

whatever be our choice we still with pride prefer,
and all who deviate, vain think must err:
clodio in book and abstract notion lose,
see none but knave and fool in honour post;
while Syphax, fond on fortune sea to sail,
and bold drive before the flatter gale,
(forward her dangerous ocean to explore,)
condemn as coward those who make the shore.
not so my friend impartial, — man he view
useful in what he shun as what pursue;
see different turn to general good conspire,
the hero passion and the poet fire;
each figure place in nature wise design,
with true proportion and exact line:
see light and shade unite in due degree,
and form the whole with fair symmetry.
