ode to peace. 

i 

she come, benign enchantress, heaven bear peace! 
with mercy beam in her radiant eye;
 she bid the horrid din of battle cease,
 and at her glance the savage passion die. 
it be nature festival, let earth rejoice,
 and pour to liberty exult song,
 in distant region, with accord voice,
 let man the victory bless, its prize to man belong. 

ii.

resistless freedom! when she nerve the arm,
 no vulgar triumph crown the hero might;
 she, she alone can spread a moral charm
 over war fell deed, and sanctify the fight. 
o, Gallia! in this bright immortal hour,
 how proud a trophy bind thy laureled brow! 
republic, hail! who independent power
 all earth contest once, all earth confess now. 

iii.

protect spirit of the glorious dead! 
ah, not in vain the hero noble toil,
 ah, not in vain the patriot blood be shed,
 that blood shall consecrate his native soil. 
illustrious name! to history record dear,
 and breathe when some high impulse fire the bard,
 for you shall virtue pour the glow tear,
 and your remember deed shall still your country guard. 

iv.

and thou, love Britain, my parental isle! 
secure, encircle by thy subject wave,
 thou, land august, where freedom rear her pile,
 while gothic night obscure a world of slave;
 thy genius, that indignant hear the shock
 of frantic combat, strife unmeet for thou,
 now view triumphant, from his sea-girt rock,
 thou unsubdued alone, for thou alone be free! 

v. 

o, happy thy misguided effort fail,
 my country! when with tyrant-host combine —
 o, hideous conquest, have thy sword prevail,
 and crown the impious league against mankind! 
thou nurse of great design, of lofty thought,
 what homicide, have thy insensate rage
 effaced the sacred lesson thou have teach,
 and with thy pure blood inscribe on glory page. 

vi.

ah, rather haste to concord holy shrine,
 you rival nation, haste with joy elate;
 your blend garland round her altar twine,
 and bind the wound of no immortal hate:
 go — breathe responsive ritual over the sod
 where freedom martyr press a early grave;
 go — vow that never shall their turf be tread
 by the pollute step of tyrant or of slave. 

vii.

and from your shore the abject vice chase,
 that low ambition generous soul disdain,
 corruption blast every moral grace,
 servility that kneel to bless his chain;
 o, liberty, those demon far remove,
 come, nymph severe good, sublime great! 
nor to the rapture hope of mortal prove
 like those illusive dream that pass the ivory gate. 

viii.

new age! that roll over man thy dawn year,
 ah, sure all happy omen hail thy birth,
 sure white annal in thy train appear,
 and pure glory cheer the gladden earth:
 like the young eagle, when his steadfast glance
 meet the full sun-beam in his upward flight,
 so thou shall with majestic step advance,
 and fix thy dauntless eye on liberty and light. 
