a epistle to the right honourable PHILIP, earl of Chesterfield, etc. 

o Chesterfield! my patron and my pride,
 in who do all that be great and good reside;
 noble by birth, by liberal art refine;
 delight of heaven, and darling of mankind! 
the public patriot, and the private friend;
 to curb the oppressor, and the oppress defend. 
to hate indolence no more impute
 the muse silence, if, hereafter mute,
 she quit her former toil for future ease;
 and check that genius which (perhaps) may please. 

it be time my fruitless labour to decline,
 when all man work can climb the stage, but i:
 when, in my stead, behold! a motley herd
 of upstart witling to my self prefer. 

not so when Booth, Wilks, cibber, rule the stage,
 dramatic ornament of this our age:
 my small attempt to please be then approve,
 and not for every trifle farce remove. 
Booth ever show i friendship and respect,
 and Wilks will rather forward than reject. 
even cibber, terror to the scribble crew! 
will oft solicit i for something new. 

now, young ruler young author take,
 not for their merit, but for cheapness sake. 
these handy hireling can, in half a day,
 steal a new ballad farce from some old play;
 to mangle scrap of many a ancient tune
 tagg feetless jingle, jar and jejune;
 the jade player with equal haste rehearse,
 until sing song limp, to horrid! hobble verse. 

though blunder follow blunder, line by line,
 the 'squire be teach to think it be wondrous fine! 
it suit his taste, he give his plaudit voice,
 and show his understanding in his choice. 
frame conception both of man and thing,
 just as sir Figg direct his leading-string:

sir Figg, grand master of the double sneer,
 who, when he most deceive, seem most sincere;
 dissembler bear, but much improve by art,
 a friendly aspect, a infernal heart:
 the mischievous, the busy go between
 easy 'squire amb's-ace, and sly harlequin;
 who, like two wrangle counsellor at bar,
 in public, seem to contradict and jar;
 but yet, in private, like dear friend caress,
 and form design, poor player to distress. 

woe to the stage! if once their scheme succeed;
 actor will then be abject slave indeed:
 poet have better lay their pen aside,
 than tame truckle to stage tyrant pride;
 who, vain and partial, keep old author down,
 to force their own low trumpery on the town. 

why to such wretch shall i yeild my cause,
 so late honour with so much applause? 
my little ballad still on every tongue,
 be in polite conversation sing:
 nor can severe censure trace one line. 
that tend to vice, in any verse of i. 
to please and yet instruct be all my aim,
 let venal poetaster boast the same;
 who utmost view be to corrupt the taste,
 to sooth the vicious, and to shock the chaste;
 and, quite estrange to any sense of shame,
 make woman speak what rake will blush to name;
 then, in excuse, plead nothing else go down;
 a wretched compliment upon the town! 

wretched as false — the town be not so deprave,
 be author and be actor less enslave:
 can one good piece be suffer to appear,
 the town will glad lend a candid ear;
 prefer pure nature and the simple scene,
 to all the monkey trick of harlequin:
 the man of taste prove this assertion true,
 we want what be rational as well as new. 

but, this declension of the british stage,
 booth, britain Roscius, just do presage;
 that rule dramatic, humour, taste and wit,
 must to that monster pantomime submit:
 yet pantomime, in all its grandeur dress,
 be but a pompous puppetshew at best. 

then, farewell stage! be business now my boast,
 with what be irksome once delight most;
 please and content with my little store,
 i scorn to prostitute my muse for more. 

alas! what fame, what gain can i propose,
 when other father fast as i compose? 
to such a pitch be pert presumption grow,
 it be well if this poor piece be think my own. 
so when, long since, in simple sonnet lay,
 i make the apprentice sing his Sally praise,
 though rude the number, yet the subject move;
 immortal ADDISON the song approve;
 then prejudice with envy do combine,
 because it be good, it be think too good for i. 

so common fame do various author choose
 to namby pamby, offspring of my muse;
 till pope, who ever prove to truth a friend,
 with generous ardour do my cause defend;
 trace i obscure and in detraction spite
 display i in a more conspicuous light. 

to mention more will prove a needless task,
 why shall they not be i? that be all i ask:
 because i be cheerful, unreserved and free,
 can nothing good or new proceed from i? 
what have i do, injurious to mankind,
 my work must be to other man assign? 

well! let they go, i all my right resign,
 entire easy, have they never be mine:
 yet, this reflection consolate my fate,
 i see my error ever it prove too late. 

no more half maze i hurry through the town,
 with magazine of project in my crown:
 while pyrate printer rob i of my gain,
 and reap the labour harvest of my brain. 

like other man, i walk a common pace,
 nor run through London one continue race;
 but know when, where and what i be to do,
 you will think it be strange, my lord! but yet it be true. 

thrice welcome, sweet tranquillity of mind! 
i now a treasure in contentment find;
 can labour or relax when ever i please,
 and boast I have once enjoy a moment ease;
 of all a moderate man can wish possess,
 but most in such a godlike patron bless. 
beneath the sacred sanction of who name,
 i build my present peace, my future fame. 
