reflection on the prevalence of fashion.

now while the field in vivid green be dress,
 and early flower adorn spring simple vest;
 while bright sun the open landscape warm,
 and nature beauty in each object charm;
 far from the tumult of the worldly crowd,
 from mad extravagance and folly loud,
 here let i sit, and court the muse to tell
 by what attraction, by what magic spell,
 fashion frail chain the heaven-born soul can bind,
 and fix on trifle the delude mind;
 can lead we from the path mild reason teach,
 corrupt our principle, debase our thought;
 and render man, for noble view design,
 to all creation boundless glory blind. 
the son of earth in emulation vie
 to gain applause, to draw the public eye,
 and to become, pursue different rule,
 the praise and envy of surround fool. 
to few, alas! the indulgent hand of heaven
 have dazzle wit or deep discernment give:
 to few superior talent be allow,
 to rise sublime above the grovel crowd;
 to view unmoved what mean mortal prize,
 and all ambition glitter toy despise. 
not so the favourite of Fortune train —
 she be the gay, the trivial, and the vain;
 to they profuse the partial goddess pour
 her lavish honour, and her golden store. 
yet shall the happy trifler want a name,
 unnoted in the shine list of fame? 
a name nor wealth nor title can bestow:
 that, and that only, to ourselves we owe. 
convince of this, to gain the envy prize
 each candidate some various method try. 
in rural scene, where peaceful shade delight,
 and flowery meadow fix the wander sight —
 where pebbly stream in wild meander flow,
 and perfume wind over bed of rose blow —
 even there the love of fame mankind inspire,
 and rustic breast with rustic passion fire. 
the esquire feel anguish more than word can tell,
 if other hound in swiftness his excel;
 if other steed, more forward in the race,
 outstrip his courser in the devious chase. 
the country justice, into year decline,
 to more substantial honour turn his mind:
 he glory in his barn with plenty store,
 and the luxuriance of his copious board;
 nor let one care his placid mind molest —
 except some costly dish shall crown another feast. 
the rural Belle, impatient, seek renown
 in some new head-dress just arrive from town;
 think how the wonder neighbourhood will gaze,
 and circle beauty envy while they praise. 
but few the care that fill her artless breast,
 not yet by vice or taint or depress,
 compare to those more courtly bell engage,
 where fashion govern with despotic rage;
 where her fair votary with contempt survey
 the long-lost innocence of former day:
 sever from blush modesty and truth,
 the dear companion of her happy youth,
 no tie can bind, no principle restrain,
 and love and duty plead, but plead in vain. 
yet, of the number who in error tread,
 more be by weakness than by vice mislead —
 and rather act a imitative part,
 than follow the plain dictate of their heart. —
 elect by a grateful people voice,
 more from a sense of duty than from choice,
 to join in senate in the loud debate,
 the good Aurelius leave his love retreat. 
with he the young Hermione he lead —
 Hermione, who rear amid circle shade,
 remote from fashion and remote from strife,
 he choose the partner of his blameless life. 
her cheek disclose the rose soft dye,
 and innocence beam lovely from her eye;
 on her red lip a mild composure charm,
 and perfect symmetry her figure form. 
in this new scene with timid step she move,
 and blush hear when flattery approve;
 the flutter beaux in vain to please she seek —
 her dear Aurelius fill she every thought. 
now envy loud ridicule the fair,
 censure her dress, her manner, and her air;
 and every female, swell with jealous hate,
 condemn what she can never imitate; —
 and, low than the last of womankind,
 to they his taunt the silly coxcomb join,
 who nature form in a capricious mood,
 scorn by the wise, and pity by the good. 
Hermione abash view envy sneer,
 while its rude satire piere her listen ear. 
by nature virtuous, but too weak her sense
 to brave the attack of dark malevolence,
 she leave reluctant all she fond love,
 and follow what her judgement disapprove;
 with folly first, with vice next comply,
 and sacrifice her feeling to her pride. 
now, first in. dissipation giddy train,
 behold Hermione in triumph reign:
 no more she rise with the morning ray,
 but waste in card the night — in sleep the day;
 her pallid cheek, its native colour flee,
 assume the glow of artificial red;
 her charm decay, her wonted health be fly,
 her former rectitude for ever go. 
in vain with anxious care Aurelius try
 to clear the mist of error from her eye. 
at length he lead she to the rural plain,
 where once contentment bless his wide domain:
 but now no more contentment will attend,
 no more from care corrosive sting defend;
 his change Hermione he fond mourn,
 who alter heart no tenderness return;
 till, long between contend passion toss,
 his fortune sink, his peace entire lose,
 he yield to the welcome stroke of death,
 and sigh Hermione! with late breath. 
o sad vicissitude of human state! 
daughter of virtue, with vain pride elate,
 condemn not here a sister levity;
 but tremble think, such you, perhaps, may be. —
 yet, if over this sad tale we drop a tear,
 what mortal, say, from laughter can forbear,
 when he behold emilius awkward grace,
 his figure mean, and consequential face,
 and view his mind — receptacle for all
 the folly that to wretched mortal fall? 
breed in the city to a humble fate,
 the sober youth behind his counter sit:
 he study be of stock the rise and fall,
 and his grand festival a lord mayor ball. 
when fortune, careful of the fool and knave,
 a large estate beyond his wish give,
 he hastes to figure where the great resort,
 and quit the exchange to bustle through the court. 
to ape the courtly fop in vain he try;
 now with lord trinket in his carriage vie;
 now game, now drink, now swear — and all for fame,
 since more illustrious blockhead do the same. —
 but hark! what knell, inspire awful fear,
 in break sound thus strike my wound ear? 
that knell it call Olivia to the tomb,
 fall in gay youth, in beauty bright bloom,
 adorn with sentiment and sense refine,
 who only fault be a too feel mind. 
propitious fortune, at her natal hour,
 have add wealth to nature lavish dower:
 the rich hortensio child and only heir,
 she grow and flourish in his guardian care,
 till the please father with delight survey
 his fond hope accomplish in the maid,
 with native grace still by art,
 Agenor seek, and win the virgin heart:
 her sire consent, and Hymen holy band
 soon at the altar join their will hand. 
unhappy fair! she hope the sacred rite
 their heart shall ever with their hand unite,
 her husband still her lover shall remain,
 and death alone dissolve their last chain. 
not so Agenor. breed in fashion school,
 and blind govern by her senseless rule,
 he think affection for a wife disgrace
 the nice refinement of a man of taste. 
in vain mankind with one consent declare
 Olivia fair amid thousand fair:
 blind to her charm, unworthy of her love,
 to mean beauty he affection rove;
 and, seek fancy bliss, his footstep roam
 far from the genuine happiness of home. 
a soft concern, mix with offend pride,
 usurp the breast of his neglect bride,
 to think that he alone unmoved shall view
 those peerless charm which all beside subdue. 
at length her busy thought suggest a scheme
 destructive to her peace and to her fame,
 and make she strive by jealousy to gain
 that fickle heart which scorn a mild chain. 
too soon the story restless scandal spread,
 how fair Olivia, by resentment lead,
 just incense against a faithless spouse,
 have in her turn forget her plight vow. 
Agenor hear the tale; and, wild with rage,
 mistake honour urge he to engage
 his life for she, who his caprice disdain
 while undefiled her character remain. 
why shall on the sad relation dwell? 
a hasty challenge send — he fight, and fell! 
Borne through those street a senseless load of clay,
 where late he wander negligent and gay,
 his alter feature crowd with tear survey. 
but who can paint the anguish and despair
 that rack the bosom of the hapless fair
 who cause his death, when, pierce with many a wound,
 the man she love a breathless corpse she find? 
horror, contrition, grief, at once combine
 to rouse each feeling of her torture mind,
 till, her weak frame unequal to the strife,
 prone on agenor bier she close her wretched life. 
learn hence, you fair, to shun each dangerous art,
 nor even in thought from rectitude depart:
 be still unmoved by jealousy alarm,
 for temper more than wit or beauty charm. 
so, when old age shall spoil each transient grace,
 dim thy bright eye, and wrinkle over thy face —
 steal from thy fade cheek the rose hue,
 and bend that form which now delight the view —
 still chaste affection with unclouded ray
 shall gild the evening of thy late day;
 still powerful virtue shall victorious prove,
 and fix, where beauty fail, a husband love. —
 Silius affect a absent careless mien,
 nothing by he be hear, and nothing see;
 or, shall his eye a play or ball explore,
 he listless yawn, and wish it be over. —
 his native England Lycidas disdain,
 and quit her oaken grove for gallia plain:
 foreign his accent, foreign be his air,
 his dress resplendent with parisian glare;
 and, while his apish trick contempt inspire,
 he vain think the wonder crowd admire. —
 nothing so much delight camillo mind,
 as to be think a man of taste refine;
 on picture, statue, poem to decide,
 and by his nod the son of genius guide. 
unnumbered artists-crowd his plenteous board,
 and needy science court the wealthy lord:
 there, like the mimic hero of the stage,
 he act Mæcenas to the present age,
 while starve wit, amid their venal lay,
 pay for substantial dinner empty praise. —
 but these be trifle fault, and less proceed
 from heart defective than defective head. 
but dark shade remain, who force to paint,
 language be cold, idea be but faint;
 crime at which reason start with holy fear,
 to which even pity scarce can grant a tear. 
behold the reptile man, who impious pride
 dare all that be sacred, all that be just, deride;
 dare the existence of that god deny,
 who be, and be, through all eternity;
 who power, resistless, to destroy or save,
 to man, ungrateful man, a being give;
 who mercy doom his only son to bleed,
 our sinful race from path of death to lead;
 who, omnipresent, all our guilt can view,
 and pity yet withhold the vengeance due! 
but let i hope that few thus mad dare
 wage with omnipotence a desperate war. 
most man acknowledge and revere a god,
 and dread at interval his chasten rod:
 but scarce the tear of soft contrition spring,
 when, bear on dissipation airy wing,
 and amid the world ensnare pleasure toss,
 too oft the thoughtless wanderer be lose. 
child of error, then, a moment stay,
 nor scorn to listen to my artless lay,
 which seek no recompense, but to impart
 a ray of truth to the bewilder heart. 
yet think a hour shall come, nor far that hour,
 when death dread horror shall each sense overpower;
 when you shall ask in vain a little time,
 in vain lament the error of your prime;
 with terror view your near approach end,
 and helpless, hopeless to the grave descend. 
o then reform, while haply yet you can,
 while providence allow a lengthen span,
 nor to a future time the change delay. 
perhaps your life may finish with this day;
 the present day, the present hour alone,
 be all, weak mortal, thou can call thy own. 
then seize this fleet moment to deplore
 thy sin, resolve to yield to sin no more;
 regard life dark hour, its scene most gay,
 as shower and sunbeam of a April day;
 and fix thy mind on that sublime abode,
 where soon thy spirit may rejoin its god;
 there, mix with angel and archangel, raise
 the hymn of glory to thy maker praise;
 thy view over vast, unmeasured space extend,
 and taste pure joy that know nor change nor end! 
