the consuliad,

a heroic poem.

of war senator, and battle dire,
 of quail uneaten. Muse awake the lyre,
 where C—pb—ll's chimney overlook the square,
 and n—t—n's future prospect hang in air;
 where counsellor dispute, and cocker match,
 and caledonian earl in concert scratch;
 a group of hero, occupy the round,
 long in the roll of infamy renowned. 
circle the table all in silence sit,
 now tear bloody lean, now champ fat;
 now pick ortolan, and chicken slay,
 to form the whimsy of a à-la-reine:
 now storm castle of the new taste,
 and grant article to fort of paste;
 now swallow bitter draught of prussian beer;
 now suck tallow of salubrious deer. 
the god of cabinet and senate see
 his son, like ass, to one centre draw. 

inflate discord hear, and leave her cell,
 with all the horror of her native hell:
 she, on the soar wing of genius flee,
 and wave the pen of Junius round her head. 
beneath the table, veil from sight, she spring,
 and sit astride on noisy twitcher tongue:
 twitcher, superior to the venal pack
 of bloomsbury notorious monarch, jack:
 twitcher, a rot branch of mighty stock,
 who interest wind his conscience as his clock:
 who attribute detestable, have long
 be evident, and infamous in song. 
a toast demand: Madoc swift arise. 
pactolian gravy trickle down his clothes:
 his sanguine fork a murder pigeon press,
 his knife with deep incision seek the breast. 
upon his lip the quiver accent hang,
 and too much expedition chain his tongue. 
when thus he sputter: "all the glass fill,
 and toast the great Pendragon of the hill:
 mab-uth owein, a long train of king,
 from who the royal blood of Madoc spring. 
Madoc, undoubted of Arthur race,
 you see the mighty monarch in his face:
 Madoc, in bagnios and in court adore,
 demand this proper homage of the board." 
 "monarch!" say twitcher, set down his beer:
 he muscle wreath a contemptuous sneer;
 "monarch! of molehill, oyster-bed, a rock,
 these be the grafter of your royal stock
 my pony scrub can sire more valiant trace —"
 the mangle pigeon thunder on his face;
 his open mouth the melt butter fill,
 and drop from his nose and chin distil. 
furious he start, rage his bosom warm;
 loud as his lordship morning dun he storm. 
 "thou vulgar imitator of the great,
 grow wanton with the excrement of state:
 this to thy head notorious twitcher send." 
his shadow body to the table bend:
 his strain arm uprear a loin of veal,
 in these degenerate day, for three a meal:
 in ancient time, as various writer say,
 a alderman or priest, eat three a day. 
with godlike strength, the grin twitcher ply,
 his stretch muscle and the mountain fly. 
swift, as a cloud that shadow over the plain,
 it fly and scatter drop of oily rain. 
in opposition to extend knife,
 on royal madoc spread chest it drive:
 senseless he fall upon the sandy ground,
 press with the steamy load that ooze around. 
and now confusion spread her ghastly plume,
 and faction separate the noisy room. 
balluntun, exercise in every vice
 that open to a courtier paradise,
 with d—s—n trammel, scruple not to draw
 injustice up the rocky hill of law:
 from who humanity the laurel spring,
 which will in george's-field be ever young. 
the vile balluntun, start from his chair,
 to fortune thus address his private prayer:
 "goddess of fate rotundity, assist
 with thought-winged victory my untried fist:
 if i the grin twitcher overturn,
 six russian frigate at thy shrine shall burn;
 nine rioter shall bleed beneath thy foot;
 and hang cutter decorate each street." 
the goddess smile, or rather smooth her frown,
 and shake the triple feather of her crown:
 instil a private pension in his soul. 
with rage inspire, he seize a Gallic roll:
 he burst arm the missive weapon throw,
 high over his rival head it whistle slay,
 curraras, for his Jewish soul renowned,
 receive it on his ear and kiss the ground. 
curraras, verse in every little art,
 to play the minister or felon part:
 grow hoary in the villainy of state,
 a title make he infamous great. 
a slave to venal slave; a tool to tool:
 the representative to knave and fool. 
but see! commercial bristol genius sit,
 her shield a turtle-shell, her lance a spit. 
see, while her nod alderman be spread,
 in all the branch honour of the head;
 curraras, ever faithful to the cause,
 with beef and venison their attention draw:
 they drink, they eat, then sign the mean address;
 say, can their humble gratitude do less? 
by disappointment vex, balluntun fly;
 red lightning flash in his dance eye. 
firm as his virtue, mighty twitcher stand,
 and elevate for furious fight his hand:
 one point fist, his shadow corps defend
 the other on balluntun eye descend:
 a darkling, shake light his optic view,
 circle with livid tinge red and blue. 
now fire with anguish and inflame by pride,
 he thunder on his adversary side:
 with patter blow prolong the unequal fight;
 twitcher retreat before the man of might. 
but fortune, (or some high power, or god)
 oblique extend forth a sable rod:
 as twitcher retrograde maintain the fray,
 the harden serpent intercept his way:
 he fall, and fall with a lordly air,
 crush into atom the judicial chair. 
curraras, for his Jewish soul renowned,
 arise; but deasen with a sing sound,
 a cloud of discontent overspread his brow;
 revenge in every bloody feature glow. 
around his head a roast gander whirl,
 drop Manilla sauce on his curl:
 swift to the vile balluntun face it fly,
 the burn pepper sparkle in his eye:
 his India waistcoat reek with the oil,
 glow bright red, the glory of the spoil. 

the fight be general; fowl repulse fowl:
 the victor thunder, and the vanquish howl. 
star, garter, all the implement of show,
 that deck the power above, disgrace below. 
nor sword, nor mighty weapon do they draw,
 for all be well acquaint with the law. 
let drap—r to improve his diction fight;
 our hero, like lord George can scold and write. 
Gogmagog early of the jockey club;
 empty as C—br—ke's oratorial tub:
 a rusty link of ministerial chain;
 a live glory of the present reign. 
verse in the art of ammunition bread,
 he wave a red wheat manchet round his head:
 David-ap-Howel, furious, wild, and young,
 from the same line as royal Madoc spring;
 occur, the object of his burst ire,
 and on his nose receive the weapon dire:
 a double river of congeal blood,
 overflow his garter with a purple flood. 
mad as a bull by dare mastiff tear,
 when lady scream and greasy butcher roar:
 mad as b—rg—e when grope through the park,
 he kiss his own dear lady in the dark. 
the lineal representative of king,
 a carve weapon seize, and up he spring:
 a weapon long in cruel murder stain,
 for mangle captive carcase ordain. 
but fortune, providence, or what you will,
 to lay the rise scene of horror still;
 in Fero person seize a shine pot,
 where bubble scrip, and contract flame hot:
 in the fierce cambrian breech drain it dry,
 the chapel totter with the shriek cry,
 loud as the mob reiterate yell,
 when Sawny rise, as mighty Chatham fall. 

Flaccus the glory of a masquerade;
 who every action be of trifle make:
 at graft—n's well-stored table ever find;
 like g—n too for every vice renowned. 
G—n to who immortal sense we owe,
 the blood which will from civil discord flow:
 who swell each grievance, lengthen every tax,
 blind to the ripen vengeance of the axe. 
Flaccus, they outhful, degagée and gay,
 with eye of pity, see the dreary fray:
 amid the greasy horror of the fight,
 he tremble for his suit of virgin white. 
fond of his eloquence, and easy flow
 of talk verbose who meaning none can know:
 he mount the table, but through eager haste,
 his foot upon a smoke court-pie place:
 the burn liquid penetrate his shoe,
 swift from the rostrum the declaimer fly,
 but learned heroic he disdain,
 to spoil his pretty counteance with strain. 
remount on the table, now he stand,
 wave his high powder'd-head and ruffle hand. 
 "friend! let this clang of hostile fury cease,
 ill it become the plenipo of peace:
 shall olio, from internal battle dress,
 like bullet outward perforate the breast;
 shall javelin bottle blood aetherial spill;
 shall luscious turtle without surfeit kill." 
more have he say: when from doglostock fling,
 a custard pudding tremble on his tongue:
 and, ah! misfortune seldom come alone,
 great twitcher rise seize a polish bone;
 upon his breast the oily weapon clang;
 headlong he fall, propel by thicken bang. 
the prince of trimmer, for his magic fame,
 quarlendorgongos by infernal name:
 by mortal alavat in common style;
 nurse in a furnace, Nox and neptune child:
 burst with rage, a weighty bottle catch,
 with crimson blood and vital spirit fraught,
 to doxo head the gurgle woe he send;
 doxo make mighty in his mighty friend. 
upon his front the stubborn vessel sound,
 back from his hard front the bottle bound:
 he fall. the royal Madoc rise up,
 repose he weary, on his painful crup:
 the head of doxo, first project down,
 thunder upon the kingly cambrian crown:
 the sanguine tumour swell; again he fall;
 on his broad chest the bulky doxo sprawl. 
Tyro the sage, the sensible, the strong,
 as yet unnoticed in the muse-taught song. 
Tyro, for nerocmancy far renowned,
 a great adept than Agrippa sound;
 oft as his phantom reason intervene,
 de viris pension, the defaulter screen;
 another c—rt—t remain in Cl—;
 in fl—the—r fifty jefferies appear,
 Tyro stand neuter, till the champion tire,
 in languid attitude a truce desire,
 long be the bloody fight; confusion dire
 have hide some circumstance from the lyre:
 suffice it, that each hero kiss the ground,
 tyro except for old law renowned;
 who stretch his authoritative hand,
 loud thus issue forth his dread command. 
 "peace, wrangle senator, and placeman, peace,
 in the king name, let hostile vengeance cease!" 
aghast the champion hear the furious sound,
 the fall unmolested leave the ground. 
 "what fury, noble, occupy your breast;
 what patriot spirit have your mind possess. 
nor honorary gift, nor pension, please,
 Sav, be you Covent-Garden patentee! 
how? Wist you not what ancient sage say,
 the council quarrel, and the poor have bread. 
see this court-pie with twenty-thousand dress;
 be every thought of enmity at rest:
 divide it and be friend again," he say:
 the council god return; and discord flee. 
