the apology.

address to the critical reviewer.

laugh not the heart, when giant, big with pride,
 assume the pompous port, the martial stride;
 over arm herculean heave the enormous shield,
 vast as a weaver beam the javelin wield;
 with the loud voice of thunder Jove defy,
 and dare to single combat — what? — a fly. 

and laugh we less, when giant name, which shine
 establish as it be by right divine;
 critic who every captive art adore,
 to who glad science pour forth all her store;
 who high in letter reputation sit,
 and hold, Astraea like, the scale of wit;
 with partial rage rush forth, — oh! shame to tell! —
 to crush a bard just burst from the shell? 

great be his peril in this stormy time
 who rash venture on a sea of rhime. 
around vast surge roll, wind envious blow,
 and jealous rock and quicksand lurk below. 
great his foe he dread, but more his friend;
 he hurt i most who lavish commend. 

look through the world — in every other trade
 the same employment cause of kindness make;
 at least appearance of good will create;
 and every fool puff off the fool he hate:
 cobbler with cobbler smoke away the night,
 and in the common cause even player unite. 
author, alone, with more than savage rage,
 unnatural war with brother author wage. 
the pride of nature will as soon admit
 competitor in empire as in wit. 
onward they rush at fame imperious call,
 and, less than great, will not be at all. 

smite with the love of honour, — or the penny,
 overrun with wit, and destitute of sense,
 if any novice in the rhyme trade,
 with lawless pen the realm of verse invade;
 forth from the court, where sceptre sage sit,
 abuse with praise, and flatter into wit;
 where in lethargic majesty they reign,
 and what they win by dullness still maintain;
 legion of factious author throng at once;
 fool beckon fool, and dunce awaken dunce. 
to h—m—lt—n's the ready lie repair; —
 never be lie make which be not welcome there. —
 thence, on maturer judgement anvil wrought,
 the polish falsehood into public bring. 
quick circulate slander mirth afford,
 and reputation bleed in every word. 

a critic be of old a glorious name,
 who sanction hand merit up to fame:
 beauty as well as fault he bring to view:
 he judgement great, and great his candour too. 
no servile rule draw sickly taste aside;
 secure he walk, for nature be his guide. 
but now, oh strange reverse! our critic bawl
 in praise of candour with a heart of Gall. 
conscious of guilt, and fearful of the light,
 they lurk enshroud in the veil of night:
 safe from detraction, seize the unwary prey,
 and stab, like bravo, all who come that way. 

when first my muse, perhaps more bold than wise,
 bad the rude trifle into light arise,
 little she think such tempest will ensue,
 less, that those tempest will be raise by you. 
the thunder fury rend the tower oak,
 rosciad, like shrub, may escape the fatal stroke. 
vain thought! a critic fury know no bound;
 drawcansir like, he deal destruction round;
 nor can we hope he will a stranger spare
 who give no quarter to his friend Voltaire. 

unhappy genius! place, by partial fate,
 with a free spirit in a slavish state;
 where the reluctant muse, oppress by king,
 or droop in silence, or in fetter sing. 
in vain thy dauntless fortitude have bear
 the bigot furious zeal, and tyrant scorn. 
why do thou safe from homebred danger steer? 
reserve to perish more ignoble here. 
thus, when the Julian tyrant pride to swell
 Rome with her Pompey at pharsalia fall,
 the vanquish chief escape from caesar hand
 to die by ruffian in a foreign land. 

how can these self-elected monarch raise
 so large a empire on so small a base? 
in what retreat, inglorious and unknown,
 do genius sleep when dullness seize the throne? 
whence, absolute now grow, and free from awe,
 she to the subject world dispense law. 
without her licence, not a letter stir;
 and all the captive criss cross row be she. 
the stagyrite, who rule from nature draw,
 opinion give, but give his reason too. 
our great dictator take a short way —
 who shall dispute what the reviewer say? 
their word be sufficient; and to ask a reason,
 in such a state as they, be downright treason. 
true judgement, now, with they alone can dwell;
 like church of Rome they be grow infallible. 
dull superstitious reader they deceive,
 who pin their easy faith on critic sleeve,
 and, know nothing, every thing believe! 
but why repine we, that these puny elf
 shoot into giant? — we may thank ourselves. 
fool that we be, like israel fool of yore,
 the calf ourselves have fashion we adore. 
but let true reason once resume her reign,
 this god shall dwindle to a calf again. 

found on art which shun the face of day,
 by the same art they still maintain their sway. 
wrap in mysterious secrecy they rise,
 and, as they be unknown, be safe and wise. 
at whomsoever aim, however severe
 the envenom slander fly, no name appear. 
prudence forbid that step. — then all may know,
 and on more equal term engage the foe. 
but now, what Quixote of the age will care
 to wage a war with dirt, and fight with air? 
by interest join, the expert confederate stand,
 and play the game into each other hand. 
the vile abuse, in turn by all deny,
 be bandy up and down from side to side:
 it fly — hey! — presto! — like a juggler ball,
 until it belong to nobody at all. 

all man and thing they know, themselves unknown,
 and publish every name — except their own. 
nor think this strange — secure from vulgar eye
 the nameless author pass in disguise. 
but veteran critic be not so deceive,
 if veteran critic be to be believe. 
once see they know a author evermore,
 nay swear to hand they never see before. 
thus in the rosciad, beyond chance or doubt,
 they, by the write, find the writer out. 
 "that be lloyd — his manner there you plain trace,
"and all the actor stare you in the face. 
 "by Colman that be write. — on my life,
"the strong symptom of the jealous wife. 
 "that little disingenuous piece of spite,
"Churchill, a wretch unknown, perhaps may write. "
how do it make judicious reader smile,
 when author be detect by their stile:
 though every one who know this author, know
 he shift his stile much often than his clothes? 

whence can arise this mighty critic spleen,
 the muse a trifler, and her theme so mean? 
what have i do, that angry heaven shall send
 the bittere foe, where most i wish a friend? 
oft have my tongue be wanton at thy name,
 and hail the honour of thy matchless fame. 
for i let hoary Fielding bite the ground
 so noble pickle stand superble bind. 
from livy temple tear the historic crown
 which, with more justice bloom upon thy own. 
compare with thou, be all life-writer dumb,
 but he who write the life of Tommy thumb. 
who ever read the regicide but swear
 the author write as man never write before? 
other for plot and underplot may call,
 here be the right method — have no plot at all. 
who can so often in his cause engage,
 the tiny pathos of the grecian stage,
 while horror rise, and tear spontaneous flow
 at tragic ha! and no less tragic oh!? 
his nervous weakness all to praise agree;
 and then, for sweetness, who so sweet as he? 
too big for utterance when sorrow swell
 the too big sorrow flow tear must tell:
 but when those flow tear shall cease to flow,
 why, — then the voice must speak again you know. 

rude and unskilful in the poet trade,
 i keep no naiad by i ready-made;
 never do i colour high in air advance,
 tear from the bleed foppery of France:
 no flimsy linsey-woolsey scene i write
 with patch here and there like Joseph coat. 
i humble theme befit: secure, for i,
 let playwright smuggle nonsense duty free:
 secure, for i, you lamb, you lambkin bind,
 and frisk and frolic over the fairy ground:
 secure, for i, thou pretty little fawn
 lick sylvia hand, and crop the flowery lawn:
 uncensured let the gentle breeze rove,
 through the green umbrage of the enchant grove:
 secure, for i, let foppish nature smile,
 and play the coxcomb in the desert isle. 

the stage i choose — a subject fair and free —
 it be you — it be mine — it be public property. 
all common exhibition open lie
 for praise or censure to the common eye. 
hence be a thousand hackney-writer feed;
 hence monthly critic earn their daily bread. 
this be a general tax which all must pay,
 from those who scribble, down to those who play. 
actor, a venal crew, receive support
 from public bounty, for the public sport. 
to clap or hiss, all have a equal claim,
 the cobbler and his lordship right the same. 
all join for their subsistence; all expect
 free leave to praise their worth, their fault correct. 
when active pickle Smithfield stage ascend,
 the three day wonder of his laugh friend;
 each, or as judgement, or as fancy guide,
 the lively witling praise or deride. 
and where be the mighty difference, tell i where,
 betwixt a merry Andrew and a player? 

the stroll tribe, a despicable race,
 like wander Arabs, shift from place to place. 
vagrant by law, to justice open lay,
 they tremble, of the beadle lash afraid,
 and fawn cringe, for wretched mean of life,
 to madam mayoress or his worship wife. 

the mighty monarch, in theatric sack,
 carry his whole regalia at his back;
 his royal consort head the female band,
 and lead the heir-apparent in her hand;
 the panniered ass creep on with conscious pride,
 bear a future prince on either side. 
no choice musician in this troop be find
 to varnish nonsense with the charm of sound;
 no sword, no dagger, not one poison bowl;
 no lightning flash here, no thunder roll;
 no guard to swell the monarch train be show;
 the monarch here must be a host alone. 
no solemn pomp, no slow procession here;
 no ammon entry, and not juliet bier. 

by need compel to prostitute his art,
 the vary actor fly from part to part;
 and, strange disgrace to all theatric pride,
 his character be shift with his side. 
question and answer he by turn must be,
 like that small wit in modern tragedy;
 who, to support his fame, — or fill his purse, —
 still pilfer wretched plan, and make they worse;
 like gypsy, least the steal brat be know,
 deface first, then claim for his own. 
in shabby state they strut, and tatter robe;
 the scene a blanket, and a barn the globe. 
no high conceit their moderate wish raise,
 content with humble profit, humble praise. 
let dowdy simper, and let bumpkin stare,
 the stroll pageant hero tread in air:
 please for his hour he to mankind give law,
 and snore the next out on a truss of straw. 

but if kind fortune, who we sometime know
 can take a hero from a puppetshew,
 in mood propitious shall she favourite call,
 on royal stage in royal pomp to bawl,
 forgetful of himself he rear the head,
 and scorn the dunghill where he first be breed:
 converse now with well-dressed king and queen,
 with god and goddess behind the scene,
 he sweat beneath the terror-nodding plume,
 teach by mock honour real pride to assume. 
on this great stage the world, no monarch ever
 be half so haughty as a monarch-player. 

do it more move our anger or our mirth
 to see these thing, the low son of earth,
 presume, with self-sufficient knowledge grace,
 to rule in letter and preside in taste. 
the town decision they no more admit,
 themselves alone the arbiter of wit;
 and scorn the jurisdiction of that court
 to which they owe their being and support. 
actor, like monk of old, now sacred grow,
 must be attack by no fool but their own. 

let the vain tyrant sit amid his guard,
 his puny green-room wit and venal bard,
 who mean tremble at the puppet frown,
 and, for a playhouse freedom lose their own;
 in spite of new-made law, and new-made king,
 the free-born muse with liberal spirit sing,
 bow down, you slave; before these idol fall;
 let genius stoop to they who have none all;
 never will i flatter, cringe, or bend the knee
 to those who, slave to all, be slave to i. 

actor, as actor, be a lawful game;
 the poet right; and who shall bar his claim? 
and, if overween of their little skill,
 when they have leave the stage they be actor still;
 if to the subject world they still give law,
 with paper crown, and sceptre make of straw;
 if they in cellar or in garret roar,
 and king one night, be king for evermore;
 shall not bold truth, even there, pursue her theme,
 and wake the coxcomb from his golden dream? 
or if, well worthy of a better fate,
 they rise superior to their present state;
 if, with each social virtue grace, they blend
 the gay companion and the faithful friend;
 if they, like Pritchard, join in private life
 the tender parent and the virtuous wife;
 shall not our verse their praise with pleasure speak,
 though mimic bark and envy split her cheek? 
no honest worth beneath the muse praise;
 no greatness can above her censure raise:
 station and wealth, to she, be trifle thing;
 she stoop to actor, and she soar to king. 

be there a man, in vice and folly breed,
 to sense of honour as to virtue dead;
 who tie nor human, nor divine, can bind;
 alien to god, and foe to all mankind;
 who spare no character; who every word,
 bitter as gall, and sharp than the sword,
 cut to the quick; who thought with rancour swell:
 who tongue, on earth, perform the work of hell? 
if there be such a monster, the review
 shall find he hold forth against abuse. 
 "attack profession! — it be a deadly breach! —
"the christian law another lesson teach: —
 "unto the end shall charity endure,
"and candour hide those fault it can cure. "
thus candour maxim flow from rancour throat,
 as devil, to serve their purpose, scripture quote. 

the muse office be by heaven design,
 to please, improve, instruct, reform mankind;
 to make deject virtue noble rise
 above the tower pitch of splendid vice;
 to make pale vice, abash, her head hang down,
 and tremble crouch at virtue awful frown. 
now arm with wrath, she bid eternal shame;
 with strict justice brand the villain name:
 now in the mild garb of ridicule
 she sport, and please while she wound the fool. 
her shape be often vary; but her aim,
 to prop the cause of virtue, still the same. 
in praise of mercy let the guilty bawl,
 when vice and folly for correction call;
 silence the mark of weakness just bear,
 and be partaker of the crime it spare. 

but if the muse, too cruel in her mirth,
 with harsh reflexion wound the man of worth;
 if wanton she deviate from her plan,
 and quit the actor to expose the man;
 ashamed, she mark that passage with a blot,
 and hate the line where candour be forget. 

but what be candour, what be humour vein,
 though judgement join to consecrate the strain,
 if curious number will not aid afford,
 nor choice music play in every word? 
verse must run, to charm a modern ear,
 from all harsh, rugged interruption clear:
 soft let they breathe, as zephyr balmy breeze;
 smooth let their current flow as summer sea;
 perfect then only deem when they dispense
 a happy tuneful vacancy of sense. 
italian father thus, with barbarous rage,
 fit helpless infant for the squeak stage;
 deaf to the call of pity, nature wound,
 and mangle vigour for the sake of sound. 
henceforth farewell then, feverish thirst of fame;
 farewell the long for a poet name;
 perish my muse; — a wish above all severe
 to he who ever hold the muse dear,
 if ever her labour weaken to refine
 the generous roughness of a nervous line. 

other affect the stiff and swell phrase;
 their muse must walk in stilt and strut in stay:
 the sense they murder, and the word transpose,
 lest poetry approach too near to prose. 
see, torture reason how they pare and trim,
 and, like Procrustes, stretch or lop the limb. 

Waller, who praise succeed bard rehearse,
 parent of harmony in english verse,
 who tuneful muse in sweet accent flow,
 in couplet first teach straggle sense to close. 

in polish number, and majestic sound,
 where shall thy rival, pope, be ever find? 
but while each line with equal beauty flow,
 even excellence, unvaried, tedious grow. 
nature, through all her work, in great degree,
 borrow a blessing from variety. 
music itself her needful aid require
 to rouse the soul, and wake our die fire. 
still in one key, the nightingale will tease:
 still in one key, not brent will always please. 

here let i bend, great Dryden, at thy shrine,
 thou dear name to all the tuneful nine. 
what if some dull line in cold order creep,
 and with his theme the poet seem to sleep? 
still when his subject rise proud to view,
 with equal strength the poet rise too. 
with strong invention, noble vigour fraught,
 think still spring up and rise out of thought;
 number, ennoble number in their course,
 in vary sweetness flow, in vary force;
 the power of genius and of judgement join,
 and the whole art of poetry be thy. 

but what be number, what be bard to i,
 forbid to tread the path of poesy? 
 "a sacred muse shall consecrate her pen;
"priest must not hear nor see like other man;
 "far high theme shall she ambition claim;
"behold where Sternhold point the way to fame. "

while, with mistaken zeal, dull bigot burn,
 let reason for a moment take she turn. 
when coffee-sages hold discourse with king,
 and blind walk in paper leading-string,
 what if a man delight to pass his time
 in spin reason into harmless rhime;
 or sometime bold venture to the play? 
say, where be the crime? — great man of prudence, say? 
no two on earth in one thing can agree,
 all have some darling singularity. 
woman and man, as well as girl and boy,
 in gewgaws take delight, and sigh for toy. 
your sceptre, and your crown, and such like thing,
 be but a better kind of toy for king. 
in thing indifferent, reason bid we choose,
 whether the whim's a monkey or a Muse. 

what the grave trifler on this busy scene,
 when they make use of this word reason, mean,
 i know not; but, accord to my plan,
 it be lord-cheif-justice in the court of man,
 equal form to rule in age and youth,
 the friend of virtue and the guide to truth. 
to she i bow, who sacred power i feel;
 to her decision make my last appeal;
 condemn by she, applaud world, in vain,
 shall tempt i to resume the pen again:
 by her absolve, my course i will still pursue:
 if reason for i, god be for i too. 
