write for a gentlewoman in distress. to her grace Adelida, Dutchess of Shrewsbury.

may i inquire the reason of my fate,
 or with my maker dare expostulate;
 do i, in prosperous day, despise the poor,
 or drive the friendless stranger from my door? 
be not my soul pour out for the distress? 
do i not vindicate the poor oppress? 
do not the orphan cry with i prevail? 
do i not weep the woe i can not heal? 
why then, thou gracious, thou all-powerful god,
 why do i feel the oppressor iron rod? 
why thus the scorner cruel taunt endure,
 who base fret the wound, they will not cure? 
o thou, who mercy do to all extend,
 say, shall my sorrow never, never, end? 
let not my tear for ever, fruitless, flow;
 commiserate a wretch, overwhelm with woe;
 no long let distress my bosom tear:
 o shield i from the horror of despair! 

forgive i, madam, that i thus impart
 the throb, the anguish, of a break heart. 
oft, when my weary eye can weep no more,
 to sooth my woe, i read your letter over. 
goodness, and wit, and humour, there i find;
 and view with joy those picture of your mind;
 with pleasure on the love resemblance gaze,
 till peaceful slumber on my eye-lid seize. 
then, then, imagination glad my sight
 with transient image of past delight;
 my ache heart of every care beguile;
 then TALBOT live, and Adelida smile. 

delightful form! why will you fleet away,
 and leave i to the terror of the day? 
in vain from reason i expect relief;
 for sad reflection double every grief. 
some of my friend in death cold arm i see;
 other, though, live, yet be dead to i? 
of friend, and child both, i be bereave,
 and soon must lose the only bless leave;
 a husband form for tenderness and truth,
 the love, the kind companion of my youth;
 with he, through various storm of fate i pass;
 relentless fate! — and must we part at last? 
o king of terror, i invoke thy power;
 oh! stand between i and that dreadful hour;
 from that sad hour thy wretched suppliant save;
 oh! shield i from it! — hide i in the grave! 
