Written for a Gentlewoman in Distress. To her Grace Adelida, Dutchess of Shrewsbury.

Might I inquire the Reasons of my Fate,
 Or with my Maker dare expostulate;
 Did I, in prosp'rous Days, despise the Poor,
 Or drive the friendless Stranger from my Door? 
Was not my Soul pour'd out for the Distress'd? 
Did I not vindicate the Poor oppress'd? 
Did not the Orphan's Cry with me prevail? 
Did I not weep the Woes I could not heal? 
Why then, Thou gracious, Thou all-pow'rful God,
 Why do I feel th' Oppressor's Iron Rod? 
Why thus the Scorners cruel Taunts endure,
 Who basely fret the Wounds, they will not cure? 
O Thou, whose Mercy does to All extend,
 Say, shall my Sorrows never, never, end? 
Let not my Tears for ever, fruitless, flow;
 Commiserate a Wretch, o'erwhelm'd with Woe;
 No longer let Distress my Bosom tear:
 O shield me from the Horrors of Despair! 

Forgive me, Madam, that I thus impart
 The Throbs, the Anguish, of a breaking Heart. 
Oft, when my weary'd Eyes can weep no more,
 To sooth my Woes, I read your Letters o'er. 
Goodness, and Wit, and Humour, there I find;
 And view with Joy those Pictures of your Mind;
 With Pleasure on the lov'd Resemblance gaze,
 Till peaceful Slumbers on my Eye-lids seize. 
Then, then, Imagination glads my Sight
 With transient Images of past Delight;
 My aking Heart of ev'ry Care beguiles;
 Then Talbot lives, and Adelida smiles. 

Delightful Forms! why will you fleet away,
 And leave me to the Terrors of the Day? 
In vain from Reason I expect Relief;
 For sad Reflection doubles ev'ry Grief. 
Some of my Friends in Death's cold Arms I see;
 Others, tho, living, yet are dead to me? 
Of Friends, and Children both, I am bereft,
 And soon must lose the only Blessing left;
 A Husband form'd for Tenderness and Truth,
 The lov'd, the kind Companion of my Youth;
 With him, thro' various Storms of Fate I pass'd;
 Relentless Fate! — And must we part at last? 
O King of Terrors, I invoke thy Pow'r;
 Oh! stand between me and that dreadful Hour;
 From that sad Hour thy wretched Suppliant save;
 Oh! shield me from it! — Hide me in the Grave! 
