a vision.

methinks a boundless plain entranced i view,
 beyond what wake eye can ever scan,
 with thousand and ten thousand flock bestrew,
 emblem, i soon descry, of fall man. 

through tangle wild and crooked way with speed
 number i see on number heedless run,
 yet oft they stop to crop each poisonous weed,
 that show it be gaudy colour to the sun. 

with grief i mark their fleece tear and rend,
 as through the bramble eager they rush,
 some, on their own and other ruin bend,
 turn round enrage, and at each other push. 

the young their fold and fertile vale forsake,
 and venturous climb the wild and craggy rock,
 but soon the wolf the straggle lamb overtake,
 who rash dare to leave the parent flock. 

a general bleat now assail my ear
 in tone expressive of the deep woe;
 "alas!" i cry, "be there no shepherd near,
" no guide the strait, the even way to show? " 

when turn to the east my inquire eye,
 (with double strength it be visual power renew)
 the plain, the beat path i do espy
 though verdant vale with guide and fold bestrew. 

 "ah, wretched sheep," lament then i cry,
 "why leave you thus your fold and foster guide? 
undo you be, and, lose by your own pride,
 you shun those help which bounteous heaven provide." 

but oh! how can my feeble verse portray
 the glorious vision, which i then survey,
 when all resplendent as the blaze of day,
 the shepherd come in majesty array? 

such heavenly light refulgent beam around,
 swift over the wide expanse i see it spread,
 such word benignant in my ear do sound,
 as cheere the living and revive the dead. 

methinks all nature seem to bloom anew,
 the barren desert blossom as the rose,
 the parch wilderness appear to view
 as pasture green, where live water flow. 

there at his soothe call, and safe from harm,
 with tender care his flock the shepherd feed,
 the feeble lamb he gather with his arm,
 and gentle those that be with young he lead. 

obedient to the heavenly shepherd call,
 gasp with thirst i haste to the stream,
 there in his presence on my knee i fall,
 then wake, and start from my enrapture dream. 
