ode on the poetical character.

by the same.

as once, if not with light regard,
 i read aright that gifted bard,
 (he who school above the rest
 his lovely elfin queen have bless)
 one, only one, unrivaled fair
 may hope the magic girdle wear,
 at solemn turney hang on high,
 the wish of each love-darting eye. 

lo! to each other nymp in turn apply,
 as if, in air unseen, some hover hand,
 some chaste and angel-friend to virgin fame,
 with whisper spell have burst the start band,
 it leave unblest her loathe dishonour side;
 happy, hopeless fair, if never
 her baffle hand with vain endeavour
 have touch that fatal zone to she deny! 
young fancy thus, to i divine name,
 to who, prepare and bathe in heaven,
 the c of ample power be give:
 to few the god like gift assignt,
 to gird their bless prophetic loin,
 and gaze her vision wild, and feel unmixed her flame. 
the band, as fairy legend say,
 be weave on that create day,
 when he, who call with thought to birth
 yond tent sky, this laugh earth,
 and dress with spring, and forest tall,
 and pour the main engirt all,
 long by the love enthusiast woo,
 himself in some divine mood,
 retire, sit with she alone,
 and place she on his saphire throne,
 the while, the vault shrine around,
 seraphic wire be hear to sound! 
now sublime triumph swell,
 now on love and mercy dwelling;
 and she, from out the veil cloud,
 breathe her magic note aloud:
 and thou, thou rich-haired youth of morn,
 and all thy subject life be bear! 
the dangerous passion keep aloof,
 far from the saint grow woof:
 but near it sit ecstatic wonder,
 listen the deep applaud thunder:
 and truth, in sunny vest array,
 by who the tarsol eye be make:
 all the shadowy tribe of mind,
 in braid dance their murmur join,
 and all the bright uncounted power,
 who feed on heaven ambrosial flower. 
where be the bard, who soul can now
 its high presume hope avow? 
where he who think, with rapture blind,
 this hallow work for he design? 

high on some cliff, to heaven up-piled,
 of rude access, of prospect wild,
 where, tangle round the jealous steep,
 strange shade overbrow the valley deep,
 and holy genii guard the rock,
 its gloom embrown, its spring unlock,
 while on its rich ambitious head,
 an Eden, like his own, lie spread. 
i view that oak, the fancy glade among,
 by which as Milton lie, his evening ear,
 from many a cloud that drop ethereal dew,
 nigh sphere in heaven its native strain can hear:
 on which that ancient trump he reach be hang;
 thither of his glory greeting,
 from Waller myrtle shade retreat,
 with many a vow from hope aspire tongue,
 my tremble foot his guide step pursue;
 in vain — such bliss to one alone,
 of all the son of soul be know,
 and heaven, and fancy, kindred power,
 have now overturn the inspire bower,
 or curtained close such scene from every future view. 
