ode to night.

the busy care of day be do;
in yonder western cloud the sun
now set, in other world to rise,
and glad with night the nether sky.
with linger pace the part day retire,
and slow leave the mountain top, and gild spire.

yond azure cloud, enrobe with white,
still shoot a gleam of faint light:
at length descend a brown shade;
at length the glimmer object fade:
until all submit to night impartial reign,
and undistinguished darkness cover all the plain.

no more the ivy-crowned oak
resound beneath the woodman stroke.
now silence hold her solemn sway;
mute be each bush, and every spray:
nought but the sound of murmur rill be hear,
or from the moulder tower, night solitary bird.

hail sacred hour of peaceful rest!
of power to charm the trouble breast!
by thou the captive slave obtain
short respite from his gall pain;
nor sigh for liberty, nor native soil;
but for a while forget his chain, and sultry toil.

no horror have thou in thy train,
no scorpion lash, no clank chain.
when the pale murderer round he spy
a thousand grisly form arise,
when shriek and groan arouse his palsy fear,
it be guilt alarm his soul, and conscience wound his ear.

the village swain who Phillis charm,
who breast the tender passion warm,
wish for thy all-shadowing veil,
to tell the fair his lovesick tale:
nor less impatient of the tedious day,
she long to hear his tale, and sigh her soul away.

oft by the covert of thy shade
Leander woo the thracian maid;
through foam sea his passion bear,
nor fear the ocean thunder roar.
the conscious virgin from the sea-girt tower
hang out the faithful torch to guide he to her bower.

oft at thy silent hour the sage
pore on the fair instructive page;
or rapt in muse deep, his soul
mount active to the starry pole:
there please to range the realm of endless night,
number the star, or mark the comet devious light.

thy be the hour of converse sweet,
when sprightly wit and reason meet:
wit, the fair blossom of the mind,
but fair still with reason join.
such be the feast thy social hour afford,
when eloquence and Granville join the friendly board.

Granville, who polish mind be fraught
with all that Rome or Greece ever teach;
who please and instruct the ear,
when he assume the critic chair,
or from the Stagyrite or Plato draw
the art of civil life, the spirit of the law.

o let i often thus employ
the hour of mirth and social joy!
and glean from granville learned store
fair science and true wisdom lore.
then will i still implore thy long stay,
nor change thy festive hour for sunshine and the day.
