a epistle, [to mrs. wallup] etc.  

madam, what muse can speak, what pen display
 britannia pomp upon that happy day,
 when royal George our city dain to grace,
 and from impend slavery free her race? 
his grateful subject round his chariot hang,
 long live the king be hear from every tongue:
 transport rapture all their sense employ,
 and babe unborn, by instinct leap for joy;
 even those who death stand ready to release,
 bless the deliverer, and die in peace. 

as roman sage charge their son to tell
 that at their death they leave Augustus well:
 so shall those patriot who with care and toil,
 rescue the charter of our british isle,
 at fate first summons will obey,
 and to their weep wife and child say,
 cease, cease your tear, no more of grief be show,
 we leave you free, and George upon the throne. 

this madam, we may write, but who can tell
 what mighty transport in your bosom dwell,
 to see the sceptre by that hero sway,
 to who long since your ardent vow be pay. 
when your unwearied zeal thrice cross the sea,
 nor fear what danger may obstruct your way:
 not lead by interest, or intrigue of state,
 (avarice and pride! fault of the mean great:)
 no private end by you be understand,
 but all your wish be the public good. 
oh may the princess you so oft have praise,
 and great idea of her virtue raise,
 give you that preference due to your desert,
 and place you foremost in her royal heart. 

the princess, say i? oh that charm name,
 she come! who can the exult joy sustain? 
the hero do such mighty transport give,
 we scarce can view the heroine, and live. 
oh happy Britain! oh propitious day! 
that shall this lady to thy isle convey:
 from she may such a race of prince flow,
 until herald barren of new title grow. 

come royal dame, and bless our longing eye,
 fulfil our hope, consummate all our joy. 
your glorious offspring let Britannia see,
 and make her happy, as you make her free. 
those babe be for our church safety give,
 the darling hostage betwixt she and heaven. 

britannia court shall in full lustre shine,
 as heretofore in bright Maria time:
 Maria name still sound in british ear,
 like music tune from the celestial sphere. 
with thousand beauty be Maria grace,
 a thousand virtue in her soul be place;
 such be her form, and such her mighty mind,
 that scarce angel can be more refine:
 she want only immortality,
 to make the angel with the saint agree. 

the sun which set in fair Maria eye,
 in carolina do triumphant rise,
 in she you will find Maria loss retrieve,
 that charm queen for who so much we grieve. 

as when some happy nuptial knot be untie,
 and death uncourteous do the pair divide,
 the poor wife, overpower by the stroke of fate,
 mourn like a turtle her depart mate,
 stretch on the breathless trunk her tear she vent,
 and utter to the lifeless clay complaint:
 to draw she thence all argument be try,
 nothing can raise she from her husband side,
 till some one friend more lucky than the rest,
 lay the survive infant on her breast:
 she view each feature, dwell on every grace,
 and in the child survey the father face;
 then the dear relic snatch to her arm,
 and all the mother instant return. 
so, when the beauteous, fair Maria die,
 sorrow overwhelm we like a rise Tyde,
 till godlike WILLIAM study our repose,
 fix the succession, and relieve our woe. 

whatever the almighty give to bless mankind,
 we, or in spring, or in the autumn find,
 the spring revive what winter have decay,
 and in new livery all the earth array. 
but though the spring a thousand sweet disclose,
 the indian jessamine, and syrian rose;
 the various product of each fertile soil,
 it be the rich autumn crown the peasant toil. 
so, though we see a new-creat spring,
 and every joy revive in the king;
 you in the princess will our harvest bring. 
