A MELANCHOLY LOVER'S FAREWELL TO HIS MISTRESS.

DEAR Phillis, all my hopes are o'er
 And I shall see thy face no more. 
Since every secret wish is vain,
 I will not stay to give thee pain. 
Then do not drop thy lowering brow,
 But let me bless thee ere I go:
 Oh! do not scorn my last adieu! 
I've loved thee long, and loved thee true. 

The prospects of my youth are crost,
 My health is flown, my vigour lost;
 My soothing friends augment my pain,
 And cheerless is my native plain;
 Dark o'er my spirits hangs the gloom,
 And thy disdain has fixed my doom. 
But light waves ripple o'er the sea
 That soon shall bear me far from thee;
 And, wheresoe'er our course is cast,
 I know will bear me to my rest. 
Full deep beneath the briny wave,
 Where lie the venturous and brave,
 A place may be for me decreed;
 But, should the winds my passage speed,
 Far hence upon a foreign land,
 Whose sons perhaps with friendly hand
 The stranger's lowly tomb may raise,
 A broken heart will end my days. 

But Heaven's blessing on thee rest! 
And may no troubles vex thy breast! 
Perhaps, when pensive and alone,
 You'll think of me when I am gone,
 And gentle tears of pity shed,
 When I am in my narrow bed. 
But softly will thy sorrows flow
 And greater mayest thou never know! 
Free from all worldly care and strife,
 Long mayest thou live a happy life! 
And every earthly blessing find,
 Thou loveliest of woman kind:
 Yea, blest thy secret wishes be,
 Though cruel thou hast proved to me! 

And dost thou then thine arm extend? 
And may I take thy lovely hand? 
And do thine eyes thus gently look,
 As though some kindly wish they spoke? 
My gentle Phillis, though severe,
 I do not grudge the ills I bear;
 But still my greatest grief will be
 To think my love has troubled thee. 
Oh do not scorn this swelling grief! 
The laden bosom seeks relief;
 Nor yet this infant weakness blame,
 For thou hast made me what I am. 
Hark now! the sailors call away,
 No longer may I lingering stay. 
May peace within thy mansion dwell! 
O gentle Phillis, fare thee well! 
