on atheism.

tell i, you dare atheist, what be your end,
 to what sure point do your debauch tend? 
you will be happy and secure it here,
 and have no glymp of future world appear;
 your mind scarce doubt, but crime reversion fear. 
whoever know a sober atheist yet? 
it be the extravagance of float wit,
 buoy up with wine and sensual appetite. 
that wine can uncreate by all be confess,
 unmake the man, and level he with beast:
 what be it they will not give the change be true? 
for they with doubt do all their crime pursue;
 they be more plague to curb the thought of hell,
 then all the self-denial to live well. 
no man at first to atheism incline,
 he take that refuge after he have fine;
 bold in his crime until he can repent,
 then strive to think there be no punishment:
 lull in lewd pleasure from devotion free,
 we call he atheist, alias debauchee. 
where be the happiness they so much boast,
 their joy be in their consequence lose? 
woman and wine their great dear concern,
 but cheat their hope and make a ill return;
 rapture with charm of his delude fair,
 oh! the delight and bliss he centre there;
 and in carouse with lascivious song,
 and all the frolick which to wine belong. 
these be their summum bonum, here they be bless,
 in those wild joy that sting while they be possess;
 their disappointment pride and jealousy,
 be more severe than fast and mortify;
 a hector rival or decease at last,
 full revenge the gay delight that be past;
 the pain and qualm that wait a drunken fit,
 severe scourge the gust of appetite;
 they be punish here, and if there be no hell,
 (as they will fain believe but can tell.) 
we have the best on it for we be happy now,
 our joy not torture excess allow;
 please and secure amid our bliss we move,
 and with just transport hope for more above;
 in this we be bless, and since it last as long
 as life, what matter though we'er in the wrong? 
we'er happy while we be, and shall not know
 if we mistake, whether we do or no;
 if you be in the wrong, your error more perplex,
 you be plague in this world to be damn in the next,
