the recall to affection.

oh! stay affection; pray thou stay! 
what have i say — or mean to say? 
it be love, even love the trespass cause
 that warmth of speech, which scarce be close
 ere the hard sentence tear my frame,
 and die my cheek with honest shame. 
regret come shiver through my vein,
 and bind my tongue in iron chain;
 my soul in prison seem to be,
 and ever must if tear from thou;
 one look of thy, when sweet kind,
 can overturn a world of mind! 
the stern resolve that pride have make,
 at thy soft touch in vapour fade;
 thy smile, that rule the inmost soul,
 can every harsh resolve control. 

return, my love companion dear,
 the solace of each former year! 
else life, through many a sicken day,
 must slow, slow creep away;
 even when thou bound this ache brow,
 and sweet cheere, i know not how,
 yet the dull hour, with weary knell,
 seem to toll on the pass bell. 

if not for thou, this throb breast
 have never enjoy the balm of rest;
 rest! — do i say? no bliss have know,
 the blush of nature by have fly,
 or over the sense vain stray,
 have thou not wander in the shade;
 have thou not see the cloud of morn,
 on purple pinion light bear,
 uprear the canopy of day,
 and ever his chariot float away;
 have thou not mark the evening shade,
 in all her changeful colour fade; —
 the golden glow, the sapphire hue,
 the rosy red, the melt blue,
 the soft sea-green with yellow tinge,
 the curl cloud with skirt of fringe; —
 this eye have never behold one charm,
 or feel the glow of nature warm;
 nor have she see one drop shower
 bring back to life the faint flower;
 or the tall wood their arch spread
 in gothic cloister over head;
 while the pale moon, with lamplike beam,
 in tremor lend her silvery stream;
 "yond drop of flame that stud the sky"
 have seem plain star to my poor eye,
 until these orb, with glory bind,
 by thou be call fair world around! 

no; source of pleasure! it be thy soul
 that bring i to conceive the whole. 
the wish to please new thought inspire,
 and i grow learn where thou admire;
 to be companion meet i strive,
 with all the self-taught lore of love,
 love nature as she ought to be;
 for love she, be love thou! 
but shall thou leave this vacant heart,
 and shall we, shall we ever part,
 even nature self will grow less dear,
 and i still shed the fretful tear. 
