write in a churchyard,

on see a number of cattle graze in it.

1766

be still my heart, and let this move sight
 whisper a moral to each future lie;
 let this convince how like the lightning flight
 be earthly pageantry precarious stay. 
within this place of consecrate trust
 the neighbour herd their daily pasture find;
 and idle bound over each hallow bust,
 form a sad prospect to the pensive mind. 
while over the grave thus careless they tread,
 allure by hunger to the deed profane,
 they crop the verdure rise from the bed
 of some fond parent, or some lovesick swain. 
no more do vengeance to revenge the deed
 lodge in their breast, or vigour aid the blow;
 the power to make the sad offender bleed
 the prostrate image never again shall know. 
nor can the time-worn epitaph rehearse
 the name or title which its owner bear;
 no more the sorrow live within the verse,
 for memory paint the move scene no more. 
perhaps it be one who noble deed attain
 honour and fame in time of hostile war; —
 who arm the captive liberty regain,
 and stamp his valour with a glorious scar. 
alas! his widow may attend he here,
 and child, too, the slow procession join,
 and his fond friend indulge the trickle tear
 over his last honour at the awful shrine. 
perhaps some orphan here may see inurn
 the only guardian of her orphan year;
 and, on the precipice of error turn,
 become reclaim by sweet repentant tear. 
the lover, too, may strain a eager look,
 once more attempt to survey the fair
 who, for his sake, her early friend forsake,
 with he her day of joy or grief to share. 
what beauty or what charm adorn the frame
 of this cold image, now to earth consign;
 or what just praise the heart high worth may claim,
 the time-worn letter now no more remind. 
then what be honour? — what be wealth or fame? 
since the possessor wait the common doom! 
as much revere we find the peasant name
 as the rich lord, when in the level tomb. 
to both alike this tribute we may send,
 the heart-swollen sigh, or the lament tear;
 and without difference over their ash bend,
 for all distinction find a level here. 
for nought avail the marble over each head,
 nor all the art which sculpture can bestow,
 to save the memory of the honour dead,
 or strike the live with their wonted awe. 
then come, you vain, who fortune deign to bless,
 this scene at once shall all her fraud expose;
 and you who beauty lovely charm possess
 from this may find a moral in the rose. 
for soon infirmity shall fix her seat,
 and dissolution last close the scene;
 no more shall youth your jocund act repeat,
 or age relate what grave year have be. 
yet think not death await the course of year,
 he come while youth her shield of health support;
 in every place the potent king appear,
 to youth, to age, to every scene resort. 
but why, my heart, that palpitate beat! 
can death idea cause that pensive gloom? 
since in the world such thorny care we meet,
 and since it be peace within the silent tomb. 
yet still the thought of nature sad decay,
 and the reception in the world unknown,
 must cast a cloud over hope celestial ray,
 if not dispel by conscious worth alone:
 may this support i in the awful hour
 when earthly prospect fade before my view;
 o! then, my friend, into my bosom pour
 some soothe balsam at the last adieu. 
say, in Elysium we shall meet again,
 nor there shall error hold the enchant rod;
 but free from earth at once we will break the chain,
 and thus release shall never offend our god. 
then hence aversion to the body doom,
 nor let this scene a pensive murmur raise,
 nor let thought grieve when ponder over the tomb,
 though on my grave the senseless herd shall graze. 
