the thief and the cordelier, a ballad. 

who have ever be at Paris, must needs know the grieve,
 the fatal retreat of th'unfortunate brave;
 where honour and justice most odd contribute,
 to ease hero pain by a halter and gibbet. 

there death break the shackle, which force have put on;
 and the hangman complete, what the judge but begin:
 there the esquire of the pad, and the knight of the post,
 find their pain no more balk, and their hope no more cross. 

great claim be there make, and great secret be know;
 and the king, and the law, and the thief have his own:
 but my hearer cry out; what a duce do thou ail? 
cut off thy reflection; and give we thy tale. 

it be there, then, in civil respect to harsh law,
 and for want of false witness, to back a bad cause,
 a norman, though late, be oblige to appear:
 and who to assist, but a grave cordelier? 

the esquire, who good grace be to open the scene,
 seem not in great haste, that the show shall begin:
 now fit the halter, now traverse the cart;
 and often take leave; but be loath to depart. 

what frighten you thus, my good son? say the priest:
 you murder, be sorry, and have be confess. 
o father! my sorrow will scarce save my Bacon:
 for it be not that i murder, but that i be take. 

pough! prithee never trouble thy head with such fancy:
 rely on the aid you shall have from saint Francis:
 if the money you promise be bring to the chest;
 you have only to die: let the church do the rest. 

and what will folk say, if they see you afraid? 
it reflect upon i; as i know not my trade:
 courage, friend; today be your period of sorrow;
 and thing will go better, believe i, tomorrow. 

to-morrow? our hero reply in a fright:
 he that be hang before noon, ought to think of tonight. 
tell your bead, quoth the priest, and be fair truss up:
 for you sure tonight shall in paradise sup. 

alas! quoth the esquire, however sumptuous the treat,
 parblew, i shall have little stomach to eat:
 i shall therefore esteem it great favour, and grace;
 will you be so kind, as to go in my place. 

that i will, quoth the father, and thank you to boot;
 but our action, you know, with our duty must suit. 
the feast, i propose to you, i can taste:
 for this night, by our order, be mark for a fast. 

then turn about to the hangman, he say;
 dispatch i, i prithee, this troublesome blade:
 for thy cord, and my cord both equal tie;
 and we live by the gold, for which other man die. 
