a description of a city shower. 

October, 1710. 

careful observer may foretell the hour
 (by sure prognostic) when to dread a shower:
 while rain depend, the pensive cat give over
 her frolick, and pursue her tail no more. 
return home at night, you will find the sink
 strike your offend sense with double stink. 
if you be wide, then gto not far to dine,
 you will spend in coach-hire more than save in wine. 
a come shower your shoot corn presage,
 old ache throb, your hollow tooth will rage. 
saunter in coffee-house be Dulman see;
 he damn the climate, and complain of spleen. 

mean while the south rise with dabble wing,
 a sable cloud athwart the welkin fling,
 that swill more liquour than it can contain,
 and like a drunkard give it up again. 
brisk Susan whip her linen from the rope,
 while the first drizzle shower be bear aslope,
 such be that sprinkle which some careless quean
 flirt on you from her mop, but not so clean. 
you fly, invoke the god; then turn, stop
 to rail; she sing, still whirl on her mop. 
not yet, the dust have shun the unequal strife,
 but aid by the wind, fight still for life;
 and waft with its foe by violent gust,
 it be doubtful which be rain, and which be dust. 
ah! where must needy poet seek for aid,
 when dust and rain at once his coat invade;
 his only coat, where dust confuse with rain,
 roughen the nap, and leave a mingle stain. 

now in contiguous drop the flood come down,
 threaten with deluge this devote town. 
to shop in croud the dagged female fly,
 pretend to cheapen good, but nothing buy. 
the Templer spruce, while every spout abroach,
 stay till it be fair, yet seem to call a coach. 
the tuck'd-up sempstress walk with hasty stride,
 while stream run down her oil umbrella side. 
here various kind by various fortune lead,
 commence acquaintance underneath a shed. 
triumphant Tory, and despond Whig,
 forget their feud, and join to save their wig. 
box in a chair the beau impatient sit,
 while spout run clatter over the roof by fit;
 and ever and anon with frightful din
 the leather sound, he tremble from within. 
so when Troy chairman bear the wooden steed,
 pregnant with greek, impatient to be free,
 (those bully greek who, as the modern do,
 instead of pay chairman, run they through.) 
laoco'n strike the outside with his spear,
 and each imprison hero quake for fear. 

now from all part thw swell kennel flow,
 and bear their trophy with they as they go:
 filth of all hue and odour seem to tell
 what street they sail from, by their sight and smell. 
they, as each torrent drive, with rapid force
 from Smithfield, or saint pulchre shape their course,
 and in huge confluent join at snow-hill ridge,
 fall from the conduit prone to holborn-bridge. 
sweep from butcher stall, dung, guts, and blood,
 drown puppy, stink sprat, all drench in mud,
 dead cat and turnip-top come tumble down the flood. 
