elegy.

occasion by the death of a lady.

by the same.

still shall unthinking man substantial deem
 the form that fleet through life deceitful dream! 
on cloud, where fancy beam amusive play,
 shall heedless hope his tower fabric raise! 
till at death touch the ideal glory fly,
 and real scene rush dismal on the eye;
 and, from the bower of beauty tear,
 the startle soul awake to think — and mourn. 

o you, who hour in jocund train advance,
 who spirit to the song of gladness dance;
 who flowery scene in endless view survey,
 glitter in beam of visionary day! 
o! yet while fate delay the impend woe,
 be rouse to thought, anticipate the blow;
 lest, like the lightning glance, the sudden ill
 flash to confound, and penetrate to kill:
 lest, thus encompass with funereal gloom,
 like i you bend over some untimely tomb,
 pour your wild rave in night fright ear,
 and half pronounce heaven sacred doom severe. 

wise! beauteous! good! — o every grace combine,
 that charm the eye, that captivate the mind! 
fair as the floweret open on the morn,
 who leave bright drop of liquid pearl adorn! 
sweet, as the downy-pinioned gale, that rove
 to gather fragrance in arabian grove! 
mild, as the strain, that, at the close of day
 warble remote, along the vale decay! 
yet, why with those compare? what tint so fine,
 what sweetness, mildness can be match with thy? 
why roam abroad? since still, to fancy eye,
 i see, i see thy lovely form arise! 
still let i gaze, and every care beguile,
 gaze on that cheek, where all the grace smile;
 that soul-expressing eye, benign bright,
 where meekness beam ineffable delight;
 that brow, where wisdom sit enthrone serene,
 each feature form, and dignify the mien:
 still let i listen, while her word impart
 the sweet effusion of the blameless heart;
 till all my soul, each tumult charm away,
 yield, gentle lead, to virtue easy sway. 

by thou inspire, o virtue, age be young,
 and music warble from the faulter tongue;
 thy ray creative cheer the cloud brow,
 and deck the fade cheek with rosy glow,
 brighten the joyless aspect, and supply
 pure heavenly lustre to the languid eye:
 each look, each action, while it awe, invite,
 and age with every youthful grace delight. 
but when youth live bloom reflect thy beam,
 resistless on the view the glory stream,
 the ecstatic breast triumphant virtue warm,
 and beauty dazzle with angelic charm. 

ah, whither flee! — you dear illusion stay! 
lo pale and silent lie the lovely clay! 
how be the rose on that lip decay,
 which health in all the pride of bloom array! 
health on her form each sprightly grace bestow;
 with active life each speak feature glow. 
fair be the flower, and soft the vernal sky;
 elate with hope we deem no tempest nigh;
 when lo! a whirlwind instantaneous gust
 leave all its beauty wither in the dust. 

all cold the hand that soothe woe weary head! 
all quench the eye the pity tear that shed! 
all mute the voice who please accent steal,
 infuse balm into the rankle soul! —
 o death, why arm with cruelty thy power,
 and spare the weed, yet lop the lovely flower! 
why fly thy shaft in lawless error drive! 
to virtue then no more the care of heaven! —

but peace, bold thought! be still, my burst heart! 
we, not ELIZA, feel the fatal dart. 
scape the dark dungeon do the slave complain,
 nor bless the hand that break the gall chain? 
say, pine not virtue for the linger morn,
 on this dark wild condemn to roam forlorn? 
where reason meteor-ray, with sickly glow,
 over the dun gloom a dreadful glimmer throw;
 disclose dubious to the affright eye
 overwhelm mountain totter from on high,
 black billowy sea in storm perpetual tost,
 and weary way in wilder labyrinth lose. 
o happy stroke that burst the bond of clay,
 dart through the rend gloom the blaze of day,
 and wing the soul with boundless flight to soar,
 when danger threat and fear alarm no more. 

transport thought! here let i wipe away
 the fall tear, and wake a bold lie;
 but ah! afresh the swim eye overflow —
 nor check the tear that stream for human woe. 
lo! over her dust, in speechless anguish, bend
 the hopeless parent, husband, brother, friend! —
 how vain the hope of man! — but cease thy strain,
 nor sorrow dread solemnity profane;
 mix with yond droop mourner, over her bier
 in silence shed the sympathetic tear. 
