on the honourable ROBERT boyl, notion of nature.

it be brave do, great Boyle have disenthrone. 
the goddess nature, so unjust crown,
 and by the learnt so many age own. 
refuge of atheist, who supine desire,
 please with that stage, no farther will aspire:
 it damp the theist too, while they assign,
 to nature, what be do by a power divine. 
we know not how, nor where, to ascribe event,
 while she be thus rival to omnipotence;
 sure that alone, the mighty work can do,
 the power that do create, can govern too:
 it be not like our sublunary king,
 that must be circumscribe to place, and thing,
 who straighten power, do minister elect,
 that must for they remot business act,
 the omnipresence, of the power divine,
 argue it need no deputy assign;
 nor be it beneath the glory of his state,
 to rule, protect the being he create:
 but stop my pen, blush at thy weak pretence,
 it be Boyle, not thou, that must the world convince;
 Boyle the great champion of providence. 
who conquer truth in a inquiry dress,
 have celebrate nature dispossess;
 not the vice gerent of heaven settle rule,
 but nice idea of the err school. 
fate, fortune, chance, all notional and vain,
 the float fiction of the poet brain;
 the world reject, yet stupid prefer,
 this wild chimera of philosopher:
 this more insinuate notion lie,
 unquestioned till you make your brave assay,
 which do the dare sceptic more confute,
 than a suspect orthodox dispute. 
they can pretend interest, thy line do bribe
 with which they censure, the canonic tribe:
 it be love of truth alone, thy pen do move,
 nor none but thou, can so successful prove. 
methinks i all the schoolmen shade espy,
 tend thy triumph of philosophy,
 and all the pregnant naturist of yore,
 from the great stagarite, to Des-Cartes, more,
 resign their gigantic notion now,
 and only what you write for truth allow. 
see they have all their renounce volume bring,
 (bid mankind believe, what you have teach;)
 ashamed they have be, renowned so many year,
 each from his blush brow his laurel tares:
 with their own hand, in one just wreathe they twine,
 adorn that victorious head of thy. 
and shall my female pen, thy praise pretend,
 when angel only, can enough commend,
 in song, which like themselves, can know no end. 
