on the dangerous illness of my friend mrs. l. 

13TH may, 1788. 

what be it to i though earth green lap be spread
 with new-sprung flower, the firstborn of the year! 
the smirk daisy and the cowslip tall
 may walk the mead, or wander near the brook;
 the liquid mirror may reflect the tree
 who open leaf now mottle all the stream;
 their flutter tenant, crowd cliff and spray,
 may the green curtain tight and close draw,
 to hide the habitation, weave with care,
 and all the foster secrecy of love. 
the gild insect bask in the sun,
 fan by his light, and many a colour wing,
 now show with how much care nature adorn
 her small work. what be all these to i! 
my thought from pleasure and from former joy
 start wild away; amusement silver cord
 bind on the fancy no one form of bliss;
 i try to lose myself, but still pursue
 by fear, i only fly to agony of mind,
 there lose the sight of all but one sad grief,
 which sit enthrone within this ache heart. 

the fair lily of the field now droop, —
 hang low the head, where beauty soft have weave
 those sweet entanglement that hold the eye,
 and through her silken veil will fond show
 the various work of the virtuous soul;
 the heart look through, and spread along the face
 the sentimental trait that mark the mind. 
compassion oft will bud into a tear,
 and honest scorn will flush the redden cheek,
 when harsh conclusion or ungenerous truth
 will drop like gall from the satiric tongue. 
worth she approve, however mean array;
 and greatness can not charm but by the soul. 
her accent fall with such a melt sound
 on every word that clothe her modest thought,
 that sweet expression tell the careless heart
 whenever she speak she can not speak in vain! 
your eye from she will learn a mode of speech
 which, when she please, can useless make the ear,
 and ere the sentence leave its hallow cave,
 will tell what thought be venture next abroad. 
nor have disguise in all her face or soul
 one place to hide her poor and artful head;
 truth and her train have tenant each cell,
 and honest friendship at the portal stand
 to point or tell you what be do within. 

but, ah! she droop; and i be droop too! 
it be not for i to hold the ache head,
 and cordial in my hand and eye to bear,
 to cheer she long with a ray of hope,
 and promise ease, that wander with tomorrow;
 to watch the asking of the weary eye,
 and ere the wish be form the wish foresee;
 to i such happiness must never belong! 
myself who tax the tenderness of friend,
 and oft require their all-supporting aid,
 else, else this droop, wither plant have long,
 have long ere this be moulder in the dust. 

o father of the universe! it be thou
 who give we life, and health, and joy, and ease;
 for these continue grateful let we be;
 if take from we, let we firm believe
 thy goodness equal in what thou withhold,
 as in what thou benevolent give;
 let we submit.    but oh! if it be thy will
 to save my friend, and hold she yet in life,
 o god of heaven! how thankful shall i be. 
if not, let i, all humble, strive to yield,
 assure that thou have everlasting store
 of endless bliss for every soul like she;
 for true religion purify her heart, —
 run through the current of her blameless life,
 and make it one continue hymn to thou! 
