a epistle to a lady.

when the heart ake with anguish, pine with grief,
and heaven and you alike deny relief;
when even the flatterer hope be no where find,
it be hard to feel the smart, and not lament the wound.
permit i then to sigh one last adieu,
nor scorn a sorrow friendship owe to you:
a friendship modesty may well return;
a sorrow, cruelty itself may mourn.
think how the miser, pierce with inward pain,
look down with horror on the trouble main,
or wild roam along the rocky coast,
the explore his treasure in the tempest lose;
hate his own safety, chide the wave that roll
himself ashore, but sink his dear gold.
like he afflict, pensive, and forlorn,
i look on life and all its pomp with scorn.
you be the sweetener of each busy scene;
you give the joy without, the pain within.
pleasure and you be both so near ally,
that when i lose the one, the other die;
pain too have lavish all her kill store;
nor can she add, nor can i suffer more.

in vain i view you with as chaste a fire,
as angel mingle, or as saint admire;
by reason prompt, passion have no part,
a virtuous ardour, that refine the heart.
in vain i seek a friendship free from fault,
where sex and beauty be alike forget:
a friendship by the noble union join,
the female softness, and the manly mind.
courage to conquer evil, or endure:
sweetness to sooth the pain, and smile to cure.
scandal, a busy fiend, in truth be disguise,
like fame all cover over with ear and eye,
learn the fond tale, and spread it as she fly;
nor spread alone, but alter, add, defame,
affect to pity, though her duty blame;
feign not to credit all she see or hear,
but hope the evil only in her fear;
pretend to weigh the fact in even scale,
and wish, at least, that justice may prevail;
insinuate, dissemble, lie, betray,
play the whole hypocrite such various way,
that innocence itself must suffer wrong,
and honour bleed the prey of slander tongue.

such be my fate, so grievous my distress,
condemn to suffer, but deny redress:
too fond of joy, too sensible of pain,
to part with all that be dear, and not complain:
too delicate to injure what i love,
to ask the pity fame will never approve.
what more remain, then, but to drop my claim,
and by my conduct justify my flame?
burst the dear band that to my heart-string join,
and sacrifice my peace to purchase thy?

as the fond mother, who delirious eye
her die babe, will scarce believe it die;
but strain it still with transport in her arm,
dwell on its lip and number over its charm;
plead that it slumber, and expect, in vain,
to see the little cherub live again:
so my tear heart must all the sorrow prove
that torture constancy, or sadden love:
yet fond follow your dear image still,
fancy i hear you speak, i see you smile:
dote on a phantom, idolise the name,
and wish the shade and substance be the same.

alas! how fruitless be the idle prayer!
the joy imagine, real the despair.
like Adam force his Eden to forgo,
i lose my only paradise below,
and dread the prospect of succeed woe.
