paradise regain.

by H. T. 

i 

seek not for paradise with curious eye
in asiatic clime, where tigris' wave,
mix with Euphrates in tumultuous joy,
do the broad plain of Babylonia lave.

ii.

it be go with all its charm; and like a dream,
like Babylon itself, be sweep away;
bestow one tear upon the mournful theme,
but let it not thy gentle heart dismay.

iii.

for know whereve love and virtue guide,
they lead we to a state of heavenly bliss,
where joy unknown to guilt and shame preside,
and pleasure unalloyed each hour increase.

iv.

behold that grove, who wave bough admit,
through the live colonade, the fruitful hill,
a move prospect with fat herd replete,
who low voice all the valley fill.

v. 

there, through the spiry grass where glide the brook,
(by yond tall poplar which erect its head
above the verdure of the neighbour oak,)
and gentle murmur over the adjoin mead;

vi.

Philander and Cleora, happy pair,
taste the cool breeze of the gentle wind;
their breast from guilt, their look be free from care,
sure index of a calm content mind.

vii.

it be here in virtuous lore the studious fair
inform her babe, nor scorn herself to improve,
while in his smile she live, who please care
dispense knowledge from the lip of love.

viii.

no wild desire can spread their poison here,
no discontent their peaceful hour attend;
false joy, nor flatter hope, nor servile fear,
their gentle mind with jar passion rend.

ix.

here oft in please solitude they rove,
recount over the deed of former day;
with inward joy their well-spent time approve,
and feel a recompense beyond all praise.

x. 

or in sweet converse through the grove, or near
the fountain brink, or where the arbour shade
beat back the heat, fair virtue voice they hear,
more musical by sweet digression make.

xi.

with calm dependence every good they taste,
yet feel their neighbour want with kind regret,
nor cheer themselves alone, (a mean repast!)
but deal forth blessing round their happy seat.

xii.

it be to such virtue, that the power supreme
the choice of his blessing have design,
and shed they plenteous over every clime,
the calm delight of a untainted mind.

xiii.

ere yet the sad effect of foolish pride,
and mean ambition still employ in strife,
and luxury do over the world preside,
deprave the taste, and pall the joy of life.

xiv.

for such the spring, in rich mantle clad,
pour forth her beauty through the gay parterre;
and autumn various bosom be overspread
with all the blush fruit that crown the year.

XV. 

such summer tempt, in golden beam array,
which over the field in borrow lustre glow,
to meditate beneath the cool shade
their happy state, and whence their blessing flow.

xvi.

even rugged winter vary but their joy,
paint the cheek with fresh vermilion-hue;
and those rough frost which soft frame annoy
with vigorous health their slacken nerve renew.

xvii.

from the dark bosom of the dapple morn
to Phoebus shine with meridian light,
or when mild evening do the sky adorn,
or the pale moon ride through the spangle night.

xviii.

the vary scene in every virtuous soul
each please change with various pleasure bless,
raise cheerful hope, and anxious fear control,
and form a paradise of inward peace.
