the second hymn of Callimachus.

to Apollo.

hah! how the laurel, great apollo tree,
 and all the cavern shake! far off, far off,
 the man that be unhallowed: for the god,
 the god approach. hark! he knock: the gate
 feel the glad impulse: and the sever bar
 submissive clink against their brazen portal. 
why do the delian palm incline their bough,
 self-moved: and hover swan, their throat release
 from native silence, carol sound harmonious? 

begin, young man, the hymn: let all your harp
 break their inglorious silence; and the dance,
 in mystic number tread, explain the music. 
but first by ardent prayer, and clear lustration
 purge the contagious spot of human weakness:
 impure not mortal can behold Apollo. 
so may you flourish, favour by the god,
 in youth with happy nuptial, and in age
 with silver hair, and fair descent of child;
 so lie foundation for aspire city,
 and bless your spread colony encrease. 

pay sacred reverence to apollo song;
 lest wrathful the far-shooting god emit
 his fatal arrow. silent nature stand;
 and sea subside, obedient to the sound
 of io, io pean! nor dare Thetis
 long bewail she love Achilles death:
 for Phoebus be his foe. nor must sad Niobe
 in fruitless sorrow persevere, or weep
 even through the phrygian marble. hapless mother! 
who fondness can compare her mortal offspring
 to those which fair Latona bear to Jove. 
io! again repeat you, io pean! 

against the deity it be hard to strive. 
he that resist the power of Ptolemy,
 resist the power of heaven: for power from heaven
 derive; and monarch rule by god appoint. 

recite apollo praise, until night draw on,
 the ditty still unfinished; and the day
 unequal to the godhead attribute
 various, and matter copious of your song. 

sublime at Jove right hand Apollo sit,
 and thence distribute honour, gracious king,
 and theme of verse perpetual. from his robe
 flow light ineffable: his harp, his quiver,
 and lictian bow be gold: with golden sandal
 his foot be shod; how rich! how beautiful! 
beneath his step the yellow mineral rise;
 and earth reveal her treasure. youth and beauty
 eternal deck his cheek: from his fair head
 perfume distil their sweet; and cheerful health,
 his duteous handmaid, through the air improve,
 with lavish hand diffuse scent ambrosial. 

the spear-man arm by thou, great god, direct,
 send forth a certain wound. the laureled bard,
 inspire by thou, compose verse immortal. 
teach by thy art divine, the sage physician
 elude the urn; and chain, or exile death. 

thou nomian we adore; for that from heaven
 descend, thou on fair amphrysus bank
 do guard admetus herd. since the cow
 produce a ampler store of milk; the she-goat
 not without pain drag her distend udder;
 and ewe, that erst bring forth but single lamb,
 now drop their twofold burden. bless the cattle,
 on which Apollo cast his favour eye! 

but, Phoebus, thou to man beneficent,
 delight in building city. bright Diana,
 kind sister to thy infant-deity
 new-weaned, and just arise from the cradle,
 bring hunt wild goats-head, and branch antler
 of stag, the fruit and honour of her toil. 
these with discern hand thou know to range,
 (young as thou be) and in the well-framed model,
 with emblematic skill, and mystic order,
 thou shewedst, where tower, or battlement shall rise;
 where gate shall open; or where wall shall compass:
 while from thy childish pastime man receive
 the future strength, and ornament of nation. 

Battus, our great progenitor, now touch
 the lybian strand; when the forebode crow
 fly on the right before the people, mark
 the country destine the auspicious seat
 of future king, and favour of the god,
 who oath be sure, and promise stand eternal. 

or boedromian hear thou please, or clarian,
 Phoebus, great king? for different be thy name,
 as thy kind hand have found many city,
 or deal benign thy various gift to man. 
carnean let i call thou; for my country
 call thou carnean: the fair colony
 thrice by thy gracious guidance be transport,
 ever settle in cyrene; there w'appoint
 thy annual feast, kind god, and bless thy altar
 smoke with hecatomb of slaughter bull;
 as Carnus, thy high-priest, and favour friend,
 have erst ordain; and with mysterious rite,
 our great forefather teach their son to worship. 
io carnean Phoebus! io pean! 

the yellow Crocus there, and fair Narcissus
 reserve the honour of their winter-store,
 to deck thy temple; until return spring
 diffuse nature various pride; and flower
 innumerable, by the soft southwest
 open, and gather by religious hand,
 rebound their sweet from th'odorif'rous pavement. 
perpetual fire shine hallow on thy altar. 
when annual the carnean feast be hold,
 the warlike libyan clad in armor, lead
 the dance, with clang sword and shield they beat
 the dreadful measure: in the chorus join
 their woman, brown but beautiful: such rite
 to thou well-pleasing. nor have yet thy votary,
 from Greece transplant, touch cyrene bank,
 and land determine for their last abode;
 but wander through azilis horrid Forrest
 disperse; when from myrtusa craggy brow,
 fond of the maid, auspicious to the city,
 which must hereafter bear her favour name,
 thou gracious deign to let the fair one view
 her typic people; thou with pleasure teach her
 to draw the bow, to slay the shaggy lion,
 and stop the spread ruin of the plain. 
happy the nymph, who honour by thy passion,
 be aid by thy power! the monstrous Python
 dare tempt thy wrath in vain: for dead he fall,
 to thy great strength, and golden arm unequal. 

io! while thy unerring hand elance
 another, and another dart; the people
 joyful repeat, io! io pean! 
elance the dart, Apollo: for the safety,
 and health of man, gracious thy mother bear thou. 

envy thy late foe suggest thus:
 like thou i be a power immortal; therefore
 to thou dare speak. how can thou favour partial
 those poet who write little? vast and great
 be what i love: the far extend ocean
 to a small riv'let i prefer. Apollo
 spurn envy with his foot; and thus the god:
 Dæmon, the headlong current of Euphrates,
 assyrian river, copious run, but muddy;
 and carry forward with his stupid force
 pollute dirt; his torrent still augment,
 his wave still more defile: mean while the nymph
 Melissan, sacred and recluse to Ceres,
 studious to have their offering well receive,
 and fit for heavenly use, from little urn
 pour stream select, and purity of Waters. 

io! Apollo, mighty king, let envy
 ill-judging and verbose, from lethe lake
 draw ton unmeasurable; while thy favour
 administer to my ambitious thirst
 the wholesome draught from aganippe spring
 genuine, and with soft murmur gentle rill
 down the mountain, where thy daughter haunt. 
