a poem on her majesty birthday. 

o you, the monarch bliss, the muse friend! 
accept the tribute duty bid i send:
 it be what the bard shall long before have pay;
 but fearful to aspire, have long delay. 
Phoebus alone can phoebus chariot guide;
 the youth who dare to drive it, dare, die. 
my humble muse can humble subject treat;
 but tremble to attempt a theme so great:
 yet, warm with gratitude, will fain display
 her zeal to you, on this auspicious day. 

to you! who gracious goodness plume her wing,
 by who she live, by who inspire, she sing:
 long may she celebrate your sacred birth;
 long may you stay from heaven, to bless the earth;
 to cheer the royal sovereign of our isle;
 increase his joy, or soften all his toil;
 who now, while death in purple triumph reign,
 and sanguine flood pollute the distant plain;
 watchful over britain fate, employ his care,
 or wise to avert, or brave meet the war. 

o glorious queen! by nature form to bring
 the sweet comfort to the just king! 
let proud oppressor, who abuse their power,
 hear groan subject curse their natal hour:
 you, on that happy hour, may just feast
 your soul with thought of make thousand bless;
 who godlike bounty, to the wretched, show,
 you be only powerful to relieve their woe. 

what though the muse old annal shall explore,
 mark all our queen, and trace their virtue over? 
where can she find so much exalt sense,
 noble employ, like you, in truth be Defense? 
you strive to make the seed of virtue grow,
 to spread the light, which heaven reveal below:
 yet, free from superstitious zeal, incline
 to make the ray of moral goodness shine;
 support those, who, firm to truth, defend
 that first fix law, on which all law depend. 

beneath your influence, art and science rear
 their sacred head, and flourish by your care:
 this truth let oxford pompous dome proclaim,
 which boast the honour of a royal name. 
late your bard survey the graceful scene,
 rise with bounty of a generous queen! 
o! have the muse there fledge her infant wing,
 and early taste of that learned spring;
 she then have soar in more heroic lay,
 in more majestic number sing your praise;
 but fearful now, must quit the glorious theme,
 must leave the architect to speak your fame:
 he art shall there another Athens show,
 and there another guardian Pallas you. 
