the conference.

grace say in form, which sceptic must agree,
 when they be tell that grace be say by i;
 the servant go, to break the scurvy jest
 on the proud landlord, and his threadbare guest;
 the king go round, my lady too withdraw,
 my lord, in usual taste, begin to yawn,
 and loll backward in his elbow-chair,
 with a insipid kind of stupid stare,
 pick his tooth, twirl his seal about —
 Churchill, you have a poem come out. 
you have my best wish; but i real fear
 your muse in general be too severe,
 her spirit seem her interest to oppose,
 and, where she make one friend, make twenty foe. 

C.  

your lordship fear be just, i feel their force,
 but only feel it as a thing of course. 
the man, who hardy spirit shall engage
 to lash the vice of a guilty age,
 at his first set forward ought to know,
 that every rogue he meet must be his foe,
 that the rude breath of satire will provoke
 many who feel, and more who fear the stroke. 
but shall the partial rage of selfish man
 from stubborn justice wrench the righteous pen,
 or shall i not my settle course pursue,
 because my foe, be foe to virtue too? 

l.  

what be this boast virtue, teach in school,
 and idle draw from antiquate rule? 
what be her use? point out one wholesome end? 
will she hurt foe, or can she make a friend? 
when from long fast fierce appetite arise,
 can this same virtue stifle nature cry? 
can she the pittance of a meal afford,
 or bid thou welcome to one great man board? 
when northern wind the rough December arm
 with frost and snow, can virtue keep thou warm? 
can thou dismiss the hard unfeeling do
 bare by say, thou be virtue son? 
or by base blunder statesman send to jail,
 will Mansfield take this virtue for thy bail? 
believe it not, the name be in disgrace,
 virtue and temple now be out of place. 

quit then this meteor, who delusive ray
 from wealth and honour lead thou far astray. 
true virtue mean, let reason use her eye,
 nothing with fool, and interest with the wise. 
will thou be great, her patronage disclaim,
 nor mad triumph in so mean a name:
 let noble wreath thy happy brow adorn,
 and leave to virtue poverty and scorn. 
let prudence be thy guide; who do not know
 how seldom prudence can with virtue go? 
to be successful try thy utmost force,
 and virtue follow as a thing of course. 

hirco, who know not hirco, stain the bed
 of that kind master who first give he bread,
 scatter the seed of discord through the land,
 break every public, every private band,
 behold with joy a trust friend undo,
 betray a brother, and will cheat a son:
 what mortal in his sense can endure
 the name of hirco, for the wretch be poor? 
 "let he hang, drown, starve, on a dunghill rot,
"by all detest live, and die forget;
 "let he, a poor return, in every breath
"feel all death pain, yet be whole year in death, "
be now the general cry we all pursue;
 let fortune change, and prudence change too,
 supple and pliant a new system feel,
 throw up her cap, and spaniel at his heel,
 long live great hirco, cry, by interest teach,
 and let his foe, though i prove one, be nought. 

C.  

peace to such man, if such man can have peace,
 let their possession, let their state increase,
 let their base service in court strike root,
 and in the season bring forth golden fruit,
 i envy not; let those who have the will,
 and, with so little spirit, so much skill,
 with such vile instrument their fortune carve;
 rogue may grow fat, a honest man dare starve. 

l.  

these stale conceit throw off, let we advance
 for once to real life, and quit romance. 
starve! pretty talk! but i fain will view
 that man, that honest man will do it too. 
hence to yond mountain which outbrave the sky,
 and dart from pole to pole thy strengthen eye,
 through all that space you shall not view one man,
 not one, who dare to act on such a plan. 
coward in calm will say, what in a storm
 the brave will tremble at, and not perform. 
thy be the proof, and, spite of all you have say,
 you will give your honour for a crust of bread. 

C.  

what proof may do, what hunger may effect,
 what famish nature, look with neglect
 on all she once hold dear, what fear, at strife
 with faint virtue for the mean of life,
 may make this coward flesh, in love with breath,
 shudder at pain, and shrink back from death,
 in treason to my soul, descend to bear,
 trust to fate, i neither know, nor care,

once, at this hour those wound afresh i feel,
 which nor prosperity nor time can heal,
 those wound, which fate severe have decree,
 mention or think of, must for ever bleed,
 those wound, which humble all that pride of man,
 which bring such mighty aid to virtue plan;
 once, awe by Fortune most oppressive frown,
 by legal rapine to the earth bow down,
 my credit at last gasp, my state undo,
 tremble to meet the shock i can not shun,
 virtue give ground, and blank despair prevail;
 sink beneath the storm, my spirit fail,
 like peter faith, until one, a friend indeed,
 may all distress find such in time of need,
 one kind good man, in act, in word, in thought,
 by virtue guide, and by wisdom teach,
 image of he who christian shall adore,
 stretch forth his hand, and bring i safe to shore. 

since, by good fortune into notice raise,
 and for some little merit large praise,
 indulge in swerve from prudential rule,
 hate by rogue, and not belove by fool,
 place above want, shall abject thirst of wealth
 so fierce war against my soul dear health,
 that, as a boon, i shall base shackle crave,
 and, bear to freedom, make myself a slave;
 that i shall in the train of those appear,
 who honour can love, nor manhood fear? 

that i no long skulk from street to street,
 afraid lest dun assail, and bailiff meet;
 that i from place to place this carcase bear,
 walk forth at large, and wander free as air;
 that i no long dread the awkward friend,
 who very obligation must offend,
 nor, all too froward, with impatience burn
 at suffering favour which i can return;
 that, from dependence and from pride secure,
 i be not place so high to scorn the poor,
 nor yet so low, that i my lord shall fear,
 or hesitate to give he sneer for sneer;
 that, while sage prudence my pursuit confirm,
 i can enjoy the world on equal term;
 that, kind to other, to myself most true,
 feel no want, i comfort those who do,
 and with the will have power to aid distress;
 these, and what other blessing i possess,
 from the indulgence of the public rise;
 all private patronage my soul defy. 
by candour more incline to save, than damn,
 a generous public make i what i be.
 all that i have, they give; just memory bear,
 the grateful stamp, and what i be be they. 

l.  

to feign a redhot zeal for freedom cause,
 to mouth aloud for liberty and law,
 for public good to bellow all abroad,
 serve well the purpose of private fraud. 
prudence, by public good intend her own;
 if you mean otherwise, you stand alone. 
what do we mean by country and by court,
 what be it to oppose, what to support? 
mere word of course, and what be more absurd
 than to pay homage to a empty word! 
Majors and minor differ but in name,
 patriot and minister be much the same;
 the only difference, after all their rout,
 be that the one be in, the other out. 

explore the dark recess of the mind,
 in the soul honest volume read mankind,
 and own, in wise and simple, great and small,
 the same grand lead principle in all.
 whatever we talk of wisdom to the wise,
 of goodness to the good, of public tie
 which to our country link, of private band
 which claim most dear attention at our hand,
 for parent and for child, for wife and friend,
 our first great mover, and our last great end,
 be one, and, by whatever name we call
 the rule tyrant, self be all in all.
 this, which unwilling faction shall admit,
 guide in different way a BUTE and PITT,
 make tyrant break, make king observe the law,
 and give the world a Stuart and Nassau. 

have nature (strange and wild conceit of pride)
 distinguish thou from all her son beside? 
do virtue in thy bosom bright glow,
 or from a spring more pure do action flow? 
be not thy soul bind with those very chain
 which shackle we, or be that self, which reign
 over king and beggar, which in all we see
 most strong and sovereign, only weak in thou? 
fond man, believe it not; experience tell
 it be not thy virtue, but thy pride rebel. 
think, and for once lie by thy lawless pen;
 think, and confess thyself like other man;
 think but one hour, and, to thy conscience lead
 by reason hand, bow down and hang thy head;
 think on thy private life, recall thy youth,
 view thyself now, and own with strict truth,
 that self have draw thou from fair virtue way
 farther than folly will have dare to stray,
 and that the talent liberal nature give
 to make thou free, have make thou more a slave. 

quit then, in prudence quit, that idle train
 of toy, which have so long abuse thy brain,
 and captive lead thy power; with boundless will
 let self maintain her state and empire still,
 but let she, with more worthy object catch,
 strain all the faculty and force of thought
 to thing of high dare; let her range
 through better pasture, and learn how to change;
 let she, no long to weak faction tie,
 wise revolt, and join our strong side. 

C.  

ah! what, my lord, have private life to do
 with thing of public nature? why to view
 will you thus cruel those scene unfold,
 which, without pain and horror to behold,
 must speak i something more, or less than man;
 which friend may pardon, but i never can? 
look back! a thought which border on despair,
 which human nature must, yet can bear. 
it be not the babble of a busy world,
 where praise and censure be at random hurl,
 which can the mean of my thought control,
 or shake one settle purpose of my soul. 
free and at large might their wild curse roam,
 if all, if all alas! be well at home. 
no — it be the tale which angry conscience tell,
 when she with more than tragic horror swell
 each circumstance of guilt; when stern, but true,
 she bring bad action forth into review;
 and, like the dread handwriting on the wall,
 bid late remorse awake at reason call,
 arm at all point bid scorpion vengeance pass,
 and to the mind hold up reflection glass,
 the mind, which start, heave the heart-felt groan,
 and hate that form she know to be her own. 

enough of this — let private sorrow rest —
 as to the public i dare stand the test;
 dare proud boast, i feel no wish above
 the good of ENGLAND, and my country be love. 
stranger to party-rage, by reason voice,
 unerring guide, direct in my choice,
 not all the tyrant power of earth combine,
 no, nor of hell, shall make i change my mind. 
what! herd with man my honest soul disdain,
 man who, with servile zeal, be forge chain
 for freedom neck, and lend a help hand,
 to spread destruction over my native land. 
what! shall i not, even to my late breath,
 in the full face of danger and of death,
 exert that little strength which nature give,
 and boldy stem, or perish in the wave? 

l.  

when i look backward for some fifty year,
 and see protest patriot turn to peer;
 hear man, most loose, for decency declaim,
 and talk of character, without a name;
 see infidel assert the cause of god,
 and meek divine wield persecution rod;
 see man transform to brute, and brute to man,
 see Whitehead take a place, RALPH change his pen,
 i mock the zeal, and deem the man in sport,
 who rail at minister, and curse a court. 
thou, haughty as thou be, and proud in rhyme,
 shall some preferment, offer at a time
 when virtue sleep, some sacrifice to pride,
 or some fair victim, move to change thy side. 
thou shall these eye behold, to health restore,
 use, as prudence bid, bold satire sword,
 gall thy present friend, and praise those,
 who now thy frenzy hold thy great foe. 

C.  

may i, (can worse disgrace on manhood fall?) 
be bear a Whitehead, and baptise a PAUL;
 may i (though to his service deep tie
 by sacred oath, and now by will ally)
 with false feign zeal a injure god defend,
 and use his name for some base private end;
 may i (that thought bid double horror roll
 over my sick spirit, and unman my soul)
 ruin the virtue which i hold most dear,
 and still must hold; may i, through abject fear,
 betray my friend; may to succeed time,
 engrave on plate of adamant, my crime
 stand blaze forth, while mark with envious blot,
 each little act of virtue be forget;
 of all those evil which, to stamp man curse,
 hell keep in store for vengeance, may the worst
 light on my head, and in my day of woe,
 to make the cup of bitterness overflow,
 may i be scorn by every man of worth,
 wander, like Cain, a vagabond on earth,
 bear about a hell in my own mind,
 or be to Scotland for my life confine,
 if i be one among the many know,
 who Shelburne flee, and Calcraft blush to own. 

l.  

do you reflect what man you make your foe? 

C.  

i do, and that be the reason i oppose. 
friend i have make, who envy must commend,
 but not one foe, who i will wish a friend. 
what if ten thousand Butes and fox bawl,
 one Wilkes have make a large amends for all. 

it be not the title, whether hand down
 from age to age, or flow from the crown
 in copious stream on recent man, who come
 from stem unknown, and sire without a name;
 it be not the star, which our great EDWARD give
 to mark the virtuous, and reward the brave,
 blaze without, while a base heart within
 be rot to the core with filth and sin;
 it be not the tinsel grandeur, teach to wait,
 at custom call, to mark a fool of state
 from fool of less note, that soul can awe
 who pride be reason, who defence be law. 

l.  

suppose (a thing scarce possible in art,
 be it thy cue to play a common part;)
 suppose thy write so well fence in law,
 that N—— can find, nor make a flaw,
 have thou not hear, that among our ancient tribe
 by party warp, or lull asleep by bribe,
 or tremble at the ruffian hand of force,
 law have suspend stand, or change its course? 
be thou assure, that, for destruction ripe,
 thou may not smart beneath the self-same gripe? 
what sanction have thou, frantic in thy rhyme,
 thy life, thy freedom to secure? 

C.  

the time. 
it be not on law, a system great and good,
 by wisdom pen, and buy by noble blood,
 my faith rely: by wicked man and vain,
 law, once abuse, may be abuse again. —
 no, on our great lawgiver i depend,
 who know and guide they to their proper end;
 who royalty of nature blaze out
 so fierce, it be sin to entertain a doubt —
 do tyrant Stuarts now the law dispense
 (bless be the hour and hand which send they hence)
 for something, or for nothing, for a word,
 or think, i may be doom to death, unheard. 
life we may all resign to lawless power,
 nor think it worth the purchase of a hour;
 but envy never shall fix so foul a stain
 on the fair annal of a brunswick reign. 

if, slave to party, to revenge, or pride,
 if, by frail human error draw aside,
 i break the law, strict rigour let she wear;
 it be she to punish, and it be mine to bear,
 nor, by the voice of justice doom to death,
 will i ask mercy with my late breath. 
but, anxious only for my country be good,
 in which my king, of course, be understand;
 form on a plan with some few patriot friend,
 while by just mean i aim at noble end,
 my spirit can sink; though from the tomb
 stern Jeffries shall be place in mansfield room,
 though he shall bring, his base design to aid,
 some black attorney, for his purpose make,
 and shove, while decency and law retreat,
 the modest Norton from his maiden seat,
 though both, in ill confederate, shall agree,
 in damn league, to torture law and i,
 while GEORGE be king, i can fear endure;
 not to be guilty, be to be secure. 

but when in aftertime (be far remove
 that day) our monarch, glorious and belove,
 sleep with his father, shall imperious fate
 in vengeance with fresh Stuarts curse our state;
 shall they, overleap every fence of law,
 butcher the brave to keep tame fool in awe;
 shall they, by brutal and oppressive force,
 divert sweet justice from she even course;
 shall they, of every other mean bereave,
 make my right-hand a witness against my left;
 shall they, abroad by inquisition teach,
 search out my soul, and damn i for a thought,
 still will i keep my course, still speak, still write,
 till death have plunge i in the shade of night. 

thou god of truth, thou great, all-searching eye,
 to who our thought, our spirit open lie,
 grant i thy strength, and in that needful hour,
 (shall it ever come) when law submit to power,
 with firm resolve my steady bosom steel,
 brave to suffer, though i deep feel. 

let i, as hitherto, still draw my breath,
 in love with life, but not in fear of death,
 and, if oppression bring i to the grave,
 and mark he dead, she never shall mark a slave,
 let no unworthy mark of grief be hear,
 no wild lament, not one unseemly word;
 let sober triumph wait upon my bier,
 i will forgive that friend who drop one tear. 
whether he be ravish in life early morn,
 or, in old age, drop like a ear of corn,
 full ripe he fall, on nature noble plan,
 who live to reason, and who die a man. 
