on the death of J—. h—. ESQ. 

June, 1790. 

ere phoebus beam exhale the pearly dew,
 while hoary moisture all the field overspread,
 where ozier cypress, and the droop yew,
 have form a muse melancholy shade. 

Belinda sit, bedew with briny tear,
 the echo grove her deep-fetched sigh retain;
 her plaintive note distress my listen ear,
 while in low accent thus she do complain. 

 "and be the please scene, alas! no more! 
corrosive grief now on my vital prey! 
distress, in sigh i spend the heavy hour,
 nor feel of comfort one auspicious ray! 

now gloomy vision hover round my bed,
 more sadden thought my wake hour employ! 
hope balmy whisper be for ever flee,
 and far remove be every gleam of joy! 

my former day can never more return;
 each future prospect darken on my view;
 life rugged path seem dreary and forlorn;
 no kindly hand do there sweet floweret strew. 

alas! on life tempestuous ocean tost,
 become a prey to each high swell wave,
 my every hope of happiness be lose —
 lay in the silent, solitary grave! 

no more, o death! thy point shaft i dread! 
thy keen dart i hourly wish to share;
 since my love Henry number with the dead,
 nought in this world can now engage my care! 

ah! what to i avail the radiant sky,
 the verdant meadow, or the vocal grove? 
no kind companion share the melt joy,
 and tune his lute to melody and love. 

he be — but oh! no language can express —
 what my love HENRY ever be to i:
 my joy in health, my support in distress,
 my lover, friend, and tender husband he. 

for i a parent love he do forgo,
 with all the pleasure of his native shore:
 on i alone do every care bestow;
 he see i happy, and he wish no more. 

keen recollection animate my pain,
 and all my pleasure past augment my woe;
 yet fond remembrance shall those joy retain,
 while vital life within this bosom flow. " 

thus speak Belinda, on the turf recline;
 no ray of hope her sadden fancy cheere:
 when from a thicket, as by heaven design,
 a nymph celestial in her sight appear. 

her flow robe wave in the ambient air;
 a flowery wreath her modest temple grace;
 her presence kind smooth the brow of care,
 and all the horror of the scene efface. 

array in heavenly smile she onward come;
 vain phantom her superior power confess:
 she view the sad, deject, mournful dame,
 and thus in soothe accent her address. 

 "do not Belinda at thy fate repine,
 nor by thy tear augment the ponderous load;
 the lovely youth must be no long thy:
 he be go, such be the sovereign will of god. 

he be go to flourish in a fair soil,
 a plant too noble for this noxious clime:
 where virtue must triumphant ever smile,
 he will share of joy ecstatic and sublime. 

vain be thy sorrow, vain the sigh of those,
 who do his favour or his friendship share:
 he be go beyond the reach of human woe,
 above the weight of every worldly care. 

pure be the virtue centre in his breast,
 with unassuming rectitude they sway:
 he tongue the dictate of his heart express,
 while his mild manner more than word convey! 

but human bliss be of a transient date,
 nor permanent thy woe, though now severe:
 soon shall you meet in a celestial state,
 and then no more the pang of part fear. 
