verse write in LONDON on the approach of spring.

early the sun his radiant axle guide,
 slope his steep course with the Pleiades;
 on every fragrant briar the floweret bloom,
 and the wild woodlark chant his early song
 in heedless carol, to the smile hour,
 young maia festive train; their wavy dance
 she jocund lead, and from her horn profuse
 pour rose, violet, woodbine, eglantine,
 fair Flora dower, what time the youthful spring
 clasp her all-blushing in a secret bower:
 thou the mild offspring of their warm embrace,
 oh lovely may, and these thy heritage,
 which bounteous thou with a unsparing hand
 scattere to all, though chief thou love to deck
 the village phaebe brow, and fair far
 be thy adorn, than the sunny glow
 of eastern ruby, ill assort grace
 that deck not but deform the fade cheek
 of the wan courtier. — far more rapture greet
 fancy fond ear, wherever she muse rove,
 thy minstrelsy untutored, than the trill
 and languid descant of italian art. 
yet sing the woodlark, and the hawthorn bloom,
 unheard the song, the fragrance unperceived
 by i; though not among the son of man
 there life, who listen with more rapture ear,
 or feel more lively, nature vary boon. 
for though confine in the city wall
 to dwell with busy care, and with he watch
 the call of interest, be my lot affix,
 far happy seem to i the peasant life,
 who tread the furrow labour, yet his mind
 vacant of thought can muse of what around
 strike his rapt eye with beauty, or his ear
 with please song, than if a golden mine
 disclose its boundless treasure, but condemn
 my cark thought, to watch the gild mischief,
 and cunning devise to increase the store. 

bereave of every pleasure nature give
 each plain but heart-felt rapture, what be wealth? 
in artful maze we but toil for bliss:
 true pleasure dwell not in the arch roof,
 she sing no carol to the midnight ball;
 the load board and bacchus fluster draught
 in vain be try, for ah she dwell not there! 
she dwell not with such rude ill-mannered mirth,
 but seek with her mild sister cheerfulness
 the russet plain; there prompt the virgin song,
 breathe the brisk carol from the cottage reed,
 strike the quick tabor glad with echo pulse,
 and animate the village holiday. 
nor then alone but when his honest labour
 call the good swain, she early join his step;
 for the mild radiance of the open dawn
 give to her sight the wide-extended view
 of hill and dale, hoar forest, flower heath,
 rich harvest, verdant meadow, where the stream
 roll far its plenteous wave, and all around
 to pleasure ear most grateful, thousand bird,
 lark, linnet, thrush, and thou of all the grove
 the sweet songster, witch philomel,
 be rise to hymn out thy morning song. 

thou too at eve, when all his labour over,
 he at the furrow end unyoke the steer,
 and seek with weary step his rest at home,
 do with thy tranquil warble sooth his soul;
 best prelude to the peace his cottage give. 

there at the door his numerous offspring watch
 their sire return, and eager run to tell
 the tide of his come, while his dame
 ply her glad evening care, to deck the board
 with food uncater by the baleful hand
 of luxury, and fit to refresh
 his toil-worn spirit, and her smile welcome
 give its due relish to the simple fare. 

what be to this the proud luxurious feast,
 the city boast, where distant colony
 of east and western world must be explore
 to strike the sickly palate feeble sense
 with faint delight? oh what be all our joy,
 even those of monarch, to the thousand beauty
 that strike the rapt soul of the rude hind? 

can art best mimicry their form express? 
can rich Loraine mix up the glow tint
 bright as Aurora? can he form a shade
 to strike the fancy with a gloom so solemn
 as every thicket, copse, or secret grove
 at twilight hour afford? can savage Rosa
 with aught so wild noble fill the mind,
 as where the ancient oak in the wood depth
 have shed his leafy honour, and around
 the woodman with fell axe have lower the pride
 of many a tall tree, he desert stand
 a barren trunk, while rude wind howl around,
 and dreary torrent lash his naked limb? 
mean time the rift thunder dreadful roar,
 the livid lightning flash, and element
 conjoin pour out their wrath, as if to rend
 the lone, defenceless, age, feeble oak. 
such scene awake imagination power
 to sacred thought; such Rosa can paint;
 it be his alone to show the shatter trunk:
 the wind keen howl, the thunder awful sound,
 the dreary rain, these mock the pencil power. 

can aught of artful music sooth the soul
 to so serene a temper, as the flight
 of songster in the grove? or can thy strain,
 (though there enchantment strike the magic chord)
 oh matchless Purcell! with so wild a charm
 transport the mind, as when at dusk of eve
 from the hoar battlement the lone owl cry
 pierce the awful silence, and the fall
 and time-worn hollow tower convey the sound
 to the near wood, where in the devious path
 retire fancy wander, on her ear
 the faint sound murmur, strait the distant low
 of unyoke heifer, strait the cuckoo note
 she hear, while oft the rove zephyr tread
 rustle alarm her, and the measure step
 of the slow steer, who brush through the thicket
 to seek his food, beat due regular. 
as on he wander, through the open bower
 he see the pale moon rise; cloud on cloud
 pile mountainous awhile obstruct her beam,
 till labour thence she lift her silver brow,
 and pour her full ray on the ivy steeple. 
and hark its bell now toll the minute knell,
 and through the churchway path the surpliced priest
 walk slow forward, while the snowy pall
 cover the relic of some love lorn virgin,
 pass with awful pace along the glade. 

wrap harmonist! what though thy study chord
 can sound the slow knell, echo to the note
 the lone owl utter, breathe the heifer low,
 and mark the funeral step with pause cadence,
 and music can no more, where be the tower
 overhung with-ivy, see by the pale moon,
 who faint beam glimmer on the snowy pall? 
where be the rocky cloud from whence she break? 
yet do not these, do not the rustle breeze
 and the slow-treading heifer add delight? 
do not accordant sense join to fill
 the muse mind with calm and holy rapture? 
and can the city by the utmost force
 of mimic art, with labour imitation
 so soothe the soul, or give such mild delight? 

you gay and sportive votary of joy,
 forgive the thoughtless muse, for she have lead i
 to talk of please horror, and the bliss
 which melancholy give; you can form
 amid the circle folly, which urge on
 your laugh hour, perhaps you can form
 a notion of these joy, and with a taunt
 of high contempt, despise the wild enthusiasm. 
yet on the well-trod stage have you not see
 your Roscius fire by the natural bard,
 immortal Shakespear, wander the bleak heath
 a poor and outcast king, nor blame the wind
 who keen tooth seize his age, nor chide the element
 for their unkindness, while the ruffle storm
 tear the proud garment from his shiver trunk,
 and the fierce lightning fire his madden brain? 
have you not then feel horror? will you not
 change your rich pomp for Edgar naked hovel,
 and be the poor king host? — have you not wish
 to range with rosaline the forest wild,
 or live beneath the shelter of some oak
 with melancholy Jaques? tell i, why then
 you look on wealth and greatness with a scorn? 
why but because the muse with native strength
 pour truth on fancy eye; and yet the muse
 can only boast in the most warm description
 a faint resemblance, nor have she such force
 to strike as nature have. alas! her voice
 but wake remembrance of our absent bliss;
 and when she sing of incense-breathing spring,
 she waft no odour to the longing sense,
 but only prompt our sigh, that we must dwell
 confine in the full city, distant far
 from every scene of rural innocence,
 who wood, who shade, who storm, or funeral,
 even raise a sense of pleasure. what can then
 the bright view, what can the happy hour
 that give the blush bride to the true arm
 of faithful Damon? thenot please revive
 to former youth, and gay of the day
 provoke the village mirth, and from his soul
 enjoy the spousal of his boy, who scarce
 (overcome with rapture) can himself conduct
 his festival; and but for busy thenot,
 each due right be neglect, and the guest
 unbidden by the tabor sprightly sound
 to seek the green, and in the jocund dance
 each maiden with her youth breathe sport and joy,
 save the still happy pair: their great bliss
 fill the whole breast, nor leave a vacant place
 for light mirth. unnoticed speak the pipe:
 they hear no sound but the endear voice
 of mutual love: they do not mark the joy
 in every face around; for their attention,
 fix on each other, watch every glance
 diffuse by the lovely languid eye. 
well may all else be unperceived; for who
 observe bright Hesper dart his point ray,
 when ride high mild Cynthia pour serene
 her steady beam. oh tell i, when compare
 to these true rapture, what be the shadowy pomp
 and artful splendour, when the golden shackle
 Fetter two venal soul, by interest call
 to prostitute the ever-hallowed rite
 of holy HYMEN? — on the village plain
 nought join but mutual love; no sordid motive
 promote unnatural union; but the flame
 that first unite glow throughout their life
 a steady fire, who unabate light
 gild youth with rapture, and with foster warmth
 cheer droop age, who smile see his offspring
 step forth to claim the joy he celebrate
 with annual hospitality, what time
 the circle year bring round the happy day
 that shower down blessing on he, when it give
 to his fond vow the will sylvia charm,
 then bloom young, now hoary, but her heart
 unchanged by time; for still the same desire
 to add to every joy, or fond soothe
 each woe he feel, reign unabated there. 
his social roof receive each welcome guest,
 his open heart diffuse round his pleasure,
 and each plain neighbour with unfeign tongue
 congratulate his bliss. who will not leave
 for these sincere delight, the pageant pomp,
 the rich array, the courtly formal speech
 unuttered by the heart, the birthday wish
 of venal hireling, who for interest crowd
 the glitter levee? happy (reason deem
 view in each light) the simple village life,
 than all that courtier wish, or king bestow. 
king can give a boon of so rich price
 as be thy smile, o lovely health! and thou
 shun the tumult, to the rural green
 retire. there, not build by mortal hand,
 stand on the southern slope of the fresh hill
 thy temple, from who roof the eglantine
 and vagrant woodbine hang; and at the porch
 sit thy good priestess ease, administer
 to exercise (who up the gentle slope
 by moderate foot move) the holy cup
 of temperance, nymph of the crystal spring
 that dwell beneath thy altar; and from thence
 warble with gentle lapse join the full stream,
 that wind wild delay its silver course
 in the rich mead, who bank the peasant oft
 approach to allay his thirst, and quaff
 the simple beverage from the limpid fount. 
bright virgin, thou of all the power who range
 the rural plain, i woo with constant vow
 most ardent! deign around my temple bind
 thy fragrant wreath, and deck my purple cheek
 with thy rich glow. then undisturbed the mind
 muse pursue its holy meditation,
 and rapt in trance, can trace a thousand gift
 shower by the gracious hand of nature king
 to deck the various field. the wonder eye
 roam over the fair creation; then to heaven
 unbidden soar; for the full soul impress
 with holy transport, there direct its view
 from whence its blessing flow, and the rapt voice
 accordant hymn the grateful song of praise. 
the rapid gust of passion, which or pride,
 or folly, or the thousand vary form
 of courtly affectation ever raise,
 here all subside, and the compose breast
 expand with love, and to its utmost power
 diffuse blessing to mankind, nor fear
 ingratitude shall check, or pride shall spurn
 the offer bounty of the generous heart. 

bless be the day, and double bless the hour,
 when my fidele with unfeigned vow
 give her fond hand, and own her constant love:
 though since that hour already thrice the sun
 from every sign have see our grow bliss;
 and though thy smile of unaffected love
 add joy to every joy, and charm to ease
 the brow of care; though thou be all that heaven
 can give in woman, tenderness, and truth,
 and all my heart ever wish, when warm fancy
 form the fond future view of household bliss;
 yet happy still perhaps our lot have be,
 have thou beneath the rural thatch receive
 my faithful vow, and we have never hear
 of town or city life; a marian thou,
 and rustic corin i. then on the plain
 content we have pass life little day. 
while youth with sprightly beam illume her hour,
 they will move on with joy; and when at noon
 firm manhood call we forth to till the soil,
 and with our labour hand direct the plough,
 we will be ready, nor refuse the task,
 due tribute to the public; till at eve
 our vigour lose, when age come creep on,
 we will unyoke our heifer, and retire
 to welcome ease, our best skill then employ
 at our own home; attentive there to thatch
 the chink which time have make, and to root up
 each foul weed that deform our little plot. 
this business over, calm we shall attend
 the approach hour of our eternal rest;
 and when it come, bear to our peaceful grave
 by the plain villager; what though no tomb
 of sculpture marble call the pass eye
 to read our story, yet the cottage tear
 shall on our ash fall, and the good heart
 overflow sincere for a neighbour lose:
 upon our bier the virgin troop will hang
 fresh-woven chaplet of the sweet flower:
 green turf shall deck our grave; and every year
 in springtime will some friendly hand with care
 bind the fresh briar around, to guard the place
 from the rude insult of the careless step;
 and faithful memory to late time record,
 we be the happy pair of human kind. 
