write in Devonshire, near the dart.

hail, Devon! in thy bosom let i rest,
 and pour forth music from my rapture breast:
 i will stray thy meadow hill
 and plain along,
 and loud sing the widely-varied song,
 trace thy river, and thy bubble rill. 

oft, rise from the sea, the tempest lour,
 and buoy on wind the cloud majestic sail,
 while scatter burst in wide and frequent shower,
 swell the stream which glide through every vale;
 yet be the marshy plain bedeck with flower,
 and balmy sweet be bear on every gale. 

where dart romantic wind its mazy course,
 and mossy rock set beneath the woody hill,
 from whence each creep rill its store distil,
 and wander water join with rapid force;
 there nature hand have wild strew her flower,
 and vary prospect strike the rove eye;
 rough-hanging wood over culture hill arise;
 thick ivy spread around huge antic tower,
 and fruitful grove
 scatter their blossom fast as fall shower,
 perfume every stream which over the landscape pour. 

along the grassy bank how sweet to stray,
 when the mild eve smile in the glow west,
 and lengthen shade proclaim depart day,
 and faint sunbeam in the water play,
 when every bird seek its accustom rest! 
how grand, to see the burn orb descend,
 and the grave sky wrap in its nightly robe,
 whether resplendent with the starry globe,
 or silvered by the mildly-solemn moon,
 when nightingale their lonely song resume,
 and folly son their babble noise suspend! 

or when the darken cloud fly over the sea,
 and early morning beam a cheerful ray,
 wake melodious songster from each tree;
 how sweet beneath each dewy hill
 amid the please shade to stray,
 where nectar flower their sweet distil,
 who watery pearl reflect the day! 
to scent the jonquil rich perfume,
 to pluck the hawthorn tender brier,
 as wild beneath each flowery hedge
 fair strawberry with violet bloom,
 and every joy of spring conspire! 

nature wild songster from each bush and tree
 invite the early walk, and breathe delight;
 what bosom heave not with warm sympathy
 when the gay lark salute the new-born light? 
Hark! where the shrill-toned thrush,
 sweet whistle, carol the wild harmony! 
the linnet warble, and from yonder bush
 the robin pour soft strain of melody! 

hail Devon! while through the love wood i stray,
 O! let i loud pour the grateful lay! 
tell each luxuriant bank where violet grow,
 each mazy vale, where fragrant woodbine wind,
 how much of their bewitch charm they owe
 to the sweet peace which fill my happy mind. 
Ah! where again will it such pleasure find? 
o, love society! the heartfelt lay
 be all the humble muse can now bestow;
 thy praise still i sing, as on i stray,
 write in my heart amid each strain they flow. 
