LUCY, or the bank of Avon.

write at the age of seventeen, and never mean by mr. B.  for the public eye.

where gentle Avon wind its silver stream,
 a moss-grown cottage rear its humble head;
 there Lucy first the vernal air inhale,
 and spend beneath its roof her infant year. 
like avon stream those year flow gentle on,
 nor heave a murmur sigh for pomp or wrath;
 her parent toil to ease be all her care. 
their cott, with three small field, be all their store;
 this little all, by labour, not by fraud
 obtain, by bounteous heaven be kind bless,
 and ever do their frugal want supply. 
to nature, not to art, her charm she owe;
 by all the hamlet be those charm confess,
 still have she live, and still have happy be,
 have honour be young Edward constant guide:
 but Edward, tutor long in fashion school,
 lord of each please art, each win grace,
 to visit Shakspeare hallow Mulberry come,
 by Lucy guide to the classic shade. 
beneath its ancient bough he woo the nymph,
 and twice two moon on avon bank he spend,
 ere the sad maid, by hapless love betray,
 yield her virgin honour to his arm. 

you vestal stern, who oft a virtue boast
 that spring unbidden in your frigid breast,
 scorn weak love, be still severe chaste! 
yet, spare; oh! spare poor Lucy injure shade:
 for once resemble heaven, and pardon she,
 if ever you for heaven pardon hope;
 for crime you have, though not from love they spring,
 and have young Edward seek your cold embrace,
 then you like Lucy may have love and fall. 
sad Lucy once possess, her arm he leave
 to pluck fresh rose in a distant clime;
 and twice two year on transatlantic shore,
 Edward, false Edward, spend, ere he return
 to visit injure Lucy native land. 
she, like the plaintive bird, her love bewail,
 and, ever sigh, stray on avon bank;
 like avon stream her tear flow ceaseless down,
 for three long year her fate she sore mourn;
 the four, no long able to endure
 the pang of hope delay, and blast fame,
 in avon stream the ruin Lucy plunge;
 Avonian nymph the love-lorn fair receive,
 and deep mourn a sister hapless fate. 
and now vile Edward come; to avon bank
 his guilty step he bend, and seek his fair,
 who now on avon bank have cease to stray;
 but ere poor Lucy wellknown cott he reach,
 he meet the sexton grim, who, jeer, say,
 "go to thy Lucy beneath yond yew-tree shade! 
in bridal honour deck she wait thou there." 
guide by the pale moon tremble he go,
 but, ah! no Lucy there sad Edward find:
 nought but the stone that tell her tale of woe. 
full long entranced in grief he speechless stand,
 then sheathe his glitter poignard in his breast,
 and sink expire on his Lucy grave. 
from this say tale one moral may we learn,
 that virtue path alone be path of peace,
 and that the man who these pure path shall quit
 for pleasure gild hall and roseate bower
 through life long course will never true bliss attain. 
