the author answer his friend, who blame he for not sing, when desire, he contradict the third satyr of Horace, begin with omnibus hoc vitium est cantoribus inter amicos, etc.  he defend Tigellius, and prove that Horace have no actual skill in vocal music.

if this strange vice in all good singer be,
as the admire Horace do declare,
that when desire, though bless with health and ease
their choice friend they still deny to please,
yet if unasked shall rude sing so long,
to tire they quite with each repeat song:
i strong then shall take his satyr part,
lash the performer, and despise their art.
but have study long enough to be
a little know in that quality:
i soon perceive when i his version meet
it be more from prejudice, than judgement write.
and Horace be in his reproof more free,
because Tigellius be his enemy,
who resty vice must bear this fierce assault
while all the rest be lash for one man fault.
satyr shall never take from malice aid,
for with due reverence to Horace pay,
who rail at fault through personal prejudice,
show more his own, than shame another vice;
Tigellius, as his character be plain,
be of a humour most absurd and vain,
fantastic in his garb, unsettled in his brain.
and if (as once great Cesar he deny
when ask to sing) it be the effect of pride:
lictor and fasces shall have blunt teach
the fool to know the obedience that he ought.
but if Augustus his command do lay
when the genius be not able to obey;
as oft with singer it will happen so,
accord as their joy or trouble grow;
it be no offence then to excuse his art,
the soul untuned make discord in each part.
and monarch can no more give vocal breath
than they can hinder when fate summons, death:
though kind compliance singer ought to use,
they often have just reason to refuse;
a pleasure love by one, be like by more,
suppose, sir, i have sing too much before,
make my self hoarse, and even rack my throat
to please some friend, with some fine treble note;
chance do i then to you and other bring,
the second complement, be prithee sing;
i swear i — can, can say you, that be find sport;
but all good singer be so hard to court:
come, come, you must, here be lady beg, not i
what soul so dull as beauty can deny?
to make excuse then, modest i tell
how hoarse i be, with what that day befall,
it be all in vain, you rail, i be think a clown,
and omnibus hoc victium knock i down.
i often have, (it be true) to sing deny,
but not through resty vanity, or pride;
but that perhaps i have be tire before,
untune and ill, not able to sing more,
or that a hour of infelicity
have rob my soul of usual harmony;
yet all be the same the old see be still repeat,
you singer long to be so much entreat,
though at that time to i no joy can fall
great, than not to have be ask at all;
the harmonious soul must have her humour free,
consent of part still make best harmony.
we read the Iewish captive can not sing
in a strange land, rule by a foreign king;
contentment the melodious chord control,
and tune the diapason of our soul:
what make a cobbler chirp a pleasant part
at his hard labour, but a merry heart;
he sing when ask, or blunt else deny,
accord to his share of grief or joy.
thus the same accident to we befall,
and that which tune the cobbler tune we all;
but if against our will we thrash out song,
for sing then be thrash to the lung;
the blast of airy praise we dear get,
than peasant do their bread, with toil and sweat
to sleep at your command be the same thing,
as when you be ill or vex in mind to sing,
and though performance never so easy show,
as it have charm it have vexation too,
and the singer plague it be none but singer know.
how often have i hear the unskilful say,
have i a voice by heaven i will sing all day;
but with that science have he be endow,
and be to sing, when ask, or be think proud,
when weary, hoarse, or vex, not to deny,
but at all season with all friend comply,
he will then blame Horace full as much as i;
who want of knowledge in the vocal art
make he lash all, for one man mean desert:
for have he the fatigue of songster know,
and judge their inconvenience by his own;
Tigellius only have correction meet,
and omnibus hoc vitium never be write.
