riddle.

by the same.

through the close covert of the shady grove,
one summer day it be my chance to rove,
where, shroud from the sun too scorch ray,
stretch at her ease, half-slumbering cloe lay.
occasion so invite, who can miss?
soft i steal, and snatch a sudden kiss.
startle at first, the rise blush display
the quick resentment of the ruffle maid;
lively display — for soon it over past;
such blush anger never long do last!
quick reconcilement must to rage succeed,
where wrong ideal solid pleasure breed.
submissive look my pardon soon obtain,
and pardon love as soon new boldness gain.
offend thus, forgive thus, we lay,
long time entranced with the alternate play;
until warn, too soon, by envious night, we part:
the thrill joy still flutter round my heart;
thought still, though faint, paint the glow bliss,
on fancy lip still cleave the rapturous kiss.

but mark the sad effect of casual love,
and tread with caution in the shady grove.
in due time, cloe at my door appear,
a fix composure on her brow she wear;
and guess the cause: close in her lap conceal
a lovely twin in either hand she hold;
and take, she cry, these pledge of our love,
these fruit you plant in the shady grove.

soft as the downy bloom on cloe check,
smooth as the polish ivory of her neck,
warm as her bosom, white as be her arm,
so smooth be they and white, so soft and warm,
please i receive they for the giver sake,
heedless what censure strait-laced prude may make.

compliant to my form hand they grow,
and with their size increase obedience due,
as i direct they take the appoint bent,
with every motion, every beck, consent,
whatever i want, they reach with ready hand,
whereve i go, they wait at my command.
now at ease one in my bosom lay;
while by my side the other wanton play;
now this my hand embrace; the other free,
take his full swing and play at liberty.
before i hand in hand sometime they move,
emblem of friendship, and unite love;
sometime behind my lead step they trace
still close knit in brotherly embrace;
anon on either side as guard attend,
at once adorn i, and at once defend.
still more and more my love they thus engage,
thus still shall cherish my decline age;
and when the appoint hour of fate shall come,
they will follow still attendant on my tomb.
more last far than man soon fade breath,
their love extend beyond the vale of death;
they will hang for ever over my much-loved bust,
till they themselves, like i, be turn to dust.
