the female right to literature,

in a letter to a young lady from FLORENCE.

by —

while you, athenia, with assiduous toil
reap the rich fruit of learning fertile soil;
now search whatever historic truth have show,
and make the wealth of age past your own;
now crop the blossom of poetic flower,
and range delight in the muse bower;
say, will the sweet of her sex attend
to line by friendship, not by by flattery pen;
to line which tempt not worth with empty praise;
but to still great height that worth will raise;
to line which dare against a world decide,
and stem the rage of custom rapid tide!

come then, athenia, free let we scan
the coward insult of that tyrant, man.
self-praised, and grasp at despotic power,
he look on slavery as the female dower;
to nature boon ascribe what force have give,
and usurpation deem the gift of heaven.
see the first-peopled east, where Asia shed
her balmy spice over her fertile mead:
there, while the assyrian stretch his wide domain
from distant Indus to the cyprian main,
all nature law by impious force be break;
the female sex to slavery gall yoke
bow their fair neck: from social life confine,
and all the exertion of the enlighten mind,
close in a proud seraglio wanton bower,
the dalliance of a tyrant loose hour.
by kings example subject form their life,
dependent satrap have their train of wife;
proportion power each petty tyrant crave,
and each poor female be the slave of slave.

when Persia next overturn the assyrian throne,
destroy her tyranny and fix its own;
the fair distress no mild treatment see,
this be indeed the unalterable law. 
in future time, whatever master come,
tyrant be change, but tyranny the same:
at length to accumulate the female woe,
the grand impostor Mahomet arise;
swell with prophetic lie, he lay his plan
on the firm basis of the pride of man;
"woman, the toy of man, and slave of lust,
"be but mere mould to form man outward crust;
"the heavenly spark, that animate the clay,
"of the prime essence that effulgent ray,
"the immortal soul be all to man confine,
"not mean squander on weak womankind. "

accurse wretch! by hell black council drive
thus to debase the fair work of heaven.
and can religion rear her sacred head
fraught with such doctrine? can such error spread
from western Tangier, and the sun-burnt moor,
to the cold Tartar ever-frozen shore?
even Greece too not exempt, Greece, once the seat
where sense and freedom hold the reins of state;
where force be reason handmaid; where the band
of love and friendship join the wed hand;
where flourish once, and flourish still in fame
the athenian matron, and the spartan dame.

in Rome too liberty once reign, in Rome
the female virtue be allow to bloom,
and bloom they do: when cannae fatal plain
be heap with mountain of the roman slay,
be there a matron weep her child dead? 
be there a matron weep not those that flee? 
then when each rumour seem the voice of fate,
and speak the victor thunder at their gate,
be there one mention peace? do they not pour
their wealth, their jewel to the public store,
in emulous haste all press to be poor?

alas how change! how be the mighty sink,
from the firm patriot to the whine monk!
where industry secure the public good,
where censor, consul, and dictator plough.
now lazy zealot batten on the spoil,
and consecrate sloth devour the farmer toil.
but oh still worse! where love and friendship shine,
domestic tyranny have fix his throne,
with all his train of monster: at his side
swell with self-flattery sit stiff-necked pride;
two twin-born fiend his other ear engage,
heart-cankered jealousy, and fire-eyed rage;
in front, his empire sole support and source,
rattle chain, bar and lock, stalk brutal force;
while pale and shrivel, crouch beneath the chair,
lie sneak, conscious worthlessness; and near
squint-eyed suspicion lurk, with self-distracting fear.

hail, happy Britain, dear parental land,
where liberty maintain her late stand!
oh while amid tyrannic realm i rove,
enamour let i pour my filial love
into thy bosom. when the raven wing
of darkness hover over i, when the spring
of every outward sense be shut, my soul
thou oft revisit, oft without controul
range thy field delight, and inhale
friendship pure joy, and freedom healthful gale.

but say, Britannia, do thy son, who claim
a birthright liberty, dispense the same
in equal scale? why then do custom bind
in chain of ignorance the female mind?
why be to they the bright etherial ray
of science veil? why do each pedant say,
"shield i, propitious power, nor clog my life
"with that supreme of plague a learned wife. 
"it be man, with science to expand the soul,
"and wing his eagle-flight from pole to pole;
"it be his to pierce antiquity dark gloom,
"and the still thick shade of time to come;
"it be his to guide the ponderous helm of state,
"and bear alone all wisdom solid weight.
"let woman with allure grace move
"the fondle passion and the baby love;
"be this our only science, be her doom
"fix to the toilette, the spinnet and loom. "

tongue-doughty pedant, be athenia soul
form for these only? bring the exact rule
of judgement to the trial, prove that ever
thy school-proud tribe engross a great share
of mental excellence; though vernal youth
joust swell her lovely bosom, yet bless truth,
offspring of sense and industry, have there
long fix her residence; and teach the fair
or wisdom deep recess to explore,
or on invention rapid wing to soar
above the aonian mount; and can thou think
that virtue, which exalt the soul, can sink
the outward charm? must knowledge give offence?
and be the grace all at war with sense?
say, who of all the fair be form to move
the fond passion, most ecstatic love,
more than athenia? in her gentle eye
soft innocence and virgin modesty
incessant shine, while still a new-born grace
spring in each speak feature of her face.
her sprightly wit no forward pertness spoil:
no self-assuming air her judgement soil;
still prone to learn, though capable to teach,
and lofty all her thought, but humble all her speech.
proceed, athenia, let thy grow mind
take every knowledge in of every kind:
still on perfection fix thy steady eye,
be ever rise, rise thou never so high.
but oh reflect, that in the adventurous flight,
thou mount a glorious, but a dangerous height:
when every science every grace shall join,
when most thy wit, when most thy beauty shine,
when thick crowd enamour press around,
when loud every tongue thy praise shall sound,
when verse too offer incense to thy shrine,
and adoration breathe in every line,
then let my friendly Muse express her care,
then most will danger spread her viewless snare:
then let this truth possess thy inmost soul,
"one drop of vanity may spoil the whole."

not self-secure on earth can knowledge dwell,
knowledge the bliss of heaven and pang of hell,
alike the instrument of good and evil,
the attribute of god and of the devil.
without she, virtue be a powerless will;
she, without virtue, be a powerful ill;
do she then join with virtue, or oppose,
she prove the best of friend, or worst of foe.
o! be they once in happy union join,
and be that union in athenia mind.
