the arbour:

a ode to contentment.

by mr. THOMAS Cole.

to these lone shade, where peace delight to dwell,
may fortune oft permit i to retreat;
here bid the world, with all its care, farewell,
and leave its pleasure to the rich and great.

oft as the summer sun shall cheer this scene,
with that mild gleam which point his part ray,
here let my soul enjoy each eve serene,
here share its calm, until life decline day.

no gladsome image then shall escape my sight,
from these gay flower, which border near my eye,
to yond bright cloud, that deck, with rich light,
the gild mantle of the western sky.

with ample gaze, i will trace that ridge remote,
where open cliff disclose the boundless main;
with earnest ken, from each low hamlet note
the steeple summit peep over the plain.

what various work that rural landscape fill,
where mingle hedge-row beauteous field enclose;
and prudent culture, with industrious skill,
her chequer scene of crop and fallows show?

how shall i love to mark that riv'let's maze,
through which it work its untaught course along;
while near its grassy bank the herd shall graze,
and blithsome milkmaid chant her thoughtless song?

still will i note the shade of lengthen sheep,
as scatter over the hill slant brow they rove;
still note the day last glimmer lustre creep
from off the verge of yonder upland grove.

nor shall my leisure seldom wait to view
the slow-winged rook in homeward train succeed;
nor yet forbear the swallow to pursue,
with quick glance, close skim over the mead.

but most here shall i delight to explore
the bounteous law of nature mystic power;
then muse on he who bless all her store,
and give to solemn thought the sober hour.

let mirth unenvied laugh with proud disdain,
and deem it spleen one moment thus to waste;
if so she keep far hence her noisy train,
nor interrupt those joy she can taste.

far sweet stream shall flow from wisdom spring,
than she receive from folly costly bowl;
and what delight can her chief dainty bring,
like those which feast the heavenly-pensive soul?

hail silence then! be thou my frequent guest;
for thou be wont my gratitude to raise,
as high as wonder can the theme suggest,
whenever i meditate my maker praise.

what joy for tutor piety to learn,
all that my christian solitude can teach,
where weak-eyed reason self may well discern
each clear truth the gospel deign to preach?

no object here but may convince the mind,
of more than thoughtful honesty shall need;
nor can suspense long question here to find
sufficient evidence to fix its creed.

it be god that give this bower its awful gloom;
his arch verdure do its roof invest;
he breathe the life of fragrance on its bloom;
and with his kindness make its owner bless.

oh! may the guidance of thy grace attend
the use of all thy bounty shall bestow;
lest folly shall mistake its sacred end,
or vice convert it into mean of woe.

incline and aid i still my life to steer,
as conscience dictate what to shun or choose;
nor let my heart feel anxious hope or fear,
for aught this world can give i or refuse.

then shall not wealth parade one wish excite,
for wretched state to barter peace away;
nor vain ambition lure my pride invite,
beyond contentment humble path to stray.

what though thy wisdom may my lot deny,
the treasure plenty free to dispense;
yet well thy goodness can that want supply
with large portion of benevolence.

and sure the heart that will the generous deed,
may all the joy of charity command;
for she best love from notice to recede,
and deal her unsought gift with secret hand.

then will i sometime bid my fancy steal,
that unclaimed wealth no property restrain;
sooth with fictitious aid my friendly zeal,
and realize each godly act she feign.

so shall i gain the gold without alloy;
without oppression, toil, or treacherous snare;
so shall i know its use, its power employ,
and yet avoid its danger and its care.

and spite of all that boastful wealth can do,
in vain will fortune strive the rich to bless,
be they not flatter with some distant view
of what she never can give they to possess.

even wisdom high conceit great want will feel,
if not supply from fancy boundless store;
and nought but shame make power itself conceal,
that she, to satisfy, must promise more.

but though experience will not fail to show,
however its truth man weakness may upbraid,
that what he most value here below,
owe half its relish to kind fancy aid;

yet shall not prudence her light wing command,
she may too far extend her heedless flight;
for pleasure soon shall quit her fairyland
if nature region be not hold in sight.

from truth be abode, in search of kind deceit,
within due limit she may safe roam;
if rove do not make she hate retreat,
and with aversion shun her proper home.

but thanks to those, who fond parental care
to learning path my youthful step confine,
i need not shun a state which let i share
each calm delight that soothe the studious mind.

while genius last, his fame shall never decay,
who artful hand first cause its fruit to spread;
in last volume stamp the print lie,
and teach the muse to embalm the dead.

to he i owe each fair instructive page,
where science tell i what her son have know;
collect their choice work from every age,
and make i wise with knowledge not my own.

book right use may every state secure:
from fortune evil may our peace defend;
may teach we how to shun, or to endure,
the foe malignant, and the faithless friend.

shall rigid want withdraw all outward aid,
kind store of inward comfort they can bring;
shall keen disease life taint stream invade,
sweet to the soul from they pure health may spring.

shall both at once man weak frame infest,
some letter charm may still relief supply;
against all event prepare his patient breast,
and make he quite resign to live, or die.

for though no word can time or fate restrain;
no sound suppress the call of nature voice;
though neither rhyme, nor spell, can conquer pain,
nor magic self make wretchedness our choice,

yet reason, while it form the subtle plan,
some pure source of pleasure to explore,
must deem it vain for that poor pilgrim, man,
to think of rest until his journey over;

must deem each fruitless toil, by heaven design
to teach he where to look for real bliss;
else why shall heaven excite the hope to find
what balk pursuit must here for ever miss?
