the tulip and lily.

by mr. b—y.

high over the bed, conspicuous see,
 a tulip rise, the garden queen. 
never on Holland foggy strand
 be tall rear by dutchman hand:
 never be Flora know to imprint
 on tulip leaf a bright tint,
 or lead with more fantastic freak,
 on tulip leaf the vary streak. 

beneath the tower tulip shade,
 in nought but simple white array,
 and shelter from the intrude view,
 a lily of the valley grow;
 the humble plant of all the train
 that deck the mountain or the plain,
 or on the river margin blow,
 and paint the dance scene below. 
unenvying she the praise can hear
 of fine flower that flaunt near:
 and she can see without a sigh
 the saucy zephyr pass she by,
 to woo the pink, more gay dress,
 or pant upon the Rose breast. 

it chance upon a May-day morn,
 when blossom crowd the whiten thorn,
 with more than usual lustre bright,
 the genial god of heat and light,
 through the blue heaven pursue his course,
 and shine with more than summer force. 
each flower that glow in bright array
 witness the life-imparting day:
 the tulip too, above the rest,
 the vigorous warmth with joy confess. 
what transport in her bosom swell,
 each vary streak when she behold
 withdraw from the pursue eye,
 and shift into the neighbour dye! 
the lily charm, and humble state,
 she view with boundless joy elate;
 and thus unable to refrain,
 break out in contumelious strain:
 "how vary, midst the garden race,
" the mark of bounteous nature grace! 
 "how boast the imperial tulip flower
" the effort of her vigorous power! 
 "who ever can view without surprise,
" the expand leaf, and glossy dye! 
 "the colour that together run,
" and wave and brighten in the sun! 
 "while she that blossom in my shade,
" as though to spring from earth afraid,
 "no leaf expand, nor dye display,
" nor win surprise, nor merit praise. 

 "behold yond butterfly so sine,
" who brightness almost equal i,
 "that hover over the gay parterre,
" and hang on waver wing in air;
 "what though from flower to flower he sport,
" and pay to all a pass court;
 "in vain with deepen tint they glow,
" and fletter to the flutter bean,
 "in vain each envious rival burn,
" to kindred finery still he turn,
 "on i at length delight to rest,
" and spread his plumage over my breast. " 

to these proud taunt, and more beside,
 the lily not a word reply,
 but hang her head with modest grace,
 nor look the insulter in the face. 

not so the bee, who murmur near,
 and chance the opprobrious strain to hear. 
ill-pleased to see the flower neglect,
 which she so honour and respect! 
from who full cup she daily draw
 so large a share of precious dew;
 while from her high and mighty neighbour
 she scarce get what pay her labour;
 thus, settle on the lily breast,
 her indignation she express:

 "and whence proceed the haughty strain,
" thou flower, so useless, and so vain! 
 "forget you, then, from whence you spring,
" the tawdry child of sordid dung! 
 "what though in vary colour bright,
" you glare awhile upon the sight;
 "the transient hour of bloom over,
" your fade charm attract no more,
 "and all your finery quite forget:
" unmarked you wither, and you rot. 
 "now hither turn but your reflection,
" you will kiss the rod of my correction. 
 "this flower, on who so rude you press,
" in nature simple clthe dress,
 "from her our numerous tribe derive
" the choice sweet that store the hive:
 "and she, meek daughter of the vale,
" that grow scent the pass gale,
 "not less revive the ravish sense,
" when root and remove from hence. 
 "on Chloe breast still see to blow,
" add whiteness to the dazzle snow:
 "and deal sweetness, though in death,
" perfume even Chloe fragrant breath. " 
