the enquiry.

in vain, alas! (do lazy mortal cry)
 in vain will wisdom trace the boundless sky,
 where double wonder upon wonder rise,
 and world on world confound our dazzle eye:
 better be still — let nature rest, say they,
 than err by guess and with opinion stray:
 then tell i, why our eye be make to view
 those orb that glister in the fluid blue? 
why in our sight those shine wonder roll? 
or why to man be give a think soul? 
may i not ask how move the radiant sun? 
how the bright star their point circuit run? 
what warm those world that so remote shine? 
and what can temper Saturn freeze clime? 
who that behold the full-orbed moon arise,
 that cheerful empress of the nightly sky;
 who will not ask (can learn sage tell)
 what kind of people on her surface dwell? 
but there we pause — not Newton art can show
 a truth, perhaps, not fit for we to know. 

how great the power, who give those world to roll;
 the thought strike inward, and confound the soul;
 fall down, o man — ah fall before the rod
 of this almighty, all-creating god:
 but hark — from heaven there come a cheere sound;
 now man revive, and smile the world around:
 it be mercy — lo a golden ray descend,
 and hope and comfort in the lustre blend. 

when from the star we turn our ache eye,
 to earth we bend they where new wonder rise;
 where life and death the equal scale suspend,
 new being rise as the former end. 
who not surprise can trace each just degree
 from the swift eagle to the peevish bee;
 from the fierce lion that will yield to none,
 to the weak mouse that hide she from the sun! 

how near one species to the next be join,
 the due gradation please a think mind;
 and there be creature which no eye can see,
 that for a moment live and breathe like i:
 who a small fly in bulk as far exceed,
 as you tall cedar do the wave reed:
 these we can reach — and may we not suppose
 there still be creature more minute than those. 

will heaven permit, and may our organ bear
 to pierce where comet wave their blaze hair:
 where other sun alternate set and rise,
 and other moon light up the cheerful sky:
 the ravish soul may still she search pursue,
 still find new wonder open on her view:
 from thence to world in miniature descend,
 and still press forward, but shall find no end:
 where little forest on a leaf appear,
 and drop of dew be mighty ocean there:
 these may have whale that in their water play,
 and wanton out their age of half a day:
 in those small groves the small bird may sing,
 and share like we their winter and their spring. 

pluck off you acorn from its parent bough,
 divide that acorn in the midst — and now
 in its firm kernel a fair oak be see
 with spread branch of a sprightly green:
 from this young tree a kernel may we rend,
 there will another its small bough extend. 

all matter live, and show its maker power;
 there be not a seed but what contain a flower:
 though unobserved its secret beauty lie,
 till we be bless with microscopic eye. 
when for blue plumb our longing palate call,
 or scarlet cherry that adorn the wall;
 with each plump fruit we swallow down a tree,
 and so destroy whole groves that else will be
 as large and perfect as those shade we see. 

behold you monster that unwieldly lave
 beneath the surface of the briny wave:
 still as he turn, the trouble sea divide;
 and roll in eddy from his slimy side. 

less huge the dolphin to the sun display
 his scale, and in the smooth ocean play:
 still less the herring and round mackrel sweep
 the shallow tide, nor trust the roar deep:
 how far by gradual numberless degree,
 the senseless oyster be remove from these. 

who follow nature through her mazy way,
 from the mute insect to the fount of day,
 (where now she rise, now her step decline)
 have need of judgement better teach than i:
 but on this subject we have talk too long,
 where grave-faced wisdom may itself be wrong. 
