the confine debtor.

a fragment from a prison.

the confine debtor.

from these drear cell, where cheerless horror reign,
 midst the dread sound of groan and clank of chain,
 where life be death, and day perpetual night,
 say! shall a wretch like i presume to write? 
a wretch cut off from every social tie,
 expel from life, yet not allow to die,
 at once, from wife, from child tear away
 by those, who make calamity their prey;
 who dart with more than tygers savage rage
 on pine sickness, or decrepit age:
 can such a wretch with tremble hand assay
 his mansion and companion to portray,
 and grief proclaim which never have meet the day? 
grief, which no tongue can speak, or pencil paint,
 which mock all sorrow, and make language faint,
 bring scene to light as Erebus profound,
 where murderer dire lie shackle to the ground,
 and innocence and guilt alike be bind! 
yet can i to my sad companion gain
 one ray of hope, it will mitigate my pain! 

oh be my line in heaven own language dress,
 then will they pierce and rend each human breast,
 expand each heart, and make each eye overflow,
 at these dread scene of wretchedness and woe. 

yet though no poet fire inspire my pen,
 i write to christian and i write to man,
 i write to those (if heaven direct it so)
 who heart dilate at every human woe,
 to those who charity with heal hand
 diffuse health and blessing over the land,
 who condescend to search the hide cell,
 where pine want in silent anguish dwell,
 there, in obedience to their lord divine,
 they bind the wound, and pour in oil and wine! 

what joy they feel, who follow such a guide! 
joy! which exceed all human worldly pride,
 joy! which even death itself can destroy,
 for then they "enter on their master joy!" 
oh do the proud and selfish but believe
 how far more bless to give, than to receive! 
do but the slave of pomp and grandeur know
 what stream of comfort from their wealth may flow! 
Waters! as pure as morning dew, which rise
 from lofty mountain till they reach the sky,
 descend thence, as tender drop of rain,
 they cheer each valley, and each thirsty plain;
 so when in gratitude the widow prayer,
 the pris'ner sigh relieve, the orphan tear
 to heaven ascend, a offer pure and neat,
 a bless memorial and a odour sweet,

record stand, from thence they tenfold pour
 their precious ointment, as the grateful shower! 

ah i! what mean that shriek, that horrid yell,
 those bitter oath, which sink the soul to hell? 
say, lose companion, in this dread abode
 do you never think of a offend god? 
never seek by prayer, by penitence and sigh,
 the obtain that pardon, which the world deny? 
ah! sue for mercy with your late breath,
 and tremble ask for pardon after death. 

no, no, i will curse not even that fatal morn,
 which see i to this loathsome prison bear;
 snatch from my homely bed, where long i will lie
 struggle with sickness, poverty and pain,
 yet still kind hope, (the wretch late friend)
 do frequent comfort with my sorrow blend;
 for near my couch the partner of my care
 will anxious watch, and bid i not despair,
 while she with life and strength, by heaven supply,
 can yield that help, sickness to i deny,
 can by her distaff earn that homely bread,
 by which our helpless child long be feed:
 she bid i hope by industry set free,
 no gripe landlord need we dread to see,
 she teach i to suppress the rise sigh,
 and check the tear when start from my eye;
 she over my limb her thread-worn garment spread,
 and with her infant clothes sustain my head,
 while at my foot those infant playful smile,
 and by their prattle oft my pain beguile! —
 ah! helpless babe, ah! wretched, dear wife! 
more love by i than liberty, or life,
 no more thy soothe voice now charm my ear,
 and gentle whisper that no danger near,
 no more my playful infant cheer my sight,
 here all be horror and perpetual night! 
hope can no long now suppress my sigh,
 or check the tear when stream from my eye. 
still, still i feel that pang, which rent my heart,
 still do i hear thy scream when force apart,
 still view thy pallid face, all bathe in tear,
 my child cry still vibrate in my ear,
 still feel they cling around my tremble knee,
 while on their helpless parent bailiff seize,
 still, still i hear my wife, my child call —
 "have patience, patience, and we will pay thou all!" 

remorseless creditor, thou have do the deed! 
nor tear, nor prayer, nor innocence can plead! 
oh! have thy heart one spark of pity know,
 to grief like we it have compassion show! 
come! see thy captive! view his wretched state,
 and show some mercy ere it be too late;
 think! will this noisome air, and clay-cold floor,
 his feeble frame to strength and health restore? 
oh can he liberty and strength regain,
 to pay thy debt he every nerve will strain! 
will grief and anguish aid the wretched wife
 in earn food to save each infant life? 
ah! rather will not frenzy and despair
 deprive those infant of a mother care? 
methinks even now, within this dungeon foul,
 i hear she vent her agony of soul. 

yet let not thought like these distract my brain,
 thought, which heap woe on woe, and pain on pain;
 no! rather let i, with implore eye,
 look up to he, who hear the pris'ner sigh;
 to he, who call the weary and oppress,
 to come to he for succour and for rest! 
who, though forlorn and helpless here i lie,
 without one pity friend or comfort nigh,
 may cause some tender sympathize heart
 to soothe our sorrow, and relief impart,
 some heart, replete with love, to who it be give
 those bounty to dispense, which flow from heaven! 
