Newmarket.

a satire.

by the same.

his country hope, when now the bloom heir
 have leave the parent, or the guardian care;
 fond to possess, yet eager to destroy,
 of each vain youth, say, what be the darling joy? 
of each fond frolic what the source and end,
 his sole and first ambition what? — to spend. 

some squire, to gallia cook most dainty dupe,
 melt manor in ragout, or drown in soup:
 this coxcomb dote on fiddler, till he see
 his mortgage mountain dcstitute of tree;
 convince too late, that modern strain can move,
 with mighty force than those of Greece, the grove. 
in headless statue rich, and useless urn,
 marmoreo from the classic tour return;
 so poor the wretch of current coin, you will laugh —
 he care not — if his caesar be but safe. 
some tread the slippery path of love delight,
 these deal the card, or shake the box at White. 
to different pleasure different taste incline,
 nor the same sea receive the rush swine. 
though drink alike with Circe poisonous bowl,
 in separate sty the mimic monster roll. 

but will you learn, you leisure-loving squire,
 how best you may disgrace your prudent sire;
 how soon soar to fashionable shame,
 be damn at once to ruin — and to fame;
 by hand of groom ambitious to be crown,
 o great dare to tread Olympic ground! 
where fame Newmarket spread her tempt plain,
 there let the choose steed victorious strain;
 where not (as erst be sing in manly lay) 
man fly to different end through different way;
 through the same path, to the same goal you run,
 and be, at once, undo and undo,
 forfeit, forget friend, honour, and estate,
 lose all at once — for what? — to win the plate:
 all be betray, and all alike betray,
 to your own beast, actaeon-like, a prey. 

what dream of conquest flush hilario breast,
 when the good knight at last retire to rest! 
behold the youth with new-felt rapture mark
 each please prospect of the spacious park,
 that park, where beauty undisguised engage,
 those beauty less the work of art than age;
 in simple state, where genuine nature wear
 her venerable dress of ancient year;
 where all the charm of chance with order meet,
 the rude, the gay, the graceful, and the great. 
here age oak uprear their branch. hoar,
 and form dark grove, which Druids may adore;
 pride and support of britain conquer cross,
 which distant ancestor see crown with moss:
 with meet bough, and deepen to the view,
 here shoot the broad umbrageous avenue:
 here various tree compose a chequer scene,
 glow in gay diversity of green:
 there the full stream, through intermingle glade,
 shine a broad lake, or fall in deep cascade. 
nor want there hazel copse, or beechen lawn,
 to cheer with sun or shade the bound fawn. 

and see the good old seat, who gothic tower
 awful emerge from yonder tuft bower;
 who raftered hall the crowd tenant feed,
 and deal to age and want their daily bread:
 where garter knight, with peerless beauty join,
 at high and solemn festival have dine;
 present oft fair virtue shine task,
 in mystic pageantry, and moral masque. 
but vain all ancient praise, or boast of birth,
 vain all the palm of old heroic worth! 
at once a bankrupt, and a prosperous heir,
 Hilario bet — park, house, dissolve in air. 
with antique armour hang, high trophy room
 descend to gamester, prostitute, and groom. 
he see his steelclad sire, and mother mild,
 who brave shake the lance, or sweet smile,
 all the fair series of the whisker race,
 who picture form the stately gallery grace,
 debase, abuse, the price of ill-got gold,
 to deck some tavern vile, at auction sell. 
the parish wonder at the unopen door,
 the chimney blaze, the table groan no more. 
thick weed around the untrodden court arise,
 and all the social scene in silence lie. 
himself, the loss polite to repair,
 turn atheist, fiddler, highwayman, or player. 
at length, the scorn, the shame of man and god,
 be doom to rub the steed that once he ride. 

you rival youth, your golden hope how vain,
 your dream of thousand on the list plain! 
not more fantastic Sancho airy course,
 when mad mount on the magic horse,
 he pierce heaven open sphere with dazzle eye,
 and seem to soar in visionary sky. 
nor less, i ween, precarious be the meed
 of young adventurer on the muse steed;
 for poet have, like you, their destine round,
 and we be but a race on classic ground. 

long time, soft son of patrimonial ease,
 Hippolitus have eat firloin in peace:
 have quaff secure, unvexed by toil or wife,
 the mild October of a rural life:
 long live with calm domestic conquest crown,
 and kill his game on safe paternal ground. 
as bland he puff the pipe over weekly news,
 his bosom kindle with sublime view. 
lo there, thy triumph, taaff, thy palm, Portmore,
 tempt he to rein the steed, and stake his store. 
like a new bruiser on broughtonic sand,
 amid the list our hero take his stand;
 suck by the sharp, to the peer a prey,
 he roil his eye that witness huge dismay;
 when lo! the chance of one unlucky heat
 strip he of game, strong beer, and sweet retreat. 
how awkward now he bear disgrace and dirt,
 nor know the poor last refuge, to be pert. —
 the shiftless beggar bear of ill the worst,
 at once with dullness, and with hunger curse. 
and feel the tasteless breast equestrian fire? 
and dwell such mighty rage in grave squire? 

in all attempt, but for their country, bold,
 Britain, thy conscript counsellor behold;
 (for some, perhaps, by fortune favour yet,
 may gain a borough by a lucky bet)
 smite with the love of the laconic boot,
 the cap and wig succinct, the silken suit,
 mere modern phaeton usurp the reins,
 and scour in rival race Newmarket plain,
 see side by side, the jockey and sir John,
 discuss the important point — of six to one. 
for o, my muse, the deep-felt bliss how dear,
 how great the pride to gain a jockey ear! 

see, like a rout host, with headlong pace,
 thy member pour amid the mingle race! 
all ask, what crowd the tumult can produce —
 "be bedlam or the commons all break loose? 
such noise and nonsense, bet, damn, sink,
 such emphasis of oath, and claret drink! 
like school-boy free, they run as chance direct,
 proud from a wellbred thing to risque their neck. 
the warrior scar not half so graceful seem,
 as, at Newmarket, dislocate limb. 

thy sage hear, amid the admire crowd
 adjudge the stake, most eloquent loud:
 with critic skill, over dubious bet preside,
 the low dispute, or kindle, or decide:
 all empty wisdom, and judicious prate,
 of distance horse, grave six the fate,
 guide the nice conduct of a dare match,
 and over the equestrian right, with care paternal watch. 

mean time, no more the mimic patriot rise,
 to guard britannia honour, warm and wise:
 no more in senate dare assert her law,
 nor pour the bold debate in freedom cause:
 neglect the counsel of a sink land,
 and know not rostrum, but Newmarket stand. 

be these the sage directive power design,
 with the nice search of a sagacious mind,
 in judgement scale the fate of realm to weigh,
 britannia interest, trade, and law survey? 
o say, when least their sapient scheme be cross,
 or when a nation, or a match be lose? 
who dam and sire with more exactness trace,
 than of their country king the sacred race:
 think London journey be the worst of ill,
 and set their hand to article for bill:
 stranger to all historian sage relate,
 they be the memoir of the equestrian state:
 unskilled in albion past and present view,
 who cheny record for rapin peruse. 

go on, brave youth, till, in some future age,
 whip shall become the senatorial badge;
 until England see her throng senator
 meet all at Westminster, in boot and spur;
 see the whole house, with mutual frenzy mad,
 her patriot all in leathern breech clad;
 of bet, for tax, learned debate,
 and guide, with equal reins, a steed and state. 

how will a virtuous houhnhym neigh disdain,
 to see his brother brook the imperious rein;
 bear slavery wanton whip, or gall goad,
 smoke through the glebe, or trace the destine road,
 and rob of manhood by the murderous knife,
 sustain each sordid toil of servile life. 
yet o, what rage will touch his generous mind,
 to see his son of more than mortal kind;
 a kind, with each ingenuous virtue bless,
 that fill the prudent head, or valorous breast,
 afford diversion to that monster base,
 that mean spawn of man half-monkey race;
 in who pride, avarice, ignorance conspire,
 that hate animal, a yahoo-'squire. 

how be the adventurer of the british race
 change from the choose chief of ancient day;
 who, warm with genuine glory honest thirst,
 divine labour in the pythian dust. 
they be the wreath that lift from the throng,
 they be the theban bard recording song. 
mean time, to manly emulation blind,
 slave to each vulgar vice that stain the mind,
 our british therons issue to the race,
 of their own generous courser the disgrace. 
what though the groom of Greece never take the odds,
 they win no bet — but then they soar to god;
 and more an hiero palm, a pindar ode,
 than all the unite plate of George bestow. 

Greece! how i kindle at thy magic name,
 feel all thy warmth, and catch the kindred flame. 
thy solemn scene, and awful vision rise,
 in ancient grace, before my muse eye. 
here sparta son in mute attention hang,
 while sage Lycurgus pour the mild harangue;
 there Xerxes host, all pale with deadly fear,
 shrink at her fate hero flash spear. 
here, hang with many a lyre of silver string,
 the laureate walk of sweet Ilissus spring:
 and lo! where, rapt in beauty heavenly dream,
 Hoar Plato walk his olived academe. —

yet ah! no more the seat of art and arm
 delight with wisdom, or with virtue warm. 
lo! the stern Turk, with more than gothic rage,
 have blast all the bay of ancient age;
 no more her grove by sacred foot be tread,
 each attic grace have leave the love abode. 
fall be fair Greece! by luxury please bane
 seduce, she drag a barbarous foreign chain,

Britannia, watch! o trim thy wither bay,
 remember thou have rival graecia praise,
 great nurse of work divine! yet oh! beware
 lest thou the fate of Greece, my country, share. 
recall thy wonted worth with conscious pride,
 thou too have see a Solon in a Hyde;
 have bid thy Edwards and thy Henry rear,
 with spartan fortitude, the british spear;
 alike have see thy son deserve the meed,
 or of the moral, or the martial deed. 
