autumn.

by mr. Brerewood.

though the season must alter, ah! yet let i find
 what all must confess to be rare,
 a female still cheerful, and faithful and kind,
 the blessing of autumn to share. 

let one side of our cottage, a flourish vine
 overspread with its branch, and shade;
 who cluster appear more transparent and fine,
 as its leaf be begin to fade. 

when the fruit make the branch bend down with its load,
 in our orchard surround with pale:
 in a bed of clean straw let our apple be stow,
 for a tart that in winter regales. 

when the vapour that rise from the earth in the morn
 seem to hang on its surface like smoke,
 until disperse by the sun that gild over the corn,
 within door let we prattle and joke. 

but when we see clear all the hue of the leaf,
 and at work in the field be all hand,
 some in reap the wheat, other bind the sheaf,
 let we careless stroll over the land. 

how please the sight of the toil they make,
 to collect what kind nature have send! 
heaven grant we may not of their labour partake;
 but, oh! give we their happy content. 

and sometime on a bank, under shade, by a brook,
 let we silent sit at our ease,
 and there gaze on the stream, till the fish on the hook
 struggle hard to procure its release. 

and now when the husbandman sing harvest home,
 and the corn all get into the house;
 when the long wish for time of their meeting be come,
 to frolic, and feast, and carouse:

when the leaf from the tree be begin to be shed,
 and be leave the branch all bare,
 either strew at the root, shrivel, wither, and dead,
 or else blow to and fro in the air;

when the way be so miry, that bog they may seem,
 and the axle-tree ready to break,
 while the waggoner whistle in stop his team,
 and then clap the poor jade on the neck;

in the morning let we follow the cry of the hound,
 or the fearful young covey beset;
 which, though skulk in stubble and weed on the ground,
 be become a prey to the net. 

let we enjoy all the pleasure retirement afford,
 still amuse with these innocent sport,
 nor once envy the pomp of fine lady and lord,
 with their grand entertainment in court. 

in the evening when lover be lean on stile,
 deep engage in some amorous chat,
 and it be very well know by his grin, and her smile,
 what they both have a mind to be at;

to our dwelling, though homely, well-pleased to repair,
 let our mutual endearment revive,
 and let no single action, or look, but declare,
 how content and happy we live. 

shall idea arise that may ruffle the soul,
 let soft music the phantom remove,
 for it be harmony only have force to control,
 and unite all the passion in love. 

with her eye but half open, her cap all awry,
 when the lass be prepare for bed;
 and the sleepy dull clown, who sit nod just by,
 sometime rouze and scratch his head. 

in the night when it be cloudy and rainy, and dark,
 and the labourer snore as they lie,
 not a noise to disturb we, unless a dog bark
 in the farm, or the village hard by. 

at the time of sweet rest, and of quiet like this,
 ere our eye be close up in their lid,
 let we welcome the season, and taste of that bliss,
 which the sunshine and daylight forbid. 
