[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book i 

the sofa.

i sing the sofa. i who late sing
 truth, hope and charity, and touch with awe
 the solemn chord, and with a tremble hand,
 escape with pain from that adventurous flight,
 now seek repose upon a humble theme;
 the theme though humble, yet august and proud
 the occasion — for the fair command the song. 

time be, when clthe sumptuous or for use,
 save their own paint skin, our sire have none. 
as yet black breech be not; satin smooth,
 or velvet soft, or plush with shaggy pile:
 the hardy chief upon the rugged rock
 wash by the sea, or on the grav'ly bank
 throw up by wintery torrent roar loud,
 fearless of wrong, repose his weary strength. 
those barbarous age past, succeed next
 the birthday of invention, weak at first,
 dull in design, and clumsy to perform. 
joint-stool be then create; on three leg
 upborne they stand. three leg uphold firm
 a massy slab, in fashion square or round. 
on such a stool immortal Alfred sit,
 and sway the sceptre of his infant realm;
 and such in ancient hall and mansion drear
 may still be see, but perforate sore
 and drill in hole the solid oak be find,
 by worm voracious eat through and through. 

at length a generation more refine
 improve the simple plan, make three leg four,
 give they a twist form vermicular,
 and over the seat with plenteous wad stuff
 induce a splendid cover green and blue,
 yellow and red, of tapestry rich wrought
 and weave close, or needle-work sublime. 
there may you see the pioney spread wide,
 the full-blown rose, the shepherd and his lass,
 lap-dog and lambkin with black stare eye,
 and parrot with twin cherry in their beak. 

now come the cane from India, smooth and bright
 with nature varnish; sever into stripe
 that interlace each other, these supply
 of texture firm a lattice work, that brace
 the new machine, and it become a chair. 
but restless be the chair; the back erect
 distress the weary loin that feel no ease;
 the slippery seat betray the slide part
 that press it, and the foot hang dangle down,
 anxious in vain to find the distant floor. 
these for the rich: the rest, who fate have place
 in modest mediocrity, content
 with base material, sit on well tan hide
 obdurate and unyielding, glassy smooth,
 with here and there a tuft of crimson yarn,
 or scarlet crewel in the cushion fix:
 if cushion may be call, what hard seem
 than the firm oak of which the frame be form. 
no want of timber then be feel or fear
 in albion happy isle. the umber stand
 ponderous, and fix by its own massy weight. 
but elbow still be want; these, some say,
 a alderman of Cripplegate contrive,
 and some ascribe the invention to a priest
 burly and big and studious of his ease. 
but rude at first, and not with easy slope
 recede wide, they press against the rib,
 and bruise the side, and elevate high
 teach the raise shoulder to invade the ear. 
long time elapse or ever our rugged sire
 complain, though incommodious pen in,
 and ill at ease behind. the lady first
 begin murmur, as become the soft sex. 
ingenious fancy, never better please
 than when employ to accommodate the fair,
 hear the sweet moan with pity, and devise
 the soft settee; one elbow at each end,
 and in the midst a elbow, it receive
 unite yet divide, twain at once. 
so sit two king of Brentford on one throne;
 and so two citizen who take the air
 close pack and smile in a chaise and one. 
but relaxation of the languid frame
 by soft recumbency of outstretch limb,
 be bliss reserve for happy day. so slow
 the growth of what be excellent, so hard
 to attain perfection in this nether world. 
thus first necessity invent stool,
 convenience next suggest elbow chair,
 and luxury the accomplish sofa last. 

the nurse sleep sweet, hire to watch the sick
 who snore she disturb. as sweet he
 who quit the coach-box at the midnight hour
 to sleep within the carriage more secure,
 his leg depend at the open door. 
sweet sleep enjoy the curate in his desk,
 the tedious rector drawl over his head,
 and sweet the clerk below: but neither sleep
 of lazy nurse, who snore the sick man dead,
 nor his who quit the box at midnight hour
 to slumber in the carriage more secure,
 nor sleep enjoy by curate in his desk,
 nor yet the doze of the clerk be sweet,
 compare with the repose the sofa yield. 

oh may i live exempt (while i live
 guiltless of pamper appetite obscene)
 from pang arthritic that infest the toe
 of libertine excess. the sofa suit
 the gouty limb, it be true; but gouty limb
 though on a sofa, may i never feel:
 for i have love the rural walk through lane
 of grassy swarth close crop by nibble sheep,
 and skirt thick with intertexture firm
 of thorny bough: have love the rural walk
 over hill, through valley, and by river brink,
 ever since a truant boy i pass my bound
 enjoy a ramble on the bank of Thames. 
and still remember, nor without regret
 of hour that sorrow since have much endear,
 how oft, my slice of pocket store consume,
 still hunger pennyless and far from home,
 i feed on scarlet hip and stoney haw,
 or blush crab, or berry that imboss
 the bramble, black as jet, or sloe austere. 
hard fare! but such as boyish appetite
 disdain not, nor the palate undepraved
 by culinary art, unsavoury deem. 
no sofa then await my return,
 nor sofa then i need. youth repair
 his waste spirit quick, by long toil
 incur short fatigue; and though our year
 as life decline, speed rapid away,
 and not a year but pilfer as he go
 some youthful grace that age will glad keep,
 a tooth or auburn lock, and by degree
 their length and colour from the lock they spare;
 the elastic spring of a unwearied foot
 that mount the stile with ease, or leap the fence,
 that play of lung inhale and again
 respire free the fresh air, that make
 swift pace or steep ascent no toil to i,
 my have not pilfer yet; nor yet impair
 my relish of fair prospect; scene that soothe
 or charm i young, no long young, i find
 still soothe and of power to charm i still. 
and witness, dear companion of my walk,
 who arm this twentieth winter i perceive
 fast lock in i, with pleasure such as love
 confirm by long experience of thy worth
 and well-tried virtue can alone inspire —
 witness a joy that thou have double long. 
thou know my praise of nature most sincere,
 and that my rapture be not conjure up
 to serve occasion of poetic pomp,
 but genuine, and be partner of they all. 
how oft upon yond eminence, our pace
 have slacken to a pause, and we have bear
 the ruffle wind scarce conscious that it blow,
 while admiration feed at the eye,
 and still unsated, dwell upon the scene. 
thence with what pleasure have we just discern
 the distant plough slow-moving, and beside
 his labour team that swerve not from the track,
 the sturdy swain diminish to a boy! 
here ouse, slow wind through a level plain
 of spacious mead with cattle sprinkle over,
 conduct the eye along his sinuous course
 delight. there, fast root in his bank
 stand, never overlook, our favourite elm
 that screen the herdsman solitary hut;
 while far beyond and overthwart the stream
 that as with melt glass inlay the vale,
 the slope land recede into the cloud;
 display on its vary side, the grace
 of hedgerow beauty numberless, square tower,
 tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bell
 just undulate upon the listen ear;
 groves, heath, and smoke village remote. 
scene must be beautiful which daily view
 please daily, and who novelty survive
 long knowledge and the scrutiny of year. 
praise just due to those that i describe. 

nor rural sight alone, but rural sound
 exhilarate the spirit, and restore
 the tone of languid nature. mighty wind
 that sweep the skirt of some far-spreading wood
 of ancient growth, make music not unlike
 the dash of ocean on his wind shore,
 and lull the spirit while they fill the mind,
 unnumbered branch wave in the blast,
 and all their leaf fast flutter, all at once. 
nor less composure wait upon the roar
 of distant flood, or on the soft voice
 of neighbour fountain, or of rill that slip
 through the cleave rock, and chime as they fall
 upon loose pebble, lose themselves at length
 in mat grass, that with a lively green
 betray the secret of their silent course. 
nature inanimate employ sweet sound,
 but animate nature sweet still
 to sooth and satisfy the human ear. 
ten thousand warbler cheer the day, and one
 the live-long night: nor these alone who note
 nice-fingered art must emulate in vain,
 but caw rook, and kite that swim sublime
 in still repeat circle, scream loud,
 the jay, the pie, and even the bode owl
 that hail the rise moon, have charm for i. 
sound inharmonious in themselves and harsh,
 yet hear in scene where peace for ever reign,
 and only there, please high for their sake. 

peace to the artist, who ingenious thought
 devise the weather-house, that useful toy! 
fearless of humid air and gather rain
 forth step the man, a emblem of myself,
 more delicate his timorous mate retire. 
when winter soak the field, and female foot
 too weak to struggle with tenacious clay,
 or ford the rivulet, be best at home,
 the task of new discovery fall on i. 
at such a season and with such a charge
 once go i forth, and find, till then unknown,
 a cottage, whither oft we since repair:
 it be perch upon the greenhill top, but close
 environ with a ring of branch elm
 that overhang the thatch, itself unseen,
 peep at the vale below; so thick beset
 with foliage of such dark redundant growth,
 i call the low-roofed lodge the peasant nest. 
and hide as it be, and far remote
 from such unplease sound as haunt the ear
 in village or in town, the bay of cur
 incessant, clink hammer, grind wheel,
 and infant clamorous whether please or pain,
 oft have i wish the peaceful covert mine. 
here, i have say, at least i shall possess
 the poet treasure, silence, and indulge
 the dream of fancy, tranquil and secure. 
vain thought! the dweller in that still retreat
 dear obtain the refuge it afford. 
its elevate scite forbid the wretch
 to drink sweet water of the crystal well;
 he dip his bowl into the weedy ditch,
 and heavy-laden bring his beverage home
 far-fetched and little worth; nor seldom wait,
 dependent on the baker punctual call,
 to hear his creak pannier at the door,
 angry and sad and his last crust consume. 
so farewell envy of the peasant nest. 
if solitude make scant the mean of life,
 society for i! thou seem sweet,
 be still a please object in my view,
 my visit still, but never mine abode. 

not distant far, a length of colonade
 invite we. monument of ancient taste,
 now scorn, but worthy of a better fate. 
our father know the value of a screen
 from sultry sun, and in their shade walk
 and long-protracted bower, enjoy at noon
 the gloom and coolness of decline day. 
we bear our shade about we; self deprive
 of other screen, the thin umbrella spread,
 and range a indian waste without a tree. 
thanks to benevolus — he spare i yet
 these chestnut range in correspond line,
 and though himself so polish, still reprieve
 the obsolete prolixity of shade. 

descend now (but cautious, lest too fast)
 a sudden steep, upon a rustic bridge
 we pass a gulph in which the willow dip
 their pendent bough, stoop as if to drink. 
hence ankle deep in moss and flowery thyme
 we mount again, and feel at every step
 our foot half sink in hillock green and soft,
 raise by the mole, the miner of the soil. 
he not unlike the great one of mankind,
 disfigure earth, and plot in the dark
 toil much to earn a monumental pile,
 that may record the mischief he have do. 

the summit gain, behold the proud alcove
 that crown it! yet not all its pride secure
 the grand retreat from injury impress
 by rural carver, who with knife deface
 the panel, leave a obscure rude name
 in character uncouth, and spell amiss. 
so strong the zeal to immortalize himself
 beat in the breast of man, that even a few
 few transient year win from the abyss abhor
 of blank oblivion, seem a glorious prize,
 and even to a clown. now rove the eye,
 and post on this speculative height
 exult in its command. the sheep-fold here
 pour out its fleecy tenant over the glebe. 
at first, progressive as a stream, they seek
 the middle field; but scatter by degree
 each to his choice, soon whiten all the land. 
there, from the sun-burnt hay-field homeward creep
 the load wain, while lighten of its charge
 the wain that meet it, pass swift by,
 the boorish driver lean over his team
 vocif'rous, and impatient of delay. 
nor less attractive be the woodland scene
 diversify with tree of every growth
 alike yet various. here the grey smooth trunk
 of ash or lime, or beech, distinct shine,
 within the twilight of their distant shade;
 there lose behind a rise ground, the wood
 seem sink, and shorten to its topmost bough. 
no tree in all the grove but have its charm,
 though each its hue peculiar; pale some,
 and of a wannish grey; the willow such
 and poplar, that with silver line his leaf,
 and ash far-stretching his umbrageous arm. 
of deep green the elm; and deep still,
 lord of the wood, the long-surviving oak. 
some glossy-leaved and shine in the sun,
 the maple, and the beech of oily nut
 prolific, and the lime at dewy eve
 diffuse odour: nor unnoted pass
 the sycamore, capricious in attire,
 now green, now tawny, and here autumn yet
 have change the wood, in scarlet honour bright. 
over these, but far beyond, (a spacious map
 of hill and valley interpose between)
 the ouse, divide the well water land,
 now glitter in the sun, and now retire,
 as bashful, yet impatient to be see. 

hence the declivity be sharp and short,
 and such the re-ascent; between they weep
 a little naiad her impoverish urn
 all summer long, which winter fill again. 
the fold gate will bar my progress now,
 but that the lord of this enclose demesne,
 communicative of the good he own,
 admit i to a share: the guiltless eye
 commit no wrong, nor waste what it enjoy. 
refresh change! where now the blaze sun? 
by short transition we have lose his glare
 and step at once into a cool clime. 
you fall avenue! once more i mourn
 your fate unmerited, once more rejoice
 that yet a remnant of your race survive. 
how airy and how light the graceful arch,
 yet awful as the consecrate roof
 re-echoing pious anthem! while beneath
 the chequer earth seem restless as a flood
 brush by the wind. so sportive be the light
 shot through the bough, it dance as they dance,
 shadow and sunshine intermingle quick,
 and darken and enlighten, as the leaf
 play wanton, every moment, every spot. 

and now with nerve new-braced and spirit cheere
 we tread the wilderness, who well-rolled walk
 with curvature of slow and easy sweep,
 deception innocent — give ample space
 to narrow bound. the grove receive we next;
 between the upright shaft of who tall elm
 we may discern the thresher at his task. 
thump after thump, resound the constant flail,
 that seem to swing uncertain, and yet fall
 full on the destine ear. wide fly the chaff,
 the rustle straw send up a frequent mist
 of atom sparkle in the noonday beam. 
come hither, you that press your bed of down
 and sleep not: see he sweat over his bread
 before he eat it. — it be the primal curse,
 but soften into mercy; make the pledge
 of cheerful day, and night without a groan. 

by ceaseless action, all that be, subsist. 
constant rotation of the unwearied wheel
 that nature ride upon, maintain her health,
 her beauty, her fertility. she dread
 a instant pause, and live but while she move. 
its own revolvency uphold the world. 
wind from all quarter agitate the air,
 and fit the limpid element for use,
 else noxious: ocean, river, lake, and stream
 all feel the freshen impulse, and be cleanse
 by restless undulation; even the oak
 thrive by the rude concussion of the storm;
 he seem indeed indignant, and to feel
 the impression of the blast with proud disdain,
 frown as if in his unconscious arm
 he hold the thunder. but the monarch owe
 his firm stability to what he scorn,
 more fix below, the more disturb above. 
the law by which all creature else be bind,
 bind man the lord of all. himself derive
 no mean advantage from a kindred cause,
 from strenuous toil his hour of sweet ease. 
the sedentary stretch their lazy length
 when custom bid, but no refreshment find,
 for none they need: the languid eye, the cheek
 desert of its bloom, the flaccid, shrink,
 and wither muscle, and the vapid soul,
 reproach their owner with that love of rest
 to which he forfeit even the rest he love. 
not such the alert and active. measure life
 by its true worth, the comfort it afford,
 and they alone seem worthy of the name. 
good health, and its associate in the most,
 good temper; spirit prompt to undertake,
 and not soon spend, though in a arduous task;
 the power of fancy and strong thought be they;
 even age itself seem privilege in they
 with clear exemption from its own defect. 
a sparkle eye beneath a wrinkle front
 the veteran show, and grace a grey beard
 with youthful smile, descend towards the grave
 sprightly, and old almost without decay. 

like a coy maiden, ease, when court most,
 farther retire — a idol, at who shrine
 who often sacrifice be favour least. 
the love of nature, and the scene she draw
 be nature dictate. strange! there shall be find
 who self-imprisoned in their proud saloon,
 renounce the odour of the open field
 for the unscented fiction of the loom. 
who satisfy with only pencil scene,
 prefer to the performance of a god
 the inferior wonder of a artist hand. 
lovely indeed the mimic work of art,
 but nature work far lovely. i admire —
 none more admire the painter magic skill,
 who show i that which i shall never see,
 convey a distant country into i,
 and throw italian light on english wall. 
but imitative stroke can do no more
 than please the eye, sweet nature every sense. 
the air salubrious of her lofty hill,
 the cheere fragrance of her dewy vale
 and music of her wood — no work of man
 may rival these; these all bespeak a power
 peculiar, and exclusive her own. 
beneath the open sky she spread the feast;
 it be free to all — it be every day renew,
 who scorn it, starve deserve at home. 
he do not scorn it, who imprison long
 in some unwholesome dungeon, and a prey
 to sallow sickness, which the vapor dank
 and clammy of his dark abode have breed,
 escape at last to liberty and light. 
his cheek recover soon its healthful hue,
 his eye relumine its extinguish fire,
 he walk, he leap, he run — be winge with joy,
 and riot in the sweet of every breeze. 
he do not scorn it, who have long endure
 a fever agony, and feed on drug. 
nor yet the mariner, his blood inflame
 with acrid salt; his very heart athirst
 to gaze at nature in her green array. 
upon the ship tall side he stand, possess
 with vision prompt by intense desire;
 fair field appear below, such as he leave
 far distant, such as he will die to find —
 he seek they headlong, and be see no more. 

the spleen be seldom feel where Flora reign;
 the lower eye, the petulance, the frown,
 and sullen sadness that overshade, distort,
 and mar the face of beauty, when no cause
 for such immeasurable woe appear,
 these Flora banish, and give the fair
 sweet smile and bloom less transient than her own. 
it be the constant revolution stale
 and tasteless, of the same repeat joy,
 that pall and satiate, and make languid life
 a pedlar pack, that bow the bearer down. 
health suffer, and the spirit ebb; the heart
 recoil from its own choice — at the full feast
 be famish — find no music in the song,
 no smartness in the jest, and wonder why. 
yet thousand still desire to journey on,
 though halt and weary of the path they tread. 
the paralitic who can hold her card
 but can play they, borrow a friend hand
 to deal and shuffle, to divide and sort
 her mingle suit and sequence, and sit
 spectatress both and spectacle, a sad
 and silent cypher, while her proxy play. 
other be drag into the crowd room
 between supporter; and once seat, sit
 through downright inability to rise,
 until the stout bearer lift the corpse again. 
these speak a loud memento. yet even these
 themselves love life, and cling to it, as he
 that overhang a torrent, to a twig. 
they love it, and yet loath it; fear to die,
 yet scorn the purpose for which they live. 
then wherefore not renounce they? no — the dread,
 the slavish dread of solitude, that breed
 reflection and remorse, the fear of shame,
 and their inveterate habit, all forbid. 

who call we gay? that honour have be long
 the boast of mere pretender to the name. 
the innocent be gay — the lark be gay
 that dry his feather saturate with dew
 beneath the rosy cloud, while yet the beam
 of day-spring overshoot his humble nest. 
the peasant too, a witness of his song,
 himself a songster, be as gay as he. 
but save i from the gaiety of those
 who headache nail they to a noonday bed;
 and save i too from they who haggard eye
 flash desperation, and betray their pang
 for property strip off by cruel chance;
 from gaiety that fill the bone with pain,
 the mouth with blasphemy, the heart with woe. 

the earth be make so various, that the mind
 of desultory man, studious of change,
 and please with novelty, may be indulge. 
prospect however lovely may be see
 till half their beauty fade; the weary sight,
 too well acquaint with their smile, slide off
 fastidious, seek less familiar scene. 
then snug enclosure in the shelter vale,
 where frequent hedge intercept the eye,
 delight we, happy to renounce a while,
 not senseless of its charm, what still we love,
 that such short absence may endear it more. 
then forest, or the savage rock may please,
 that hide the sea-mew in his hollow cleft
 above the reach of man: his hoary head
 conspicuous many a league, the mariner
 bind homeward, and in hope already there,
 greet with three cheer exult. at his waist
 a girdle of half-withered shrub he show,
 and at his foot the baffle billow die. 
the common overgrow with fern, and rough
 with prickly goss, that shapeless and deform
 and dangerous to the touch, have yet its bloom
 and deck itself with ornament of gold,
 yield no unplease ramble; there the turf
 smell fresh, and rich in odoriferous herb
 and fungous fruit of earth, regales the sense
 with luxury of unexpected sweet. 

there often wander one, who better day
 see better clad, in cloak of satin trim
 with lace, and hat with splendid ribbon bind. 
a serve maid be she, and fall in love
 with one who leave she, go to sea and die. 
her fancy follow he through foam wave
 to distant shore, and she will sit and weep
 at what a sailor suffer; fancy too
 delusive most where warm wish be,
 will oft anticipate his glad return,
 and dream of transport she be not to know. 
she hear the doleful tiding of his death,
 and never smile again. and now she roam
 the dreary waste; there spend the livelong day,
 and there, unless when charity forbid,
 the livelong night. a tatter apron hide,
 wear as a cloak, and hardly hide a gown
 more tatter still; and both but ill conceal
 a bosom heave with never-ceasing sigh. 
she beg a idle pin of all she meet,
 and hoard they in her sleeve; but needful food,
 though press with hunger oft, or comely clothes,
 though pinch with cold, ask never. — Kate be craze. 

i see a column of slow-rising smoke
 overtop the lofty wood that skirt the wild. 
a vagabond and useless tribe there eat
 their miserable meal. a kettle fling
 between two pole upon a stick transverse,
 receive the morsel; flesh obscene of dog,
 or vermin, or at best, of cock purloin
 from his accustom perch. hard-faring race! 
they pick their fuel out of every hedge,
 which kindle with dry leaf, just save unquenched
 the spark of life. the sportive wind blow wide
 their flutter rag, and show a tawny skin,
 the vellum of the pedigree they claim. 
great skill have they in palmistry, and more
 to conjure clean away the gold they touch,
 convey worthless dross into its place. 
loud when they beg, dumb only when they steal. 
strange! that a creature rational, and cast
 in human mould, shall brutalise by choice
 his nature, and though capable of art
 by which the world may profit and himself,
 self-banished from society, prefer
 such squalid sloth to honourable toil. 
yet even these, though feign sickness oft
 they swath the forehead, drag the limp limb
 and vex their flesh with artificial sore,
 can change their whine into a mirthful note
 when safe occasion offer, and with dance
 and music of the bladder and the bag
 beguile their woe and make the wood resound. 
such health and gaiety of heart enjoy
 the houseless rover of the sylvan world;
 and breathe wholesome air, and wander much,
 need other physic none to heal the effect
 of loathfome diet, penury, and cold. 

bless he, though undistinguished from the crowd
 by wealth or dignity, who dwell secure
 where man, by nature fierce, have lay aside
 his fierceness, have learn, though slow to learn,
 the manner and the art of civil life. 
his want, indeed, be many; but supply
 be obvious; place within the easy reach
 of temperate wish and industrious hand. 
here virtue thrive as in her proper soil;
 not rude and surly, and beset with thorn,
 and terrible to sight, as when she spring,
 (if ever she spring spontaneous) in remote
 and barbarous clime, where violence prevail,
 and strength be lord of all; but gentle, kind,
 by culture tame, by liberty refresh,
 and all her fruit by radiant truth mature. 
war and the chace engross the savage whole. 
war follow for revenge, or to supplant
 the envy tenant of some happy spot,
 the chace for sustenance, precarious trust! 
his hard condition with severe constraint
 bind all his faculty, forbid all growth
 of wisdom, prove a school in which he learn
 sly circumvention, unrelenting hate,
 mean self-attachment, and scarce aught beside. 
thus fare the shiver native of the north,
 and thus the ranger of the western world
 where it advance far into the deep,
 towards the antarctic. even the favour isle
 so late find, although the constant sun
 cheer all their season with a grateful smile,
 can boast but little virtue; and inert
 through plenty, lose in moral, what they gain
 in manner, victim of luxurious ease. 
these therefore i can pity, place remote
 from all that science trace, art invent,
 or inspiration teach; and enclose
 in boundless ocean never to be pass
 by navigator uninformed as they,
 or plough perhaps by british bark again. 
but far beyond the rest, and with most cause
 thou, gentle savage! who not love of thou
 or thy, but curiosity perhaps,
 or else vain glory, prompt we to draw
 forth from thy native bower, to show thou here
 with what superior skill we can abuse
 the gift of providence, and squander life. 
the dream be past. and thou have find again
 thy cocoa and banana, palm and yam,
 and homestall thatch with leaf. but have thou find
 their former charm? and have see our state,
 our palace, our lady, and our pomp
 of equipage, our garden, and our sport,
 and hear our music; be thy simple friend,
 thy simple fare, and all thy plain delight
 as dear to thou as once? and have thy joy
 lose nothing by comparison with we? 
rude as thou be (for we return thou rude
 and ignorant, except of outward show)
 i can think thou yet so dull of heart
 and spiritless, as never to regret
 sweet taste here, and leave as soon as know. 
methinks i see thou stray on the beach,
 and ask of the surge that bath thy foot
 if ever it have wash our distant shore. 
i see thou weep, and thy be honest tear,
 a patriot for his country. thou be sad
 at thought of her forlorn and abject state,
 from which no power of thy can raise she up. 
thus fancy paint thou, and though apt to err,
 perhaps err little, when she paint thou thus. 
she tell i too that due every morn
 thou climb the mountain top, with eager eye
 explore far and wide the watery waste
 for sight of ship from England. every speck
 see in the dim horizon, turn thou pale
 with conflict of contend hope and fear. 
but come at last the dull and dusky eve,
 and send thou to thy cabin, well-prepared
 to dream all night of what the day deny. 
alas! expect it not. we find no bait
 to tempt we in thy country. do good,
 disinterest good, be not our trade. 
we travel far it be true, but not for nought;
 and must be bribe to compass earth again
 by other hope and rich fruit than you. 

but though true worth and virtue, in the mild
 and genial soil of cultivate life
 thrive most, and may perhaps thrive only there,
 yet not in city oft. in proud and gay
 and gain devote city; thither flow,
 as to a common and most noisome sewer,
 the dregs and faeculence of every land. 
in city foul example on most mind
 beget its likeness. rank abundance breed
 in gross and pamper city sloth and lust,
 and wantonness and gluttonous excess. 
in city, vice be hide with most ease,
 or see with least reproach; and virtue teach
 by frequent lapse, can hope no triumph there
 beyond the achievement of successful flight. 
i do confess they nursery of the art,
 in which they flourish most. where in the beam
 of warm encouragement, and in the eye
 of public note they reach their perfect size. 
such London be, by taste and wealth proclaim
 the fair capital of all the world,
 by riot and incontinence the worst. 
there, touch by Reynolds, a dull blank become
 a lucid mirror, in which nature see
 all her reflect feature. Bacon there
 give more than female beauty to a stone,
 and chatham eloquence to marble lip. 
nor do the chisel occupy alone
 the power of sculpture, but the style as much;
 each province of her art her equal care. 
with nice incision of her guide steel
 she plough a brazen field, and clothes a soil
 so sterile with what charm soever she will,
 the rich scenery and the lovely form. 
where find philosophy her eagle eye
 with which she gaze at yond burn disk
 undazzled, and detect and count his spot? 
in London; where her implement exact
 with which she calculate compute and scan
 all distance, motion, magnitude, and now
 measure a atom, and now gird a world? 
in London; where have commerce such a mart,
 so rich, so throng, so drain, and so supply
 as London, opulent, enlarge, and still
 increase London? Babylon of old
 not more the glory of the earth, than she
 a more accomplish world chief glory now. 

she have her praise. now mark a spot or two
 that so much beauty will do well to purge;
 and show this queen of city, that so fair
 may yet be foul, so witty, yet not wise. 
it be not seemly, nor of good report
 that she be slack in discipline. more prompt
 avenge than to prevent the breach of law. 
that she be rigid in denounce death
 on petty robber, and indulge life
 and liberty, and ofttimes honour too
 to peculator of the public gold. 
that thief at home must hang; but he that put
 into his overgorge and bloat purse
 the wealth of indian province, escape. 
nor be it well, nor can it come to good,
 that through profane and infidel contempt
 of holy write, she have presume t'annul
 and abrogate, as round as she may,
 the total ordonnance and will of god;
 advance fashion to the post of truth,
 and centre all authority in mode
 and custom of her own, till sabbath rite
 have dwindle into unrespected form,
 and knee and hassock be well-nigh divorce. 

god make the country, and man make the town. 
what wonder then, that health and virtue, gift
 that can alone make sweet the bitter draught
 that life hold out to all, shall most abound
 and least be threaten in the field and grove? 
possess you therefore, you who bear about
 in chariot and sedans, know no fatigue
 but that of idleness, and taste no scene
 but such as art contrive, possess you still
 your element; there only, you can shine,
 there only mind like you can do no harm. 
our grove be plant to console at noon
 the pensive wanderer in their shade. at eve
 the moonbeam slide soft in between
 the sleep leaf, be all the light they wish,
 bird warble all the music. we can spare
 the splendour of your lamp, they but eclipse
 our soft satellite. your song confound
 our more harmonious note. the thrush depart
 scare, and the offend nightingale be mute. 
there be a public mischief in your mirth,
 it plague your country. folly such as you
 grace with a sword, and worthy of a fan,
 have make, which enemy can never have do,
 our arch of empire, steadfast but for you,
 a mutilate structure, soon to fall. 
