to the right honourable William Clayton, ESQ (now lord sundon) on his being elect representative in parliament for Westminster without opposition.

to you, great steward of the public trust,
 true to your king, and to your country just! 
no venal bard his joyful tribute bring,
 nor envy sure can censure what he sing;
 since each impartial tongue your praise declare,
 the muse but echo, what the poet hear. 

some, by their birth, to senate lie their claim,
 who folly shame the seat, which honour they:
 but you, who merit move the people voice,
 unanimous, to make so wise a choice,
 with solid sense, and prudent conduct show,
 you grace the senate, not the senate you. 
where, in the list of patriot, can we find
 a sound judgement, a sincerer mind? 
or where a juster hand, to poise the scale
 of king prerogative, and public weal? 
nor this you strive to sink, nor that extend;
 bigot to neither side, to both a friend. 
so flow the spirit through our vital frame;
 nor yet this member chill, nor that inflame. 

true to your principle, you never stray
 from public good, though interest lead the way:
 for public good you still employ your tongue;
 and, rather than commit, you suffer wrong. 
when south sea wave overflow the british plain,
 and member barter honesty for gain;
 no gain, no place, nor profit can control
 the stubborn virtue of your steady soul:
 you firm to honour, truth, and conscience stand,
 unfashionable just, and obstinate good. 

but why shall i in feeble number tell
 those virtue, which your action paint so well? 
for all the action of your life proclaim
 a subject loyal love, a patriot fame. 
your care to keep the people interest sure,
 your zeal to guard the prince crown secure,
 make prince and people both espouse your cause;
 witness their late choice, and loud applause;
 when crowd street with acclamation ring,
 and clayton praise dwell on every tongue;
 party themselves agree your worth to boast,
 or differ only, who shall praise it most;
 while timorous candidate the test decline,
 and, to your noble brow, the palm resign:
 so fly the star before the rise sun;
 and, from his bright beam withdraw their own. 
