the double welcome.

a poem to the duke of Marlborough. 

the muse that by your victory inspire,
 first sing those conquest, all the world admire,
 now sing the triumph of your native land,
 where you our heart as well as troop command,
 her debt of praise be you, but it be her due,
 that welcome victory, now to welcome you.

and though her verse too mean to sing your fame,
 injure the hero by the poet name;
 abject and low, and scorch by party-fire,
 who neither name invite nor hope inspire:
 yet this she claim, she can your fame rehearse,
 unbiased in your praise, impartial in her verse.
this character she have keep, and this she bring,
 she always scorn to flatter, though she sing to king. 

satyr have be her talent, truth her song,
 truth who can bear it! sing too loud, too long.
bright truth! that stranger to the jingle train,
make all their praise satyr, all their satyr vain,
while truth can neither this nor that explain.
the unspotted standard have be all her aim,
 for this she have feel her fate, and sink her fame:
 for this they have damn the poet and his rhyme,
 and slay the unhappy muse for want of crime

adapt thus to sacred truth and fame,
 she never sing but they be both her theam
 stranger to panegyric and to praise,
 it must be some sublime must her just fancy raise.
to truth and merit she be always true,
she never can the flatter flight pursue,
and never praise but William, sir, and you. 

and shall she, spite of nature, strain she think,
 shall she his laurel sing that never fight,
 shall she make Gallo chaste and Talus wise,
 and praise immortal blockhead in disguise,
or feign a hero,
 it will be so force, so awkward, and so dull,
 Gallo will seem more lewd, Talus seem more a fool:
 truth through the lawn of flattery will shine,
 and in mock-praise the satyr must be see.

shall we eternal trophy seem to raise,
 and fly chamo doubtful victory praise.
dispute honour partial decide,
 and grant that fame Bellona have deny;
 to victory statue new mock honour pay,
 and say they conquer there that run away;
 it will with such incoherent nonsense shine,
 the blush hero must the awkward praise decline:
 the strong collateral banter will appear,
 courage so sing will read like hymn to fear. 
the painter thus by contrary present
 the allegoric devil like the saint,
 but by some faint reflection show their care
 the cleave mean shall not fail to appear.

the poet, sir, to plainness thus enure,
 thus from the charge of flattery first secure,
 a honest and unbiased freedom bring,
 and all the nation listen while he sing;
 in his invite consort free join,
 just so they do when first he sing the Boyne;
 just as when namur conquer wall he sing,
 Britannia own his harp divine string.
it be subject make a poet, and the verse
 must be inspire when William we rehearse;
 his mighty name poetic force procure,
 and next to he the inspiration you. 

from foreign field and wild danubian shore,
 where english army never tread before,
 fruitful of danger, long enure to war
 for great Gustavus use to conquer there;
 herculean labour past, and hazard run,
 unheard of march make, unlooked for victory win:
 from Battels fight in earnest, and the field
 which none but these can win, where those must yield:)
 from unexampled conduct and success,
 that never have be so great have this be less
 from deed too mighty to be speak by word,
 print in death, engrave with english sword,
 confess by humble France, and loud tell
 by valour dear buy, by valour dear sell:
 from scatter enemy and rescue crown,
 which envy nor dispute nor pride disown;
 you be welcome, sir, to this unthankful shore,
 where man of worth be never own before.

if in the future glory you pursue,
 you find the hateful scandal happen true;
 the name of schellenberg and hockstet lie
 bury with namure and the boyn in wild obscurity.
let not your virtue in suspense appear,
 it have always be the fate of merit here:
 a steady glory ever have entail
 the grin of envy; envy never fail
 to act the high refine extreme of hell
 how William find it, blush my muse to tell. 

shall any foreign bard desire to know
 why Britain can so few like William show?
say angry poet, tell they it be because
 ingrateful devil grudge they due applause.
the nation genius act from below
 reward no service, will no merit know.
fame empty record none but marlbro' show,
 will England work on England term espouse:
 but he like Wiliam, heaven their fame regard,
 pursue true virtue for its own reward.
welcome immortal hero to that shore,
 where man of equal worth be never see before.

from fame breda set out the mighty train,
 William too oft set out from thence in vain.
advance my muse, and view the embattle line,
 they pass the maese, the Moselle, and the Rhine. 
France in suspense the mighy storm foresee,
the conquer squrdron for the battle draw,
and Mars stand blind hover over Landau. 

laugh at the guilty baffle god of war,
 you son of arm, the scene prepare afar;
 not Lewis now, not Mars himself can know
 where english Jove his thunderbolt will throw:
no traitor bribe by France can lead the way,
not hell it self the project can betray,
nor sell the nation, as in William time, for pay.

the troop amuse with halt and feint of war
 the just surprise instruct they what to fear;
 when you to danube bank in have advance,
 a length unlooked for, unforeseen by France. 

swift, as the german eagle lead, you fly
 on gust of hope, and wing of victory;
 your pass over the swabian rock appear
 like hannibal, with flame and vinegar:
 and when the distant vale their prospect show,
 you threaten conquest to the plain below.

before your powerful troop bavaria fly,
 and schellenberg give way to victory.
the fame ascent have thirteen time and more
 be storm, and never be win but once before.
once do the great Gustave Bavaria here pursue,
 he conquer here because he fight like you.

from thence through ravage town and conquer plain
 the monument of victory remain,
 Augsburg and Munick tremble at your name,
 though not inform of your approach fame:
 to Blenheim, happy name! the scene advance,
 there gather all the thunderbolt of France. 
a leash of army on thy plain appear
each fancy able to support a war,
and free a nation from the vanity of fear.

we that at distance see the approach day,
 know the design, and see the bloody way.
blame not, great prince, the doubt we own be true;
 our anxious thought for England and for you.
we know your brave resolve and steady mind,
 but who dare hope for what remain behind;
 who dare foretell the glory of the day,
 that see the dreadful danger of the way:
 not heaven it self, have we the news receive
 from heaven it self, will here have be believe.
when first the tiding through the nation fly,
 we pause to ask if it be a dream or true;
 amaze almost as much as they that flee,
 while those with fear, and these with joy, dismay.
speak all you son of rhime, the day rehearse,
 the theme too high for my too humble verse:
 Apollo must your head at once inspire,
 for needful praise with emblematic fire.
he that in suit verse to marlbro' write,
 shall feel that very spirit by which he fight.

yet still the mean poet of the train
 keep on, nor shall his tribute come in vain:
 not all be virgil to mecaenas come,
 yet all huzza Augustus back to Rome;
 when from the less honour of the day
 he bring the egyptian lover crown away
 and thus while caesar glory you pursue,
 the nation praise be your native due:
 the universal suffrage spread your name,
 and all man bless the poet in your fame.

poet, a large parenthesis allow,
 say here he conquer — leave the mighty how:
 the vast particular let those explain,
 that sing in number suit to the man:
 let ADDISON our modern Virgil sing,
 for he be a poet fit for a king;
 no hero will his mighty flight disdain,
 the first, as thou the last of the inspire train;
 Maecenas have his modern fancy string,
 and fix his pension first, or he have never sing;
 thou unregarded pay thy debt to fame,
 oppress by fate, and too obscure to name.
envy and party-spleen he have never know,
 no humble jail have pull his fancy down:
 the tower youth with high success aspire,
 and sing as one who song the world admire.

yet say he conquer, though the mighty how
 for ADDISON thou may in large parenthesis allow;
 trace he from bleinheim and Danubian plain,
 the gallic captive Heoes in his chain:
 trace he to philipsburgh and to Landau,
 and tell the french it be true as they foresee;
 he will the mighty bastion there pull down,
 though not before their army overthrow.

attend the hero to the ancient saar,
 and see he threaten native France with war;
 surrender Treves that fatal town to France,
 their troop abandon it as his advance;
 remind they of old Holstein and crequi,
 there France, as now at bleinheim, learn to fly.

tell we no more of conquest, fame oppress,
 the breathless muse claim some time to rest;
 saarbruck and traarback will but spoil our verse,
 so harsh no number can their sound rehearse:
 so nimeghen distract soft Boileau,
 the subject lofty, and the poet low,
 make his just number halt, his verse lame,
 for want of rhime to the exotic name.

thus from a vast variety of scene,
 and six huge conquest fix in one campaign,
 Bavaria conquer, settle, and subdue,
 the fly prince four hundred mile pursue:
 from nineteen town surrender, and the field
 with slaughter heap and vanquish legion fill
 from captive prince in your train bring home,
 so casar lead the king of Gaul to Rome;
 from trophy noble buy, and fetch from far,
 from bold finish the jest of war,
 your're welcome, sir, behold the approach throng
 of three great nation listen to my song.

how have this wise pretend age till now
 talk big of fight, never yet know how;
 our soldier tire with strange fateague die,
 and in the ditch, not bed of honour lie;
 starve with the cold and terror of the night,
 but never show the how or where to fight.
the weary land the trade of war resent,
 for what the end design the mean prevent.
the misery we to this day endure
 they cause that always have be pay to cure;
 plunder their battle, and the pay their end,
 they shun their enemy and rob their friend:
 peace will such soldier livelihood destroy,
 and so indeed they will for their country die.
for fighting just the way to be undo,
 and conquest will conclude a war too soon.
good husbandry, as wo—ly tell we how,
 have make the irish war have hold till now;
 but fight ginkle strike the stroke too soon,
 and so the nation save, and all the r—s undo.

but you instruct for your country be good,
 the cheat of war have all at once snbdue:
 and they that think the field be but a play,
 where all may cheat the nation for their pay;
 with lace and feather bluster a campaign
 to all the nation but themselves in vain;
 grow rich upon the plunder of our land,
 and raise great fortune out of low command;
 these find the banter on themselves make good,
 while you the proper end of war pursue.

our campaign beau not more shall mock the field
 and none take arm but those that dare be kill;
the powder wig, the snuff-box and perfume
will court no more the musquet and the drum,
and beau go rake to war, come bully home.

the very word a different accent bear,
 fight must now be understand by war;
 battle and death synonimous in name,
 and wound and blood will only purchase fame;
 coward must lay their buy commission down,
 their camp the pit, and their campaign the town;
there they may bully, swagger, and repeat
the mighty no engagement they be at,
and fight the french in tea and chocolate.

but he that follow marlbro' to the field,
 must all his fame on dangerous merit build,
 must look for blow, and fair state his case
 shame at his back, and death before his face;
 a general that can show he how to die,
 and push he on to conquer victory.
shame, fear twin-sister, make a coward brave,
 he fight to lose the life he dare not save;
fear make he bold because he dare not fly,
it want more heart to run away than die,
for who dare turn his back when marlbro by.

the english arm grow dull with rust and peace,
 tarnish with luxury, and stain with ease,
 you have new point, sir, with heart of steel,
 and France confess what she can conceal:
 our honour cloud with contempt and time,
 sully with long disuse, and sink in crime;
 bury so deep allow the muse to grieve,
 William himself can not her name retrieve;
 though through ten thousand different danger seek,
 though through ten thousand victory he fight:
 the transmigrate phantosme you obtain,
 and in your fame revive she once again:

our hero few, and long ago forget,
 the breed extinct, behold the barren spot;
 stiril in worth, and poor in son of fame,
 crime taint the best record, and blast the worthless name.
William the first, for thirteen age past,
 and fate portend that marlbro' will be last:
 how shall the strength of nature save the breed,
 who shall to William fame and you succeed!

and now from all the danger of the field,
 which god and man with equal joy behold;
 which all our widow harp have new string,
 which thousand hero fight a thousand poet sing.
to britain crowd shore your triumph come,
 and all the wonder nation shout you home:
 a double welcome you at once possess,
 for double conquest crown you with success:
 with double joy we shout, and twice applaud
 council at home and conquest from abroad.

interest in all our praise will appear,
 you be welcome, sir, because you be want here;
 we want you here to calm our wild debate,
 and balance party as you balance state;
 to check insult faction, and supply
 immoderate heat with force humility;
 con—dators to consolidate,
 and tack our t—ers to their own dear fate;
 to calm the church sea, and keep it still,
 and fix the nation peace against she Will.  

thus when from fight army, sir, you come,
 you must engage with devil near home.

army of hell bear monster must appease,
 the Titan heaven attack be fool to these;
 they mountain throw, and hill erect on hill,
 these mountain bi-s consolidate to bi-s;
 the mighty parallel agree in part,
 from hell they fetch their strength, as these their art
 they heaven high power with borrow power invade,
 these heaven vicegerent queen assault by her own aid;
 like they they fall, heaven have decree it so,
 and you must ann's immortal thunder throw. 
see how the embattle troop of strife appear,
 word be their missive weapon, noise the war;
 with high-church zeal and party spirit fire,
 with hell immortal hate of peace inspire,

a pulpit war! whence shall sedition come?
our soldier fight abroad, our priest at home;
 arm with vast Helms of contradict truth,
 with plume of incoherent sense set forth;
 self inconsistent reason puff the mind,
 bluster come on before, and distant modesty behind.
see how the black brigade in arm advance,
 you will see no such, sir, when you conquer France;
 their meaning easy to be understand,
 the gown have often dip the slieve in blood:
 will you their sense of thing, sir, understand,
 and know for what it be they embroil the land;
 quite different end of war they all profess,
 they fight for plunder, sir, and you for peace:
 your noble hazard help the world to enjoy,
 you fight for right, these mere to destroy. 
pardon the poet all your war be jest,
 you have fight with man, you never fight with priest. 
disdain not, sir, the instruction of our verse,
 your art of war will not this cloud disperse;
 priest, like the female sex, when they engage,
 there be always something bloody in their rage. 
thus nature always in extreme delight,
 the great fall be from the great height.
angel sublime in nature, and divine,
 be therefore turn to devil when they sin;
 and humane son of god be worse than they,
 when once they can the law of crime obey;
 the high seraphic office qualify,
 and they be the wicked because they be wise.
expect no quarter where the tribe command,
 they fight you with their head and not their hand. 
my muse profane no more the sacred name,
Jesus be these thy son!
the church the horrid ravisher disown,
 and loud beneath the weight of party groan.

these be the strong bandity of the gown,
 who preach for God sake, plunder for their own. 
our state divine that push the party cause,
 and swear and pray for persecution law,
 own it be against their doctrine and their sense;
 but free grant they will be at that expense,
 will sell the church, the nation, and the queen,
 while all our moderate clergy strive with they in vain.

with mighty arm thus they invade our peace,
 in vain the queen intreat their calm recess:
 tell they if she shall grant the wild desire,
 and pass the public mischief they require,
 they will grasp but air, a empty fruitless name,
 and be the first will perish in their own flame.
in vain the unite peer reject the bill,
man seldom quit the hope of do ill,
they be double damn that can despair of hell.

the unhappy wretch bend to push their fate,
 and bear to find their own mistake too late,
 only adjourn the mischief they design,
 please with the hope of great yet behind
 so far from peace, peace never be their design,
 they can for no repulse the feud decline;
 their weighty clamour all the nation fill,
 and damn the lord because they dame the bill;
 whole troop of satyr in their front advance,
 their household band more fierce than those of France. 
our poet tremble when their troop appear,
 but you, sir, never have be use to fear. 

there fame sachevrel lead the vast forlorn,
 by he the party bloody standard bear;
 abandon both by modesty and sense,
 and manner leave he as the consequence:
 scolding his native talent, and to rail
 serve he for argument when reason fail;
 with college licence and assize applause,
 he damn the queen, the bishop, and the law;
 nor spare the church her self, but give the lie
 to all her doctrine and authority;
 high church buffoon, the oxford state jest,
 a noisy, saucy, swear, drunken priest.

lie a turncoat with extend throat
 have change his cassock for a campaign coat:
 strip of his shepherd clthe he appear
 the very wolf he dress in ass ear;
 his ecclesiastic dignity lay down,
 and hate the pulpit for he hate the crown;
 the revolution damn, affront the queen,
 his sword the gown supply, the text his pen
 he be now a priest incog— with sword and wig,
 and swear to let you know he hate a Whig;
 his strong non jurant squadron bring along,
 below lampoon too rakish for our song;
 he damn the church for schismatic because
 they alter their allegiance by the law;
 declare the church of England only there
 where strong aversion to the regency appear;
 unchurch all our clergy at a blow,
 and vote the bishop useless —

this mighty captain rake deserve your care,
 his point dart in high-church front appear
 ready to charge the loyal troop you bring,
 with mock-religion and a pageant king. 

M—n, a starve mercenary priest,
 a job, hackney, vicious pulpit jest,
 from Ostia and from belgia late flee,
 and take the oath for very want of bread;
 immoral life, and a immodest tongue
 and deal in rhime, and wit, and baudy-song. 
the needy prelate, at who bounteous gate
 he lie expect and importunate,
 buy his wish absence with a teach cure
 to make just room for d—s about his door;
 until from the clamorous claimer force to fly,
 his justice give his charity the L—
 may they from creditor be never free
 that nourish sacred drone in charity;
 who mighty alm by mighty debt be know,
 and lend to god what never be their own;
 give borrow sum, and borrow sermon preach,
 and rob the poor to help relieve the rich.

these be the general of the mighty band,
 the tallard and Marsins of high command;
 mean as they be they lead the wondrous host
 of priest-rid worthy who some brain have lose,
 with packingtonian fury hurry on,
 who zeal must for their ignorance atone;
 who hunt deep contrary with eager pain,
 pull down the church to build it up again:
 for how can high non jurant L— rail,
 when strong consolidate project fail:
 how can they all their waver logic fix,
 and prove we shall conform to schismatic.
for if the church, as learned man have say,
 be part from she only lawful head,
 and the weak few, their duty who retain,
 be all the real church that can remain,
 the devil must this double knot untie,
 and explicate the wild mystery,
 how the dissenter can be charge by both,
 two contrary agree, and neither of they truth;
 damn the whole party nonconformity,
 and yet will damn they too if they comply.
coercive power provoke, and strive by force
 to re-reform we all from bad to worse;
 force we with one schismatic church to join,
 and at one breath unchurch we all again.

let b—ly blush, if not forsake by grace,
 and let his sense assume his lose religion place;
 let he confess the throw out the B—,
 can two clash church wish fulfil:
 that these must first abandon common sense,
 forsake their cause, and quit their own defence,
 when they occasional oppression seek,
 and cure the schism by the schismatic.

Assist, great sir, your suppliant country be peace,
 and screen the church from wild absurdity;
 aid she more moderate clergy to defend,
 temper the mean, and peace the mighty end;
 the universal voice of truth and law
 that make to drive when this shall fail to draw;
join to engage you in the just defence,
of temper, moderation, right and sense,
and of the nation peace by consequence.
on this the mighty public weal depend,
 conquest the nation from her foe defend,
 complete it, sir, and save we from our friend.

thus, sir, the nation guardian you will appear,
 abroad suppress, at home prevent the war;
 anticipate our faction in their growth,
 and smother feud beneath the arm of truth;
 and this your double victory will create,
 you will heal religion and preserve the state.

whenever heaven shall thus at once incline
 one agent two such vast event to join,
 the nation must concur, the general voice
 will bless the man to crown the sacred choice
