to C*** p****, ESQ;

from friendship cradle up the verdant path
of youth, life jolly spring; and now sublime
to its full manhood and meridian strength,
her late stage, (for friendship ever hale
know not old age, disease, and decay,
but burn keep her sacred fire, until death
cold hand extinguish) at this spot, this point,
here p***, we social meet, and gaze about,
and look back to the scene our pastime tread
in nature morning, when the gamesome hour
have slide foot, and laugh themselves away.
luxurious season! vital prime! where Thames
flow by etona wall, and cheerful see
her son wide swarm; or where sedgy cam
bath with slow pace his academic grove,
pierian walk! — o never hope again,
(impossible! untenable!) to grasp
those joy again; to feel alike the pulse
dance, and fiery spirit boil high:
or see the pleasure that with careless wing
sweep on, and flowery garland toss around
disport! try to call she back — as well
bid yesterday return, arrest the flight
of time; or muse by a river brink,
say to the wave that huddle swift by
for ever, from thy fountain roll anew.

the merriment, the tale, and heartfelt laugh
that echo round the table, idle guest,
must rise, and serious inmate take their place.
reflection daughter, sad and world-worn thought
dislodge fancy empire — yet who know
exact the balance of our loss and gain?
who know how far a rattle may outweigh
the mace or sceptre? but as boy resign
the plaything, bauble of their infancy,
so fare it with maturer year: they sage,
imagination airy region quit,
and under reason banner take the field,
with resolution face the cloud or storm,
while all their former rainbow die away.
some to the palace with regardful step,
and courtly blandishment resort, and there
advance obsequious; in the sunshine bask
of princely grace, catch the create eye,
parent of honour: — in the senate some
harangue the full-benched auditory, and wield
their listen passion (such the power, the sway
of reason eloquence!) — or at the bar,
where Cowper, TALBOT, Somers, Yorke before
plead their way to glory chair supreme,
and worthy fill it. let not these great name
damp, but incite: nor Murray praise obscure
thy young merit. know, these light, ere yet
to noonday lustre kindle, have their dawn.
proceed familiar to the gate of fame,
nor think the task severe, the prize too high
of toil and honour, for thy father son.
