HOLBAIN.

DOWN sunk the sun, nor shed one golden ray,
 But rising mists shut in the low'ring day:
 The tides o'erflown ahd drench'd the swampy turf,
 And drizzling rains bedew'd the dreary earth;
 The rising moon a bloody meteor seem'd,
 And, scarce observ'd, the muffled planets gleam'd;
 The winds were hush'd in silence most profound,
 And night's dim shades hung heavily around. 

HOLBAIN, a youth benighted in his course,
 Led o'er the marshy plains his fiery horse;
 Involving treacherous mists delude his sight,
 While lost he wander'd through the dreary night. 
With speed his blood grew warm, his pulses beat,
 The spirits to his panting heart retreat;
 Where tyrant fear with thrilling horror press'd,
 Till now a stranger to his daring breast. 
An unknown, trackless waste before him lay,
 And boggy marshes intercept his way;
 His eager pace is check'd by dangerous swamps,
 Or stopping he is chill'd by mizzling damps. 
Alone, his active mind conspir'd with fear,
 And fancied forms impregnated the air:
 Lightly he stepp'd, of every sound afraid,
 And often startled by the steed he led,
 Which as he curb'd unruly rear'd and neigh'd. 
Clearing the clouds, a sudden gust arose,
 Sigh'd through the woods, and shook the wat'ry boughs
 Alarm'd, his hand his courser's rein forsook,
 Which free, impetuous o'er the meadows broke;
 In bounding circles strove to heave along,
 Clogg'd 'mid the slimy mud, and fiercely strong;
 Snorting with direful rage, he madd'ning flies,
 Then plung'd, and smother'd in a quagmire dies. 

Grief pierc'd the youth, while idle terrors flew,
 And gloomy fancies melted from his view. 

He look'd around; - no spectres haunt his sight,
 (For rising winds had swept the misty night)
 The moon amid the parting vapours rode,
 And o'er the earth a varying light bestow'd. 
Mourning his generous friend, while sad he stood,
 The sound of feet he heard, and turning, view'd
 Near him a man, quick passing o'er the plain,
 His aspect peaceful, and his vestments plain;
 So thin, he look'd the image of decay,
 And closely wrapp'd to keep night's chills away. 
HOLBAIN salutes him, and enquires what care
 Tempts him through damps to trust the midnight air? 

 "Say rather," he replied, "what cause had led
" Thy daring feet to cross this dangerous mead,
 "Where fenny quagmires, shrouded by the night,
" Bury the traveller, and delude the sight? -
 "But well I know the pass and I will set thee right." 

 "O'erjoy'd, the youth his proffer'd aid embrac'd,
 Pepeats his wanderings, and his fears retrac'd;
 Tells how 'mid fogs, bewilder'd in his course,
 He 'mongst the marshes lost his faithful horse;
 Then names his destin'd journey, and the road,
 Which he, mistaking, had unwary trod. 

 "Thou'rt far, alas! from home," the senior cried,
 "The path so intricate I scarce can guide;
" But if you'll be the partner of my way,
 "And deign beneath my humble roof to stay;
" Soon as to-morrow shall return to light
 "My son shall tend thy steps, and set thee right." 

HOLBAIN his ardent gratitude confess'd,
 And oft-repeated thanks his joy express'd. 
Onward together as their course they speed
 The youth recounts the virtues of his steed;
 The other patient listen'd, nor reprov'd,
 For 'midst his warmth he trac'd a mind he lov'd. 

Quitting the plains, they pass where awful stood,
 Grown thick with age, a wild majestic wood,
 Where lofty trees their solemn branches spread,
 And winds loud whistling sung around their head;
 Th' autumnal blight the wither'd leaves had strow'd,
 And bright the moon her awful visage show'd:
 Rugged and long the way, and late the night,
 But pleasing converse made the journey light. 

Beguiling time, the elder thus begun,
 While native sweetness on his accents hung:
 "Say, youth, to what profession art thou bred? 
" By glory fir'd, or by the Muses led? 
 "Or does philosophy thy mind pervade? 
" Or seek you riches in the world of trade? " 

 "Glory," reply'd the youth, has spread its charms;
 "I caught its rays, and chose to follow arms;
" Impatient grew to signalize my name,
 "And took the brightest road that led to fame." 

 "And what is fame?" the senior calm replies;
 "Distinctly speak, that I may prove thee wise." 

 "Fame," HOLBAIN cried, "like a celestial light,
" Irradiates truth, and makes e'en virtue bright;
 "The soul of mighty deeds, whose fires impart,
" Beams which through length of ages glorious dart. " 

 "Ardent thou speak'st," with smiles rejoin'd the sire,
 "Yet be not dazzled while thou dost aspire;
" Though those whom Fame 'midst her bright glories place
 "Shine forth examples to the human race,
" Whose every act the crowd with transports view,
 "And indiscriminate their paths pursue,
" Whether their tract a noble end displays,
 "Or splendent vices catch fame's dazzling rays:
" But be it thine to check ambition's flame,
 "And closely link with justice love of fame;
" Which shining with intrinsic lustre bright,
 "With virtue's beams will dart th' immortal light. 
" Heroes too long, of human glory proud,
 "Insatiable have drench'd the world with blood;
" Too loud the bards their frantic deeds resound,
 "While blinded mortals ravish'd listen round. 
" Detested race! yet oft I feel the fire
 "Which urg'd them on, and mental strength admire;
" For, wanting strength, none e'er can reach the heights
 "Where Virtue sits, and Genius wings her flights;
" But monstrous crimes in soils luxuriant grow,
 "Strong powers ill govern'd sink us deep below. 
" Civilization, as it taught mankind,
 "To individuals different tasks assign'd:
" No more the appetites absorb our cares,
 "The mind breaks forth, and nobler functions shares;
" The polish'd arts with active fancy rise,
 "And Nature's mazes draw our wondering eyes;
" Genius finds wider scope, and mounting high
 "Exploring truth dawns with divinity! 
" But shame, deep shame to the inventive mind,
 "'Mid heavenly studies still to blood inclin'd,
 "And, hunting not our food, we hunt mankind! 
" Nature has countless wonders strow'd around,
 "Through air, the pregnant earth, and vast profound;
" Where latent truths, evading common view,
 "Open pure lessons to the thinking few;
" Who, truly wise, while fiercer passions die,
 "Learn the frail state of their mortality. 
" The finer arts my admiration claim,
 "As inoffensive paths to boundless fame;
" Hence Poesy supreme in glory soars,
 "Whose searching eye the heavens and earth explores! 

 "Its rapid flight nor space nor time can bound,
" The world of spirits, or the pow'rs of sound. 
 "Nor does the painter vain exert his art,
" Who, tracing Nature through each varying part,
 "Arrests the strongest passions in their course,
" And gives us time ot contemplate their force. 
 "Friend to such arts as Nature's works pourtray,
" No stormy passions cloud my evening ray:
 "Sorrow in vain has strove to break a heart
" Whose wishes ne'er for simple truth depart;
 "The charm of life, its griefs, its date I know,
" And from these lights my inward comforts flow;
 "For, while my reason Nature's ways explores,
" Religion strengthens, and my soul adores! " 

They now had reach'd the confines of the wood,
 Where, girt with trees, the stranger's mansion stood,
 To which they bend; the shining moon was gone,
 And scatter'd stars beam'd through the heavens alone. 
Soft at the door his stick the sire applies,
 Which opening quick, light glanc'd against their eyes:
 His children ran with eager arms t' embrace
 Their welcome sire, and kiss his much-lov'd face;
 Anxious to know what cause could him detain,
 In a drear night, chill'd by autumnal rain. 
Answering by turns, in pleasing tones he greets,
 While he and HOLBAIN 'midst them take their seats. 
His daughters tend him with assiduous care,
 And cheerful smiles domestic joys declare;
 Artless their forms, with modest plainness dress'd,
 And education's power their mien confess'd. 
His eldest son the youthful stranger greets,
 While he, with smiles, his happy chance repeats;
 Two younger boys obey their sister's word,
 And with refereshing viands spread the board. 
Now HOLBAIN'S eyes attentively survey
 Th' instructive partner of his rugged way:
 Wasted by care, he view'd the placid sire,
 His large light eyes still beam'd with mental fire;
 Submissively serene his pleasing brow,
 His lips, though pale, with genial smiles could glow;
 His manners simple, but his thoughts refin'd,
 Nor elegance was wanting to his mind. 
His guest he welcomes, and with pleasing voice
 Prays him to share his board and homely joys:
 The artless youth with cheerful smiles partook,
 Then round the table threw a happy look. 
As he observes the family by turns
 His fine eyes sparkle, and his bosom burns;
 The elder youth, more silent than the rest,
 Seem'd with the recent marks of grief impress'd. 
One daughter near her father took her place,
 Filial affection beaming in her face;
 Her features plain, her cheeks no roses die,
 No radiance kindles in her modest eye;
 But feeling, sense, and purity combine,
 A powerful charm, and with expression shine:
 Amid her sister's locks the Graces stray,
 Soften'd her eyes, and flush'd her cheeks like May. 
HOLBAIN delighted shar'd the sweet repast,
 Which filial love, good sense, and beauty grac'd;
 Unwilling he at last retir'd to rest,
 With love for the whole family impress'd. 

Soon as the beams which chace the glowing dawn
 Play'd o'er the hills, and mark'd distinct the morn,
 He sprung from rest, all eager to survey
 The mansion where so many virtues lay:
 Delighted he beheld the bless'd retreat,
 Where useful plainness, taste, and order meet. 
Neat was the bounteous garden, pal'd around,
 Which Autumn with her ripening tributes crown'd. 
As 'mid the thick-grown trees some fruits he sought,
 The elder youth he met, absorb'd in thought,
 Perturb'd within, irregular his pace,
 And gushing tears stream'd o'er his strong-mark'd face:
 Striving to pass unseen, he met his eyes,
 Nor could his heaving breast repress deep sighs. 
HOLBAIN confus'd strove quickly to depart
 (Sacred he deem'd the feelings of the heart.) 

The other, following, said, "With shame I glow,
" To be surpris'd in this unmanly woe:
 "Serene my father each affliction bears,
" But larger griefs impel my copious tears:
 "Fall'n low from state and envied happiness,
" Deeply does grief this sanguine heart impress;
 "Bitter remorse 'mid sad reflections rise,
" And joy in vain would shine to glad these eyes;
 "But listen, while my faultering lips impart
" What may excuse this weakness of my heart;
 "Just woke from madness, thought astonish'd turns,
" Feels the dire hand of fate, and inward burns: -

 "There stood a fabric, deeply wrapt in woods,
" Where hoarse resounded loud impetuous floods,
 "Which from the hills in rapid torrents gush'd
"'Mid the dark trees, and down the vallies rush'd;
 "The ruin'd walls were round with ivy spread,
" And gloomy shades wild Gothic grandeur shed. 
 "The aweful ocean's wond'rous space was nigh,
" Whose roarings wak'd a deep solemnity! -
 "Often, with youth's romantic raptures fraught,
" In meditation lost, these scenes I sought;
 "Here mus'd, here read; the Muses courted here,
" And strove to draw them from their tuneful sphere:
 "Thus fir'd, my genius boundless scope employ'd,
" Glanc'd o'er all nature, and her works enjoy'd. 
 "My mother (ever honour'd be her name! 
" Warm'd by whose force my spirit burst to flame;
 "Whose stronger passions, chasten'd by our sire,
" Still fill her children's pulses with her fire)
 "Listen'd, whilst I its various beauties told,
" And sought the Gothic structure to behold;
 "Her breast maternal in my joys took part,
" My feelings were congenial to her heart;
 "At her request we went, nor mark'd on high
" A threatening storm which gather'd o'er the sky. 

 "I led my mother through the devious wood,
" To where, involv'd with trees, the fabric stood;
 "With equal awe she view'd the solemn place,
" While warmly I romantic dreams re-trace;
 "The songs I here had tun'd enrapt I read,
" And hours upon their swiftest pinions fled:
 "Nature, in her still warm, diffus'd the fire
" Which in her youth loud woke th' harmonic lyre. 
 "I saw her charm'd, and warmly urg'd her stay,
" To blend her wisdom with my youthful lay,
 "Devoting to her son the th' instructive day. 
" When from her lips a forc'd consent I drew,
 "I caught her words, and for refreshments flew;
" While she within the tottering castle stays,
 "And all the grandeur of the scene surveys,
" Stupendous clouds were rolling o'er the heav'n,
 "Strong rush'd large torrents, by quick eddies driv'n. 

 "In curious choice of dainty viands bent,
" (O never pardon'd folly!) far I went:
 "Too far, alas!-a friend partook the way,
" With whom in converse thoughtlessly I stray:
 "Pleas'd with myself, while partial praise I sought,
" The best of mothers vanish'd from my thought;
 "Till rouz'd by a tremendous storm, which broke
" Thro' the vast heavens, and my remembrance woke. 

 "Strong gather'd thro' the trees the whirling gale,
" Blew bleak a while, then whistled in the vale;
 "Then on it came, and with redoubl'd force
" Strove 'midst contending trees to wing its course;
 "Driv'n back again, loud roaring it complains,
" Or blustering thunders o'er the neighboring plains:
 "Wildly I heard the stormy ocean roar,
" Wave dash'd on wave flew bellowing to the shore;
 "Grief for my mother fills my labouring breast:
" Precipitate I flew, with fears oppress'd. 
 "The storm with tenfold fury stil persists,
" Scarce the strong oak its dreadful power resists;
 "Borne by its ravings, tost aloft in air,
" Uprooted, torn, the mangled wood lies bare:
 "Trembling and horror-struck, I rapid flew,
" Nor could my friend my hasty steps pursue;
 "As I advance th' o'erwhelming tide arose,
" Delug'd the plains, and round in surges flows;
 "So fierce the winds, my feet were scarcely staid,
" While through encroaching waters on I wade;
 "My pulses with strong agitation beat,
" While present death with thousand horrors threat. 
 "And art thou, O my mother! 'mid this storm? 
 "What from the winds shall guide thy sacred form? 
" The ruin'd fabric totters at each breath,
 "Perhaps already has conspir'd thy death! 
" Four times I fell, 'midst gushing waters thrown,
 "Borne on by tides, or dash'd against huge stones;
" Yet strong necessity had giv'n me force,
 "And, spite of obstacles, I speed my course:
" When near advanc'd I stopp'd, and dar'd not go,
 "Arrested by foreboding sense of woe. 
" I call'd aloud on her who speaks no more,
 "Aloud the angry torrents thundering roar! 
" Still nearer on, I trembling call'd again;
 "Still roar'd the winds, and still my voice was vain! 
" Mad with despair, wild tow'rds the spot I rush,
 "Where all around the bellowing torrents gush;
" No trace of Gothic arch or roof remains,
 "By winds and waters swept along the plains. 
" Deep the contending elements resound,
 "While, lost to thought, my frantic brain turns round:
" Still seeking what I knew I could not find,
 "My dreadful cries concorded with the wind. 
" Myself I felt the cause; - grief and dismay
 "Rush'd on my brain, and snatch my sense away:
" My friend preserv'd my life, a thankless load,
 "And bore me to my father from the wood;
" I knew not how he found me, or where sought,
 "For long suspended were the powers of thought. 

 "I view my father, though worn down by care,
" Sublimely virtuous, keenest sufferings bear;
 "His best affections ravish'd from his breast,
" And sanguine hopes by penury suppress'd:
 "The day my mother died, on tempests tost,
" Loaded with wealth, his stranded ships were lost;
 "Wing'd with our fate one storm relentless blew,
" Conspir'd our ruin, and each hope o'erthrew;
 "Yet strong within, to every ill resign'd,
" Nought shakes the stedfast basis of his mind;
 "For pious Faith, and Hope's seraphic eye,
" Unfold the joys of immortality! 
 "Active in all his duties here below,
" Strong perseverance blunts the edge of woe. 
 "With industry he heaps our little stores,
" And still great Nature's ample page explores;
 "T' instruct the children in his Maker's ways,
" And shew how all by slow degrees decays;
 "That tho' on earth GOD'S hand is strong impress'd,
" Yet higher hopes should fill the human breast. 
 "O! bless'd example of a pious mind! 
" Yet still my stubborn breast pants unresign'd;
 "Not guiltlessly I draw this wretched breath,
" Nor tranquilly behold the gulf of death. " 

Thoughtful he paus'd; - while HOLBAIN silent pray'd,
 And with strong sympathy the youth survey'd:
 "Mysterious do thy ways, O GOD! appear,
" But, born to suffer, man must learn to bear. 
 "Divinely pour religion through the soul,
" For that alone the passions can controul! " 
Each stood absorb'd, till summon'd to repair
 Within the hall, the morn's repast to share;
 Th' obtrusion gave them pain-a while they stay,
 Then, walking slow, wip'd the hot tears away. 

HOLBAIN again the virtuous father meets,
 And with the morning's salutation greets;
 As pensively around his eyes he throws,
 Strong to his mind their loss and patience rose:
 Then 'mid the family he took his place,
 And charm'd beheld the younger daughter's grace:
 More sweet she looks by day, the lovely die
 Of her fair cheeks with brightest flowrets vie,
 Her azure eyes shot forth a lucid ray,
 O'er her white neck her amber ringlets stray. 
An anxious wish warm kindled in his breast,
 Its noble fire his guileless eyes confess'd;
 A pleas'd remembrance of his wealth arose,
 His breast benevolent with rapture glows. 

Lingering he strove to lengthen out his stay,
 And tore himself at last by force away;
 But first the sire's permission did obtain
 To visit this delightful spot again;
 When friendship strengthening, into union grew,
 And happier scenes unfolded to their view. 
