HOLBAIN.

down sink the sun, nor shed one golden ray,
 but rise mist shut in the lower day:
 the tide overflown and drench the swampy turf,
 and drizzle rain bedew the dreary earth;
 the rise moon a bloody meteor seem,
 and, scarce observe, the muffle planet gleam;
 the wind be hush in silence most profound,
 and night dim shade hang heavy around. 

HOLBAIN, a youth benight in his course,
 lead over the marshy plain his fiery horse;
 involve treacherous mist delude his sight,
 while lose he wander through the dreary night. 
with speed his blood grow warm, his pulse beat,
 the spirit to his pant heart retreat;
 where tyrant fear with thrill horror press,
 till now a stranger to his dare breast. 
a unknown, trackless waste before he lie,
 and boggy marsh intercept his way;
 his eager pace be check by dangerous swamp,
 or stop he be chill by mizzle damp. 
alone, his active mind conspire with fear,
 and fancy form impregnate the air:
 light he step, of every sound afraid,
 and often startle by the steed he lead,
 which as he curb unruly rear and neigh. 
clear the cloud, a sudden gust arise,
 sigh through the wood, and shake the watery bough
 alarm, his hand his courser rein forsake,
 which free, impetuous over the meadow break;
 in bound circle strive to heave along,
 clog amid the slimy mud, and fierce strong;
 snort with direful rage, he madden fly,
 then plunge, and smother in a quagmire die. 

grief pierce the youth, while idle terror fly,
 and gloomy fancy melt from his view. 

he look around; - no spectre haunt his sight,
 (for rise wind have sweep the misty night)
 the moon amid the part vapour ride,
 and over the earth a vary light bestow. 
mourn his generous friend, while sad he stand,
 the sound of foot he hear, and turn, view
 near he a man, quick pass over the plain,
 his aspect peaceful, and his vestment plain;
 so thin, he look the image of decay,
 and close wrap to keep night chill away. 
HOLBAIN salute he, and enquire what care
 tempt he through damp to trust the midnight air? 

 "say rather," he reply, "what cause have lead
" thy dare foot to cross this dangerous mead,
 "where fenny quagmire, shroud by the night,
" bury the traveller, and delude the sight? -
 "but well i know the pass and i will set thou right." 

 "overjoy, the youth his proffer aid embrace,
 pepeat his wander, and his fear retrace;
 tell how amid fog, bewilder in his course,
 he among the marsh lose his faithful horse;
 then name his destine journey, and the road,
 which he, mistake, have unwary tread. 

 "thou be far, alas! from home," the senior cry,
 "the path so intricate i scarce can guide;
" but if you will be the partner of my way,
 "and deign beneath my humble roof to stay;
" soon as tomorrow shall return to light
 "my son shall tend thy step, and set thou right." 

HOLBAIN his ardent gratitude confess,
 and oft-repeated thanks his joy express. 
onward together as their course they speed
 the youth recount the virtue of his steed;
 the other patient listen, nor reprove,
 for amid his warmth he trace a mind he love. 

quit the plain, they pass where awful stand,
 grow thick with age, a wild majestic wood,
 where lofty tree their solemn branch spread,
 and wind loud whistle sing around their head;
 the autumnal blight the wither leaf have strow,
 and bright the moon her awful visage show:
 rugged and long the way, and late the night,
 but please converse make the journey light. 

beguile time, the elder thus begin,
 while native sweetness on his accent hang:
 "say, youth, to what profession be thou breed? 
" by glory fire, or by the muse lead? 
 "or do philosophy thy mind pervade? 
" or seek you riches in the world of trade? " 

 "glory," reply the youth, have spread its charm;
 "i catch its ray, and choose to follow arm;
" impatient grow to signalise my name,
 "and take the bright road that lead to fame." 

 "and what be fame?" the senior calm reply;
 "distinct speak, that i may prove thou wise." 

 "fame," HOLBAIN cry, "like a celestial light,
" irradiate truth, and make even virtue bright;
 "the soul of mighty deed, who fire impart,
" beam which through length of age glorious dart. " 

 "ardent thou speak," with smile rejoin the sire,
 "yet be not dazzle while thou do aspire;
" though those who fame amid her bright glory place
 "shine forth example to the human race,
" who every act the crowd with transport view,
 "and indiscriminate their path pursue,
" whether their tract a noble end display,
 "or splendent vice catch fame dazzle ray:
" but be it thy to check ambition flame,
 "and close link with justice love of fame;
" which shine with intrinsic lustre bright,
 "with virtue beam will dart the immortal light. 
" hero too long, of human glory proud,
 "insatiable have drench the world with blood;
" too loud the bard their frantic deed resound,
 "while blind mortal ravish listen round. 
" detest race! yet oft i feel the fire
 "which urge they on, and mental strength admire;
" for, want strength, none ever can reach the height
 "where virtue sit, and genius wing her flight;
" but monstrous crime in soil luxuriant grow,
 "strong power ill govern sink we deep below. 
" civilization, as it teach mankind,
 "to individual different task assign:
" no more the appetite absorb our care,
 "the mind break forth, and noble function share;
" the polish art with active fancy rise,
 "and nature maze draw our wonder eye;
" genius find wide scope, and mount high
 "explore truth dawn with divinity! 
" but shame, deep shame to the inventive mind,
 "amid heavenly study still to blood incline,
 "and, hunt not our food, we hunt mankind! 
" nature have countless wonder strow around,
 "through air, the pregnant earth, and vast profound;
" where latent truth, evade common view,
 "open pure lesson to the think few;
" who, true wise, while fierce passion die,
 "learn the frail state of their mortality. 
" the fine art my admiration claim,
 "as inoffensive path to boundless fame;
" hence poesy supreme in glory soar,
 "who search eye the heaven and earth explore! 

 "its rapid flight nor space nor time can bound,
" the world of spirit, or the power of sound. 
 "nor do the painter vain exert his art,
" who, trace nature through each vary part,
 "arrest the strong passion in their course,
" and give we time ot contemplate their force. 
 "friend to such art as nature work portray,
" no stormy passion cloud my evening ray:
 "sorrow in vain have strive to break a heart
" who wish never for simple truth depart;
 "the charm of life, its grief, its date i know,
" and from these light my inward comfort flow;
 "for, while my reason nature way explore,
" religion strengthen, and my soul adore! " 

they now have reach the confine of the wood,
 where, gird with tree, the stranger mansion stand,
 to which they bend; the shine moon be go,
 and scatter star beam through the heaven alone. 
soft at the door his stick the sire apply,
 which open quick, light glance against their eye:
 his child run with eager arm to embrace
 their welcome sire, and kiss his much-loved face;
 anxious to know what cause can he detain,
 in a drear night, chill by autumnal rain. 
answer by turn, in please tone he greet,
 while he and HOLBAIN amid they take their seat. 
his daughter tend he with assiduous care,
 and cheerful smile domestic joy declare;
 artless their form, with modest plainness dress,
 and education power their mien confess. 
his old son the youthful stranger greet,
 while he, with smile, his happy chance repeat;
 two young boy obey their sister word,
 and with refereshing viand spread the board. 
now holbain eye attentive survey
 the instructive partner of his rugged way:
 waste by care, he view the placid sire,
 his large light eye still beam with mental fire;
 submissive serene his please brow,
 his lip, though pale, with genial smile can glow;
 his manner simple, but his thought refine,
 nor elegance be want to his mind. 
his guest he welcome, and with please voice
 pray he to share his board and homely joy:
 the artless youth with cheerful smile partake,
 then round the table throw a happy look. 
as he observe the family by turn
 his fine eye sparkle, and his bosom burn;
 the elder youth, more silent than the rest,
 seem with the recent mark of grief impress. 
one daughter near her father take her place,
 filial affection beam in her face;
 her feature plain, her cheek no rose die,
 no radiance kindle in her modest eye;
 but feeling, sense, and purity combine,
 a powerful charm, and with expression shine:
 amid her sister lock the grace stray,
 soften her eye, and flush her cheek like may. 
HOLBAIN delight share the sweet repast,
 which filial love, good sense, and beauty grace;
 unwilling he at last retire to rest,
 with love for the whole family impress. 

soon as the beam which chace the glow dawn
 play over the hill, and mark distinct the morn,
 he spring from rest, all eager to survey
 the mansion where so many virtue lie:
 delight he behold the bless retreat,
 where useful plainness, taste, and order meet. 
neat be the bounteous garden, pale around,
 which autumn with her ripen tribute crown. 
as amid the thick-grown tree some fruit he seek,
 the elder youth he meet, absorb in thought,
 perturb within, irregular his pace,
 and gush tear stream over his strong-marked face:
 strive to pass unseen, he meet his eye,
 nor can his heave breast repress deep sigh. 
HOLBAIN confuse strive quick to depart
 (sacred he deem the feeling of the heart.) 

the other, follow, say, "with shame i glow,
" to be surprise in this unmanly woe:
 "serene my father each affliction bear,
" but large grief impel my copious tear:
 "fall low from state and envy happiness,
" deep do grief this sanguine heart impress;
 "bitter remorse amid sad reflection rise,
" and joy in vain will shine to glad these eye;
 "but listen, while my faulter lip impart
" what may excuse this weakness of my heart;
 "just wake from madness, think astonish turn,
" feel the dire hand of fate, and inward burn: -

 "there stand a fabric, deep wrap in wood,
" where hoarse resound loud impetuous flood,
 "which from the hill in rapid torrent gush
"amid the dark tree, and down the valley rush;
 "the ruin wall be round with ivy spread,
" and gloomy shade wild gothic grandeur shed. 
 "the awful ocean wondrous space be nigh,
" who roar wake a deep solemnity! -
 "often, with youth romantic rapture fraught,
" in meditation lose, these scene i seek;
 "here muse, here read; the muse court here,
" and strive to draw they from their tuneful sphere:
 "thus fire, my genius boundless scope employ,
" glance over all nature, and her work enjoy. 
 "my mother (ever honour be her name! 
" warm by who force my spirit burst to flame;
 "who strong passion, chasten by our sire,
" still fill her child pulse with her fire)
 "listen, while i its various beauty tell,
" and seek the gothic structure to behold;
 "her breast maternal in my joy take part,
" my feeling be congenial to her heart;
 "at her request we go, nor mark on high
" a threaten storm which gather over the sky. 

 "i lead my mother through the devious wood,
" to where, involve with tree, the fabric stand;
 "with equal awe she view the solemn place,
" while warm i romantic dream retrace;
 "the song i here have tune enrapt i read,
" and hour upon their swift pinion flee:
 "nature, in she still warm, diffuse the fire
" which in her youth loud wake the harmonic lyre. 
 "i see she charm, and warm urge she stay,
" to blend her wisdom with my youthful lay,
 "devote to her son the the instructive day. 
" when from her lip a force consent i draw,
 "i catch her word, and for refreshment fly;
" while she within the totter castle stay,
 "and all the grandeur of the scene survey,
" stupendous cloud be roll over the heaven,
 "strong rush large torrent, by quick eddy drive. 

 "in curious choice of dainty viand bend,
" (o never pardon folly!) far i go:
 "too far, alas!-a friend partake the way,
" with who in converse thoughtless i stray:
 "please with myself, while partial praise i seek,
" the best of mother vanish from my thought;
 "till rouse by a tremendous storm, which break
" through the vast heaven, and my remembrance wake. 

 "strong gather through the tree the whirl gale,
" blow bleak a while, then whistle in the vale;
 "then on it come, and with redouble force
" strive amid contend tree to wing its course;
 "drive back again, loud roar it complain,
" or bluster thunder over the neighbour plain:
 "wild i hear the stormy ocean roar,
" wave dash on wave fly bellow to the shore;
 "grief for my mother fill my labour breast:
" precipitate i fly, with fear oppress. 
 "the storm with tenfold fury still persist,
" scarce the strong oak its dreadful power resist;
 "Borne by its rave, toss aloft in air,
" uprooted, tear, the mangle wood lie bare:
 "tremble and horror-struck, i rapid fly,
" nor can my friend my hasty step pursue;
 "as i advance the overwhelm tide arise,
" deluge the plain, and round in surge flow;
 "so fierce the wind, my foot be scarce stay,
" while through encroach water on i wade;
 "my pulse with strong agitation beat,
" while present death with thousand horror threat. 
 "and be thou, o my mother! amid this storm? 
 "what from the wind shall guide thy sacred form? 
" the ruin fabric totter at each breath,
 "perhaps already have conspire thy death! 
" four time i fall, amid gush water throw,
 "bear on by tide, or dash against huge stone;
" yet strong necessity have give i force,
 "and, spite of obstacle, i speed my course:
" when near advance i stop, and dare not go,
 "arrest by foreboding sense of woe. 
" i call aloud on she who speak no more,
 "aloud the angry torrent thunder roar! 
" still near on, i tremble call again;
 "still roar the wind, and still my voice be vain! 
" mad with despair, wild towards the spot i rush,
 "where all around the bellow torrent gush;
" no trace of gothic arch or roof remain,
 "by wind and water sweep along the plain. 
" deep the contend element resound,
 "while, lose to thought, my frantic brain turn round:
" still seek what i know i can not find,
 "my dreadful cry concord with the wind. 
" myself i feel the cause; - grief and dismay
 "rush on my brain, and snatch my sense away:
" my friend preserve my life, a thankless load,
 "and bore i to my father from the wood;
" i know not how he find i, or where seek,
 "for long suspend be the power of thought. 

 "i view my father, though wear down by care,
" sublime virtuous, keen suffering bear;
 "he best affection ravish from his breast,
" and sanguine hope by penury suppress:
 "the day my mother die, on tempest toss,
" load with wealth, his strand ship be lose;
 "winge with our fate one storm relentless blow,
" conspire our ruin, and each hope overthrow;
 "yet strong within, to every ill resign,
" nought shake the steadfast basis of his mind;
 "for pious faith, and hope seraphic eye,
" unfold the joy of immortality! 
 "active in all his duty here below,
" strong perseverance blunt the edge of woe. 
 "with industry he heap our little store,
" and still great nature ample page explore;
 "the instruct the child in his maker way,
" and show how all by slow degree decay;
 "that though on earth God hand be strong impress,
" yet high hope shall fill the human breast. 
 "O! bless example of a pious mind! 
" yet still my stubborn breast pant unresigned;
 "not guiltless i draw this wretched breath,
" nor tranquil behold the gulf of death. " 

thoughtful he pause; - while HOLBAIN silent pray,
 and with strong sympathy the youth survey:
 "mysterious do thy way, o god! appear,
" but, bear to suffer, man must learn to bear. 
 "divine pour religion through the soul,
" for that alone the passion can control! " 
each stand absorb, till summon to repair
 within the hall, the morn repast to share;
 the obtrusion give they pain-a while they stay,
 then, walk slow, wipe the hot tear away. 

HOLBAIN again the virtuous father meet,
 and with the morning salutation greet;
 as pensive around his eye he throw,
 strong to his mind their loss and patience rise:
 then amid the family he take his place,
 and charm behold the young daughter grace:
 more sweet she look by day, the lovely die
 of her fair cheek with bright flowret vie,
 her azure eye shoot forth a lucid ray,
 over her white neck her amber ringlet stray. 
a anxious wish warm kindle in his breast,
 its noble fire his guileless eye confess;
 a please remembrance of his wealth arise,
 his breast benevolent with rapture glow. 

linger he strive to lengthen out his stay,
 and tear himself at last by force away;
 but first the sire permission do obtain
 to visit this delightful spot again;
 when friendship strengthen, into union grow,
 and happy scene unfold to their view. 
