pre-existence:

a poem, in imitation of Milton. 

now have the archangel trumpet, raise sublime
above the wall of heaven, begin to sound;
all aether take the blast, and hell beneath
shake with celestial noise; the almighty host
hot with pursuit, and reek with the blood
of guilty cherub smear in sulphurous dust,
pause at the know command of sound gold.
at first they close the wide tartarian gate,
the impenetrable fold on brazen hinge
roll creak horrible; the din beneath
overcome the roar of flame, and deafen hell.
then through the solid gloom with nimble wing
they cut their shine trace up to light;
return upon the edge of heavenly day,
where thin beam play round the vast obscure,
and with eternal gleam drive back the night.
they find the troop less stubborn, less involve
in crime and ruin, bar the realm of peace,
yet uncondemned to baleful seat of woe,
doubtful and suppliant; all the plume of light
moult from their shudder wing, and sickly fear
shade every face with horror; conscious guilt
roll in the livid eye-ball, and each breast
shake with the dread of future doom unknown.

it be here the wide circumference of heaven
open in two vast gate, that inward turn
voluminous, on jasper column hang
by geometry divine: they ever glow
with live sculpture, that arise by turn
the imboss the shine leaf, by turn they set
to give succeed argument their place;
in holy hieroglyphic on they move,
the gaze of journey angel, as they pass
oft look back, and hold in deep surprise.
here stand the troop distinct; the cherub guard
unbar the splendid gate, and in they roll
harmonious; for a vocal spirit sit
within each hinge, and, as they onward drive,
in just division break the numerous jarr
with symphony melodious, such as sphere
involve in tenfold wreath be say to sound.

out flow a blaze of glory; for on high
tower advance the move throne of god,
vast and majestic; on each radiant side
the point ray slope glitter; at the foot
glide a full tide of day, that onward pour,
in liquid torrent through the black abyss,
sparkle among reluctant shape which thence
retire confuse; as when vesuvio shake
with inward torment, and disgorge flame,
over the vast mountain ridge the burn wave
drive their refulgent curl, and on they roll
sweep the glow plain down to the sea;
the affright sea leap back with hideous roar
to give the fire its course; thus chaos wild
hiss recoil to let in flood of light.

above the throne, the idea heavenly bright
of past, of present, and of come time
fix their immoved abode, and there present
a endless landscape of create thing
to sight celestial, where angelic eye
be lose in prospect; for the shiny range,
boundless and various in its bosom bear
million of full-proportioned world, behold
with steadfast eye, till more arise to view,
and farther inward scene start up unknown.

myriad of seraph in long series wait
about the throne, and as it move, proceed
in numerous order, to celestial song.
above, the symphony of mellow flute;
and harp, by fly angel gentle touch,
relieve the trumpet rage, and fit blend
the solemn sound in harmony divine;
such as may tune new world, and give the law
to globe on high, and the just figure guide
of planet form all their airy dance.
below, the blaze wheel drive bound over
the starry pavement; star and hill of light
double their glory where the chariot roll
with rattle sound; and the empyraeum vast
down to its steadfast axis, groan throughout
under the burn tract, till now it rest
upon the gape brink of heaven; and there
with open pomp, fill the vast empty space.

silence ensue; a deep and awful pause
more terrible, all expectation hold
in horror: now wrath imminent amaze
with dreadful precipice, to all it seem
more formidable near; then from the throne
a vocal thunder roll the sense of god,
majestical long, repugnant all
to princes custom here; their judgment flash
on guilt, with word concise, and sudden blaze.
quite otherwise, the God enlarge speech
set wide the fate of thing; that all around
may take full prospect of their come doom.

servant of god! and virtue great in arm;
we approve your faithful work, and you return
bless from the dire pursuit of rebel foe;
resolve, obdurate, they have try the force
of this right hand, and know almighty power;
transfix with lightning down they sink, they fall
into the fiery gulph, and deep they plunge
below the burn wave, to hide their head
in shelter from my vengeance bellow hence
more fierce, and scorch with more dreadful fire.
there let they find their doom, that dare defy
omnipotence, and slight his proffer grace;
roll in flame, and never to find a dawn
of heavenly day; instead, the mind imbibe
eternal gloom, and finge with constant flame,
can find no ease; while fierce their boil rage
eat through the impyreal mould, and glow within
with endless pain; not one repentant thought
shall cool the breast, but proud in horrid crime,
the soul anneal and harden in the fire.

but you commission by command divine,
have wise fill your trust, and close they all
within the fervid lake, lest any roam
into the dark abyss to shun their doom,
and in the womb immense of thing unborn
shall seek annihilation; you must rise
among the shine virtue more sublime;
on lofty throne prefer for lofty deed.

for you, you guilty throng! that late join
in this sedition, since seduce from good,
and catch in train of guile, by spirit malign,
superior in their order; you accept,
tremble, my heavenly clemency and grace.
when the long aera once have fill its orb,
you shall emerge to light, and humble here
again shall bow before his favour throne,
if your own virtue second my decree:
but all must have their mane first below,
so stand the eternal fate, but smooth you
than what lose angel feel; nor can our reign,
without just doom, the peace of heaven secure;
for form celestial new erect in glory
will totter, dazzle with the height of power,
do not the nerve of justice fix their sight.

see, where below in chaos wondrous deep
a speck of light dawn forth, and thence throughout
the shade, in many a wreath, my form power
there swift turn the burn eddy round,
absorb all crude matter near its brink;
which next, with subtle motion, take the form
i please to stamp, the seed of infant world
all now in embryo, but ere long shall rise
various scatter in this vast expanse,
involve in wind orb, until the brim
of outward circle brush the heavenly gate.
the middle point a globe of curl fire
shall hold, which round it shed its genial heat;
wherever i kindle life the motion grow
in all the endless orb, from this machine;
and infinite vicissitude shall roll
about the restless centre; for i rear,
in those meander turn, a dusty ball,
deform all over with wood, who shaggy top
enclose eternal mist, and deadly damp
hover within their bough, to choak the light;
impervious scene of horror, until reform
to field, and grassy dale, and flowery mead,
by your continual pain. the torrid zone
here fry with constant heat, the swarthy world;
parch the plain where hideous monster glare,
and dusty mountain, tumble by the wind,
stretch their uncertain heap; no less the frost
at either end shall rage, and high shall raise
firm promontory; vast the ruin seem
of desert nature, and the eternal pile
load all the dreary coast, and thick in ice,
arm either pole, that yearly peep askance
on come light, but feel no gentle ray
unbind the freeze chain. between these lie
the changeful clime, alternate they burn,
and chill again by turn; for both extreme
make their incursion here; and this my will
unchangeable ordain your doleful seat.

beneath mishapen chaos, and the field
of fight atom, where hot, moist, and dry,
wage a eternal war with dismal roar;
the dismal roar break smooth on the ground,
sacred to horror, and eternal night:
here silence sit, who visionary shape
in fold of wreathy mantling sink obscure,
and in dark fume recline his drowsy head;
a urn he hold, from whence a lake proceed,
wide, flow gentle, smooth, and Lethe name:
hither compel, each soul must drink long draught
of those forgetful stream, until form within.
and all the great idea fade and die:
for if vast thought shall play about a mind
enclose in flesh, and drag cumbrous life,
flutter and beat in the mournful cage,
it soon will break its grate and wing away:
it be therefore my decree, the soul return
naked from off this beach, and perfect blank,
to visit the new world; and strait to feel
itself, in crude consistence close shut,
the dreadful monument of just revenge;
immure by heaven own hand, and place erect
on fleet matter all imprison round
with wall of clay; the aetherial mould shall bear
the chain of member, deafen with a ear,
blind by eye, and manacle in hand.
here anger, vast ambition, and disdain,
and all the haughty movement rise and fall,
as storm of neighbour atom tear the soul;
and hope, and love, and all the calm turn
of easy hour, in their gay gild shape,
with sudden run, skim over delude mind,
as matter lead the dance; but one desire,
unsatisfied, shall mar ten thousand joy.

the rank of being, that shall first advance,
drink deep of human life; and long shall stay
on this great scene of care. from all the rest,
that long for the destine body wait,
less penance i expect; and short abode
in those pale dreary kingdom will content:
each have his lamentable lot, and all,
on different rack, abide the pain of life.

the pensive spirit take the lonely grove:
nightly he visit all the sylvan scene,
where far remote, a melancholy moon
raise her head, serene and shear of beam,
throw here and there the glimmer through the tree,
to make more awful darkness. starry light,
hang up on high, shed round they as they burn
a pale sad influence; and they gild the plain
with doubtful ray, which strike within the shade
a tremble lustre and uncertain light.

the sage shall haunt this solitary ground,
and view the dismal landscape, limn within
in horrid shade, mix with imperfect light.
here judgmegt, blind by delusive sense,
contract through the cranny of a eye,
shoot up faint languid beam, to that dark seat,
wherein the soul bereave of native fire,
sit intricate, in misty cloud obscure,
even from itself conceal, and there preside
over jar image with reason sway,
which by his order more confound their form;
and by decision more embroil the fray:
the more he strive to appease, the more he feel
the struggle surge of the darksome void
impetuous, and the thick revolve thought
encounter thought, image on image turn,
a chaos of wild science, where sometime
the clash notion strike out casual light,
which soon must perish and be lose again
in the thick darkness round it. now, he try
with all his might to raise some weighty thought,
of i, of fate, or of the eternal round,
which but recoil to crush the labour mind.
high be his reason, but the feeble clue
of fleet image he draw in vain
to wondrous length; (for still the turn maze
elude his art) its end fly far away,
and leave he trace round the toilsome path,
return oft on the same beat thought.
for much of good he talk, and life serene,
of happiness deny, the dismal waste
of wisdom privilege, and the obdurate breast,
stubborn in anguish; idle wisdom all,
weak sorcery to charm a real pain;
distaste crowd and business, thus he seek
diversion in himself, but with deep thought
he kindle doubt; and while he strive to blow
the ash off, revive the brand of care.

hence far remove, a different noisy race
in city full and frequent take their seat,
where honour be crush, and gratitude oppress
with swell hope of gain, that raise within
a tempest, and, drive onward by success,
can find no bound. for creature of a day
stretch their wide care to age; full increase
starve the penurious soul, while empty sound
fill the ambitious; that shall ever shrink,
pine with endless care, while this shall swell
to tympany enormous. bright in arm
here shine the hero, out he fierce lead
a martial throng, his instrument of rage,
to fill the world with death, and thin mankind.
ambition drive, and round the world he roam,
mark his way with blood; the dreadful noise
beget a fame; and all the breath he leave
be spend in his false praise, and vain bloat
the tyrant soul; while high his kingdom rise
in fleet pomp, hover over their gaudy wing
around the servile globe, that tame bend
beneath his haughty reign; and all his slave
under his yoke shall groan, and scarce shall groan
without a crime. here torture engine roar
with human voice disguise; earth, water, fire,
be make (dire element of cruelty!)
subservient to his lust, and power to kill;
yet shall the herd endure, nor dare to break
unite their imaginary chain;
while their great monarch chill with equal fear,
no less a slave than they. each rumour shake
the haughty purple, dark and cloudy care
involve the awful throne, that stand erect,
balance on the wild people tempere rage,
and fortify with dangerous art of power.
but death shall shift those scene of misery;
then doubtful title kindle up new war,
and urge on linger fate; the ensign blaze
about the camp, and drum and trumpets sound
prepare a solemn way to grizzly war;
javelin and beard spear in ghastly rank
erect their shine head, and round the field
a harvest scene of formidable death;
then join the horrid shock, who bellow burst
torment the shatter air, and drown the groan
of man below that roll in certain death.
these be the mortal sport, the tragic play
by man himself embroil; the dire debate
make the waste desert seem serene and mild,
where savage nature in one common lie,
by homely cot possess; all squalid, wild,
and despicable poor, they range the field,
and feel their share of hunger, care, and pain,
cheat by fly prey; and now they tear
their pant flesh; and now with nail unclean
they tug their shaggy beard; and deep quaff
of human woe, even when they rude sip
the flow stream, or chew the savory pulp
of nature fresh viand; fragrant fruit
enjoy with tremble, and in danger seek.

but where the appoint limit of a law
fence the general safety of the world,
no great quiet reign; for wanton man,
in giddy frolick easy leap over
his own invent bound; hence rapine, fraud,
revenge, and lust, and all the hideous train
of nameless ill, distort the meager mind
to endless shape of woe. here miser mourn
depart gold, and their defraud heir
dire perjury complain; the blend load
of punishment and crime deform the world,
and give no rest to man; with pang and throe
he enter on the stage; prophetic tear
and infant cry prelude his future woe;
and all be one continue scene of grief,
until the sad sable curtain fall in death.

but that last act shall in one moment close
of doubt and darkness; pain shall crack the string
of life decay; no less the soul convulse,
tremble in anxious care, and shudder stand,
afraid to leap into the open gulph
of future fate, till all the bank of clay
fall from beneath his foot: in vain he grasp
the shatter reed that cheat his easy wish.
reason be now no more; that narrow lamp
(which with its sickly fire will shoot its beam
to distance unknown, and stretch its ray
askance my path, in deep darkness veil)
be sink into his socket; inly there
it burn a dismal light; the expire flame
be choke in fume, and part in various doubt.

then the gay glory of the live world
shall cast their empty varnish, and retire
out of his feeble view; and rise shade
sit hover over all nature various face.
music shall cease, and instrument of joy
shall fail that sullen hour; nor can the mind
attend their sound, when fancy swim in death,
confuse and crush with care: for long shall seem
the dreary road, and melancholy dark,
that lead he know not where. here empty space
gape horrible, and threaten to absorb
all being: yonder sooty demon glare,
and dolorous spectre grin; the shapeless rout
of wild imagination dance and play
before his eye obscure; till all in death
shall vanish, and the prisoner, now enlarge,
regain the flame border of the sky.

he end. peal of thunder rend the heaven,
and chaos, from the bottom turn, resound
the mighty clangor: all the heavenly host
approve the high decree, and loud they sing
eternal justice; while the guilty troop,
sad with their doom, but sad without despair,
fall flutter down to lethe lake, and there
for penance, and the destine body, wait.
