the change.

poor river, now thou be almost dry,
 what nymph, or Swain, will near thou lie? 
since bring, alas! to sad decay,
 what flock, or herd, will near thou stay? 
the swan, that seek thou in thy pride,
 now on new stream forgetful ride:
 and fish, that in thy bosom lay,
 choose in more prosperous flood to play. 
all leave thou, now thy ebb appear,
 to waste thy sad remains in tear;
 nor will thy mournful murmur heed. 
fly, wretched stream, with all thy speed,
 among those solid rock thy grief bestow;
 for friend, like those alas! thou never do know. 

and thou, poor sun! that sat on high;
 but late, the splendour of the sky;
 what flower, though by thy influence bear,
 now cloud prevail, will towards thou turn '
now darkness sit upon thy brow,
 what persian votary will bow? 
what river will her smile reflect,
 now that no beam thou can direct? 
by watery vapour overcast,
 who think upon thy glory past? 
if present light, nor heat we get,
 unheeded thou may rise, and set. 
not all the past can one adorer keep,
 fall, wretched sun, to the more faithful deep

nor do thou, lofty structure! boast,
 since undermine by time and frost:
 since thou can no reception give,
 in untrod meadow thou may live. 
none from his ready road will turn,
 with thou thy wretched change to mourn. 
not the soft night, or cheerful day
 thou have bestow, can give thou praise. 
no lusty tree that near thou grow,
 (though it beneath thy shelter rise)
 will to thy age a staff become. 
fail, wretched building! to thy tomb. 
thou, and thy paint roof, in ruin mix,
 fall to the earth, for that alone be fix. 

the same, poor man, the same must be
 thy fate, now fortune frown on thou. 
her favour every one pursue,
 and lose she, thou all must lose. 
no love, sow in thy prosperous day,
 can fruit in this cold season raise:
 no benefit, by thou confer,
 can in this time of storm be hear. 
all from thy trouble water run;
 thy stoop fabric all man shun. 
all do thy cloud look decline,
 as if thou never do on they shine. 
o wretched man! to other world repair;
 for faith and gratitude be only there. 
