the linnet and the goldfinch.

it be when the morn disclose her rosy brow,
 and new-waked heifer in the pasture low,
 when little songster in the gale respire:
 to mira shade repair the woodland choir;
 perch on a bough that shine with morning dew,
 the linnet thus address the feather crew. 

the linnet.

say, my soft sister; say, you tuneful throng;
 who now demand the tribute of a song? 
who call we here? who give we leave to rove
 and warble in this late forbid grove? 
not long ago as Mira, mournful maid,
 all pensive sit beneath the dusky shade,
 just over her head i whistle on a bough,
 but discontent sit frown on her brow:
 be go thou too officious bird, she cry;
 (and turn on i — on i her angry eye)
 go from my bower, lead the tuneful throng;
 for Artemisia hear no more your song. 
these slight shade can please the fair no more;
 you hony-suckle shed your bloom store;
 you spread tree now let your branch die;
 and you shrill warbler from those branch fly:
 she say: — the blossom fall from every tree,
 and we deject from her arbour flee;. 
we flee all mournful to the distant plain:
 then say who call we to these groves again. 

the goldfinch.

by mira order to this grove we come,
 Mira, who sonnet please the rural dame:
 it be yesternight she wave her hand to i,
 as i sit whistle on a chestnut-tree:
 come here (she cry) you soft aërial choirs;
 my ear no more your sprightly music tire:
 now i can listen all the evening long,
 for Artemisia will attend your song:
 she come: you tree put on your best array,
 and with fresh odour greet the rise day. 
breathe sweet, you woodbine, and with head recline
 court the soft whisper of the western wind. 
you friendly zephyr, dry the dewy ground;
 shine bright, thou sun; and laugh, you mead around:
 thus Mira speak. — once more the blossom glow,
 and mild breeze over the mountain blow. 
the smile grove once more renew its charm,
 and tree embrace twist their curl arm;
 safe to shelter the expect fair,
 from the hot sunbeam or the northern air:
 here we attend, and hop from spray to spray,
 until the kind fate shall bring the wished-for day. 
when she, of who our Mira daily sing,
 who name she whisper to the listen spring,
 shall bless these shade — then, you melodious throng,
 let each prepare they for the sprightly song. 
let the shrill thrush begin her vary strain,
 and the small Wren in soft note complain. 
the pierce linnet and the lark agree,
 less loud the red-breast, nightingale and i. 
here end the goldfinch, and exult spring;
 her please companion clap their joyful wing. 
