a monody on the death of queen Caroline.

by RICHARD west, ESQ; son to the chancellor of Ireland, and grandson to bishop Burnet.

i 

sing we no more of hymeneal lay,
nor strew the land with myrtle and with bay:
the voice of joy be flee the british shore,
for Caroline no more:
and now our sorrow ask a sad string;
come, plaintive goddess of the cyrrhan spring,
pour thy deep note, and shed thy tuneful tear,
and, while we lose the memory of pain
in thy oblivious strain,
— ah! drop thy cypress on yond mournful bier!
begin: nor more delay
the sacred meed of gratitude to pay:
begin: whatever immortal song can do,
to the dear name of Caroline be due:
who love the muse, deserve the muse love:
then raise thy number high,
sound out her glory to the throne of Jove,
spread the glad voice through all the ambient sky,
from the dull marble vindicate her praise,
and waft it down to lighten future day.

ii.

you bard to come, the song of truth attend:
this, this be she, the muse judge and friend!
the royal female! who benignant hand
throughout fair albion land
deal every useful, every decent part,
each memphian science, and each attic art:
within the muse bower
she oft be wont to lose the vacant hour,
or underneath the sapient grot recline,
her soul to contemplation she resign,
and for awhile lay down
the painful, envy burden of a crown:
mean time thy rural ditty be not mute,
sweet bard of merlin cave!
though rude, thy ditty be of she, who give
thy voice to sing, and tune thy oaten flute
in strain unwonted to the ear of swain:
as when the lark, ambitious of the sky,
quit the low harvest of the golden plain,
teach by the sun inspire warmth to rise,
sublime in air he spread his dapple wing,
mount the blue aether, and in mount sing.

iii.

but whither wander the licentious song?
such joyous note to happy day belong!
ah i! our happy day be now no more: —
return, sad Muse: see pale Britannia weep,
see all the sister of the subject deep
their sovereign loss deplore!
see fond Ierne give her sorrow vent,
and as she tune her brazen lyre to woe,
indulge her grief to flow! —
see even the northern Orcades lament!
nor end the wail here:
whereve beneath our flag wild ocean roar,
from farther orient to hesperia shore,
from torrid affrick to the world cold end,
the british woe extend:
and every colony have drop a tear.

iv.

o honour flood! with reed pierian crown,
Isis! who argent water glide along
fair bellosite lycaean shade renowned,
now aid my feeble song;
and call thy choose son, and bid they bring
their lay of doric air,
with lenient sound to steal awhile from care
the inconsolable king:
o! sooth his anguish, and compose his pain
with artful unimaginable strain,
accord sweet to the golden lyre,
such as may half inspire
the iron breast of Hades to resign
our lose, love Caroline.

v. 

these be thy glorious deed, almighty death!
these be thy triumph over the son of man,
that now receive the miserable breath,
which the next moment they resign again!
ah i! what boot we all our boast power,
our golden treasure, and our purple state?
they can ward the inevitable hour,
nor stay the fearful violence of fate:
— virtue herself shall fail:
else now, if virtue ever can prevail,
death have not dare to violate the throne,
nor have Britannia hear her sovereign groan.
— you nymph! recall the song:
for heaven-born virtue do to heaven belong,
and scorn the mean of her son shall die,
but open he a passage to the sky;
her rod ay-pointing to the eternal goal,
from the brute earth she free the ardent soul;
swift from the vulgar herd aloft she spring,
spurn the moist clay, and soar on azure wing,

vi.

then hence with sorrow vain:
you theban muse! elevate the strain:
search over the record of immortal fame,
and high refulgent on the female line,
imblaze in starry character the name
of british Caroline:
while sacred story ring with sheba praise,
while berenice virtue still inspire
the cyrenean lyre,
and Gloriana bloom in spenser lay;
thy name, great queen, shall glow in every page,
shall dwell in every clime, and live in every age.
when GEORGE shall go, where WILLIAM go before,
and all the present world shall be no more;
when the fond faction of unjust mankind,
the mean, the mad, the envious, and the blind,
shall turn to worm and dust;
then time, impartial judge, that state the price
of each man virtue, and of each man vice,
from thy bright fame shall clear the canker rust;
and o! the muse ever shall be just.

vii.

but lo! what sudden radiance gild the sky?
it be gratitude descend from above,
know by the sweetness of her dove-like eye,
daughter of truth and universal love!
to Henry sacred dome she waft along,
and on thy tomb she pour
celestial sweet and aramanthine flower:
the old, the young, the rich, the wretched crowd
numerous around she, and with accent loud
raise the mix voice, and pour the grateful song:
"hail queen adorn by nature and by art!
"thy be each virtue of the head and heart;
"thy people bless thou, and thy child love,
"and thy king honour, and thy god approve, "

viii.

but here my labour cease:
it be time the foam courser to release.
and thou, o royal shade,
forgive the muse that these vain honour pay;
a muse as yet unheeded and unknown;
that dare to sacrifice to truth alone,
not prone to blame, not hasty to commend,
no foe unjust, no mercenary friend,
no sensual bosom, no ungenerous mind,
and though not virtuous, virtuous incline.
