to Sophia J. Baillie, a infant.

sweet bud of promise, fresh and fair,
 just move in the morning air,
 the morn of life but just begin,
 the sand of time just set to run! 
sweet babe with cheek of pinky hue,
 with eye of soft ethereal blue,
 with raven hair like fine down
 of unfledged bird and scant show
 beneath the cap of cumbrous lace,
 that circle round thy placid face! 
ah, baby! little do thou know
 how many yearn bosom glow,
 how many lip in blessing move,
 how many eye beam look of love
 at sight of thou! 
some future day,
 and grant it heaven! thou will repay
 the early love of love friend
 with oft-renewed and dear amends. 
affection true, as with a spell,
 have many way her tale to tell:
 and thou, with lightsome laugh eye,
 thy artless love will testify
 by proffer kiss oft repeat,
 and word at will, when thou be seat
 on the paternal knee, in glory,
 rehearse there thy mimic story —
 by little errand, run so fleet
 for dear mamma; and when so featly
 thou do for she the Dunsbourn heather,
 the primrose and the daisy gather,
 the daisy fresh with unbruised stem,
 like thou a "bright and bonny gem" —
 all this, and more than i can say
 will show thy love some future day. 
sweet bud of hope, belove, care,
 upon thy head heaven blessing rest! 

verse add to the forgo by the baby paternal grandmother.

unconscious babe! — not even line like these
 have power thy little slumber sense to please,
 nor all the charm portray with so much grace,
 can force one smile from that soft "placid face." 

but oh, how sweet on the parent ear
 fall tender tone of love from one so dear! 
how seem the little form that pen have trace,
 with future charm and virtue to be grace,
 while bright seem the hope such love bestow,
 and the fair prospect with fresh beauty glow. 

dear, dear Joanna, well employ be thou
 in weave chaplet for this baby brow! —
 for this dear babe, who have so welcome be
 to those who now on earth no more be see! 

for i, for i, in these decline day,
 nothing remain but humble prayer and praise:
 praise for the precious boon already give,
 prayer for its endless happiness in heaven! 
