[pastoral 04] the four pastoral.

Mico.

this place may seem for shepherd leisure make,
 so love these elm unite their shade. 
the ambitious woodbine, how it climb, to breathe
 its balmy sweet around on all beneath! 
the ground with grass of cheerful green bespread,
 through which the spring flower uprears its head. 
lo here the king-cup, of a golden hue,
 medly with daisy white and endive blue. 
hark how the gaudy goldfinch, and the thrush,
 with tuneful warble fill that bramble-bush! 
in please consort all the bird combine,
 and tempt we in the various ssng to join. 
up, argol, then; and to thy lip apply
 thy mellow pipe, or vocal music try:
 and since our ewe have graze, no harm, if they
 lye round and listen, while their lambkin play. 

argol.

the place indeed give Pleasance to the eye;
 and Pleasance work the singer fancy high:
 the field breath sweet, and how the gentle breeze
 move every leaf, and tremble through the tree. 
so sweet a scene ill suit my rugged lay,
 and better fit the music thou can play. 

Mico.

no skill of music can i, simple Swain,
 no fine device thy ear to entertain;
 albeit some deal i pipe, rude though it be,
 sufficient to divert my sheep and i,
 yet colinet (and colinet have skill)
 my finger guide on the tuneful quill,
 and try to teach i on what sound to dwell,
 and where to sink a note, and where to swell. 

argol.

ah Mico! half my flock will i bestow,
 will colinet to i his cunning show. 
so trim his sonnet be, i prithee, Swain,
 now give we once a sample of his strain:
 for, wonder of that lad the shepherd say,
 how sweet his pipe, how ravish his lay:
 the sweetness of his pipe and lay rehearse,
 and ask what gift thou please for thy verse. 

Mico.

since then thou list, a mournful song i choose;
 a mournful song relieve a mournful muse. 
fast by the river on a bank he sit,
 to weep the lovely maid untimely fate,
 fair Stella hight: a lovely maid be she,
 who fate he weep, a faithful shepherd he. 

awake my pipe; in every note express
 fair stella death, and colinet distress. 

o woeful day! o day of woe! quoth he;
 and woeful i, who live the day to see! 
that ever she can die! o most unkind,
 to go, and leave thy colinet behind! 
and yet, why blame i her? full fain will she,
 with die arm, have clasp her self to i:
 i clasp she too; but death be all too strong,
 nor vow, nor tear can fleet life prolong. 
teach i to grieve, with bleat moan, my sheep;
 teach i, thou ever-flowing stream, to weep;
 teach i you faint, you hollow wind, to sigh,
 and let my sorrow teach i how to die:
 now flock, nor stream, nor wind can ever relieve
 a wretch like i, for ever bear to grieve. 

awake, my pipe; in every note express
 fair stella death, and colinet distress. 

you bright maid, faint emblem of my fair,
 with look cast down, and with dishevel hair,
 in bitter anguish beast your breast, and moan
 her hour untimely, as it be your own. 
alas the fade glory of your eye
 in vain we dote upon, in vain you prize:
 for though your beauty rule the silly Swain,
 and in his heart like little queen you reign;
 yet death will even that rule beauty kill,
 as ruthless wind the tender blossom spill. 
if either music voice, or beauty charm,
 can make he mild, and stay his lift arm;
 my pipe her face, her face my pipe shall save,
 redeem thus each other from the grave. 
for see (o baleful sight!) see where she lie! 
the bud flower, unkind blast, die. 

awake, my pipe; in every note express
 fair stella death, and colinet distress. 

unhappy colinet! what boot thou now
 to weave fresh garland for the damsel brow? 
throw by the Lilly, daffodil and rose;
 one of black yew, and willow pale, compose,
 with baneful henbane, deadly nightshade dress;
 a garland that may witness thy unrest. 
my pipe, who soothe sound can passion move,
 and first teach stella virgin heart to love,
 untune, shall hang upon this blast oak,
 whence owl their dirge sing, and raven croak:
 nor lark, nor linnet shall by day delight,
 nor nightingale divert my moan by night;
 the night and day shall undistinguished be,
 alike to Stella, and alike to i. 

thus sweet do the gentle shepherd sing,
 and heavy woe within soft number bring:
 and now that sheephook for my song i crave. 

argol.

not this, but one much fair shall thou have,
 of season elm, where stud of brass appear,
 to speak the giver name, the month and year;
 the hook of polish steel, the handle turn,
 and rich by the graver skill adorn. 

o, colinet, how sweet thy grief to hear! 
how do thy verse subdue the listen ear! 
not half so sweet the midnight wind, that move
 in drowsy murmur over the wave grove;
 nor drop water, that in grot distil,
 and with a tinkle sound their cavern fill:
 so sing the swan, that in soft number waste
 their die breath, and warble to the last. 
and next to thou shall Mico bear the bell,
 that can repeat thy peerless verse so well. 

but see; the hill increase shadow cast:
 the sun, i ween, be leave we in haste:
 his weak ray faint glimmer through the wood,
 and bluey mist arise from yonder flood. 

Mico.

bid then our cur to gather in the sheep:
 good shepherd with their flock betimes shall sleep:
 for, he that late lie down, as late will rise,
 and, sluggard like, until noonday snore lie;
 while in their fold his injure ewe complain,
 and after dewy pasture bleat in vain. 
