elegy write at the hot-well, Bristol,

July, 1789. 

inscribe to the reverend W. Howley. 

the morning wake in shadowy mantle grey,
the darksome wood their glimmer skirt unfold,
prone from the cliff the falcon wheel her way,
and long and loud the bell slow chime be toll.

the redden light gain fast upon the sky,
and far away the glisten vapour sail,
down the rough steep the accustom hedger hie,
and the stream wind in brightness through the vale.

Mark how those rive rock on either shore
uplift their bleak and furrow front on high;
how proud desolate their forehead hoar,
that meet the early sunbeam of the sky!

bind for yond dusky mart, with pennant gay,
the tall bark, on the wind water line,
between the rive cliff slow ply her way,
and peer on the sight the white sail shine.

alas! for those by droop sickness wear,
who now come forth to meet the cheer ray;
and feel the fragrance of the tepid morn
round their tear breast and throb temple play! 

perhaps they muse with a despond sigh
on the cold vault that shall their bone inurn;
while every breeze seem, as it whisper by,
to breathe of comfort never to return.

yet oft, as sad throng dream arise,
awhile forgetful of their pain they gaze,
a transient lustre light their fade eye,
and over their cheek the tender hectic play.

the purple morn that paint with sidelong gleam
the cliff tall crest, the wave wood that ring
with song of bird rejoice in the beam,
touch soft the wakeful nerve accord string.

then at sad meditation silent hour
a thousand wish steal upon the heart;
and, while they meek bend to heaven high power,
ah! think it be hard, it be sure hard to part:

to part from every hope that bring delight,
from those that love they, those they love so much!
then fancy swell the picture on the sight,
and soften every scene at every touch.

sweet as the mellow wood beneath the moon,
remembrance lend her soft-uniting shade;
"some natural tear she drop, but wipe they soon:" —
the world retire, and its dim prospect fade!

air of delight, that soothe the ache sense;
water of health, that through yond cavern glide;
oh! kind yet your heal power dispense,
and bring back feeble life be exhaust tide! 

perhaps to these grey rock and mazy spring
some heart may come, warm with the pure fire;
for who bright fancy plume her radiant wing,
and warble muse wake the lonely lyre.

some orphan maid, deceive in early youth,
pale over yond spring may hang in mute distress;
who dream of faith, of happiness, and truth,
of love — that virtue will protect and bless.

some muse youth in silence there may bend,
untimely strike by sharp sorrow dart;
for friendship form, yet leave without a friend,
and bear still the arrow at his heart.

such be lament russell early doom,
the gay companion of our stripling prime;
even so he sink unwept into the tomb,
and over his head close the dark gulph of time.

hither he come, a wan and weary guest,
a soften balm for many a wound to crave;
and woo the sunshine to his ache breast,
which now seem smile on his verdant grave!

he hear the whisper wind that now i hear,
as, bode much, along these hill he pass;
yet ah! how mournful do they meet his ear
on that sad morn he hear they for the last! 

so sink the scene, like a depart dream,
since late we sojourn blythe in wykeham bower,
or hear the merry bell by Isis' stream,
and think our way be strew with fairy flower!

of those with who we play upon the lawn
of early life, in the fresh morning play;
alas! how many, since that vernal dawn,
like thou, poor Russell, 'neath the turf be lay!

joyous a while they wander hand in hand,
by friendship lead along the springtide plain;
how oft do fancy wake her transport bland,
and on the lid the glisten tear detain!

i yet survive, now muse other song,
than that which early please my vacant year;
think how day and hour have pass along,
mark by much pleasure some, and some by tear!

thankful, that to these verdant scene i owe
that he who late i see all droop pale,
raise from the couch of sickness and of woe,
now live with i these mantling view to hail.

thankful, that still the landscape beam bright,
of pendant mountain, or of woodland grey,
can wake the wonted sense of pure delight,
and charm a while my solitary way.

enough: — through the high heaven the proud sun ride,
my wander step their silent path pursue
back to the crowd world where fortune guide:
Clifton, to thy white rock and wood adieu!
