the grotto:

a ode to silence.

by the same.

come, muse silence, nor refuse to shed
thy sober influence over this darkling cell;
thy desert waste and lonely plain,
can never confine thy peaceful reign;
nor do thou only love to dwell
amid the dark mansion of the vault dead:
for still at eve serene hour,
all nature own thy soothe power:
oft have thou deign with i to rove,
beneath the calm sequester grove;
oft deign my secret step to lead
along the dewy pathless mead;
or up the dusky lawn, to spy
the last faint gleam of the twilight sky.
then will thou still thy pensive votary meet,
oft as he call thou to this gloomy seat:
for here, with many a solemn mystic rite,
be thou invoke to consecrate the ground,
ere these rude wall be rear remote from sight,
or ere with moss this shaggy roof be crown

hail! bless parent of each pure thought,
that do at once the heart exalt and mend!
here will thou never fail to find
my vacant solitude incline
thy serious lesson to attend.
for they i ween shall be with goodness fraught,
whether thou bid i meditate
on man, in untaught nature state;
how far this life he ought to prize;
how far its transient scene despise:
what height his reason may attain,
and where its proud attempt be vain:
what toil his virtue ought to brave,
for hope reward joy beyond the grave:
or if in man redeem you bid i trace
each wondrous proof of heaven transcendent grace;
then breathe some spark of that celestial fire,
which in the rapture seraph glow above,
where faint myriad crowd the joyful choir,
and harp their praise round the throne of love.
the trifle son of levity and pride
hence shall thy awful seriousness exclude;
nor shall loud riot thoughtless train
with frantic mirth this grott profane.
no foe to peace shall here intrude.
for thou will kind bid each sound subside,
save such as soothe the listen sense,
and serve to aid thy influence:
save where, soft-breathing over the plain,
mild zephyr wave the rustle grain:
or where some stream, from rocky source,
slow trickle down its ceaseless course:
or where the sea imperfect roar
come gentle murmur from the distant shore.
but most in philomel, sweet bird of night,
in plaintive philomel, be thy delight:
for she, or studious to prolong her grief,
or oft to vary her exhaustless lay,
with frequent pause, from thou shall seek relief,
nor close her strain, till dawn the noisy day.

without thy aid, to happy tasteful art,
no deep instructive science can prevail:
for only where thou do preside,
can wit inventive power be try:
and reason better task will fail,
do not thy haunt the serious theme impart.
the critic, that with plod head
toil over the learning of the dead;
the cloister hermit that explore,
by midnight lamp, religion store;
each sage that mark, with thoughtful gaze,
the lunar orb, or planet maze;
and every bard, that stray along
the sylvan shade, intent on sacred song;
shall all to thou those various praise give,
which, through thy friendly aid, themselves receive:
for though thou may from glory seat retire,
where loud applause proclaim the honour name;
yet do thy modest wisdom still inspire
each noble work that swell the voice of fame.
