OITHÓNA: a poem.

darkness dwell around dunlathmon, though the moon show half her face on the hill. the daughter of night turn her eye away; for she behold the grief that be come. — the son of morni be on the plain; but there be no sound in the hall. no long-streaming beam of light come tremble through the gloom. the voice of oi-thóna be not hear amid the noise of the stream of duvranna. —

whither be thou go in thy beauty, dark-haired daughter of Nuäth? lathmon be in the field of the valiant, but thou do promise to remain in the hall; thou do promise to remain in the hall till the son of morni return. till he return from strumon, to the maid of his love. the tear be on thy cheek at his departure; the sigh rise in secret in thy breast. but thou do not come to meet he, with song, with the lightly-trembling sound of the harp. —

such be the word of Gaul, when he come to dunlathmon tower. the gate be open and dark. the wind be bluster in the hall. the tree strow the threshold with leaf; and the murmur of night be abroad. — sad and silent, at a rock, the son of morni sit: his soul tremble for the maid; but he know not whither to turn his course. the son of Leth stand at a distance, and hear the wind in his bushy hair. but he do not raise his voice, for he see the sorrow of Gaul.

sleep descend on the hero. the vision of night arise. oi-thóna stand in a dream, before the eye of morni son. her dark hair be loose and disorder: her lovely eye roll in tear. blood stain her snowy arm. the robe half hide the wound of her breast. she stand over the chief, and her voice be hear.

sleep the son of morni, he that be lovely in the eye of oi-thóna? sleep Gaul at the distant rock, and the daughter of Nuäth low? the sea roll round the dark isle of tromáthon; i sit in my tear in the cave. nor do i sit alone, o Gaul, the dark chief of cuthal be there. he be there in the rage of his love. — and what can oi-thóna do?

a rough blast rush through the oak. the dream of night depart. Gaul take his aspen spear; he stand in the rage of wrath. often do his eye turn to the east, and accuse the lag light. — at length the morning come forth. the hero lift up the sail. the wind come rustle from the hill; and he bound on the wave of the deep. — on the third day arise Tromathon, like a blue shield in the midst of the sea. the white wave roar against its rock; sad oi-thóna sit on the coast. she look on the roll water, and her tear descend. — but when she see Gaul in his arm, she start and turn her eye away. her lovely cheek be bend and red; her white arm tremble by her side. — thrice she strive to fly from his presence; but her step fail she as she go.

daughter of Nuäth, say the hero, why do thou fly from Gaul? do my eye send forth the flame of death? or darken hatred in my soul? thou be to i the beam of the east rise in a land unknown. but thou cover thy face with sadness, daughter of high dunlathmon! be the foe of oi-thóna near? my soul burn to meet he in battle. the sword tremble on the side of Gaul, and long to glitter in his hand. — speak, daughter of Nuäth, do thou not behold my tear?

carborne chief of strumon, reply the sigh maid, why come thou over the dark-blue wave to nuath mournful daughter? why do i not pass away in secret, like the flower of the rock, that lift its fair head unseen, and strow its wither leaf on the blast? why do thou come, o Gaul, to hear my depart sigh? i pass away in my youth; and my name shall not be hear. or it will be hear with sorrow, and the tear of Nuäth will fall. thou will be sad, son of morni, for the fall fame of oi-thóna. but she shall sleep in the narrow tomb, far from the voice of the mourner. — why do thou come, chief of strumon, to the sea-beat rock of Tromathon.

i come to meet thy foe, daughter of carborne Nuäth! the death of Cuthal chief darken before i; or morni son shall fall. — oi-thóna! when Gaul be low, raise my tomb on that oozy rock; and when the dark-bounding ship shall pass, call the son of the sea; call they, and give this sword, that they may carry it to morni hall; that the grey-haired hero may cease to look towards the desert for the return of his son.

and shall the daughter of Nuäth live, she reply with a burst sigh? shall i live in tromáthon, and the son of morni low? my heart be not of that rock; nor my soul careless as that sea, which lift its blue wave to every wind, and roll beneath the storm. the blast which shall lay thou low, shall spread the branch of oi-thóna on earth. we shall wither together, son of carborne morni! — the narrow house be pleasant to i, and the grey stone of the dead: for never more will i leave thy rock, sea-surrounded tromáthon! — night come on with her cloud, after the departure of lathmon, when he go to the war of his father, to the moss-covered rock of duthórmoth; night come on, and i sit in the hall, at the beam of the oak. the wind be abroad in the tree. i hear the sound of arm. joy rise in my face; for i think of thy return. it be the chief of cuthal, the red-haired strength of dunrommath. his eye roll in fire: the blood of my people be on his sword. they who defend oi-thóna fall by the gloomy chief. — what can i do? my arm be weak; it can not lift the spear. he take i in my grief, amid my tear he raise the sail. he fear the return strength of lathmon, the brother of unhappy oi-thóna. — but behold, he come with his people! the dark wave be divide before he! — whither will thou turn thy step, son of morni? many be the warrior of dunrommath!

my step never turn from battle, reply the hero, as he unsheathe his sword; and will i begin to fear, oi-thóna, when thy foe be near? go to thy cave, daughter of nuath, till our battle cease. son of Leth, bring the bow of our father; and the sound quiver of morni. let our three warrior bend the yew. our self will lift the spear. they be a host on the rock; but our soul be strong.

the daughter of Nuäth go to the cave: a trouble joy rise on her mind, like the red path of the lightning on a stormy cloud. — her soul be resolve, and the tear be dry from her wildlylooking eye. — dunrommath slow approach; for he see the son of morni. contempt contract his face, a smile be on his dark-brown cheek; his red eye roll, half-concealed, beneath his shaggy brow.

whence be the son of the sea, begin the gloomy chief? have the wind drive you to the rock of tromáthon? or come you in search of the white-handed daughter of Nuäth? the son of the unhappy, you feeble man, come to the hand of dunrommath. his eye spare not the weak; and he delight in the blood of stranger. oi-thóna be a beam of light, and the chief of cuthal enjoy it in secret; will thou come on its loveliness like a cloud, son of the feeble hand! — thou may come, but shall thou return to the hall of thy father?

do thou not know i, say Gaul, red-haired chief of cuthal? thy foot be swift on the heath, in the battle of carborne lathmon; when the sword of morni son pursue his host, in morven woody land. dunrommath! thy word be mighty, for thy warrior gather behind thou. but do i fear they, son of pride? i be not of the race of the feeble.

Gaul advance in his arm; dunrommath shrink behind his people. but the spear of Gaul pierce the gloomy chief, and his sword lop off his head, as it bend in death. — the son of morni shake it thrice by the lock; the warrior of dunrommath flee. the arrow of Morven pursue they: ten fall on the mossy rock. the rest lift the sound sail, and bind on the echo deep.

Gaul advance towards the cave of oi-thóna. he behold a youth lean against a rock. a arrow have pierce his side; and his eye roll faint beneath his helmet. — the soul of morni son be sad, he come and speak the word of peace.

can the hand of Gaul heal thou, youth of the mournful brow? i have search for the herb of the mountain; i have gather they on the secret bank of their stream. my hand have close the wound of the valiant, and their eye have bless the son of morni. where dwell thy father, warrior? be they of the son of the mighty? sadness shall come, like night, on thy native stream; for thou be fall in thy youth. —

my father, reply the stranger, be of the son of the mighty; but they shall not be sad; for my fame be depart like morning mist. high wall rise on the bank of duvranna; and see their mossy tower in the stream; a rock ascend behind they with its bend fir. thou may behold it far distant. there my brother dwell. he be renown in battle: give he this glitter helmet.

the helmet fall from the hand of Gaul; for it be the wound oi-thóna. she have arm herself in the cave, and come in search of death. her heavy eye be half close; the blood pour from her side. —

son of morni, she say, prepare the narrow tomb. sleep come, like a cloud, on my soul. the eye of oi-thóna be dim. o have i dwell at duvranna, in the bright beam of my fame! then have my year come on with joy; and the virgin will bless my step. but i fall in youth, son of morni, and my father shall blush in his hall. —

she fall pale on the rock of tromáthon. the mournful hero raise her tomb. — he come to Morven; but we see the darkness of his soul. Ossian take the harp in the praise of oi-thóna. the brightness of the face of Gaul return. but his sigh rise, at time, in the midst of his friend, like blast that shake their unfrequent wing, after the stormy wind be lay.

