prologue to Comus,

perform for the benefit of the general hospital at bath, 1756. 

by the same.

speak by miss Morrison, in the character of a lady of fashion.

well, i have be beat up for volunteer,
but find that — charity have get no ear.
i first attack a colonel of the guard —
sir, charity — consider its reward.
with heal hand the sad sore it skin,
and cover — oh! — a multitude of sin.
he swear, the world be welcome to his thought:
it be damn hypocrisy to hide one fault;
and with that sin his conscience never be twit —
the only one he never have commit.

next, to my knight i plead. he — shake his head;
complain the stock be low — and trade be dead.
in these bath-charity a tax he will find
more heavy than — four shilling in the pound.
what with the playhouse, hospital, and abbey,
a man be stripe — unless he will look quite shabby.
then such a train, and such expense to fit!
my lady, all the brat, and cousin Kit —
he will steal, himself — perhaps — into the pit.

old lady slipslop, at her morning card,
vow that all work of genus she regard;
raffle for Chinese god, card-house, shell,
nor grudge to the music, or the bell,
but have a strange antiquity to nasty ospitel. 

i hope your lordship — then my lord reply —
no doubt, the governor be — very wise;
but, for the play, he — wonder at their choice.
in Milton day such stuff may be the taste,
but faith! he think it be damn dull and chaste.
then swear, he to the charity be hearty,
but can, in honour, break his evening party.

when to the gouty alderman i sue,
the nasty fellow, (egad!) be downright rude.
be beg groan the fashion, with a pox!
the mayor shall set such housewife in the stock.
give you a guinea! z—ds! reply the beast,
it will buy a ticket for a turtle-feast.
think what a guinea-a-head may set before you —
sir — mullet — turbot — and a grand John Dorey,
i will never give a groat, as i be a sinner,
unless they gather it in a dish, at dinner.

i trust, by art and more polite address,
you fair advocate meet more success;
and not a man compassion cause withstand,
when beauty plead for such general good. 
