to mrs. P—, with some drawing of bird and insect.

Amanda bid; at her command again
 i seize the pencil, or resume the pen;
 no other call my will hand require,
 and friendship, better than a muse inspire. 

paint and poetry be near ally;
 the kindred art two sister muse guide;
 this charm the eye, that steal upon the ear;
 there sound be tune; and colour blend here:
 this with a silent touch enchant our eye,
 and bid a gay bright world arise:
 that, less ally to sense, with deep art
 can pierce the close recess of the heart;
 by well set syllable, and potent sound,
 can rouse, can chill the breast, can sooth, can wound;
 to life add motion, and to beauty soul,
 and breathe a spirit through the finish whole:
 each perfect each, in friendly union join;
 this give amanda form, and that her mind. 

but humble theme my artless hand require,
 nor high than the feather tribe aspire. 
yet who the various nation can declare
 that blow with busy wing the people air? 
these cleave the crumble bark for insect food;
 those dip their crooked beak in kindred blood:
 some haunt the rushy moor, the lonely wood;
 some bathe their silver plumage in the flood;
 some fly to man; his household god implore,
 and gather round his hospitable door;
 wait the know call, and find protection there
 from all the less tyrant of the air. 

the tawny eagle seat his callow brood
 high on the cliff, and feast his young with blood. 
on snowden rock, or orkney wide domain,
 who beetling cliff overhang the western main,
 the royal bird his lonely kingdom form
 amid the gather cloud, and sullen storm;
 through the wide waste of air he dart his sight
 and hold his sound pinion poise for flight;
 with cruel eye premeditate the war,
 and mark his destine victim from afar:
 descend in a whirlwind to the ground,
 his pinion like the rush of water sound;
 the fair of the fold he bear away,
 and to his nest compel the struggle prey;
 he scorn the game by mean hunter tear,
 and dip his talon in no vulgar gore. 

with lovely pomp along the grassy plain
 the silver pheasant draw his shine train;
 on india paint shore, by ganges stream,
 he spread his plumage to the sunny gleam:
 but when the wiry net his flight confine,
 he lower his purple crest, and inly pine;
 the beauteous captive hang his ruffle wing
 oppress by bondage, and our chilly spring. 
to claim the verse, unnumbered tribe appear
 that swell the music of the vernal year:
 seize with the spirit of the kindly spring
 they tune the voice, and sleek the glossy wing:
 with emulative strife the note prolong
 and pour out all their little soul in song. 
when winter bite upon the naked plain,
 nor food nor shelter in the grove remain,
 by instinct lead, a firm unite band,
 as marshale by some skilful general hand,
 the congregate nation wing their way
 in dusky column over the trackless sea;
 in cloud unnumbered annual hover over
 the craggy bass, or kilda utmost shore:
 thence spread their sail to meet the southern wind,
 and leave the gather tempest far behind;
 pursue the circle sun indulgent ray,
 course the swift season, and overtake the day. 

not so the insect race, ordain to keep
 the lazy sabbath of a half-year sleep. 
entomb, beneath the filmy web they lie,
 and wait the influence of a kind sky;
 when vernal sunbeam pierce their dark retreat,
 the heave tomb distend with vital heat;
 the full-formed brood impatient of their cell
 start from their trance, and burst their silken shell;
 tremble awhile they stand, and scarce dare
 to launch at once upon the untried air:
 at length assure, they catch the favour gale,
 and leave their sordid spoil, and high in ether sail. 
so when Rinaldo strike the conscious rind,
 he find a nymph in every trunk confine;
 the forest labour with convulsive throe,
 the burst tree the lovely birth disclose,
 and a gay troop of damsel round he stand,
 where late be rugged bark and lifeless wood. 
lo! the bright train their radiant wing unfold,
 with silver fringe and freckle over with gold:
 on the gay bosom of some fragrant flower
 they idle flutter live their little hour;
 their life all pleasure, and their task all play,
 all spring their age, and sunshine all their day. 
not so the child of sorrow, wretched man,
 his course with toil conclude, with pain begin:
 pleasure the portion of the inferior kind;
 but glory, virtue, heaven for man design. 

what atom form of insect life appear! 
and who can follow nature pencil here? 
their wing with azure, green, and purple gloss,
 stud with colour eye, with gem emboss,
 inlay with pearl, and mark with various stain
 of lively crimson through their dusky vein. 
some shoot like live star, athwart the night,
 and scatter from their wing a vivid light,
 to guide the indian to his tawny love,
 as through the wood with cautious step he move. 

see the proud giant of the beetle race;
 what shine arm his polish limb enchase! 
like some stern warrior formidable bright
 his steely side reflect a gleam light;
 on his large forehead spread horn he wear,
 and high in air the branch antler bear;
 over many a inch extend his wide domain,
 and his rich treasury swell with hoard grain. 

thy friend thus strive to cheat the lonely hour,
 with song, or paint, a insect, or a flower:
 yet if Amanda praise the flow line,
 and bend delight over the gay design,
 i envy not, nor emulate the fame
 or of the painter, or the poet name:
 can i to both with equal claim pretend,
 yet far, far dear be the name of friend. 
