strephon complaint on quit his retirement.

i 

business! — oh stay till i recover breath,
astonish word put my maze spirit to flight;
business to i sound terrible as death,
as death to lover on their bridal night.
free as air, but more serene,
the series of my life have be;
but i uncustomed to the yoke, must now
in stubborn harness toil at the dull blow.

ii.

then farewell happiness, repose farewell!
you come not where poor Strephon must reside '
for you like halcyon on calm water dwell,
but business be a rough and trouble tide.
few sun have rise since i be bless,
of god like liberty possess;
but slave t'employment now without repose
i be (ghost-like) hurry where my daemon go.

iii.

but business to preferment will direct,
and it be even necessary to be great.
ah have i then no more than this t'expect?
my stint hope will starve on such thin meat.
impertinent! content i crave,
and wild you of grandieur rave!
if life at best a tedious rugged road,
what must it be with grandieur's cumber load?

iv.

condemn to the town-noise and impertinence,
where mode and ceremony i must view!
yet be the sight all Strephon can dispense,
but he must there be ceremonious too.
i fear my rural soul too plain
to learn the town dissemble strain;
for while i practise the fly courtier art,
i shall forget my self, and speak my heart. 

v. 

when first the unwelcome tiding i receive,
summon to bid my peaceful shade adieu;
scarce be i by my fellow-swain believe,
until stream tear prove my sad story true.
then pensive they my doom resent,
as it be to death or banishment;
but oh my panalthaea passionate moan
surpass her sex kindness, and her own. 

vi.

thus speak she with a force frown on her brow,
will you be go? false Strephon, will you go?
then go thy way; go, for i hate thou now!
but tell i, be you serious Swain, or no?
this be some newfound wile to prove
(ridiculous jealousy!) my love:
but while of my this feign suspect be show,
you will suggest that you have renounce your own. 

vii.

thy love chaste nymph deep in my breast i lay,
when first the precious pledge i do receive,
nor have i thence the sacred store convey,
here, force the cabinet open and you will believe!
you will see with what a bleed heart,
from these dear shade and thou i part;
but rigurous fate — then on her virgin breast
i lean my droop head, and weep the rest. 

viii.

oh flood and groves, beneath who sacred shade
i have sit as happy as first mortal be;
for when distraction do my breast invade,
some rapturous shepherd song redress my care.
but above the flight of other swain
i prize my astragon soft strain;
for (turtle-like) my pensive astragon
be sweet sad and charm in his moan. 
