[nereid:] eclogue x. 

Meroe. 

Otys, begin —

since he be go, i will fetch he to my arm
 by sacred spell, and force of magic charm,
 search in the slime, you will find the crampfish there,
 that, chill stop whatever swim too near:
 you will find the fish, that stay the labour ship,
 though ruffle wind drive over the noisy deep:
 so Phorbas, while from i he perjure fly,
 be strike benumb, and fix with strange surprise. 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

take here, and drain the sepia inky juice,
 sprinkle the sea, and say, i thus infuse
 sad gloomy thought into the perjure Swain,
 until he relent sigh, and turn to love again. 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

wreathe three time thrice three reed, and seven time round
 the chaplet wave (strange virtue have be find. 
in number hide; and energy divine,
 in figure spell, and the mysterious trine.) 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

take here the ravenous dog, and wind he through. 
then cry aloud, Phorbas, i strike for you;
 so may his soul be pierce with fret pain,
 until he relent sigh, and turn to love again. 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

go fetch dry weed; they lie on yonder isle;
 then raise in corner square the artful pile,
 and force the kindle heap with flame oil:
 so may his torture soul in anguish mourn,
 and as the pile, so may the triton burn. 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

i hear the hollow elf, and midnight shriek
 of wander ghost, who now unbodied seek
 their lose abode, and restless ever roam;
 affright, you elf, and bring my Phorbas home. 
look down auspicious moon; too well you know
 what love will force, and potent charm can do. 

while now the flame consume the sacred heap,
 sing Otys; try to lull my soul asleep;
 delightful sound, when form by studious art
 will kind relief a while, and slumber ease impart;
 they quell sad thought, and raise from black despair
 the trouble mind, and still the voice of care. 

Otys. 

love once assay to swim; in wanton play
 he labour strive to cut the liquid way:
 he press the water with extend arm,
 and as he move, display a thousand charm. 
when tire with sport, he will at length have fly,
 his wing be clog with wet, and useless grow,
 flutter he strive, but moisture press he down. 
the god of love be now to sea confine,
 no triton must be proud, or nymph unkind. 

Mer.  

cease, Otys; see, the flame already die,
 choke with dark smoky fume, that circle rise. 
moisture imbibe preserve the reek heap:
 sad sign! —

nor will he burn, nor shall i cease to weep. 
in vain we strive: no artful spell can move,
 no charm will force unwilling soul to love. 
