hope.

ask what be human life — the sage reply
 with disappointment lower in his eye,
 a painful passage over a restless flood,
 a vain pursuit of fugitive false good,
 a scene of fancy bliss and heart-felt care,
 close at last in darkness and despair. —
 the poor, inure to drudgery and distress,
 act without aim, think little and feel less,
 and no where but in feign arcadian scene,
 taste happiness, or know what pleasure mean. 
riches be pass away from hand to hand,
 as fortune, vice or folly may command;
 as in a dance the pair that take the lead
 turn downward, and the low pair succeed,
 so shift and so various be the plan
 by which heaven rule the mix affair of man,
 vicissitude wheel round the motley crowd,
 the rich grow poor, the poor become purse-proud:
 business be labour, and man weakness such,
 pleasure be labour too, and tire as much,
 the very sense of it forego its use,
 by repetition pall, by age obtuse. 
youth lose in dissipation, we deplore
 through life sad remnant, what no sigh restore,
 our year, a fruitless race without a prize,
 too many, yet too few to make we wise. 
dangle his cane about, and take snuff,
 Lothario cry, what philosophic stuff. 
oh querulous and weak! who useless brain
 once think of nothing, and now think in vain,
 who eye revert weep over all the past,
 who prospect show thou a dishearten waste,
 will age in thou resign his wintery reign,
 and youth invigorate that frame again,
 renew desire will grace with other speech
 joy always prize, when place within our reach. 
for lift thy palsy head, shake off the gloom
 that overhang the border of thy tomb,
 see nature gay as when she first begin,
 with smile allure her admirer, man,
 she spread the morning over eastern hill,
 earth glitter with the drop the night distil,
 the sun obedient, at her call appear
 to fling his glory over the robe she wear,
 bank clothe with flower, grove fill with sprightly sound,
 the yellow tilth, green mead, rock, rise ground,
 stream edge with osier, fatten every field
 wherever they flow, now see and now conceal,
 from the blue rim where sky and mountain meet,
 down to the very turf beneath thy foot,
 ten thousand charm that only fool despise,
 or pride can look at with indifferent eye,
 all speak one language, all with one sweet voice
 cry to her universal realm, rejoice. 
man feel the spur of passion and desire,
 and she give large more than he require,
 not that his hour devote all to care,
 hollow-eyed abstinence and lean despair,
 the wretch may pine, while to his smell, taste, sight,
 she hold a paradise of rich delight,
 but gentle to rebuke his awkward fear,
 to prove that what she give, she give sincere,
 to banish hesitation, and proclaim
 his happiness, her dear, her only aim. 
it be grave philosophy absurd dream,
 that heaven intention be not what they seem,
 that only shadow be dispense below,
 and earth have no reality but woe. 
thus thing terrestrial wear a different hue,
 as youth or age persuade, and neither true;
 so Flora wreath through colour crystal see,
 the rose or lily appear blue or green,
 but still the impute tint be those alone
 the medium represent, and not their own. 
to rise at noon, sit slipshod and undress,
 to read the news or fiddle as seem best,
 until half the world come rattle at his door,
 to fill the dull vacuity until four,
 and just when evening turn the blue vault grey,
 to spend two hour in dress for the day,
 to make the sun a bauble without use,
 save for the fruit his heavenly beam produce,
 quite to forget, or deem it worth no thought,
 who bid he shine, or if he shine or not,
 through mere necessity to close his eye
 just when the lark and when the shepherd rise,
 be such a life, so tedious the same,
 so void of all utility or aim,
 that poor jonquil, with almost every breath
 sigh for his exit, vulgar call, death:
 for he, with all his folly, have a mind
 not yet so blank, or fashionable blind,
 but now and then perhaps a feeble ray
 of distant wisdom shoot across his way,
 by which he read, that life without a plan,
 as useless as the moment it begin,
 serve mere as a soil for discontent
 to thrive in, a encumbrance, ever half spend. 
oh weariness beyond what ass feel,
 that tread the circuit of the cistern wheel,
 a dull rotation never at a stay,
 yesterday face twin image of today,
 while conversation, a exhaust stock,
 grow drowsy as the click of a clock. 
no need, he cry, of gravity stuff out
 with academic dignity devout,
 to read wise lecture, vanity the text;
 proclaim the remedy, you learn, next,
 for truth self-evident with pomp impress,
 be vanity surpass all the rest. 
that remedy, not hide in deep profound,
 yet seldom seek, where only to be find,
 while passion turn aside from its due scope
 the enquirer aim, that remedy, be hope. 
life be his gift, from who whatever life need,
 and every good and perfect gift proceed,
 bestow on man, like all that we partake,
 royal, free, for his bounty sake. 
transient indeed, as be the fleet hour,
 and yet the seed of a immortal flower,
 design in honour of his endless love,
 to fill with fragrance his abode above. 
no trifle, howsoever short it seem,
 and howsoever shadowy, no dream,
 its value, what no thought can ascertain,
 nor all a angel eloquence explain. 
man deal with life, as child with their play,
 who first misuse, then cast their toy away,
 live to no sober purpose, and contend
 that their creator have no serious end. 
when god and man stand opposite in view,
 man disappointment must of course ensue. 
the just creator condescend to write
 in beam of inextinguishable light,
 his name of wisdom, goodness, power and love,
 on all that bloom below or shine above,
 to catch the wander notice of mankind,
 and teach the world, if not perverse blind,
 his gracious attribute, and prove the share
 his offspring hold in his paternal care. 
if lead from earthly thing to thing divine,
 his creature thwart not his august design,
 then praise be hear instead of reason pride,
 and captious cavil and complaint subside. 
nature employ in her allot place,
 be handmaid to the purpose of grace,
 by good vouchsafe make know superior good,
 and bliss not see by blessing understand. 
that bliss reveal in scripture with a glow
 bright as the covenant-insuring bow,
 fire all his feeling with a noble scorn
 of sensual evil, and thus hope be bear. 
hope set the stamp of vanity on all
 that man have deem substantial since the fall,
 yet have the wondrous virtue to educe
 from emptiness itself a real use,
 and while she take as at a father hand
 what health and sober appetite demand,
 from fade good derive with chemic art
 that last happiness, a thankful heart. 
hope with uplift foot set free from earth,
 pant for the place of her ethereal birth,
 on steady wing sail through the immense abyss,
 plucks amaranthine joy from bower of bliss,
 and crown the soul while yet a mourner here,
 with wreath like those triumphant spirit wear. 
hope as a anchor firm and sure, hold fast
 the christian vessel, and defy the blast;
 hope! nothing else can nourish and secure
 his new-born virtue, and preserve he pure;
 hope! let the wretch once conscious of the joy,
 who now despair agony destroy,
 speak, for he can, and none so well as he,
 what treasure centre, what delight in thou. 
have he the gem, the spice, and the land
 that boast the treasure, all at his command,
 the fragrant grove, the inestimable mine,
 be light when weigh against one smile of thy. 
though clasp and cradle in his nurse arm,
 he shine with all a cherub artless charm,
 man be the genuine offspring of revolt,
 stubborn and sturdy, a wild ass colt;
 his passion like the watery store that sleep
 beneath the smile surface of the deep,
 wait but the lash of a wintery storm,
 to frown and roar, and shake his feeble form. 
from infancy through childhood giddy maze,
 froward at school, and fretful in his play,
 the puny tyrant burn to subjugate
 the free republic of the whip-gig state. 
if one, his equal in athletic frame,
 or more provoke still, of noble name,
 dare step across his arbitrary view,
 an Iliad, only not in verse, ensue. 
the little greek look tremble at the scale,
 until the best tongue or heavy hand prevail. 
now see he launch into the world at large;
 if priest, supine dron over his charge,
 their fleece his pillow, and his weekly drawl,
 though short, too long, the price he pay for all;
 if lawyer, loud whatever cause he plead,
 but proud of the worst, if that succeed. 
perhaps a grave physician, gather fee,
 punctual pay for lengthen out disease,
 no cotton, who humanity shed ray
 that make superior skill his second praise. 
if arm engage he, he devote to sport
 his date of life, so likely to be short,
 a soldier may be any thing, if brave,
 so may a tradesman, if not quite a knave. 
such stuff the world be make of; and mankind
 to passion, interest, pleasure, whim resign,
 insist on, as if each be his own pope,
 forgiveness, and the privilege of hope;
 but conscience in some awful silent hour,
 when captivate lust have lose their power,
 perhaps when sickness, or some fearful dream
 remind he of religion, hate theme! 
start from the down on which she late sleep,
 and tell of law despise, at least not keep;
 show with a point finger and no noise,
 a pale procession of past sinful joy,
 all witness of blessing foul scorn,
 and life abuse — and not to be suborn. 
Mark these, she say, these summon from afar,
 begin their march to meet thou at the bar;
 there find a judge, inexorable just,
 and perish there, as all presumption must. 
peace be to those (such peace as earth can give)
 who live in pleasure, dead even while they live,
 bear capable indeed of heavenly truth,
 but down to late age from early youth
 their mind a wilderness through want of care,
 the plough of wisdom never enter there. 
peace (if insensibility may claim
 a right to the meek honour of her name)
 to man of pedigree, their noble race
 emulous always of the near place
 to any throne, except the throne of grace. 
let cottager and unenlightened swain
 revere the law they dream that heaven ordain,
 resort on Sunday to the house of prayer,
 and ask, and fancy they find blessing there;
 themselves perhaps when weary they retreat
 the enjoy cool nature in a country seat,
 the exchange the centre of a thousand trade,
 for clump and lawn and temple and cascade,
 may now and then their velvet cushion take,
 and seem to pray for good example sake;
 judge, in charity no doubt, the town
 pious enough, and have need of none. 
kind soul! to teach their tenantry to prize
 what they themselves without remorse despise;
 nor hope have they nor fear of aught to come,
 as well for they have prophecy be dumb;
 they can have hold the conduct they pursue,
 have Paul of Tarsus live and die a Jew;
 and truth propose to reasoner wise as they,
 be a pearl cast — complete cast away. 
they die — death lend they, please and as in sport,
 all the grim honour of his ghastly court;
 far other painting grace the chamber now,
 where late we see the mimic landscape glow;
 the busy herald hang the sable scene
 with mournful escutcheon and dim lamp between,
 proclaim their title to the crowd around,
 but they that wear they, move not at the sound;
 the coronet place idle at their head,
 add nothing now to the degrade dead,
 and even the star that glitter on the bier,
 can only say, nobility lie here. 
peace to all such — it be pity to offend
 by useless censure who we can mend,
 life without hope can close but in despair,
 it be there we find they and must leave they there. 
as when two pilgrim in a forest stray,
 both may be lose, yet each in his own way,
 so fare it with the multitude beguile
 in vain opinion waste and dangerous wild;
 ten thousand rove the brake and thorn among,
 some eastward, and some westward, and all wrong:
 but here, alas! the fatal difference lie,
 each man belief be right in his own eye;
 and he that blame what they have blind choose,
 incur resentment for the love he show. 
say botanist! within who province fall
 the cedar and the hyssop on the wall,
 of all that deck the lane, the field, the bower,
 what part the kindred tribe of weed and flower? 
sweet scent, or lovely form, or both combine,
 distinguish every cultivate kind,
 the want of both denote a mean breed,
 and Chloe from her garland pick the weed. 
thus hope of every sort, whatever sect
 esteem they, sow they, rear they, and protect;
 if wild in nature, and not due find
 Gethsemane! in thy dear, hallow ground,
 that can bear the blaze of scripture light,
 nor cheer the spirit, nor refresh the sight,
 nor animate the soul to christian deed,
 oh cast they from thou! be weed, arrant weed. 
ethelred house, the centre of six way,
 diverge each from each, like equal ray,
 himself as bountiful as April rain,
 lord paramount of the surround plain,
 will give relief of bed and board to none,
 but guest that seek it in the appoint, one. 
and they may enter at his open door,
 even till his spacious hall will hold no more. 
he send a servant forth by every road,
 to sound his horn and publish it abroad,
 that all may mark, knight, menial, high and low,
 a ordnance it concern they much to know. 
if after all, some headstrong, hardy lowt,
 will disobey, though sure to be shut out,
 can he with reason murmur at his case,
 himself sole author of his own disgrace? 
no! the decree be just and without flaw,
 and he that make, have right to make the law;
 his sovereign power and pleasure unrestrained,
 the wrong be he, who wrongful complain. 
yet half mankind maintain a churlish strife
 with he, the donor of eternal life,
 because the deed by which his love confirm
 the largess he bestow, prescribe the term. 
compliance with his will your lot insure,
 accept it only, and the boon be you;
 and sure it be as kind to smile and give,
 as with a frown to say, do this and live. 
love be not pedlar trumpery, buy and sell,
 he will give free, or he will withhold,
 his soul abhor a mercenary thought,
 and he as deep who abhor it not;
 he stipulate indeed, but mere this,
 that man will free take a unbought bliss,
 will trust he for a faithful generous part,
 nor set a price upon a will heart. 
of all the way that seem to promise fair,
 to place you where his saint his presence share,
 this only can — for this plain cause, express
 in term as plain; himself have shut the rest. 
but oh the strife, the bicker and debate,
 the tiding of unpurchased heaven create! 
the flirt fan, the bridle and the toss,
 all speaker, yet all language at a loss. 
from stuccoe wall smart argument rebound,
 and beau, adept in every thing profound,
 die of disdain, or whistle off the sound. 
such be the clamor of rook, daw, and kite,
 the explosion of the level tube excite,
 where moulder abbey-wall overhang the glade,
 and oak cooeval spread a mournful shade. 
the scream nation hover in mid air,
 loud resent the stranger freedom there,
 and seem to warn he never to repeat
 his bold intrusion on their dark retreat. 
adieu, vinoso cry, ever yet he sip,
 the purple bumper tremble at his lip,
 adieu to all morality! if grace
 make work a vain ingredient in the case. 
the christian hope be — waiter, draw the cork —
 if i mistake not — blockhead! with a fork! 
without good work, whatever some may boast,
 mere folly and delusion — sir, your toast. 
my firm persuasion be, at least sometime,
 that heaven will weigh man virtue and his crime,
 with nice attention in a righteous scale,
 and save or damn as these or those prevail. 
i plant my foot upon this ground of trust,
 and silence every fear with — god be just;
 but if perchance on some dull drizzle day,
 a thought intrude that say, or seem to say. 
if thus the important cause be to be try,
 suppose the beam shall dip on the wrong side,
 i soon recover from these needless fright,
 and god be merciful — set all to right. 
thus between justice, as my prime support,
 and mercy flee to, as the last resort,
 i glide and steal along with heaven in view,
 and — pardon i, the bottle stand with you. 
i never will believe, the colonel cry,
 the sanguinary scheme that some devise,
 who make the good creator, on their plan,
 a being of less equity than man. 
if appetite, or what divine call lust,
 which man comply with, even because they must,
 be punish with perdition, who be pure? 
then they, not doubt, as well as i, be sure. 
if sentence of eternal pain belong
 to every sudden slip and transient wrong,
 then heaven enjoin the fallible and frail,
 a hopeless task, and damn they if they fail. 
my creed (whatever some creed-maker mean
 by Athanasian nonsense or Nicene)
 my creed be, he be safe that do his best,
 and death a doom sufficient for the rest. 
right, say a ensign, and for aught i see,
 your faith and mine substantial agree:
 the best of every man performance here,
 be to discharge the duty of his sphere. 
a lawyer deal shall be just and fair,
 honesty shine with great advantage there;
 fast and prayer sit well upon a priest,
 a decent caution and reserve at least. 
a soldier best be courage in the field,
 with nothing here that want to be conceal,
 manly deportment, gallant, easy, gay,
 a hand as liberal as the light of day,
 the soldier thus endow, who never shrink,
 nor closet up his thought whatever he think,
 who scorn to do a injury by stealth,
 must go to heaven — and i must drink his health. 
sir smug! he cry (for low at the board,
 just make five chaplain of his patron lord,
 his shoulder witness by many a shrug,
 how much his feeling suffer, sit sir smug)
 your office be to winnow false from true,
 come, prophet, drink, and tell we what think you. 
sigh and smile as he take his glass,
 which they that woo preferment, rare pass,
 fallible man, the church-bred youth reply,
 be still find fallible, however wise,
 and differ judgment serve but to declare
 that truth lie somewhere, if we know but where. 
of all it ever be my lot to read
 of critic now alive or long since dead,
 the book of all the world that charm i most
 be, welladay, the titlepage be lose. 
the writer well remark, a heart that know
 to take with gratitude what heaven bestow,
 with prudence always ready at our call,
 to guide our use of it, be all in all. 
doubtless it be — to which of my own store
 i superadd a few essential more;
 but these, excuse the liberty i take,
 i wave just now, for conversation sake. —
 Spoke like a oracle, they all exclaim,
 and add right reverend to smug honour name,
 and yet our lot be give we in a land
 where busy art be never at a stand,
 where science point her telescopic eye,
 familiar with the wonder of the sky,
 where bold enquiry dive out of sight,
 bring many a precious pearl of truth to light,
 where nought elude the persevere quest,
 that fashion, taste, or luxury suggest. 
but above all, in her own light array,
 see mercy grand apocalypse display! 
the sacred book no long suffer wrong,
 bind in the fetter of a unknown tongue,
 but speak with plainness art can never mend,
 what simple mind can soon comprehend. 
god give the word, the preacher throng around,
 live from his lip, and spread the glorious sound:
 that sound bespeak salvation on her way,
 the trumpet of a life-restoring day;
 it be hear where England eastern glory shine,
 and in the gulf of her cornubian mine. 
and still it spread. see Germany send forth
 her son to pour it on the farther north:
 fire with a zeal peculiar, they defy
 the rage and rigor of a polar sky,
 and plant successful sweet sharon rose,
 on icy plain and in eternal snow. 
oh bless within the enclosure of your rock,
 nor herd have you to boast, nor bleat flock,
 no fertilise stream your field divide,
 that show reverse the villa on their side,
 no grove have you; no cheerful sound of bird,
 or voice of turtle in your land be hear,
 nor grateful eglantine regales the smell
 of those that walk at evening where you dwell —
 but winter arm with terror, here unknown,
 sit absolute on his unshaken throne,
 pile up his store amidst the freeze waste,
 and bid the mountain he have build, stand fast,
 beckon the legion of his storm away
 from happy scene, to make your land a prey,
 proclaim the soil a conquest he have win,
 and scorn to share it with the distant sun. 
— yet truth be you, remote, unenvied isle,
 and peace, the genuine offspring of her smile,
 the pride of letter ignorance that bind
 in chain of error, our accomplish mind,
 that deck with all the splendour of the true
 a false religion, be unknown to you. 
nature indeed vouchsafe for our delight
 the sweet vicissitude of day and night,
 soft air and genial moisture, feed and cheer
 field, fruit and flower, and every creature here,
 but bright beam than his who fire the sky,
 have rise at length on your admire eye,
 that shoot into your dark cave the day
 from which our nice optic turn away. 
here see the encouragement grace give to vice,
 the dire effect of mercy without price! 
what be they? — what some fool be make by art
 they be by nature, atheist, head and heart. 
the gross idolatry blind heathen teach
 be too refine for they, beyond their reach;
 not even the glorious sun, though man revere
 the monarch most that seldom will appear,
 and though his beam that quicken where they shine,
 may claim some right to be esteem divine,
 not even the sun, desirable as rare,
 can bend one knee, engage one votary there;
 they be what base credulity believe
 true christian be, dissembler, drunkard, thief. 
the full-gorged savage at his nauseous feast
 spend half the darkness, and snore out the rest,
 be one, who justice on a equal plan
 denounce death upon the sin of man,
 may almost have indulge with a escape,
 chargeable only with a human shape. 
what be they now? — morality may spare
 her grave concern, her kind suspicion there. 
the wretch that once sing wild, dance and laugh,
 and suck in dizzy madness with his draught,
 have weep a silent flood, reverse his way,
 be sober, meek, benevolent, and pray;
 feed spare, communicate his store,
 abhor the craft he boast of before,
 and he that steal have learn to steal no more. 
well speak the prophet, let the desert sing,
 where spring the thorn, the spiry fir shall spring,
 and where unsightly and rank thistle grow,
 shall grow the myrtle and luxuriant yew. 
go now, and with important tone demand
 on what foundation virtue be to stand,
 if self-exalting claim be turn adrift,
 and grace be grace indeed, and life a gift;
 the poor reclaim inhabitant, his eye
 glisten at once with pity and surprise,
 amaze that shadow shall obscure the sight
 of one who birth be in a land of light,
 shall answer, hope, sweet hope, have set i free,
 and make all pleasure else mere dross to i. 
these amid scene as waste as if deny
 the common care that wait on all beside,
 wild as if nature there, void of all good,
 play only gambol in a frantic mood;
 yet charge not heavenly skill with have plan
 a plaything world unworthy of his hand,
 can see his love, though secret evil lurk
 in all we touch, stamp plain on his work,
 deem life a blessing with its numerous woe,
 nor spurn away a gift a god bestow. 
hard task indeed, over arctic sea to roam! 
be hope exotic? grow it not at home? 
yes, but a object bright as orient morn,
 may press the eye too close to be bear,
 a distant virtue we can all confess,
 it hurt our pride and move our envy less. 
leuconomus (beneath well-sounding greek
 i slur a name a poet must not speak)
 stand pillory on infamy high stage,
 and bear the pelt scorn of half a age,
 the very butt of slander, and the blot
 for every dart that malice ever shoot. 
the man that mention he, at once dismiss
 all mercy from his lip, and sneer and hiss;
 his crime be such as Sodom never know,
 and perjury stand up to swear all true;
 his aim be mischief, and his zeal pretence,
 his speech rebellion against common sense,
 a knave when try on honesty plain rule,
 and when by that of reason, a mere fool,
 the world best comfort be, his doom be pass,
 die when he may, he must be damn at last. 
now truth perform thy office, waft aside
 the curtain draw by prejudice and pride,
 reveal (the man be dead) to wonder eye,
 this more than monster in his proper guise. 
he love the world that hate he: the tear
 that drop upon his bible be sincere. 
assail by scandal and the tongue of strife,
 his only answer be a blameless life,
 and he that forge and he that throw the dart,
 have each a brother interest in his heart. 
Paul love of Christ, and steadiness unbribed,
 be copy close in he, and well transcribe;
 he follow Paul: his zeal a kindred flame,
 his apostolic charity the same,
 like he cross cheerful tempestuous sea,
 forsake country, kindred, friend, and ease;
 like he he labour, and like he, content
 to bear it, suffer shame wherever he go. 
blush calumny! and write upon his tomb,
 if honest eulogy can spare thou room,
 thy deep repentance of thy thousand lie,
 which aim at he, have pierce the offend sky,
 and say, blot out my sin, confess, deplore,
 against thy image in thy saint, oh lord! 
no blind bigot, i maintain it still,
 than he that must have pleasure, come what will;
 he laugh, whatever weapon truth may draw,
 and deem her sharp artillery mere straw. 
scripture indeed be plain, but god and he
 on scripture-ground, be sure to disagree;
 some wise rule must teach he how to live,
 than that his maker have see fit to give,
 supple and flexible as indian cane,
 to take the bend his appetite ordain,
 contrive to suit frail nature crazy case,
 and reconcile his lust with save grace. 
by this, with nice precision of design,
 he draw upon life map a zig-zag line,
 that show how far it be safe to follow sin,
 and where his danger and God wrath begin. 
by this he form, as please he sport along,
 his well poise estimate of right and wrong,
 and find the modish manner of the day,
 though loose, as harmless as a infant play. 
build by whatever plan caprice decree,
 with what material, on what ground you please,
 your hope shall stand unblamed, perhaps admire,
 if not that hope the scripture have require:
 the strange conceit, vain project and wild dream,
 with which hypocrisy for ever teem,
 (though other folly strike the public eye,
 and raise a laugh) pass unmolested by;
 but if unblameable in word and thought,
 a man arise, a man who god have teach,
 with all Elijah dignity of tone,
 and all the love of the belove John,
 to storm the citadel they build in air,
 and smite the untempered wall, it be death to spare. 
to sweep away all refuge of lie,
 and place, instead of quirk themselves devise,
 Lama sabacthani, before their eye,
 to prove that without Christ, all gain be loss,
 all hope, despair, that stand not on his cross,
 except the few his god may have impress,
 a tenfold frenzy seize all the rest. 
throughout mankind, the christian kind at least,
 there dwell a consciousness in every breast,
 that folly end where genuine hope begin,
 and he that find his heaven must lose his sin:
 nature oppose with her utmost force,
 this rive stroke, this ultimate divorce,
 and while religion seem to be her view,
 hate with a deep sincerity, the true;
 for this of all that ever influence man,
 since Abel worship, or the world begin,
 this only spare no lust, admit no plea,
 but make he, if at all, complete free,
 sound forth the signal, as she mount her car,
 of a eternal, universal war,
 reject all treaty, penetrate all wile,
 scorn with the same indifference frown and smile,
 drive through the realm of sin, where riot reel,
 and grind his crown beneath her burn wheel! 
hence all that be in man, pride, passion, art,
 power of the mind, and feeling of the heart,
 insensible of truth almighty charm,
 start at her first approach, and sound to arm! 
while bigotry with well-dissembled fear,
 his eye shut fast, his finger in his ear,
 mighty to parry, and push by God word
 with senseless noise, his argument the sword,
 pretend a zeal for godliness and grace,
 and spit abhorrence in the christian face. 
parent of hope, immortal truth, make know
 thy deathless wreath, and triumph all thy own:
 the silent progress of thy power be such,
 thy mean so feeble, and despise so much,
 that few believe the wonder thou have wrought,
 and none can teach they but who thou have teach. 
oh see i swear to serve thou, and command
 a painter skill into a poet hand,
 that while i tremble trace a work divine,
 fancy may stand aloof from the design,
 and light and shade and every stroke be thy. 
if ever thou have feel another pain,
 if ever when he sigh, have sigh again,
 if ever on thy eyelid stand the tear
 that pity have engender, drop one here. 
this man be happy — have the world good word,
 and with it every joy it can afford;
 friendship and love seem tender at strife,
 which most shall sweeten his untroubled life;
 polite learn, and of a gentle race,
 good-breeding and good sense give all a grace,
 and whether at the toilette of the fair
 he laugh and trifle, make he welcome there;
 or, if in masculine debate he share,
 insure he mute attention and regard. 
alas how change! expressive of his mind,
 his eye be sink, arm fold, head reclind,
 those awful syllable, hell, death, and sin,
 though whisper, plain tell what work within,
 that conscience there perform her proper part,
 and write a doomsday sentence on his heart;
 forsake, and forsake of all friend,
 he now perceive where earthly pleasure end,
 hard task! for one who late know no care,
 and hard still as learn beneath despair:
 he hour no long pass unmarked away,
 a dark importance sadden every day,
 he hear the notice of the clock, perplex,
 and cry, perhaps eternity strike next:
 sweet music be no long music here,
 and laughter sound like madness in his ear,
 his grief the world of all her power disarm,
 wine have no taste, and beauty have no charm:
 God holy word, once trivial in his view,
 now by the voice of his experience, true,
 seem, as it be, the fountain whence alone
 must spring that hope he pant to make his own. 
now let the bright reverse be know abroad,
 say, man be a worm, and power belong to god. 
as when a felon who his country law
 have just doom for some atrocious cause,
 expect in darkness and heart-chilling fear,
 the shameful close of all his mispend year,
 if chance, on heavy pinion slow bear,
 a tempest usher in the dread morn,
 upon his dungeon wall the lightning play,
 the thunder seem to summon he away,
 the warder at the door his key apply,
 shoot back the bolt, and all his courage die:
 if then, just then, all thought of mercy lose,
 when hope, long linger, at last yield the ghost,
 the sound of pardon pierce his startle ear,
 he drop at once his fetter and his fear,
 a transport glow in all he look and speak,
 and the first thankful tear bedew his cheek. 
joy, far superior joy, that much outweigh
 the comfort of a few poor add day,
 invade, possess, and overwhelm the soul
 of he who hope have with a touch make whole:
 it be heaven, all heaven descend on the wing
 of the glad legion of the king of king;
 it be more — it be god diffuse through every part,
 it be god himself triumphant in his heart. 
oh welcome now, the sun be once hate light,
 his noonday beam be never half so bright,
 not kindred mind alone be call to employ
 their hour, their day in listen to his joy,
 unconscious nature, all that he survey,
 rock, grove and stream must join he in his praise. 
these be thy glorious work, eternal truth,
 the scoff of wither age and beardless youth,
 these move the censure and illiberal grin
 of fool that hate thou and delight in sin:
 but these shall last when night have quench the pole,
 and heaven be all depart as a scroll:
 and when, as justice have long since decree,
 this earth shall blaze, and a new world succeed,
 then these thy glorious work, and they that share
 that hope which can alone exclude despair,
 shall live exempt from weakness and decay,
 the bright wonder of a endless day. 
happy the bard, (if that fair name belong
 to he that blend no fable with his song)
 who line unite, by a honest art,
 the faithful monitor and poet part,
 seek to delight, that they may mend mankind,
 and while they captivate, inform the mind. 
still happy, if he till a thankful soil,
 and fruit reward his honourable toil:
 but happy far who comfort those that wait
 to hear plain truth at judah hallow gate;
 their language simple as their manner meek,
 no shine ornament have they to seek,
 nor labour they, nor time nor talent waste
 in sort flower to suit a fickle taste;
 but while they speak the wisdom of the sky,
 which art can only darken and disguise,
 the abundant harvest, recompense divine,
 repay their work — the glean only, mine. 
