to Columbia

song to the tune of the anacreontic

i 

to Columbia, who, glad reclin’d at her ease,
on atlantic’s broad bosom lie smile in peace;
Minerva fly hasty, send from above,
and addres’d she this message from thunder Jove:
“rouse, quick awake,
for your freedom’s at stake,
storm arise your renown’d independence to shake;
then lose not a moment, my aid i will lend,
if your son will assemble your right to defend.”

ii.

Rous’d, Columbia rise up, and indignant, declar’d,
that no nation she’d wrong’d and no nation she fear’d;
that she wish’d not for war, but if war be her fate,
she will meet it with soul, independent and great:
then tell mighty Jove,
that we quick will prove,
we’ll deserve the protection he’ll send from above.
for ne’er shall the son of America bend,
but unite, their right and their freedom defend.

iii.

Minerva smil’d cheerful as she withdraw,
enrapture to find her americans true;
“for,” say she “our sly mercury ofttimes report
that your son be divide”  — Columbia retort,
tell that vile god of thief,
his report but deceive,
and we care not what madman such nonsense believe
for ne’er shall the son of America bend,
but, unite, their right and their freedom defend.

iv.

Jove rejoic’d in Columbians this union to see,
and swear by old Styx, she deserv’d to be free,
then assemble the god, and to all give consent,
their assistance if needful in war to present;
Mars arise, shake his armour,
and swear, his old farmer
shall ne’er in his country see aught that canharm she;
for ne’er shall the son of America bend,
but, unite, their right and their freedom defend.

v. 

Minerva resolv’d that her aegis she’d lend;
and Apollo declare he their cause will befriend;
old Vulcan a armour will forge for their aid,
more firm than the one for Achilles he make;
then say he i’ll prepare
a compound most rare,
of courage and union, each a full share;
then ne’er shall the son of America bend,
but their right and their freedom most firm defend.

vi.

you son of Columbia, then join hand in hand,
divide we fall, but unite we stand;
’tis we to determine, ’tis we to decree,
that in peace we will live independent and free,
and shall from afar,
break the horror of war,
we’ll always be ready at once to declare,
that ne’er will the son of America bend;
but unite their right and their freedom defend.
