epilogue.

by d. Garrick, ESQ.

whatever you think, good sir, in this agree,
 that we, at least, have give — variety! 
that we have post on, in prose and verse,
 through tragedy, — and comedy, — and farce. 
have you not have in i a strange farrago,
 of Rhadamistus, sturgeon, and Iago? 
nay, we have run from english to the french,
 and the great boy become a simple wench! 
nature a simple wench much better teach
 to act our character, and wear the breech. 

but, why this motley mixture? — it be the fashion;
 the time be medley, — medley all the nation. 
one day reign tragedy, — all gloom and sorrow;
 then, shift the scene — and enter farce tomorrow. 
now rise six thousand discontent sailor! 
then come the farce, — up get as many tailor! 
these king of shred and patch touch in brain,
 strut for a day, and then — cross-legged again. 

our goddess, liberty, from who we own
 each blessing spring — for GEORGE be on the throne,
 now, magna charta and a William give,
 then scour the street, and with the rabble live;
 will drink, huzza, and rouse you from your bed,
 break all your window, and perhaps your head:
 here taste, opinion, passion never fix,
 but rise and fall like stock — and politics. 

that we shall ask you to our medley treat,
 and get you too — be, say! no boyish feat. 
be we not hopeful youth? — deal fair, and tell we —
 and likely to turn out good sprightly fellow? 
i mean to have that kind of useful spirit,
 which modest assure we we have merit. 
we little folk, like great one, be but show,
 bold face oft hide what the faint heart do know. 
think you, we be not in a grievous fright,
 to have our noble patron in our sight,
 who know — be know so well to speak and write! 
we pray, before our awful judge appear,
 that our weak pipe be not within his hear;
 one sense of he, less keen than all the rest,
 somewhat becalm the flutter of my breast;
 it give some courage to our trouble thought,
 that see only mark but half our fault. 

 "it be a ill wind, they say, that blow no good,"
 and well the proverb now be understand;
 for what have long be mourn by all the nation,
 be at this time our only consolation. 
