a description of a journey to Marlborough, bath, Portsmouth, etc. 

to the right honourable the lord viscount Palmerston.

while some, my lord, the roman coast explore,
 survey the fane, and trace their beauty over,
 studious of art, by which ingenious Boyle
 now draw the plan, or now erect the pile;
 more bound in my fancy, and my purse,
 i, over domestic plain, pursue my course;
 and every please object in the way,
 the muse shall sing, if you accept she lay. 

when cancer fierce glow with phoebus heat,
 and cloud of dust fly even in brentford-street;
 over Hounslow-heath my early course i steer,
 for robber fame; but i not robber fear:
 let gold, like guilt, increase the miser grief;
 a poet purse, like virtue, dare a thief. 
Colebrook i quick pass, and soon my eye
 survey the royal tower of Windsor rise:
 charm with the theme of pope harmonious song,
 i check my steed, and slow move along;
 as linger mariner contract their sail,
 to feast on odour of arabian gale. 
but lest, my lord, your patience shall accuse
 the dull narration of a tedious muse,
 i will not sing each trifle that occur,
 how much i eat, and drink, and whip, and spur:
 how oft my palfry stumble in the way,
 till Hatford end the travel of the day;
 where kind menalcas, partner of my soul,
 revive i with his friendly, flow bowl;
 yet force no intemperate bumper round,
 except when delia health the glass crown. 
a thousand labour past, we now run over,
 what scene we act, and what toil we bear:
 no party feud, nor politics we name;
 the joy of friendship most be our theme. 
warn by the clock, we now retire to rest,
 till rise Phoebus streak the purple east. 
breakfast soon over, we trace the verdant field,
 where sharpen Scythes the labour mower wield:
 straight emulation glow in every vein;
 i long to try the curvous blade again. 

as when, at hockley-hole, old gamester view
 young combatant their martial sport renew,
 a youthful vigour fire their ancient soul,
 nor former wound their courage can control;
 again they mount the stage, again they play,
 again they bear the noble prize away:
 so with ambition burn my dare breast;
 i snatch the scythe, and with the swain contest;
 behind they close, i rush the sweep steel;
 the vanquish mower soon confess my skill. 

not long at this laborious sport i stay;
 but, with my friend, to Charlton take my way:
 it be there, my lord, induce by potent ale,
 swain leave their plough, and thresher quit their flail:
 your bounty soon provoke the bell to ring;
 clown dance, boy hollow, and hoarse cobbler sing. 
not great be the joy in ancient Greece,
 when aeson son produce the golden fleece,
 than now appear in every thresher breast,
 soon as your gold sing prologue to the feast. 

why shall the muse recite our bill of fare,
 and with a long description tire your ear? 
none can your generous treat with want reproach;
 all eat enough, and many drink too much:
 full twenty thresher quaff around the board;
 all name their toast, and every one, my lord. 
no care, no toil, no trouble now appear;
 for trouble, toil, and care be drown in beer;
 till soon the chol'ric fume of liquour rise,
 flush in their face, and sparkle in their eye:
 they now the rustic feat of manhood boast,
 who best can reap, or mow, or thresh the most:
 contention doubtful! all with anger burn,
 while each appear a hero in his turn:
 hard word succeed; so far can beer prevail,
 that blow be menace, even without the flail;
 till thus our landlord, rise from his chair,
 like prudent Nestor, stop impend war:

 "what madness, friend, what madness can engage
" your mind to burn with this unseemly rage? 
 "for shame, stain not with blood our grateful cheer;
" desist from blood — or else desist from beer. 
 "be these the only thanks you give my lord? 
" and be it thus his favour you reward? 
 "if no respect you pay this cheerful feast,
" yet pay the noble founder some, at least — " 

he say: abash the conscious hero stand,
 shake hand, and thirst more for beer — than blood:
 another glass to temple health they pour;
 and praise their liquour much, his bounty more. 

oft as this day return, shall thresher claim
 some hour of rest sacred to temple name;
 oft as this day return, shall temple cheer
 the thresher heart with mutton, beef, and beer:
 hence, when their children child shall admire
 this holiday, and, whence derive, inquire;
 some grateful father, partial to my fame,
 shall thus describe from whence, and how it come. 

 "here, child, a thresher live in ancient day;
" quaint song he sing, and please roundelay;
 "a gracious queen his sonnet do commend;
" and some great lord, one temple, be his friend:
 "that lord be please this holiday to make,
" and feast the thresher, for that thresher sake. " 

thus shall tradition keep my fame alive;
 the bard may die, the thresher still survive. 

next, over pewsey fertile field i haste,
 field with the beard crop of Ceres grace! 
while please hope my grateful bosom cheer;
 but soon they vanish — Stanley be not here. 

from hence the muse to silver Kennet fly,
 on who green margin hertford turret rise. 
here often round the verdant plain i stray,
 where Thomson sing his bold, unfettered lay;
 or climb the wind, mazy mountain brow;
 and, though i swift walk, ascend but slow. 
the spiral path in gradual circle lead,
 increase my journey, and elude my speed:
 yet, when at length i reach the lofty height,
 town, valley, river, meadow meet my sight;
 a thousand grateful object round i smile,
 who various beauty overpay my toil. 

so may you often see the studious youth
 begin the long, laborious search for truth;
 how slow his progress, but how great his pain! 
how many mazy problem vex his brain! 
before he over the hill of science rise,
 where, far from vulgar sight, the goddess lie:
 yet, there arrive, he end the happy chace;
 reflect, with pleasure, on his glorious race;
 see the bright nymph so many charm display,
 as crown the labour of the lengthen way. 

within the basis of the verdant hill,
 a beauteous grot confess hertford skill;
 who, with her lovely nymph, adorn the place;
 give every polish stone its proper grace;
 now vary rustic moss about the cell;
 now fit the shine pearl, or purple shell:
 Calypso thus, attend with her train,
 with rural palace adorn the plain;
 nor with more elegance her grot appear,
 nor with more beauty shine the immortal fair. 

the muse her journey, next, to bath pursue;
 bath, fix by nature to delight the muse! 
where flowery shrub, and curl vine unite;
 hill, vale, and wave wood attract the sight;
 a vary scene! for nature here display
 a thousand lovely charm, a thousand way:
 Allen attend, to dress her beauteous face,
 with handmaid art improve every grace;
 now form the verdant walk, or sunny glade,
 or pour the water over the steep cascade;
 or now contract they with judicious skill,
 and lead they, gentle murmur, down the hill. 

a son of Aesculapius here i meet;
 polite his manner, and his temper sweet:
 he sage discourse, with soft, persuasive art,
 charm the please ear, till it improve the heart:
 bright truth, and virtue, be his lovely theme;
 which seem more lovely, when describe by he. 

various diversion here employ the fair;
 to dance some, and some to play repair:
 not musidora so consume her day,
 the dame who bid i sing jehovah praise:
 uncharmed with all the flutter pomp of pride,
 heaven, and domestic care her time divide:
 in her own breast she seek a calm repose,
 and shun the crowd room of bell and beaux;
 where coquetilla oft her eye have roll,
 oft win a worthless heart, and lose her gold. 

from bath, i travel through the sultry vale,
 till Sal'sb'ry plain afford a cool gale:
 arcadian plain, where Pan delight to dwell,
 in verdant beauty can these excel:
 these too, like they, may gain immortal fame,
 resound with Corydon and thyrsis flame;
 if, to his mouth, the shepherd will apply
 his mellow pipe, or vocal music try:
 but, to his mouth, the shepherd never apply
 his mellow pipe, nor vocal music try:
 prop on his staff, he indolent stand;
 his hand support his head, his staff his hand;
 or, idle bask in the sunny ray,
 supine lazy, loiter life away. 
here, as i pass the plain, (a lovely scene,
 array in nature livery, gay green!) 
on every side the wanton lambkin play,
 who artless bleat rural music make;
 too harsh perhaps to please politer ear,
 yet much the sweet tune the farmer hear. 

soon as the plain be ravish from my sight,
 new different prospect equal delight;
 where pembroke turret charm my gaze eye,
 and awful statue solemn surprise:
 bard, sage, hero, patriot, prince stand,
 a mix, majestic, venerable band! 
here mighty Homer, phoebus old son,
 or sing, or seem to sing, in breathe stone. 
see martial Phocion silent persuade,
 and smooth tongue Cicero, in marble, plead:
 here shine great Pompey, great Julius there,
 with dare Brutus, honest severe:
 friendship, and freedom in his soul contend;
 forgive he, Caesar, if he wrong his friend! 
though brutus dagger pierce thy bosom through,
 it be liberty, not malice, strike the blow. 
unhappy Brutus, destine to withstand
 thy friend ambition with a fatal hand! 
unhappy Caesar, who ambition move
 that fatal hand, to murder who it love! 
have thou, like britain monarch, strive to save
 expire nation, not the world enslave;
 thy laurel then have still unblasted stand,
 nor Brutus ever be stain with caesar blood. 

not far from hence, old sarum ruin stand,
 high on a bleak and barren tract of land;
 a mount, which once sustain a city weight,
 and lofty tower adorn its awful height;
 till want of water force the thirsty crowd
 to seek the vale, where crystal river flow. 
there Poore the first auspicious work begin;
 first, for a temple, draw the glorious plan;
 then quick make the sacred column rise,
 and bid the lofty spire invade the sky. 
the prudent people too, with equal haste,
 new dwelling build, which far their old surpass:
 cautious of thirst, they make the docile tide,
 in wind current, through the city glide:
 in every street the wanton naiad play,
 to every door their liquid urn convey;
 in which the late thirsty peasant spy
 at once the cool draught, and scaly Fries;
 scene, which, before, the lofty mount deny! 
hence let ambition learn to check its pride:
 high station often bring a weight of care;
 true happiness be find in humble sphere:
 this useful truth let sarum glory show,
 which fade when on high, but flourish below. 

i next to bathurst rural seat ascend,
 Bathurst, my infant muse generous friend! 
and, as around his spacious park i stray,
 charm with the prospect, which the field display,
 muse on verse, the will number come,
 my song begin, and Clarendon my theme. 
what sweet subject can i wish to choose? 
what scene more lovely can delight a muse? 
see, Flora paint the ground with vary dye,
 and fragrant shrub with odour fill the sky! 
here curl vine their luscious sweet disclose,
 there fair Pomona load the blush bough:
 see, fruitful Ceres crown the vale with corn,
 and fleecy flock the verdant hill adorn! 
here wave tree project a cool shade,
 where Bathurst oft converse with the dead;
 read over what the ancient sage write;
 nor only read, but act as sage teach;
 improve the present hour, that fortune give;
 nor trust tomorrow, but today he live. 

as thus my careless lay, unlaboured, flow,
 before my eye a pile of ruin rise;
 who rugged wall, like native rockwork, shine;
 for time have turn the cement into stone. 
our second HENRY here, if fame be true,
 measure the prince right, and people due;
 make law to bound the priest and baron claim —
 nor even those law do haughty Becket blame;
 Becket! true tyrant of the roman state,
 curse with religion just enough to hate;
 who stern, ambitious zeal his king defy,
 and damn all those, who dare oppose his pride. 

o thou supreme! who mercy ever shine
 the best, the bright jewel in thy crown! 
never let i such cruel faith approve,
 which bid i hate, who heaven command to love! 
let christian charity incline my mind
 to wish the happiness of all mankind! 
in social friendship always let i live,
 slow to be angry, easy to forgive! 

paultons afford i next a kind retreat,
 where crowd joy my grateful heart dilate;
 to see the friend, who first my lay approve,
 who love the muse, and by she be belove;
 who teach her tender pinion how to fly,
 tell when she creep too low, or soar too high. 
o Stanley! if, forgetful of thy love,
 i ever to gratitude rebellious prove;
 still may i want a friend, but never find;
 may fortune, Phoebus, Stanley, prove unkind! 

here often through the gloomy wood i rove,
 please with the silent horror of the grove. 
and now the lawn, and wind walk delight;
 and now the memphian turret charm my sight:
 here conic fir in graceful order stand;
 tall Cedars there, the growth of syrian land. 
lead i, you sacred dryad! lead i through
 your sylvan scene, where future navy grow;
 where lofty oak their branch arm extend,
 and tower pine to kiss the cloud ascend;
 where open glade admit the sunny ray,
 or venerable groves exclude the day. 
there let i knave, and fool, and fop despise,
 and think of action worthy of the wise. 

my friend and i, Southampton next receive;
 Southampton, wash with thetis silver wave:
 upon who sandy margin Bevis rear
 his head, on which a stately dome appear;
 where british Scipio, crown with martial bay,
 in solitude enjoy his ancient day:
 yet, still incline to conquer, wage here,
 with stubborn wood and wild, innoxious war;
 subdue the native rudeness of the soil,
 and make the barren sand with verdure smile;
 bend the young plant obedient to his will,
 or through the valley lead the crystal rill;
 sublime the mount, or bid the mole subside,
 to stretch the prospect over the lucid tide:
 the foil of art illustrate his design;
 and make the diamond nature bright shine. 

charm with the beauty of the silver sea,
 we board a ship, and skim the watery way:
 blow with propitious gale, we quick view
 britannia strength, her guard, and glory too;
 where george dreadful eagle wait stand,
 to bear his fatal thunder over the flood. 
the wondrous scene delight my gaze eye,
 at once impart pleasure and surprise:
 intrepid sailor, swarm in the sky,
 intent on business, different labour try:
 some stride the yard, or tower mast ascend;
 some on the rope, in airy crowd, depend;
 thick as the insect, round the poplar, play,
 when Phoebus gild they with a western ray. 

but unexpected danger oft deceive
 the dare man, who tempt the foamy wave:
 while on the fleet we all delight gaze,
 the sudden wind arise, and sweep the sea;
 with rapid force they fly, and from the ship
 disjoin the boat, and drive it over the deep:
 our cautious pilot quick shift the sail,
 revert his course against the furious gale. 
o Chloe! then what ruthless pain distress
 thy dizzy head, and rack thy tender breast! 
how often do the bard thy fate bemoan! 
how often do he wish thy pain his own! 
how do the Triton, move with pity, gaze
 on thy fair face, distort twenty way! 
yet, though distort, still thy feature show
 bright in distress, and innocent in woe. 
so Venus oft her silver light display,
 through evening mist, that rise to cloud her ray. 

but Neptune now, who pity chloe pain,
 return the boat; we steer our course again,
 at six, we safe land at port smouth key,
 and soon forget the danger of the sea. 
straight to some hospitable inn we haste,
 revive our spirit with a sweet repast:
 the smile glass, with rosy liquour crown,
 sacred to friendly health, go cheerful round;
 while time, in mirthful converse, sweet flow,
 till gentle sleep invite we to repose. 

the morning come, we to the wharf repair,
 survey the mighty magazine of war:
 tremendous row of cannon meet our eye;
 and iron death, in massy mountain, rise:
 store-house of Mars! where, range in order, lie
 ten thousand thunder for some fatal day. 

depart hence, the Dock we travel round,
 where labour shipwright rattle axe sound:
 some bend the stubborn plank, while other rear
 the lofty mast, or crooked timber square;
 some ply their engine, some direct the toil,
 and careful inspect the mighty pile;
 see every chink secure stop, before
 the wing castle venture from the shore. 

so, when the youthful crane intend to fly
 her first long journey through the spacious sky;
 before she rear herself sublime in air,
 she range every plume with prudent care;
 try if her pinion can her flight sustain;
 then spring away, and soar above the main. 

but see! the smoke firy forge appear;
 vulcanian sound surprise our listen ear:
 see! busy Smith around their anvil sweat;
 their brawny arm the glow anchor beat;
 alternate the chime hammer fall,
 and loud note echo through the sooty hall. 
such, haply, on the sound anvil ring,
 when first the harp melodious Tubal string:
 as tubalcain the ductile metal wrought,
 and vulcan heavenly art to mortal teach;
 the brother, please to hear his hammer chime,
 soon harmonise their note to proper time:
 man bosom then sonorous organ warm,
 the soft lyre his gloomy sorrow charm;
 while tyrant heart unusual pity find,
 and savage temper soften with the sound. 

it be now the time, when phoebus pierce ray
 shoot down direct, and measure half the day:
 a bold commander lucky we meet,
 who courteous invite we to the fleet:
 a table elegant spread we find,
 and loyal health the captain push round;
 AUGUSTUS first, and all the royal line,
 give sweet flavour to the sparkle wine;
 wager, and Norris, next, who bold reign,
 in float castle, monarch of the main. 

but now again our wing sail we spread,
 again we visit paulton sylvan shade;
 where, part from my friend, i mount my steed,
 and, over the wild of Wellow, urge his speed:
 wild, which be late sterile, as the coast,
 where patient Cato march his faint host! 
nor can the Swain explore a cool shade,
 when fervid Phoebus burn his glow head;
 till chandos bid the dreary desert smile
 with verdant groves, and beautify the soil:
 he say; ten thousand tree adorn the plain,
 ten thousand shade, delightful to the Swain. 

hence, over the plain, and fruitful field i pass,
 full forty mile, till Witney end my race. 
i visit here a elegant divine,
 in who the scholar, friend, and critic join;
 who free judge of a author thought,
 improve his beauty, and correct his fault;
 severe kind, and candid severe;
 polite, as courtier; and, as truth, sincere;
 who, in minerva temple, teach our youth
 the path to wisdom, virtue, honour, truth;
 till have, with a generous mind, bestow
 the flower of all his year in do good;
 fatigue with labour, and with age decay,
 retire, with honour, to the rural shade. 

so, when the prince of river, fruitful Nile,
 have flow, and fatten all the memphian soil,
 spend all the richness, that his wave contain,
 back to his bank, he draw his humid train. 

i pay my offering next at phoebus shrine,
 Oxford, the seat of all the tuneful nine. 
forgive i, god of verse, who dare greet
 thy sacred temple with unhallowed foot! 
as pious mussulman to Mecca roam,
 zealous to worship at their prophet tomb;
 so come the poet to thy reverend fane,
 invoke thou to aid his humble strain. 
o! may a spark of thy celestial flame
 but raise my number equal to my theme,
 Alfred immortal in my page shall shine;
 Alfred, the monarch, hero, and divine! 
who, have brave all his foe overthrow,
 advance thy kingdom, and confirm his own;
 water his realm with the pierian spring,
 recall the banish art, and bad the muse sing. 
then shall my number sound with wickham praise;
 nor less shall foxe fame adorn my lay,
 who pious care the decent fabric rear,
 which kind shelter the unworthy bard;
 nor the unworthy bard shall leave unpaid
 the grateful debt, contract while he stay:
 thy favour, chief, window, shall be know,
 in last number, tuneful as thy own. 
thou, Bodley, will i sing; who can refuse
 a verse to Bodley, patron of the muse? 
who letter bounty to the world declare
 the treasure wisdom of three thousand year. 
nor shall the muse forget the prelate fame,
 who grace the river with a stately frame,
 know by the flowery mead, which round it lie,
 and beauteous walk, that charm the student eye;
 where courtly ADDISON attune his lay,
 and raise his own, by sing dryden's praise. 
hail, happy bard! who genius still can shine
 in every art; for every art be thy:
 whether thou do the critic pen engage,
 the critic pen improve the poet rage;
 whether thou do the hero deed rehearse,
 the hero deed shine bright in thy verse:
 or do thy tragic muse sublime tell,
 how stubborn Cato for his country fall;
 party no more retain their factious hate;
 all pity caesar, honour cato fate:
 nor less thy soft diurnal essay please,
 that glass, where every fool his folly see;
 where virtue shine with such attractive grace,
 she tempt the vicious to her chaste embrace. 
o! may thy labour be a star to guide
 my thought and action over life devious tide! 
if pride, or passion check my doubtful sail,
 let thy instruction lend a friendly gale,
 to waft i to the peaceful, happy shore,
 where thou, immortal bard! art go before:
 then those who grant i not a poet name,
 shall own i leave behind a better fame. 
