the rape of the lock.

 Canto i 

what dire offence from amorous cause spring,
 what mighty quarrel rise from trivial thing,
 i sing — this verse to c—l, Muse! be due;
 this, even Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
 slight be the subject, but not so the praise,
 if she inspire, and he approve my lay. 
say what strange motive, goddess! can compel
 a wellbred lord to assault a gentle Belle? 
oh say what stranger cause, yet unexplored,
 can make a gentle Belle reject a lord? 
and dwell such rage in soft bosom then? 
and lodge such dare soul in little man? 

Sol through white curtain do his beam display,
 and open those eye which bright shine than they;
 now shock have give himself the rouse shake,
 and nymph prepare their chocolate to take;
 thrice the wrought slipper knock against the ground,
 and strike watch the tenth hour resound. 
Belinda still her downy pillow press,
 her guardian sylph prolong the balmy rest. 
it be he have summon to her silent bed
 the morning dream that hover over her head. 
a youth more glitter than a birth-night beau,
 (that even in slumber cause her cheek to glow)
 seem to her ear his win lip to lay,
 and thus in whisper say, or seem to say. 

fair of mortal, thou distinguish care
 of thousand bright inhabitant of air! 
if ever one vision touch thy infant think,
 of all the nurse and all the priest have teach,
 of airy elf by moonlight shadow see,
 the silver token, and the circle green,
 or virgin visit by angel-pow'r,
 with golden crown and wreath of heavenly flower,
 hear and believe! thy own importance know,
 nor bound thy narrow view to thing below. 
some secret truth from learned pride conceal,
 to maid alone and child be reveal:
 what though no credit doubt wit may give? 
the fair and innocent shall still believe. 
know then, unnumbered spirit round thou fly,
 the light militia of the low sky;
 these, though unseen, be ever on the wing,
 hang over the box, and hover round the ring. 
think what a equipage thou have in air,
 and view with scorn two page and a chair. 
as now your own, our being be of old,
 and once enclose in woman beauteous mould;
 thence, by a soft transition, we repair
 from earthly vehicle to these of air. 
think not, when woman transient breath be flee,
 that all her vanity at once be dead:
 succeed vanity she still regard,
 and though she play no more, overlook the card. 
her joy in gild chariot, when alive,
 and love of ombre, after death survive. 
for when the fair in all their pride expire,
 to their first element the soul retire:
 the spright of fiery termagant in flame
 mount up, and take a salamander name. 
soft yield mind to water glide away,
 and sip with nymph, their elemental tea. 
the grave prude sink downward to a gnome,
 in search of mischief still on earth to roam. 
the light coquette in sylph aloft repair,
 and sport and flutter in the field of air. 

know farther yet; whoever fair and chaste
 reject mankind, be by some sylph embrace:
 for spirit, free from mortal law, with ease
 assume what sex and what shape they please. 
what guard the purity of melt maid,
 in courtly ball, and midnight masquerade,
 safe from the treacherous friend, and dare spark,
 the glance by day, the whisper in the dark;
 when kind occasion prompt their warm desire,
 when music soften, and when dance fire? 
it be but their sylph, the wise celestial know,
 though honour be the word with man below. 

some nymph there be, too conscious of their face,
 for life predestine to the gnome embrace. 
who swell their prospect and exalt their pride,
 when offer be disdain, and love deny. 
then gay idea crowd the vacant brain;
 while peer and duke, and all their sweep train,
 and garter, star, and coronet appear,
 and in soft sound, your grace salute their ear. 
it be these that early taint the female soul,
 instruct the eye of young coquette to roll,
 teach infant cheek a bid blush to know,
 and little heart to flutter at a beau. 

oft when the world imagine woman stray,
 the sylph through mystic maze guide their way,
 through all the giddy circle they pursue,
 and old impertinence expel by new. 
what tender maid but must a victim fall
 to one man treat, but for another ball? 
when florio speak, what virgin can withstand,
 if gentle Damon do not squeeze her hand? 
with vary vanity, from every part,
 they shift the move toy-shop of their heart;
 where wig with wig, with sword-knot sword-knot strive,
 beau banish beau, and coach coach drive. 
this err mortal levity may call,
 oh blind to truth! the sylph contrive it all. 

of these be i, who thy protection claim,
 a watchful sprite, and Ariel be my name. 
late, as i range the crystal wild of air,
 in the clear mirror of thy rule star
 i see, alas! some dread event impend,
 before to the main this morning sun descend. 
but heaven reveal not what, or how, or where:
 warn by thy sylph, oh pious maid beware! 
this to disclose be all thy guardian can. 
beware of all, but most beware of man! 

he say; when shock, who think she sleep too long,
 leap up, and wake his mistress with his tongue. 
it be then Belinda! if report say true,
 thy eye first open on a billet-doux;
 wound, charm, and ardour, be no soon read,
 but all the vision vanish from thy head. 

and now, unveiled, the toilet stand display,
 each silver vase in mystic order lay. 
first, rob in white, the nymph intent adore
 with head uncover, the cosmetic power. 
a heavenly image in the glass appear,
 to that she bend, to that her eye she rear;
 the inferior priestess, at her altar side,
 tremble, begin the sacred rite of pride. 
unnumbered treasure open at once, and here
 the various offering of the world appear;
 from each she nice cull with curious toil,
 and deck the goddess with the glitter spoil. 
this casket india glow gem unlock,
 and all Arabia breathe from yonder box. 
the tortoise here and elephant unite,
 transform to comb, the speckle and the white. 
here file of pin extend their shine row,
 puff, powder, patch, bible, billet-doux. 
now awful beauty put on all its arm;
 the fair each moment rise in her charm,
 repair her smile, awaken every grace,
 and call forth all the wonder of her face;
 see by degree a pure blush arise,
 and keen lightning quicken in her eye. 
the busy sylph surround their darling care;
 these set the head, and those divide the hair,
 some fold the sleeve, while other plait the gown;
 and Betty praise for labour not her own. 

the rape of the lock.

 Canto ii.

not with more glory, in the etherial plain,
 the sun first rise over the purple main,
 than issue forth, the rival of his beam
 launch on the bosom of the silver Thames. 
fair nymph, and well-dress youth around she shine,
 but every eye be fix on she alone. 
on her white breast a sparkle cross she wear,
 which Jew may kiss, and infidel adore. 
her lively look a sprightly mind disclose,
 quick as her eye, and as unfixed as those:
 favour to none, to all she smile extend,
 oft she reject, but never once offend. 
bright as the sun, her eye the gazer strike,
 and, like the sun, they shine on all alike. 
yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride,
 may hide her fault, if bell have fault to hide:
 if to her share some female error fall,
 look on her face, and you will forget they all. 

this nymph, to the destruction of mankind,
 nourish two lock, which graceful hang behind
 in equal curl, and well conspire to deck
 with shine ringlet her smooth ivory neck. 
love in these labyrinth his slave detain,
 and mighty heart be hold in slender chain. 
with hairy sprindge we the bird betray,
 slight line of hair surprise the finny prey,
 fair tress man imperial race ensnare,
 and beauty draw we with a single hair. 

the adventurous baron the bright lock admire,
 he see, he wish, and to the prize aspire:
 resolve to win, he meditate the way,
 by force to ravish, or by fraud betray;
 for when success a lover toil attend,
 few ask, if fraud or force attain his end. 

for this, ever phaebus rose, he have implore
 propitious heaven, and every power adore,
 but chief love — to love a altar build,
 of twelve vast french romance, neat gild. 
there lay the sword-knot sylvia hand have sow,
 with flavia busk that oft have rap his own:
 a fan, a garter, half a pair of glove;
 and all the trophy of his former love. 
with tender billet-doux he light the pyre,
 and breathe three amorous sigh to raise the fire. 
then prostrate fall, and beg with ardent eye
 soon to obtain, and long possess the prize:
 the power give ear, and grant half his prayer,
 the rest, the wind disperse in empty air. 

but now secure the paint vessel glide,
 the sunbeam tremble on the float tide,
 while melt music steal upon the sky,
 and soften sound along the water die. 
smooth flow the wave, the zephyr gentle play,
 Belinda smile, and all the world be gay. 
all but the sylph — with careful thought oppress,
 the impend woe sit heavy on his breast. 
he summons strait his denizen of air;
 the lucid squadron round the sail repair:
 soft over the shroud aerial whisper breath,
 that seem but zephyr to the train beneath. 
some to the sun their insect-wing unfold,
 waft on the breeze, or sink in cloud of gold. 
transparent form, too fine for mortal sight,
 their fluid body half dissolve in light. 
loose to the wind their airy garment fly,
 thin glitter texture of the filmy dew;
 dip in the rich tincture of the sky,
 where light disport in ever-mingling die,
 while every beam new transient colour fling,
 colour that change whenever they wave their wing. 
amid the circle, on the gild mast,
 superior by the head, be Ariel place;
 his purple pinion open to the sun,
 he raise his azure wand, and thus begin. 

you sylph and sylphid, to your chief give ear,
 Fays, fairy, genii, elf, and daemon hear! 
you know the sphere and various task assign,
 by law eternal, to the aerial kind. 
some in the field of pure Aether play,
 and bask and whiten in the blaze of day. 
some guide the course of wander orb on high,
 or roll the planet through the boundless sky. 
some less refine, beneath the moon pale light
 hover, and catch the shoot star by night;
 or suck the mist in gross air below,
 or dip their pinion in the paint bow,
 or brew fierce tempest on the wintery main,
 or on the glebe distil the kind rain. 
other on earth over human race preside,
 watch all their way, and all their action guide:
 of these the chief the care of nation own,
 and guard with arm divine the british throne. 

our humble province be to tend the fair,
 not a less please, though less glorious care. 
to save the powder from too rude a gale,
 nor let the imprison essence exhale,
 to draw fresh colour from the vernal flower,
 to steal from rainbow ere they drop in shower
 a bright wash; to curl their wave hair,
 assist their blush, and inspire their air;
 nay oft, in dream, invention we bestow,
 to change a flounce, or add a furbelo. 

this day, black omen threat the bright fair
 that ever deserve a watchful spirit care;
 some dire disaster, or by force, or slight,
 but what, or where, the fate have wrap in night. 
whether the nymph shall break diana law,
 or some frail china jar receive a flaw,
 or stain her honour, or her new brocade,
 forget her prayer, or miss a masquerade,
 or lose her heart, or necklace, at a ball;
 or whether heaven have doom that shock must fall. 
haste then you spirit! to your charge repair;
 the flutter fan be zephyretta care;
 the drop to thou, brillante, we consign;
 and momentilla, let the watch be thy;
 do thou, crispissa, tend her favourite lock;
 Ariel himself shall be the guard of shock. 

to fifty choose sylph, of special note,
 we trust the important charge, the petticoat:
 oft have we know that sevenfold fence to fail,
 though stiff with hoop, and arm with rib of whale. 
form a strong line about the silver bind,
 and guard the wide circumference around. 

whatever spirit, careless of his charge,
 his post neglect, or leave the fair at large,
 shall feel sharp vengeance soon overtake his sin,
 be stop in vial, or transfix with pin;
 or plunge in lake of bitter wash lie,
 or wedge whole age in a bodkin eye:
 gum and pomatum shall his flight restrain,
 while clog he beat his silken wing in vain;
 or alom-stypticks with contract power
 shrink his thin essence like a rivele flower. 
or as Ixion fix, the wretch shall feel
 the giddy motion of the whirl mill,
 in fume of burn chocolate shall glow,
 and tremble at the sea that froth below! 

he speak; the spirit from the sail descend;
 some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend,
 some third the mazy ringlet of her hair,
 some hang upon the pendant of her ear;
 with beat heart the dire event they wait,
 anxious, and tremble for the birth of fate. 

the rape of the lock.

 Canto iii.

close by those mead for ever crown with flower,
 where Thames with pride survey his rise tower,
 there stand a structure of majestic frame,
 which from the neighbour Hampton take its name. 
here britain statesman oft the fall foredoom
 of foreign tyrant, and of nymph at home;
 here thou, great Anna! who three realm obey,
 do sometime counsel take — and sometime tea. 

hither the hero and the nymph resort,
 to taste awhile the pleasure of a court;
 in various talk the instructive hour they pass,
 who give a ball, or pay the visit last:
 one speak the glory of the british queen,
 and one describe a charm indian screen;
 a third interpret motion, look, and eye;
 at every word a reputation die. 
snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat,
 with sing, laugh, ogle, and all that. 

mean while decline from the noon of day,
 the sun oblique shoot his burn ray;
 the hungry judge soon the sentence sign,
 and wretch hang that juryman may dine;
 the merchant from the exchange return in peace,
 and the long labour of the toilette cease —
 Belinda now, who thirst of fame invite,
 burns to encounter two adventurous knight,
 at ombre single to decide their doom;
 and swell her breast with conquest yet to come. 
strait the three band prepare in arm to join,
 each band the number of the sacred nine. 
soon as she spread her hand, the aerial guard
 descend, and sit on each important card:
 first Ariel perch upon a matadore,
 then each, accord to the rank they bear;
 for sylph, yet mindful of their ancient race,
 be, as when woman, wondrous fond of place. 

behold, four king in majesty revere,
 with hoary whisker and a forky beard;
 and four fair queen who hand sustain a flower,
 the expressive emblem of their soft power;
 four knave in garb succinct, a trusty band,
 cap on their head, and halberd in their hand;
 and particoloured troop, a shine train,
 draw forth to combat on the velvet plain. 

the skilful nymph review her force with care;
 let spade be trump, she say, and trump they be. 
now move to war her sable matador,
 in show like leader of the swarthy moor. 
spadillio first, unconquerable lord! 
lead off two captive trump, and sweep the board. 
as many more manillio force to yield,
 and march a victor from the verdant field. 
he basto follow, but his fate more hard
 gain but one trump and one plebeian card. 
with his broad sabre next, a chief in year,
 the hoary majesty of spade appear;
 put forth one manly leg, to sight reveal;
 the rest his many-coloured robe conceal. 
the rebel-knave, that dare his prince engage,
 prove the just victim of his royal rage. 
even mighty pam that king and queen overthrow,
 and mow down army in the fight of lu,
 sad chance of war! now, destitute of aid,
 fall undistinguished by the victor spade! 

thus far both army to Belinda yield;
 now to the baron fate incline the field. 
his warlike Amazon her host invade,
 the imperial consort of the crown of spade. 
the club black tyrant first her victim die,
 spite of his haughty mien, and barbarous pride:
 what boot the regal circle on his head,
 his giant limb in state unwieldy spread? 
that long behind he trail his pompous robe,
 and of all monarch only grasp the globe? 

the baron now his diamond pour apace;
 the embroider king who show but half his face,
 and his refulgent queen, with power combine,
 of break troop a easy conquest find. 
club, diamond, heart, in wild disorder see,
 with throng promiscuous strow the level green
 thus when disperse a rout army run,
 of asia troop, and africk sable son,
 with like confusion different nation fly,
 in various habit and of various dye,
 the pierce battalion disunited fall,
 in heap on heap; one fate overwhelm they all. 

the knave of diamond now exert his art,
 and win (oh shameful chance!) the queen of heart. 
at this, the blood the virgin cheek forsake,
 a livid paleness spread over all her look;
 she see, and tremble at the approach ill,
 just in the jaw of ruin, and codille. 
and now, (as oft in some distemper state)
 on one nice trick depend the general fate,
 a ace of heart step forth: the king unseen
 lurk in her hand, and mourn his captive queen. 
he spring to vengeance with a eager pace,
 and fall like thunder on the prostrate ace. 
the nymph exult fill with shout the sky,
 the wall, the wood, and long canal reply. 

oh thoughtless mortal! ever blind to fate,
 too soon deject, and too soon elate! 
sudden these honour shall be snatch away,
 and curse for ever this victorious day. 

for lo! the board with cup and spoon be crown,
 the berry crackle, and the mill turn round. 
on shine altar of Japan they raise
 the silver lamp, and fiery spirit blaze. 
from silver spout the grateful liquour glide,
 and china earth receive the smoke Tyde. 
at once they gratify their scent and taste,
 while frequent cup prolong the rich repast. 
strait hover round the fair her airy band;
 some, as she sipe, the fume liquour fan,
 some over her lap their careful plume display,
 tremble, and conscious of the rich brocade. 
coffee, (which make the politician wise,
 and see through all thing with his half shut eye)
 send up in vapour to the baron brain
 new stratagem, the radiant lock to gain. 
ah cease rash youth! desist ever it be too late,
 fear the just god, and think of scylla fate! 
change to a bird, and send to flit in air,
 she dear pay for nisus injure hair! 

but when to mischief mortal bend their mind,
 how soon fit instrument of ill they find? 
just then, Clarissa draw with tempt grace
 a two-edged weapon from her shine case;
 so lady in romance assist their knight,
 present the spear, and arm he for the fight. 
he take the gift with reverence, and extend
 the little engine on his finger end,
 this just behind Belinda neck he spread,
 as over the fragrant steam she bend her head:
 swift to the lock a thousand spright repair,
 a thousand wing, by turn, blow back the hair,
 and thrice they twitch the diamond in her ear,
 thrice she look back, and thrice the foe draw near. 
just in that instant, anxious Ariel seek
 the close recess of the virgin thought;
 as on the nosegay in her breast recline,
 he watch the idea rise in her mind,
 sudden he view, in spite of all her art,
 a earthly lover lurk at her heart. 
amaze, confuse, he find his power expire,
 resign to fate, and with a sigh retire. 

the peer now spread the glitter forfex wide,
 t'inclose the lock; now join it, to divide. 
even then, before the fatal engine close,
 a wretched sylph too fond interpose;
 fate urge the sheer, and cut the sylph in twain,
 ( but airy substance soon unite again) 
the meeting point the sacred hair dissever
 from the fair head, for ever and for ever! 

then flash the live lightning from her eye,
 and scream of horror rend the affright sky. 
not loud shriek by dame to heaven be cast,
 when husband or when monkey breath their last,
 or when rich china vessel, fall from high,
 in glitter dust and paint fragment lie! 

let wreath of triumph now my temple twine,
 (the victor cry) the glorious prize be mine! 
while fish in stream, or bird delight in air,
 or in a coach and six the british fair,
 as long as atalantis shall be read,
 or the small pillow grace a lady bed,
 while visit shall be pay on solemn day,
 when numerous wax-light in bright order blaze,
 while nymph take treat, or assignation give,
 so long my honour, name, and praise shall live! 

what time will spare, from steel receive its date,
 and monument, like man, submit to fate! 
steel do the labour of the god destroy,
 and strike to dust the imperial tower of Troy;
 steel can the work of mortal pride confound,
 and hew triumphal arch to the ground. 
what wonder then, fair nymph! thy hair shall feel
 the conquer force of unresisted steel? 

the rape of the lock.

 Canto iv.

but anxious care the pensive nymph oppress,
 and secret passion labour in her breast. 
not youthful king in battle seize alive,
 not scornful virgin who their charm survive,
 not ardent lover rob of all their bliss,
 not ancient lady when refuse a kiss,
 not tyrant fierce that unrepenting die,
 not Cynthia when her manteau pin awry,
 ever feel such rage, resentment and despair,
 as thou, sad virgin! for thy ravish hair. 

for, that sad moment, when the sylph withdraw,
 and Ariel weep from Belinda fly,
 umbriel, a dusky melancholy spright,
 as ever sully the fair face of light,
 down to the central earth, his proper scene,
 repair to search the gloomy cave of spleen. 

swift on his sooty pinion flitt the gnome,
 and in a vapour reach the dismal dome. 
no cheerful breeze this sullen region know,
 the dread east be all the wind that blow. 
here, in a grotto, shelter close from air,
 and screen in shade from day detest glare,
 she sigh for ever on her pensive bed,
 pain at her side, and languor at her head. 

two handmaid wait the throne: alike in place,
 but differ far in figure and in face. 
here stand ill-nature like a ancient maid,
 her wrinkle form in black and white array;
 with store of prayer, for morning, night, and noon. 
her hand be fill; her bosom with lampoon. 

there affectation with a sickly mien
 show in her cheek the rose of eighteen,
 practise to lisp, and hang the head aside,
 faint into air, and languish with pride;
 on the rich quilt sink with become woe,
 wrap in a gown, for sickness, and for show. 
the fair one feel such malady as these,
 when each new night-dress give a new disease. 

a constant vapour over the palace fly;
 strange phantom rise as the mist arise;
 dreadful, as hermit dream in haunt shade,
 or bright as vision of expire maid. 
now glare fiend, and snake on roll spire,
 pale spectre, gape tomb, and purple fire:
 now lake of liquid gold, elysian scene,
 and crystal dome, and angel in machine. 

unnumbered throng on every side be see
 of body change to various form by spleen. 
here live teapot stand, one arm hold out,
 one bent; the handle this, and that the spout:
 a pipkin there like Homer tripod walk;
 here sigh a jar, and there a goose-pye talk;
 man prove with child, as powerful fancy work,
 and maid turn bottle, call aloud for cork. 

safe past the gnome through this fantastic band,
 a branch of heal spleenwort in his hand. 
then thus address the power — hail wayward queen;
 who rule the sex to fifty from fifteen,
 parent of vapor and of female wit,
 who give the hysteric or poetic fit,
 on various temper act by various way,
 make some take Physick, other scribble play;
 who cause the proud their visit to delay,
 and send the godly in a Pett, to pray. 
a nymph there be, that all thy power disdain,
 and thousand more in equal mirth maintain. 
but oh! if ever thy gnome can spoil a grace,
 or raise a pimple on a beauteous face,
 like Citron-Waters matron cheek inflame,
 or change complexion at a lose game;
 if ever with airy horn i plant head,
 or rumple petticoat, or tumble bed,
 or cause suspicion when no soul be rude,
 or discompose the head-dress of a prude,
 or ever to costive lap-dog give disease,
 which not the tear of bright eye can ease:
 hear i, and touch Belinda with chagrin;
 that single act give half the world the spleen. 

the goddess with a discontent air
 seem to reject he, though she grant his prayer. 
a wondrous bag with both her hand she bind,
 like that where once Ulysses hold the wind;
 there she collect the force of female lung,
 sigh, sob, and passion, and the war of tongue. 
a vial next she fill with faint fear,
 soft sorrow, melt grief, and flow tear. 
the gnome rejoice bear her gift away,
 spread his black wing, and slow mount to day. 

sink in thalestris arm the nymph he find,
 her eye deject and her hair unbind. 
full over their head the swell bag he rend,
 and all the fury issue at the vent. 
Belinda burn with more than mortal ire,
 and fierce Thalestris fan the rise fire. 
o wretched maid! she spread her hand, and cry,
 (while hampton echo, wretched maid reply)
 be it for this you take such constant care
 the bodkin; comb, and essence to prepare;
 for this your lock in paper-durance bind,
 for this with torture iron wreathe around? 
for this with fillet strain your tender head,
 and brave bear the double load of lead? 
god! shall the ravisher display your hair,
 while the fop envy, and the lady stare! 
honour forbid! at who unrivalled shrine
 ease, pleasure, virtue, all, our sex resign. 
methinks already i your tear survey,
 already hear the horrid thing they say,
 already see you a degrade toast,
 and all your honour in a whisper lose! 
how shall i, then, your helpless fame defend? 
it will then be infamy to seem your friend! 
and shall this prize, the inestimable prize,
 expose through crystal to the gaze eye,
 and heighten by the diamond circle ray,
 on that rapacious hand for ever blaze? 
soon shall grass in hide-park circus grow,
 and wit take lodging in the sound of bow;
 soon let earth, air, sea, to chaos fall,
 man, monkey, lapdog, parrot, perish all! 

she say; then rage to sir Plume repair,
 and bid her beau demand the precious hair:
 (sir plume, of amber snuff-box just vain,
 and the nice conduct of a cloud cane)
 with earnest eye, and round unthinking face,
 he first the snuff-box open, then the case,
 and thus break out — "my lord, why, what the devil? 
"z—ds! damn the lock! before god, you must be civil! 
 "plague on it! it be past a jest — nay prithee, pox! 
"give she the hair — he speak, and rap his box. 

it grieve i much (reply the peer again)
 who speak so well shall ever speak in vain. 
but by this lock, this sacred lock i swear. 
(which never more shall join its part hair,
 which never more its honour shall renew,
 clip from the lovely head where once it grow)
 that while my nostril draw the vital air,
 this hand, which win it, shall for ever wear. 
he speak, and speak in proud triumph spread
 the long-contended honour of her head. 

but umbriel, hateful gnome! forbear not so;
 he break the vial whence the sorrow flow. 
then see! the nymph in beauteous grief appear,
 her eye half languish, half drown in tear;
 on her heave bosom hang her droop head,
 which, with a sigh, she raise; and thus she say. 

for ever curse be this detest day,
 which snatch my best, my favourite curl away! 
happy! ah ten time happy, have i be,
 if Hampton-court these eye have never see! 
yet be not i the first mistake maid,
 by love of court to numerous ill betray. 
oh have i rather unadmired remain
 in some lone isle, or distant northern land;
 where the gild chariot never mark the way,
 where none learn ombre, none ever taste bohea! 
there keep my charm conceal from mortal eye,
 like rose that in desert bloom and die. 
what move my mind with youthful lord to room? 
o have i stay, and say my prayer at home! 
it be this, the morning omen do foretell;
 thrice from my tremble hand the patch-box fall;
 the totter china shake without a wind,
 nay, poll sit mute, and shock be most unkind! 
a sylph too warn i of the threat of fate,
 in mystic vision, now believe too late! 
see the poor remnant of this slight hair! 
my hand shall rend what even thy own do spare. 
this, in two sable ringlet teach to break,
 once give new beauty to the snowy neck. 
the sister-lock now sit uncouth, alone,
 and in its fellow fate foresee its own;
 uncurl it hang, the fatal sheer demand;
 and tempt once more thy sacrilegious hand. 
oh have thou, cruel! be content to seize
 hair less in sight, or any hair but these! 

the rape of the lock.

 Canto v. 

she say: the pity audience melt in tear,
 but fate and Jove have stop the baron ear. 
in vain Thalestris with reproach assail,
 for who can move when fair Belinda fail? 
not half so fix the trojan can remain,
 while Anna beg and Dido rage in vain. 
to arm, to arm! the bold Thalestris cry,
 and swift as lightning to the combat fly. 
all side in party, and begin the attack;
 fan clap, silk ruffle, and tough whalebone crack;
 hero and heroine shout confuse rise,
 and base, and triple voice strike the sky. 
no common weapon in their hand be find,
 like god they fight, nor dread a mortal wound. 

so when bold Homer make the god engage,
 and heavenly breast with human passion rage;
 against Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes, arm;
 and all Olympus ring with loud alarm. 
Jove thunder roar, heaven tremble all around;
 blue Neptune storm, the bellow deep resound;
 earth shake she nod tower, the ground give way;
 and the pale ghost start at the flash of day! 

triumphant umbriel on a sconce height
 clap his glad wing, and sit to view the fight,
 prop on their bodkin spear the spright survey
 the grow combat, or assist the fray. 

while through the press enrage Thalestris fly,
 and scatter death around from both her eye,
 a beau and witling perish in the throng,
 one die in metaphor, and one in song. 
o cruel nymph! a live death i bear,
 cry dapperwit, and sink beside his chair. 
a mournful glance sir fopling upward cast,
 those eye be make so kill — be his last:
 thus on meander flowery margin lie
 the expire swan, and as he sing he die. 

as bold sir Plume have draw Clarissa down,
 Chloe step in, and kill he with a frown;
 she smile to see the doughty hero slay,
 but at her smile, the beau revive again. 

now Jove suspend his golden scale in air,
 weigh the men wit against the lady hair;
 the doubtful beam long nod from side to side;
 at length the wit mount up, the hair subside. 

see fierce Belinda on the baron fly,
 with more than usual lightning in her eye;
 nor fear the chief the unequal fight to try,
 who seek no more than on his foe to die. 
but this bold lord, with manly strength endue,
 she with one finger and a thumb subdue:
 just where the breath of life his nostril draw,
 a charge of snuff the wily virgin throw;
 the gnome direct, to every atom just,
 the pungent grains of titillate dust. 
sudden, with start tear each eye overflow,
 and the high dome re-echo to his nose. 

now meet thy fate, the incense virago cry,
 and draw a deadly bodkin from her side. 
( the same, his ancient personage to deck,
 her great great grandsire wear about his neck
 in three seal-ring; which after melt down,
 form a vast buckle for his widow gown:
 her infant grandame whistle next it grow,
 the bell she gingle, and the whistle blow;
 then in a bodkin grace her mother hair,
 which long she wear, and now Belinda wear.) 

boast not my fall (he cry) insult foe! 
thou by some other shall be lay as low. 
nor think, to die deject my lofty mind;
 all that i dread, be leave you behind! 
rather than so, ah let i still survive,
 and burn in Cupid flame, — but burn alive. 

restore the lock! she cry; and all around
 restore the lock! the vault roof rebound. 
not fierce Othello in so loud a strain
 roar for the handkerchief that cause his pain. 
but see how oft ambitious aim be cross,
 and chief contend until all the prize be lose! 
the lock, obtain with guilt, and keep with pain,
 in every place be seek, but seek in vain:
 with such a prize no mortal must be bless,
 so heaven decree! with heaven who can contest? 

some think it mount to the lunar sphere,
 since all thing lose on earth, be treasure there. 
there hero wit be keep in ponderous vase,
 and beau in snuff-box and tweezer-case. 
there break vow, and death-bed alm be find,
 and lover heart with end of ribbon bind;
 the courtier promise, and sick man prayer,
 the smile of harlot, and the tear of heir,
 cage for gnat, and chain to yoke a flea;
 dry butterfly, and tome of casuistry. 

but trust the muse — she see it upward rise,
 though mark by none but quick poetic eye:
 (so Rome great founder to the heaven withdraw,
 to Proculus alone confess in view.) 
a sudden star, it shoot through liquid air,
 and draw behind a radiant Trail of hair. 
not berenice lock first rise so bright,
 the sky bespangle with dishevel light. 
the sylph behold it kindle as it fly,
 and please pursue its progress through the sky. 

this the beau-monde shall from the Mall survey,
 and hail with music its propitious ray. 
this, the bless lover shall for Venus take,
 and send up vow from rosamonda lake. 
this partridge soon shall view in cloudless sky,
 when next he look through galilaeo eye;
 and hence the egregious visard shall foredoom
 the fate of louis, and the fall of Rome. 

then cease, bright nymph! to mourn the ravish hair
 which add new glory to the shine sphere! 
not all the tress that fair head can boast
 shall draw such envy as the lock you lose. 
for, after all the murder of your eye,
 when, after million slay, your self shall die;
 when those fair sun shall set, as set they must,
 and all those tress shall be lay in dust;
 this lock, the muse shall consecrate to fame,
 and midst the star inscribe Belinda name! 
