to mrs. Strangeways Horner, with a letter from my son; wherein he desire i to accept his first prize of learning, confer on he by the university of Dublin.

o thou, with every virtue grace,
 adorn with wit, and sense, and taste;
 who, with a goodness unconfined,
 delight in blessing human kind,
 who woe so oft thy peace destroy;
 it be just, thou shall partake their joy:
 then in my transport deign to share;
 behold this letter from my heir:
 there see the picture of a mind,
 in duty, as in art, refine;
 who, in full triumph, can submit
 his trophy at his parent foot. 
so he, in roman story fame,
 who from Corioli be name,
 with joy engage in glorious toil,
 to glad his mother with the spoil:
 her son, by roman arm, overcome;
 by roman art, i soar to fame. 

methinks, i see your friendship rise,
 and sparkle in your lovely eye. 
your heir! (i hear you now repeat)
 i long to know of your estate. 
say — be it a hibernian bog,
 where Phoebus seldom shine for fog? 

Hortensia, there he sometime shine;
 but often hide his head, and pine,
 on happy clime to look, nor see
 such dismal scene of poverty;
 nor see a isle, by nature bless,
 by ill-judged policy oppress;
 her trade usurp by foreign land,
 while Albion fast tie up her hand:
 nor see her son in science skill,
 and yet her post by stranger fill. 

but, since of my estate you ask,
 the answer be no easy task,
 critic, not lawyer, be to show,
 whether my title good, or no. 
Ovid have long ago define,
 what land be to the muse assign:
 it be but a barren soil, it be true,
 not such as heaven bestow on you;
 (yet, miser-like, our land you seize,
 and win, but will not wear, the bay:)
 a steep, a slippery, dangerous hill,
 which we, alas! be climb still;
 still think there be better land up high,
 which all will gain, but few acquire. 
if low or beat path we trace,
 we be deem a abject, grovel race:
 and oft, when we attempt to soar,
 we miss our aim, and fall the low:
 though some by magic number find
 the art to gain the high ground;
 yet most of those, alas! we know,
 have cause to wish they will stay below;
 rather than be exalt there,
 to starve in pure poetic air;
 while tasteless wight, in valley feed,
 despise the wit in want of bread. 

yet sometime we in story find
 a instance of a noble mind,
 that make apollo shrine its care,
 and bless the tribe that worship there. 
high in the deathless list of fame,
 revere the godlike Sidney name:
 there Dorset, and Southampton, view;
 and there the poet Montagu. 
Eliza pay she Spencer toil
 with acre of hibernian soil:
 and now illustrious Caroline
 resolve to raise the droop nine;
 with pleasure see the labour hind
 studious to cultivate his mind;
 and deign to smile on rural line,
 where so much native beauty shine. 

Hortensia, i revere your friend:
 may blessing on her head descend,
 who make a peasant merit know,
 and place the poor before the throne:
 thus imitate the power divine,
 and prove her soul ally to thy. 
