elegy, on W. Beckford ESQ.

weep on, you briton — give your general tear;
 but hence, you venal — hence, each title slave;
 a honest pang shall wait on beckford bier,
 and patriot anguish mark the patriot grave. 

when like the roman to his field retire,
 it be you, (surround by unnumbered foe)
 who call he forth, his service require,
 and take from age the blessing of repose. 

with soul impel by virtue sacred flame,
 to stem the torrent of corruption tide,
 he come, heaven fraught with liberty! he come
 and noble in his coutry service die. 

in the last awful, the depart hour,
 when life poor lamp more faint, and faint grow;
 as memory feeble exercise her power,
 he only feel for liberty and you. 

he view death arrow with a christian eye,
 with firmness only to a christian know;
 and noble give your misery that sigh
 with which he never gratify his own. 

thou, breathe sculpture, celebrate his fame,
 and give his laurel everlasting bloom;
 receive his worth while gratitude have name,
 and teach succeed age from his tomb. 

the sword of justice cautious he sway,
 his hand for ever hold the balance right;
 each venial fault with pity he survey,
 but murder find no mercy in his sight. 

he know when flatterer besiege a throne,
 truth seldom reach to a monarch ear;
 know, if oppress a loyal people groan,
 it be not the courtier interest he shall hear,

hence, honest to his prince, his manly tongue,
 the public wrong and loyalty convey,
 while title trembler, every nerve unstring,
 look all around, confound and dismay. 

Look'd all around, astonish to behold,
 (train up to flattery from their early youth)
 a artless, fearless citizen, unfold
 to royal ear, a mortify truth. 

title to he no pleasure can impart,
 no bribe his rigid virtue can control;
 the star can never gain upon his heart,
 nor turn the tide of honour in his soul. 

for this his name our history shall adorn,
 shall soar on fame wide pinion all sublime;
 until heaven own bright, and never die morn
 absorb our little particle of time. 
