a hymn to fortitude.

by the same.

night, brood over her mute domain,
 in awful silence wrap her reign;
 cloud press on cloud, and, as they rise,
 condense to solid gloom the sky. 
portentous, through the foggy air,
 to wake the daemon of despair,
 the raven hoarse, and bode owl,
 to Hecate curse anthem howl. 

intent with execrable art,
 to burn the vein, and tear the heart,
 the witch, unhallowed bone to raise,
 through funeral vault and charnel stray;
 call the damn shade from every cell,
 and add new labour to their hell. 

and, shield i, heaven! what hollow sound,
 like fate dread knell, run echo round? 
the bell strike one, that magic hour,
 when rise fiend exert their power. 
and now, sure now, some cause unblest
 breathe more than horror through my breast:
 how deep the breeze! how dim the light! 
what spectre swim before my sight! 
my freeze limb pale terror chain,
 and in wild eddy wheel my brain:
 my icy blood forget to roll,
 and death even seem to seize my soul. 
what sacred power, what heal art,
 shall bid my soul herself assert;
 shall rouse the immortal active flame,
 and teach she whence her being come? 

o fortitude! divine bright,
 o virtue child, and man delight! 
descend, a amicable guest,
 and with thy firmness steel my breast:
 descend, propitious to my lay,
 and, while my lyre resound thy praise,
 with energy divine strong,
 exalt my soul, and warm my song. 

when rave in eternal pain,
 and load with ten thousand chain,
 vice, deep in phlegeton, yet lie,
 nor with her visage blast day;
 no fear to guiltless man be know,
 for god and virtue reign alone. 
but, when from native flame and night,
 the curse monster winge her flight,
 pale fear, among her hideous train,
 chase sweet contentment from her reign;
 place death and hell before each eye,
 and wrap in mist the golden sky;
 banish from day each dear delight,
 and shake with conscious start the night. 

when, from the imperial seat on high,
 the lord of nature turn his eye,
 to view the state of thing below;
 still bless to make his creature so:
 from earth he see Astraea fly,
 and seek her mansion in the sky;
 peace, crown with olive, leave her throne,
 and white rob innocence be go:
 while vice, reveal in open day,
 sole tyrant rule with iron sway;
 and virtue veil her weep charm,
 and flee for refuge to his arm,
 her altar scorn, her shrine deface —
 who thus the essential good address. 

 "thou, who my soul adore alone,
 effulgent sharer of my throne,
 fair empress of eternity! 
who uncreated reign like i;
 who i, who sole and boundless sway,
 with pleasure infinite obey:
 to yond diurnal scene below,
 who feel their folly in their woe,
 again propitious turn thy flight;
 again oppose yond tyrant might;
 to earth thy cloudless charm disclose,
 revive thy friend, and blast thy foe:
 thy triumph man shall rapture see,
 act, suffer, live, and die for thou. 
but since all crime their hell contain,
 since all must feel who merit pain,
 let fortitude thy step attend,
 and be, like thou, to man a friend;
 to urge he on the arduous road,
 that lead to virtue, bliss, and god. 
to blunt the sting of every grief,
 and be to all a near relief." 

he say; and she, with smile divine,
 which make all heaven more bright shine,
 to earth return with all her train,
 and bring the golden age again. 
since err mortal, unconstrained,
 the god, that warm their breast, profane,
 she guardian of their joy no more,
 can only leave they, and deplore:
 they, now the easy prey of pain,
 curse in their wish, their choice obtain! 
till arm with heaven and fate, she come
 her destine honour to reclaim. 
vice and her slave behold her flight,
 and flee like bird obscene from light,
 back to the abode of plague return,
 to sin and smart, blaspheme and burn. 

thou, goddess! since, with sacred aid,
 have every grief and pain allay,
 to joy convert every smart,
 and place a heaven in every heart:
 by thou we act, by thou sustain,
 thou sacred antidote of pain! 
at thy great nod the Alps subside,
 reluctant river turn their tide;
 with all thy force alcides warm,
 his hand against oppression arm:
 by thou his mighty nerve be string,
 by thou his strength for ever young;
 and while on brutal force he press,
 his vigour with his foe increase. 
by thou, like Jove almighty hand,
 ambition havoc to withstand,
 Timoleon rise, the scourge of fate,
 and hurl a tyrant from his state;
 the brother in his soul subdue,
 and warm the poniard in his blood;
 a soul by so much virtue fire,
 not Greece alone, but heaven admire. 

but in these dregs of human kind,
 these day to guilt and fear resign,
 how rare such view the heart elate! 
to brave the last extreme of fate;
 like heaven almighty power, serene,
 with fix regard to view the scene,
 when nature quake beneath the storm,
 and horror wear its dire form. 
though future world be now descry,
 though Paul have write, and Jesus die,
 dispel the dark infernal shade,
 and all the heaven of heaven display;
 curse with unnumbered groundless fear,
 how pale yond shiver wretch appear! 
for he the day-light shine in vain,
 for he the field no joy contain;
 nature whole charm to he be lose,
 no more the wood their music boast;
 no more the mead their vernal bloom,
 no more the gale their rich perfume:
 impend mist deform the sky,
 and beauty withereth in his eye. 
in hope his terror to elude,
 by day he mingle with the crowd;
 yet find his soul to fear a prey,
 in busy croud, and open day. 
if night his lonely walk surprise,
 what horrid vision round he rise! 
that blast oak, which meet his way,
 show by the meteor sudden ray,
 the midnight murderer know retreat,
 feel heaven avengeful bolt of late;
 the clash chain, the groan profound,
 loud from yond ruin tower resound;
 and now the spot he seem to tread,
 where some self-slaughtered corpse be lay:
 he feel fix earth beneath he bend,
 deep murmur from her cave ascend;
 till all his soul, by fancy sway,
 see lurid phantom crowd the shade;
 while shroud mane pale stare,
 and beckon wish to breathe their care:
 thus real woe from false he bear,
 and feel the death, the hell he fear. 

o thou! who spirit warm my song,
 with energy divine strong,
 erect his soul, confirm his breast,
 and let he know the sweet of rest;
 till every human pain and care,
 all that may be, and all that be,
 but false imagine ill appear,
 beneath our hope, our grief, or fear. 
and, if i right invoke thy aid,
 by thou be all my woe allay;
 with scorn instruct i to defy
 impose fear, and lawless joy;
 to struggle through this scene of strife,
 the pain of death, the pang of life,
 with constant brow to meet my fate,
 and meet still more, euanthe hate. 
and when some swain her charm shall claim,
 who feel not half my generous flame,
 who care her angel-voice beguile,
 on who she bend her heavenly smile;
 for who she weep, for who she glow,
 on who her treasure soul bestow;
 when perfect mutual joy they share,
 ah! joy enhance by my despair! 
mix being in each flame kiss,
 and bless, still rise to high bliss:
 then, then, exert my utmost power,
 and teach i being to endure;
 lest reason from the helm shall start,
 and lawless fury rule my heart;
 lest madness all my soul subdue,
 to ask her maker, what do thou? 
yet, can thou in that dreadful hour,
 on my rack soul all Lethe pour,
 or fan i with the gelid breeze,
 that chain in ice the indignant sea;
 or wrap my heart in tenfold steel,
 i still be man, and still must feel. 
