the decision of fortune.

a fable. 

fortune well-pictured on a roll globe,
 with wave lock, and thin transparent robe,
 a man behold, to his neighbour cry,
 whoever will catch this dame, must swift ride. 
Mark, how she seem to fly, and with her bear,
 all that be worth a busy mortal care:
 the gild air about her statue shine,
 as if the earth have lend it all her mine;
 at random here a diadem she sling,
 and there a scarlet hat with dangle string,
 and to ten thousand fool ten thousand glorious thing. 
shall i then stay at home, dull and content
 with quarter-day, and hard extort rent? 
no, i will to horse, to sea, to utmost isle,
 but i will encounter her propitious smile:
 while you in slothful ease may choose to sleep,
 and scarce the few paternal acre keep. 
farewell, reply his friend, may you advance,
 and grow the darling of this lady chance:
 while i indeed, not court of her grace,
 shall dwell content, in this my native place,
 hope i still shall for your friend be know:
 but if too big for such acquaintance grow,
 i shall be such a fond mistaken sot,
 to think remembrance shall become my lot;
 when you exalt, have your self forget. 
nor i ambitious ever shall you find,
 or hunt fortune, who, they say, be blind:
 but if her want of sight shall make she stray,
 she shall be welcome, if she come this way. 
it be very like (the undertaker cry)
 that she her step to these lose path shall guide:
 but i lose time, while i such thought deride. 
away he go, with expectation cheere,
 but when his course he round the world have steer,
 and much have bear, and much have hope and fear,
 yet can not be inform where he may find
 this fickle mistress of all humankind:
 he quit at length the chace of fly game,
 and back as to his neighbor house he come,
 he there encounter the uncertain dame;
 who light from her gaudy coach in haste,
 to he her eager speech thus address. 
fortune behold, who have be long pursue,
 while all the man, that have my splendor view,
 mad enamour, have such flattery forge,
 and with such lie their vain pretension urge,
 that hither i be flee to shun their suit,
 and by free choice conclude their vain dispute;
 while i the owner of this mansion bless,
 and he unseeking fortune shall possess. 
though right charge as something dark of sight,
 yet merit, when it be find, be my delight;
 to knave and fool, when i have some grace allow,
 'Thas be like scatter money in a croud,
 to make i sport, as i behold they strive,
 and some observe (through age) but half-alive;
 scramble among the vigorous and young,
 one prove his sword, and one his wheedle tongue,
 all strive to obtain i right or wrong:
 while crown, and crosier in the contest hurl,
 show i a farce in the contend world. 
thou be delude, while with ship, or steed,
 thou late do attempt to reach my speed,
 and by laborious toil, and endless pain,
 do sell thy quiet for my doubtful gain
 while he alone my real favourite rise,
 who every thing to its just value prize,
 and neither court, nor yet my gift despise. 
