ode v. hymn to cheerfulness. the author sick. 

how thick the shade of evening close! 
how pale the sky with weight of snow! 
haste, light the taper, urge the fire,
 and bid the joyless day retire!
 — alas, in vain i try within
 to raise the dull, deject scene,
 while rouse by grief these fiery pain
 tear the frail texture of my vein;
 while winter voice, that storm around,
 and yond deep death-bell's groan sound
 renew my mind oppressive gloom,
 until start horror shake the room! 

be there in nature no kind power
 to sooth affliction lonely hour? 
to blunt the edge of dire disease,
 and teach these wintery shade to please? 
come, cheerfulness, triumphant fair,
 shine through the painful cloud of care;
 o sweet of language, mild of mein,
 o virtue friend and pleasure queen! 
assuage the flame that burn my breast,
 Attune my jar thought to rest;
 and while thy gracious gift i feel,
 my song shall all thy praise reveal. 

as once (it be in astraea reign)
 the vernal power renew their train,
 it happen that immortal love
 be range through the sphere above,
 and downward hither cast his eye
 the year return pomp to spy,
 he see the radiant god of day
 lead round the globe the rosy may;
 the fragrant air and genial hour
 be shed round he dew and flower;
 before his wheel Aurora past,
 and hesper golden lamp be last. 
but, fair of the bloom throng,
 when health majestic move along
 all gay with smile, to see below
 the joy which from her presence flow,
 while earth enliven hear her voice,
 and field, and flock, and swain rejoice;
 then mighty love her charm confess,
 and soon his vow incline her breast,
 and, know from that auspicious morn,
 the please cheerfulness be bear. 

thou cheerfulness, by heaven design
 to rule the pulse, that move the mind,
 whatever fretful passion spring,
 whatever chance or nature bring
 to strain the tuneful poize within,
 and disarrange the sweet machine,
 thou goddess, with a master-hand
 do each attemper key command,
 refine the soft and swell the strong,
 till all be concord, all be song. 

fair guardian of domestic life,
 best banisher of homebred strife,
 nor sullen lip, nor taunt eye
 deform the scene where thou be by:
 no sicken husband damn the hour
 that bind his joy to female power;
 no pine mother weep the care
 that parent waste on hopeless heir:
 the officious daughter please attend;
 the brother rise to the friend:
 by thou their board with flower be crown,
 by thou with song their walk resound. 
by thou their sprightly morning shine,
 and evening-hour in peace decline. 

behold the youth, who tremble heart
 beat high with love unpitied smart;
 though now he stray by rill and bower,
 and weep wear the lonely hour,
 or, if the nymph her audience deign,
 shame the soft story of his pain
 with slavish look, discolour eye,
 and accent falter into sigh;
 yet thou, auspicious power, with ease,
 cat'st yield he happy art to please,
 exalt his mein to manly charm,
 instruct his tongue with noble arm,
 with more command passion move,
 and teach the dignity of love. 

friend to the muse and all her train,
 for thou i court the muse again;
 and may the votive lie disclose
 how much to thy fair aid she owe! 
see, when thy touch reveal her mine,
 how pure the store of fancy shine! 
hark, when thy breath her song impel,
 how full the tuneful current swell! 
let melancholy plaintive tongue
 instruct the nightly strain of y —;
 but thy be Homer ancient might,
 and thy victorious pindar flight:
 thy myrtle crown the lesbian mead;
 thy voice awake sicilian reed;
 thy breath perfume the teian rose,
 and tibur vine spontaneous flow
 while Horace wanton in thy choir;
 the god and hero of the lyre. 

see where the pale, the sicken sage
 (a prey perhaps to fortune rage,
 perhaps by tender grief oppress,
 or gloom congenial to his breast)
 retire in desart-scene to dwell,
 and bid the joyless world farewell. 
alone he tread the autumnal shade,
 alone beneath the mountain lay,
 he see the nightly damp arise,
 and gather storm involve the sky;
 he hear the neighbour surge roll,
 and rage thunder shake the pole;
 then, strike by every object round,
 and stun by every horrid sound,
 he pant to traverse nature way. 
his evil haunt he through the maze:
 he view ten thousand daemon rise
 to wield the empire of the sky,
 and chance and fate assume the rod,
 and malice blot the throne of god. 
— o thou, who please power i sing! 
thy lenient influence hither bring;
 compose the storm, dispel the gloom,
 till nature wear her wonted bloom,
 till field and shade their sweet exhale,
 and music swell each open gale:
 then over his breast thy softness pour,
 and let he learn the timely hour
 to trace the world benignant law,
 and judge of that preside cause
 who found in discord beauty reign,
 convert to pleasure every pain,
 subdue the hostile form ta rest,
 and bid the universe be bless. 

o thou, who please power i sing! 
if right i touch the votive string,
 if equal praise i yield thy name,
 still govern thou thy poet flame;
 still with the muse my bosom share,
 and sooth to peace corrode care. 
but most exert thy genial power
 on friendship consecrate hour;
 and while my Agis lead the road
 to fearless wisdom high abode,
 or, warm in, freedom sacred cause,
 pursue the light of graecian law,
 attend, and grace our generous toil
 with all thy garland all thy smile. 
but if, by fortune stubborn sway,
 from he and friendship tear away,
 i court the muse heal spell
 for grief that still with absence dwell,
 do thou conduct my fancy dream
 to such indulgent, tender theme
 as just the struggle breast may cheer,
 and just suspend the start tear,
 yet leave that charm sense of woe,
 which none but friend and lover know. 
