stanza. [over ilion plain, where once the warrior bleed]

over ilion plain, where once the warrior bleed,
and once the poet raise his deathless strain,
over ilion plain a weary driver lead
his stately camel: for the ruin fane

wide round the lonely scene his glance he throw,
for now the red cloud fade in the west,
and twilight over the silent landscape draw
her deepen veil; eastward his course he press:

there, on the grey horizon glimmer bind,
rise the proud column of desert Troy,
and wander shepherd now a shelter find
within those wall, that ring with prince joy!

beneath a lofty porch the driver pass,
then, from his camel heave the heavy load;
partake with they the simple, cool, repast,
and, in short vesper, give himself to god.

from distant land with merchandise he come,
his all of wealth his patient servant bear;
oft deep-drawn sigh his anxious wish proclaim
to reach, again, his happy cottage door;

for there, his wife, his little child, dwell;
their smile shall pay the toil of many a hour.
even now warm tear to expectation swell,
as fancy over his mind extend her power.

a deathlike stillness reign, where once the song,
the song of hero, wake the midnight air,
save, when a solemn murmur roll along,
that seem to say — "for future world prepare."

for time be imperious voice be frequent hear
shake the marble temple to its fall,
(by hand he long have conquer, vain rear)
and distant ruin answer to his call.

while Hamet sleep, his camel round he lie,
beneath he, all his store of wealth be pile;
and here, his cruise and empty wallet lay,
and there, the flute that cheere he in the wild.

the robber Tartar on his slumber steal,
for over the waste, at eve, he watch his train;
ah! who his thirst of plunder shall control?
who call on he for mercy — call in vain!

a poison poignard in his belt he wear,
a crescent sword depend at his side,
the deathful quiver at his back he bear,
and infant — at his very look have die!

the moon cold beam athwart the temple fall,
and to his sleep prey the Tartar lead;
but soft! — a startle camel shake his bell,
then stretch his limb, and rear his drowsy head.

Hamet awake! the poignard glitter high!
swift from his couch he spring, and 'scape the blow;
when from a unknown hand the arrow fly,
that lie the ruffian, in his vengeance, low.

he groan, he die! from forth a columned gate
a fearful shepherd, pale and silent, creep,
who, as he watch his fold flock star-late,
have mark the robber steal where Hamet sleep.

he fear his own, and save a stranger life!
poor Hamet clasp he to his grateful heart;
then, rouse his camel for the dusty strife,
and, with the shepherd, hasten to depart.

and now, Aurora breathe her freshen gale,
and faint tremble on the eastern cloud;
and now, the sun, from under twilight veil,
look gay forth, and melt her airy shroud.

wide over the level plain, his slant beam
dart their long line on ilion tower scite;
the distant hellespont with morning gleam,
and old Scamander wind his wave in light.

all merry sound the camel bell, so gay,
and merry beat fond hamet heart, for he,
ever the dim evening steal upon the day,
his child, wife and happy home shall see.
