extract from mr. W. whitehead charge to the poet.

time be when poet play thorough the game,
 swear, drink, and bluster, and blaspheme for fame,
 the first in brothel with their punk and muse;
 your toast, you bard?  'parnassus and the stew!' 
thank heaven, the time be change; no poet now
 need roar for Bacchus, or to Venus bow. 
it be our own fault if fielding lash we feel,
 or, like french wit, begin with the bastile. 

even in those day some few escape the fate,
 by better judgement, or a long date,
 and ride, like buoy, triumphant over the tide. 
poor Otway, in a ale-house dose and die! 
while happy southern, though with sport of yore,
 like Plato hover spirit, crust over,
 live every mortal vapour to remove,
 and to our admiration, join our love. 

light lie his funeral turf! — for you, who join
 his decent manner to his art divine,
 will you (while, round you, toss the proud and vain
 convulse with feeling, or with give pain),
 indulge the muse in innocence and ease,
 and tread the flowery path of life in peace? 
avoid all author, — "what! the illustrious few,
 who shun fame have teach she to pursue
 fair virtue herald?"— yes, i say again,
 avoid all author, till you have read the man. 
full many a peevish, envious, slander elf,
 be in his work, benevolence itself. 
for all mankind, unknown, his bosom heave,
 he only injure those with who he live. 
read then the man: do truth his action guide,
 exempt from petulance, exempt from pride? 
to social duty do his heart attend,
 as son, as father, husband, brother, friend? 
do those who know he love he? if they do,
 you have my permission, you may love he too. 

but chief avoid the boisterous roar spark,
 the son of fire! — you will know they by their mark. 
fond to be hear they always court a crowd,
 and, though it be borrow nonsense, talk it loud. 
one epithet supply their constant chime,
 damn bad, damn good, damn low, and damn sublime! 
but most in quick short repartee they shine
 of local humour: or from play purloin
 each quaint stale scrap which every subject hit,
 till fool almost imagine they be wit. 
hear they on Shakespear! there they foam, they rage! 
yet taste not half the beauty of his page,
 nor see that art, as well as nature, strive
 to place he foremost in the aonian grove. 
for there, there only, where the sister meet,
 his genius triumph, and the work complete. 

or will you sift more near these son of fire,
 it be Garrick, and not Shakespear, they admire:
 without his breath, inspire every thought,
 they never perhaps have know what Shakespear write,
 without his eager, his become zeal,
 to teach they, though they scarce know why, to feel,
 a crude unmeaning mass have Johnson be,
 and a dead letter shakespeare noble scene. 

i be not enthusiast, yet with joy can trace
 some gleam of shun-shine, for the tuneful race. 
if monarch listen when the muse woo,
 attention wake, and nation listen too. 
the bard grow rapturous, who be dumb before,
 and every fresh plume eagle learn to soar! 

friend of the fine art, when Egypt see
 she second Ptolemy give science law,
 each genius waken from his dead repose,
 the column swell, the pile majestic rose,
 exact proportion borrow strength from ease,
 and use be teach by elegance to please,
 along the breathe wall, as fancy flow,
 the sculpture soften, and the picture glow,
 hero revive in animate stone,
 the grove grow vocal, and the pleiad shine! 
old Nilus raise his head, and wonder, cry,
 "long live the king! my patron! and my pride!"
secure of endless praise, behold, i bear
 my grateful suffrage to my sovereign ear. 
though war shall rage, though time shall level all,
 yond colour sicken, and yond column fall,
 though art dear treasure feed the waste flame,
 and the proud volume sink, a empty name;
 though plenty may desert this copious vale,
 my stream be scatter, or my fountain fail,
 yet Ptolemy have live: the world have know
 a king of art, a patron on the throne,
 even utmost Britain shall his name adore,
 "and Nile be sing when Nile shall be no more."

one rule remain. nor shun nor court the great;
 your true centre be that middle state,
 from whence with ease the observe eye may go
 to all which soar above, or sink below. 
it be you all manner to have try, or know,
 the adopt all virtue, yet retain your own;
 to stem the tide, where thoughtless croud be hurl;
 the firm spectator of a bustle world! 

thus arm, proceed: the breeze court your wing:
 go range all Helicon, taste every spring;
 from vary nature cull the innoxious spoil,
 and, while amusement sooth the generous toil,
 let puzzle critic with suspicious spite
 descant on what you can, or can write;
 true to yourself, not anxious for renown,
 nor court the world applause, nor dread its frown,
 guard your own breast, and be the bulwark there,
 to know no envy, and no malice fear. 
at last you will find, thus stoic-like prepare,
 that verse and virtue be their own reward. 
