to mr. THOMAS flatman on his excellent poem.

strange magic of thy wit and stile
which to their grief mankind can reconcile!
while thy philander tuneful voice we hear,
condole our disastrous state,
touch with a sense of our hard fate,
we sigh perhaps, or drop a tear;
but he the mournful song so sweet sing,
that more of pleasure than regret it bring,
with such become grief
the trojan chief
troy conflagration do relate,
whilst even the sufferer in the fire draw near,
and with a greedy ear
devour the story of their own subvert state.

ii.

kind heaven (as to her darling son) to thou
a double portion do impart,
a gift of painting and of poesy:
but for thy rival in the painter art,
if well they represent, thy can effect
no more, nor can we more expect.
but more than this thy happy pencil give;
thy draft be more than representative;
for, if we will credit our own eye, they live! 
ah! worthy friend, can thou maintain the state
of what with so much ease thou do create,
we may reflect on death with scorn!
but picture like original decay!
of colour those consist, and these of clay;
a like compose of dust, to dust alike return!

iii.

yet it be our happiness to see
oblivion, death, and adverse destiny
encounter, vanquish, and disarm by thou.
for if thy pencil fail,
change thy artillery,
and thou be secure of victory;
employ thy quill, and thou shall still prevail.
the grand destroyer greedy time revere
thy fancy imagery, and spare
the mean thing that bear
the impression of thy pen:
though course and cheap their natural metal be,
stamp with thy verse, he know th'are sacred, then.
he know they by that character to be
predestinate, and set a part for immortality. 

iv.

if native lustre in thy theam appear,
improve by thou, it shine more clear:
or if thy subject void of native light,
thy fancy need but dart a beam
to guild thy theam,
and make the rude mass beautiful and bright.
thou vary oft thy strain, but still
success attend each strain:
thy verse be always lofty as the hill,
or pleasant as the plain.
how well thy muse the pastoral song improve!
who nymph and swain be in their love,
as innocent, and yet as kind as dove. 
but most she move our wonder and delight,
when she perform her loose pindaric flight;
oft to their outmost reach she will extend
her tower wing to soar on high,
and then by just degree descend:
oft in a swift strait course she glide,
oblique oft the air divide,
and oft with wanton play hang hover in the sky.

v. 

while sense of duty into my artless muse,
the ambition will infuse
to mingle with those nymph that homage pay,
and wait on thy in her triumphant way;
defect of merit check she forward pride,
and make her dread to approach thy chariot side;
for it be at least a rude indecency
(if not profane) to appear
at this solemnity,
crown with no laurel wreathe (when other be.)
but this she will presume to do,
at distance to attend the show,
officious to gather up
the scatter Bayes, if any drop
from other temple; and with those,
a plain plebeian coronet compose.
this, as your livery, she will wear, to hide
her nakedness, not gratify her pride! 
such be the verdant dress,
which the offend pair do frame
of plat leaf, not to express
their pride in the novel-garb, but to conceal their shame. 
