on mr. walpole house at strawberry hill.

by miss m. —.

when envy see yond gothic structure rise,
 she view the fabric with malignant eye:
 with grief she gaze on the antique wall,
 the picture window, and the trophy hall. 
through well-ranged chamber, next she bend her way,
 gloomy, not dark, and cheerful, though not gay;
 where to the whole, each part proportion bear,
 and all around, a please aspect wear. 
towards the study then her footstep tend,
 where column rise, and sculpture arch bend:
 here soothe melancholy hold her seat,
 and contemplation seek the love retreat. 
the garden next display a magic scene
 of fragrant plant and never-fading green:
 each various season, various gift bestow,
 the lilac, woodbine, and the bloom rose;
 hence, in clear prospect to the gazer eye,
 wood, hill, and stream, in sweet confusion lie. 
the silver Thames, as he pursue his way,
 seem here to loiter, and prolong his stay. 
these matchless charm, her indignation move,
 she weep to find she can but approve:
 then sore sigh, from her canker breast,
 thus the curse fiend her impious woe express:
 be i in vain the foe to all thy race? 
it be i that wrought thy patriot sire disgrace;
 in vain i strive to blot his honour name,
 bright it shine, restore by endless fame:
 and must another Walpole break my rest,
 and must thy praise, my repose molest? 
it be thy, by various talent, still to please,
 to plan with judgement, execute with ease;
 with equal skill, to build, converse and write,
 to charm the mind, and gratify the sight. 
ah! can i but these battlement overthrow,
 and lie this monument of genius low? 
but vain the wish, for art and nature join
 to add perfection to the fair design:
 it must proceed, for so the fate decree,
 yet mark the sentence that be pronounce by i:
 thousand that view it shall the work despise,
 and thousand more shall view it with my eye;
 the applause which thou so glad will receive,
 the candid and the wise alone shall give:
 taste, though much talk of, be confine to few,
 they best can prize it, who be most like you. 
