a epistle address to sir THOMAS Hanmer,

on his edition of shakespeare work.

by mr. WILLIAM Collins.

while bear to bring the muse happy day,
a patriot hand protect a poet lay:
while nurse by you she see her myrtle bloom,
green and unwithered over his honour tomb:
excuse her doubt, if yet she fear to tell
what secret transport in her bosom swell:
with conscious awe she hear the critic fame,
and blush hide her wreath at shakespeare name.
hard be the lot those injure strain endure,
unowned by science, and by year obscure,
fair fancy weep; and echo sigh confess
a fix despair in every tuneful breast.
not with more grief the afflict swain appear,
when wintery wind deform the plenteous year;
when linger frost the ruin seat invade
where peace resort, and the grace play.

each rise art by just gradation move,
toil build on toil, and age on age improve:
the muse alone unequal deal her rage,
and grace with noble pomp her early stage.
Preserv'd through time, the speak scene impart
each changeful wish of phaedra torture heart:
or paint the curse, that mark the theban reign,
a bed incestuous, and a father slay.
with kind concern our pity eye overflow,
trace the sad tale, and own another woe.

to Rome remove, with wit secure to please,
the comic sister keep their native ease.
with jealous fear decline Greece behold
her own meander art almost excel!
but every muse essay to raise in vain
some labour rival of her tragic strain;
ilyssus laurel, though transfer with toil,
droop their fair leaf, nor know the unfriendly soil.

as art expire, resistless dullness rise;
Goths, priest, or Vandals, — all be learning foe.
till Julius first recall each exile maid,
and Cosmo own they in the etrurian shade:
then deep skill in love engage theme,
the soft provencial pass to arno stream:
with graceful ease the wanton lyre he string,
sweet flow the lay — but love be all he sing.
the gay description can not fail to move;
for, lead by nature, all be friend to love.

but heaven, still various in its work, decree
the perfect boast of time shall last succeed.
the beauteous union must appear at length,
of Tuscan fancy, and athenian strength:
one great muse Eliza reign adorn,
and even a Shakespear to her fame be bear!

yet ah! so bright her morning open ray,
in vain our Britain hope a equal day!
no second growth the western isle can bear,
at once exhaust with too rich a year.
too nice Johnson know the critic part;
nature in he be almost lose in art.
of soft mould the gentle Fletcher come,
the next in order, as the next in name.
with please attention amid his scene we find
each glow thought, that warm the female mind;
each melt sigh, and every tender tear,
the lover wish and the virgin fear.
his every strain the smile and grace own;
but strong Shakespear feel for man alone:
draw by his pen, our rude passion stand
the unrivalled picture of his early hand.

with gradual step, and slow, exacter France
see art fair empire over her shore advance:
by length of toil a bright perfection know,
correct bold, and just in all she draw.
till late Corneille, with lucan spirit fire,
breathe the free strain, as Rome and he inspire:
and classic judgement gain to sweet Racine
the temperate strength of maro chaster line.

but wild far the british laurel spread,
and wreath less artful crown our poet head.
yet he alone to every scene can give
the historian truth, and bid the manner live.
wake at his call i view, with glad surprise,
majestic form of mighty monarch rise.
there Henry trumpet spread their loud alarm,
and laureled conquest wait her hero arm.
here gentle Edward claim a pity sigh,
scarce bear to honour, and so soon to die!
yet shall thy throne, unhappy infant, bring
no beam of comfort to the guilty king:
the time shall come, when gloster heart shall bleed
in life last hour, with horror of the deed:
when dreary vision shall at last present
thy vengeful image in the midnight tent,
thy hand unseen the secret death shall bear,
blunt the weak sword, and break the oppressive spear.

whereve we turn, by fancy charm, we find
some sweet illusion of the cheat mind.
oft, wild of wing, she call the soul to rove
with humble nature, in the rural grove;
where swain content own the quiet scene,
and twilight fairy tread the circle green:
dress by her hand, the wood and valley smile,
and spring diffusive deck the enchant isle. 

o more than all in powerful genius bless,
come, take thy empire over the will breast!
whatever the wound this youthful heart shall feel,
thy song support i, and thy moral heal!
there every thought the poet warmth may raise,
there native music dwell in all the lay.
o may some verse with happy skill persuade
expressive picture to adopt thy aid!
what wondrous draught may rise from every page!
what other raphael charm a distant age!

methinks even now i view some free design,
where breathe nature live in every line:
chaste and subdue the modest light decay,
steal into shade, and mild melt away.
— and see, where Anthony in tear approve,
guard the pale relic of the chief he love:
over the cold corpse the warrior seem to bend,
deep sink in grief, and mourn his murder friend!
still as they press, he call on all around,
lift the tear robe, and point the bleed wound.

but who be he, who brow exalt bear
a wrath impatient, and a fierce air?
awake to all that injure worth can feel,
on his own Rome he turn the avenge steel.
yet shall not war insatiate fury fall,
(so heaven ordain it) on the destine wall.
see the fond mother amid the plaintive train
hang on his knee, and prostrate on the plain!
touch to the soul, in vain he strive to hide
the son affection, in the roman pride:
over all the man conflict passion rise,
rage grasp the sword, while pity melt the eye.

thus, generous critic, as thy bard inspire,
the sister art shall nurse their droop fire;
each from his scene her store alternate bring,
blend the fair tint, or wake the vocal string:
those sibyl-leaf, the sport of every wind,
(for poet ever be a careless kind)
by thou dispose, no farther toil demand,
but, just to nature, own thy form hand.

so spread over Greece, the harmonious whole unknown,
even Homer number charm by part alone.
their own Ulysses scarce have wander more,
by wind and water cast on every shore:
when raise by fate, some former Hanmer join
each beauteous image of the boundless mind:
and bid, like thou, his Athens ever claim
a fond alliance with the poet name.
