to her grace the duchess dowager of Portland.

nature! thou active principle, who depth
 the curious mind will will explore;
 thou, who in universal order sway
 the jar atom of a various world! 
the sceptic deity! who wilder soul
 never reach, by faith, thy first stupendous cause. 

immediate emanation of a god!
 o, swell the untaught rapture; bid it rise
 spontaneous in my bare uncultured mind! 
thou shall aspire, when gratitude assist,
 to noble height than science ever dare. 
then find with ecstasy a portland name,
 and bid it live beyond the wreck of world. 
for she let fancy pierce the deep abyss,
 dart through the liquid element, and tread
 the shelly pavement, dazzle with the glare
 of vary hue; the lively coral here,
 here the pale pearl; the lovely vivid green
 of brilliant onyx, and the sapphire blue. 

the Triton sport in their oozy grot,
 forget to heave the tempest-loving wave;
 the huge leviathan, which late had'scape
 norwegian toil, and, sting by fear, descend
 more swift than eagle mount meridian height,
 feel rapture add to the joy of life,
 while Neptune, from his float couch, thus speak:
 "Portland my deep dominion dare explore,
"nor here alone the naturalist pursue
 "those hide gem by vulgar soul never prize;
"for she the bold adventurer shall dare
 "the golden serpent in arabian wild,
"Asphaltite, and the venerable Nile,
 "pluck the fair apple which gomorrah flame
"have fill with sulphur; tread once hallow earth
 "where ancient Sion stand; those height ascend
"which pious Noah, oft Deucalion call,
 "first hail with grateful joy, and fearless press
"the caspian wave: for she the rover seek
 "the scatter remnant of a ruin world. 
"but that the surge yond planet will overwhelm,
 "the root of ocean will i throw to land,
"and all my gem shall meet her generous eye;
 "— it must not be; great Jove indignant frown
"will shrink each coward wave beneath his fellow. 
 "this boon refuse, i give a noble still
"in sweet exchange; magnificent good,
 "her godlike soul the wanderer shall sooth,
"chace the sad gloom from sorrow woe-sunk eye,
 "and bid each future minute fly in peace."

thus speak the god, the listen surge catch
 the potent sound, and waste they to the shore;
 echo to mantuan grove the strain prolong;
 but Tityrus have long forsake the shade;
 and, since his absence, melody have mourn. 
