amabella.

write by the desire of mrs. Montagu.

by mr. jerningham.

Harmodius breathe the rural air, nor find
 his ruddy health with length of year decrease:
 by duty prompt, amabella crown
 his silver forehead with the wreath of peace:

by partial nature frame in beauty mould,
 adorn with every grace, unspoiled by art,
 to friendship circle still do she unfold
 the lovely beauty of a feeling heart. 

endear to all she meet, each welcome day,
 by fortune hand, with various blessing fraught:
 when, lo! her gaiety accustom ray
 be quench, untimely, with the gloom of thought. 

what fix the bosom-thorn, affliction know,
 where peace sit brood as the gentle dove:
 what blast on her cheek the summer rise,
 or slow disease, or unsuccessful love,

remain unknown. — it be by the many guess,
 that love to her soft vow have prove unkind:
 beyond the power of her weak frame oppress,
 insanity overthrow her lovely mind. 

at length recover, yet to grief devote,
 to solitude she give the unsocial day;
 like a pale votary from the world remote,
 uncheered, unvisited of pleasure ray. 

oft do Harmodius (at her state dismay)
 solicit from his child her secret pain:
 her vague reply still from his question stray,
 and each repeat effort prove in vain. 

to speed the moment of the loiter hour,
 and by their plaintive strain perchance allure,
 within a spacious myrtle-woven bower,
 two turtle dove the pensive fair secure. 

 "you little captive, will she often say,
" though here seclude from the field of air,
 "through yonder vernal grove forbid to stray,
" and join the kindred train that wanton there;

 "against you the gunner never lift his arm,
" nor over this mansion do the falcon sail;
 "you live unconscious of the storm alarm,
" the rain impetuous, and the beat hail. 

 "nor here, by kind compassion unimpressed,
" the school-boy ever rear his impious hand,
 "to fill with agony the feather breast,
" and raze the little dome that love have plan. " 

their harmless joy disease too soon efface:
 one fatal morn, her turturella mate
 she find, with flag wing subdue, oppress,
 and just, just sink at the blow of fate:

while down her cheek compassion shower distil,
 she gentle raise it to her anxious breast;
 but death cold blast life crimson current chill,
 and thus the fair her breathless bird address:

 "ill-fated turtle, round who peaceful bower
" the jocund love so late wont to play:
 "how sink, alas! in youth exult hour,
" to fell disease, to death the untimely prey:

 "how silent be the voice, which, void of art,
" along the tender day be hear to coo! 
 "how still, how freeze be the constant heart,
" which to its dear companion beat so true! 

 "that dear companion, that now widow dove,
" to screen from every harm be mine the care;
 "and, while she mourn her ne'er-reviving love,
" her grief to i the mourner will endear:

 "like thou, a widow too, condemn to mourn:
" no more to i do life unfold its charm,
 "death; death forbid he ever to return!" 
she say — and sink into the attendant arm. 

her swift relapse to her former state,
 with bode fear, approach the serve train:
 this scene dread period tremble they wait,
 nor be their bode fear indulge in vain:

awaken from her trance, around she throw,
 distressful fair, her much disorder eye;
 and wilder say — "repeat that kind adieu:
" ah no! from love to war, to death he fly. 

 "do you not hear the clash of hostile spear? 
" ah! mark you not that breast-plate stain with gore? 
 "what groan be that which pierce these fearful ear? 
" he fall, he fall — my warrior be no more:

 "nor be, o heaven! his amabella near
" to soothe his pain, and echo sigh to sigh,
 "drop on the gape ground a balmy tear,
" kiss his cold lip, and close his fade eye. " 

of her distress the alarm Harmodius teach,
 with tremble step approach the unconscious fair:
 "give i, he cry, with grief paternal fraught,
" give i, o amabel'! to soothe thy care:

 "say, what affliction have thy soul impress? 
" reveal what storm thy bosom calmness break? 
 "reveal — and thus relieve this anguish breast:
" the tender father to his daughter speak. " 

amabella.

 "ah! what avail the praise the brave obtain! 
" through his white bosom rush the hostile steel:
 "it be his to swell the number of the slay,
" and mine affliction keen point to feel. " 

Harmodius.

 "her rove thought no trace of reason bear:
" to her rack mind, o heaven! thy peace impart:
 "a love parent bath thy cheek with tear;
" Harmodius hold thou to his break heart. " 

amabella.

 "to thou, i grateful kneel, o generous seer! 
" who do, to one unknown, thy care extend:
 "along thy path may peace her olive rear,
" and heaven, in battle, shield thy dear friend:

 "for i, who droop beneath misfortune shower,
" i have a father, — now, alas! a foe, —
 "thou will blush to hear, — in sorrow dark hour,
" he leave his child abandon to her woe:

 "but to thy heart, that be frame of soft mould,
" what can to thou, a wretch like i endear! 
 "the spring, the motive of thy love unfold:
" say, say, for i why flow that friendly tear! 

 "yet soft awhile, — methinks that hoary brow —
" that plaintive voice — ah, bear with my distress! 
 "or much remembrance be efface, or now,
" a tender father tear-dewed cheek i press. " 

Harmodius.

 "on knee of gratitude, i bless the sky,
" that amabella to herself restore. " 

amabella.

 "ah, wherefore do thou joy! thy daughter die:
" support i to yond couch — i can no more —
 "i feel, i feel the pulse of life retire! 
" ah, deign to hear thy die child reveal,
 "what, in rebellion to thy just desire,
" lock in her breast, she dare so long conceal. 

 "by thou, unsanctioned, do i plight my love,
" and, all to thou unknown, a bride become. " 

Harmodius.

 "Harmodius will to both a father prove." 

amabella.

 "to he thy pardon thou can never proclaim:

 "three fleet hour have scarce call i bride,
" when he be summon to the martial plain:
 "and there, — forgive these tear, — in beauty pride,
" the much-lamented valiant youth be slay. 

 "what though unworthy of thy care i prove,
" to thy remembrance let thy child be dear;
 "thy kind compassion let the daughter move,
" when this weak frame shall press the untimely bier. " 

more will she say, — her voice begin to fail,
 from her faint eye life linger spark retire,
 the ripen cherry on her lip grow pale,
 she heave a sigh, and in that sigh expire. 
