soliloquy of a beauty in the country. 

write at Eton school.

by the same.

it be night; and Flavia to her room retire,
with evening chat and sober read tire;
there melancholy, pensive, and alone,
she meditate on the forsake town:
on her raise arm recline her droop head,
she sigh, and thus in plaintive accent say:

"ah, what avail it to be young and fair,
"to move with negligence, to dress with care?
"what worth have all the charm our pride can boast,
"if all in envious solitude be lose?
"where none admire, it be useless to excel;
"where none be beau, it be vain to be a Belle:
"beauty, like wit, to judge shall be show;
"both most be value where they best be know.
"with every grace of nature, or of art,
"we can break one stubborn country heart:
"the brute, insensible, our power defy:
"to love exceed a 'squire capacity.
"the town, the court, be beauty proper sphere;
"that be our heaven, and we be angel there:
"in that gay circle thousand cupid rove,
"the court of Britain be the court of love.
"how have my conscious heart with triumph glow,
"how have my sparkle eye their transport show,
"at each distinguish birth-night ball, to see
"the homage due to empire, pay to i!
"when every eye be fix on i alone,
"and dread mine more than the monarch frown:
"when rival statesman for my favour strive,
"less jealous in their power, than in their love.
"change be the scene; and all my glory die,
"like flower transplant to a cold sky;
"lose be the dear delight of give pain,
"the tyrant joy of hear slave complain.
"in stupid indolence my life be spend,
"supine calm, and dull innocent:
"unblest i wear my useless time away;
"sleep (wretched maid!) all night, and dream all day;
"go at set hour to dinner and to prayer;
"for dullness ever must be regular.
"now with mamma at tedious whist i play;
"now without scandal drink insipid tea;
"or in the garden breathe the country air,
"secure from meet any tempter there:
"from book to work, from work to book i rove,
"and be (alas!) at leisure to improve!
"be this the life a beauty ought to lead?
"be eye so radiant only make to read?
"these finger, at who touch even age will glow,
"be these of use for nothing but to sew?
"sure err nature never can design
"to form a housewife in a mould like mine!
"o Venus, queen and guardian of the fair,
"attend propitious to thy votary prayer:
"let i revisit the dear town again:
"let i be see! — can i that wish obtain,
"all other wish my own power will gain.
