[fragment] xv.

where be gealchossa my love, the daughter of tuathal-teachvar? i leave she in the hall of the plain, when i fight with the hairy ulfadha. return soon, she say, o lamderg! for here i wait in sorrow. her white breast rise with sigh; her cheek be wet with tear. but she come not to meet lamderg; or sooth his soul after battle. silent be the hall of joy; i hear not the voice of the singer. Brann do not shake his chain at the gate, glad at the come of his master. where be gealchossa my love, the daughter of tuathal-teachvar?

lamderg! say firchio son of Aydon, gealchossa may be on the hill; she and her choose maid pursue the fly deer.

firchio! no noise i hear. no sound in the wood of the hill. no deer fly in my sight; no pant dog pursue. i see not gealchossa my love; fair as the full moon set on the hill of cromleach. go, firchio! go to allad, the grey-haired son of the rock. he live in the circle of stone; he may tell of gealchossa.

allad! say firchio, thou who dwell in the rock; thou who tremble alone; what see thy eye of age?

i see, answer allad the old, Ullin the son of carbre: he come like a cloud from the hill; he hum a surly song as he come, like a storm in leafless wood. he enter the hall of the plain. lamderg, he cry, most dreadful of man! fight, or yield to Ullin. lamderg, reply gealchossa, lamderg be not here: he fight the hairy ulfadha; mighty man, he be not here. but lamderg never yield; he will fight the son of carbre. lovely art thou, o daughter of tuathal-teachvar! say Ullin. i carry thou to the house of carbre; the valiant shall have gealchossa. three day from the top of cromleach will i call lamderg to fight. the four, you belong to Ullin, if lamderg die, or fly my sword.

allad! peace to thy dream! — sound the horn, firchio! — Ullin may hear, and meet i on the top of cromleach.

lamderg rush on like a storm. on his spear he leap over river. few be his stride up the hill. the rock fly back from his heel; loud crash they bind to the plain. his armour, his buckler ring. he hum a surly song, like the noise of the fall stream. dark as a cloud he stand above; his arm, like meteor, shine. from the summit of the hill, he roll a rock. Ullin hear in the hall of carbre. —

