Isaiah xxxiv.

come near, you nation! and give ear, o earth!
you distant isle, and continent remote,
whereve disperse beneath the vast expanse
of heaven high roof, attend! attend, and hear
your doom tremendous ratify above,
sad retribution of enormous guilt,
which call loud for justice and revenge,
fly swift as light up to the throne of god,
and pull down dire destruction on the earth.
the mighty god, with all his thunder arm,
will cast abroad the terror of his wrath;
and shower down vengeance on the guilty land.
the lord of host amid a night of cloud,
and with the majesty of darkness crown,
thunder aloft; and from the inmost heaven
hurl down impetuous fury swift as thought
through the azure void, wide-stretched from pole to pole,
to ravage all the boundless universe.
as when a bluster wind roll from the north,
and shake all autumn with the drive blast;
so shall the fury of the omnipotent
destroy the nation, and confound their arm,
sword, shield, and spear, and all the power of war;
with eager speed rush over the embattle rank,
and through the thick battalion urge its way.
jehovah arm will shake the vast convex,
and wrap the whole circumference around
in waste desolation, ruin wide.
destructive slaughter, ghastly to behold,
dire specimen of wrath omnipotent,
shall march tremendous over the burden earth,
oppress, and conscious of unusual weight,
shrink beneath the heavy load of death.
the purple pile, and mountain of the slay,
expire wretch, pour out their soul
with burst of groan, shall fill the labour world.
each slaughter corps shall breath a pestilence;
and wide around diffuse the scent of death.
the eternal hill shall float in sea of blood;
and mountain vanish in the crimson tide.
nature huge volume shall be fold up
like a vast scroll; and all the glitter orb
drop from the heaven like autumnal leaf,
or the ripe fig, when sultry Sirius reign;
while peal of thunder rattle in the sky,
shall roll incessant over the astonish world.
death and destruction threaten all below,
and in substantial darkness high enthrone,
shall draw the curtain of eternal night,
and spread confusion hideous over the earth,
as when the embryo world ere time begin,
in one rude heap, one undigested mass
of jar discord, and disorder lie.
the sun, amaze to see the wild obscure,
no more with radiant light shall gild the sky;
no more diffuse his all genial beam
on the high mountain spread the shine morn;
but downwards flame through the vast immense,
shall hide his glory in eternal night,
thus in loud thunder speak the almighty sire —
in copious slaughter will i take my sword,
and, Idumea! thou shall swim in blood.
the lord shall hasten from the lofty sky;
destruction on his awful footstep wait;
death stalk before, ruin on every side
proclaim the terror of a angry god.
the ravenous sword, pamper with reek gore,
drink with the blood of half the rebel world,
shall there be sheathe in israel stubborn foe.

Bozrah with human sacrifice shall smoke,
and Idumea, thoughtless of her fate,
shall feel the smart of heaven avenge rod.
the great, the small, the oppressor, and the oppress,
shall join promiscuous in the common heap;
and one vast ruin shall involve they all.
for israel god be gird with burn rage,
and vow a last revenge to zion foe.
the silver stream, that shine along the plain,
and chide their bank, and tinkle as they run,
shall stop, and stagnate to a sable pool;
and, black with mud, unconscious of a tide,
no more shall charm the sense, or lull the soul,
or in soft murmur die upon the ear:
but in crude stream and deadly stench exhale,
and with contagious vapour load the sky.

rapacious flame, in pyramid of fire,
shall burn unquenchable; and sulphurous smoke,
advance over the horizontal plain,
in dusky wreath roll ever to the sky.
the inhospitable land, leave desolate,
unfruitful, but in every noxious weed,
shall be a lonely desert, waste and wild;
within who silent confine none shall dwell;
nor ever more be hear the harmonious voice
of warble bird, that heretofore be wont
in vocal choir to animate the grove,
and from the shady covert of the tree
dispense sweet music to the listen vale:
but hoot owl, that spread their lazy wing
over the dark gloom, and with their bode scream
double the native horror of the night;
these with the cormorant shall dwell therein,
secure in the upper lintel lodge,
and in the window direful dirge sing.

god shall extend, and bear his thunder arm;
and with confusion circumscribe the land.
where be the noble, and the mighty chief,
that in soft ease their silken moment waste;
to who their prostrate vassal throng in crowd,
strive who first shall awful homage pay,
and adoration! they shall they invoke;
but all in vain; their name shall be no more,
but in their stead more worthy savage,
with rapine uncontrouble shall reign;
and noble brute shall canton out the land,
those regal dome, and tower palace,
that high in cloud exalt their impious head,
reflect through the liquid firmament
home to the distant ken a dazzle blaze,
thorn shall surround, and nettle grow within:
ivy shall creep along the paint wall:
the mat grass overspread the polish floor;
and bramble vile entwine the empty throne.
while beast from different clime, joyous to find
a place of rest to man alone deny,
shall take possession of the gild dome:
the shaggy satyr, that old forest haunt,
the ostrich and his mate, and dragon huge
shall sport, and revel in the dreary waste.
there the hoarse screech-owl, that in dead of night
upon the chimney top perch ominous,
while song obscene the silent hour disturb,
shall in loud shriek their sad presage tell,
shall unmolested solitude enjoy,
and desolation make more desolate.
raven, and praetor, scent from afar
the universal slaughter, shall come forth
from the high mountain, and the humble vale,
croak in hideous concert, as they fly,
darken the heaven with their ghastly train;
and glut their hungry jaw with human prey,
not one of these shall fail; none want her mate;
but shall for ever, such the lord decree,
in edom ruin wanton undisturbed.
this be the fate, ordain for zion foe.
