[nereid:] eclogue xii.

mur. 

see thou yond fleet, that slow move in state? 
the sea have scarce a depth to bear the press weight. 

gl.  

these every shore have see; all climates know,
 as far as land extend, or water flow. 
Lacon the chief, who guide the float host,
 as late i hear, when near the british coast,
 unseen i stand, while thus a fish Swain
 half-frozen say, and to his mate begin. 

1 fish. 

pity, you god, and thaw the rigid frost,
 my hand be stiff, and all my feel lose. 
the moon with sharpen horn look cold bright,
 and thus augment the chillness of the night. 
bright icy spangle gild the shine oar,
 and snowy flake have whiten all the shore. 
how curse the fate! how hard the fisher lot,
 to toil for ever thus, and toil for nought? 
midst all the gloom, and horror of the night,
 when ramble elf, and shriek ghost affright,
 on restless water we be labour tost,
 to catch the fall ice, and hoary frost;
 while the soft dame of the luxurious town
 on yield bed be lay, and every clown
 when night draw near, unyoke the will beast,
 then eat his fill; and thus by heaven bless,
 on smell heap of straw he take unenvied rest. 
or else deceive a while the winter night
 with please tale, and story feign of sprite. 
with wake care, when we at length have catch
 the mighty prize, we so impatient seek;
 the squeamish town reject it all with scorn,
 and empty we with fruitless pain return. 

o! may i live content a shepherd Swain,
 and sit on grassy vale, and view the circle plain:
 how bless be i, will i the god allow
 to goad the ox, and hold the bend blow,
 or on the rise ridge with equal hand
 to strow the scatter seed, and stock the furrow land. 

gl.  

thus he; but age sire, who hoary head
 have see more year, with calm experience say,

2 fish. 

all their fortune be of all the worst;
 each man (himself a judge) be true curse. 
through ignorance we commend a life unknown,
 and praise another state, and grieve our own,
 while he as much complain; be pine with care,
 and glad will exchange his envy share. 
the god on we a daily feast bestow,
 for which no price we pay, no thanks we owe. 
the Cod (delicious food!) mullet and sole,
 and shine mack'rell swim for we in shoal. 
such fare the wealthy citizen will prize,
 even when they stink, (long keep) and we despise. 
while on sour herb the shepherd poor feed,
 or sapless cheese, and crust of mouldy bread;
 or if it chance a straggle lamb be drown,
 with sigh he eat what he with sorrow find:
 he grieve his loss, and ever be in pain
 by snowy winter, or by summer rain. 
all do not love in clot field to sweat,
 where clayie Fallows clog the labour foot. 
but who be not please to walk on easy sand,
 while wave heap be by the zephyr fan,
 and wanton gale, that whistle in the weed,
 from flow grass disperse the riper seed. 
who will not gather the desert shell,
 or climb steep rock, and search the hollow cell
 for hide egg, while all the bird in vain
 fly sorrow round, and with loud threat complain? 
no earthy fume, or noisy insect here
 disturb, or taint the unmolested air. 
Venus protect the sea, from whence she come,
 and love in water can preserve his flame. 
the nymph to leavy wood, and shady groves
 the sea prefer; the sea the triton love;
 Lacon the sea prefer to flowery mead,
 and over unfathomed depth the navy lead. 
while he defend our isle from hostile fleet,
 the Fisher undisturbed at leisure sit;
 his net secure fear nought but wave and wind,
 or boisterous fish, who will not be confine. 
Lacon will not despise the fisher Cott,
 but please look, and often hail our boat. 
if ever he come again, he have from i
 the choice spoil of all the rifle sea,
 Buckhorn, and salt Cod, sprat smoke and dry,
 and oyster, that unshelled in pickle lie. 

gl.  

he say, and from he shake the fall ice,
 when to he thus enliven youth reply. 

1 fish. 

Lacon! — the name have thaw my stagnate blood:
 it spring through every vein; i feel the circle flood. 
no midnight chill can harm, nor fall sleet;
 joy fill the soul, and spread diffusive heat,
 though the bright moon, and every shine star
 encrease the cold, and whet the pierce air:
 who Lacon love, he may the nymph attend,
 and from the shelf, and rock unseen defend. 
who Lacon hate (if there be such) may they
 dash in rough storm sink down to fish a grateful prey. 
will he permit, i will leave my fish oar,
 and venture on the main to distant shore. 
i be no stranger to the sea, and know
 what it be to dance on wave, when wind too rude blow. 

2 fish. 

fond youth (return the sire) will thou compare
 these rot boat to mighty ship of war? 
who steady bulk can stem the ocean-flood,
 and with their mast over-lock the flit cloud;
 be it thou to climb that height, a strange surprise
 will loose thy hold, and turn thy swim eye. 
ambition suit not he, who birth be mean;
 the god despise the proud, and love the humble Swain. 

Glauc. 

he say, and end thus th'alternate song:
 i drive the fish, and the unthinking throng
 press to their boat, and fill the swell net;
 they joyous seize the prey, and all their pain forget. 
