[the task, a poem, in six book.]

book iii.

the garden.

as one who long in thicket and in brake
 entangle, wind now this way and now that
 his devious course uncertain, seek home;
 or have long in miry way be foil
 and sore discomfit, from slough to slough
 plunge, and half despair of escape,
 if chance at length he find a greenswerd smooth
 and faithful to the foot, his spirit rise,
 he chirrup brisk his ear-erecting steed,
 and wind his way with pleasure and with ease;
 so i, design other theme, and call
 the adorn the sofa with eulogium due,
 to tell its slumber and to paint its dream,
 have ramble wide. in country, city, seat
 of academic fame (however deserve)
 long hold, and scarce disengage at last. 
but now with pleasant pace, a cleanly road
 i mean to tread. i feel myself at large,
 courageous, and refresh for future toil,
 if toil await i, or if danger new. 

since pulpit fail, and sounding-board reflect
 most part a empty ineffectual sound,
 what chance that i, to fame so little know,
 nor conversant with man or manner much,
 shall speak to purpose, or with better hope
 crack the satyric thong? it be wise far
 for i enamour of sequester scene,
 and charm with rural beauty, to repose
 where chance may throw i, beneath elm or vine,
 my languid limb when summer fear the plain,
 or when rough winter rage, on the soft
 and shelter sofa, while the nitrous air
 feed a blue flame and make a cheerful hearth;
 there undisturbed by folly, and apprize
 how great the danger of disturb she,
 to muse in silence, or at least confine
 remark that gall so many, to the few
 my partner in retreat. disgust conceal
 be ofttimes proof of wisdom, when the fault
 be obstinate, and cure beyond our reach. 

domestic happiness, thou only bliss
 of paradise that have survive the fall! 
though few now taste thou unimpaired and pure,
 or taste, long enjoy thou, too infirm
 or too incautious to preserve thy sweet
 unmixed with drop of bitter, which neglect
 or temper shed into thy crystal cup. 
thou be the nurse of virtue. in thy arm
 she smile, appear, as in truth she be,
 heaven bear and destine to the sky again. 
thou be not know where pleasure be adore,
 that reel goddess with the zoneless waist
 and wander eye, still lean on the arm
 of novelty, her fickle frail support;
 for thou be meek and constant, hate change,
 and find in the calm of truth-tied love
 joy that her stormy rapture never yeild. 
forsake thou, what shipwreck have we make
 of honour, dignity, and fair renown,
 until prostitution elbow we aside
 in all our crowd street, and senate seem
 convene for purpose of empire less,
 than to release the adultress from her bond. 
the adultress! what a theme for angry verse,
 what provocation to the indignant heart
 that feel for injure love! but i disdain
 the nauseous task to paint she as she be,
 cruel, abandon, glory in her shame. 
no. let she pass, and chariot along
 in guilty splendour, shake the public way;
 the frequency of crime have wash they white. 
and verse of i shall never brand the wretch,
 who matron now of character unsmirch
 and chaste themselves, be not ashamed to own. 
virtue and vice have boundary in old time
 not to be pass. and she that have renounce
 her sex honour, be renounce herself
 by all that prize it; not for prud'ry sake,
 but dignity, resentful of the wrong. 
it be hard perhaps on here and there a waif
 desirous to return and not receive,
 but be a wholesome rigor in the main,
 and teach the unblemished to preserve with care
 that purity, who loss be loss of all. 
man too be nice in honour in those day,
 and judge offender well. and he that sharp,
 and pockete a prize by fraud obtain,
 be mark and shun as odious. he that sell
 his country, or be slack when she require
 his every nerve in action and at stretch,
 pay with the blood that he have base spare
 the price of his default. but now, yes, now,
 we be become so candid and so fair,
 so liberal in construction, and so rich
 in christian charity, a good-natured age! 
that they be safe, sinner of either sex,
 transgress what law they may. well dress, well breed,
 well equipaged, be ticket good enough
 to pass we ready through every door. 
hypocrisy, detest she as we may,
 (and no man hatred ever wrong she yet)
 may claim this merit still, that she admit
 the worth of what she mimic with such care,
 and thus give virtue indirect applause;
 but she have burn her mask not need here,
 where vice have such allowance, that her shift
 and specious semblance have lose their use. 

i be a strike deer that leave the herd
 long since; with many a arrow deep infix
 my pant side be charge when i withdraw
 to seek a tranquil death in distant shade. 
there be i find by one who have himself
 be hurt by the archer. in his side he bear
 and in his hand and foot the cruel scar. 
with gentle force solicit the dart
 he draw they forth, and heal and bid i live. 
since then, with few associate, in remote
 and silent wood i wander, far from those
 my former partner of the people scene,
 with few associate, and not wish more. 
here much i ruminate, as much i may,
 with other view of man and manner now
 than once, and other of a life to come. 
i see that all be wanderer, go astray
 each in his own delusion; they be lose
 in chace of fancy happiness, still woo
 and never win. dream after dream ensue,
 and still they dream that they shall still succeed,
 and still be disappoint; ring the world
 with the vain stir. i sum up half mankind,
 and add two-thirds of the remainder half,
 and find the total of their hope and fear
 dream, empty dream. the million slit as gay
 as if create only like the fly
 that spread his motley wing in the eye of noon
 to sport their season and be see no more. 
the rest be sober dreamer, grave and wise,
 and pregnant with discovery new and rare. 
some write a narrative of war and feat
 of hero little know, and call the rant
 a history. describe the man, of who
 his own cooeval take but little note,
 and paint his person, character and view,
 as they have know he from his mother womb. 
they disentangle from the puzzle skein
 in which obscurity have wrap they up,
 the thread of politic and shrewd design
 that run through all his purpose, and charge
 his mind with meaning that he never have,
 or have, keep conceal. some drill and bear
 the solid earth, and from the strata there
 extract a register, by which we learn
 that he who make it and reveal its date
 to Moses, be mistake in its age. 
some more acute and more industrious still
 contrive creation. Travel nature up
 to the sharp peak of her sublime height,
 and tell we whence the star. why some be fix,
 and planetary some. what give they first
 rotation, from what fountain flow their light. 
great contest follow, and much learned dust
 involve the combatant, each claim truth,
 and truth disclaim both. and thus they spend
 the little wick of life poor shallow lamp,
 in play trick with nature, give law
 to distant world and trifle in their own. 
be it not a pity now that tickle rheum
 shall ever teaze the lung and blear the sight
 of oracle like these? great pity too,
 that have wield the element, and build
 a thousand system, each in his own way,
 they shall go out in fume and be forget? 
ah! what be life thus spend? and what be they
 but frantic who thus spend it? all for smoke —
 eternity for bubble, prove at last
 a senseless bargain. when i see such game
 play by the creature of a power who swear
 that he will judge the earth, and call the fool
 to a sharp reckon that have live in vain,
 and when i weigh this seem wisdom well
 and prove it in the infallible result
 so hollow and so false — i feel my heart
 dissolve in pity, and account the learn,
 if this be learning, most of all deceive. 
great crime alarm the conscience, but she sleep
 while thoughtful man be plausible amuse. 
defend i therefore common sense, say i,
 from revery so airy, from the toil
 of drop bucket into empty well,
 and grow old in draw nothing up! 

it be well, say one sage erudite, profound,
 terrible arch and aquiline his nose,
 and overbuilt with most impend brow,
 it be well can you permit the world to live
 as the world please. what be the world to you? 
much. i be bear of woman, and draw milk
 as sweet as charity from human breast. 
i think, articulate, i laugh and weep
 and exercise all function of a man. 
how then shall i and any man that live
 be stranger to each other? pierce my vein,
 take of the crimson stream meander there
 and catechise it well. apply your glass,
 search it, and prove now if it be not blood
 congenial with thy own. and if it be,
 what edge of subtlety can thou suppose
 keen enough, wise and skilful as thou be,
 to cut the link of brotherhood, by which
 one common maker bind i to the kind. 
true; i be no proficient, i confess,
 in art like you. i can call the swift
 and perilous lightning from the angry cloud,
 and bid they hide themselves in the earth beneath,
 i can analyse the air, nor catch
 the parallax of yonder luminous point
 that seem half quench in the immense abyss;
 such power i boast not — neither can i rest
 a silent witness of the headlong rage
 or heedless folly by which thousand die,
 bone of my bone, and kindred soul to i. 

god never mean that man shall scale the heaven
 by stride of human wisdom. in his work
 though wondrous, he command we in his word
 to seek he rather, where his mercy shine. 
the mind indeed enlighten from above
 view he in all. ascribe to the grand cause
 the grand effect. acknowledge with joy
 his manner, and with rapture taste his stile. 
but never yet do philosophic tube
 that bring the planet home into the eye
 of observation, and discover, else
 not visible, his family of world,
 discover he that rule they; such a veil
 hang over mortal eye, blind from the birth
 and dark in thing divine. full often too
 our wayward intellect, the more we learn
 of nature, overlook her author more,
 from instrumental cause proud to draw
 conclusion retrograde and mad mistake. 
but if his word once teach we, shoot a ray
 through all the heart be dark chamber, and reveal
 truth undiscerned but by that holy light,
 then all be plain. philosophy baptize
 in the pure fountain of eternal love
 have eye indeed; and view all she see
 as mean to indicate a god to man,
 give he his praise, and forfeit not her own. 
learning have bear such fruit in other day
 on all her branch. piety have find
 friend in the friend of science, and true prayer
 have flow from lip wet with castalian dew. 
such be thy wisdom, Newton, childlike sage! 
sagacious reader of the work of god,
 and in his word sagacious. such too thy
 Milton, who genius have angelic wing,
 and feed on manna. and such thy in who
 our british Themis glory with just cause
 immortal Hale! for deep discernment praise
 and sound integrity not more, than fame
 for sanctity of manner undefiled. 

all flesh be grass, and all its glory fade
 like the fair flower dishevel in the wind;
 riches have wing, and grandeur be a dream;
 the man we celebrate must find a tomb,
 and we that worship he, ignoble grave. 
nothing be proof against the general curse
 of vanity, that seize all below. 
the only amaranthine flower on earth
 be virtue, the only last treasure, truth. 
but what be truth? it be pilate question put
 to truth itself, that deign he no reply. 
and wherefore? will not god impart his light
 to they that ask it? — free — it be his joy,
 his glory, and his nature to impart. 
but to the proud, uncandid, insincere
 or negligent enquirer, not a spark. 
what be that which bring contempt upon a book
 and he that write it, though the stile be neat,
 the method clear, and argument exact? 
that make a minister in holy thing
 the joy of many and the dread of more,
 his name a theme for praise and for reproach? —
 that while it give we worth in God account,
 depreciate and undo we in our own? 
what pearl be it that rich man can buy,
 that learning be too proud to gather up,
 but which the poor and the despise of all
 seek and obtain, and often find unsought? 
tell i, and i will tell thou, what be truth. 

oh friendly to the best pursuit of man,
 friendly to thought, to virtue, and to peace,
 domestic life in rural leisure pass! 
few know thy value, and few taste thy sweet,
 though many boast thy favour, and affect
 to understand and choose thou for their own. 
but foolish man forego his proper bliss
 even as his first progenitor, and quit,
 though place in paradise (for earth have still
 some trace of her youthful beauty leave)
 substantial happiness for transient joy. 
scene form for contemplation, and to nurse
 the grow seed of wisdom; that suggest
 by every please image they present
 reflection such as meliorate the heart,
 compose the passion, and exalt the mind,
 scene such as these, it be his supreme delight
 to fill with riot and defile with blood. 
shall some contagion kind to the poor brute
 we persecute, annihilate the tribe
 that draw the sportsman over hill and dale
 fearless, and rapt away from all his care;
 shall never game-fowl hatch her egg again,
 nor bait hook deceive the fish eye;
 can pageantry and dance and feast and song
 be quell in all our summer-month retreat;
 how many self-deluded nymph and swain
 who dream they have a taste for field and grove,
 will find they hideous nursery of the spleen,
 and crowd the road, impatient for the town! 
they love the country, and none else, who seek
 for their own sake its silence and its shade. 
delight which who will leave, that have a heart
 susceptible of pity, or a mind
 culture and capable of sober thought,
 for all the savage din of the swift pack
 and clamour of the field? detest sport,
 that owe its pleasure to another pain,
 that feed upon the sob and die shriek
 of harmless nature, dumb, but yet endue
 with eloquence that agony inspire
 of silent tear and heart-distending sigh! 
vain tear alas! and sigh that never find
 a correspond tone in jovial soul. 
well — one at least be safe. one shelter hare
 have never hear the sanguinary yell
 of cruel man, exult in her woe. 
innocent partner of my peaceful home,
 who ten long year experience of my care
 have make at last familiar, she have lose
 much of her vigilant instinctive dread,
 not needful here, beneath a roof like i. 
yes — thou may eat thy bread, and lick the hand
 that feed thou; thou may frolic on the floor
 at evening, and at night retire secure
 to thy straw-couch, and slumber unalarmed. 
for i have gain thy confidence, have pledge
 all that be human in i, to protect
 thy unsuspecting gratitude and love. 
if i survive thou i will dig thy grave,
 and when i place thou in it, sigh say,
 i know at least one hare that have a friend. 

how various his employment, who the world
 call idle, and who just in return
 esteem that busy world a idler too! 
friend, book, a garden, and perhaps his pen,
 delightful industry enjoy at home,
 and nature in her cultivate trim
 dress to his taste, invite he abroad —
 can he want occupation who have these? 
will he be idle who have much to enjoy? 
i therefore, studious of laborious ease,
 not slothful; happy to deceive the time
 not waste it; and aware that human life
 be but a loan to be repay with use,
 when he shall call his debtor to account,
 from who be all our blessing, business find
 even here. while sedulous i seek to improve,
 at least neglect not, or leave unemployed
 the mind he give i; drive it, though slack
 too oft, and much impede in its work
 by cause not to be divulge in vain,
 to its just point the service of mankind. 
he that attend to his interior self,
 that have a heart and keep it; have a mind
 that hunger and supply it; and who seek
 a social, not a dissipate life,
 have business. feel himself engage to achieve
 no unimportant, though a silent task. 
a life all turbulence and noise, may seem
 to he that lead it, wise and to be praise;
 but wisdom be a pearl with most success
 seek in still water, and beneath clear sky. 
he that be ever occupy in storm,
 or dive not for it, or bring up instead,
 vain industrious, a disgraceful prize. 

the morning find the self-sequestered man
 fresh for his task, intend what task he may. 
whether inclement season recommend
 his warm but simple home, where he enjoy
 with she who share his pleasure and his heart,
 sweet converse, sip calm the fragrant lymph
 which neat she prepare; then to his book
 well choose, and not sullen peruse
 in selfish silence, but impart oft
 as aught occur that she may smile to hear,
 or turn to nourishment digest well. 
or if the garden with its many care,
 all well repay, demand he, he attend
 the welcome call, conscious how much the hand
 of lubbard labour need his watchful eye,
 oft loiter lazy if not o'erseen,
 or misapply his unskilful strength. 
nor do he govern only or direct,
 but much perform himself. no work indeed
 that ask robust tough sinew breed to toil,
 servile employ — but such as may amuse,
 not tire, demand rather skill than force. 
proud of his well spread wall, he view his tree
 that meet (no barren interval between)
 with pleasure more than even their fruit afford,
 which, save himself who train they, none can feel. 
these therefore be his own peculiar charge,
 no mean hand may discipline the shoot,
 none but his steel approach they. what be weak,
 distemper, or have lose prolific power
 impair by age, his unrelenting hand
 doom to the knife. nor do he spare the soft
 and succulent that feed its giant growth
 but barren, at the expense of neighbour twig
 less ostentatious, and yet stud thick
 with hopeful gem. the rest, no portion leave
 that may disgrace his art, or disappoint
 large expectation, he disposés neat
 at measure distance, that air and sun
 admit free may afford their aid,
 and ventilate and warm the swell bud. 
hence summer have her riches, autumn hence,
 and hence even winter fill his wither hand
 with blush fruit, and plenty not his own. 
fair recompense of labour well bestow
 and wise precaution, which a clime so rude
 make needful still, who spring be but the child
 of churlish winter, in her froward mood
 discover much the temper of her sire. 
for oft, as if in she the stteam of mild
 maternal nature have reverse its course,
 she bring her infant forth with many smile,
 but once deliver, kill they with a frown. 
he therefore, timely warn, himself supply
 her want of care, screen and keep warm
 the plenteous bloom, that no rough blast may sweep
 his garland from the bough. again, as oft
 as the sun peep and vernal air breathe mild,
 the fence withdraw, he give they every beam,
 and spread his hope before the blaze of day. 

to raise the prickly and green-coated gourd
 so grateful to the palate, and when rare
 so covete, else base and disesteem —
 food for the vulgar mere — be a art
 that toil age have but just mature,
 and at this moment unassayed in song. 
yet gnat have have, and frog and mouse long since
 their eulogy; those sing the mantuan bard,
 and these the grecian in ennoble strain,
 and in thy number, Phillips, shine for ay
 the solitary shilling. pardon then
 you sage dispenser of poetic fame! 
the ambition of one mean far, who power
 presume a attempt not less sublime,
 pant for the praise of dress to the taste
 of critic appetite, no sordid fare,
 a cucumber, while costly yet and scarce. 

the stable yield a stercorarious heap
 impregnate with quick ferment salt,
 and potent to resist the freeze blast. 
for here the beech and elm have cast their leaf
 decidu'ous, and when now November dark
 check vegetation in the torpid plant
 expose to his cold breath, the task begin. 
wary therefore, and with prudent heed
 he seek a favour spot. that where he build
 the agglomerate pile, his frame may front
 the sun meridian disk, and at the back
 enjoy close shelter, wall, or reed, or hedge
 impervious to the wind. first he bid spread
 dry fern or litter hay, that may imbibe
 the ascend damp; then leisurely impose
 and light, shake it with agile hand
 from the full fork, the saturate straw. 
what long bind the close, form secure
 the shapely side, that as it rise take
 by just degree a overhang breadth,
 shelter the base with its project eave. 
the uplift frame compact at every joint,
 and overlay with clear translucent glass
 he settle next upon the slope mount,
 who sharp declivity shoot off secure
 from the dash pane the deluge as it fall. 
he shut it close, and the first labour end. 
thrice must the voluble and restless earth
 spin round upon her axle, here the warmth
 slow gather in the midst, through the square mass
 diffuse, attain the surface. when behold! 
a pestilent and most corrosive steam,
 like a gross fog boeotian, rise fast,
 and fast condense upon the dewy sash,
 ask egress; which obtain, the overcharge
 and drench conservatory breathe abroad
 in volume wheel slow, the vapor dank,
 and purify, rejoice to have lose
 its foul inhabitant. but to assuage
 the impatient fervor which it first conceive
 within its reek bosom, threaten death
 to his young hope, require discreet delay. 
experience, slow preceptress, teach oft
 the way to glory by miscarriage foul,
 must prompt he, and admonish how to catch
 the auspicious moment, when the tempere heat
 friendly to vital motion, may afford
 soft fomentation, and invite the seed. 
the seed select wise, plump and smooth
 and glossy, he commit to pot of size
 diminutive, well fill with well prepare
 and fruitful soil, that have be treasure long,
 and drink no moisture from the drip cloud. 
these on the warm and genial earth that hide
 the smoke manure and overspread it all,
 he place light, and as time subdue
 the rage of fermentation, plunge deep
 in the soft medium, until they stand immerse. 
then rise the tender germ upstart quick
 and spread wide their spongy lobe, at first
 pale, wan, and livid, but assume soon,
 if fan by balmy and nutritious air
 strain through the friendly mat, a vivid green. 
two leaf produce, two rough indent leaf,
 cautious, he pinch from the second stalk
 a pimple, that portend a future sprout,
 and interdict its growth. thence straight succeed
 the branch, sturdy to his utmost wish,
 prolific all, and harbinger of more. 
the crowd root demand enlargement now
 and transplantation in a ampler space. 
indulge in what they wish, they soon supply
 large foliage, overshadow golden flower,
 blow on the summit of the apparent fruit. 
these have their sex, and when summer shine
 the bee transport the fertilise meal
 from flower to flower, and even the breathe air
 waft the rich prize to its appoint use. 
not so when winter scowl. assistant be
 then act in nature office, bring to pass
 the glad espousal and insure the crop. 

grudge not you rich (since luxury must have
 his dainty, and the world be more numerous half
 live by contrive delicate for you)
 grudge not the cost. you little know the care,
 the vigilance, the labour and the skill
 that day and night be exercise, and hang
 upon the ticklish balance of suspense,
 that you may garnish your profuse regales
 with summer fruit bring forth by wintery sun. 
ten thousand danger lie in wait to thwart
 the process. heat and cold, and wind and steam,
 moisture and drought, mouse, worm, and swarm fly
 minute as dust and numberless, oft work
 dire disappointment that admit no cure,
 and which not care can obviate. it be long,
 too long to tell the expedient and the shift
 which he that fight a season so severe
 devise, while he guard his tender trust,
 and oft, at last, in vain. the learn and wise
 sarcastic will exclaim, and judge the song
 cold as its theme, and like its theme, the fruit
 of too much labour, worthless when produce. 

who love a garden, love a green-house too. 
unconscious of a less propitious clime
 there bloom exotic beauty, warm and snug,
 while the wind whistle and the snow descend. 
the spiry myrtle with unwithering leaf
 shine there and flourish. the golden boast
 of Portugal and western India there,
 the ruddy orange and the pale lime
 peep through their polish foliage at the storm,
 and seem to smile at what they need not sear. 
the amomum there with intermingle flower
 and cherry hang her twig. geranium boast
 her crimson honour, and the spangle beau
 ficoides, glitter bright the winter long. 
all plant of every leaf that can endure
 the winter frown if screen from his shrewd bite,
 live there and prosper. those Ausonia claim,
 Levantine region these; the azores send
 their jessamine, her jessamine remote
 caffraia; foreigner from many land
 they form one social shade, as if convene
 by magic summons of the orphean lyre. 
yet just arrangement, rare bring to pass
 but by a master hand, dispose well
 the gay diversity of leaf and flower,
 must lend its aid to illustrate all their charm,
 and dress the regular yet various scene. 
plant behind plant aspire, in the van
 the dwarfish, in the rear retire, but still
 sublime above the rest, the stately stand. 
so once be range the son of ancient Rome,
 a noble show! while Roscius tread the stage;
 and so, while Garrick as renowned as he,
 the son of Albion; fear each to lose
 some note of nature music from his lip,
 and covetous of shakespeare beauty see
 in every flash of his far-beaming eye. 
nor taste alone and well contrive display
 suffice to give the marshale rank the grace
 of their complete effect. much yet remain
 unsung, and many care be yet behind
 and more laborious. Cares on which depend
 their vigor, injure soon, not soon restore. 
the soil must be renew, which often wash
 lose its treasure of salubrious salt,
 and disappoint the root; the slender root
 close interweave where they meet the vase
 must smooth be shear away; the sapless branch
 must fly before the knife; the wither leaf
 must be detach, and where it strew the floor
 sweep with a woman neatness, breed else
 contagion, and disseminate death. 
discharge but these kind office, (and who
 will spare, that love they, office like these?) 
well they reward the toil. the sight be please,
 the scent regale, each odoriferous leaf,
 each open blossom free breathe abroad
 its gratitude, and thank he with its sweet. 

so manifold, all please in their kind,
 all healthful, be the employ of rural life,
 reiterate as the wheel of time
 run round, still end, and begin still. 
nor be these all. to deck the shapely knoll
 that soft swell and gay dress, appear
 a flowery island from the dark green lawn
 emerge, must be deem a labour due
 to no mean hand, and ask the touch of taste. 
here also grateful mixture of well match
 and sort hue, (each give each relief,
 and by contrast beauty shine more)
 be needful. strength may wield the ponderous spade,
 may turn the clod, and wheel the compost home,
 but elegance, chief grace the garden show
 and most attractive, be the fair result
 of thought, the creature of a polish mind. 
without it, all be gothic as the scene
 to which the insipid citizen resort
 near yonder heath; where industry mispend,
 but proud of his uncouth ill-chosen task,
 have make a heaven on earth. with sun and moon
 of close-rammed stone have charge the encumber soil,
 and fair lay the zodiac in the dust. 
he therefore who will see his flower dispose
 sightly and in just order, here he give
 the bed the trust treasure of their seed
 forecast the future whole. that when the scene
 shall break into its preconceive display,
 each for itself, and all as with one voice
 conspire, may attest his bright design. 
nor even then, dismiss as perform
 his pleasant work, may he suppose it do. 
few self-supported flower endure the wind
 uninjured, but expect the uphold aid
 of the smooth-shaven prop, and neat tie
 be wed thus like beauty to old age,
 for interest sake, the live to the dead. 
some cloth the soil that feed they, far diffuse
 and lowly creep, modest and yet fair,
 like virtue, thrive most where little see. 
some more aspire catch the neighbour shrub
 with clasp tendril, and invest his branch
 else unadorned, with many a gay festoon
 and fragrant chaplet, recompense well
 the strength they borrow with the grace they lend. 
all hate the rank society of weed
 noisome, and ever greedy to exhaust
 the improv'rish earth; a overbear race,
 that like the multitude make faction-mad
 disturb good order, and degrade true worth. 

oh bless seclusion from a jar world
 which he thus occupy, enjoy! retreat
 can indeed to guilty man restore
 lose innocence, or cancel folly past,
 but it have peace, and much secure the mind
 from all assault of evil, prove still
 a faithful barrier, not overleap with ease
 by vicious custom, rage uncontrolled
 abroad, and desolate public life. 
when fierce temptation second within
 by traitor appetite, and arm with dart
 tempere in hell, invade the throb breast,
 to combat may be glorious, and success
 perhaps may crown we, but to fly be safe. 
have i the choice of sublunary good,
 what can i wish, that i possess not here? 
health, leisure, mean to improve it, friendship, peace,
 no loose or wanton, though a wander muse,
 and constant occupation without care. 
thus bless, i draw a picture of that bliss;
 hopeless indeed that dissipate mind,
 and profligate abuser of a world
 create fair so much in vain for they,
 shall seek the guiltless joy that i describe
 allure by my report. but sure no less
 that self-condemned they must neglect the prize,
 and what they will not taste, must yet approve. 
what we admire we praise. and when we praise
 advance it into notice, that its worth
 acknowledge, other may admire it too. 
i therefore recommend, though at the risk
 of popular disgust, yet bold still,
 the cause of piety and sacred truth
 and virtue, and those scene which god ordain
 shall best secure they and promote they most;
 scene that i love, and with regret perceive
 forsake, or through folly not enjoy. 
pure be the nymph, though liberal of her smile,
 and chaste, though unconfined, who i extol. 
not as the prince in sushan, when he call
 vainglorious of her charm his Vashti forth
 to grace the full pavilion. hi design
 be but to boast his own peculiar good,
 which all may view with envy, none partake. 
my charmer be not my alone; my sweet
 and she that sweetens all my bitter too,
 nature, enchant nature, in who form
 and lineament divine i trace a hand
 that err not, and find rapture still renew,
 be free to all man, universal prize. 
strange that so fair a creature shall yet want
 admirer, and be destine to divide
 with mean object, even the few she find. 
strip of her ornament, her leaf and flower,
 she lose all her influence. city then
 attract we, and neglect nature pine
 abandon, as unworthy of our love. 
but be not wholesome air, though unperfumed
 by rose, and clear sun though scarce feel,
 and grove if unharmonious, yet secure
 from clamour, and who very silence charm,
 to be prefer to smoke, to the eclipse
 that metropolitan volcano make,
 who Stygian throat breathe darkness all day long,
 and to the stir of commerce, drive slow,
 and thunder loud, with his ten thousand wheel? 
they will be, be not madness in the head
 and folly in the heart; be England now
 what England be, plain, hospitable, kind,
 and undebauched. but we have bid farewell
 to all the virtue of those better day,
 and all their honest pleasure. mansion once
 know their own master, and laborious hind
 that have survive the father, serve the son. 
now the legitimate and rightful lord
 be but a transient guest, new arrive
 and soon to be supplant. he that see
 his patrimonial timber cast its leaf,
 sell the last scantling, and transfer the price
 to some shrewd sharp, here it bud again. 
estate be landscape, gaze upon awhile,
 then advertise, and auctioneer away. 
the country starve, and they that feed the overcharge
 and surfeit lewd town with her fair due,
 by a just judgement strip and starve themselves. 
the wing that waft our riches out of sight
 grow on the gamester elbow, and the alert
 and nimble motion of those restless joint
 that never tire, soon fan they all away. 
improvement too, the idol of the age,
 be feed with many a victim. lo! he come —
 the omnipotent magician, brown appear. 
down fall the venerable pile, the abode
 of our forefather, a grave whisker race,
 but tasteless. Springs a palace in its stead,
 but in a distant spot; where more expose
 it may enjoy the advantage of the north
 and agueish east, till time shall have transform
 those naked acre to a shelter grove. 
he speak. the lake in front become a lawn,
 wood vanish, hill subside, and valley rise,
 and stream as if create for his use,
 pursue the track of his direct wand
 sinuous or strait, now rapid and now slow,
 now murmur soft, now roar in cascade,
 even as he bid. the enrapture owner smile. 
it be finish. and yet finish as it seem,
 still want a grace, the lovely it can show,
 a mine to satisfy the enormous cost. 
drain to the last poor item of his wealth
 he sigh, depart, and leave the accomplish plan
 that he have touch, retouch, many a long day
 labour, and many a night pursue in dream,
 just when it meet his hope, and prove the heaven
 he want, for a wealthy to enjoy. 
and now perhaps the glorious hour be come,
 when have no stake leave, no pledge to endear
 her interest, or that give her sacred cause
 a moment operation on his love,
 he burn with most intense and flagrant zeal
 to serve his country. ministerial grace
 deal he out money from the public chest,
 or if that mine be shut, some private purse
 supply his need with a usurious loan
 to be refund due, when his vote
 well-managed, shall have earn its worthy price. 
oh innocent compare with art like these,
 crape and cock pistol and the whistle ball
 send through the traveller temple! he that find
 one drop of heaven sweet mercy in his cup,
 can dig, beg, rot, and perish well-content,
 so he may wrap himself in honest rag
 at his last gasp; but can not for a world
 fish up his dirty and dependent bread
 from pool and ditch of the commonwealth,
 sordid and sicken at his own success. 

ambition, avarice, penury incur
 by endless riot; vanity, the lust
 of pleasure and variety, dispatch
 as due as the swallow disappear,
 the world of wander knight and squire to town. 
London ingulf they all. the shark be there
 and the shark prey. the spendthrift and the leech
 that suck he. there the sycophant and he
 that with bareheaded and obsequious bow
 beg a warm office, doom to a cold jail
 and groat per diem if his patron frown. 
the levee swarm, as if in golden pomp
 be character on every statesman door,
 "batter and bankrupt for tune mend here"
 these be the charm that sully and eclipse
 the charm of nature. it be the cruel gripe
 that lean hard-handed poverty inflict,
 the hope of better thing, the chance to win,
 the wish to shine, the thirst to be amuse,
 that at the sound of winter hoary wing,
 unpeople all our county, of such herd
 of flutter, loiter, cringe, beg, loose
 and wanton vagrant, as make London, vast
 and boundless as it be, a crowd coop. 

oh thou resort and mart of all the earth,
 chequer with all complexion of mankind,
 and spot with all crime; in who i see
 much that i love, and more that i admire,
 and all that i abhor; thou freckle fair
 that please and yet shock i, i can laugh
 and i can weep, can hope, and can despond,
 feel wrath and pity when i think on thou! 
ten righteous will have save a city once,
 and thou have many righteous. — well for thou —
 that salt preserve thou; more corrupt else,
 and therefore more obnoxious at this hour,
 than Sodom in her day have power to be,
 for who god hear his abr'am plead in vain. 
