Lothario. 

join now Apollo the harmonious strain,
 o muse, grace, all you gentle train;
 once more conspire to aid my humble lay,
 and wake my harp to fame lothario praise. 
a comedy youth, young Cupid favourite care,
 handsome in shape, and graceful in his air:
 in all respect he be form the fair to please,
 can sigh, and talk, and laugh, and love with ease. 
but o what word, what number can express,
 what muse can paint lothario late distress? 
this i will essay, although the task' severe,
 while Delia drop a sympathetic tear. 

and thus it happen, on a fatal morn,
 rouse with the sound of hound and echo horn,
 this charm youth, on rural sport intent,
 with some companion to the field he go:
 each hound he summons, they attend he there,
 with eager step pursue the timid hare. 
please with their toil, over various height they go,
 nor do the craggy cliff their speed prevent. 
too soon Lothario gain the wish for prize,
 while horn and hound re-echo to the sky. 

the chase now past, their late inspire toil,
 our jovial sportsman lead to rest a while. 
to the next inn with hasty step they pass,
 and quaff with social heart the cheerful glass. 
in foam goblet please draught go round;
 in sparkle liquour every care be drown. 
but ah! the fume affect lothario brain;
 once more he try for pleasure on the plain. 
the scene be change, his pleasure now be go,
 lose and forlorn he wander all alone. 
with weary step, over barren heath he pass,
 and in bane moss, alas! he land at last. 
his tremble hand, which hold the lifeless hare,
 now cast it from he as not worth his care. 
three time he drop, three time he lift his plaid,
 hope and despair by turn his breast invade:
 he look for help, alas! no help be nigh,
 and in the dreary moss he be force to lie. 
 "be i to death become a easy prey,"
 with quiver lip methinks he thus do say,
 "now farewell hope, my much love friend, adieu;
"my dear companion, charm Delia too,
 "o be thou near to heave a tender sigh,
"upon thy breast i will content die:
 "with ravish eye i will view thy charm no more;
"my race be run, life fleet vision over. " 

thus do the sad Lothario vent his grief,
 till balmy sleep bestow a short relief. 
on mossy pillow rest his droop head,
 while azure curtain hang around his bed,
 all night extend on the turf he lie,
 nor open his eye till dawn of the day:
 the chill frost his tender form have seize,
 but phoebus beam the captive swain release,
 abash, confound, be thus confine,
 to free himself part of his coat resign;
 with tardy pace the plain he wander over,
 some cot or village wish to see once more. 
kind fortune now do her assistance lend,
 and lead he safe to a generous friend. 

Lothario view the mansion with delight,
 and at the door he knock with all his might. 
impatience, by repeat stroke, confess,
 till they with joy receive the welcome guest,
 who seem as one from mortal long estrange,
 his lose address and comely visage change:
 he clothes by nauseous mud bespatter over;
 his hair dishevel, and his ruffle tear. 
strike with amaze, they view his dismal case,
 nor be they slow in render he solace,
 unto the parlour fire he first be lead,
 from thence into matilda downy bed;
 then with assiduous care they kind soothe
 and cheer the lonely, wander, helpless youth. 
each friendly aid conspire to ease his pain,
 and bring Lothario to himself again. 

you lovely nymph, now sing in soft strain
 lothario praise, the pride of scotia plain;
 you charm youth, bless with his company,
 pray that bane moss he never more may see. 
