a poem, on the supposition of the book have be publish and read. 

the dinner be over, the table-cloth go,
 the bottle of wine and the glass bring on,
 the gentleman fill up the sparkle glass,
 to drink to their king, to their country and lass;
 the lady a glass or two only require,
 to the drawing-room then in due order retire;
 the gentleman likewise that choose to drink tea;
 and, after discuss the news of the day,
 what wife be suspect, what daughter elope,
 what thief be detect, that it be to be hope,
 the rascal will all be convict, and rope;
 what chambermaid kiss when her lady be out;
 who win, and who lose, the last night at the rout;
 what lord go to France, and what tradesman unpaid,
 and who and who dance at the last masquerade;
 what banker stop payment with evil intention,
 and twenty more thing much too tedious to mention. 
miss Rhymer say, mrs. Routella, madam, pray
 have you see the new book (that we talk of that day,
 at your house you remember) of poem, it be say
 produce by the pen of a poor servant maid? 
the company silent, the answer expect;
 say mrs. Routella, when she will recollect;
 why, madam, i have buy it for Charlotte; the child
 be so fond of a book, i be afraid it be spoil:
 i think to have read it myself, but forget it;
 in short, i have never have time to look at it. 
perhaps i may look it over some other day;
 be there any thing in it worth read, i pray? 
for your nice attention, there be nothing can 'scape. 
she answer, — there be one piece, who subject a rape. 
a rape! interrupt the captain bonair,
 a delicate theme for a female i swear;
 then smerk at the lady, they simper all round,
 touch their lip with their fan, — mrs. consequence frown. 
the simper subside, for she with her nod,
 awe these low assembly, as Jove awe the god. 
she smile on miss Rhymer, and bid she proceed —
 say she, there be various subject indeed:
 with some little pleasure i read all the rest,
 but the murder of amnon the long and best. 
of amnon, of amnon, miss Rhymer, who be he? 
his name, say miss gaiety quite new to i: —
 it be a scripture tale, madam, — he be the son of king David,
 say a reverend old rector: quoth madam, i have it;
 a scripture tale? — ay — i remember it — true;
 pray be it in the old testament or the new? 
if i think i can ready find it, i will borrow
 my house-keeper bible, and read it tomorrow. 
it be in SAMUEL, madam, say the rector: — miss gaiety
 bow, and the reverend blush for the laity. 
you have read it, i find, say miss Harriot Anderson;
 pray, sir, be it any thing like sir Charles Grandison? 
how you talk, say miss Belle, how shall such a girl write
 a novel, or any thing else that be polite? 
you will know better in time, miss: — she be but fifteen:
 her mamma be confuse — with a little chagrin,
 say, — where be your attention, child? do not you hear
 miss Rhymer say, that it be poem, my dear? 
say sir Timothy turtle, my daughter never look
 in any thing else but a cookery book:
 the proper study for woman design;
 say mrs. domestic, i be quite of your mind. 
your haricoe, madam, be the best i ever eat,
 say the knight, may i venture to beg a receipt. 
it be much at your service, say madam, and bow,
 then flutter her fan, of the compliment proud. 
say lady Jane rational, the bill of fare
 be the utmost extent of my cookery care:
 most servant can cook for the palate i find,
 but very few of they can cook for the mind. 
who, say lady pedigree, can this girl be;
 perhaps she be descend of some family; —
 of family, doubtless, say captain bonair,
 she be descend from Adam, i will venture to swear. 
her ladyship draw herself up in her chair,
 and twitch her fan-stick, affect a sneer. 
i know something of she, say mrs. devoir,
 she live with my friend, Jacky saddle, esq.  
it be sometime ago though; her mistress say then,
 the girl be excessive fond of a pen;
 i see she, but never converse with she — though
 one can make acquaintance with servant, you know. 
it be pity the girl be not breed in high life,
 say mr. Fribbello: — yes, — then, say his wife,
 she doubtless may have write something worth notice:
 it be pity, say one, — say another, and so 'it be. 
o law! say young seagram, i have see the book, now
 i remember, there be something about a mad cow. 
a mad cow! — ha, ha, ha, ha, return half the room;
 what can you expect better, say madam du bloom? 
they look at each other, — a general pause —
 and miss Coquettella adjust her gauze. 
the rector recline himself back in his chair,
 and open his snuff-box with indolent air;
 this book, say he, (snift, snift) have in the beginning,
 (the lady give audience to hear his opinion)
 some piece, i think, that be pretty correct;
 a stile elevate you can expect:
 to some of her equal they may be a treasure,
 and country lass may read they with pleasure. 
that amnon, you can call it poetry neither,
 there be no flight of fancy, or imagery either;
 you may stile it prosaic, blank-verse at the best;
 some point reflection, indeed, be express;
 the narrative line be exceed poor:
 her Jonadab be a — the drawing-room door
 be open, the gentleman come from below,
 and give the discourse a definitive blow. 
