on the birth of GEORGE prince of Wales.

write after a installation at Windsor, mdcclxii.

by the same.

imperial dome of Edward wise and brave! 
where warlike honour bright banner wave;
 at who proud tilt, unmatched for hardy deed,
 heroic king have frown on barb steed:
 though now no more thy crest chief advance
 in arm array, nor grasp the glitter lance;
 though knighthood boast the martial pomp no more,
 that grace its gorgeous festival of yore;
 say, stately dome, if ever thy marshale knight
 so noble deck their old majestic rite,
 as when, high-throned amid thy trophy shrine,
 George shine the leader of the garter line? 

yet future triumph, Windsor, still remain;
 still may thy bower receive as brave a train:
 for lo! to Britain and her favour pair,
 heaven high command have send a sacred heir! 
he, the bold pattern of his patriot sire,
 shall fill with early fame immortal fire:
 in life fresh spring, ever bud the promise prime
 his thought shall mount to virtue meed sublime:
 the patriot sire shall catch with sure presage
 each liberal omen of his open age;
 then to thy court shall lead, with conscious joy,
 in stripling beauty bloom the princely boy;
 there firm wreath the braid of heavenly die,
 true valour badge around his tender thigh. 
meantime, thy royal pile that rise elate
 with many a antique tower, in massy state,
 in the young champion muse mind shall raise
 vast image of albion elder day. 
while, as around his eager glance explore
 thy chamber rough with war construct store,
 rude helm, and bruise shield, barbaric spoil
 of ancient chivalry undaunted toil;
 amid the dusky trappings hang on high,
 young Edward sable mail shall strike his eye:
 shall fire the youth, to crown his riper year
 with rival cressys, and a new Poictiers;
 on the same wall, the same triumphal base,
 his own victorious monument to place. 

nor can a fair kindred title move
 his emulative age to glory love,
 than Edward, laureate prince. in letter truth,
 Oxford, sage mother, school this studious youth:
 her simple institute, and rigid lore,
 the royal nursling unreluctant bear;
 nor shun, at pensive eve, with lonesome pace
 the moonlight cloister chequer floor to trace;
 nor scorn to mark the sun, at matin due,
 stream through the story window holy hue. 
and o, young prince, be thy his moral praise;
 nor seek in field of blood his warrior bay. 
war have its charm terrific. far and wide
 when stand the embattle host in banner pride;
 over the vex plain when the shrill clangour run,
 and the long phalanx flash in the sun;
 when now no danger of the deathful day
 mar the bright scene, nor break the firm array:
 full oft, too rash glow with fond delight
 the youthful breast, and ask the future fight;
 nor know that horror form, a spectre wan,
 stalk yet unseen along the gleamy van. 
may no such rage be thy: no dazzle ray
 of specious fame thy steadfast foot betray. 
be thy domestic glory radiant calm,
 be thy the sceptre wreathe with many a palm,
 be thy the throne with peaceful emblem hang,
 the silver lyre to mild conquest string! 
instead of glorious feat achieve in arm,
 bid rise art display their mimic charm:
 just to thy country fame, in tranquil day,
 record the past, and rouse to future praise:
 before the public eye, in breathe brass,
 bid thy fame father mighty triumph pass:
 swell the broad arch with haughty cuba fall,
 and cloth with minden plain the historic hall. 

then mourn not, Edward dome, thy ancient boast,
 they tournament, and list combat lose! 
from Arthur board, no more, proud castle, mourn
 adventurous valour gothic trophy tear! 
those elfin charm, that hold in magic night
 its elder fame, and dim its genuine light,
 at length dissolve in truth be meridian ray,
 and the bright order burst to pure day:
 the mystic round, begird with bold peer,
 on virtue base its rescue glory rear;
 see civil prowess mighty act achieve,
 see meek humanity distress relieve;
 adopt the worth that bid the conflict cease,
 and claim its honour from the chief of peace,
