the fable of Jotham:

to the borough-hunter.

by RICHARD Owen Cambridge, ESQ

judge, chap. ix. ver. 8. 

old plumb, who though bless in his kentish retreat,
still thrive by his oilshop in Leadenhall-street,
with a Portugal merchant, a knight by creation,
from a borough in Cornwall receive invitation.
well-assured of each vote, well equip from the alley,
in quest of election-adventure they sally.
though much they discourse, the long way to beguile,
of the earthquake, the Jew, and the change of the stile,
of the irish, the stock, and the lottery committee,
they come silent and tire into Exeter city.

"some book, prithee landlord, to pass a dull hour;
"no nonsense of parson, or methodist sour,
"no poetical stuff — a damn jingle of rhime,
"but some pamphlet that be new, and a touch on the time. "

"o lord! say my host, you may hunt the town round,
"i question if any such thing can be find:
"i never be ask for a book by a guest;
"and i be sure i have all the great folk in the west. 
"none of these to my knowledge ever call for a book;
"but see, sir, the woman with fish, and the cook;
"here be the fat of carp, shall we dress you a brace?
"will you have any foal, or a mullet, or plaice? "

"a place, quoth the knight, we must have to be sure,
"but first let we see that our borough secure,
"we will talk of the place when we have settle the poll:
"they may dress we for supper the mullet and foal.
"but do you, my good landlord, look over your shelf,
"for a book we must have, we be so tire of ourselves. "

"in troth, sir, i never have a book in my life,
"but the prayer book and bible i buy for my wife. "
"well! the bible must do; but who do you take in
"some monthly collection? the new magazine?"

the bible be bring and lay out on the table,
and open at jotham most apposite fable.
sir Freeport begin with this verse, though no rhime —
"the tree of the forest go forth on a time,
(to what purpose our candidate scarce can expect,
for it be not, they find, to transplant — but elect)
"to the olive and figtree their deputy come,
"but by both be refuse, and their answer the same:
"quoth the olive, shall i leave my fatness and oil
"for a unthankful office, a dignify toil?
"shall i leave, quoth the figtree, my sweetness and fruit,
"to be envy, or slave in so vain a pursuit?
"thus rebuff and surprise they apply to the vine,
"he answer: shall i leave my grape and my wine,
"(wine the sovereign cordial of god and of man)
"to be make or the tool or the head of a clan?
"at last, as it always fall out in a scramble,
"the mob give the cry for a bramble! a bramble!
"a bramble for ever! o! chance unexpected!
"but bramble prevail and be due elect."

"o! ho! quoth the knight with a look most profound,
"now i see there be some good in good book to be find.
"i wish i have read this same bible before:
"of long mile at the least it will have save we fourscore.
"you, plumb, with your olive and oil may have stay,
"and myself may have tarry my wine to unlade.
"what have merchant to do from their business to ramble!
"your electioneer-errant shall still be a bramble. "
thus end at once the wise comment on Jotham,
and our citizens jaunt to the borough of Gotham. 
