charity.

a paraphrase on the thirteenth chapter of the first epistle to the corinthian.

do sweet sound adorn my flow tongue,
 than ever man pronounce, or angel sing:
 have i all knowledge, human and divine,
 that thought can reach, or science can define;
 and have i power to give that knowledge birth,
 in all the speech of the babble earth:
 do shadrach zeal my glow breast inspire,
 to weary torture, and rejoice in fire:
 or have i faith like that which Israel see,
 when Moses give they miracle, and law:
 yet, gracious charity, indulgent guest,
 be not thy power exert in my breast;
 those speech will send up unheeded prayer:
 that scorn of life will be but wild despair:
 a tymbal sound be better than my voice:
 my faith be form: my eloquence be noise. 

charity, decent, modest, easy, kind,
 soften the high, and rear the abject mind;
 know with just reins, and gentle hand to guide,
 betwixt vile shame, and arbitrary pride. 
not soon provoke, she easy forgive;
 and much she suffer, as she much believe. 
soft peace she bring whereve she arrive:
 she build our quiet, as she form our live;
 lay the rough path of peevish nature even;
 and open in each heart a little heaven. 

each other gift, which god on man bestow,
 it be proper bound, and due restriction know;
 to one fix purpose dedicate it be power;
 and finish it be act, exist no more. 
thus, in obedience to what heaven decree,
 knowledge shall fail, and prophecy shall cease:
 but last charity more ample sway,
 nor bind by time, nor subject to decay,
 in happy triumph shall for ever live,
 and endless good diffuse, and endless praise receive. 

as through the artist intervene glass,
 our eye observe the distant planet pass;
 a little we discover; but allow,
 that more remain unseen, than art can show:
 so while our mind it be knowledge will improve;
 (it be feeble eye intent on thing above)
 high as we may, we lift our reason up,
 by faith direct, and confirm by hope:
 yet be we able only to survey
 dawn of beam, and promise of day. 
heaven full effluence mock our dazzle sight;
 too great it be swiftness, and too strong it be light. 

but soon the mediate cloud shall be dispel;
 the sun shall soon be face to face behold,
 in all his robe, with all his glory on,
 seat sublime on his meridian throne. 

then constant faith, and holy hope shall die,
 one lose in certainty, and one in joy:
 while thou, more happy power, fair charity,
 triumphant sister, great of the three,
 thy office, and thy nature still the same,
 last thy lamp, and unconsumed thy flame,
 shall still survive —
 shall stand before the host of heaven confess,
 for ever blessing, and for ever bless. 
