elegy.

on the death of a young lady.

by the same.

yes, it be past; the fatal stroke be give. 
our pious sorrow own the hand of heaven. 
how short our joy! encumber life how vain! 
still vex with evil be never-ceasing train;
 while roll the hour which lead each fleet year,
 each ask a sigh, and each demand a tear. 
over please scene the mind with rapture rove,
 grasp in idea all its hope or love:
 snatch from its view the please scene decay,
 and the fair vision melt in shade away. 

of youth, of beauty, and of wit the boast,
 o love for ever, and too early lose,
 sweet maid, for thou now mingle with the dead,
 her sacred grief the tuneful muse shall shed;
 the soft remembrance of thy charm to save
 she plant with all her bay thy hallow grave. 

you too, companion of her happy day,
 heir of her charm, and rival of her praise,
 amid the circle of the young and gay
 your year unheeded urge their steal way,
 while mix with pleasure ever-smiling train,
 you know no sorrow, and you feel no pain;
 yet, when no more the pulse tumultuous beat,
 nor the please sense each flatter tale repeat,
 let calm reflection the sad moral teach,
 that bliss below evade our eager reach;
 that virtue only grant the real charm,
 give wit to win, and beauty power to warm;
 and though like she, who recent fate we mourn,
 and ask your pity for a sister urn,
 your beauty shine in all their bloom confess,
 amid gaze slave contend to be bless,
 yet think like she may soon those beauty fade;
 like she your glory in the dust be lay. 
time be hardy step in silence swift advance,
 dim the bright ray that dart the fiery glance,
 and age, dread herald of death awful reign,
 blast every grace, and freeze every vein. 

when with a mother joy, a mother fear,
 the thoughtful parent drop the silent tear,
 gaze on her child, and see new beauty rise,
 glow in her cheek, and sparkle in her eye,
 in expectation plan each hope of life,
 the sister, daughter, mother, friend, and wife;
 ah fleet joy! how soon those hope be over! 
we doom to mourn, and she to charm no more. 
the wane moon shall fill her waste horn,
 and nature radiance gild the orient morn,
 the smile spring with charm renew appear,
 the sleep blossom haste to deck the year,
 but bloom no more this fair depart flower,
 nor wake by genial sun, nor vernal shower. 

how vain, alas! be all thy father art,
 vain be the sigh which swell thy mother heart. 
again i see thou just expire lie,
 pale thy cold lip, half close thy languid eye,
 thy guardian innocence beside thou stand,
 and patient faith uplift her holy hand,
 teach thou with smile to meet the stroke of death,
 calm all thy pang, and ease thy struggle breath. 

resign, dear maid, to earth maternal breast,
 may sister seraph chant thy soul to rest. 
there shall the constant amaranthus bloom,
 and wing of zephyr shed the morn perfume. 
over thy sad hearse, fair emblem of the dead,
 by virgin hand be die lily shed. 
the weep grace shall thy tomb surround;
 the love with break dart shall strew the ground;
 in vain for thou they wake the fond desire,
 weave myrtle wreath, and fan their pure fire. 
the youthful god, who join the nuptial band,
 in vain expect, near his altar stand;
 fate spread the cloud: his torch extinct, he fly,
 and veil with saffron robe his stream eye. 

yet o, while crown with never-fading flower,
 thy spirit wander through elysian bower,
 if plaintive sound of mortal grief below
 reach the bless seat, and waft our tender woe,
 hear, happy shade; while thus our mortal lay
 this monument of soft affection raise. 
by gentle tie of kindred birth ally,
 the muse, that sport on camus willowed side,
 in memory lofty dome inscribe thy name,
 and with thy beauty strive to mix her fame. 
