a poem sacred to the memory of sir Isaac Newton. 

inscribe to the right honourable sir ROBERT Walpole. 

shall the great soul of Newton quit this earth,
 to mingle with his star; and every muse,
 astonish into silence, shun the weight
 of honour due to his illustrious name? 
but what can man? — even now the son of light,
 in strain high-warbled to seraphic lyre,
 hail his arrival on the coast of bliss. 
yet be not i deter, though high the theme,
 and sing to harp of angel, for with you,
 ethereal flame! ambitious, i aspire
 in nature general symphony to join. 

and what new wonder can you show your guest! 
who, while on this dim spot, where mortal toil
 cloud in dust, from motion simple law,
 can trace the secret hand of providence,
 wide-working through this universal frame. 

have you not listen while he bind the sun,
 and planet to their sphere! the unequal task
 of human kind till then. oft have they roll
 over err man the year, and oft disgrace
 the pride of school, before their course be know
 full in its cause and effect to he,
 all-piercing sage! who sit not down and dream
 romantic scheme, defend by the din
 of specious word, and tyranny of name;
 but, bid his amaze mind attend,
 and with heroic patience year on year
 deep-searching, see at last the system dawn,
 and shine, of all his race, on he alone. 

what be his rapture then! how pure! how strong! 
and what the triumph of old Greece and Rome,
 by his diminish, but the price of boy
 in some small fray victorious! when instead
 of shatter parcel of this earth usurp
 by violence unmanly, and sore deed
 of cruelty and blood, nature herself
 stand all subdue by he, and open lay
 her every latent glory to his view. 

all intellectual eye, our solar round
 first gaze through, he by the blend power
 of gravitation and projection see
 the whole in silent harmony revolve. 
from unassisted vision hide, the moon
 to cheer remot planet numerous pour,
 by he in all their mingle tract be see. 
he also fix the wander queen of night,
 whether she wane into a scanty orb,
 or, wax broad, with her pale shadowy light,
 in a soft deluge overflow the sky. 
her every motion clear-discerning, he
 adjust to the mutual main, and teach
 why now the mighty mass of water swell
 resistless, heave on the break rock
 and the full river turn; till again
 the tide revertive, unattracted, leave
 a yellow waste of idle sand behind. 

then break hence, he take his ardent flight
 through the blue infinite; and every star,
 which the clear concave of a winter night
 pour on the eye, or astronomic tube,
 far-stretching, snatch from the dark abyss,
 or such as farther in successive sky
 to fancy shine alone, at his approach
 blaze into sun, the live centre each
 of a harmonious system: all combine,
 and rule unerring by that single power,
 which draw the stone project to the ground. 

o unprofuse magnificence divine! 
o wisdom true perfect! thus to call
 from a few cause such a scheme of thing,
 effect so various, beautiful, and great,
 a universe complete! and, o belove
 of heaven! who well-purged penetrative eye,
 the mystic veil transpierce, inly scan
 the rise, move, wide-established frame. 

he, first of man, with awful wing pursue
 the comet through the long eliptic curve,
 as round innumerous world he wind his way;
 till, to the forehead of our evening sky
 return, the blaze wonder glare anew,
 and over the tremble nation shake dismay. 

the heaven be all his own; from the wild rule
 of whirl vortice, and circle sphere,
 to their first great simplicity restore. 
the school astonish stand; but find it vain
 to keep at odds with demonstration strong,
 and, unawakened, dream beneath the blaze
 of truth. at once their please vision sle,
 with the gay shadow of the morning mix,
 when Newton rise, our philosophy sun. 

the aerial flow of sound be know to he,
 from whence it first in wavy circle break,
 till the touch organ take the meaning in. 
nor can the dart beam, of speed immense,
 escape his swift pursuit, and measure eye. 
even light itself, which every thing display,
 shine undiscovered, till his bright mind
 untwisted all the shine robe of day;
 and, from the whiten undistinguished blaze,
 collect every ray into his kind,
 to the charm eye educe the gorgeous train
 of parent-colour. first the flame red
 spring vivid forth; the tawny orange next;
 and next delicious yellow; by who side
 fall the kind beam of all-refreshing green. 
then the pure blue, that swell autumnal sky,
 ethereal play; and then, of sad hue,
 emerge the deepen indico, as when
 the heavy-skirted evening droop with frost. 
while the last gleam of refract light
 die in the faint violet away. 

these, when the cloud distil the rosy shower,
 shine out distinct down the watery bow;
 while over our head the dewy vision bend
 delightful, melt on the field beneath. 
myriad of mingle die from these result,
 and myriad still remain — infinite source
 of beauty, ever-flushing, ever-new! 

do ever poet image ought so fair,
 dream in whisper grove, by the hoarse brook! 
or prophet, to who rapture heaven descend! 
even now the set sun and shift cloud,
 see, Greenwich, from thy lovely height, declare
 how just, how beauteous the refractive law. 

the noiseless tide of time, all bear down
 to vast eternity unbounded sea
 where the green island of the happy shine,
 he stem alone; and to the source (involve
 deep in primaeval gloom) ascend, raise
 his light at equal distance, to guide
 historian, wilder on his darksome way. 

but who can number up his labour? who
 his high discovery sing? when but a few
 of the deep-studying race can stretch their mind
 to what he know: in fancy light thought,
 how shall the muse then grasp the mighty theme? 

what wonder thence that his devotion swell
 responsive to his knowledge! for can he,
 who pierce mental eye diffusive see
 the finish university of thing,
 in all its order, magnitude, and part,
 forbear incessant to adore that power
 who fill, sustain, and actuate the whole. 

say, you who best can tell, you happy few,
 who see he in the soft light of life,
 all un-with-held, indulge to his friend
 the vast unborrowed treasure of his mind,
 oh speak the wondrous man! how mild, how calm,
 how great humble, how divine good;
 how firm establish on eternal truth;
 fervent in do well, with every nerve
 still press on, forgetful of the past,
 and pant for perfection: far above
 those little care, and visionary joy,
 that so perplex the fond impassion heart
 of ever-cheated, ever-trusting man. 
this, conduit, from thy rural hour we hope;
 as through the please shade, where nature pour
 her every sweet, in studious ease you walk;
 the social passion smile at thy heart,
 that glow with all the recollect sage. 

and you, you hopeless gloomy-minded tribe,
 you who, unconscious of those noble flight
 that reach impatient at immortal life,
 against the prime endear pivilege
 of be dare contend, say, can a soul
 of such extensive, deep, tremendous power,
 enlarge still, be but a fine breath
 of spirit dance through their tube awhile,
 and then for ever lose in vacant air? 

but hark! methinks i hear a warn voice,
 solemn as when some awful change be come,
 sound through the world — "it be do! — the measure full;
" and i resign my charge. — you moulder stone,
 that build the tower pyramid, the proud
 triumphal arch, the monument efface
 by ruthless ruin, and whatever support
 the worship name of hoar antiquity,
 down to the dust! what grandeur can you boast
 while Newton lift his column to the sky,
 beyond the waste of time — let no weak drop
 be shed for he. the virgin in her bloom
 cut off, the joyous youth, and darling child,
 these be the tomb that claim the tender tear,
 and elegiac song. but Newton call
 for other note of gratulation high,
 that now he wander through those endless world
 he here so well descry, and wonder talk,
 and hymn their author with his glad compeer. 

o britain boast! whether with angel thou
 sit in dread discourse, or fellow-bl,
 who joy to see the honour of their kind;
 or whether, mount on cherubic wing,
 thy swift career be with the whirl orb,
 compare thing with thing, in rapture lose,
 and grateful adoration, for that light
 so plenteous ray into thy mind below,
 from light himself; oh look with pity down
 on humankind, a frail erroneous race! 
exalt the spirit of a downward world! 
over thy deject country chief preside,
 and be her genius call! her study raise,
 correct her manner, and inspire her youth. 
for, though deprave and sink, she bring thou forth,
 and glory in thy name; she point thou out
 to all her son, and bid they eye thy star:
 while in expectance of the second life,
 when time shall be no more, thy sacred dust
 sleep with her king, and dignify the scene. 
