elegy to a young nobleman leave the university.

mdccliii.

by the same.

EER yet, ingenuous youth, thy step retire
 from cam smooth margin, and the peaceful vale,
 where science call thou to her studious choir,
 and meet thou muse in her cloister pale;
 o! let thy friend (and may he boast the name)
 breathe from his artless reed one part lay;
 a lay like this thy early virtue claim,
 and this let voluntary friendship pay. 
yet know, the time arrive, the dangerous time,
 when all those virtue, open now so fair,
 transplant to the world tempestuous clime,
 must learn each passion boisterous breath to bear,
 there, if ambition pestilent and pale,
 or luxury shall taint their vernal glow;
 if cold self-interest, with her chill gale,
 shall blast the unfold blossom ever they blow;
 if mimic hue, by art, or fashion spread,
 their genuine, simple colour shall supply,
 o! with they may these laureate honour fade;
 and with they (if it can) my friendship die. 
then do not blame, if, though thyself inspire,
 cautious i strike the panegyric string;
 the muse full oft pursue a meteor fire,
 and, vain venturous, soar on waxen wing. 
too active awake at friendship voice,
 the poet bosom pour the fervent strain,
 till sad reflection blame the hasty choice,
 and oft invoke oblivion aid in vain. 
call we the shade of pope, from that bless bower
 where throne he sit with many a tuneful sage;
 ask, if he never bemoan that hapless hour
 when saint John name illumine glory page? 
ask, if the wretch, who dare his memory stain,
 ask, if his country, his religion foe,
 deserve the meed that Marlbro' fail to gain,
 the deathless meed, he only can bestow? 
the bard will tell thou, the misguided praise
 cloud the celestial sunshine of his breast;
 even now, repentant of his err lay,
 he heave a sigh amid the realm of rest. 
if pope through friendship fail, indignant view,
 yet pity Dryden; hark, whenever he sing,
 how adulation drop her courtly dew
 on title rhymer, and inglorious king. 
see, from the depth of his exhaustless mine,
 his glitter store the tuneful spendthrift throw;
 where fear, or interest bid, behold they shine;
 now grace a Cromwell, now a Charles brow. 
bear with too generous, or too mean a heart,
 Dryden! in vain to thou those store be lend:
 thy sweet number but a trifle art;
 thy strong diction idle eloquent. 
the simple lyre, if truth direct its lay,
 warble a melody never hear from thy:
 not to disgust with false, or venal praise,
 be parnell modest fame, and may be i. 
go then, my friend, nor let thy candid breast
 condemn i, if i check the plausive string;
 go to the wayward world; complete the rest;
 be, what the pure muse will wish to sing. 
be still thyself; that open path of truth,
 which lead thou here, let manhood firm pursue;
 retain the sweet simplicity of youth,
 and all thy virtue dictate, dare to do. 
still scorn, with conscious pride, the mask of art;
 on vice front let fearful caution lour,
 and teach the diffident, discreet part
 of knave that plot, and fool that fawn for power. 
so, round thy brow when age honour spread,
 when death cold hand unstring thy mason lyre,
 when the green turf lie light on his head,
 thy worth shall some superior bard inspire:
 he, to the ample bound of time domain,
 on rapture plume shall give thy name to fly;
 for trust, with reverence trust this Sabine strain! 
 "the muse forbid the virtuous man to die." 
