the author.

to ARTHUR Murphy, ESQ.

to sing of beauty and its power divine,
 let other bard invoke the tuneful nine;
 another theme demand my humble lay,
 a theme illume by truth be resplendent ray;
 to no fictitious scene the muse shall rove,
 nor seek, by frenzy lead, the Delphic grove;
 alas! the mournful scene we mean to show,
 in real, not in fancy life we know:
 the ill from genius source that daily spring,
 my pensive muse in plaintive strain shall sing. 

all hail! you brother of the tuneful art;
 whether you lull the ear, or charm the heart;
 whether beneath some half-roofed shed you lie,
 unpitied live, or unlamented die;
 or if (severe fate) your sacred lay
 proclaim some title patron fulsome praise;
 o list awhile to my untutored song,
 and bless those number which to you belong. 

in early youth, when all our joy be pure,
 and pleasure woo we with a harmless lure;
 when, bless, and thoughtless of our future fate,
 around the cheerful hearth we lively prate;
 while tale of goblin stern, and fairy kind,
 impress with please awe the infant mind;
 or, if serener sky to field invite,
 we chace, with anxious step, the may-bug's flight;
 or else with pigmy hand the mead despoil,
 and cowslip chaplet weave with curious toil;
 even then, the hapless breast that genius light
 with double rapture hail these first delight;
 to fancy sway he yield his guileless heart,
 unawed by fashion, and unspoiled by art;
 to he who fancy magic influence know,
 with bright glow appear the blush rose;
 by nature form to relish all her sweet,
 her daisy meadow, and her green retreat. 

at length to school remove, the happy boy,
 the mother earnest of much future joy;
 forsake the scene of dear domestic bliss,
 the father smile, the mother ardent kiss;
 nor quit he yet without some fall tear
 those field his infant joy have render dear. 

at first, the clamour of the buzz school,
 and classic lily salutary rule,
 with terror new his infant mind appal,
 and present fear his pristine joy recall;
 but when the dry grammarian toil be over,
 and Ovid open all his tender store;
 with kindred flame his ardent bosom glow,
 his version pure the rise genius show;
 and the please master see, with flatter hope,
 the early effort of a future pope. 

now partial friend predict his rise fame,
 with hand unwearied fan ambition flame;
 at length some guardian care remove the youth
 to those bless scene of wisdom, and of truth,
 where holy science hold her peaceful reign,
 where genius wander over the classic plain;
 on isis verdant bank he shape his way,
amid scene that hear a warton virgin lie;
 or linger, cam, beside thy sedgy stream,
 of mason matchless verse the darling theme. 

here science woo he with her tempt lore;
 he pant while she unfold her mental store;
 with eager soul seize the value prize,
 ambition prompt he, and his prospect rise:
 still where, devoid of care, the stripling rove,
 beside the stream, or through the nod grove;
 each lively thought the hallow muse inspire;
 big with idea, glow with her fire,
 he gaze round. genius adore the youth,
 and lead he smile to the shrine of truth. 

perchance, love Isis, by thy gentle stream
 the wahder youth pursue his wayward theme;
 and as thy wave in slow succession glide,
 to mix with ocean undistinguished tide,
 with fond expectance wait the eventful hour,
 that yield departure from thy much-loved bower,
 with hope of fame his hapless bosom glow,
 nor more, content, thy peaceful empire know. 
now glitter vision in his sleep appear,
 the splendid premium, and the patron peer;
 by hope delude, and ambition lead,
 the will muse he vow for life to wed. 
with she he seek that splendid sink of vice,
 where peer, instead of poet, have their price. 
the drama now his constant thought engage,
 with eager eye he rifle Shakspeare page,
 and hope, like Murphy, to adorn the stage. 
but though, like he, he matchless power possess,
 though phoebus self the fond attempt shall bless;
 yet ere his number meet the public eye
 a thousand death the hapless bard must die;
 condemn to torture by good larpent pen,
 who cut by patent, and may come again;
 Larpent! who dare the pour wight arraign! 
lo! genius struggle in his torpid chain. 
near he Apollo veil his heavenly fire,
 and every muse with larpent name expire. 
at length arrive the dread, the awful night,
 when the maim infant see the burst of light. 
the box fill with noisy froth — the pit
 replete alone with malice and with wit. 
with vulgar dissonance the gallery arm,
 by nought but edwin monkey visage charm,
 in senseless clamour their huge prowess show,
 and fright with noise alone the tun below;
 yield rich harvest to the critic flail,
 nurse prologue then repeat her wonted tale. 
at length to every gaze eye appear,
 who open with nature key the source of tear. 
critic, though stern, awhile their voice suspend,
 till, charm by Siddons, at her shrine they bend;
 yet what avail the tribute nature pay? 
her tender tear be but her noble praise;
 the son of sordid wealth and splendid power
 feel but the sorrow of the pass hour:
 for, mark the name amid glory glitter roll,
 where misery scowl not on the aspire soul. 
know those who weep over woe his fancy frame
 withhold the bread a otway hunger claim. 
ill-fated Otway, over who melt page
 soft pity tear shall fall in every age,
 if ghastly famine, with unhallowed power,
 triumphant mark his last expire hour. 
Ah! who, by genius bless, yet curse by fate,
 can for his sorrow hope a short date? 

yet list, you hapless son of magic verse,
 while your deep woe my humble lay rehearse,
 from fame bright source let hope refulgent shine;
 for, you alone be great apollo shrine:
 a shrine to which the fool shall never bend;
 or, offer there, the god shall never befriend. 
the time may come, when England rocky shore
 shall prize the balance of the world no more,
 when some proud victor over this happy land
 shall impious stretch the tyrant fate wand,
 whenever, over Britain doom to reign no more,
 her shrine remove to the western shore,
 sweet freedom, heavenly maid, shall wing her way,
 and to new world disclose her lustrous day;
 the nine love partner of each former flight,
 disdain still to own a tyrant right,
 with she shall seek the bless, the favour clime,
 where each shall wait the awful close of time. 
the jealous guardian of your well-earned fame
 shall to the tawny tribe your worth proclaim. 
and, while around new empire rise to view,
 their mingle praise shall still belong to you. 
yet what avail this bright, this flatter thought,
 by hope inspire, nay, more, by reason teach;
 since, ere her pillar fame begin to raise,
 the fate bard thy debt, o nature, pay? 
when all the vary ill of life be over,
 and slight worth be doom to feel no more,
 when hearse in death the woe-worn genius sleep,
 then over his grave a grateful country weep,
 and load with costly pile the hallow spot,
 where all that famine spare be doom to rot. 
