the butterfly to his love.

what bowery dell, with fragrant breath,
court thou to stay thy airy flight;
nor seek again the purple heath,
so oft the scene of gay delight?

long watch i in the lily bell,
who whiteness steal the morning beam;
no flutter sound thy come tell,
no wave wing, at distance, gleam.

but fountain fresh, nor breathe grove,
nor sunny mead, nor blossom tree,
so sweet as lily cell shall prove, —
the bower of constant love and i.

when April bud begin to blow,
the primrose, and the harebell blue,
that on the verdant moss bank grow,
with violet cup, that weep in dew;

when wanton gale breathe through the shade,
and shake the bloom, and steal their sweet,
and swell the song of every glade,
i range the forest green retreat:

there, through the tangle wood-walks play,
where no rude urchin pace near,
where scarce peep the sultry day,
and light dew freshen all the air.

high on a sun-beam oft i sport
over bower and fountain, vale and hill;
oft every blush floweret court,
that hang its head over wind rill.

but these i will leave to be thy guide,
and show thou, where the jasmine spread
her snowy leaf, where may-flow'r hide,
and rose-bud rear their peep head.

with i the mountain summit scale,
and taste the wild-thyme's honeyed bloom,
who fragrance, float on the gale,
oft lead i to the cedar gloom.

yet, yet, no sound come in the breeze!
what shade thus dare to tempt thy stay?
once, i alone thou wish to please,
and with i only thou will stray.

but, while thy long delay i mourn,
and chide the sweet shade for their guile,
thou may be true, and they forlorn,
and fairy favour court thy smile.

the tiny queen of fairyland,
who know thy speed, have send thou far,
to bring, or ere the nightwatch stand,
rich essence for her shadowy car:

perchance her acorn-cup to fill
with nectar from the indian rose,
or gather, near some haunt rill,
may-dew, that lull to sleep love woe:

or over the mountain, bid thou fly,
to tell her fairy love to speed,
when evening steal upon the sky,
to dance along the twilight mead.

but now i see thou sail low,
gay as the bright flower of spring,
thy coat of blue and jet i know,
and well thy gold and purple wing.

Borne on the gale, thou come to i;
o! welcome, welcome to my home!
in lily cell we will live in glee,
together over the mountain roam!
