on the death of lady Anson.

address to the earl of Hardwicke, her father, 1761. 

by the same.

o crown with honour, bless with length of day,
 thou who the wise revere, the worthy praise;
 just guardian of those law thy voice explain,
 and merit all title thou have gain —
 though still the fair from heaven bounty flow;
 for good and great no monarch can bestow:
 yet thus, of health, of fame, of friend possess,
 no fortune, Hardwicke, be sincere bless. 
all humankind be son of sorrow bear:
 the great must suffer, and the good must mourn. 

for say, can wisdom self, what late be thy,
 can fortitude, without a sigh, resign? 
ah no! when love, when reason, hand in hand,
 over the cold urn consent mourner stand,
 the firm heart dissolve to softness here;
 and piety applaud the fall tear. 
those sacred drop, by virtuous weakness shed,
 adorn the living, while they grace the dead:
 from tender thought their source unblamed they draw,
 by heaven approve, and true to nature law. 

when his love child the roman can not save,
 immortal Tully, from a early grave,
 no common form his homefelt passion keep;
 the sage, the patriot, in the parent, weep. 
and o! by grief ally, as join in fame,
 the same thy loss, thy sorrow be the same. 
she who the muse, who the love deplore,
 even she, thy pride and pleasure, be no more:
 in bloom of year, in all her virtue bloom,
 lose to thy hope, and silent in the tomb. 

o season mark by mourning and despair! 
thy blast how fatal to the young and fair? 
for vernal freshness, for the balmy breeze,
 thy taint wind come pregnant with disease:
 sick nature sink before the mortal breath,
 that scatter fever, agony, and death! 
what funeral have thy cruel ravage spread! 
what eye have flow! what noble bosom bleed! 

here let reflection fix her sober view:
 o think, who suffer, and who sigh with you. 
see, rude snatch, in all her pride of charm,
 bright Granby from a youthful husband arm! 
in clime far distant, see that husband mourn;
 his arm reverse, his recent laurel tear! 
behold again, at fate imperious call,
 in one dread instant bloom Lincoln fall! 
see her love lord with speechless anguish bend! 
and, mix tear with he, thy noble friend,
 thy Pelham turn on heaven his stream eye:
 again in she, he see a brother die. 

and he, who long, unshaken and serene,
 have death, in each dire form of terror, see,
 through world unknown, over unknown ocean toss,
 by love subdue, now weep a consort lose:
 now, sink to fondness, all the man appear,
 his front deject, and his soul in tear! 

yet more: nor thou the muse voice disdain,
 who fond try to soothe a father pain —
 let thy calm eye survey the suffer ball:
 see kingdom round thou verge to their fall! 
what spring have promise, and what autumn yield,
 the bread of thousand ravish from their field! 
see youth and age, th'ignoble and the great,
 sweep to one grave, in one promiscuous fate! 
hear Europe groan! hear all her nation mourn! 
and be a private wound with patience bear. 

think too: and reason will confirm the thought:
 thy care, for she, be to their period bring. 
yes, she, fair pattern to a fail age,
 with wit, chastise, with sprightly temper, sage;
 who each endear name can recommend,
 who all become, wife, sister, daughter, friend,
 unwarped by folly, and by vice unstained,
 the prize of virtue have, for ever gain! 
from life escape, and safe on that calm shore
 where sin, and pain, and error be no more,
 she now no change, nor you a fear can feel:
 death, to her fame, have fix the eternal seal! 
