[line speak by the ghost of John Dennis at the devil tavern]

from purl stream and the elysian scene,
from grove that smile with never-fading green,
i reascend: in atropos despite
restore to celadon and upper light.
you god, that sway the region under ground,
reveal to mortal view your realm profound;
at his command admit the eye of day:
when celadon command, what god can disobey?
nor seek he your tartarean fire to know,
the house of torture and the abyss of woe;
but happy field and mansion free from pain,
gay mead and spring flower, best please the gentle swain.

that little, naked, melancholy thing,
my soul, when first she try her flight to wing,
begin with speed new region to explore,
and blunder through a narrow postern door.
first most devout have say its prayer,
it tumble down a thousand pair of stair,
through entry long, through cellar vast and deep,
where ghostly rat their habitation keep,
where spider spread their web and owlish goblin sleep.
after so many chance have befall,
it come into a mead of asphodel:
betwixt the confine of the light and dark
it lie, of 'Lysium the saint James park.
here spirit-beaux flutter along the Mall,
and shadow in disguise skate over the ice canal;
here grove embower and more sequester shade,
frequent by the ghost of ancient maid,
be see to rise. the melancholy scene,
with gloomy haunt and twilight walk between,
conceal the wayward band: here spend their time
green-sickness girl that die in youthful prime,
virgin forlorn, all dress in willow-green-i,
with queen Elizabeth and Nicolini.

more to reveal, or many word to use,
will tire alike your patience and my muse.
believe that never be so faithful find
queen Proserpine to Pluto under ground,
or Cleopatra to her Mark Antony,
as Orozmades to his celadony.

p.s. Lucrece for half a crown will show you fun,
but mrs. Oldfield be become a nun.
noble and cit, prince Pluto and his spouse,
flock to the ghost of Covent-Garden house:
play, which be hiss above, below revive,
when dead applaud that be damn alive.
the people, as in life, still keep their passion,
but differ something from the world in fashion.
queen Artemisia breakfast on bohea,
and Alexander wear a ramilie.
