on the abuse of travel.

a Canto, in imitation of SPENSER.

by Gilbert west, ESQ;

i 

wise be that spartan lawgiver of old,
who raise on virtue base his well-built state,
exile from her wall barbaric gold,
with all the mischief that upon it wait,
corruption, luxury, and envious hate;
and the distinction proud of rich and poor,
which among brother kindle foul debate,
and teach ambition, that to fame will soar,
to the false lure of wealth her stoop wing to lower.

ii.

yet will corruption soon have entrance find,
and all his boast scheme eftsoon decay,
have not he cast a powerful circle round,
which to a distance the arch felon fray,
and ineffectual his foul engine make:
this be, to weet, that politic command,
which from vain travel the young spartan stay,
ne suffer he forsake his native land,
to learn deceitful art, and science contraband.

iii.

yet have the ancient world her court and school;
great king and courtier civil and refine;
great rabbin, deep read in wisdom rule,
and all the art that cultivate the mind,
embellish life, and polish human kind.
such, Asia, birth-place of proud monarchy,
such, elder aegypt, in thy kingdom shine,
mysterious aegypt, the rank nursery
of superstition fond, and learned vanity.

iv.

but what accomplishment, what art polite,
do the young spartan want his deed to grace,
who manly virtue, and heroic spright,
check by no thought impure, no falsehood base,
with natural dignity may well outface
the glare of manner false, and mimic pride
and wherefore shall they range from place to place,
who to their country love so firm be tie,
all homely as she be, that for she oft they die?

v. 

and sooth it be (with reverence may you hear,
and honour due to passion so refine)
the strong affection which true patriot bear
to their dear country, zealous be and blind,
and fond as be the love of womankind,
so that they may not her defect espy,
no other paragon may ever find,
but gaze on she with a awful eye
and superstitious zeal, her learn to deify.

vi.

and, like as be the faith unsound, untrue,
of he, who wander aye from fair to fair,
conceive from each object passion new,
or from his heart quite drive the troublous care;
so with the patriot-lover do it fare,
who through the world delight aye to rove,
his country change with each change of air,
or ween the delight of all to prove,
on none, or all alike bestow his vagrant love.

vii.

also do corruption in a distant soil,
with double force assay the youthful heart,
expose suspectless to the traitor wile,
expose unwarned to pleasure poison dart,
expose unpractised in the world wide mart,
where each one lie, impose, and betray,
without a friend due counsel to impart,
without a parent awe to rule his way,
without the check of shame, or spur of public praise

viii.

forthy, false Archimago, traitor vile,
who burn against fairyland with ceaseless ire,
begin cast with foreign pleasure to beguile
her faithful knight, and quench the heavenly fire
that do his virtuous bosom aye inspire
with zeal unfeigned for her service true,
and send he forth in chivalrous attire,
arm at all point adventure to pursue,
and wreak upon her foe his vow vengeance due.

ix.

so as he journey upon the way,
he soon the sly enchanter over-hent,
clad like a fairy knight in armour gay,
with paint shield, and spear right forward bend,
in knightly guise and show of hardiment,
that aye prepare be for bloody fight.
whereat the elfin knight with speech gent
he first salute, who, well as he may,
he fair salute again, as seem courteous knight.

x. 

then begin he purpose frame of valiant deed
achieve by foreign knight of prowess great,
and mighty fame which emulation breed
in virtuous breast, and kindle martial heat;
of art and science for warrior meet,
and knight that will in feat of arm excel,
or he, who lief choose calm retreat,
with peace and gentle virtue aye will dwell,
who have their triumph, like as have Bellona fall.

xi.

these, as he say, beseem knight to know,
and all be they in fairyland teach,
where every art and all fair virtue grow;
yet various clime with various fruit be fraught,
and such in one have full perfection reach
the which no skill may in another rear,
so gloze the enchanter till he have he bring
to a huge rock, that climb so high in air,
that from it he uneath the murmur surge mote hear.

xii.

thence the salt wave beyond in prospect wide
a spacious plain the false enchanter show,
with goodly castle deck on every side,
and silver stream, that down the champain flow,
and wash the vineyard that beside they stand,
and grove of myrtle; also the lamp of day
his orient beam display without cloud,
which light on the glisten water play,
and tinge the castle, wood, and hill with purple ray.

xiii.

so fair a landscape charm the wonder knight;
and eke the breath of morning fresh and sweet
inspire his jocund spirit with delight,
and ease of heart for soft pursuasion meet.
then he the traitor base begin fair entreat,
and from the rock as downward they descend,
of that bless land his praise begin repeat,
till he he move have with he to wend;
so to the billowy shore their hasty march they bend.

xiv.

there in a paint bark all trim and gay,
who sail full glad embrace the wanton wind,
there sit a strange wight in quaint array,
that seem of various garb atone combine,
of Europe, Afric, east and western inde.
also round about he many creature stand,
of several nation and of diverse kind,
apes, serpent, bird with human speech endow,
and monster of the land, and wonder of the flood.

XV. 

he be to weet a mighty traveller,
who curiosity thereafter hight,
and well he know each coast and harbour fair,
and every nation latitude and site,
and how to steer the wander bark aright.
so to he strait the false enchanter bear,
and with he likewise bring the red-cross knight.
then fair he beseech to waft they over;
swift fly the dance bark, and reach the adverse shore.

xvi.

there when they land be, they run to greet
a bevy of bright damsel gent and gay,
who with soft smile, and salutation sweet,
and courteous violence will force they stay,
and rest they in their bower not far away;
their bower that most luxurious be dight
with all the dainty of air, earth and sea,
all that mote please the taste, and charm the sight,
the pleasure of the board, and charm of beauty bright.

xvii.

also may he therein hear a mingle sound
of feast and song and laugh jollity,
that in the noise be all distinction drown
of grave sense, or music harmony.
yet be there some in that blithe company
that apt can discourse of virtuous lore,
of manner, wisdom and sound policy;
yet nould they often open their sacred store,
ne may their voice be hear amid riot and uproar.

xviii.

thereto the joy of idleness and love,
and luxury, that besot the noble mind,
and custom prevalent at distance drive
all sense and relish of a high kind,
whereby the soul to virtue be refine.
instead whereof the art of slavery
be teach, of slavery perverse and blind,
that vain boast her native liberty,
yet wear the chain of pride, of lust, and gluttony.

xix.

of which the red-cross knight right well aware,
will in no wise agree with they to go,
albeit with courtly glee their leader fair,
 hight politessa, he do kind woo.
but all be false pretence, and hollow show,
false as the flower which to their breast they tie,
or those which seem in their cheek to glow,
for both be false, and not by nature die,
false rival of the spring, and beauty rosy pride.

xx.

then from behind then straightway begin advance
a uncouth stripling quaint habit,
as for some revel mask, or antic dance,
all chequer over with yellow, blue, and red;
also in a vizor black he shroud his head,
the which he toss to and fro amain,
and great his lathy falchion brandish,
as if he mean fierce battle to darrain,
and like a wanton ape great skip he on the plain.

xxi.

and great about he skip a gaudy throng
of youthful gallant, frolick, trim, and gay,
chant in careless note their amorous song,
match with like careless gest, like amorous play.
also be they gorgeous, dress in rich array,
and well accept of that female train,
who heart to joy and mirth devote aye,
each proffer love receive without disdain,
and part without regret from each late-favoured swain.

xxii.

and now they do accord in wanton dance
to join their hand upon the flowery plain;
the while with amorous leer and eye askance
each damsel fire with love her glow swain;
till all-impatient of the tickle pain,
in sudden laughter forth at once they break,
and end so their dance, each tender twain
to shady bower forthwith themselves betake,
deep hide in myrtle grove, beside a silver lake.

xxiii.

thereat the red-cross knight be much enmoved,
and begin his heart with indignation swell,
to view in form so make to be belove,
ne faith, ne truth, ne heavenly virtue dwell;
but lust instead, and falsehood, child of hell;
and glutton sloth, and love of gay attire:
and sooth to say, they well can parallel
their lusty paramour in vain desire;
well fit to each dame be every gallant squire.

xxiv.

yet when their sovereign call they forth to arm,
their sovereign, who behest they most revere,
right wise can they manage war alarm,
and wield with valour great the martial spear,
so that their name be dread far and near.
oh! that for liberty they so do fight!
then need no fairyland their prowess fear,
ne give in charge to her adventurous knight
their friendship to beware, and sense-deluding sleight.

xxv.

but not for liberty they wagen war,
but sole to aggrate their mighty lord,
for who their dear blood they nillen spare,
whenso he list draw the conquer sword;
so be that idol vain of they adore,
who ne with might beyond his mean thrall
endue, ne superior wisdom store,
see at his foot prostrate million fall,
and with religious dread obey his princely call.

xxvi.

thereto so high and stately be his port,
that all the petty king he sore envy,
and will he imitate in any sort,
with all the mimic pageantry of pride,
and worship be like he, and deify
of courtly sycophant and caitiff vile,
who to those service themselves apply,
and in that school of servitude ere while
have learn to bow and grin, and flatter, and beguile.

xxvii.

for to that seminary of fashion vain
the rich and noble from all part repair,
where groan enamour of the gaudy train,
and courteous behaviour gent and debonair,
they cast to imitate such semblance fair;
and deem mean of their native land,
their own rough virtue they disdain to wear,
and back return dress by foreign hound,
ne other matter care, ne other understand.

xxviii.

wherefore the enchanter vile, who sore be grieve
to see the knight reject those damsel gay,
wherewith he think he sure to have deceive,
be mind to that court he to convey,
and daze his eye with majesty bright ray:
so to a stately castle he he bring,
which in the midst of a great garden lie,
and wise be by cunning craftsman wrought,
and with all riches deck surpass human thought.

xxix.

there underneath a sumptuous canopy,
that with bright over and diamond glitter far,
sit the swell form of royal surquedry,
and deem itself algate some creature rare,
while its own haughty state it mote compare
with the base countenance of the vassal fry,
that seem to have nor eye, nor tongue, nor ear;
ne any sense, ne any faculty,
that do not to his throne owe servile ministry.

xxx.

yet wist he not that half that homage low
be at a wizard shrine in private pay,
the which conduct all that goodly show,
and as he list the imperial puppet play,
by secret spring and wheel right wise make,
that he the subtle wire mote not avise,
but deem in sooth that all he do or say,
from his own motion and free grace do rise,
and that he just hight immortal, great, and wise.

xxxi.

and eke to each of that same gild train,
that meek round that lordly throne do stand,
be by that visard tie a magic chain,
whereby their action all he mote command,
and rule with hide influence the land.
yet to his lord he outward do bend,
and those same magic chain within his hand
do seem to place, albeit by the end
he hold they fast, that none they from his gripe mote rend.

xxxii.

he be to weet a old and wrinkle magè,
deep read in all the art of policy,
and from experience grow so crafty sage,
that none his secret counsel mote descry,
ne search the mine of his deep subtlety.
thereto fair peace he love and cherish;
and traffic do promote and industry,
whereby the vulgar be in quiet feed,
and the proud lord in ease and plenty wallow.

xxxiii.

thence all the gorgeous splendour of the court,
 sith the sole business of the rich and great,
be to that hope-built temple to resort,
and round their earthly god in glory wait,
who with their pride to swell his royal state,
do pour large sum of gold on every one,
bring he by harpy fall, he to aggrate,
and tear from peasant vile, beneath the throne
who lie deep sink in earth, and inward do groan.

xxxiv.

behold, say archimage, the envy height
of human grandeur to the god ally!
behold yond sun of power, who glorious light,
over this rejoice land out-beaming wide,
call up those princely flower on every side;
which like the paint daughter of the plain,
ne toil, ne spin, ne stain their silken pride
with care, or sorrow, sith without pain,
they in eternal joy those heavenly beam maintain.

XXXV. 

they morn and evening joy eternal greet,
and for they thousand and ten thousand moil,
gather from land and ocean honeyed sweet
for they, who in soft indolence the while
and slumber peace enjoy the luscious spoil;
and as they view around the careful bee
 forespend with labour and incessant toil,
with the sweet contrast learn themselves to please,
and heighten by compare the luxury of ease.

xxxvi 

ungenerous man, quoth then the fairy knight,
that can rejoice to see another woe!
and thou, unworthy of that glory bright,
wherewith the god have deck thy princely brow,
that do on sloth and gluttony bestow
the hard-earned fruit of industry and pain,
and to the dog the labourer morsel throw,
unmindful of the hand that sow the grain,
the poor earth-trodden root of all thy greatness vain.

xxxvii.

oh foul abuse of sacred majesty,
that boast her fair self from heaven spring!
where be the mark of thy divinity?
truth, mercy, justice steady, bold and strong,
to aid the meek, and curb oppressive wrong?
where be the care and love of public good,
that to the people father do belong?
where the vicegerent of that bounteous god,
who bid dispense to all, what he for all bestow?

xxxviii.

dwell thou not rather, like the prince of hell,
in pandemonium full of ugly fiend?
dissimulation, discord, malice fall,
reckless ambition, that right onward wend,
though his wild march overthrow both fame and friend,
and virtue and his country; crooked guile,
oblique creep to his treacherous end,
and flattery, curse assassin, who the while
he hold the murderous knife, can fawn, and kiss, and smile.

xxxix.

then begin he strait unveiling the mirror bright,
the which fair Una give he heretofore,
ere he as yet, with paynim foe to fight,
for foreign land have leave his native shore.
this in his careful breast he always bear,
and on it oft will cast his wary eye;
for it by magic frame be of yore,
so that no falsehood mote it well abye,
but it be plain see, or fearful do fly.

XL. 

this on that gay assembly do he turn,
and see confound quite the gawdy scene;
see the close fire that inward do burn,
and waste the throb heart with secret teen;
see base dependence in the haughty mien
of lord and prince; see the magic chain
that each do wear, but deem he wear unseen,
the while with countenance glad he hide his pain,
and homage do require from each poor lowly swain.

xli 

and though to that old magè they lout down,
yet do they dear wish for his decay:
also tremble he, and aye upon the throne
of his great lord his totter step do stay,
and oft behind he skulk for great dismay;
also shake the throne, when so the villain crew,
that underneath oppress and grovel lie,
impatient of the grievous burden grow,
and loud for redress and liberty do sue.

xlii 

there mote he likewise see a ribald train
of dancer, broid'rer, slave of luxury,
who cast over all those lord and lady vain
a veil of semblance fair, and rich dye,
that none their inward baseness mote descry.
but nought be hide from that mirror bright.
which when false Archimago begin espy,
he fear for himself, and warn the knight
from so detest place to maken speedy flight.

xliii.

so on he pass, till he come have
to a small river, that full slow do glide,
as it uneath mote find its watery path
for stone and rubbish, that do choak its tide;
so lie the moulder pile on every side,
seem there a goodly city once have be,
albeit now fall be her royal pride,
yet mote her ancient greatness still be see,
still from her ruin prove the world imperial queen.

xliv 

for the rich spoil of all the continent,
the boast of art and nature there be bring,
corinthian brass, egyptian monument,
with hieroglyphic sculpture all inwrought,
and parian marble, by greek artist teach
to counterfeit the form of hero old,
and set before the eye of sober thought
Lycurgus, Homer, and alcides bold.
all these and many more that may not here be tell.

XLV. 

there in the midst of a ruin pile,
that seem a theatre of circuit vast,
where thousand may be seat, he erewhile
discover have a uncouth trophy place;
seem a huge heap of stone together cast
in nice disorder and wild symmetry,
urn, break freeze, statue half deface,
and pedestal with antique imagery
emboss, and pillar huge of costly porphyry.

xlvi 

aloft on this strange basis be pight
with girland gay adorn a golden chair,
in which aye smile with self-bred delight,
in careless pride recline a lady fair,
and to soft music lend her idle ear;
the which with pleasure so do she enthrall,
that for aught else she have but little care,
for wealth, or fame, or honour feminal,
or gentle love, sole king of pleasure natural.

xlvii 

also by her side, in rich robe array,
a eunuch sit, of visage pale and dead,
unseemly paramour for royal maid!
yet he she court oft and honour,
and oft will by her place in princely stead,
though from the dregs of earth he springen be,
and oft with regal crown she deck his head,
and oft, to sooth her vain and foolish ear,
she bid he the great name of mighty kesar bear.

xlviii.

thereto herself a pompous title bear,
for she be vain of her great ancestry,
but vain still of that prodigious store
of art and learning, which she vaunt to lie
in the rich archive of her treasury.
these she to stranger oftentimes will show,
with grave demean and solemn vanity,
then proud claim as to her merit due,
the venerable praise and title of vertù.

xlix 

vertù she be clepe, and hold her court
with outward show of pomp and majesty,
to which nevertheless few other do resort,
but man of base and vulgar industry.
or such predy as of they cozen be,
mime, fiddler, piper, eunuch squeak fine,
painter and builder, son of masonry,
who can well measure with the rule and line,
and all the order five right crafty define.

l. 

but other skill of cunning architect,
how to contrive the house for dwelling best,
with self-sufficient scorn they will neglect,
as correspond with their purpose least;
and herein be they copy of the rest,
who aye pretend love of science fair,
and generous purpose to adorn the breast
with liberal art, to vertù court repair,
yet nought but tune and name, and coin away do bear.

li.

for long, to visit her once-honoured seat
the studious son of learning have forbear:
who whilom thither run with pilgrim foot
her venerable relique to adore,
and load her bosom with the sacred store,
whereof the world large treasure yet enjoy.
but since she decline from wisdom lore,
they leave she to display her pompous toy
to virtuosi vain, and wonder-gaping boy.

lii 

forthy to she a numerous train do long
of usher in her court well practise,
who aye about the monied stranger throng,
offer with show of courteous bountihood
he through the rich apartment all to lead,
and show he all the wonder of her state,
who name and price they wise can aread,
and tell of coin of old and modern date,
and picture false and true right well discriminate.

liii 

also be they name after he, who tongue
shake the dictator in his curule chair,
and thunder through the roman senate, ring
his bold philippic in antonius ear;
which when the fairy hear, he sigh full dear,
and cast round his quick discern eye,
at every deal he drop a manly tear,
as he the stately building mote descry,
bath, theatre, and fane in moulder fragment lie.

LIV. 

and, oh! imperial city! then he say,
how be thou tumble from thy alpine throne!
whereon, like Jove on high olympus head,
thou sittedst erst unequalled and alone,
and madedst through the world thy greatness know;
while from the western isle, to indus shore,
from seven-mouthed Nilus, to the freeze don,
thy dread bolt the strong-pounced eagle bear,
and teach the nation round thy fasces to adore.

LV. 

and do among thy relique nought remain,
no little portion of that haughty spright?
which make thou whilom scorn soft pleasure chain,
and in free virtue place thy chief delight,
whereby through age shine thy glory bright?
and be there nought remain to confound
those, who regardless of thy woeful plight,
with idle wonder view thy ruin round,
and without thought survey thy memorable wound?

lvi 

arise, thou genuine Cicero, and declare
that all these mighty ruin scatter wide,
the sepulchre of roman virtue be,
and trophy vast of luxury and pride,
those fell disease whereof Rome erst die.
and do you then with vile mechanic think
your course, you son of fairy, hither guide,
that you those gay refinement may be teach,
which liberty fair land to shame and thraldom bring?

lvii 

let Rome those vassal art now mean boast,
which to her vanquish thrall she erst resign;
you who enjoy that freedom she have lose,
that great prerogative of humankind,
close to your heart the precious jewel bind,
and learn the rich possession to maintain,
learn virtue, justice, constancy of mind,
not to be move by fear or pleasure train;
be these your art, you brave, these only be humane.

lviii 

as he thus speak, the enchanter half ashamed
wist not what fit answer to devise,
also be his caitiff heart well-nigh inflame,
by that same knight so virtuous, brave and wise,
that long he doubt he farther to entice.
but he be harden and remorseless grow,
through practice old of villainy and vice;
so to his former wile he turn he soon,
as in another place hereafter shall be show.
