retaliation.

of old, when scarron his companion invite,
 each guest bring his dish, and the feast be unite;
 if our landlord supply we with beef, and with fish,
 let each guest bring himself, and he bring the best dish,
 our Dean shall be venison, just fresh from the plain;
 our Burke shall be tongue, with a garnish of brain;

our will shall be wild fowl, of excellent flavour,
 and Dick with his pepper, shall heighten their savour:
 our Cumberland sweetbread its place shall obtain,
 and Douglas be pudding, substantial and plain:
 our garrick a salad, for in he we see
 oil, vinegar, sugar, and saltness agree:
 to make out the dinner, full certain i be,
 that ridge be anchovy, and Reynolds be lamb;
 that hickey a capon, and by the same rule,
 magnanimous Goldsmith, a goosberry fool:
 at a dinner so various, at such a repast,
 who will not be a glutton, and stick to the last:
 here, waiter, more wine, let i sit while i be able,
 until all my companion sink under the table;
 then with chaos and blunder encircle my head,
 let i ponder, and tell what i think of the dead. 

here lie the good Dean, reunited to earth,
 who mix reason with pleasure, and wisdom with mirth:
 if he have any fault, he have leave we in doubt,
 at least, in six week, i can not find they out;
 yet some have declare, and it can be deny they,
 that slyboot be curse cunning to hide they,

here lie our good Edmund, who genius be such,
 we scarce can praise it, or blame it too much;
 who, bear for the universe, narrow his mind,
 and to party give up, what be mean for mankind,
 though fraught with all learning, yet strain his throat,
 to persuade Tommy Townsend to lend he a vote;
 who, too deep for his hearer, still go on refine,
 and thought of convince, while they think of dine;
 though equal to all thing, for all thing unfit,
 too nice for a statesman, too proud for a wit:
 for a patriot too cool; for a drudge, disobedient,
 and too fond of the right to pursue the expedient. 
in short, it be his fate, unemployed, or in place, sir,
 to eat mutton cold, and cut block with a razor. 

here lie honest William, who heart be a mint,
 while the owner never know half the good that be in it;
 the pupil of impulse, it force he along,
 his conduct still right, with his argument wrong;
 still aim at honour, yet fear to roam,
 the coachman be tipsy, the chariot drive home;
 will you ask for his merit, alas! he have none,
 what be good be spontaneous, his fault be his own. 

here lie honest Richard, who fate i must sigh at,
 alas, that such frolic shall now be so quiet! 
what spirit be his, what wit and what whim,
 now break a jest, and now break a limb;
 now wrangle and grumble to keep up the ball,
 now teaze and vex, yet laugh at all? 
in short so provoke a devil be Dick,
 that we wish he full ten time a day at old nick. 
but miss his mirth and agreeable vein,
 as often we wish to have Dick back again. 

here Cumberland lie, have act his part,
 the Terence of England, the mender of heart;
 a flatter painter, who make it his care
 to draw man as they ought to be, not as they be;
 his gallant be all faultless, his woman divine,
 and comedy wonder at be so fine;
 like a tragedy queen he have dizen she out,
 or rather like tragedy give a rout. 
his fool have their folly so lose in a crowd
 of virtue and feeling, that folly grow proud,
 and coxcomb alike in their fail alone,
 adopt his portrait be please with their own. 
say, where have our poet this malady catch,
 or wherefore his character thus without fault? 
say be it that vain direct his view,
 to find out man virtue and find they few,
 quite sick of pursue each troublesome elf,
 he grow lazy at last and draw from himself? 

here Douglas retire from his toil to relax,
 the scourge of impostor, the terror of quack:
 come all you quack bard, and you quack divine,
 come and dance on the spot where your tyrant recline,
 when satire and censure encircle his throne,
 i fear for your safety, i fear for my own;
 but now he be go, and we want a detector,
 our Dodds shall be pious, our kenrick shall lecture;
 Macpherson write bombast, and call it a style
 our Townshend make speech, and i shall compile;
 new lauder and bower the Tweed shall cross over,
 no countryman live their trick to discover;
 detection her taper shall quench to a spark,
 and Scotchman meet Scotchman and cheat in the dark. 

here lie David Garrick, describe i who can,
 a abridgment of all that be pleasant in man;
 as a actor, confess without rival to shine,
 as a wit, if not first, in the very first line;
 yet with talent like these, and a excellent heart,
 the man have his fail, a dupe to his art;
 like a ill-judging beauty, his colour he spread,
 and beplaster, with rouge, his own natural red. 
on the stage he be natural, simple, affect,
 it be only that, when he be off, he be act:
 with no reason on earth to go out of his way,
 he turn and he vary full ten time a-day;
 though secure of our heart, yet confound sick,
 if they be not his own by finess and trick;
 he cast off his friend, as a huntsman his pack,
 for he know when he please he can whistle they back. 
of praise a mere glutton, he swallow what come,
 and the puff of a dunce, he mistake it for fame;
 until his relish grow callous, almost to disease,
 who pepper the high, be sure to please. 
but let we be candid, and speak out our mind,
 if dunce applaud, he pay they in kind. 
you kenrick, the kelly, and woodfall so grave,
 what a commerce be you, while you get and you give? 
how do Grub-street re-echo the shout that you raise,
 while he be beroscius, and you be bepraise? 
but peace to his spirit, wherever it fly,
 to act as a angel, and mix with the sky:
 those poet, who owe their best fame to his skill,
 shall still be his flatterer, go where he will. 
old Shakespeare, receive he, with praise and with love,
 and beaumont and bens be his kelly above. 

here Hickey recline, a most blunt, pleasant creature,
 and slander itself must allow he good-nature:
 he cherish his friend, and he relish a bumper;
 yet one fault he have, and that one be a thumper:
 perhaps you may ask if the man be a miser? 
i answer, no, no, for he always be wise;
 too courteous, perhaps, or oblige flat;
 his very worst foe can accuse he of that. 
perhaps he confide in man as they go,
 and so be too foolish honest; ah no!
 then what be his fail? come tell it, and burn you,
 he be, can he help it? a special attorney. 

here Reynolds be lay, and, to tell you my mind,
 he have not leave a wise or better behind:
 he pencil be strike, resistless and grand,
 his manner be gentle, comply and bland;
 still bear to improve we in every part,
 his pencil our face, his manner our heart:
 to coxcomb averse, yet most civil steer,
 when they judge without skill he be still hard of hear:
 when they talk of their raphael, corregios and stuff,
 he shift his trumpet, and only take snuff. 
