a farewell to love.

well, since in spite of all that love can do,
 the dangerous step of honour thou will pursue,
 i will just grow wise and philosophic too:
 i will bid these tender silly thing farewell;
 and love, with thy great antidote, expel:
 i will tread the same ambitious path with thou,
 and glory too shall be my deity. 
and now i will once release my train of fool,
 in sheer good nature to the love soul;
 for pity's-sake at last i will set at right
 the vain conceit of the presumptuous wight:
 for though i shake off therons chain, yet he
 be all that ever deserve a smile from i. 
but he be unjust, and false; and i a part
 will not accept, though of a monarch heart. 
and therefore flatter hope, and wish too,
 with all love soft concomitant, adieu:
 no more to its imperious yoke i will bow;
 pride and resentment fortify i now. 
my inclination be reverse; nor can
 i but abhor the slavery of man,
 how ever the empty lord of nature boast
 over i, their fond prerogative be lose:
 for, uncontrolled, i thus resolve to rove,
 and hear no more of HYMEN, or of love:
 no more such wild fantastic thing shall charm:
 my breast; nor these Serener thought alarm. 
no more for farce; i will make a lover creep,
 and look as Scurvy as if he have bite a sheep. 
nor with dissemble smile indulge the fop,
 in pure revenge to their audacious hope;
 though at my foot a thousand victim lie,
 i will proud spurn the whine slave away. 
deaf, as the wind, or Theron, will i prove,
 and hear no more of HYMEN, or of love. 
like bright Diana now i will range the wood,
 and haunt the silent shade and silver flood
 i will find out the remote path i can,
 to shun the offensive, hate face of man. 
where i will indulge my liberty and bliss,
 and no endimyon shall obtain a kiss. 
now, Cupid, mourn; the enlargement of my fate
 thou have lose a politician in thy state:
 i can have teach thou, have thou lose thy arm,
 to fool the world with more delusive charm:
 i can have make thy taper burn more bright,
 and wing thy shaft with a unerring flight:
 it be i direct that successful dart,
 that find its way to the great have heart:
 it be i that make the lovely fl—n bow,
 a proud contemner of thy law, till now;
 i sing thy power, and inspire the swain,
 or thou have be no deity on the plain,
 yet think no more my freedom to surprise,
 which nothing can control but theron eye;
 and every flatter smile, and every grace,
 with all the air of that bewitch face,
 my pride and resolution may deface:
 for from those eye for ever i will remove,
 to shun the sight of what i will not love:
 and then, though every cyclop stretch his art,
 to form the little angry god a dart,
 i will yet defy his rage to touch my heart:
 for though my year compel i to disdain,
 of the false charmer mean to complain;
 it be yet some satisfaction to my mind,
 i for his sake abandon all mankind. 
my proud muse, to love no more a slave,
 shall sing the gust, the fortunate and brave,
 and twine she promise wreath for theron brow,
 the hero, not the faithless lover now. 
more bloom glory may thou still acquire,
 and urge my breast with a more active fire. 
may new success wait upon thy sword,
 and deathless honour all thy act record. 
may all thou do thy character complete;
 and, like thy self, be loyal still and great:
 while in a equal orb as free i move,
 and think no more of HYMEN, or of love. 
