ode viii. on leave holland.

adieu to leyden lonely bind,
 the belgian muse sober seat;
 where shed frugal gift around
 on all the favourite at her foot,
 she feed the body bulky frame
 for passive, persevere toil;
 and leave, for some ambitious aim,
 the dare mind shall scorn her homely spoil,
 she breathe maternal fog to damp its restless flame. 

adieu the grave, pacific air,
 safe from the flit mountain-breeze;
 the marshy level lank and bare,
 sacred from furrow hill or tree:
 adieu each mantling, fragrant flood,
 untaughto to murmur or to flow:
 adieu the music of the mud,
 that sooth at eve the patient lover woe,
 and wake to sprightly thought the painful poet blood. 

with look so frosty, and with step so tame,
 you careful nymph, you household thing, adieu;
 not once you teach i love or friendship flame,
 and where be he that ever teach it you? 
and you, the slow-eyed father of the land,
 with who dominion lurk from hand to hand,
 unowned, undignified by public choice,
 i go where freedom in the street be know,
 and tell a monarch on his throne,
 tell he he reign, he live but by her voice. 

o native Albion, when to thou
 shall i return to part no more? 
far from this pale, discolour sea,
 that sleep upon the reedy shore,
 when shall i blow thy azure tide,
 and, as thy fleece-white hill aspire,
 bless the fair shade that on their side
 embower the village and the sacred spire,
 while the green hedge, below, the golden slope divide? 

you nymph that guard the pathless grove,
 you blue-eyed sister of the stream,
 with who i will at morn to rove,
 with who at noon i talk in dream;
 o take i to your haunt again,
 the rocky spring, the greenwood glade;
 to prompt my slumber in the murmur shade,
 and sooth my vacant ear with many a airy strain. 

and thou, my faithful harp, no long mourn
 thy droop master unpropitious hand;
 now bright sky and fresh gale return,
 now fair maid thy melody demand. 
daughter of Albion, guard your votive lyre! 
o bloom god of thespia laureled choir,
 why sound not my harmonious as thy own,
 when all the virgin-deitie above
 with Venus and with Juno move
 in concert round thy list'ming father throne? 

thou too, protectress of my lay,
 elate with who majestic call
 above the soft italian praise,
 above the slavish wreath of Gaul,
 i dare from impious throne reclaim,
 and wanton sloth luxurious charm,
 the honour of a poet name
 to ashley wisdom, or to hamden arm. 
thou, freedom, i rejoin, and bless thy genuine flame. 

great citizen of Albion! thou
 heroic valour still attend,
 and useful science please to see
 how be her studious toil extend. 
while truth, diffuse from on high
 a lustre unconfined as day,
 fill and command the public eye,
 till pierce and sink by her pow'ful ray,
 tame sloth and monkish awe, like nightly daemon, fly. 

hence all the land the patriot ardour share;
 hence dread religion smile with social joy;
 hence the free bosom soft, lovely care,
 each graceful scene of private life employ. 
o fair Britannia, hail! — with partial love
 the tribe of man their native seat approve,
 unjust and hostile to a foreign fame;
 but when from generous mind and manly law
 a nation hold her prime applause,
 there public zeal defy the test of blame. 
