the grumbletonian; or, the dog withoutdoor.

a wealthy farmer in the west,
 with life enjoyment ample bless,
 a man esteem both far and near,
 who in his house keep special beer;
 twelve child eke around his table,
 all lusty, lively, brisk and able:

he carry wondrous well his age,
 his wife be housewifely and sage;
 they thrive, and pick up wealth apace,
 and none at church of they take place. 

two mastiff dog he keep, to guard
 his house, his poultry, and his yard;
 with offal from the meat he kill,
 their hungry paunch well he fill:
 all sleek they be, and in good case,
 and show the plenty of the place. 

but in the house they dare not enter,
 my dame her crockery will not venture;
 for she have tea-table, and china,
 and hold her head as high as any:
 her house be keep too nice and neat
 for dog to traipse with dirty foot. 

for many year these currs be quiet,
 nor grumble at their bound or diet,
 will bark at beggar or at stranger,
 and make much noise at little danger;
 but, to the comer too and fro,
 no mark of surliness they will show. 

a hound the farmer have beside,
 a hound! his heart delight and pride;
 peerless he be of all his kind,
 so fleet! he will outstrip the wind,
 the best that ever follow game,
 frolic he be, and fly his name. 

care and love by every soul,
 he range the house without controul;
 this make the angry mastiff jealous,
 fly shall be raise above his fellow:
 keep his nose warm and lick the plate,
 while they stand shiver at the gate. 

they grudge each bit that go beside they,
 and vow revenge what ever betide they;
 in short so wondrous fell they grow,
 at friend and foe they fierce fly. 

these ugly currs keep such a rout,
 that no one dare stir in or out;
 to quiet they their master try,
 but they his threat and he defy:
 their fury will not be abate,
 they bark the more, the more he rate;
 and make such a confound din,
 he think it be best to let they in:

for why, their noise disturb the head
 of my good dame, now sick abed;
 so, rather than her head shall ache,
 he let they in for quiet sake. 

but lest their rage on he shall fall,
 he wise raise his ploughman all,
 with prong, and fork, and bill in hand,
 these furious creature to withstand;
 but for this caution be no need,
 as by the sequel you may read:

for soon as ever the door be open,
 they both into the kitchen crope,
 wag their tail, all tame and mild,
 as harmless lamb, or suck child. 

these currs who be so fierce before,
 now crouch and wriggle on the floor;
 fawn at the very servant foot,
 and tremble lest they shall be beat. 

next they traverse the kitchen round,
 to see what prog be to be find;
 where, have feed to heart desire,
 they stretch themselves before the fire,
 content and snug they lie till broad day light,
 the house be still, my dame sleep well that night. 
