one Canto of a ancient poem, call the unknown knight or the tournament.

the Matten belle have sound long,
 the cock have sing their morning song,
 when lo! the tuneful clarion sound,
 (wherein all other noise be drown)
 do echo to the room around,
 and greet the ear of champion strong;
 arise, arise from downy bed
 for sun do gin to show his head! 

then each do don in seemly gear,
 what armour eke beseem to wear,
 and on each shield device shine,
 of wound heart and battle win,
 all curious and nice echon;
 with many a tassild spear;
 and mount eachone on a steed
 Unwote make lady heart to bleed. 

herald eke side the clarion wound,
 the horse start at the sound;
 the knight eachone do point the lance,
 and to the combatte do advance;
 from Hyberne, Scotland, eke from france;
 thyre prancyng horse tear the ground;
 all strive to reche the place of fight,
 the first to exercise their might —

O'Rocke upon his courser fleet,
 who swift as lightning be his foot,
 first gain the list and gat he fame;
 from west hybernee isle he come,
 his might depicture in his name. 
all dread such a one to meet;
 bold as a mountain wolf he stand,
 upon his sword sit grim death and blood. 

but when he throw down his asenglave,
 next come in sir botelier bold and brave,
 the death of many a saraceen;
 they think he a devil from hell black pen,
 ne think that any of mortal man
 can send so many to the grave. 
for his life to John rumsee he render his thanks
 descend from godred the king of the mank. 

within his sure rest he settle his spear,
 and run at O'Rocke in full career;
 their lance with the furious stroke
 into a thousand shiver break,
 even as the thunder tear the oak,
 and scatter splinter here and there;
 so great the shock, their sense do depart,
 the blood all run to strengthen up the heart. 

sir botelier rumsie first come from his trance,
 and from the Marshall take the lance;
 O'Rocke eke choose another spear,
 and run at sir botelier full career;
 his prancynge stead the ground do tear;
 in haste he make a false advance;
 sir botelier see, with might amain
 fellde he down upon the plain. 

sir pigotte novlin at the clarion sound,
 on a milkwhite stead with gold trappings around,
 he couchde in his rest, his silver-poynt spear,
 and ferslie run up in full career;
 but for his appearance he pay full dear,
 in the first course lay on the ground;
 besmear in the dust with his silver and gold,
 no long a glorious sight to behold. 

sir botelier then have conquer his twayne,
 ride conqueror off the tourney plain;
 receivy a garland from Alice hand,
 the sayr lady in the land. 
sir pigotte this view, and furious do stand,
 torment in mind and bodily pain,
 sir botelier crown, most gallant stand,
 as some tall oak within the thick wode. 

awhile the shrill clarion sound the word;
 next ride in sir John, of adderleigh lord,
 who over his back his thick shield do bring,
 in checkee of red and silver sheeninge,
 with steed and gold trappings beseem a king,
 a guild fine adder twine round his sword. 
de bretville advance a man of great might
 and couch his lance in his rest for the fight. 

ferse as the fall water of the lough,
 that tumble headlong from the mountain brow,
 even so they meet in drierie sound,
 de bretville fall upon the ground,
 the blood from inward bruise wound,
 do out his stain helmet flow;
 as some tall bark upon the foamy main,
 so lie de bretville on the plain. 

sir John of the Dale or Compton hight,
 advance next in list of fight,
 he know the trick of tourney full well,
 in run race ne man can he excel,
 or how to wield a sword better tel. 
and eke he be a man of might;
 on a black stead with silver trappynge dyght
 he darde the danger of the tourneyd sight. 

within their rest their speere they set,
 so furious each other meet. 
that compton well intend spear
 sir John his shield in piece tear,
 and wind his hand in furious geir;
 sir Johns stelae assenglave be wet:
 sir John then toe the marshal turn
 his breast with meekle fury burn. 

the tender of the field come in,
 and bid the champion not begin;
 eke tourney but one hour shall last,
 and then one hour be go and pass. 
