a imitation of the prophecy of Nereus.

from Horace, book iii. ode xxv .

by the same.

as mar his round one morning take,
(who some call earl, and some call duke)
and his new brother of the blade,
shiver with fear and frost, survey,
on Perth bleak hill he chance to spy
a age visard six foot high,
with bristle hair and visage blight,
wall-eyed, bare-haunched, and second-sighted.

the grizzly sage in thought profound
behold the chief with back so round,
then roll his eye-ball to and fro
over his paternal hill of snow,
and into these tremendous speech
break forth the prophet without breech.

into what ill betray by thou,
this ancient kingdom do i see!
her realm unpeopled and forlorn!
wae i! that ever thou be bear!
proud english loon (our clan overcome)
on scottish pad shall amble home;
i see they dress in bonnet blue,
(the spoil of thy rebellious crew)
i see the target cast away,
and chequer plad become their prey,
the chequer plad to make a gown
for many a lass in London town.

in vain the hungry mountaineer
come forth in all their warlike geer,
the shield, the pistol, durk, and dagger,
in which they daily wont to swagger;
and oft have sally out to pillage
the hen-roost of some peaceful village,
or, while their neighbour be asleep,
have carry off a lowland sheep.

what boot thy highborn host of beggar,
Mac-Leans, mackenzie, and macgregor,
with popish cut-throat, perjure ruffian,
and forster troop of raggamuffin?

in vain thy lad around thou bandy,
inflame with bagpipe and with brandy.
do not bold Sutherland the trusty,
with heart so true, and voice so rusty,
(a loyal soul) thy troop affright,
while hoarse he demand the fight?
do thou not generous ilay dread,
the brave hand, the wise head?
undaunted do thou hear the alarm
of hoary Athol sheathe in arm?

Douglas, who draw his lineage down
from thane and peer of high renown,
fiery and young, and uncontrolled,
with knight and squire, and baron bold,
(his noble household-band) advance,
and on his milkwhite courser prance.
thou Forfar to the combat dare,
grow swarthy in iberian war:
and Monroe kindle into rage
sour defy thou to engage;
he will rout thy foot, though never so many,
and horse to boot — if thou have any.

but see Argyle with watchful eye,
lodge in his deep intrenchment lie!
couch like a lion in thy way,
he wait to spring upon his prey;
while like a herd of timorous deer
thy army shake and pant with fear,
lead by their doughty general skill,
from frith to frith, from hill to hill.

be thus thy haughty promise pay
that to the chevalier be make,
when thou do oath and duty barter
for dukedom, generalship, and garter?
three moon thy Jemmy shall command,
with highland sceptre in his hand,
too good for his pretend birth
— then down shall fall the king of Perth.

it be so decree: for GEORGE shall reign,
and traitor be forswear in vain.
heaven shall for ever on he smile,
and bless he still with a Argyle.
while thou, pursue by vengeful foe,
condemn to barren rock and snow,
and hinder pass inverlocky,
shall burn thy clan, and curse poor jockey.
