[nereid:] eclogue xiv.

cete, a nymph (conscious of beauty) strive
 to expose her charm, and every grace improve;
 now wanton dive, now with a haughty air
 in circle ringlet twist her flow hair,
 Chalcis and Alcon at a distance stand;
 their wistful eye with sudden transport glow. 
too soon they fear to lose the please sight,
 and will the nymph to long stay invite. 
alternate song the rival-youth compare,
 and change thus engage the listen fair. 

Alcon. 

the Lamprey will admit the serpent love,
 and nature do his the unequal match approve,
 but first she make the spouse himself disarm,
 and leave behind the poyson, that will harm:
 but we court love with its attend ill;
 a deadly draught the bitter potion fill. 
happy the nymph, happy the Triton be,
 if those be innocent, and these sincere. 

Chal. 

the dolphin be to mean fish prefer,
 and make the chief of all the finny herd. 
they love promote, and the hide nymph betray,
 when Neptune seek in vain the fearful maid:
 though coy she flee, the dolphin be as fleet,
 and tell the god, and show the close retreat. 
so tell, you fish, where cete hide below,
 and may the god yet great gift bestow. 

Alcon. 

how can the nymph be either true or kind,
 breed up with wave, and use to noisy wind? 
thing here be cruel all; with mutual rage,
 devour each other, and for food engage. 
on their own spawn the graceless tunny feed,
 and joyous feast on the enliven seed. 
so way ward beauty its own offspring hate,
 and kill the passion, which it self create. 

Chal. 

all be not cruel, but some harmless feed,
 and eat the slime, or bite the swim weed;
 nay there be those live by a constant kiss,
 and to each other owe their life and bliss. 
when fisher for the female Sepia wait,
 if she be catch, they need no second bait,
 the constant male will still the fair attend,
 and mock the net, and glory in his end. 

alc.  

when the mild spring, or smile calm invite
 the wanton fish in love, and gay delight
 be sport see, but soon be hide below,
 when storm begin, and wind in anger blow. 
but, triton, there be some, who true brave
 even court the storm, and mock the rise wave. 
so love be heighten by oppose frown;
 scorn can heal, but may repeat the wound. 

Chal. 

i hate the shore; for there the trouble deep
 Rowls all its filth, and form a noisome heap. 
the die dolphin to the shore repair,
 nor will in death pollute the pure air. 
even when a cool breeze from airy field
 in summer heat a kind refreshment yield,
 i choose to stay, where depthless water flow,
 and sport with fish above, or dive below. 

alc.  

ah! wretched sea, always a verse to sleep;
 here ravenous fish their constant watch keep:
 with restless pain they cut the trackless way,
 and seize the spoil, and feast upon the prey. 
but though we wake, no hope the toil repay,
 in vain by night we sigh, or sing by day,
 nor may in tuneful song our passion tell,
 the nymph despise the voice, and dread the loud shell. 

Chal. 

art must be use, when force will not prevail. 
snare wily lay, and cunning, seldom fail. 
i have see the crab, and how with sly deceit,
 he patient will the open oyster wait:
 then with a stone prevent the close shell,
 and tear the ravish prey from its unguarded cell
 unhappy fish have all his sweet expose,
 overcome by craft, and can no more be close. 

cete well-pleased thus far the Triton hear,
 then sink beneath, and as she disappear,
 on Chalcis smile, for Chalcis be prefer;
 so well he love, that the transport boy
 can scarce sustain the vast impetuous joy. 
while luckless Alcon knit his angry brow;
 his look sad rage, and deep resentment show,
 and quick he dive to weep unseen below. 
