the choice; or, dull hour past.

heigho! i be wondrous dull; in truth i be wondrous sad —
 little amusement, and the weather bad;
 what shall i do? i will write — come, ready friend —
 i mean my pen — good folk, i pray attend:
 still at a loss, i do not wish to teaze; —
 my muse, assist i — teach i how to please —
 my thought be free — then, fancy, take thy range —
 i will write my wish — no choice — pshaw, how i change! 
critic, be dumb — i will the thought impart,
 that some kind youth may bid for anna heart:
 he who aspire this little heart to gain,
 some decent share of merit must attain;
 serene religion must his action guide,
 bright truth, nice honour, over his mind preside;
 prudence to guide he through life busy scene,
 never extravagant, nor ever mean;
 let he have sense design man to see,
 enough to rule himself and govern i;
 to feel for human kind — a generous soul,
 to i devote, but polite to all;
 his temper kind — of that i must be sure —
 a husband frown i never can endure;
 to female weakness mild reproof impart,
 but with indifference never chill the heart;
 no foolish fondness shall he ever show,
 but love refine, within his bosom glow;
 his manner easy, generous, void of art,
 let every word flow candid from the heart;
 his person please, in his taste refine,
 a face the index of a honest mind;
 to jealousy he never must give way,
 trust to my honour, and i will not betray;
 no flatter fribble shall my hand obtain,
 where much be say, there little can remain;
 a man for riches i can never prize, —
 let kindness grant what adverse fate deny;
 i wish not wealth, nor title do i claim,
 only let goodness mark his honest name;
 to little error i will kind bend;
 his wish, my law, i never will contend;
 and, shall he stray (as none faultless be)
 prudence shall veil it; for i will not see:
 a youth like this to share the care of life,
 shall find in i a kind and faithful wife. 
ambitious female in their wealth may glee, —
 love, worth, and honour, form the heart for i. 
methinks you frown — i hear you loud exclaim,
 "to hope so much a female be to blame;
" in modern day, do you expect to find
 "grace, worth, and goodness, with firm honour join? 
" but if so high be your pretension, tell
 "what do you boast? in what do you excel?" 
in great sincerity i now step forth,
 confess my merit humble as my worth;
 i boast no beauty — i not grace claim,
 and all my portion be, a spotless name;
 sincere and artless — man exert your skill,
 with prudent fondness make i what you will. 
blush, methinks, i hear it say, "no more! 
" no other claim! — true your merit poor. " 
yet, in life vary maze, i hope to meet
 some kindred heart, unpractised in deceit. 
to prove the tender friend — companion — wife,
 will be the sweet care of anna life;
 with temper mild, and innocent gay,
 submissive gentleness she will ever pay. —
 my friend, adieu! — my hour be past away. 
