The CHOICE; or, DULL HOUR PAST.

Heigho! I'm wond'rous dull; in truth I'm wond'rous sad —
 Little amusement, and the weather bad;
 What shall I do? I'll write — Come, ready friend —
 I mean my pen — Good folks, I pray attend:
 Still at a loss, I do not wish to teaze; —
 My muse, assist me — teach me how to please —
 My thoughts are free — then, fancy, take thy range —
 I'll write my wish — no choice — pshaw, how I change! 
Critics, be dumb — I will the thought impart,
 That some kind youth may bid for Anna's heart:
 He who aspires this little heart to gain,
 Some decent share of merit must attain;
 Serene religion must his actions guide,
 Bright truth, nice honor, o'er his mind preside;
 Prudence to guide him thro' life's busy scene,
 Never extravagant, nor ever mean;
 Let him have sense designing men to see,
 Enough to rule himself and govern me;
 To feel for human kind — a generous soul,
 To me devoted, but polite to all;
 His temper kind — of that I must be sure —
 A husband's frown I never could endure;
 To female weakness mild reproof impart,
 But with indifference never chill the heart;
 No foolish fondness should he ever shew,
 But love refin'd, within his bosom glow;
 His manner easy, gen'rous, void of art,
 Let ev'ry word flow candid from the heart;
 His person pleasing, in his taste refin'd,
 A face the index of an honest mind;
 To jealousy he never must give way,
 Trust to my honour, and I'll not betray;
 No flatt'ring fribble shall my hand obtain,
 Where much is said, there little can remain;
 A man for riches I can never prize, —
 Let kindness grant what adverse fate denies;
 I wish not wealth, nor titles do I claim,
 Only let goodness mark his honest name;
 To little errors I will kindly bend;
 His wish, my law, I never will contend;
 And, should he stray (as none faultless be)
 Prudence shall veil it; for I will not see:
 A youth like this to share the cares of life,
 Shall find in me a kind and faithful wife. 
Ambitious females in their wealth may glee, —
 Love, worth, and honor, form the heart for me. 
Methinks ye frown — I hear ye loud exclaim,
 "To hope so much a female is to blame;
" In modern days, do you expect to find
 "Grace, worth, and goodness, with firm honor join'd? 
" But if so high are your pretensions, tell
 "What do you boast? in what do you excel?" 
In great sincerity I now step forth,
 Confess my merit humble as my worth;
 I boast no beauty — I no graces claim,
 And all my portion is, a spotless name;
 Sincere and artless — Man exert your skill,
 With prudent fondness make me what you will. 
Blushing, methinks, I hear it said, "No more! 
" No other claim! — truly your merit's poor. " 
Yet, in life's varying maze, I hope to meet
 Some kindred heart, unpractis'd in deceit. 
To prove the tender friend — companion — wife,
 Will be the sweetest care of Anna's life;
 With temper mild, and innocently gay,
 Submissive gentleness she'll ever pay. —
 My friends, adieu! — my hour is past away. 
