Damon and Philander. 

Damon.

the sun with keenness dart his sultry ray;
 to some cool shade Philander haste away,
 nigh yond smooth rivulet, where the southern breeze
 so soft play among the border tree. 
beneath yond spread elm let we rest a while,
 and with our song the tedious hour beguile:
 there will i tune my pipe to delia praise,
 while every swain attentive to my lay. 

Philander.

o Damon! how insipid be thy theme? 
philander sick of thy love delia name:
 nor can the fair nymph enslave my heart;
 man soul be form to act a noble part. 
this gewgaw train can never my thought employ;
 such will dispel but can augment my joy. 
i will sing the beauty of the breathe spring,
 the treasure autumn to my barn will bring. 
to note of transport ever tune my reed,
 while on the plain my numerous flock i feed. 

Damon.

let damon breast such trivial joy disdain;
 what though my flock overspread the wide domain? 
what though my barn be with abundance store,
 and generous nectar ever grace my board? 
nor honour, riches, though their force unite,
 in delia absence ever can delight. 
o Delia! sweet than the open dawn,
 more bright than ray that cheer the dewy lawn. 
her sparkle eye the orient gem outshine,
 or bright lustre of golconda mine:
 her cheek of roseate hue, her flaxen hair,
 in easy curl, wave gentle in the air. 
her coral lip ambrosial sweet retain;
 she rival Juno in her air and mien;
 she far exceed what ancient painter draw,
 when fancy flight the cyprian queen pursue. 
such excellence may grace a prince arm;
 yet this must yield to her interior charm. 
in her fair bosom virtue bear the sway;
 there wisdom shed a pure unmingled ray. 
truth, innocence, and modesty combine
 the adorn her mind, where all perfection shine:
 apollo wit do to the maid belong;
 her voice more charm than the syren song. 

Philander.

hold, hold, dear Damon, sure too much be say;
 your delia then a most bewitch maid:
 as blind man judge of colour, so you trace
 the matchless beauty of her charm face,
 recount her virtue, and, with partial eye,
 admire in she what other will despise. 
a sad delirium sure have seize thy brain,
 which make thou fancy what the poet feign,
 of love, and such like vain fantastic whim,
 it be wild chimera all, and idle dream. 

Damon.

and do thou doubt of such a thing as love? 
if once thy breast, like i, the smart shall prove,
 more than be paint by the poet art,
 in genuine colour will affect thy heart. 
but wherefore now contemn my rural lay? 
thy note be swell once with lucretia praise! 
do she thy favour treat with disrespect,
 which make thou now all other maid neglect! 

Philander.

Lucretia still appear in all her charm,
 a match most fit for philander arm. 
what she possess yield most solid joy,
 since bag of wealth buy pleasure never can cloy,
 these beauty catch; they set my heart on fire;
 her farm, her flock, be all i do admire:
 her dart be powerful, of a yellowish hue,
 more fierce than those the fame alcides throw. 
her strike beauty in full bloom appear,
 at the dull period of full fifty year:
 then Delia will no admiration claim,
 but dear Lucretia ever be the same. 

Damon.

for this you love she; now i true find,
 that none but gild cord your heart can bind;
 nor wit nor beauty can obtain your vow;
 at mammon shrine you still devout bow. 

Philander.

vain will the attempt of either be to hold
 my amorous heart, without the force of gold:
 beauty a empty trifle still i deem,
 a childish toy, unworthy of esteem. 
its gaudy foliage may attract the eye;
 but as the tulip it will fade and die:
 the glow cheek enamour fop may prize,
 but man of sense can ruby lip despise. 
and what be wit? a giddy flutter thing,
 which can no real satisfaction bring. 
a thousand ill attend his wretched life,
 who dear companion be a witty wife:
 still she be right, and ever in the wrong,
 such elocution dwell upon her tongue. 
but if assist by the muse skill,
 he sure may dread the poison of her quill;
 she with keen satire lash all around,
 and with the rest her husband feel the wound. 
shall poverty, by sudden threat alarm,
 can wit with all its power now prove a charm? 
the fair flower Parnassus ere can boast,
 yield to the treasure of the golden coast. 
the maid who come fraught with that precious over,
 bring virtue, wit, and beauty all in store;
 this give the pallid cheek a crimson glow,
 the tawny skin the tincture of the snow. 
this make the dwarf complete in every part:
 she wound most sure who throw the golden dart. 
short of one foot, distort of one eye,
 strike by its lustre, no defect i spy. 

Damon.

thus do Philander waste his wit to prove
 a happy marriage destitute of love. 
gold, curse gold, the bane of every bliss,
 thy summum bonum, all thy happiness. 
say, to what purpose do thy word avail? 
beauty and wit to give we joy may fail. 
wit cease to please, and beauty may decay,
 riches make wing and swift fly away;
 deprive of all, what will Philander say? 
but to secure thou of thy darling charm,
 go to the mine, and lodge within her arm;
 enfold thy mistress in a fond embrace,
 for ever banish from the shepherd race. 
nor quit thy mansion till thou breathe thy last:
 such sordid soul no social joy shall taste. 
bless with my Delia on this happy plain,
 where peace and pleasure in perfection reign,
 i will more serene pass life hour away,
 than without she, though crown with princely sway. 
to please my charmer all my care shall be;
 can i be wretched when she smile on i? 
but we must go, our fleecy charge attend. 
farewell, Philander, i be still thy friend. 
the maid who real charm the heart can hold,
 must not be deem one whit the worse for gold. 
