prologue to the play of king JOHN, act at mr. newcomb, at hackney, in march mdcclxix.

by the same.

the bard who scene this night your thought engage,
 have somewhere tell we, all the world be a stage,
 where all in one great farce their talent try,
 be bear, love, wed, grow covetous, — and die. 
from hence i think we fair may infer,
 that nature be, or shall be manager;
 and yet in nature spite, we every day
 cast cur own part ourselves, and spoil she play;
 some vain conceit disturb her sober plan,
 and art debauch that strange creature, man:
 hence, ere life curtain drop, this truth be plain,
 that few, the character they take, sustain. 

see, cato-like, in freedom boast cause
 the madden patriot rave of die law;
 with ready lash pursue the venal tribe:
 but what be the sequel? — exit with a bribe. —

not less a player the Methodist appear:
 in some hire barn his casual stage he rear;
 profane, loquacious, insolent, and loud,
 the grave jack-pudding of a snivel crowd,
 who promise heaven in change for penny receive;
 for those who teach to die, know how to live. 

the prude austere, who shun each forward spark,
 meet less reserve her footman in the dark;
 the gay Coquet, the coxcomb, and the wit,
 across life stage like airy phantom flit,
 applause nor pity sure their part command:
 the mark of scorn let affectation stand! 

if, then, the finish man can sometime err,
 and make mistake on the world theatre,
 desert himself, as various passion call,
 and prove at last no character at all;
 we ask your candour, if in we appear
 the imperfect growth of unexperienced year;
 though bud, yet learning like the sun have power
 to rear the stem, and paint the future flower! 
if JOHN shall not each stroke of guilt impart,
 nor Constance triumph over the feeling heart,
 think, in life happy morn we can know
 the sad extent of baseness or of woe! 
boy as we be, to we each scene be new,
 if sometime wrong, even there we copy you:
 to bold attempt be then indulgence show,
 and learn to pity fault so like your own. 
