the scavenger.

a town eclogue. in the manner of swift.

by the same.

awake my muse, prepare a lofty theme:
the wind valley and the dimple stream
delight not all; quit, quit the verdant field,
and try what dusty street and alley yield.

where Avon wide flow, and gather fame,
a town there stand, and Warwick be its name,
for useful art, entitle once to share
the mercian dame, elfleda guardian care.
nor less for feat of chivalry renowned
when her own Guy be with her laurel crown.
now indolence subject the drowsy place,
and bind in silken bond her feeble race.
no busy artisan their fellow greet,
no load carriage obstruct the street;
scarce here and there a saunter band be see,
and pavement dread the turf encroach green.

last of the toil race there live a pair,
breed up in labour, and inure to care,
to sweep the street their task from sun to sun,
and seek the nastiness that other shun.
more plod hind, or dame, you never shall see,
he gaffer pestel hight, and gammer she.
as at their door they sit one summer day,
old pestel first essay the plaintive lay,
his gentle mate the plaintive lay return,
and thus alternate their grief they mourn.

O. p. 

alas! be ever such fine weather see!
how dusty be the road, the street how clean!
how long, you almanac, will it be dry?
empty my cart how long, and idle i?
once other day, and different fate we know,
that something have to carry, i to do.
now even at best the time be none so good,
but it be hard work to scrape a livelihood.
the cattle in the stall resign their life,
and balk the shambles, and the bloody knife.
the affright farmer pensive sit at home,
and turnpike threaten to complete my doom.

wife.

well! for the turnpike, that will do no hurt,
the road, they say, be not much the better for it.
but much i fear this murrain, where it will end,
for sure the cattle do our door befriend.
oft have i praise they as they stalk along,
their fat the butcher please, but i their dung.

O. p. 

see what a little dab of dirt be here!
but yield all Warwick more, o tell i where?
lo! where this ant-like hillock scarce be see,
heap upon heap, and load on load have be:
big and big the proud dunghill grow,
until my diminish house be hide from view.

wife.

ah! gaffer pestel, what brave day be those,
when high than our house, our muck-hill rose?
the grow mount i view with joyful eye,
and mark what each load add to its size.
wrap in its fragrant steam we often sit,
and to its praise hold delightful chat.
nor do i ever neglect my mite to pay,
to swell the goodly heap from day to day;
for this each morn i ply the stubbed-broom;
until i scarce hobble over my furrow room:
for this i squat i on my ham each night,
and mingle profit sweet with sweet delight?
a cabbage once i buy, but small the cost,
nor do i think the farthing all be lose:
again you sell its well digest store,
to dung the garden where it grow before.

O. p. 

what though the boy, and boylike fellow jeer,
and at the scavenger employment sneer,
yet then at night content i tell my gain,
and think well pay their malice and my pain.

why toil the merchant but to swell his store?
why crave the wealthy landlord still for more?
why will our gentry flatter, trade, and lie,
why pack the card, and — what do you call the die?
all, all the please path of gain pursue,
and wade through thick and thin, as we folk do.
sweet be the scent that from advantage spring,
and nothing dirty that good interest bring.
it be this that cure the scandal, and the smell,
the rest — even let our learned better tell.

wife.

when goody Dobbins call i filthy bear,
and name the kennel and the duck chair:
with patience i can hear the scold quean,
for sure it be dirtiness that keep i clean.
clean be my gown on Sunday, though not fine,
nor mistress ***'s cap so white as i.
a slut in silk or kersey be the same,
nor sweet always be the fine dame.

thus wail they pleasure past, and present care,
while the starve hog join his complaint to they.
to still his grunt different way they tend
to west-gate one, and one to cotton-end.
