dar-thula: a poem.

daughter of heaven, fair be thou! the silence of thy face be pleasant. thou come forth in loveliness: the star attend thy blue step in the east. the cloud rejoice in thy presence, o moon, and brighten their dark-brown side. who be like thou in heaven, daughter of the night? the star be ashamed in thy presence, and turn aside their green, sparkle eye. — whither do thou retire from thy course, when the darkness of thy countenance grow? have thou thy hall like Ossian? dwell thou in the shadow of grief? have thy sister fall from heaven? be they who rejoice with thou, at night, no more? — yes! — they have fall, fair light! and thou do often retire to mourn. — but thou thyself shall fail, one night; and leave thy blue path in heaven. the star will then lift their green head: they who be ashamed in thy presence, will rejoice.

thou be now clothe with thy brightness: look from thy gate in the sky. burst the cloud, o wind, that the daughter of night may look forth, that the shaggy mountain may brighten, and the ocean roll its blue wave, in light.

nathos be on the deep, and althos that beam of youth, ardan be near his brother; they move in the gloom of their course. the son of usnoth move in darkness, from the wrath of carborne cairbar.

who be that dim, by their side? the night have cover her beauty. her hair sigh on ocean wind; her robe stream in dusky wreath. she be like the fair ghost of heaven, in the midst of his shadowy mist. who be it but dar-thula, the first of erin maid? she have flee from the love of cairbar, with the carborne nathos. but the wind deceive thou, o dar-thula; and deny the woody etha, to thy sail. these be not thy mountain, nathos, nor be that the roar of thy climb wave. the hall of cairbar be near; and the tower of the foe lift their head. Ullin stretch its green head into the sea; and tura bay receive the ship. where have you be, you southern wind! when the son of my love be deceive? but you have be sport on plain, and pursue the thistle beard. o that you have be rustle in the sail of nathos, till the hill of etha rose! till they rise in their cloud, and see their come chief! long have thou be absent, nathos! and the day of thy return be past.

but the land of stranger see thou, lovely: thou be lovely in the eye of dar-thula. thy face be like the light of the morning, thy hair like the raven wing. thy soul be generous and mild, like the hour of the set sun. thy word be the gale of the reed, or the glide stream of lora.

but when the rage of battle rise, thou be like a sea in a storm; the clang of thy arm be terrible: the host vanish at the sound of thy course. — it be then dar-thula behold thou, from the top of her mossy tower: from the tower of seláma, where her father dwell.

lovely art thou, o stranger! she say, for her tremble soul arise. fair art thou in thy battle, friend of the fall Cormac! why do thou rush on, in thy valour, youth of the ruddy look? few be thy hand, in battle, against the carborne cairbar! — o that i may be free of his love! that i may rejoice in the presence of nathos! — bless be the rock of etha; they will behold his step at the chace! they will see his white bosom, when the wind lift his raven hair!

such be thy word, dar-thula, in seláma mossy tower. but, now, the night be round thou: and the wind have deceive thy sail. the wind have deceive thy sail, dar-thula: their bluster sound be high. cease a little while, o north wind, and let i hear the voice of the lovely. thy voice be lovely, dar-thula, between the rustle blast.

be these the rock of nathos, and the roar of his mountain-stream? come that beam of light from usnoth nightly hall? the mist roll around, and the beam be feeble: but the light of dar-thula soul be the carborne chief of etha! son of the generous usnoth, why that break sigh? be we not in the land of stranger, chief of echo etha?

these be not the rock of nathos, he reply, nor the roar of his stream. no light come from etha hall, for they be distant far. we be in the land of stranger, in the land of carborne cairbar. the wind have deceive we, dar-thula. Ullin lift here her green hill. — go towards the north, althos; be thy step, ardan, along the coast; that the foe may not come in darkness, and our hope of etha fail. —

i will go towards that mossy tower, and see who dwell about the beam. — rest, dar-thula, on the shore! rest in peace, thou beam of light! the sword of nathos be around thou, like the lightning of heaven.

he go. she sit alone, and hear the roll of the wave. the big tear be in her eye; and she look for the carborne nathos. — her soul tremble at the blast. and she turn her ear towards the tread of his foot. — the tread of his foot be not hear. where be thou, son of my love! the roar of the blast be around i. dark be the cloudy night. — but nathos do not return. what detain thou, chief of etha? — have the foe meet the hero in the strife of the night? —

he return, but his face be dark: he have see his depart friend. — it be the wall of tura, and the ghost of Cuchullin stalk there. the sigh of his breast be frequent; and the decay flame of his eye terrible. his spear be a column of mist: the star look dim through his form. his voice be like hollow wind in a cave: and he tell the tale of grief. the soul of nathos be sad, like the sun in the day of mist, when his face be watery and dim.

why be thou sad, o nathos, say the lovely daughter of colla? thou be a pillar of light to dar-thula: the joy of her eye be in etha chief. where be my friend, but nathos? my father rest in the tomb. silence dwell on seláma: sadness spread on the blue stream of my land. my friend have fall, with Cormac. the mighty be slay in the battle of Ullin.

evening darken on the plain. the blue stream fail before my eye. the unfrequent blast come rustle in the top of seláma grove. my feat be beneath a tree on the wall of my father. truthil pass before my soul; the brother of my love; he that be absent in battle against the carborne cairbar.

bend on his spear, the gray-haired colla come: his down-cast face be dark, and sorrow dwell in his soul. his sword be on the side of the hero: the helmet of his father on his head. — the battle grow in his breast. he strive to hide the tear.

dar-thula, he sigh say, thou be the last of colla race. truthil be fall in battle. the king of seláma be no more. — cairbar come, with his thousand, towards seláma wall. — colla will meet his pride, and revenge his son. but where shall i find thy safety, dar-thula with the dark-brown hair! thou be lovely as the sun-beam of heaven, and thy friend be low!

and be the son of battle fall, i say with a burst sigh? cease the generous soul of truthil to lighten through the field? — my safety, colla, be in that bow; i have learn to pierce the deer. be not cairbar like the hart of the desert, father of fall truthil?

the face of age brighten with joy: and the crowd tear of his eye pour down. the lip of colla tremble. his grey beard whistle in the blast. thou be the sister of truthil, he say, and thou burn in the fire of his soul. take, dar-thula, take that spear, that brazen shield, that burnish helmet: they be the spoil of a warrior: a son of early youth. — when the light rise on seláma, we go to meet the carborne cairbar. — but keep thou near the arm of colla; beneath the shadow of my shield. thy father, dar-thula, can once defend thou; but age be tremble on his hand. — the strength of his arm have fail, and his soul be darken with grief.

we pass the night in sorrow. the light of morning rise. i shine in the arm of battle. the gray-haired hero move before. the son of seláma convene around the sound shield of colla. but few be they in the plain, and their lock be grey. the youth have fall with truthil, in the battle of carborne Cormac.

companion of my youth! say colla, it be not thus you have see i in arm. it be not thus i stride to battle, when the great confadan fall. but you be load with grief. the darkness of age come like the mist of the desert. my shield be wear with year; my sword be fix in its place. i say to my soul, thy evening shall be calm, and thy departure like a fade light. but the storm have return; i bend like a age oak. my bough be fall on seláma, and i tremble in my place. — where be thou, with thy fall hero, o my carborne truthil! thou answer not from thy rush blast; and the soul of thy father be sad. but i will be sad no more, cairbar or colla must fall. i feel the return strength of my arm. my heart leap at the sound of battle.

the hero draw his sword. the gleam blade of his people rise. they move along the plain. their grey hair stream in the wind. — cairbar sit, at the feast, in the silent plain of lona. he see the come of the hero, and he call his chief to battle.

why shall i tell to nathos, how the strife of battle grow! i have see thou, in the midst of thousand, like the beam of heaven fire; it be beautiful, but terrible; the people fall in its red course. — the spear of colla slay, for he remember the battle of his youth. a arrow come with its sound, and pierce the hero side. he fall on his echo shield. my soul start with fear; i stretch my buckler over he; but my heave breast be see. cairbar come, with his spear, and he behold seláma maid: joy rise on his dark-brown face; he stay the lift steel. he raise the tomb of colla; and bring i weep to seláma. he speak the word of love, but my soul be sad. i see the shield of my father, and the sword of carborne truthil. i see the arm of the dead, and the tear be on my cheek.

then thou do come, o nathos: and gloomy cairbar flee. he flee like the ghost of the desert before the morning beam. his host be not near: and feeble be his arm against thy steel.

why be thou sad, o nathos! say the lovely maid of colla?

i have meet, reply the hero, the battle in my youth. my arm can not lift the spear, when first the danger rise; but my soul brighten before the war, as the green narrow vale, when the sun pour his streamy beam, before he hide his head in a storm. my soul brighten in danger before i see seláma fair; before i see thou, like a star, that shine on the hill, at night; the cloud slow come, and threaten the lovely light.

we be in the land of the foe, and the wind have deceive we, dar-thula! the strength of our friend be not near, nor the mountain of etha. where shall i find thy peace, daughter of mighty colla! the brother of nathos be brave: and his own sword have shine in war. but what be the son of usnoth to the host of carborne cairbar! o that the wind have bring thy sail, Oscar king of man! thou do promise to come to the battle of fall Cormac. then will my hand be strong as the flame arm of death. cairbar will tremble in his hall, and peace dwell round the lovely dar-thula. but why do thou fall, my soul? the son of usnoth may prevail.

and they will prevail, o nathos, say the rise soul of the maid: never shall dar-thula behold the hall of gloomy cairbar. give i those arm of brass, that glitter to that pass meteor; i see they in the dark-bosomed ship. dar-thula will enter the battle of steel. — ghost of the noble colla! do i behold thou on that cloud? who be that dim beside thou? it be the carborne truthil. shall i behold the hall of he that slay seláma chief! no: i will not behold they, spirit of my love!

joy rise in the face of nathos, when he hear the white bosome maid. daughter of seláma! thou shine on my soul. come, with thy thousand, cairbar! the strength of nathos be return. and thou, o age usnoth, shall not hear that thy son have flee. i remember thy word on etha; when my sail begin to rise: when i spread they towards Ullin, towards the mossy wall of tura. thou go, he say, o nathos, to the king of shield; to Cuchullin chief of man who never flee from danger. let not thy arm be feeble: neither be thy thought of flight; lest the son of Semo say that etha race be weak. his word may come to usnoth, and sadden his soul in the hall. — the tear be on his cheek. he give this shine sword.

i come to tura bay: but the hall of tura be silent; i look around, and there be none to tell of the chief of dunscaich. i go to the hall of his shell, where the arm of his father hang. but the arm be go, and age lamhor sit in tear.

whence be the arm of steel, say the rise lamhor? the light of the spear have long be absent from tura dusky wall. — come you from the roll sea? or from temora mournful hall?

we come from the sea, i say, from usnoth rise tower. we be the son of slis-sáma, the daughter of carborne Semo. where be tura chief, son of the silent hall? but why shall nathos ask? for i behold thy tear. how do the mighty fall, son of the lonely tura?

he fall not, lamhor reply, like the silent star of night, when it shoot through darkness and be no more. but he be like a meteor that fall in a distant land; death attend its green course, and itself be the sign of war. — mournful be the bank of lego, and the roar of streamy Lara! there the hero fall, son of the noble usnoth.

and the hero fall in the midst of slaughter, i say with a burst sigh. his hand be strong in battle; and death be behind his sword. — we come to lego mournful bank. we find his rise tomb. his conpanion in battle be there; his bard of many song. three day we mourn over the hero: on the four, i strike the shield of caithbat. the hero gather around with joy, and shake their beamy spear.

corlath be near with his host, the friend of carborne cairbar. we come like a stream by night, and his hero fall. when the people of the valley rise, they see their blood with morning light. but we roll away, like wreath of mist, to cormac echo hall. our sword rise to defend the king. but temora hall be empty. Cormac have fall in his youth. the king of Erin be no more.

sadness seize the son of Ullin, they slow, gloomy retire: like cloud that, long have threaten rain, retire behind the hill. the son of usnoth move, in their grief, towards tura sound bay. we pass by seláma, and cairbar retire like lano mist, when it be drive by the wind of the desert.

it be then i behold thou, o maid, like the light of etha sun. lovely be that beam, i say, and the crowd sigh of my bosom rise. thou come in thy beauty, dar-thula, to etha mournful chief. — but the wind have deceive we, daughter of colla, and the foe be near.

yes! — the foe be near, say the rustle strength of althos. i hear their clang arm on the coast, and see the dark wreath of erin standard. distinct be the voice of cairbar, and loud as cromla fall stream. he have see the dark ship on the sea, before the dusky night come down. his people watch on lena plain, and lift ten thousand sword.

and let they lift ten thousand sword, say nathos with a smile. the son of carborne usnoth will never tremble in danger. why do thou roll with all thy foam, thou roar sea of Ullin? why do you rustle, on your dark wing, you whistle tempest of the sky? — do you think, you storm, that you keep nathos on the coast? no: he shall detain he, child of the night! — althos! bring my father arm: thou see they beam to the star. bring the spear of Semo, it stand in the dark-bosomed ship.

he bring the arm. nathos clothe his limb in all their shine steel. the stride of the chief be lovely: the joy of his eye terrible. he look towards the come of cairbar. the wind be rustle in his hair. dar-thula be silent at his side: her look be fix on the chief. she strive to hide the rise sigh, and two tear swell in her eye.

althos! say the chief of etha, i see a cave in that rock. place dar-thula there: and let thy arm be strong. ardan! we meet the foe, and call to battle gloomy cairbar. o that he come in his sound steel, to meet the son of usnoth! — dar-thula! if thou shall escape, look not on the fall nathos. lift thy sail, o althos, towards the echo grove of etha.

tell to the chief, that his son fall with fame; that my sword do not shun the battle. tell he i fall in the midst of thousand, and let the joy of his grief be great. daughter of colla! call the maid to etha echo hall. let their song arise for nathos, when shadowy autumn return. — o that the voice of cona may be hear in my praise! then will my spirit rejoice in the midst of my mountain wind.

and my voice shall praise thou, nathos chief of the woody etha! the voice of Ossian shall rise in thy praise, son of the generous usnoth! why be i not on Lena, when the battle rose? then will the sword of Ossian defend thou; or himself fall low.

we sit, that night, in Selma round the strength of the shell. the wind be abroad, in the oak; the spirit of the mountain shriek. the blast come rustle through the hall, and gentle touch my harp. the sound be mournful and low, like the song of the tomb. Fingal hear it first, and the crowd sigh of his bosom rise. — some of my hero be low, say the gray-haired king of Morven. i hear the sound of death on the harp of my son. Ossian, touch the sound string; bid the sorrow rise; that their spirit may fly with joy to morven woody hill.

i touch the harp before the king, the sound be mournful and low. bend forward from your cloud, i say, ghost of my father! bend; lay by the red terror of your course, and receive the fall chief; whether he come from a distant land, or rise from the roll sea. let his robe of mist be near; his spear that be form of a cloud. place a half-extinguished meteor by his side, in the form of the hero sword. and, oh! let his countenance be lovely, that his friend may delight in his presence. bend from your cloud, i say, ghost of my father! bend.

such be my song, in Selma, to the lightly-trembling harp. but nathos be on ullin shore, surround by the night; he hear the voice of the foe amid the roar of tumble wave. silent he hear their voice, and rest on his spear.

morning rose, with its beam; the son of Erin appear; like grey rock, with all their tree, they spread along the coast. cairbar stand, in the midst, and grim smile when he see the foe.

nathos rush forward, in his strength; nor can dar-thula stay behind. she come with the hero, lift her shine spear. and who be these, in their armour, in the pride of youth? who but the son of usnoth, althos and dark-haired ardan?

come, say nathos, come! chief of the high temora! let our battle be on the coast for the white-bosomed maid. his people be not with nathos; they be behind that roll sea. why do thou bring thy thousand against the chief of etha? thou do fly from he, in battle, when his friend be around he.

youth of the heart of pride, shall erin king fight with thou? thy father be not among the renown, nor of the king of man. be the arm of foe in their hall? or the shield of other time? cairbar be renown in temora, nor do he fight with little man.

the tear start from carborne nathos; he turn his eye to his brother. their spear fly, at once, and three hero lie on earth. then the light of their sword gleam on high; the rank of Erin yield; as a ridge of dark cloud before a blast of wind.

then cairbar order his people, and they draw a thousand bow. a thousand arrow fly; the son of usnoth fall. they fall like three young oak which stand alone on the hill; the traveller see the lovely tree and wonder how they grow so lonely; the blast of the desert come, by night, and lay their green head low; next day he return but they be wither, and the heath be bare.

dar-thula stand in silent grief, and behold their fall; no tear be in her eye: but her look be wild sad. pale be her cheek; her tremble lip break short a half-formed word. her dark hair fly on the wind. — but gloomy cairbar come. where be thy lover now? the carborne chief of etha? have thou behold the hall of usnoth? or the dark-brown hill of Fingal? my battle have roar on Morven, do not the wind meet dar-thula. Fingal himself will have be low and sorrow dwell in Selma.

her shield fall from dar-thula arm, her breast of snow appear. it appear, but it be stain with blood for a arrow be fix in her side. she fall on the fall nathos, like a wreath of snow. her dark hair spread on his face, and their blood be mix round.

daughter of colla! thou be low! say cairbar hundred bard; silence be at the blue stream of seláma, for truthil race have fail. when will thou rise in thy beauty, first of erin maid? thy sleep be long in the tomb, and the morning distant far. the sun shall not come to thy bed and say, awake dar-thula! awake, thou first of woman! the wind of spring be abroad. the flower shake their head on the green hill, the wood wave their grow leaf. retire, o sun, the daughter of colla be asleep. she will not come forth in her beauty: she will not move, in the step of her loveliness.

such be the song of the bard, when they raise the tomb. i sing, afterwards, over the grave, when the king of Morven come; when he come to green Ullin to fight with carborne cairbar.

