gratitude.

a pastoral.

menalcas.

friend Colin! well overtake. i have of late
 observe thy cheerful mien, and airy gait:
 say, what auspicious change, since other day,
 when by thy lonely cot i take my way? 
sorrow and sadness then overspread thy brow,
 and every look do gloomy care disclose:
 now joy diffusive in thy aspect rise,
 and mirth and gladness sparkle in thy eye. 

Colin.

where have thou live, menalcas, not to know,
 who generous bounty have remove my woe? 
i think, the gracious carolina's name,
 ere this, have fill the sound trump of fame. 

menalcas.

that gracious name the world be bind to bless;
 all grateful swain her generous deed confess:
 but, Colin, say, have she remove thy care? 
i be happy, when thy happiness i hear. 

Colin.

o you, menalcas, know my abject birth,
 bear in a cot, and breed to till the earth;
 on rigid worldling always doom to wait,
 force at their frugal hand my bread to get:
 but when my want to Caroline be know,
 she bless i with a pasture of my own. 
this make new pleasure in my bosom glow;
 these joyful look i to her bounty owe. 

menalcas.

and may kind heaven reward that gracious queen,
 who to thy want have so propitious be! 
yet, though her bounty have thy want supply,
 let not her bounty ever exalt thy pride;
 but keep a humble mind, a grateful heart;
 her favour far exceed thy own desert:
 heaven move the goodness of the royal dame;
 and heaven and she thy gratitude must claim. 

Colin.

when i she first into her favour take,
 i cut this oaken staff, (it be now my Crook)
 and grave her royal bounty in the rind;
 but grave it deep in my grateful mind:
 the letter in the staff may wear away;
 those write in my soul shall never decay. 

menalcas.

so may thy little flock increase their tale;
 so may thy field of pasture never fail;
 may heaven and she, in just proportion, still
 or smile, or frown, as thou be good, or ill. 

Colin.

may hungry fox kill my tender lamb,
 may poisonous serpent suck their bleat dam;
 and may my cow distend udder fail,
 elude my hope, and never fill the pail;
 in short, (to make my curse the more complete,
 though it be the only thing i dread and hate)
 may heaven and heavenly Caroline remove
 their smile, if Colin ever ungrateful prove. 

menalcas.

thy thanks and prayer her generous soul will please;
 a tribute just due, and pay with ease:
 sometime a song perhaps she may require;
 and thou to sing but late do aspire;
 when in a abject, low, laborious state,
 sink deep in care, and press beneath their weight;
 then (so, at least, it be say among our swain)
 in sonnet Colin charm away his pain:
 much soon now thou may a song rehearse,
 whenever she condescend to hear thy verse. 

Colin.

o friend! too well you know, my simple strain
 be far inferior to each rural swain:
 yet, since great Carolina think no scorn,
 to patronize a shepherd mean bear;
 henceforth i will strive to raise my voice sublime,
 and with her royal name adorn my rhyme;
 i will on each verdant mountain sing her praise,
 and vocal groves shall echo to my lay;
 to every Swain her godlike worth proclaim,
 nor ever drop the please glorious theme. 

menalcas.

then, since we be meet, where friendly branch spread,
 and tremble leaf diffuse a cool shade;
 since, on the spray, the thrush and Finch rejoice,
 invoke thy muse, and tune thy rural voice. 

Colin.

another day my rural voice i will raise,
 another day the muse shall tune she lay:
 but now, alas! such crowd joy i find,
 no word can speak the transport of my mind. 
will Phoebus warm i with poetic fire,
 or will the mantuan Muse my tongue inspire;
 as great ELIZA shine in spencer line,
 the great Carolina shall in mine;
 then will i emulate the tuneful throng,
 and with her glorious name immortalize my song. 
