SHAKSPEARE.

o sovereign master! who with lonely state
do rule as in some isle enchant land,
on who soft air and shadowy spirit wait,
while scene of "fairy" bloom at thy command,
on thy wild shore forgetful can i lie,
and list, till earth dissolve to thy sweet minstrelsy! 

call by thy magic from the hoary deep,
aërial form shall in bright troop ascend,
and then a wondrous masque before i sweep;
while sound, that the earth own not, seem to blend
their steal melody, that when the strain
cease, i shall weep, and will so dream again!

the song have cease. ah! who, pale shade, be thou,
sad rave to the rude tempestuous night!
sure thou have have much wrong, so stern thy brow,
so piteous thou do tear thy tress white;
so wild thou do cry, blow, bitter wind!
you element, i call not you unkind! 

beneath the shade of nod branch grey,
'amid rude romantic wood, and glen forlorn,
the merry hunter wear the hour away;
ring the deep forest to the joyous horn!
joyous to all, but he, who with sad look
hang idle muse by the brawl brook.

but mark the merry elf of fairy land! 
to the high moon gleamy glance,
they with shadowy morrice dance;
soft music die along the desert sand;
soon at peep of cold-eyed day,
soon the numerous light decay;
merry, now merry,
after the dewy moon they fly.

the charm be wrought: i see a age form,
in white robe, on the wind seashore stand;
over the career surge he wave his wand:
hark! on the bleak rock burst the swell storm:
now from bright open cloud i hear a lay,
come to these yellow sand, fair stranger, come away! 

see you pass by the weird sister pale! 
mark you the lower castle on the heath!
hark, hark, be the deed do — the deed of death!
the deed be do: — hail, king of Scotland, hail!
i see no more; — to many a fearful sound
the bloody cauldron sink, and all be dark around.

pity! touch the tremble string,
a maid, a beauteous maniac, wild sing:
they lay he in the ground so cold,
upon his breast the earth be throw;
high be heap the grassy mould,
oh! he be dead and go. 
the wind of the winter blow over his cold breast,
but pleasant shall be his rest.

o sovereign master! at who sole command
we start with terror, or with pity weep;
oh! where be now thy all-creating wand;
bury ten thousand thousand fathom deep!
the staff be break, the powerful spell be flee,
and never earthly guest shall in thy circle tread.
