Gotham.

book ii.

how much mistake be the man, who think
 that all who will, without restraint, may drink,
 may large drink, even till their bowel burst,
 plead no right but mere that of thirst,
 at the pure water of the live well,
 beside who stream the muse love to dwell! 
verse be with they a knack, a idle toy,
 a rattle gild over, on which a boy
 may play untaught, while, without art or force,
 make it but jingle, music come of course. 

little do such man know the toil, the pain,
 the daily, nightly rack of the brain,
 to range the thought, the matter to digest,
 to cull fit phrase, and reject the rest,
 to know the time when humour, on the cheek
 of mirth may hold her sport, when wit shall speak,
 and when be silent; when to use the power
 of ornament, and how to place the flower,
 so that they neither give a tawdry glare,
 nor waste their sweetness in the desert air;
 to form (which few can do, and scarce one,
 one critic in a age can find, when do)
 to form a plan, to strike a grand outline,
 to fill it up, and make the picture shine
 a full, and perfect piece; to make coy rhyme
 renounce her folly, and with sense keep time,
 to make proud sense against her nature bend,
 and wear the chain of rhyme, yet call her friend. 

some fop there be, among the scribble tribe,
 who make it all their business to describe,
 no matter whether in, or out of place;
 studious of finery, and fond of lace,
 alike they trim, as coxcomb fancy bring,
 the rag of beggar, and the robe of king. 
let dull propriety in state preside
 over her dull child, nature be their guide,
 wild nature, who at random break the fence
 of those tame drudge judgement, taste, and sense,
 nor will forgive herself the mighty crime
 of keep term with person, place, and time. 

let liquid gold emblaze the sun at noon,
 with borrow beam let silver pale the moon,
 let surge hoarse lash the resound shore,
 let stream Maeander, and let torrent roar,
 let they breed up the melancholy breeze
 to sigh with sigh, sob with sob tree,
 let vale embroidery wear, let flower be tinge
 with various tint, let cloud be palace or fringe,
 they have their wish; like idle monarch boy,
 neglect thing of weight, they sigh for toy;
 give they the crown, the sceptre, and the robe,
 who will may take the power, and rule the globe. 

other there be, who, in one solemn pace,
 with as much zeal, as Quakers rail at lace,
 rail at needful ornament, depend
 on sense to bring they to their journey end. 
they will not (heaven forbid) their course delay,
 nor for a moment step out of the way,
 to make the barren road those grace wear,
 which nature will, if please, have plant there. 

vain man! who blind thwart nature plan
 never find a passage to the heart of man;
 who, breed among fog in academic land,
 scorn every thing they do not understand;
 who, destitute of humour, wit, and taste,
 let all their little knowledge run to waste,
 and frustrate each good purpose, while they wear
 the robe of learning with a sloven air. 
though solid reason arm each sterling line,
 though truth declare aloud, "this work be i,"
 vice, while from page to page dull moral creep,
 throw by the book, and virtue fall asleep. 

sense, mere, dull, formal sense, in this gay town
 must have some vehicle to pass she down,
 nor can she for a hour ensure her reign,
 unless she bring fair pleasure in her train. 
let she, from day to day, from year to year,
 in all her grave solemnity appear,
 and, with the voice of trumpet, through the street
 deal lecture out to every one she meet,
 half who pass by be deaf, and other half
 can hear indeed, but only hear to laugh. 

quit then, you grave son of letter pride,
 take for once experience as a guide,
 quit this grand error, this dull college mode;
 be your pursuit the same, but change the road;
 write, or at least appear to write with ease,
 and, if you mean to profit, learn to please. 

in vain for such mistake they pardon claim,
 because they wield the pen in virtue name. 
thrice sacred be that name, thrice bless the man
 who think, speak, write, and live on such a plan! 
this, in himself, himself of course must bless,
 but can with the world promote success. 
he may be strong, but, with effect to speak,
 shall recollect his reader may be weak;
 plain, rigid truth, which saint with comfort bear,
 will make the sinner tremble, and despair. 
true virtue act from love, and the great end,
 at which she noble aim, be to amend;
 how then do those mistake, who arm her law
 with rigour not their own, and hurt the cause
 they mean to help, while with a zealot rage
 they make that goddess, who they will have engage
 our dear love, in hideous terror rise! 
such may be honest, but they can be wise. 

in her own full, and perfect blaze of light,
 virtue break forth too strong for human sight:
 the dazzle eye, that nice but weak sense,
 shut herself up in darkness for defence. 
but, to make strong conviction deep sink,
 to make the callous feel, the thoughtless think,
 like god make man, she lay her glory by,
 and beam mild comfort on the ravish eye. 
in earnest most, when most she seem in jest,
 she worm into, and wind around the breast,
 to conquer vice, of vice appear the friend,
 and seem unlike herself to gain her end. 
the son of sin, to while away the time
 which linger on their hand, of each black crime
 to hush the painful memory, and keep
 the tyrant conscience in delusive sleep,
 read on at random, nor suspect the dart
 until they find it root in their heart. 
against vice they give their vote, nor know at first
 that, curse that, themselves too they have curse,
 they see not, till they fall into the snare,
 delude into virtue unaware. 
thus the shrewd doctor, in the spleen-struck mind
 when pregnant horror sit, and brood over wind,
 discard drug, and strive how to please,
 lure on insensible, by slow degree,
 the patient to those manly sport, which bind
 the slacken sinew, and relieve the mind;
 the patient feel a change as wrought by stealth,
 and wonder on demand to find it health. 

some few, who fate ordain to deal in rhyme
 in other land, and here in other time,
 who, wait at their birth, the midwife Muse
 sprinkle all over with castalian dew,
 to who true genius give his magic pen,
 who art by just degree lead up to man,
 some few, extreme well-shunned, have steer between
 these dangerous rock, and hold the golden mean. 
sense in their work maintain her proper state,
 but never sleep, or labour with her weight;
 grace make the whole look elegant, and gay,
 but never dare from sense to run astray. 
so nice the master touch, so great his care,
 the colour bold glow, not idle glare. 
mutual give, and receive aid,
 they set each other off, like light and shade,
 and, as by stealth, with so much softness blend,
 it be hard to say, where they begin, or end. 
both give we charm, and neither give offence;
 sense perfect grace, and grace enliven sense. 

peace to the man, who these high honour claim,
 health to their soul, and to their memory fame:
 be it my task, and no mean task, to teach
 a reverence for that worth i can reach;
 let i at distance, with a steady eye,
 observe, and mark their passage to the sky,
 from envy free, applaud such rise worth,
 and praise their heaven, though pinion down to earth. 

have i the power, i can not have the time,
 while spirit flow, and life be in her prime,
 without a sin against pleasure, to design
 a plan, to methodise each thought, each line
 high to finish, and make every grace,
 in itself charm, take new charm from place. 
nothing of book, and little know of man,
 when the mad fit come on, i seize the pen,
 rough as they run, the rapid thought set down,
 rough as they run, discharge they on the town. 
hence rude, unfinished brat, before their time,
 be bear into this idle world of rhyme,
 and the poor slattern Muse be bring to bed
 with all her imperfection on her head. 
some, as no life appear, no pulse play
 through the dull, dubious mass, no breath make way,
 doubt, great doubt, till for a glass they call,
 whether the child can be baptise at all. 
other, on other ground, objection frame,
 and, grant that the child may have a name,
 doubt, as the sex may well a midwife pose,
 whether they shall baptise it, verse or prose. 

even what my master please; bard, mild, meek man,
 in love to critic stumble now and then. 
something i do myself, and something too,
 if they can do it, leave for they to do. 
in the small compass of my careless page
 critic may find employment for a age;
 without my blunder they be all undo;
 i twenty feed, where Mason can feed one. 

when satire stoop, unmindful of her state,
 to praise the man i love, curse he i hate;
 when sense, in tide of passion bear along,
 sink to prose, degrade the name of song;
 the censor smile, and, while my credit bleed,
 with as high relish on the carrion feed
 as the proud earl feed at a turtle feast,
 who, turn by gluttony to worse than beast,
 eat, until his bowel gush upon the floor,
 yet still eat on, and die call for more. 

when loose digression, like a colt unbroken,
 spurn connection, and her formal yoke,
 bound through the forest, wander far astray
 from the know path, and love to loose her way,
 it be a full feast to all the mongrel pack
 to run the rambler down, and bring she back. 

when gay description, fancy fairy child,
 wild without art, and yet with pleasure wild,
 wake with nature at the morning hour
 to the lark call, walk over the open flower
 which large drink all night of heaven fresh dew,
 and, like a mountain nymph of dian crew,
 so light walk, she not one mark imprint,
 nor brush off the dew, nor soil the tint;
 when thus description sport, even at the time
 that drum shall beat, and cannon roar in rhyme,
 critic can live on such a fault as that
 from one month to the other, and grow fat. 

you mighty monthly judge, in a dearth
 of letter blockhead, conscious of the worth
 of my material, which against your will
 oft you have confess, and shall confess it still,
 material rich, though rude, inflame with thought,
 though more by fancy than by judgement wrought,
 take, use they as your own, a work begin,
 which suit your genius well, and weave they in,
 frame for the critic loom, with critic art,
 till thread on thread depend, part on part,
 colour with colour mingle, light with shade,
 to your dull taste a formal work be make,
 and, have wrought they into one grand piece,
 swear it surpass Rome, and rival Greece. 

nor think this much, for at one single word,
 soon as the mighty critic fiat hear,
 science attend their call; their power be own;
 order take place, and genius be dethrone;
 letter dance into book, defiance hurl
 at mean, as atom dance into a world. 

i high business call, a great plan,
 worthy man whole employ, the good of man,
 the good of man commit to my charge;
 if idle fancy ramble forth at large,
 careless of such a trust, these harmless lay
 may friendship envy, and may folly praise,
 the crown of Gotham may some Scot assume,
 and vagrant Stuarts reign in churchill room. 

o my poor people, o thou wretched earth,
 to who dear love, though not engage by birth,
 my heart be fix, my service deep swear,
 how (by thy father can that thought be bear,
 for monarch, will they all but think like i,
 be only father in the best degree)
 how must thy glory fade, in every land
 thy name be laugh to scorn, thy mighty hand
 be shorten, and thy zeal, by foe confess,
 bless in thy self, to make thy neighbour bless,
 be rob of vigour, how must freedom pile,
 the boast of age, which adorn the isle
 and make it great and glorious, fear abroad,
 happy at home, secure from force and fraud,
 how must that pile, by ancient wisdom raise
 on a firm rock, by friend admire and praise,
 envy by foe, and wonder at by all,
 in one short moment into ruin fall,
 shall any slip of stuart tyrant race
 or bastard, or legitimate, disgrace
 thy royal seat of empire! but what care
 what sorrow must be i, what deep despair
 and self-reproach, shall that hate line
 admittance gain through any fault of i! 
curse be the cause whence gotham evil spring,
 though that curse cause be find in gotham king. 

let war, with all his needy, ruffian band,
 in pomp of horror, stalk through gotham land
 knee-deep in blood; let all her stately tower
 sink in the dust; that court, which now be we,
 become a den, where beast may, if they can,
 a lodging find, nor fear rebuke from man;
 where yellow harvest rise, be bramble find;
 where vine now creep, let thistle curse the ground;
 dry, in her thousand valley, be the rill;
 barren the cattle, on her thousand hill;
 where power be place, let tiger prowl for prey;
 where justice lodge, let wild ass bray;
 let cormorant in church make their nest,
 and, on the sail of commerce, bittern rest;
 be all, though prince in the earth before,
 her merchant bankrupt, and her mart no more;
 much rather will i, may the will of fate
 give i to choose, see gotham ruin state
 by ill on ill, thus to the earth weigh down,
 than live to see a Stuart wear her crown. 

let heaven in vengeance arm all nature host,
 those servant, who their maker know, who boast
 obedience as their glory, and fulfil,
 unquestioned, their great master sacred will. 
let rage wind root up the boil deep,
 and, with destruction big, over Gotham sweep;
 let rain rush down, till faith with doubtful eye
 look for the sign of mercy in the sky;
 let pestilence in all her horror rise;
 wherever i turn, let famine blast my eye;
 let the earth yawn, and, ever they have time to think,
 in the deep gulph let all my subject sink
 before my eye, while on the verge i reel;
 feel, but as a monarch ought to feel,
 not for myself, but they, i will kiss the rod,
 and, have own the justice of my god,
 myself with firmness to the ruin give,
 and die with those for who i wish to live. 

this (but may heaven more merciful decree
 never tempt his servant with such ill as these)
 this, or my soul deceive i, i can bear;
 but that the Stuart race my crown shall wear,
 that crown, where, high cherish, freedom shine
 bright as the glory of the midday sun,
 bear and breed slave, that they, with proud misrule,
 shall make brave, free-born man, like boy at school,
 to the whip crouch and tremble — o, that thought! 
the labour brain be even to madness bring
 by the dread vision, at the mere surmise
 the throng spirit, as in tumult, rise,
 my heart, as for a passage, loud beat,
 and, turn i where i will, distraction meet. 

o my brave fellow, great in art and arm,
 the wonder of the earth, who glory warm
 to high achievement, can your spirit bend
 through base controul (you never can descend
 so low by choice) to wear a tyrant chain,
 or let, in freedom seat, a Stuart reign. 
if fame, who have for age far and wide
 spread in all realm, the cowardice, the pride,
 the tyranny, and falsehood of those lord,
 content you not, search england fair record,
 ENGLAND, where first the breath of life i draw,
 where, next to Gotham, my best love be due. 
there once they rule, though crush by william hand,
 they rule no more, to curse that happy land. 

the first, who, from his native soil remove,
 hold england sceptre, a tame tyrant prove. 
virtue he lack, curse with those thought which spring
 in soul of vulgar stamp, to be a king;
 spirit he have not, though he laugh at law,
 to play the bold-faced tyrant with applause;
 on practise most mean he raise his pride,
 and craft oft give, what wisdom oft deny. 

never can he feel how true man be bless
 in blessing those around he; in his breast,
 crowd with folly, honour find no room;
 mark for a coward in his mother womb,
 he be too proud without affront to live,
 too timorous to punish or forgive. 

to gain a crown, which have in course of time,
 by fair descent, be his without a crime,
 he bear a mother exile; to secure
 a great crown, he base can endure
 the spill of her blood by foreign knife,
 nor dare revenge her death who give he life;
 nay, by fond fear, and fond ambition lead,
 strike hand with those by who her blood be shed. 

call up to power, scarce warm on England throne,
 he fill her court with beggar from his own,
 turn where you will, the eye with scots be catch,
 or english knave who will be scotsmman think. 
to vain expense unbounded loose he give,
 the dupe of Minions, and of slave the slave;
 on false pretence mighty sum he raise,
 and damn those senate rich, who, poor, he praise;
 from empire throw, and doom to beg her bread,
 on foreign bounty while a daughter feed,
 he lavish sum, for she receive, on man
 who name will fix dishonour on my pen. 

lie be his plaything, parliament his sport,
 bookworm and catamite engross the court;
 vain of the scholar, like all scotsmman since
 the pedant scholar, he forget the prince,
 and, have with some trifle store his brain,
 never learn, or wish to learn the art to reign. 
enough he know to make he vain and proud,
 mock by the wise, the wonder of the crowd;
 false friend, false son, false father, and false king,
 false wit, false statesman, and false every thing,
 when he shall act, he idle choose to prate,
 and pamphlet write, when he shall save the state. 

religious, if religion hold in whim,
 to talk with all, he let all talk with he,
 not on God honour, but his own intent,
 not for religion sake, but argument;
 more vain if some sly, artful, high-dutch slave,
 or, from the Jesuit school, some precious knave
 conviction feign, than if, to peace restore
 by his full soldiership, world hail he lord. 

power be his wish, unbounded as his will,
 the power, without controul, of do ill.. 
but what he wish, what he make bishop preach,
 and statesman warrant, hang within his reach
 he dare not seize; fear give, to gall his pride,
 that freedom to the realm his will deny. 

of treaty fond, overween of his part,
 in every treaty, of his own mean art
 he fall the dupe; peace be his coward care,
 even at a time when justice call for war;
 his pen he will draw, to prove his lack of wit,
 but, rather than unsheathe the sword, submit;
 truth fair must record, and, please to live
 in league with mercy, justice may forgive
 kingdom betray, and world resign to Spain,
 but never can forgive a Raleigh slay. 

at length (with white let freedom mark that year)
 not fear by those, who most he wish to fear,
 not love by those, who most he wish to love,
 he go to answer for his fault above,
 to answer to that god, from who alone
 he claim to hold, and to abuse the throne,
 leave behind, a curse to all his line,
 the bloody legacy of right divine. 

with many virtue which a radiance fling,
 round private man; with few which grace a king,
 and speak the monarch, at that time of life
 when passion hold with reason doubtful strife,
 succeed CHARLES, by a mean sire undo,
 who envy virtue, even in a son. 

his youth be froward, turbulent, and wild;
 he take the man up, ever he leave the child;
 his soul be eager for imperial sway
 ever he have learn the lesson to obey. 
surround by a fawn, flatter throng,
 judgement each day grow weak, and humour strong;
 wisdom be treat as a noisome weed,
 and all his folly let to run to seed. 

what ill from such beginning needs must spring! 
what ill to such a land, from such a king! 
what can she hope! what have she not to fear! 
base Buckingham possess his youthful ear;
 Strafford and Laud, when mount on the throne
 engross his love, and make he all their own,
 Strafford and Laud, who bold dare avow
 the traitorous doctrine teach by Tory now;
 each strive undo he, in his turn and hour,
 the first with pleasure, and the last with power. 

think (vain thought, disgraceful to the throne!) 
that all mankind be make for king alone,
 that subject be but slave, and what be whim
 or worse in common man, be law in he;
 drink with prerogative, which fate decree
 to guard good king, and tyrant to mislead,
 which, in a fair proportion, to deny
 allegiance dare not, which to hold too high
 no good can wish, no coward king can dare,
 and hold too high, no english subject bear;
 besiege by man of deep and subtle art,
 man void of principle, and damn with part,
 who see his weakness, make their king their tool,
 then most a slave, when most he seem to rule;
 take all public step for private end,
 deceive by favourite, who he call friend,
 he have not strength enough of soul to find
 that monarch, mean as blessing to mankind,
 sink their great state, and stamp their fame undo,
 when, what be mean for all, they give to one;
 listen uxorious, while a woman prate,
 model the church, and parcel out the state,
 while (in the state not more than woman read)
 high-churchman preach, and turn his pious head;
 tutor to see with ministerial eye;
 forbid to hear a loyal nation cry;
 make to believe (what can a favourite do)
 he hear a nation hear one or two;
 teach by state-quack himself secure to think,
 and out of danger, even on danger brink;
 while power be daily crumble from his hand,
 while murmur run through a insult land,
 as if to sanction tyrant heaven be bind,
 he proud seek the ruin which he find. 

twelve year, twelve tedious and inglorious year,
 do ENGLAND, crush by power and awe by fear,
 while proud oppression strike at freedom root,
 lament her senate lose, her Hampden mute. 
illegal tax, and oppressive loan,
 in spite of all her pride, call forth her groan,
 patience be hear her grief aloud to tell,
 and loyalty be tempt to rebel. 

each day new act of outrage shake the state,
 new court be raise to give new doctrine weight;
 state-inquisition keep the realm in awe,
 and curse star-chamber make, or rule the law;
 jury be pack, and judge be unsound;
 through the whole kingdom not one Pratt be find. 

from the first moment of his giddy youth
 he hate senate, for they tell he truth. 
at length against his will compel to treat,
 those who he can not fright, he strive to cheat,
 with base dissemble every grievance hear,
 and, often give, often break his word. 
o where shall helpless truth for refuge fly,
 if king, who shall protect she, dare to lie? 

those who, the general good their real aim,
 seek in their country be good their monarch fame,
 those who be anxious for his safety, those
 who be induce by duty to oppose,
 their truth suspect, and their worth unknown,
 he hold as foe, and traitor to his throne,
 nor find his fatal error till the hour
 of save he be go and pass, till power
 have shift hand, to blast his hapless reign,
 make their faith, and his repentance vain. 

hence (by that curse confine to gotham foe)
 war, dread to mention, civil war arise;
 all act of outrage, and all act of shame
 stalk forth at large, disguise with honour name;
 rebellion, raise high her bloody hand,
 spread universal havoc through the land;
 with zeal for party, and with passion drink,
 in public rage all private love be sink,
 friend against friend, brother against brother stand,
 and the son weapon drink the father blood;
 nature, aghast, and fearful lest her reign
 shall last no long, bleed in every vein. 

unhappy Stuart! harsh though that name,
 grate on my ear, i shall have die with shame,
 to see my king before his subject stand,
 and at their bar hold up his royal hand,
 at their command to hear the monarch plead,
 by their decree to see that monarch bleed. 
what though thy fault be many, and be great,
 what though they shake the basis of the state,
 in royalty secure thy person stand,
 and sacred be the fountain of thy blood. 
vile minister, who dare abuse their trust,
 who dare seduce a king to be unjust,
 vengeance, with justice league, with power make strong,
 have noble crush; the king can do no wrong. 

yet grieve not, CHARLES, nor thy hard fortune blame;
 they take thy life, but they secure thy fame. 
their great crime make thy like speck appear,
 from which the sun in glory be not clear. 
have thou in peace and year resign thy breath
 at nature call, have thou lay down in death
 as in a sleep, thy name, by justice bear
 on the four wind, have be in piece tear. 
pity, the virtue of a generous soul,
 sometime the vice, have make thy memory whole. 
misfortune give, what virtue can not give,
 and bid, the tyrant slay, the martyr live. 

you prince of the earth, you mighty few,
 who, world subdue, can yourself subdue,
 who, goodness scorn, wish only to be great,
 who breath be blast, and who voice be fate,
 who own no law, no reason but your will,
 and scorn restraint, though it be from do ill,
 who of all passion groan beneath the worst,
 then only bless when they make other curse;
 think not, for wrong like these unscourged to live;
 long may you sin, and long may heaven forgive;
 but, when you least expect, in sorrow day,
 vengeance shall fall more heavy for delay;
 nor think that vengeance heap on you alone
 shall (poor amends) for injure world atone;
 no; like some base distemper, which remain,
 transmit from the taint father vein,
 in the son blood, such broad and general crime
 shall call down vengeance even to late time,
 call vengeance down on all who bear your name,
 and make their portion bitterness and shame. 

from land to land for year compel to roam,
 while usurpation lord it at home,
 of majesty unmindful, force to fly,
 not dare, like a king, to reign, or die,
 recall to repossess his lawful throne
 more at his people seek, than his own,
 another CHARLES succeed; in the school
 of travel he have learn to play the fool,
 and, like pert pupil with dull tutor send
 to shame their country on the continent,
 from love of ENGLAND by long absence wean,
 from every court he every folly glean,
 and be, so close do evil habit cling,
 till crown, a beggar; and when crown, no king. 

those grand and general power, which heaven design
 a instance of his mercy to mankind,
 be lose, in storm of dissipation hurl,
 nor will he give one hour to bless a world;
 light than levity which stride the blast,
 and, of the present fond, forget the past,
 he change and change, but, every hope to curse,
 change only from one folly to a worse;
 state he resign to those who state can please,
 careless of majesty, his wish be ease;
 pleasure, and pleasure only be his aim;
 king of less wit may hunt the bubble fame;
 dignity, through his reign, be make a sport,
 nor dare decorum show her face at court,
 morality be hold a stand jest,
 and faith a necessary fraud at best;
 courtier, their monarch ever in their view,
 possess great talent, and abuse they too;
 whatever be light, impertinent, and vain,
 whatever be loose, indecent, and profane,
 (so ripe be folly, folly to acquit)
 stand all absolve in that poor bauble, wit. 

in gratitude, alas! but little read,
 he let his father servant beg their bread,
 his father be faithful servant, and his own,
 to place the foe of both around his throne. 

bad counsel he embrace through indolence,
 through love of ease, and not through want of sense;
 he see they wrong, but rather let they go
 as right, than take the pain to make they so. 

woman rule all, and minister of state
 be for command at toilette force to wait;
 woman, who have, as monarch, grace the land,
 but never govern well at second-hand. 

to make all other error slight appear,
 in memory fix, stand Dunkirk and Tangier;
 in memory fix so deep, that time in vain
 shall strive to wipe those record from the brain,
 amboyna stand — god, that a king can hold
 in such high estimate, vile, paltry gold,
 and of his duty be so careless find,
 that, when the blood of subject from the ground
 for vengeance call, he shall reject their cry,
 and, bribe from honour, lie his thunder by,
 give holland peace, while english victim groan,
 and butcher subject wander, unatoned! 
o, dear, deep injury to england fame,
 to they, to we, to all! to he, deep shame! 
of all the passion which from frailty spring,
 avarice be that which least become a king. 

to crown the whole, scorn the public good,
 which through his reign he little understand,
 or little heed, with too narrow aim
 he reassure a bigot brother claim,
 and, have make time-serving senate bow,
 sudden die, that brother best know how. 

no matter how — he sleep among the dead,
 and JAMES his brother reign in his stead. 
but such a reign — so glare a offence
 in every step against freedom, law, and sense,
 against all the right of nature general plan,
 against all which constitute a Englishman,
 that the relation will mere fiction seem,
 the mock creation of a poet dream,
 and the poor bard will, in this sceptic age,
 appear as false as their historian page. 

ambitious folly seize the seat of wit,
 christian be force by bigot to submit,
 pride without sense, without religion zeal,
 make dare inroad on the commonweal,
 stern persecution raise her iron rod,
 and call the pride of king, the power of god,
 conscience and fame be sacrifice to Rome,
 and ENGLAND weep at freedom sacred tomb. 

her law despise, her constitution wrench
 from its due, natural frame, her right retrench
 beyond a coward sufferance, conscience force,
 and heal justice from the crown divorce,
 each moment pregnant with vile act of power,
 her patriot bishop sentence to the tower,
 her OXFORD (who yet love the Stuart name)
 brand with arbitrary mark of shame,
 she weep — but weep not long; to arm she fly,
 at honour call the avenge sword she draw,
 turn all her terror on the tyrant head,
 and send he in despair to beg his bread,
 while she (may every state in such distress
 dare with such zeal, and meet with such success)
 while she (may Gotham, shall my abject mind
 choose to enslave, rather than free mankind,
 pursue her step, tear the proud tyrant down,
 nor let i wear if i abuse the crown)
 while she (through every age, in every land,
 write in gold let revolution stand)
 while she, secure in liberty and law,
 find what she seek, a saviour in Nassau. 
