address to health.

— 1784. 

o! goddess, in who green retreat
 mirth, youth, and laughter, love to meet,
 and round thy flaunt, breezy bower,
 weave many a knot fringe of flower,
 who sweet head, nod, seem to say —
 if health you seek, we show the way! 
but not amid green retreat alone,
 the shrub-built court, or mossy throne,
 where flower with meek contention vie
 to yield perfume, or win the eye,
 inquire swain the goddess find
 on the hoar rock beat by the wind;
 indifferent though her glossy hair
 tremble at every breath of air —
 even though her playful curl be flow
 upon the breeze that be round her blow. 
still she bound on — the swain pursue —
 through daisy field and woodland too;
 and, on the pathless mountain side,
 take exercise to be their guide;
 for she bestow the well-earned wealth —
 the generous almoner of health;
 her gift hand round to those who know
 to brush the mead, or climb the brow;
 to rise when ruddy morn bestow
 on the pale sky the blush rose,
 while yet the hawthorn hang with dew,
 and spangle bright with every hue;
 while bird yet sing their first good-morrow,
 and nature smile bode nought of sorrow:
 it be then that health hold forth her hand,
 and bid they trip the furrow land;
 that exercise shall warm glow
 the fair-won treasure to bestow;
 that sleep shall ask no downy bed,
 alike to she where rest her head,
 whether on moss-grown turf recline,
 in shady grot, or cool wind,
 on earth green lap overhang with oak,
 or sound slumber on the rock;
 for exercise unerring know
 the vary couch of sweet repose;
 know, too, that health the path shall tread,
 and turn to down the rocky bed. 

ah! goddess, will thou never attend? 
will thou never meet one as a friend? 
it be not because i have not be
 amid the nymph and shepherd see;
 for, as they frolic over the mead,
 gay bound to the oaten reed,
 this foot, i ween, as light can pass
 as any yet that tread the grass;
 why then, ah! why have thou still be
 the saddener of my mirthful scene! 
for thou I have seek in every shade, —
 to thou I have due oblation pay;
 with wake morn have leave my bed,
 while the light breeze play round my head;
 and cowslip rise beneath my foot,
 aurora infant ray to meet. 
when sober eve, "the matron grey,"
 be take leave of sultry day;
 ever yet the sun, that scorch before,
 with beam oblique glance on the shore;
 ever yet his radiance leave the sky,
 and dewy damp begin to rise;
 ever the blue mist, at distance see,
 have furl his dark unwholesome screen;
 i eager go with search eye
 to meet thou, mountain exercise,
 still trust thou will bring to i
 the buskin nymph i fear i never again shall see! 

but since in vain i search around —
 since health be nowhere to be find,
 to cheerfulness i bend the knee,
 the goddess next of kin to thou! 
and she, so soft, thy form shall wear,
 hang round my bed, and over my chair,
 that sickness shall let minute pass,
 nor see one sand forsake the glass. 
though ever faint as she move,
 and droop even in fragrant grove;
 who lifeless frame no art can cheer,
 nor all the change of the year;
 nor song, nor pipe, can bid she raise
 one cheer thought of better day; —
 nor all the floweret nature spread
 on her green lap in leafy bed,
 can over her cheek prolong the smile,
 though balmy zephyr play the while,
 till touch by thou, thou goddess dear! 
who dry this eye of many a tear. 
and oft, when sickness by my side
 have every other joy deny,
 with hope or fancy in thy train
 thou soothe, or seem to soothe my pain,
 and banish every thought of sorrow
 by gay point to tomorrow. 
fancy will weave a wreath of flower,
 and dress the nimble-footed hour,
 that henceforth ever more shall go
 "upon the light fantastic toe;"
 not heavy, as beat time
 to every plaintive note of i;
 for hope, with smile that may deceive
 a heart less will to believe,
 will wave her hand, and point, say,
 health keep for thou yond come day. 

again deceive; the flatterer send
 her second self, and best of friend;
 she, who her cup so oft have bring,
 not fill with the enliven draught,
 yet taste so like, you scarce can tell, —
 content can imitate so well;
 so well can counterfeit her air,
 so well can chant her note that cheer,
 that ever, when she meet my eye,
 methinks the rosy goddess by. 

hygea, then, bind through the vale,
 and listen to each shepherd tale,
 and let the nymph around thou throng,
 enrapture with thy matin song;
 and on the heart feel every word
 strike the soft, sweet, harmonic chord,
 which thrill through the frame shall rise,
 and sparkle in the telltale eye. 

but what have i of comfort lose,
 that healthy, stout frame can boast! 
have i not sister, ever near,
 o ever kind! o ever dear! 
who suffer not the wind to wave
 over the bend shrub they prop and save. 
from autumn fade form they hide,
 and winter strip hand they guide;
 and even midst the summer heat
 a equal watchfulness i meet. 
away then, health! thy frown be vain,
 thou can not touch my soul with pain! 
