ode.

to independency.

by mr. Mason.

i 

here, on my native shore recline,
while silence rule this midnight hour,
i woo thou, goddess. on my muse mind
descend, propitious power!
and bid these ruffle gale of grief subside:
bid my calm soul with all thy influence shine;
as yond chaste orb along this ample tide
draw the long lustre of her silver line,
while the hush breeze its last weak whisper blow,
and lull old Humber to his deep repose.

ii.

come to thy votary ardent prayer,
in all thy graceful plainness dress;
no knot confine thy wave hair,
no zone thy float vest.
unsullied honour deck thy open brow,
and candor brighten in thy modest eye:
thy blush be warm content aetherial glow,
thy smile be peace; thy step be liberty:
thou scatter blessing round with lavish hand,
as spring with careless fragrance fill the land.

iii.

as now over this lone beach i stray;
thy favourite Swain oft steal along,
and artless weave his doric lay,
far from the busy throng.
thou hear he, goddess, strike the tender string,
and bid his soul with bold passion move:
strait these responsive shore forget to ring,
with beauty praise, or plaint of slight love;
to lofty flight he dare genius rise,
and lead the war, against thy, and freedom foe.

iv.

point with satire keen steel,
the shaft of wit he dart around:
even mitred dullness learn to feel,
and shrink beneath the wound.
in awful poverty his honest muse
walk forth vindictive through a venal land:
in vain corruption shed her golden dew,
in vain oppression lift her iron hand;
he scorn they both, and, arm with truth alone,
bid lust and folly tremble on the throne.

v. 

behold, like he, immortal maid,
the muse vestal fire i bring:
here at thy foot the spark i spread;
propitious wave thy wing,
and fan they to that dazzle blaze of song,
that glare tremendous on the son of pride.
but, hark, methinks i hear her hallow tongue!
in distant trill it echos over the tide;
now meet my car with warble wild free,
as swell the lark meridian ecstasy.

vi.

"fond youth! to marvell patriot fame,
"thy humble breast must never aspire.
"yet nourish still the lambent flame;
"still strike thy blameless lyre:
"lead by the moral muse secure rove;
"and all the vernal sweet thy vacant youth
"can cull from busy fancy fairy grove,
"o hang their foliage round the fane of truth:
"to art like these devote thy tuneful toil,
"and meet its fair reward in d'arcy smile. "

vii.

"it be he, my son, alone shall cheer
"thy sicken soul; at that sad hour,
"when over a much-loved parent bier
"thy duteous sorrow shower:
at that sad hour; when all thy hope decline;
when pine care lead on her pallid train,
and see thou, like the weak, and widow vine,
wind thy blast tendril over the plain.
at that sad hour shall d'arcy lend his aid,
and raise with friendship arm thy droop head.

viii.

"this fragrant wreath, the muse meed,
"that bloom those vocal shade among,
"where never flattery dare to tread,
"or interest be servile throng;
"receive, my favour son, at my command,
"and keep, with sacred care, for d'arcy brow:
"tell he, it be weave by my immortal hand,
"i breathe on every flower a pure glow;
"say, for thy sake, i send the gift divine
"to he, who call thou his, yet make thou mine. "
