the passage of the mountain of saint Gothard.

to my child. 

you plain, where three fold harvest press the ground,
 you clime, where genial gale incessant swell,
 where art and nature shed profuse round
 their rival wonder — Italy, farewell. 

still may thy year in full splendour shine! 
its icy dart in vain may winter throw! 
to thou, a parent, sister, i consign,
 and winge with health, i woo thy gale to blow. 

yet, please, helvetia rugged brow i see,
 and through their craggy steep delight roam;
 please with a people, honest, brave and free,
 while every step conduct i near home. 

i wander where tesino mad flow,
 from cliff to cliff in foam eddy toss;
 on the rude mountain barren breast he rise,
 in po broad wave now hurry to be lose. 

his shore, neat hut and verdant pasture fill,
 and hill where wood of pine the storm defy;
 while, scorn vegetation, high still,
 rise the bare rock coeval with the sky. 

upon his bank a favour spot i find,
 where shade and beauty tempt to repose;
 within a grove, by mountain circle round,
 by rock overhang, my rustic seat i choose. 

advance thence, by gentle pace and slow,
 unconscious of the way my footstep press,
 sudden, support by the hill below,
 saint gothard summit rise above the rest. 

 'midst tower cliff and tract of endless cold
 the industrious path pervade the rugged stone,
 and seem — Helvetia let thy toil be tell —
 a granite girdle over the mountain throw. 

no haunt of man the weary traveller greet,
 no vegetation smile upon the moor,
 save where the floweret breathe uncultured sweet,
 save where the patient monk receive the poor. 

yet let not these rude path be cold trace,
 let not these wild with listless step be tread,
 here fragrance scorn not to perfume the waste,
 here charity uplift the mind to god. 

his humble board the holy man prepare,
 and simple food, and wholesome lore bestow,
 extol the treasure that his mountain bear,
 and paint the peril of impend snow. 

for while bleak winter numb with chill hand —
 where frequent cross mark the traveller fate —
 in slow procession move the merchant band,
 and silent bend, where totter ruin wait. 

yet 'midst those ridge, 'midst that drift snow,
 can nature deign her wonder to display;
 here Adularia shine with vivid glow,
 and gem of crystal sparkle to the day. 

here too, the hoary mountain brow to grace,
 five silver lake, in tranquil state be see;
 while from their water, many a stream we trace,
 that, scape from bondage, roll the rock between. 

hence flow the Reuss to seek her wed love,
 and, with the Rhine, germanic clime explore;
 her stream i mark, and see she wild move
 down the bleak mountain, through her craggy shore. 

my weary footstep hope for rest in vain,
 for steep on steep, in rude confusion rise;
 at length i pause above a fertile plain
 that promise shelter and foretell repose. 

fair run the streamlet over the pasture green,
 its margin gay, with flock and cattle spread;
 embower tree the peaceful village screen,
 and guard from snow each dwelling jut shed. 

sweet vale! who bosom waste and cliff surround,
 let i awhile thy friendly shelter share! 
emblem of life! where some bright hour be find
 amid the dark, dreary year of care. 

delve through the rock, the secret passage bend;
 and beauteous horror strike the dazzle sight;
 beneath the pendent bridge the stream descend
 calm — till it tumble over the frown height. 

we view the fearful pass — we wind along
 the path that mark the terror of our way —
 'mid beetling rock, and hang wood among,
 the torrent pour, and breathe its glitter spray. 

weary at length, serener scene we hail —
 more culture grove overshade the grassy mead,
 the neat, though wooden hamlet, deck the vale,
 and altorf spire recall heroic deed. 

but though no more amid those scene i roam,
 my fancy long each image shall retain —
 the flock return to its welcome home —
 and the wild carol of the cowherd strain. 

lucernia lake its glassy surface show,
 while nature vary beauty deck its side;
 here, rock and wood its narrow wave enclose,
 and there, its spread bosom open wide. 

and hail the chapel! hail the platform wild! 
where tell direct the avenge dart,
 with well string arm, that first preserve his child,
 then winge the arrow to the tyrant heart. 

across the lake, and deep embower in wood,
 behold another hallow chapel stand,
 where three Swiss hero, lawless force withstand,
 and stamp the freedom of their native land. 

their liberty require no rite uncouth,
 no blood demand, and no slave enchain;
 her rule be gentle and her voice be truth,
 by social order form, by law restrain. 

we quit the lake — and cultivation toil,
 with nature charm combine, adorn the way,
 and well earn wealth improve the ready soil,
 and simple manner still maintain their sway. 

farewell Helvetia! from who lofty breast,
 proud Alps arise, and copious river flow;
 where, source of stream, eternal glacier rest,
 and peaceful science gild the plain below. 

oft on thy rock the wonder eye shall gaze,
 thy valley oft the rapture bosom seek —
 there, nature hand her bold work display,
 here, bliss domestic beam on every cheek. 

hope of my life! dear child of my heart! 
that anxious heart, to each fond feeling true,
 to you still pant each pleasure to impart,
 and more — oh transport — reach its home and you. 
