cruelty and lust.

a epistolary essay. 

where can the wretchede of all creature fly
 to tell the story of her misery? 
where, but to faithful Celia, in who mind
 a manly bravery with soft pity join. 
i fear these line will scarce be understand,
 blur with incessant tear, and write in blood:
 but if you can the mournful page read,
 the sad relation show you such a deed,
 as all the annal of the infernal reign
 shall strive to equal, or exceed, in vain. 

neronior fame, no doubt, have reach your ear,
 who cruelty have cause a sea of tear:
 fill each lament town with funeral sigh,
 deplore widow shriek, and orphan cry. 
at every health the horrid monster quaff,
 ten wretch die, and as they die, he laugh:
 till, tire with act devil, he be lead,
 drink with excess of blood, and wine, to bed,
 oh curse place! — i can no more command
 my pen, shame and confusion shake my hand:
 but i must on, and let my Celia know,
 how barbarous be my wrong, how vast my woe. 

among those croud of western youth, who run
 to meet the brave, betray, unhappy man,
 my husband, fatal unite, go;
 unused to arm, and thoughtless of the event. 
but when the battle be by treachery win,
 the chief, and all, but his false friend, undo:
 though in the tumult of that desperate night,
 he escape the dreadful slaughter of the flight,
 yet the sagacious blood-hound, skill too well
 in all the murder quality of hell,
 each secret place so regular beat,
 they soon discover his unsafe retreat. 
as hungry wolf, triumph over their prey,
 to sure destruction hurry they away. 
so the purveyor of fierce moloc son,
 with Charon to the common butch'ry run;
 where proud neronior by his gibbet stand
 to glut himself with fresh supply of blood. 
our friend, by powerful intercession, gain
 a short reprieve, but for three day obtain,
 to try all way may to compassion move
 the savage general, but in vain they strive. 
when i perceive that all address fail,
 and nothing over his stubborn soul prevail,
 distract almost, to his tent i fly,
 to make the last effort what tear can do. 
low on my knee i fall, then thus begin:
 great genius of success, thou more than man! 
who arm to every clime have terror hurl,
 and carry conquest round the tremble world. 
still may the bright glory fame can lend,
 your sword, your conduct, and your cause attend. 
here now, the arbiter of fate you sit,
 while suppliant slave their rebel head submit. 
oh pity the unfortunate, and give
 but this one thing? oh let but Charion live. 
and take the little all, that we possess:
 i will bear the meager anguish of distress;
 content, nay please to beg, or earn my bread,
 let Charion live, no matter how i be feed. 
the fall of such a youth no lustre bring,
 to he who sword perform such wondrous thing,
 as save kingdom, and support king. 
that triumph only with true grandeur shine,
 where god-like courage, god-like pity join. 
Caesar, the old favourite of war,
 take not more pleasure to subdue, than spare:
 and since in battle you can great be,
 that over, be'nt less merciful than he. 
ignoble spirit by revenge, be know,
 and cruel action spoil the conqueror crown:
 in future history fill each mournful page
 with tale of blood, and monument of rage:
 and while his annal be with horror read,
 man curse he live, and detest he dead. 
oh, do not sully with a sanguine dye,
 the foul stain, so fair a memory! 
then as you will live the glory of our isle,
 and fate on all your expedition smile;
 so when a noble course, you have brave run,
 die the best soldier, and the happy man. 
none can the turn of providence foresee,
 or what their own catastrophe may be;
 therefore to person labour under woe,
 that mercy they may want, shall always show,
 for in the chance of war, the slight thing
 may lose the battle, or the victory bring. 
and how will you that general honour prize,
 shall in cool blood his captive sacrifice? 

he that with rebel arm to fight be lead,
 to justice forfeit his opprobrious head:
 but it be unhappy charion's first offence,
 seduce by some too plausible pretence,
 to take the inj'r side by error bring;
 he have no malice, though he have the fault. 
let the old tempter find a shameful grave,
 but the half-innocent, the tempt, save. 
vengeance divine, though for the great crime,
 but rare strike the first or second time:
 and he best follow the almighty will,
 who spare the guilty, he have power to kill. 
when proud rebellion will unhinge a state,
 and wild disorder in a land create,
 it be requisite, the first promoter shall
 put out the flame, they kindle, with their blood:
 but sure it be a degree of murder, all
 that draw their sword, shall undistinguished fall:
 and since a mercy must to some be show,
 let Charion among the happy few be one:
 for as none guilty have less guilt than he,
 so none for pardon have a fair plea. 

when David general have win the field,
 and Absalom, the love ungrateful, kill,
 the trumpet sound make all slaughter cease,
 and mislead Israelites return in peace. 
the action past, where so much blood be spill,
 we hear of none arraign for that day guilt:
 but all conclude with the desire event,
 the monarch pardon, and the Jew repent. 

as great example your high courage warm,
 and to illustrious deed excite your arm:
 so when you instance of mercy view,
 they shall inspire you with compassion too:
 for he that emulate the true brave,
 will always conquer, and shall always save. 

here interrupt, stern neronior cry,
 (swell with success, and blubber up with pride)
 madam, his life depend upon my will,
 for every rebel, i can spare, or kill:
 i will think of what you have say, this night return
 at ten, perhaps you will have no cause to mourn. 
go see your husband, bid he not despair;
 his crime be great, but you be wondrous fair. 

when anxious misery the soul amaze,
 and dire confusion in our spirit raise;
 upon the least appearance of relief
 our hope revive, and mitigate our grief. 
impatience make our wish earnest grow,
 which through false optic our deliverance show. 
for while we fancy danger do appear
 most at a distance, it be oft too near:
 and many time secure from obvious foe,
 we fall into a ambuscade of woe. 

please with the false neronior dark reply,
 i think the end of all my sorrow nigh;
 and to the main-guard hasten, where the prey
 of this bloodthirsty fiend in durance lay. 
when Charion see i, from his turffy bed
 with eagerness he raise his droop head. 
oh, fly my dear, this guilty place, he cry,
 and in some distant clime thy virtue hide! 
here nothing but the foul dæmons dwell,
 the refuse of the damn, and mob of hell:
 the air they breath, be every atom curse,
 there be no degree of ill, for all be worst. 
in rape and murder, they alone delight,
 and villainy of less importance slight:
 act they indeed, but scorn they shall be name,
 for all their glory to be more than damn;
 neronior chief of this infernal crew,
 and seem to merit that high station too. 
nothing but rage, and lust inspire his breast,
 by asmodai, and moloc both possess. 
when tell you go to intercede for i,
 it throw my soul into a agony. 
not that i will not for my freedom give
 what be requisite, or do not wish to live:
 but for my safety i can never be base,
 or buy a few short year with long disgrace
 nor will i have your yet unspotted fame
 for i expose to a eternal shame. 
with ignominy to preserve my breath,
 be worse, by infinite degree, than death. 
but if i can my life with honour save,
 with honour i will descend into the grave,
 for though revenge and malice both combine,
 (as both to fix my ruin seem to join)
 yet maugre all their violence and skill,
 i can die just, and i be resolve i will. 

but what be death, we so unwise fear? 
a end of all our busy tumult here:
 the equal lot of poverty and state,
 which all partake of by a certain fate. 
who ever the prospect of mankind survey,
 at diverse age, and by diverse way,
 will find they from this noisy scene retire,
 some the first minute that they breath, expire. 
other perhaps survive to talk, and go,
 but die, before they good or evil know. 
here one to puberty arrive, and then
 return lament to the dust again:
 another there, maintain a long strife
 with all the powerful enemy of life;
 till with vexation tire, and threescore year,
 he drop into the dark, and disappear. 
i be young indeed, and may expect to see
 time future long, and late posterity. 
it be what with reason i shall wish to do,
 if to be old, be to be happy too. 
but since substantial grief so soon destroy
 the gust of all imaginary joy,
 who will be too importunate to live,
 or more for life, than it can merit, give. 

beyond the grave stupendous region lie,
 the boundless realm of vast eternity;
 where mind, remove from earthly body dwell;
 but who their government, or law can tell? 
what be their employment till the final doom,
 and time be eternal period shall come? 
thus much the sacred oracle declare,
 that all be bless, or miserable there:
 though if there be such variety of fate,
 none good expire too soon, none bad too late. 
for my own part, with resignation still
 i can submit to my creator will:
 let he recall the breath, from he i draw,
 when he think fit, and when he please too. 
the way of die be my least concern,
 that will give no disturbance to my urn:
 if to the seat of happiness i go,
 there end all possible return of woe:
 and when to those bless mansion i arrive,
 with pity i will behold those that survive. 
once more i beg, you will from these tent retreat,
 and leave i to my innocence, and fate. 

Charion, say i, oh, do not urge my flight! 
i will see the event of this important night:
 some strange presage in my soul forebode
 the worst of misery, or the great good. 
few hour will show the utmost of my doom,
 a joyful safety, or a peaceful tomb. 
if you miscarry, i be resolve to try,
 if gracious heaven will suffer i to die. 
for when you be to endless rapture go,
 if i survive, it be but to be undo. 
who will support a injure widow right,
 from sly injustice, or oppressive may? 
protect her person, or her cause defend? 
she rare want a foe, or find a friend,
 i have no distrust of providence, but still
 it be best to go beyond the reach of ill:
 and those can have no reason to repent,
 who though they die betimes, die innocent. 
but to a world of everlasting bliss
 why will you go, and leave i here in this? 
it be a dark passage, but our foe shall view,
 i will die as calm, though not so brave as you:
 that my behaviour to the last may prove,
 your courage be not great than my love. 
the hour approach, as to neronior tent
 with tremble, but impatient step i go,
 a thousand horror throng into my breast,
 by sad idea, and strong fear possess. 
whereve i pass, the glare light will show
 fresh object of despair, and scene of woe. 

here, in a crowd of drunken soldier, stand
 a wretched, poor old man, besmear with blood,
 and at his foot, just through the body run,
 struggle for life, be lay his only son;
 by who hard labour he be daily feed,
 divide still with pious care, his bread. 
and while he mourn with flood of age tear,
 the sole support of his decripid year,
 the barbarous mob, who rage no limit know,
 with blasphemous derision mock his woe. 

there, under a wide oak, disconsolate,
 and drown in tear, a mournful widow sit. 
high in the bough the murder father hang;
 beneath, the child round their mother cling;
 they cry for food, but it be without relief;
 for all they have to live upon, be grief:
 a sorrow so intense, such deep despair,
 no creature mere human, long can bear. 
first in her arm her weep babe she take,
 and with a groan, do to her husband look! 
then lean her head on they, and sigh cry,
 pity i saviour of the world! and die. 

from this sad spectacle my eye i turn;
 where son their father, maid their lover mourn;
 friend for their friend, sister for brother weep;
 prisoner of war in chain, for slaughter keep. 
each every hour do the black message dread,
 which shall declare, the person love be dead. 
then i behold, with brutal shout of mirth,
 a comely youth, and of no common birth,
 to execution lead, who hardly bear
 the wound in battle, he receive before;
 and as he pass, i hear he brave cry,
 i neither wish to live, nor fear to die. 

at the curse tent arrive, without delay
 they do i to the general convey;
 who thus begin —
 madam! by fresh intelligence i find,
 that charion's treason of the black kind;
 and my commission be express to spare
 none that so deep in rebellion be. 
new measure therefore it be in vain to try,
 no pardon can be grant, he must die. 
must, or i hazard all, which yet i will do,
 to be oblige in one request by you,
 and maugre all the danger i foresee:
 be my this night, i will set your husband free
 soldier be rough, and can hope success
 by supple flattery, and by soft address;
 the pert, gay coxcomb by these little art,
 gain a ascendant over the lady heart,
 but i can not such whine method use;
 consent, he live; he die, if you refuse. 

amaze at this demand, say i, the brave,
 upon ignoble term, disdain to save;
 they let their captive still with honour live;
 nor more require, than what themselves will give:
 for generous victor, as they scorn to do
 dishonest thing, scorn to propose they too. 
mercy, the bright virtue of the mind,
 shall with no devious appetite be join:
 for if when exercise, a crime it cost,
 the intrinsic lustre of the deed be lose. 
great man their action of a piece shall have,
 heroic all, and each entire brave:
 from the nice rule of honour none shall swerve;
 do because good, without a mean reserve. 

the crime, new charge on the unhappy youth
 may have revenge, and malice, but no truth. 
suppose the accusation just bring,
 and clear prove to the minute fault,
 yet mercy next, to infinite abate,
 offence next, to infinite great:
 and it be the glory of a noble mind,
 in full forgiveness not to be confine,
 your prince frown, if you have cause to fear,
 this act will more illustrious appear;
 though his excuse can never be withstand,
 who disobey, but only to be good. 
perhaps the hazard more than you express;
 the glory will be, be the danger less. 
for he, that to his prejudice will do
 a noble action, and a generous too,
 deserve to wear a more resplendent crown,
 than he, that have a thousand battle win. 
do not invert divine compassion so,
 as to be cruel, or no mercy show! 
of what renown can such a action be,
 which save my husband life, but ruin i? 
though if you final resolve to stand
 upon so vile, inglorious a demand,
 he must submit; if it be my fate to mourn
 his death, i will bathe with virtuous tear his urn. 

well, madam, haughty, neronior cry,
 your courage and your virtue shall be try:
 but to prevent all prospect of a flight,
 some of my lamb shall be your guard to night. 
by they, no doubt, you will tender be use,
 they seldom ask a favour that be refuse:
 perhaps you will find they so gent breed,
 they will leave you but few virtuous tear to shed. 
surround with so innocent a throng,
 the night must pass delightful along:
 and in the morning, since you will not give
 what i require, to let your husband live,
 you shall behold he sigh his late breath,
 and gentle swing into the arm of death. 
his fate he merit, as to rebel due,
 and you will be as much deserve by you. 

oh, Celia, think! so far as thought can show,
 what pang of grief, what agony of woe,
 at this dire resolution seize my breast! 
by all thing sad, and terrible possess. 
in vain i weep, and it be in vain i pray,
 for all my prayer be to a tiger make;
 a tiger! worse; for it be beyond dispute,
 no fiend so cruel as a reason brute,
 encompass thus, and hopeless of relief,
 with all the squadron of despair and grief:
 ruin — it be not possible to shun,
 what can i do, oh! what will you have do? 

the hour that pass, till the black morn return,
 with tear of blood shall be for ever mourn. 
when to involve i with consummate grief,
 beyond expression, and above belief,
 madam, the monster cry, that you may find
 i can be grateful to the fair that be kind,
 step to the door, i will show you such a sight,
 shall overwhelm your spirit with delight. 
do not that wretch, who will dethrone his king. 
become the gibbet, and adorn the string? 
you need not now a injure husband dread,
 live he may, he will not upbraid you dead. 
it be for your sake, i seize upon his life,
 he will perhaps have scorn so chaste a wife. 
and, madam, you will excuse the zeal i show,
 to keep that secret none alive shall know. 
curse of all creature, for compare with thou,
 the devil, say i, be dull in cruelty. 
o may that tongue eternal viper breed,
 and, wasteless, their eternal hunger feed,
 in fire too hot for salamander dwell,
 the burn earnest of a hot hell. 
may that vile lump of execrable lust
 corrupt alive, and rot into the dust. 
may thou despair at the point of death,
 with oath and blasphemy resign thy breath;
 and the worst torment that the damn shall share,
 in thy own person all unite bear. 

o Celia, o my friend! what age can show
 sorrow like i, so exquisite a woe? 
indeed it do not infinite appear,
 because it can be everlasting here;
 but it be so vast, that it can never increase,
 and so confirm, it never can be less. 
