elegy i.

write at the convent of haut Villers in Champagne, 1754. 

silent and clear, through yonder peaceful vale,
while marne slow water weave their mazy way,
see, to the exult sun, and foster gale,
what boundless treasure his rich bank display!

fast by the stream, and at the mountain base,
the low herd through live pasture rove;
wide-waving harvest crown the rise space;
and still superior nod the viny grove.

high on the top, as guardian of the scene,
imperial sylvan spread his umbrage wide;
nor want there many a cot, and spire between,
or in the vale, or on the mountain side,

to mark that man, as tenant of the whole,
claim the just tribute of his culture care,
yet pay to heaven, in gratitude of soul,
the boon which heaven accept, of praise and prayer.

o dire effect of war! the time have be
when desolation vaunt here her reign;
one ravage desert be yond beauteous scene,
and Marne run purple to the fright Seine.

oft at his work the toilsome day to cheat
the swain still talk of those disastrous time,
when guise pride, and condé ill-starred heat
teach christian zeal to authorise their crime:

oft to his child sportive on the grass
do dreadful tale of wear tradition tell,
oft point to epernay ill-fated pass
where force thrice triumph, and where Biron fall.

o dire effect of war! — may ever more
through this sweet vale the voice of discord cease!
a british bard to gallia fertile shore
can wish the blessing of eternal peace.

yet say, you monk, (beneath who moss-grown seat,
within who cloister cell the indebt muse
awhile sojourn, for meditation meet,
and these loose thought in pensive strain pursue,)

avail it aught, that war be rude tumult spare
yond cluster vineyard, or yond golden field,
if niggard to yourself, and fond of care,
you slight the joy their copious treasure yield?

avail it aught that nature liberal hand
with every blessing grateful man can know
clothes the rich bosom of yond smile land,
the mountain slope side, or pendant brow,

if meager famine paint your pallid cheek,
if break the midnight bell your hour of rest,
if amid heart-chilling damp, and winter bleak,
you shun the cheerful bowl, and moderate feast!

look forth, and be convince! it be nature plead,
her ample volume open on your view,
the simple-minded swain, who run read,
feel the glad truth, and be it hide from you?

look forth, and be convince. yond prospect wide
to reason ear how forcible they speak,
compare with those how dull be letter pride,
and austin babble eloquence how weak!

temperance, not abstinence, in every bliss
be man true joy, and therefore heaven command.
the wretch who riot thank his god amiss:
who starve, reject the bounty of his hand.

Mark, while the Marne in yond full channel glide,
how smooth his course, how nature smile around!
but shall impetuous torrent swell his tide,
the fairy landskip sink in ocean drown.

nor less disastrous shall his thrifty urn
neglect leave the once well-watered land,
to dreary waste yond paradise will turn,
pollute ooze, or heap of barren sand.
