[pastoral 02] the second pastoral.

thenot.

thy cloudy look why melt into tear,
 unseemly, now that heaven so blithe appear? 
why in this mournful manner be thou find,
 unthankful lad, when all thing smile around? 
hear how the lark and linnet joint sing! 
their note soft-warb'ling to the gladsome spring. 

colinet.

though soft their note, not so my wayward fate:
 nor lark will sing, nor linnet in my state. 
each creature to his proper task be bear;
 as they to mirth and music, i to mourn. 
wake, at midnight, i my woe renew,
 and with my tear increase the fall dew. 

thenot.

small cause, i ween, have lusty youth to plain;
 or who may then the weight of age sustain,
 when, as our wain strength do daily cease,
 the tiresome burden double its increase? 
yet though with year my body downwards tend,
 as tree beneath their fruit in autumn bend;
 my mind a cheerful temper still retain,
 spite of my snowy head and icy vein:
 for, why shall man at cross mishap repine,
 sour all his sweet, and mix with tear his wine? 
but speak: for much it may relieve thy woe
 to let a friend thy inward ailment know. 

colinet.

it will idle waste thou, thenot, a whole day,
 shall thou give ear to all my grief can say. 
thy ewe will wander, and the heedless lamb
 with loud complaint require their absent dam. 

thenot.

there be lightfoot, he shall tend they close; and i,
 betwixt while, across the plain will glance my eye. 

colinet.

where to begin i know not; where to end:
 scarce do one smile hour on my youth attend. 
though few my day, as my own folly show,
 yet be those day all cloud over with woe:
 no gleam of happy sunshine do appear
 my lower sky, and wintery day, to cheer. 
my piteous plight, in yonder naked tree,
 which bear the thunder scar, too well i see:
 quite destitute it stand of shelter kind,
 the mark of storm and sport of every wind:
 its rive trunk feel not the approach of spring,
 nor any bird among the branch sing. 
no more beneath thy shade shall shepherd throng
 with merry tale, or pipe, or please song. 
unhappy tree! and more unhappy i! 
from thou, from i, alike the shepherd fly. 

thenot.

sure thou in some ill-chosen hour waste bear,
 when blight mil-dew spoil the rise corn;
 or when the moon, by witchcraft charm, foreshow
 through sad eclipse a various train of woe. 
untimely bear, ill luck betide thou still. 

colinet.

and can there, thenot, be a great ill? 

thenot.

nor wolf, nor fox, nor rot among our sheep;
 from these shepherd care his flock may keep:
 against ill luck all cunning foresight fail;
 whether we sleep or wake, it nought avail. 

colinet.

ah i the while! ah i the luckless day! 
ah luckless lad! the rather may i say. 
unhappy hour! when first, in youthful bud,
 i leave the fair sabrina silver flood:
 ah silly i! more silly than my sheep,
 which on thy flowery bank i once do keep. 
sweet be thy bank! oh when shall i once more
 with long eye review thy flowery shore? 
when, in the crystal of thy water, see
 my face, grow wan through care and misery? 
when shall i see my hut, the small abode
 my self have raise and cover over with sod? 
though small it be, a mean and humble cell,
 yet be there room for peace and i to dwell. 

thenot.

and what the cause that draw thou first away? 
from thy love home what tempt thou to stray? 

colinet.

a lewd desire strange land and swain to know:
 ah god! that ever i shall covet woe! 
with wander foot unblest, and fond of fame,
 i seek i know not what, beside a name. 

thenot.

or, sooth to say, do thou not hither roam
 in hope of wealth, thou can not find at home? 
a roll stone be ever bare of moss;
 and, to their cost, green year old proverb cross. 

colinet.

small need there be, in flatter hope of gain,
 to drive my pine flock athwart the plain
 to distant cam: fine gain at length, i trow,
 to hoard up to myself such deal of woe! 
my sheep quite spend through travel and ill fare,
 and, like their keeper, ragged grow and bare,
 here, on cold earth to make my nightly bed,
 and on a bend willow rest my head. 
it be hard to bear the pinch cold with pain,
 and hard be want to the unpractised Swain:
 but neither want, nor pinch cold be hard,
 to blast storm of calumny compare:
 unkind as hail it fall, who pelt shower
 destroy the tender herb and bud flower. 

thenot.

Slander, we shepherd count the great wrong:
 for, what wound sore than a evil tongue? 

colinet.

untoward lad, who Pleasance take in spite,
 make mock of all the ditty i endite. 
in vain, o colinet, thy pipe, so shrill,
 charm every vale, and gladden every hill:
 in vain thou seek the cover of the grove,
 in the cool shade to sing the heat of love:
 no passion but rank envy, can, thou move. 
sing what thou will, ill nature will prevail;
 and every elf have skill enough to rail. 

but yet, though poor and artless be my vein,
 menalcas seem to like my simple strain;
 and long as he be please to hear my song,
 that to menalcas do of right belong,
 nor night, nor day, shall my rude music cease;
 i ask no more, so i menalcas please. 

thenot 

menalcas, lord of all the neighbour plain,
 preserve the sheep, and over the shepherd reign:
 for he our yearly wake and feast we hold,
 and choose the fat firstling from the fold,
 he, good to all, that good deserve, shall give
 thy flock to feed, and thou at ease to live;
 shall curb the malice of unbridled tongue,
 and with due praise reward thy rural song. 

colinet.

first then shall lightsome bird forget to fly,
 the briny ocean turn to pasture dry,
 and every rapid river cease to flow,
 before i unmindful of menalcas grow. 

thenot.

this night thy care with i forget; and fold
 thy flock with i, to ward the injurious cold. 
sweet milk and clout cream, soft cheese and Curd,
 with some remain fruit of last year hoard,
 shall be our evening fare: and for the night,
 sweet herb and moss, that gentle sleep invite. 
and now behold the sun depart ray
 over yonder hill, the sign of ebb day. 
with song the jovial hind return from blow,
 and unyoked heifer, pace homeward, low. 
