a essay on conversation. 

by Benjamin Stillingfleet.

the art of converse, how to sooth the soul
of haughty man, his passion to control,
his pride at once to humble and to please,
and join the dignity of life with ease,
be now my theme. o thou, who nature hand
frame for this best, this delicate command,
and teach when lisp, without reason aid,
at the same time to speak and to persuade,
Wyndham, with diligence awhile attend,
nor scorn the instruction of a old friend;
who when the world be great commerce shall have join
the deep reflection, and the strengh of mind,
to the bright talent of thy youthful state,
in turn shall on thy better lesson wait.

whence come it, that in every art we see
many can rise to a supreme degree;
yet in this art, for which all seem design
by nature, scarce one complete we find?
you will say, perhaps, we think, we speak, we move,
by the strong spring alone of selfish love:
yet among all the species, be there one,
who with more caution than ourselves, we shun?
what be it fill a puppet-show or court?
go none but for the profit or the sport?
if so, why come each soul fatigue away,
and curse the dull puppet same dull play;
yet, unconvinced, be tempt still to go?
it be that we find at home our great foe.
and reason good why solitude we flee;
can want with self-sufficiency agree?

yet, such our inconsistency of mind,
we court society, and hate mankind.
with some we quarrel, for they be too sincere:
with other, for they be close, reserve and queer:
this be too learn, too prudent, or too wise;
and that we for his ignorance despise:
a voice perhaps our ear shall harsh strike,
then strait even wit itself shall raise dislike;
our eye may by some feature be annoy,
behold at once a character destroy:
one so good-natured, he be beyond all bearing,
he will ridicule no friend, though out of hear:
another warm with zeal, offend our eye,
because he hold the mirror up to vice.
no wonder then, since fancy wild as these
can move our spleen, that real fault displease.
when Maevius, spite of dullness, will be bright,
and teach abgyll to speak, and swift to write;
when Flavia entertain we with her dream,
and Macer with his no less airy scheme;
when peevishness, and jealousy and pride,
and interest that can brother heart divide,
in their imagine form our eyesight hit,
of a old maid, a poet, peer or cit;
can then, you will say, philosophy refrain,
and check the torrent of each boil vein?
yes. she can still do more; view passion slave
with mind serene, indulge he, and yet save.

but self-conceit step in, and with strict eye
scan every man, and every man awry;
that reign passion, which through every stage
of life, still haunt we with unceasing rage.
no quality so mean, but what can raise
some drudge drivel candidate for praise;
even in the wretch, who wretch can despise,
still self-conceit will find a time to rise.
Quintus salute you with forbid face,
and think he carry his excuse in lace:
you ask, why Clodius bully all he can?
Clodius will tell you, he be a gentleman:
myrtilla strut and shudder half the year,
with a round cap, that show a fine turn ear:
the low jest make Delia laugh to death;
yet she be no fool, she have only handsome tooth.
ventoso loll, and scorn all human kind
from the gild coach with four palace slave behind;
do all this pomp and state proceed from merit?
mean thought! he deem it noble to inherit:
while fopling from some title draw his pride,
meanless, or infamous, or misapply;
free-mason, rake or wit, it be just the same,
the charm be hence, he have gain himself a name.
yet, spite of all the fool that pride have make,
it be not on man a useless burden lay;
pride have ennoble some, and some disgrace;
it hurt not in itself, but as it be place;
when right, its view know none but virtue bound;
when wrong, it scarce look one inch around.
Mark! with what care the fair one critic eye
scan over her dress, nor let we a fault slip by;
each rebel hair must be reduce to place
with tedious skill, and torture into grace;
Betty must over and over the pin dispose,
until into modish fold the drapery flow,
and the whole frame be fit to express
the charm of decency and nakedness.
why all this art, this labour ornament;
to captivate, you will cry no doubt, it be mean.
true. but let we wait upon this fair machine
from the lone closet to the social scene;
there view her loud, affect, scornful, sour,
pain all other, and herself still more.
what mean she, at one instant to disgrace,
the labour of ten hour, her much-loved face?
why, it be the self-same passion gratify;
the work be ruin, that be raise by pride.

yet of all temper, it require least pain,
can we but rule ourselves, to rule the vain.
the prudent be by reason only sway,
with he each sentence and each word be weigh;
the gay and giddy can alone be catch
by the quick lustre of a happy thought;
the miser hate, unless he steal your pelf;
the prodigal, unless you rob yourself;
the lewd will shun you, if your wife prove chaste;
the jealous, if a smile on he be cast;
the steady or the whimsical will blame,
either, because you be not, or be the same;
the peevish, sullen, shrewd, luxurious, rash,
will with your virtue, peace, or interest, clash;
but mark the proud man price, how very low!
it be but a civil speech, a smile, or bow.

you who push on by noble ardour, aim
in social life to gain immortal fame,
observe the various passion of mankind,
general, peculiar, single or combine:
how youth from manhood differ in its view,
and how old age still other path pursue;
how zeal in Priscus nothing more than heat,
in codex burn, and ruin all it meet;
how freedom now a lovely face shall wear,
now shock we in the likeness of a bear;
how jealousy in some resemble hate,
in other, seem but love grow delicate;
how modesty be often pride refine,
and virtue but the canker of the mind;
how love of riches, grandeur, life, and fame,
wear different shape, and yet be still the same.

but not our passion only disagree,
in taste be find as great variety:
Sylvius be ravish when he hear a hound,
his lady hate to death the odious sound:
yet both love music, though in different way;
he in a kennel, she at opera.
a florist shall, perhaps, not grudge some hour,
to view the colour in a bed of flower;
yet, show he titian workmanship divine,
he pass on, and only cry, it be fine.
a rusty coin, a old wormeaten post,
the mouldy fragment of a author lose,
a butterfly, a equipage, a star,
a globe, a fine palace head, a china jar,
a mistress, or a fashion, that be new,
have each their charm, though feel but by a few.
then study each man passion and his taste,
the first to soften, and indulge the last:
not like the wretch, who beat down virtue fence,
and deviate from the path of common sense;
who daub with fulsome flattery, blind and bold,
the very weakness we with grief behold.
passion be common to the fool and wise,
and all will hide they under art disguise;
for so avow, in other, be their shame,
none hate they more, than he who have the same.
but taste seem more peculiar our own,
and every man be fond to make his know;
proud of a mark he fancy be design
by nature to advance he over his kind;
and where he see that character impress,
with joy he hug the favourite to his breast.

but the main stress of all our care must lie,
to watch ourselves with strict and constant eye:
to mark the work mind, when passion course
begin to swell, and reason still have force;
or, if she be conquer by the strong tide,
observe the moment when they first subside;
for he who hope a victory to win
over other man, must with himself begin;
else like a town by mutiny oppress,
he be ruin by the foe within his breast;
and they alone, who in themselves oft view
man image, know what method to pursue.
all other creature keep in beat way,
man only move in a eternal maze:
he live and die, not tame by cultivation,
the wretch of reason, and the dupe of passion;
curious of know, yet too proud to learn;
more prone to doubt, than anxious to discern:
tire with old doctrine, prejudice at new;
mistake still the please for the true;
foe to restraint approve by general voice,
yet to each fool-born mode a slave by choice:
of rest impatient, yet in love with ease;
when most good-natured, aim how to teaze:
disdain by the vulgar to be awe,
yet never please but when the fool applaud:
by turn severe, indulgent, humble, vain;
a trifle serve to lose he or to gain.

then grant this trifle, yet his vice shun,
not like to Cato or to CLINIAS' son:
this for each humour every shape can take,
even virtue own, though not for virtue sake;
at Athens rakish, thoughtless, full of fire,
severe at Sparta, as a Chartreux friar;
in Thrace, a bully, drunken, rash, and rude;
in Asia gay, effeminate and lewd;
while the rough roman, virtue rigid friend,
can not to save the cause he die for bend:
in he it be scarce a honour to be good,
he more indulge a passion than subdue.
see how the skilful lover spread his toil,
when eager in pursuit of beauty spoil!
behold he bend at his idol foot;
humble, not mean; dispute, and yet sweet;
in rivalship not fierce, nor yet unmoved;
without a rival studious to be love;
for ever fearful, though not always witty,
and never give cause for hate or pity:
these be his art, such art as must prevail,
when riches, birth, and beauty self will fail:
and what he do to gain a vulgar end,
shall we neglect, to make mankind our friend?

good sense and learning may esteem obtain;
humour and wit a laugh, if right take:
fair virtue admiration may impart;
but it be good-nature only win the heart:
it mould the body to a easy grace,
and brighten every feature of the face:
it smooth the unpolished tongue with eloquence,
and add persuasion to the fine sense.
yet this, like every disposition, have
fix bound, over which it never ought to pass;
when stretch too far, its honour die away,
its merit sink, and all its charm decay;
among the good it meet with no applause,
and to its ruin the malicious draw,
a slave to all, who force it, or entice,
it fall by chance in virtue or in vice,
it be true, in pity for the poor it bleed,
it clothes the naked, and the hungry feed;
it cheer the stranger, nay its foe defend,
but then as oft it injure its best friend.

study with care politeness, that must teach
the modish form of gesture and of speech:
in vain formality, with matron mien,
and pertness apes her with familiar grin:
they against nature for applause strain,
distort themselves, and give all other pain:
she move with easy, though with measure pace,
and show no part of study, but the grace.
yet even by this man be but half refine,
unless philosophy subdue the mind:
it be but a varnish that be quick toss,
whenever the soul in passion sea be lose.

will you both please and be instruct too,
watch well the rage of shine to subdue;
hear every man upon his favourite theme,
and ever be more know than you seem.
the low genius will afford some light,
or give a hint that have escape your sight.
doubt, till he think you on conviction yield,
and with fit question let each pause be fill:
and the most know will with pleasure grant,
you be rather much reserve, than ignorant.

the ray of wit gild wheresoever they strike,
but be not therefore fit for all alike;
they charm the lively, but the grave offend,
and raise a foe as often as a friend;
like the resistless beam of blaze light,
that cheer the strong, and pain the weak sight.
if a bright fancy therefore be your share,
let judgement watch it with a guardian care;
it be like a torrent apt to overflow,
unless by constant government keep low;
and never inefficacious pass by,
but overturn or gladen all that be nigh.
or else, like tree, when suffer wild to shoot,
that put forth much, but all unripened fruit;
it turn to affectation and grimace,
as like to wit, as dullness be to grace.

how hard soever it be to bridle wit,
yet memory oft no less require the bit:
how many, hurry by its force away,
for ever in the land of gossip stray?
usurp the province of the nurse to lull,
without her privilege for be dull?
tale upon tale they raise ten story high,
without regard to use or symmetry:
so R—, till his destine space be fill,
heap brick on brick, and fancy it be to build.
a story shall, to please, at least seem true,
be à propos, well tell, concise, and new:
and whensoever it deviate from these rule,
the wise will sleep, and leave applause to fool.
but other, more intolerable yet,
the waggery, that they have say, or hear, repeat;
heavy by memory make, and what be the worst,
at second-hand, as often as at first.
and can even patience hear, without disdain,
the maim register of sense once slay?
while the dull feature, big with archness, strive
in vain, the force half-smile to keep alive.

some know no joy like what a word can raise,
haul through a language perplex maze;
till on a mate, that seem to agree, they light,
like man and wise, that still be opposite;
not lawyer at the bar play more with sense,
when bring to the last trope of eloquence,
than they on every subject, great or small,
at club, or council, at a church, or ball;
then cry we rob they of their tribute due:
alas! how can we laugh and pity too?

while other to extreme as wild will run,
and with four face anatomise a pun:
when the brisk glass to freedom do entice,
and rigid wisdom be a kind of vice.
but let not such grave fop your laughter spoil;
never frown where sense may innocent smile.

cramp not your language into logic rule,
to rostrum leave the pedantry of school;
nor let your learning always be discern,
but choose to seem judicious more than learn.
quote seldom, and then let it be, at least,
some fact that be prove, or thought that be well express.
but lest, disguise, your eye it shall escape,
know, pedantry can put on every shape:
for when we deviate into term of art,
unless constrain, we act the pedant part.
or if we be ever in the self-fame key,
no matter of what kind the subject be.
from law of nation down to law of dress,
for statesman have their cant, and bell not less.
as good hear b—y dictate on epistle,
or b—rm—n comment on the grecian whistle;
as old obesus preach upon his belly,
or philcunucha rant on farinelli;
Flirtilla read a lecture on a fan,
or w—d set forth the praise of kouli-kan.

but above all thing raillery decline,
nature but few do for that task design:
it be in the able hand a dangerous tool,
but never fail to wound the meddle fool:
for all must grant, it need no common art
to keep man patient, when we make they smart.
not wit alone, nor humour self, will do,
without good-nature, and much prudence too,
to judge aright of person, place, and time;
for taste decree what be low, and what be sublime:
and what may charm today, or over a glass,
perhaps at court, or next day, will not pass.
then leave to low buffoon, by custom breed,
and form by nature to be kick and feed,
the vulgar and unenvied task, to hit
all person right or wrong with random wit.
our wise forefather, bear in sober day,
resign to fool the tart and witty phrase;
the motley coat give warn for the jest,
excuse the wound, and sanctify the pest:
but we from high to low all strive to sneer,
will all be wit, and not the livery wear.

of all the quality that help to raise
in man the universal voice of praise,
whether in pleasure or in use they end,
there be none that can with modesty contend.
it be a transparent veil that help the sight,
and let we look on merit with delight:
in other, it be a kindly light, that seem
to gild the worst defect with borrow beam.
yet, it be but little that its form be catch,
unless its origin be first in thought:
else rebel nature will reveal the cheat,
and the whole work of art at once defeat.

hold forth upon yourself on no pretence,
unless invite, or in self-defence;
the praise you take, although it be your due,
will be suspect, if it come from you:
for each man, by experience teach, can tell
how strong a flatterer do within he dwell:
and if to self-condemn you incline,
in sober sadness, and without design,
(for some will sly arrogate a vice,
that from excess of virtue take its rise)
the world cry out, why do he hither come?
let he do penance for his sin at home.

no part of conduct ask for skill more nice,
though none more common, than to give advice:
miser themselves in this will not be save,
unless their knowledge make it worth the have,
and where be the wonder, when we will obtrude
a useless gift, it meet ingratitude?
shun then, unasked, this arduous task to try;
but if consult, use sincerity;
too sacred be the welfare of a friend,
to give it up for any selfish end.
but use one caution, sift he over and over,
to find if all be not resolve before,
if such the case, in spite of all his art,
some word will give the sound of his heart;
and why shall you a bootless freedom use,
that serve he not, and may his friendship lose?
yet still on truth bestow this mark of love,
never to commend the thing you can approve.
sincerity have such resistless charm,
she oft the fierce of our foe disarm:
no art she know, in native whiteness dress,
her thought all pure, and therefore all express:
she take from error its deformity;
and without she, all other virtue die.
bright source of goodness! to my aid descend,
watch over my heart, and all my word attend:
if still thou deign to set thy foot below,
among a race quite polish into show,
oh! save i from the jilt dissemble part,
who grant to all all favour, but her heart:
Perverts the end of charm, for the fame;
to fawn, her business; to deceive, her aim:
she smile on this man, tip the wink on that,
give one a squeeze, another a kind pat;
now jog a foot, now whisper in a ear;
here slip a letter, and there cast a leer;
till the kind thing, the company throughout,
distribute all its pretty self about;
while all be please, and wretched soon or late,
all but the wise, who see and shun the bait.

yet if, as complaisance require to do,
and rigid virtue sometime will allow,
you stretch the truth in favour of a friend,
be sure it ever aim at some good end;
to cherish grow virtue, vice to shame,
and turn to noble view the love of fame:
and not, like fawn parasite, unawed
by sense or truth, be every passion bawd.

be rare warm in censure, or in praise;
few man deserve our passion either way:
for half the world but float betwixt good and ill,
as chance disposés object, these the will:
it be but a see-saw game, where virtue now
mount above vice, and then sink down as low.
beside the wise still hold it for a rule,
to trust that judgement most, that seem most cool:
for all that rise to hyperbole,
prove that we err, at least in the degree.
but if your temper to extreme shall lead,
always upon the indulge side exceed;
for though to blame most lend a will ear,
yet hatred ever will attend on fear:
and when a neighbour dwelling blaze out,
the world will think it be time to look about.

let not the curious from your bosom steal
secret, where prudence ought to set her seal;
yet be so frank and plain, that at one view,
in other thing, each man may see you through:
for if the mask of policy you wear,
the honest hate you, and the cunning fear.

will you be well receive wherever you go,
remember each man vanquish be a foe.
resist not, therefore, with your utmost might,
but let the weak think he be sometime right;
he, for each triumph you shall thus decline,
shall give ten opportunity to shine:
he see, since once you own he to excel,
that it be his interest you shall reason well;
and though when rough use, he be full of choler,
as bluster b—y to a brother scholar,
yet by degree, inure he to submit,
he be tame, and in his mouth receive the bit.
but chief against trifle contest guard,
it be here submission seem to man most hard:
nor imitate that resolute old fool,
who undertake to kick against his mule.
but those who will not by instruction learn,
how fatal trifle prove, let story warn.
panthus and euclio, link by friendship tie,
live each for each, as each for each will die;
like object please they, and like object pain;
it be but one soul that in two body reign.
one night, as usual it be their night to pass,
they ply the cheerful, but still temperate glass,
when lo! a doubt be raise about a word:
a doubt that must be end by the sword:
one fall a victim, mark, o man, thy shame,
because their glossary be not the same.
can Ba—l—y's self more tenderness have show
for his two tome of word, though half his own?

for what remain of fail without end,
moral must some, and some the law must mend.
while other in such monstrous form appear,
as tongue-tied sourness, sly suspicion leer,
free-fisted rudeness, dropsical pretence,
proteus caprice, and elbow insolence;
no caution to avoid they they demand,
like wretch brand by the hangman hand.

if faith to some philosopher be give,
man, that great lord of earth, that heir of heaven,
savage at first, inhabit the wood,
and scramble with his fellow-brute for food;
no social home he know, no friendship tie,
selfish in good, in ill without ally;
till some in length of time, of strong nerve,
and great cunning, force the rest to serve
one common purpose, and, in nature spite,
bring the whole jar species to unite.
but may we not with equal reason say,
that every single particle of clay,
which form our body, be at first design
to lie for ever from the rest disjoin?
can this be say, and can it be allow
it be with its power for no one end endow?
if so; we own that man, at first, by art
be soothe to act in social life a part.
it be true, in some the seed of discord seem
to contradict this all-uniting scheme:
but that no more hurt nature general course,
than matter find with a repel force.

turn we awhile on lonely man our eye,
and see what frantic scene of folly rise:
in some dark monastery gloomy cell,
where formal self-presuming virtue dwell,
bedoze with dream of grace-distilling cave,
of holy puddle, unconsume grave,
of animate plaster, wood, and stone,
and mighty cure by saint sinner do.
permit i, Muse, still farther to explore,
and turn the leaf of superstition over;
where wonder upon wonder ever grow,
chaos of zeal and blindness, mirth and woe;
 vision of devil into monkey turn,
that hot from hell roar at a finger burn;
 bottle of precious tear that saint have weep,
 and breath a thousand year in phial keep;
 sunbeam send down to prop one friar staff,
 and hell break loose to make another laugh;
 obedient flea, and superstitious mouse;
 confess wolf, and sanctify louse;
 letter and house by a angel carry;
 and, wondrous! virgin nun to Jesus marry.
one monk, not know how to spend his time,
sit down to find out some unheard-of crime;
increase the large catalogue of sin,
and where the sober finish, there begin.
of death eternal his decree be past,
for the first crime, as fix as for the last.
while that, as idle, and as pious too,
compound with false religion for the true;
he, courtly usher to the bless abode,
weigh all the nicety of form and mode;
and make the rugged path so smooth and even,
none but a ill-bred man can miss of heaven.
one heaven-inspired invent a frock, or hood:
the taylor now cut out, and man grow good.
another quit his stocking, breech, shirt,
because he fancy virtue dwell with dirt:
while all concur to take away the stress
from weighty point, and lie it on the less.
anxious each paltry relic to preserve
of he, who hungry friend they leave to starve,
harrass by watch, abstinence, and chain;
stranger to joy, familiar grow with pain;
to all the mean of virtue they attend
with strict care, and only miss the end.
can scripture teach we, or can sense persuade,
that man for such employment ever be make?
far be that thought! but let we now relate
a character as opposite, as great,
in he, who live give to Athens fame,
and, by his death, immortalise her shame.
great scourge of sophist! he from heaven bring down,
and place true wisdom on the usurper throne:
philosopher in all thing, but pretence;
he teach what they neglect, common sense.
they over the stiff lyceum form to rule;
he, over mankind; all Athens be his school.
the sober tradesman, and smart petit-maitre,
great lord, and wit, in their own eye still great,
with he grow wise; unknowing they be teach;
he speak like they, though not like they he think:
nor weep, nor laugh, at man pervert state;
but leave to woman this, to idiot that.
view he with sophist fame for fierce contest,
or crown with rose at the jovial feast;
insult by a peevish, noisy wife,
or at the bar foredoom to lose his life;
what move word flow from his artless tongue,
sublime with ease, with condescension strong!
yet scorn to flatter vice, or virtue blame;
nor change to please, but please because the same;
the same by friend caress, by foe withstand,
still unaffected, cheerful, mild, and good.
behold one pagan, draw in colour faint,
outshine ten thousand monk, though each a saint!

here let we fix our foot, hence take our view,
and learn to try false merit by the true.
we see, when reason stagnate in the brain,
the dregs of fancy cloud its pure vein;
but circulation betwixt mind and mind
extend its course, and render it refine.
when warm with youth we tread the flowery way,
all nature charm, and every scene look gay;
each object gratify each sense in turn,
while now for rattle, now for nymph we burn;
enslave by friendship or by love soft smile,
we never suspect, because we mean no guile:
till, flush with hope from view of past success,
we lie on some main trifle all our stress;
when lo! the mistress or the friend betray,
and the whole fancy cheat of life display:
stun with a ill that from ourselves arise;
for instinct rule, when reason shall have choose;
we fly for comfort to some lonely scene,
victim henceforth of dirt, and drink, and spleen.
but let no obstacle that cross our view,
pervert our talent from their destine use;
for, as upon life hill we upward press,
our view will be obstruct less and less.
be all false delicacy far away,
lest it from nature lead we quite astray;
and for the imagine vice of human race,
destroy our virtue, or our part debase;
since god with reason join to make we own,
that it be not good for man to be alone.
