table talk.

a. 

you tell i, i remember, glory build
 on selfish principle, be shame and guilt. 
the deed that man admire as half divine,
 stark nought, because corrupt in their design. 
strange doctrine this! that without scruple tear
 the laurel that the very lightning spare,
 bring down the warrior trophy to the dust,
 and eat into his bloody sword like rust. 

B. 

i grant, that man continue what they be,
 fierce, avaricious, proud, there must be war. 
and never mean the rule shall be apply
 to he that fight with justice on his side. 
let laurel, drench in pure parnassian dew,
 reward his memory, dear to every muse,
 who, with a courage of unshaken root,
 in honour field advance his firm foot,
 plant it upon the line that justice draw,
 and will prevail or perish in her cause. 
it be to the virtue of such man, man owe
 his portion in the good that heaven bestow,
 and when recording history display
 feat of renown, though wrought in ancient day,
 tell of a few stout heart that fight and die
 where duty place they, at their country side,
 the man that be not move with what he read,
 that take not fire at their heroic deed,
 unworthy of the blessing of the brave,
 be base in kind, and bear to be a slave. 
but let eternal infamy pursue
 the wretch to nought but his ambition true,
 who, for the sake of fill with one blast
 the post horn of all Europe, lay her waste. 
think yourself station on a tower rock,
 to see a people scatter like a flock,
 some royal mastiff pant at their heel,
 with all the savage thirst a tiger feel,
 then view he self-proclaimed in a gazette,
 chief monster that have plague the nation yet,
 the globe and sceptre in such hand misplace,
 those ensign of dominion, how disgrace! 
the glass that bid man mark the fleet hour,
 and death own scythe will better speak his power,
 then grace the boney phantom in their stead
 with the king shoulder knot and gay cockade,
 cloth the twin brother in each other dress,
 the same their occupation and success. 

a. 

it be your belief the world be make for man,
 king do but reason on the self same plan,
 maintain you you can they condemn,
 who think, or seem to think, man make for they. 

B. 

seldom, alas! the power of logic reign
 with much sufficiency in royal brain. 
such reason fall like a invert cone,
 want its proper base to stand upon. 
man make for king! those optic be but dim
 that tell you so — say rather, they for he. 
that be indeed a king-enobling thought,
 can they, or will they, reason as they ought. 
the diadem with mighty project line,
 to catch renown by ruin mankind,
 be worth, with all its gold and glitter store,
 just what the toy will sell for and no more. 
oh! bright occasion of dispense good,
 how seldom use, how little understand! 
to pour in virtue lap her just reward,
 keep vice restrain behind a double guard,
 to quell the faction that affront the throne,
 by silent magnanimity alone;
 to nurse with tender care the thrive art,
 watch every beam philosophy impart;
 to give religion her unbridled scope,
 nor judge by statute a believer hope;
 with close fidelity and love unfeigned,
 to keep the matrimonial bond unstained;
 covetous only of a virtuous praise,
 his life a lesson to the land he sway;
 to touch the sword with conscientious awe,
 nor draw it but when duty bid he draw,
 to sheath it in the peace-restoring close,
 with joy, beyond what victory bestow,
 bless country! where these kingly glory shine,
 bless England! if this happiness be thy. 

a. 

guard what you say, the patriotic tribe
 will sneer and charge you with a bribe. 

B. 

a bribe? 
the worth of his three kingdom i defy,
 to lure i to the baseness of a lie. 
and of all lie (be that one poet boast)
 the lie that flatter i abhor the most. 
those art be they that hate his gentle reign,
 but he that love he have no need to feign. 

a. 

your smooth eulogium to one crown address,
 seem to imply a censure on the rest. 

B. 

quevedo, as he tell his sober tale,
 ask, when in hell, to see the royal jail,
 approve their method in all other thing,
 but where, good sir, do you confine your king? 
there — say his guide, the group be full in view. 
indeed? reply the don — there be but few. 
his black interpreter the charge disdain —
 few, fellow? there be all that ever reign. 
wit undistinguishing be apt to strike
 the guilty and not guilty, both alike. 
i grant the sarcasm be too severe,
 and we can ready refute it here,
 while alfred name, the father of his age,
 and the sixth Edward grace the historic page. 

a. 

king then at last have but the lot of all,
 by their own conduct they must stand or fall. 

B. 

true. while they live, the courtly laureate pay
 his quit-rent ode, his pepper-corn of praise,
 and many a dunce who finger itch to write,
 add, as he can, his tributary mite;
 a subject fault, a subject may proclaim,
 a monarch error be forbid game. 
thus free from censure, overawe by fear,
 and praise for virtue that they scorn to wear,
 the fleet form of majesty engage
 respect, while stalk over life narrow stage,
 then leave their crime for history to scan,
 and ask with busy scorn, be this the man? 
i pity king who worship wait upon
 obsequious, from the cradle to the throne,
 before who infant eye the flatterer bow,
 and bind a wreath about their baby brow. 
who education stiffen into state,
 and death awaken from that dream too late. 
oh! be servility with supple knee,
 who trade it be to smile, to crouch, to please;
 if smooth dissimulation, skill to grace
 a devil purpose with a angel face;
 be smile peeress and simper peer,
 encompass his throne a few short year;
 if the gild carriage and the pamper steed,
 that want no drive and disdain the lead;
 if guard, mechanical form in rank,
 play, at beat of drum, their martial prank;
 shoulder and stand as if strike to stone,
 while condescend majesty look on;
 if monarchy consist in such base thing,
 sigh, i say again, i pity king! 
to be suspect, thwart, and withstand,
 even when he labour for his country good,
 to see a band call patriot for no cause,
 but that they catch at popular applause,
 careless of all the anxiety he feel,
 hook disappointment on the public wheel,
 with all their flippant fluency of tongue,
 most confident, when palpable most wrong,
 if this be kingly, then farewell for i
 all kingship, and may i be poor and free. 
to be the table talk of club up stair,
 to which the unwashed artificer repair,
 the indulge his genius after long fatigue,
 by dive into cabinet intrigue,
 (for what king deem a toil, as well they may,
 to he be relaxation and mere play)
 to win no praise when well-wrought plan prevail,
 but to be rude censure when they fail,
 to doubt the love his favourite may pretend,
 and in reality to find no friend,
 if he indulge a cultivate taste,
 his gallery with the work of art well grace,
 to hear it call extravagance and waste,
 if these attendant, and if such as these,
 must follow royalty, then welcome ease;
 however humble and confine the sphere,
 happy the state that have not these to fear. 

a. 

thus man who thought contemplative have dwell,
 on situation that they never feel,
 start up sagacious, cover with the dust
 of dream study and pedantic rust,
 and prate and preach about what other prove,
 as if the world and they be hand and glove. 
leave kingly back to cope with kingly care,
 they have their weight to carry, subject they;
 poet, of all man, ever least regret
 increase tax and the nation debt. 
can you contrive the payment, and rehearse
 the mighty plan, oracular, in verse,
 no bard, however majestic, old or new,
 shall claim my fix attention more than you. 

B. 

not Brindley nor Bridgewater will essay
 to turn the course of Helicon that way;
 nor will the nine consent, the sacred tide
 shall purl amid the traffic of Cheapside,
 or tinkle in 'change alley, to amuse
 the leathern ear of stock-jobber and jew. 

a. 

vouchsafe, at least, to pitch the key of rhime
 to theme more pertinent, if less sublime. 
when minister and ministerial art,
 patriot who love good place at their heart,
 when admiral extol for stand still,
 or do nothing with a deal of skill;
 general who will not conquer when they may,
 firm friend to peace, to pleasure, and good pay,
 when freedom wound almost to despair,
 though discontent alone can find out where,
 when theme like these employ the poet tongue. 
i hear as mute as if a siren sing. 
or tell i if you can, what power maintain
 a briton scorn of arbitrary chain? 
that be a theme may animate the dead,
 and move the lip of poet cast in lead. 

B. 

the cause, though worth the search, may yet elude
 conjecture and remark, however shrewd. 
they take, perhaps, a well-directed aim,
 who seek it in his climate and his frame. 
liberal in all thing else, yet nature here
 with stern severity deal out the year. 
winter invade the spring, and often pour
 a chill flood on summer droop flower,
 unwelcome vapor quench autumnal beam,
 ungenial blast attend, curl the stream,
 the peasant urge their harvest, ply the fork
 with double toil, and shiver at their work,
 thus with a rigor, for his good design,
 she rear her favourite man of all mankind. 
his form robust and of elastic tone,
 proportion well, half muscle and half bone,
 supply with warm activity and force
 a mind well lodge, and masculine of course. 
hence liberty, sweet liberty inspire,
 and keep alive his fierce but noble fire. 
patient of constitutional controul,
 he bear it with meek manliness of soul,
 but if authority grow wanton, woe
 to he that tread upon his free-born toe,
 one step beyond the boundary of the law
 fire he at once in freedom glorious cause. 
thus proud prerogative, not much revere,
 be seldom feel, though sometime see and hear;
 and in his cage, like parrot fine and gay,
 be keep to strut, look big, and talk away. 
bear in a climate soft far than we,
 not form like we, with such herculean power,
 the frenchman, easy, debonair and brisk,
 give he his lass, his fiddle and his frisk,
 be always happy, reign whoever may,
 and laugh the sense of misery far away. 
he drink his simple beverage with a gust,
 and feast on a onion and a crust,
 we never feel the alacrity and joy
 with which he shout and carol, vive le roy,
 fill with as much true merriment and glee,
 as if he hear his king say — slave be free. 
thus happiness depend, as nature show,
 less on exterior thing than most suppose. 
vigilant over all that he have make,
 kind providence attend with gracious aid,
 bid equity throughout his work prevail,
 and weigh the nation in a even scale;
 he can encourage slavery to a smile,
 and fill with discontent a british isle. 

a. 

Freeman and slave then, if the case be such,
 stand on a level, and you prove too much. 
if all man indiscriminate share,
 his foster power and tutelary care,
 as well be yok by despotism hand,
 as dwell at large in britain charter land. 

B. 

no. freedom have a thousand charm to show,
 that slave, however content, never know. 
the mind attain beneath her happy reign,
 the growth that nature mean she shall attain. 
the vary field of science, ever new,
 open and wide open on her view,
 she venture onward with a prosperous force,
 while no base fear impede she in her course. 
religion, rich favour of the sky,
 stand most reveal before the freeman eye;
 no shade of superstition blot the day,
 liberty chase all that gloom away;
 the soul, emancipate, unoppressed,
 free to prove all thing and hold fast the best,
 learn much, and to a thousand listen mind,
 communicate with joy the good she find. 
courage in arm, and ever prompt to show
 his manly forehead to the fierce foe;
 glorious in war, but for the sake of peace,
 his spirit rise as his toil increase,
 guard well what art and industry have win,
 and freedom claim he for her firstborn son. 
slave fight for what be better cast away,
 the chain that bind they, and a tyrant sway,
 but they that fight for freedom, undertake
 the noble cause mankind can have at stake,
 religion, virtue, truth, whatever we call
 a blessing, freedom be the pledge of all. 
oh liberty! the prisoner please dream,
 the poet muse, his passion and his theme,
 genius be thy, and thou be fancy nurse,
 lose without thou the ennoble power of verse,
 heroic song from thy free touch acquire
 its clear tone, the rapture it inspire;
 place i where winter breathe his keen air,
 and i will sing if liberty be there;
 and i will sing at liberty dear foot,
 in afric torrid clime or india fierce heat. 

a. 

sing where you please, in such a cause i grant
 a english poet privilege to rant,
 but be not freedom, at least be not we
 too apt to play the wanton with her power,
 grow freakish, and over leap every mound
 spread anarchy and terror all around? 

B. 

agree. but will you sell or slay your horse
 for bound and curvet in his course;
 or if, when ride with a careless rein,
 he break away, and seek the distant plain? 
no. his high mettle under good controul,
 give he Olympic speed, and shoot he to the goal. 
let discipline employ her wholesome art,
 let magistrate alert perform their part,
 not skulk or put on a prudential mask,
 as if their duty be a desperate task;
 let active law apply the needful curb
 to guard the peace that riot will disturb,
 and liberty preserve from wild excess,
 shall raise no feud for army to suppress. 
when tumult late burst his prison door,
 and set plebeian thousand in a roar,
 when he usurp authority just place,
 and dare to look his master in the face,
 when the rude rabble watch-word be, destroy,
 and blaze London seem a second Troy,
 liberty blush and hang her droop head,
 behold their progress with the deep dread,
 blush that effect like these she shall produce,
 worse than the deed of galley-slave break loose. 
she lose in such storm her very name,
 and fierce licentiousness shall bear the blame. 
incomparable gem! thy worth untold,
 cheap, though blood-bought, and throw away when sell;
 may no foe ravish thou, and no false friend
 betray thou, while profess to defend;
 prize it you minister, you monarch spare,
 you patriot guard it with a miser care. 

a. 

patriot, alas! the few that have be find
 where most they flourish, upon english ground,
 the country need have scanty supply,
 and the last leave the scene, when Chatham die. 

B. 

not so — the virtue still adorn our age,
 though the chief actor die upon the stage. 
in he, Demosthenes be hear again,
 liberty teach he her Athenian strain;
 she clothe he with authority and awe,
 speak from his lip, and in his look, give law. 
his speech, his form, his action, full of grace,
 and all his country beam in his face,
 he stand, as some inimitable hand
 will strive to make a Paul or Tully stand. 
no sycophant or slave that dare oppose
 her sacred cause, but tremble when he rise,
 and every venal stickler for the yoke,
 feel himself crush at the first word he speak. 
such man be raise to station and command,
 when providence mean mercy to a land. 
he speak, and they appear; to he they owe
 skill to direct, and strength to strike the blow,
 to manage with address, to seize with power
 the crisis of a dark decisive hour. 
so Gideon earn a victory not his own,
 subserviency his praise, and that alone. 
poor England! thou be a devote deer,
 beset with every ill but that of fear. 
the nation hunt; all mark thou for a prey,
 they swarm around thou, and thou stand at bay. 
undaunted still, though weary and perplex,
 once Chatham save thou, but who save thou next? 
alas! the tide of pleasure sweep along
 all that shall be the boast of british song. 
it be not the wreath that once adorn thy brow,
 the prize of happy time will serve thou now. 
our ancestry, a gallant christian race,
 pattern of every virtue, every grace,
 confess a god, they kneel before they fight,
 and praise he in the victory he wrought. 
now from the dust of ancient day bring forth
 their sober zeal, integrity and worth,
 courage, ungraced by these, affront the sky,
 be but the fire without the sacrifice. 
the stream that feed the well-spring of the heart
 not more invigorate life noble part,
 than virtue quicken with a warmth divine,
 the power that sin have bring to a decline. 

a. 

the inestimable estimate of brown,
 rise like a paper-kite, and charm the town;
 but measure plan and execute well,
 shift the wind that raise it, and it fall. 
he tread the very self-same ground you tread,
 and victory refute all he say. 

B. 

and yet his judgement be not frame amiss,
 its error, if it err, be mere this —
 he think the die hour already come,
 and a complete recovery strike he dumb. 
but that effeminacy, folly, lust,
 enervate and enfeeble, and needs must,
 and that a nation shameful debase,
 will be despise and trample on at last,
 unless sweet penitence her power renew,
 be truth, if history itself be true. 
there be a time, and justice mark the date,
 for long-forbearing clemency to wait,
 that hour elapse, incurable revolt
 be punish, and down come the thunderbolt. 
if mercy then put by the threaten blow,
 must she perform the same kind office now? 
may she, and if offend heaven be still
 accessible and prayer prevail, she will. 
it be not however insolence and noise,
 the tempest of tumultuary joy,
 nor be it yet despondence and dismay,
 will win her visit, or engage she stay,
 prayer only, and the penitential tear,
 can call she smile down, and fix she here. 
but when a country, (one that i can name)
 in prostitution sink the sense of shame,
 when infamous venality grow bold,
 write on his bosom, to be let or sell;
 when perjury, that heaven defy vice,
 sell oath by tale, and at the low price,
 stamp God own name upon a lie just make,
 to turn a penny in the way of trade;
 when avarice starve, and never hide his face,
 two or three million of the human race,
 and not a tongue enquire, how, where, or when,
 though conscience will have twinge now and then;
 when profanation of the sacred cause
 in all its part, time, ministry and law,
 bespeak a land once christian, fall and lose
 in all that war against that title most,
 what follow next let city of great name,
 and region long since desolate proclaim,
 Nineveh, Babylon, and ancient Rome,
 speak to the present time and time to come,
 they cry aloud in every careless ear,
 stop, while you may, suspend your mad career;
 o learn from our example and our fate,
 learn wisdom and repentance ever too late. 
not only vice disposés and prepare
 the mind that slumber sweet in her snare,
 to stoop to tyranny usurp command,
 and bend her polish neck beneath his hand,
 (a dire effect, by one of nature law
 unchangeable connect with its cause)
 but providence himself will intervene
 to throw his dark displeasure over the scene. 
all be his instrument; each form of war,
 what burn at home, or threaten from afar,
 nature in arm, her element at strife,
 the storm that overset the joy of life,
 be but his rod to scourge a guilty land,
 and waste it at the bid of his hand. 
he give the word, and mutiny soon roar
 in all her gate, and shake her distant shore,
 the standard of all nation be unfurled,
 she have one foe, and that one foe, the world. 
and if he doom that people with a frown,
 and mark they with the seal of wrath, press down,
 obduracy take place; callous and tough
 the reprobate race grow judgement proof:
 earth shake beneath they, and heaven roar above,
 but nothing scare they from the course they love;
 to the lascivious pipe and wanton song
 that charm down fear, they frolic it along,
 with mad rapidity and unconcern,
 down to the gulph from which be no return. 
they trust in navy, and their navy fail,
 God curse can cast away ten thousand sail;
 they trust in army, and their courage die,
 in wisdom, wealth, in fortune, and in lie;
 but all they trust in, withers, as it must,
 when he command, in who they place no trust. 
vengeance at last pour down upon their coast,
 a long despise, but now victorious host,
 tyranny send the chain that must abridge
 the noble sweep of all their privilege,
 give liberty the last, the mortal shock,
 slip the slave collar on, and snap the lock. 

a. 

such lofty strain embellish what you teach,
 mean you to prophecy, or but to preach? 

B. 

i know the mind that feel indeed the fire
 the muse impart, and can command the lyre,
 act with a force, and kindle with a zeal,
 whatever the theme, that other never feel. 
if human woe her soft attention claim,
 a tender sympathy pervade the frame,
 she pour a sensibility divine
 along the nerve of every feeling line. 
but if a deed not tame to be bear,
 fire indignation and a sense of scorn,
 the string be sweep with such a power, so loud,
 the storm of music shake the astonish crowd. 
so when remote futurity be bring
 before the keen enquiry of her thought,
 a terrible sagacity inform
 the poet heart, he look to distant storm,
 he hear the thunder ever the tempest lower,
 and arm with strength surpass human power,
 seize event as yet unknown to man,
 and dart his soul into the dawn plan. 
hence, in a roman mouth, the graceful name
 of prophet and of poet be the same,
 hence british poet too the priesthood share,
 and every hallow druid be a bard. 
but no prophetic fire to i belong,
 i play with syllable, and sport in song. 

a. 

at Westminster, where little poet strive
 to set a distich upon six and five,
 where discipline help open bud of sense,
 and make his pupil proud with silver-pence,
 i be a poet too — but modern taste
 be so refine and delicate and chaste,
 that verse, whatever fire the fancy warm,
 without a creamy smoothness have no charm. 
thus, all success depend on a ear,
 and think i may purchase it too dear,
 if sentiment be sacrifice to sound,
 and truth cut short to make a period round,
 i judge a man of sense can scarce do worse,
 than caper in the morris-dance of verse. 

B. 

thus reputation be a spur to wit,
 and some wit flag through fear of lose it. 
give i the line, that plough its stately course
 like a proud swan, conquer the stream by force. 
that like some cottage beauty strike the heart,
 quite unindebted to the trick of art. 
when labour and when dullness, club in hand,
 like the two figure at saint dunstan stand,
 beat alternate, in measure time,
 the clock-work tintinabulum of rhime,
 exact and regular the sound will be,
 but such mere quarter-stroke be not for i. 
from he who rear a poem lank and long,
 to he who strain his all into a song,
 perhaps some bonny caledonian air,
 all birk and braes, though he be never there,
 or have whelp a prologue with great pain,
 feel himself spend, and fumble for his brain;
 a prologue interdash with many a stroke,
 a art contrive to advertise a joke,
 so that the jest be clear to be see,
 not in the word — but in the gap between,
 manner be all in all, whatever be write,
 the substitute for genius, sense, and wit. 
to dally much with subject mean and low,
 prove that the mind be weak, or make it so. 
neglect talent rust into decay,
 and every effort end in push-pin play. 
the man that mean success, shall soar above
 a soldier feather, or a lady glove,
 else summon the muse to such a theme,
 the fruit of all her labour be whipt-cream. 
as if a eagle fly aloft, and then —
 stoop from his high pitch to pounce a wren. 
as if the poet purpose to wed,
 shall carve himself a wife in gingerbread. 
age elapse ever Homer lamp appear,
 and age ever the mantuan swan be hear,
 to carry nature length unknown before,
 to give a Milton birth, ask age more. 
thus genius rise and set at order time,
 and shoot a day-spring into distant clime,
 ennoble every region that he choose,
 he sink in Greece, in Italy he rise,
 and tedious year of gothic darkness pass,
 emerge all splendour in our isle at last. 
thus lovely halcyon dive into the main,
 then show far off their shine plume again. 

a. 

be genius only find in epic lay? 
prove this, and forfeit all pretence to praise. 
make their heroic power your own at once,
 or candid confess yourself a dunce. 

B. 

these be the chief, each interval of night
 be grace with many a undulate light;
 in less illustrious bard his beauty shine
 a meteor or a star, in these, the sun. 
the nightingale may claim the topmost bough,
 while the poor grasshopper must chirp below. 
like he unnoticed, i, and such as i,
 spread little wing, and rather skip than fly,
 perch on the meager produce of the land,
 an ell or two of prospect we command,
 but never peep beyond the thorny bind
 or oaken fence that hem the paddoc round. 
in Eden ever yet innocence of heart
 have fade, poetry be not a art;
 language above all teach, or if teach,
 only by gratitude and glow thought,
 elegant as simplicity, and warm
 as exstasy, unmanacled by form,
 not prompt as in our degenerate day,
 by low ambition and the thirst of praise,
 be natural as be the flow stream,
 and yet magnificent, a god the theme. 
that theme on earth exhaust, though above
 it be find as everlasting as his love,
 man lavish all his thought on human thing,
 the feat of hero and the wrath of king,
 but still while virtue kindle his delight,
 the song be moral, and so far be right. 
it be thus till luxury seduce the mind,
 to joy less innocent, as less refine,
 then genius dance a bacchanal, he crown
 the brim goblet, seize the thyrsus, bind
 his brow with ivy, rush into the field
 of wild imagination, and there reel
 the victim of his own lascivious fire,
 and dizzy with delight, profane the sacred wire. 
Anacreon, Horace, play in Greece and Rome
 this bedlam part; and, other near home. 
when Cromwell fight for power, and while he reign
 the proud protector of the power he gain,
 religion harsh, intolerant, austere,
 parent of manner like herself severe,
 draw a rough copy of the christian face
 without the smile, the sweetness, or the grace;
 the dark and sullen humour of the time
 judge every effort of the muse a crime;
 verse in the fine mould of fancy cast,
 be lumber in a age so void of taste:
 but when the second Charles assume the sway,
 and art revive beneath a soft day,
 then like a bow long force into a curve,
 the mind release from too constrain a nerve,
 fly to its first position with a spring
 that make the vault roof of pleasure ring. 
his court, the dissolute and hateful school
 of wantonness, where vice be teach by rule,
 swarm with a scribble herd as deep inlay
 with brutal lust as ever Circe make. 
from these a long succession, in the rage
 of rank obscenity debauch their age,
 nor cease, until ever anxious to redress
 the abuse of her sacred charge, the press,
 the muse instruct a well nurture train
 of able votary to cleanse the stain,
 and claim the palm for purity of song,
 that lewdness have usurp and wear so long. 
then decent pleasantry and sterling sense
 that neither give nor will endure offence,
 whip out of sight with satyr just and keen,
 the puppy pack that have defile the scene. 
in front of these come ADDISON. in he
 humour in holiday and sightly trim,
 sublimity and attic taste combine,
 to polish, furnish, and delight the mind. 
then pope, as harmony itself exact,
 in verse well discipline, complete, compact,
 give virtue and morality a grace
 that quite eclipse pleasure paint face,
 levy a tax of wonder and applause,
 even on the fool that trample on their law. 
but he (his musical finesse be such,
 so nice his ear, so delicate his touch)
 make poetry a mere mechanic be,
 and every warbler have his tune by heart. 
nature impart her satyric gift,
 her serious mirth, to Arbuthnot and swift,
 with droll sobriety they raise a smile
 at folly cost, themselves unmoved the while. 
that constellation set, the world in vain
 must hope to look upon their like again. 

a. 

be we then leave

B. 

not whole in the dark,
 wit now and then, strike smart, show a spark,
 sufficient to redeem the modern race
 from total night and absolute disgrace. 
while servile trick and imitative knack
 confine the million in the beat track,
 perhaps some courser who disdain the road,
 snuff up the wind and fling himself abroad. 
contemporary all surpass, see one,
 short his career, indeed, but able run. 
Churchill, himself unconscious of his power,
 in penury consume his idle hour,
 and like a scatter seed at random sow,
 be leave to spring by vigor of his own. 
lift at length by dignity of thought,
 and dint of genius to a affluent lot,
 he lay his head in luxury soft lap,
 and take too often there his easy nap. 
if bright beam than all he throw not forth,
 it be negligence in he, not want of worth. 
surly and slovenly and bold and coarse,
 too proud for art, and trust in mere force,
 spendthrift alike of money and of wit,
 always at speed and never draw bit,
 he strike the lyre in such a careless mood,
 and so disdain the rule he understand,
 the laurel seem to wait on his command,
 he snatch it rude from the muse hand. 
nature exert a unwearied power,
 form, open and give scent to every flower,
 spread the fresh verdure of the field, and lead
 the dance naiad through the dewy mead,
 she fill profuse ten thousand little throat
 with music, modulate all their note,
 and charm the woodland scene and wild unknown,
 with artless air and concert of her own;
 but seldom (as if fearful of expense)
 vouchsafe to man a poet just pretence. 
fervency, freedom, fluency of thought,
 harmony, strength, word exquisite seek,
 fancy that from the bow that span the sky,
 bring colour dip in heaven that never die,
 a soul exalt above earth, a mind
 skill in the character that form mankind,
 and as the sun in rise beauty dress,
 look to the westward from the dapple east,
 and mark, whatever cloud may interpose,
 ever yet his race begin, its glorious close,
 a eye like he to catch the distant goal,
 or ever the wheel of verse begin to roll,
 like he to shed illuminate ray
 on every scene and subject it survey,
 thus grace the man assert a poet name,
 and the world cheerful admit the claim. 
pity! religion have so seldom find
 a skilful guide into poetic ground,
 the flower will spring wherever she deign to stray,
 and every muse attend she in her way. 
virtue indeed meet many a rhyme friend,
 and many a compliment polite pen,
 but unattire in that become vest
 religion weave for she, and half undress,
 stand in the desert shiver and forlorn,
 a wintery figure, like a wither thorn. 
the shelf be full, all other theme be speed,
 hackneyed and wear to the last flimsy thread,
 satyr have long since do his best, and curse
 and loathsome ribaldry have do his worst,
 fancy have sport all her power away
 in tale, in trifle, and in child play,
 and it be the sad complaint, and almost true,
 whatever we write, we bring forth nothing new. 
it be new indeed, to see a bard all fire,
 touch with a coal from heaven assume the lyre,
 and tell the world, still kindle as he sing,
 with more than mortal music on his tongue,
 that he who die below, and reign above
 inspire the song, and that his name be love. 
for after all, if mere to beguile
 by flow number and a flowery stile,
 the taedium that the lazy rich endure,
 which now and then sweet poetry may cure,
 or if to see the name of idol self
 stamp on the well-bound quarto, grace the shelf,
 to float a bubble on the breath of fame,
 prompt his endeavour, and engage his aim,
 debase to servile purpose of pride,
 how be the power of genius misapply? 
the gift who office be the giver praise,
 to trace he in his word, his work, his way,
 then spread the rich discovery, and invite
 mankind to share in the divine delight,
 distort from its use and just design,
 to make the pitiful possessor shine,
 to purchase at the fool-frequented fair
 of vanity, a wreath for self to wear,
 be profanation of the base kind,
 proof of a trifle and a worthless mind. 

a. 

hail Sternhold then and Hopkins hail! 

B. 

amen. 
if flattery, folly, lust employ the pen,
 if acrimony, slander and abuse,
 give it a charge to blacken and traduce;
 though butler wit, pope number, prior ease,
 with all that fancy can invent to please,
 adorn the polish period as they fall,
 one madrigal of they be worth they all. 

a. 

it will thin the rank of the poetic tribe,
 to dash the pen through all that you proscribe. 

B. 

no matter — we can shift when they be not,
 and shall no doubt if they be all forget. 
