the author.

accurse the man, who fate ordain, in spite,
 and cruel parent teach, to read and write! 
what need of letter? wherefore shall we spell? 
why write our name? a mark will do as well. 

much be the precious hour of youth mispend,
 in climb learning rugged steep ascent;
 when to the top the bold advent'rer get,
 he reign, vain monarch, over a barren spot,
 while in the vale of ignorance below,
 folly and vice to rank luxuriance grow;
 honour and wealth pour in on every side,
 and proud preferment roll her golden tide. 

over crabbed author life gay prime to waste,
 to cramp wild genius in the chain of taste,
 to bear the slavish drudgery of school,
 and tame stoop to every pedant rule,
 for seven long year debar of liberal ease,
 to plod in college trammel to degree,
 beneath the weight of solemn toy to groan,
 sleep over book, and leave mankind unknown,
 to praise each senior blockhead threadbare tale,
 and laugh till reason blush, and spirit fail,
 manhood with vile submission to disgrace,
 and cap the fool, who merit be his place;
 vice chancellor, who knowledge be but small,
 and chancellor, who nothing know at all,
 ill-brooked the generous spirit, in those day
 when learning be the certain road to praise,
 when noble, with a love of science bless,
 approve in other what themselves possess. 

but now, when dullness rear aloft her throne,
 when lordly vassal her wide empire own,
 when wit, seduce by envy, start aside,
 and base league with ignorance and pride,
 what now shall tempt we, by false hope mislead,
 learning unfashionable path to tread;
 to bear those labour, which our father bear
 that crown withhold, which they in triumph wear? 

when with much pain this boast learning get,
 it be a affront to those who have it not. 
in some it cause hate, in other fear,
 instruct our foe to rail, our friend to sneer. 
with prudent haste the worldly-minded fool,
 forget the little which he learn at school;
 the elder brother, to vast fortune bear,
 look on all science with a eye of scorn;
 dependent brother the same feature wear,
 and young son be stupid as the heir. 
in senate, at the bar, in church and state,
 genius be vile, and learning out of date. 
be this — o death to think! be this the land
 where merit and reward go hand in hand,
 where hero, parentlike, the poet view? —
 by who they see their glorious deed renew;
 where poet, true to honour, tune their lay,
 and by their patron sanctify their praise? 
be this the land, where, on our Spencer tongue,
 enamour of his voice, description hang;
 where Johnson rigid gravity beguile,
 while reason through her critic fence smile;
 where nature listen stand, while Shakespear play,
 and wonder at the work herself have make? 
be this the land, where, mindful of her charge
 and office high, fair freedom walk at large;
 where, find in our law a sure defence,
 she mock at all restraint, but those of sense;
 where, health and honour troop by her side,
 she spread her sacred empire far and wide;
 point the way, affliction to beguile,
 and bid the face of sorrow wear a smile,
 bid those, who dare obey the generous call,
 enjoy her blessing, which god mean for all? 
be this the land, where, in some tyrant reign,
 when a weak, wicked ministerial train,
 the tool of power, the slave of interest, plan
 their country be ruin, and with bribe unmanned
 those wretch, who, ordain in freedom cause,
 give up our liberty, and sell our law;
 when power be teach by meanness where to go,
 nor dare to love the virtue of a foe;
 when, like a leprous plague, from the foul head
 to the foul heart her sore corruption spread,
 her iron arm when stern oppression rear,
 and virtue, from her broad base shake, fear
 the scourge of vice; when, impotent and vain,
 poor freedom bow the neck to slavery chain;
 be this the land, where, in those worst of time,
 the hardy poet raise his honest rhyme
 to dread rebuke, and bid controlment speak
 in guilty blush on the villain cheek,
 bid power turn pale, keep mighty rogue in awe,
 and make they fear the muse, who fear not law? 

how do i laugh, when man of narrow soul,
 who folly guide, and prejudice control;
 who, one dull drowsy track of business tread,
 worship their Mammon, and neglect their god;
 who, breathe by one musty set of rule,
 dote from the birth, and be by system fool;
 who, form to dullness from their very youth,
 lie of the day prefer to gospel truth,
 pick up their little knowledge from review,
 and lie out all their stock of faith in news:
 how do i laugh, when creature, form like these,
 who reason scorn, and i shall blush to please,
 rail at all liberal art, deem verse a crime,
 and hold not truth, as truth, if tell in rhyme? 

how do i laugh, when Publius, hoary grow
 in zeal for Scotland welfare, and his own,
 by slow degree, and course of office, draw
 in mood and figure at the helm to yawn,
 too mean (the worst of curse heaven can send)
 to have a foe, too proud to have a friend,
 err by form, which blockhead sacred hold,
 never make new fault, and never mend old,
 rebuke my spirit, bid the dare muse
 subject more equal to her weakness choose;
 bid she frequent the haunt of humble swain,
 nor dare to traffic in ambitious strain;
 bid she, indulge the poetic whim
 in quaint-wrought ode, or sonnet pert trim,
 along the churchway path complain with grey,
 or dance with Mason on the first of may? 
 "all sacred be the name and power of king,
"all state and statesman be those mighty thing
 "which, howsoever they out of course may roll,
"be never make for poet to control. "

peace, peace thou dotard, nor thus vile deem
 of sacred number, and their power blaspheme;
 i tell thou, wretch, search all creation round,
 in earth, in heaven, no subject can be find
 (our god alone except) above who weight
 the poet can rise, and hold his state. 
the bless saint above in number speak
 the praise of god, though there all praise be weak;
 in number here below the bard shall teach
 virtue to soar beyond the villain reach;
 shall tear his labour lung, strain his hoarse throat,
 and raise his voice beyond the trumpet note,
 shall a afflict country, awe by man
 of slavish principle, demand his pen. 
this be a great, a glorious point of view,
 fit for a english poet to pursue,
 undaunted to pursue, though, in return,
 his write by the common hangman burn. 

how do i laugh, when man, by fortune place
 above their better, and by rank disgrace,
 who find their pride on title which they stain,
 and, mean themselves, be of their father vain,
 who will a bill of privilege prefer,
 and treat a poet, like a creditor,
 the generous ardour of the muse condemn,
 and curse the storm they know must break on they? 
 "what, shall a reptile bard, a wretch unknown,
"without one badge of merit, but his own,
 "great noble lash, and lord, like common man,
"smart from the vengeance of a scribbler pen? "

what be in this name of lord, that we shall fear
 to bring their vice to the public ear? 
flow not the honest blood of humble swain
 quick as the tide which swell a monarch vein? 
monarch, who wealth and title can bestow,
 can make virtue in succession flow. 
will thou, proud man, be safe place above
 the censure of the muse, deserve her love,
 act as thy birth demand, as noble ought;
 look back, and by thy worthy father teach,
 who earn those honour, thou be bear to wear,
 follow his step, and be his virtue heir. 
but if, regardless of the road to fame,
 you start aside, and tread the path of shame. 
if such thy life, that shall thy sire arise,
 the sight of such a son will blast his eye,
 will make he curse the hour which give thou birth,
 will drive he, shudder, from the face of earth
 once more, with shame and sorrow, among the dead
 in endless night to hide his reverend head;
 if such thy life, though king have make thou more
 than ever king a scoundrel make before,
 nay, to allow thy pride a deep spring,
 though god in vengeance have make thou a king,
 take on virtue wing her dare flight,
 the muse shall drag thou tremble to the light,
 probe thy foul wound, and lay thy bosom bare
 to the keen question of the search air. 

god! with what pride i see the title slave,
 who smart beneath the stroke which satire give,
 aim at ease, and with dishonest art
 strive to hide the feeling of his heart! 
how do i laugh, when, with affect air,
 (scarce able through despite to keep his chair,
 while on his tremble lip pale anger speak,
 and the chase blood fly mount to his cheek)
 he talk of conscience, which good man secure
 from all those evil moment guilt endure,
 and seem to laugh at those, who pay regard
 to the wild rave of a frantic bard. 
 "satire, while envy and ill-humour sway
"the mind of man, must always make her way,
 "nor to a bosom, with discretion fraught,
"be all her malice worth a single thought. 
 "the wise have not the will, nor fool the power
"to stop her headstrong course; within the hour,
 "leave to herself, she die; oppose strife,
"give her fresh vigour, and prolong her life. 
 "all thing her prey, and every man her aim,
"i can no patent for exemption claim,
 "nor will i wish to stop that harmless dart
"which play around, but can wound my heart:
 "though point at myself, be satire free;
"to she it be pleasure, and no pain to i. "

dissemble wretch! hence to the stoic school,
 and there among thy brother play the fool,
 there, unrebuked, these wild, vain doctrine preach;
 live there a man, who satire can reach? 
live there a man, who calm can stand by,
 and see his conscience rip with steady eye? 
when satire fly abroad on falsehood wing,
 short be her life indeed, and dull her sting;
 but when to truth ally, the wound she give
 sink deep, and to remote age live. 
when in the tomb thy pamper flesh shall rot,
 and even by friend thy memory be forget,
 still shall thou live, record for thy crime,
 live in her page, and stink to aftertime. 

have thou no feeling yet? come, throw off pride,
 and own those passion which thou shall not hide. 
s, who, from the moment of his birth,
 make human nature a reproach on earth,
 who never dare, nor wish behind to stay,
 when folly, vice, and meanness lead the way,
 will blush, shall he be tell, by truth and wit,
 those action, which he blush not to commit;
 man the most infamous be fond of fame,
 and those who fear not guilt, yet start at shame. 

but whither run my zeal, who rapid force,
 turn the brain, bear reason from her course,
 carry i back to time, when poet, bless
 with courage, grace the science they profess;
 when they, in honour root, firm stand
 the bad to punish, and reward the good;
 when, to a flame by public virtue wrought,
 the foe of feedom they to justice bring,
 and dare expose those slave, who dare support
 a tyrant plan, and call themselves a court. 
ah! what be poet now? as slavish those
 who deal in verse, as those who deal in prose. 
be there a author, search the kingdom round,
 in who true worth, and real spirit find? 
the slave of bookseller, or (doom by fate
 to base chain) vile pensioner of state;
 some, dead to shame, and of those shackle proud
 which honour scorn, for slavery roar aloud,
 other, half-palsied only, mute become,
 and what make Smollet write, make Johnson dumb. 
why turn you villain pale? why bend his eye
 inward, abash, when Murphy pass by? 
do thou sage Murphy for a blockhead take,
 who wage be with vice for virtue sake? 
no, no — like other worldling, you will find
 he shift his sail, and catch every wind. 
his soul the shock of interest can endure,
 give he a pension then, and sin secure. 

with laureled wreath the flatterer brow adorn,
 bid virtue crouch, bid vice exalt her horn,
 bid coward thrive, put honesty to flight,
 Murphy shall prove, or try to prove it right. 
try, thou state-juggler, every paltry art,
 ransack the inmost closet of my heart,
 swear thou be my friend; by that base oath make way
 into my breast, and flatter to betray;
 or, if those trick be vain, if wholesome doubt
 detect the fraud, and point the villain out,
 bribe those who daily at my board be feed,
 and make they take my life who eat my bread;
 on author for defence, for praise depend;
 pay he but well, and Murphy be thy friend. 
he, he shall ready stand with venal rhyme
 to varnish guilt, and consecrate thy crime,
 to make corruption in false colour shine,
 and damn his own good name, to rescue thy. 

but, if thy niggard hand their gift withhold,
 and vice no long rain down shower of gold,
 expect no mercy; fact, well ground, teach,
 Murphy, if not reward, will impeach. 
what though each man of nice and juster think,
 shun his step, decree, by honour teach,
 he never can be a friend, who stoop so low
 to be the base betrayer of a foe;
 what though, with thy together link, his name
 must be with thy transmit down to shame,
 to every manly feeling callous grow,
 rather than not blast thy, he will blast his own. 

to open the fountain, whence sedition spring,
 to slander government, and libel king,
 with freedom name to serve a present hour,
 though bear, and breed to arbitrary power,
 to talk of Williams with insidious art,
 while a vile stuart lurk in his heart,
 and, while mean envy rear her loathsome head,
 flatter the living, to abuse the dead,
 where be shebbeare? o, let not foul reproach,
 travel thither in a city-coach,
 the pillory dare to name; the whole intent
 of that parade be fame, not punishment,
 and that old, staunch Whig beardmore stand by,
 can in full court give that report the lie. 

with rude unnatural jargon to support,
 half scotch, half english, a decline court,
 to make most glare contrary unite,
 and prove, beyond dispute, that black be white,
 to make firm honour tame league with shame,
 make vice and virtue differ but in name,
 to prove that chain and freedom be but one,
 that to be save must mean to be undo,
 be there not Guthrie? who, like he, can call
 all opposite to proof, and conquer all? 
he call forth live water from the rock;
 he call forth child from the barren stock;
 he, far beyond the spring of nature lead,
 make woman bring forth after they be dead;
 he, on a curious, new, and happy plan,
 in wedlock sacred band join man to man;
 and, to complete the whole, most strange, but true,
 by some rare magic, make they fruitful too,
 while from their loin, in the due course of year,
 flow the rich blood of guthrie english peer. 

do thou contrive some black deed of shame,
 something which nature shudder but to name,
 something which make the soul of man retreat,
 and the lifeblood run backward to her seat? 
do thou contrive, for some base private end,
 some selfish view, to hang a trust friend,
 to lure he on, even to his part breath,
 and promise life, to work he sure death? 
grow old in villainy, and dead to grace,
 hell in his heart, and tyburne in his face;
 behold, a parson at thy elbow stand,
 lower damnation, and with open hand
 ripe to betray his saviour for reward;
 the atheist chaplain of a atheist lord. 

breed to the church, and for the gown decree,
 before it be know that i shall learn to read;
 though that be nothing, for my friend, who know
 what mighty dullness of itself can do,
 never design i for a work priest,
 but hope, i shall have be a Dean at least;
 condemn (like many more, and worthy man,
 to who i pledge the service of my pen),
 condemn (while proud, and pamper son of lawn,
 cram to the throat, in lazy plenty yawn)
 in pomp of reverend beggary to appear,
 to pray, and starve on forty pound a year;
 my friend, who never feel the gall load,
 lament that i forsake the packhorse road,
 while virtue to my conduct witness bear
 in throw off that gown, which FRANCIS wear. 

what creature be that, so very pert and prim;
 so very full of foppery, and whim;
 so gentle, yet so brisk; so wondrous sweet,
 so fit to prattle at a lady foot,
 who look, as he the lord rich vineyard tread,
 and by his garb appear a man of god? 
trust not to look, nor credit outward show;
 the villain lurk beneath the cassock beau;
 that be a informer; what avail the name? 
suffice it that the wretch from Sodom come. 

his tongue be deadly — from his presence run,
 unless thy rage will wish to be undo. 
no tie can hold he, no affection bind,
 and fear alone restrain his coward mind;
 free he from that, no monster be so fell,
 nor be so sure a bloodhound find in hell. 
his silken smile, his hypocritic air,
 his meek demeanour, plausible and fair,
 be only wear to pave fraud easy way,
 and make gull virtue fall a sure prey. 
attend his church — his plan of doctrine view —
 the preacher be a christian, dull but true;
 but when the hallow hour of preaching over,
 that plan of doctrine never think of more;
 Christ be lay by neglect on the shelf,
 and the vile priest be gospel to himself. 

by Cleland tutor, and with blacow breed,
 (blacow, who by a brave resentment lead,
 OXFORD, if OXFORD have not sink in same,
 ere this, have damn to everlasting shame)
 their step he follow, and their crime partake,
 to virtue lose, to vice alone he wake,
 most luscious declaim against luscious theme,
 and, while he rail at blasphemy, blaspheme. 

be these the art, which policy supply? 
be these the step, by which grave churchman rise? 
forbid it, heaven; or, shall it turn out so,
 let i, and i, continue mean and low. 
such be their art, who interest control;
 kidgell and i have free and honest soul. 
we scorn preferment which be gain by sin,
 and will, though poor without, have peace within. 
