HENRY and Emma, a poem, upon the model of the nutbrown maid.

to cloe.

thou, to who eye i bend; at who command,
 (though low my voice, though artless be my hand)
 i take the sprightly reed, and sing, and play;
 careless of what the censure world may say:
 bright cloe, object of my constant vow,
 will thou awhile unbend thy serious brow? 
will thou with pleasure hear thy lover strain,
 and with one heavenly smile overpay his pain? 
no long shall the nutbrown maid be old;
 though since her youth three hundred year have roll. 
at thy desire, she shall again be raise;
 and her revive charm in last verse be praise. 

no long man of woman shall complain,
 that he may love, and not be love again:
 that we in vain the fickle sex pursue,
 who change the constant lover for the new. 
whatever have be write, whatever say
 of female passion feign, or faith decay;
 henceforth shall in my verse refute stand,
 be say to wind, or write upon the sand. 
and while my note to future time proclaim
 unconquered love, and ever-during flame;
 o fair of the sex! be thou my muse:
 deign on my work thy influence to diffuse. 
let i partake the blessing i rehearse;
 and grant i love, the just reward of verse. 

as beauty potent queen, with every grace
 that once be Emma, have adorn thy face;
 and as her son have to my bosom deal
 that constant flame, which faithful Henry feel:
 o let the story with thy life agree;
 let man once more the bright example see;
 what Emma be to he, be thou to i. 
nor send i by thy frown from she i love,
 distant and sad, a banish man to rove. 
but oh! with pity long entreat crown
 my pain and hope; and when thou say that one
 of all mankind thou love; oh! think on i alone. 

where beauteous Isis and her husband tame
 with mingle wave, for ever, flow the same:
 in time of yore, a ancient baron live;
 great gift bestow, and great respect receive. 

when dreadful Edward, with successful care,
 lead his free briton to the Gallic war;
 this lord have head his appoint band,
 in firm allegiance to his king command. 
and (all due honour faithful discharge)
 have bring back his paternal coat, enlarge
 with a new Mark, the witness of his toil;
 and no inglorious part of foreign spoil. 

from the loud camp retire, and noisy court,
 in honourable ease and rural sport,
 the remnant of his day, he safe pass;
 nor find they lag too slow, nor fly too fast. 
he make his wish with his estate comply;
 joyful to live, yet not afraid to die. 

one child he have, a daughter chaste and fair;
 his age comfort, and his Fortune heir. 
they call she Emma; for the beauteous dame
 who give the virgin birth, have bear the name. 
the name the indulgent father double love;
 for in the child the mother charm improve. 
yet, as when little, round his knee she play;
 he call she oft, in sport, his nutbrown maid:
 the friend and tenant take the fondle word;
 (as still they please, who imitate their lord)
 usage confirm what fancy have begin:
 the mutual term around the land be know;
 and Emma and the nutbrown maid be one. 

as with her stature, still her charm increase;
 through all the isle her beauty be confess. 
oh! what perfection must that virgin share,
 who fair be esteem, where all be fair? 
from distant shire repair the noble youth,
 and find, report, for once, have lessen truth. 
by wonder first, and then by passion move,
 they come; they see; they marvel; and they love. 
by public praise, and by secret sigh,
 each own the general power of Emma eye. 
in tilt and tournament the valiant strive,
 by glorious deed, to purchase Emma love. 
in gentle verse, the witty tell their flame,
 and grace their choice song with Emma name. 
in vain they combat, in vain they write:
 useless their strength, and impotent their wit. 
great Venus only must direct the dart,
 which else will never reach the fair one heart;
 spite of the attempt of force, and soft effect of art.
 great Venus must prefer the happy one:
 in Henry cause her favour must be show:
 and Emma, of mankind, must love but he alone. 

while these, in public, to the castle come,
 and by their grandeur justify their flame:
 more secret way the careful Henry take;
 his squire, his arm, and equipage forsake. 
in borrow name, and false attire, array,
 oft he find mean to see the beauteous maid. 

when Emma hunt, in huntsman habit dress,
 Henry on foot pursue the bound beast. 
in his right hand his beachen pole he bear:
 and graceful at his side his horn he wear. 
still to the glade, where she have bend her way,
 with know skill he drive the future prey. 
bid she decline the hill, and shun the brake;
 and show the path her steed may safe take. 
direct her spear to fix the glorious wound;
 please, in his toil, to have her triumph crown:
 and blow her praise in no common sound. 

a falc'ner Henry be, when Emma hawk:
 with she of tarsel, and of lure he talk. 
upon his wrist the tower Merlin stand;
 practise to rise, and stoop, at her command. 
and when superior now the bird have fly,
 and headlong bring the tumble quarry down:
 with humble reverence he accost the fair;
 and with the honour feather deck her hair. 
yet still, as from the sportive field she go,
 his down-cast eye reveal his inward woe. 
and by his look and sorrow be express,
 a noble game pursue, than bird or beast. 

a shepherd now along the plain he rove;
 and, with his jolly pipe, delight the groves. 
the neighbour swain around the strange throng,
 or to admire, or emulate his song:
 while, with soft sorrow, he renew his lay,
 nor heedful of their envy, nor their praise. 
but soon as Emma eye adorn the plain,
 his note he raise to a noble strain;
 with dutiful respect, and studious fear,
 lest any careless sound offend her ear. 

a frantic Gipsey, now the house he haunt,
 and in wild phrase, speak dissemble want. 
with the fond maid in palmistry he deal:
 they tell the secret first, which he reveal:
 say who shall wed, and who shall be beguile;
 what groom shall get, and squire maintain the child. 
but when bright Emma will her fortune know;
 a soft look unbend his open brow. 
with tremble awe, he gaze on her eye;
 and in soft accent, form the kind reply;
 that she shall prove as fortunate as fair,
 and Hymen choice gift be all reserve for she. 

now oft have Henry change his sly disguise;
 unmarked by all, but beauteous Emma eye. 
oft have find mean alone to see the dame,
 and at her foot to breath his amorous flame;
 and oft, the pang of absence to remove
 by letter, soft interpreter of love:
 until time and industry (the mighty two
 that bring our wish near to our view)
 make he perceive, that the incline fair
 receive his vow with no reluctant ear;
 that Venus have confirm her equal reign,
 and deal to Emma heart a share of Henry pain. 

while Cupid smile, by kind occasion bless,
 and, with the secret keep, the love increase;
 the amorous youth frequent the silent groves;
 and much he meditate; for much he love. 
he love: it be true; and be belove again:
 great be his joy: but will they long remain? 
Emma with smile receive his present flame;
 but smile, will she ever be the same? 
beautiful look be rule by fickle mind;
 and summer sea be turn by sudden wind. 
another love may gain her easy youth:
 time change thought; and flattery conquer truth. 

o impotent estate of human life! 
where hope and fear maintain eternal strife:
 where fleet joy do last doubt inspire;
 and most we question, what we most desire. 
among thy various gift, great heaven, bestow
 our cup of love unmixed; forbear to throw
 bitter ingredient in; nor pall the draught
 with nauseous grief: for our ill-judging thought
 hardly enjoy the pleasurable taste;
 or deem it not sincere; or fear it can last. 

with wish raise, with jealousy oppress
 (alternate tyrant of the human breast)
 by one great trial he resolve to prove
 the faith of woman, and the force of love. 
if scan Emma virtue, he may find
 that beauteous frame enclose a steady mind;
 he will fix his hope, of future joy secure;
 and live a slave to Hymen happy power. 
but if the fair one, as he fear, be frail;
 if poise aright in reason equal scale,
 light fly her merit, and her fault prevail;
 his mind he vow to free from amorous care,
 the latent mischief from his heart to tear,
 resume his azure arm, and shine again in war. 

south of the castle, in a verdant glade,
 a spread beach extend her friendly shade:
 here oft the nymph his breathe vow have hear:
 here oft her silence have her heart declare. 
as active spring awake her infant bud;
 and genial life inform the verdant wood;
 Henry, in knot involve Emma name,
 have half express, and half conceal his flame
 upon this tree: and as the tender Mark
 grow with the year, and widen with the bark:
 Venus have hear the virgin soft address,
 that, as the wound, the passion may increase. 
as potent nature shed her kindly shower,
 and deck the various Mead with open flower;
 upon this tree the nymph oblige care
 have leave a frequent wreathe for Henry hair:
 which as with gay delight the lover find;
 please with his conquest, with her present crown,
 glorious through all the plain he oft have go,
 and to each Swain the mystic honour show;
 the gift still praise, the giver still unknown. 

his secret note the trouble Henry write,
 to the know tree the lovely maid invite:
 imperfect word and dubious term express,
 that unforeseen mischance disturb his peace;
 that he must something to her ear commend,
 on which her conduct, and his life depend. 

soon as the fair one have the note receive;
 the remnant of the day alone she grieve:
 for different this from every former note,
 which Venus dictate, and Henry write;
 which tell she all his future hope be lay
 on the dear bosom of his nutbrown maid;
 which always bless her eye, and own her power;
 and bid she oft adieu, yet add more. 

now night advance. the house in sleep be lay,
 the nurse experience, and the pry maid;
 and last that sprite, which do incessant haunt
 the lover step, the ancient maiden aunt. 
to her dear Henry Emma wing her way,
 with quicken pace repair force delay. 
for love, fantastic power, that be afraid
 to stir abroad until watchfulness be lay;
 undaunted then, over cliff and valley stray;
 and lead his votary safe through pathless way. 
not Argus with his hundred eye shall find,
 where Cupid go; though he poor guide be blind. 

the maiden first arrive, send her eye,
 to ask, if yet it be chief delight be nigh:
 with fear, and with desire, with joy, and pain
 she see, and run to meet he on the plain. 
but oh! his step proclaim no lover haste:
 on the low ground his fix regard be cast:
 his artful bosom heave dissemble sigh;
 and tear suborn fall copious from his eye. 

with ease, alas! we credit what we love:
 his paint grief do real sorrow move
 in the afflict fair; down her cheek
 trickle the genuine tear their current break. 
attentive stand the mournful nymph: the man
 break silence first: the tale alternate run. 

HENRY.

sincere o tell i, have thou feel a pain,
 Emma, beyond what woman know to feign? 
have thy uncertain bosom ever strive
 with the first tumult of a real love? 
have thou now dread, and now bless his sway;
 by turn averse, and joyful to obey? 
thy virgin softness have thou ever bewail,
 as reason yield, and as love prevail? 
and weep the potent God resistless dart,
 his kill pleasure, his ecstatic smart,
 and heavenly poison thrill through thy heart? 
if so, with pity view my wretched state;
 at least deplore, and then forget my fate:
 to some more happy knight reserve thy charm,
 by fortune favour, and successful arm:
 and only, as the sun revolve ray
 bring back each year this melancholy day;
 permit one sigh, and set apart one tear,
 to a abandon exile endless care. 
for i, alas! outcast of human race,
 love anger only wait, and dire disgrace:
 for lo! these hand in murder be imbrue;
 these tremble foot by justice be pursue:
 fate call aloud, and hasten i away;
 a shameful death attend my long stay;
 and i this night must fly from thou and love,
 condemn in lonely wood a banish man to rove. 

Emma.

what be our bliss, that change with the moon;
 and day of life, that darken ever it be noon? 
what be true passion, if unblest it die? 
and where be Emma joy, if Henry fly? 
if love, alas! be pain; the pain i bear,
 no thought can figure, and no tongue declare. 
never faithful woman feel, nor false one feign
 the flame, which long have in my bosom reign:
 the god of love himself inhabit there,
 with all his rage, and dread, and grief, and care,
 his complement of store, and total war. 

o! cease then cold to suspect my love;
 and let my deed, at least, my faith approve. 
alas! no youth shall my endearment share;
 nor day nor night shall interrupt my care:
 no future story shall with truth upbraid
 the cold indifference of the nutbrown maid:
 nor to hard banishment shall Henry run;
 while careless Emma sleep on bed of down. 
view i resolve, wherever thou lead, to go,
 friend to thy pain, and partner of thy woe:
 for i attest fair Venus, and her son,
 that i, of all mankind, will love but thou alone. 

HENRY.

let prudence yet obstruct thy venturous way;
 and take good heed, what man will think and say;
 that beauteous Emma vagrant course take;
 her father house and civil life forsake;
 that full of youthful blood, and fond of man,
 she to the woodland with a exile run. 
reflect, that lessen fame be never regain;
 and virgin honour once, be always stain:
 timely advise, the come evil shun:
 better not do the deed, than weep it do. 
no penance can absolve our guilty fame;
 nor tear, that wash out sin, can wash out shame. 
then fly the sad effect of desperate love;
 and leave a banish man through lonely wood to rove. 

Emma.

let Emma hapless case be false tell
 by the rash young, or the ill-natured old:
 let every tongue it be various censure choose,
 absolve with coldness, or with spite accuse:
 fair truth, at last, her radiant beam will raise;
 and malice vanquish heighten virtue praise. 
let then thy favour but indulge my flight;
 o! let my presence make thy travel light;
 and potent Venus shall exalt my name
 above the rumour of censorious fame:
 nor from that busy demon restless power
 will ever Emma other grace implore,
 than that this truth shall to the world be know,
 that i, of all mankind, have love but thou alone. 

HENRY.

but can thou wield the sword, and bend the bow? 
with active force repel the sturdy foe? 
when the loud tumult speak the battle nigh,
 and wing death in whistle arrow fly;
 will thou, though wound, yet undaunted stay,
 perform thy part, and share the dangerous day? 
then, as thy strength decay, thy heart will fail;
 thy limb all tremble, and thy cheek all pale:
 with fruitless sorrow thou, inglorious maid,
 will weep thy safety by thy love betray:
 then to thy friend, by foe overcharged, deny
 thy little useless aid, and coward fly:
 then will thou curse the chance that make thou love
 a banish man, condemn in lonely wood to rove. 

Emma.

with fatal certainty Thalestris know
 to send the arrow from the twang yew:
 and great in arm, and foremost in the war,
 bonduca brandish high the british spear. 
can thirst of vengeance, and desire of fame
 excite the female breast with martial flame? 
and shall not love divine power inspire
 more hardy virtue, and more generous fire? 

near thou, mistrust not, constant i will abide,
 and fall, or vanquish, fight by thy side. 
though my inferior strength may not allow,
 that i shall bear, or draw the warrior bow;
 with ready hand i will the shaft supply,
 and joy to see thy victor arrow fly. 
touch in the battle by the hostile reed,
 shall thou (but heaven avert it!) shall thou bleed;
 to stop the wound my fine lawn i will tear;
 wash they with tear, and wipe they with my hair:
 bless, when my danger and my toil have show,
 that i, of all mankind, can love but thou alone. 

HENRY.

but can thou, tender maid, can thou sustain
 afflictive want, or hunger press pain? 
those limb, in lawn and soft silk array,
 from sunbeam guard, and of wind afraid;
 can they bear angry Jove? can they resist
 the parch dogstar, and the bleak north-east? 
when chill by adverse snow, and beat rain,
 we tread with weary step the longsome plain;
 when with hard toil we seek our evening food,
 berry and acorn, from the neighbour wood;
 and find among the cliff no other house,
 but the thin covert of some gather bough;
 will thou not then reluctant send thy eye
 around the dreary waste; and weep try
 (though then, alas! that trial be too late)
 to find thy father hospitable gate,
 and seat, where ease and plenty brood sit? 
those seat, whence long exclude thou must mourn:
 that gate, for ever bar to thy return:
 will thou not then bewail ill-fated love,
 and hate a banish man, condemn in wood to rove? 

Emma.

thy rise of fortune do i only wed,
 from it be decline determine to recede? 
do i but purpose to embark with thou,
 on the smooth surface of a summer sea;
 while gentle zephyr play in prosperous gale;
 and Fortune favour fill the swell sail:
 but will forsake the ship, and make the shore,
 when the wind whistle, and the tempest roar? 
no, Henry, no: one sacred oath have tie
 our love; one destiny our life shall guide;
 nor wild, nor deep our common way divide. 

when from the cave thou rise with the day,
 to beat the wood, and rouse the bound prey;
 the cave with moss and branch i will adorn,
 and cheerful sit, to wait my lord return. 
and when thou frequent bring the smite deer;
 (for seldom, archer say, thy arrow err)
 i will fetch quick fuel from the neighbour wood,
 and strike the sparkle flint, and dress the food:
 with humble duty and officious haste,
 i will cull the further Mead for thy repast:
 the choice herb i to thy board will bring;
 and draw thy water from the fresh spring:
 and when at night with weary toil oppress,
 soft slumber thou injoy, and wholesome rest;
 watchful i will guard thou, and with midnight prayer
 weary the god to keep thou in their care;
 and joyous ask, at morn return ray,
 if thou have health, and i may bless the day. 
my thought shall fix, my late wish depend
 on thou, guide, guardian, kinsman, father, friend:
 by all these sacred name be Henry know
 to Emma heart: and grateful let he own,
 that she, of all mankind, can love but he alone. 

HENRY.

vain thou tell i, what the woman care
 shall in the wildness of the wood prepare:
 thou, ever thou go, unhapp'y of thy kind,
 must leave the habit, and the sex behind. 
no long shall thy comely tress break
 in flow ringlet on thy snowy neck;
 or sit behind thy head, a ample round,
 in graceful breed with various ribbon bind:
 no long shall the boddice, apt palace,
 from thy full bosom to thy slender waste,
 that air and harmony of shape express,
 fine by degree, and beautiful less:
 nor shall thy lower garment artful pleat,
 from thy fair side dependent to thy foot,
 arm their chaste beauty with a modest pride,
 and double every charm they seek to hide. 
the ambrosial plenty of thy shine hair
 crop off and lose, scarce low than thy ear
 shall stand uncouth: a horseman coat shall hide
 thy taper shape, and comeliness of side:
 the short trunk-hose shall show thy foot and knee
 licentious, and to common eye-sight free:
 and with a bold stride, and loose air,
 mingle with man, a man thou must appear. 

nor solitude, nor gentle peace of mind,
 mistake maid, shall thou in forest find:
 it be long, since Cynthia and her train be there;
 or guardian god make innocence their care. 
vagrant and outlaw shall offend thy view;
 for such must be my friend; a hideous crew,
 by adverse fortune mix in social ill,
 train to assault, and discipline to kill:
 their common love, a lewd abandon pack,
 the beadle lash still flagrant on their back;
 by sloth corrupt, by disorder feed,
 make bold by want, and prostitute for bread:
 with such must Emma hunt the tedious day,
 assist their violence, and divide their prey:
 with such she must return at set light,
 though not partaker, witness of their night. 
thy ear, inure to charitable sound,
 and pity love, must feel the hateful wound
 of jest obscene, and vulgar ribaldry,
 the ill-bred question, and the lewd reply;
 bring by long habitude from bad to worse,
 must hear the frequent oath, the direful curse,
 that late weapon of the wretch war,
 and blasphemy, sad comrade of despair. 

now, Emma, now the last reflection make,
 what thou will follow, what thou must forsake:
 by our ill-omened star, and adverse heaven,
 no middle object to thy choice be give. 
or yield thy virtue, to attain thy love;
 or leave a banish man, condemn in wood to rove. 

Emma.

o grief of heart! that our unhappy fate
 force thou to suffer what thy honour hate:
 mix thou among the bad; or make thou run
 too near the path, which virtue bid thou shun. 
yet with she Henry still let Emma go;
 with he abhor the vice, but share the woe:
 and sure my little heart can never err
 amid the worst; if Henry still be there. 

our outward act be prompt from within;
 and from the sinner mind proceed the sin:
 by her own choice free virtue be approve;
 nor by the force of outward object move. 
who have assay no danger, gain no praise. 
in a small isle, amid the wide sea,
 triumphant constancy have fix her seat:
 in vain the siren sing, the tempest beat:
 their flattery she reject, nor fear their threat. 

for thou alone these little charm i dress;
 condemn they, or absolve they by thy test. 
in comely figure range, my jewel shine,
 or negligent place, for thou alone:
 for thou again they shall be lay aside:
 the woman, Henry, shall put off her pride
 for thou: my clothes, my sex exchange for thou,
 i will mingle with the people wretched lee;
 o line extreme of human infamy! 
want the scissors, with these hand i will tear
 (if that obstruct my flight) this load of hair. 
black soot, or yellow walnut shall disgrace
 this little red and white of Emma face. 
these nail with scratch shall deform my breast,
 lest by my look, or colour be express
 the mark of ought highborn, or ever better dress. 
yet in this commerce, under this disguise,
 let i be grateful still to Henry eye. 
lose to the world, let i to he be know:
 my fate i can absolve; if he shall own,
 that leave all mankind, i love but he alone. 

HENRY.

o wild thought of a abandon mind! 
name, habit, parent, woman leave behind,
 even honour dubious, thou prefer to go
 wild to the wood with i: say Emma so? 
or do i dream what Emma never say? 
o guilty error! and o wretched maid! 
who rove fancy will resolve the same
 with he, who next shall tempt her easy fame;
 and blow with empty word the susceptible flame. 
now why shall doubtful term thy mind perplex? 
confess thy frailty, and avow the sex:
 no long loose desire for constant love
 mistake; but say, it be man, with who thou long to rove. 

Emma.

be there not poison, rack, and flame, and sword;
 that Emma thus must die by Henry word? 
yet what can sword or poison, rack or flame,
 but mangle and disjoined this brittle frame? 
more fatal Henry word; they murder Emma fame. 

and fall these say from that gentle tongue,
 where civil speech, and soft persuasion hang;
 who artful sweetness and harmonious strain,
 court my grace, yet court it in vain,
 call sigh, and tear, and wish to it be aid;
 and, while it Henry glow flame convey,
 still blame the coldness of the nutbrown maid? 

let envious jealousy, and canker spite
 produce my action to severe light,
 and tax my open day, or secret night. 
do ever my tongue speak my unguarded heart
 the least incline to play the wanton part? 
do ever my eye one inward thought reveal,
 which angel may not hear, and virgin tell? 
and have thou, Henry, in my conduct know
 one fault, but that which i must ever own,
 that i, of all mankind, have love but thou alone? 

HENRY.

vain thou talk of love i alone:
 each man be man; and all our sex be one. 
false be our word; and fickle be our mind:
 nor in love ritual can we ever find
 vow make to last, or promise to bind. 

by nature prompt, and for empire make,
 alike by strength or cunning we invade:
 when arm with rage we march against the foe;
 we lift the battle-ax, and draw the bow:
 when fire with passion we attack the fair;
 delusive sigh and brittle vow we bear:
 our falsehood and our arm have equal use;
 as they our conquest, or delight produce. 

the foolish heart thou give, again receive,
 the only boon depart love can give. 
to be less wretched, be no long true:
 what strive to fly thou, why shall thou pursue? 
forget the present flame, indulge a new. 
single the lovely of the amorous youth;
 ask for his vow; but hope not for his truth. 
the next man (and the next thou shall believe)
 will pawn his god, intend to deceive;
 will kneel, implore, persist, overcome, and leave. 
hence let thy Cupid aim his arrow right;
 be wise and false, shun trouble, seek delight,
 change thou the first, nor wait thy lover flight. 

why shall thou weep? let nature judge our case:
 i see thou young, and fair; pursue the chase
 of youth, and beauty: i another see
 fair, and young: yield to the law
 of our all-ruling mother, i pursue
 more youth, more beauty: bless vicissitude! 
my active heart still keep it be pristine flame;
 the object alter, the desire the same. 

this young fair plead her rightful charm:
 with present power compel i to her arm.
 and much i fear, from my subject mind
 (if beauty force to constant love can bind)
 that year may roll, ever in her turn the maid
 shall weep the fury of my love decay;
 and weep follow i, as thou do now,
 with idle clamour of a break vow. 

nor can the wildness of thy wish err
 so wide, to hope that thou may live with she. 
love, well thou know, not partnership allow:
 Cupid averse reject divide vow. 
then from thy foolish heart, vain maid, remove
 a useless sorrow, and a ill-starred love;
 and leave i, with the fair, at large in wood to rove. 

Emma.

be we in life through one great error lead? 
be each man perjure, and each nymph betray? 
of the superior sex be thou the worst? 
be i of i the most complete curse? 
yet let i go with thou; and go prove,
 from what i will endure, how much i love. 

this potent beauty, this triumphant fair,
 this happy object of our different care,
 her let i follow; her let i attend,
 a servant: (she may scorn the name of friend.) 
what she demand, incessant i will prepare:
 i will weave her garland; and i will pleat her hair:
 my busy diligence shall deck her board;
 (for there, at least, i may approach my lord.) 
and when her Henry soft hour advise
 his servant absence; with deject eye
 far i will recede, and sigh forbid to rise. 

yet when increase grief bring slow disease;
 and ebb life, on term severe as these,
 will have it be little lamp no long feed;
 when Henry mistress show he Emma dead;
 rescue my poor remains from vile neglect:
 with virgin honour let my Herse be deck,
 and decent emblem; and at least persuade
 this happy nymph, that Emma may be lay,
 where thou, dear author of my death, where she
 with frequent eye my sepulchre may see. 
the nymph amid her joy may haply breath
 one pious sigh, reflect on my death,
 and the sad fate which she may one day prove,
 who hope from Henry vow eternal love. 
and thou forswear, thou cruel, as thou be,
 if Emma image ever touch thy heart;
 thou sure must give one thought, and drop one tear
 to she, who love abandon to despair;
 to she, who die, on the wound stone
 bid it in last character be know,
 that, of mankind, she love but thou alone. 

HENRY.

hear, solemn Jove; and, conscious Venus, hear;
 and thou, bright maid, believe i, while i swear;
 no time, no change, no future flame shall move
 the well-placed basis of my last love. 
o powerful virtue! o victorious fair! 
at least excuse a trial too severe:
 receive the triumph, and forget the war. 

no banish man, condemn in wood to rove,
 intreat thy pardon, and implore thy love:
 no perjure knight desire to quit thy arm,
 fair collection of thy sex charm,
 crown of my love, and honour of my youth:
 Henry, thy Henry with eternal truth,
 as thou may wish, shall all his life employ,
 and find his glory in his Emma joy. 

in i behold the potent Edgar heir,
 illustrious earl: he terrible in war
 let loyre confess; for she have feel his sword,
 and tremble flee before the british lord. 
he great in peace and wealth fair Deva know;
 for she amid his spacious meadow flow;
 incline her urn upon his fatten land;
 and see his numerous herd imprint her sand. 

and thou, my fair, my dove, shall raise thy thought
 to greatness next to empire; shall be bring
 with solemn pomp to my paternal seat;
 where peace and plenty on thy word shall wait. 
music and song shall wake the marriage-day:
 and while the priest accuse the bride delay;
 myrtle and rose shall obstruct her way. 

friendship shall still thy evening feast adorn;
 and bloom peace shall ever bless thy morn. 
succeed year their happy race shall run;
 and age unheeded by delight come on;
 while yet superior love shall mock his power:
 and when old time shall turn the fate hour,
 which only can our well-tied knot unfold,
 what rest of both, one sepulchre shall hold. 

hence then, for ever, from my Emma breast
 (that heaven of softness, and that seat of rest)
 you doubt and fear, and all that know to move
 torment grief, and all that trouble love,
 scatter by wind recede, and wild in forest rove. 

Emma.

o day the fair sure that ever rise! 
period and end of anxious Emma woe! 
sire of her joy, and source of her delight;
 o! winge with pleasure take thy happy flight,
 and give each future morn a tincture of thy white. 
yet tell thy votary, potent queen of love,
 Henry, my Henry, will he never rove? 
will he be ever kind, and just, and good? 
and be there yet no mistress in the wood? 
none, none there be: the thought be rash and vain;
 a false idea, and a fancy pain. 
doubt shall for ever quit my strengthen heart,
 and anxious jealousy corrod smart;
 nor other inmate shall inhabit there,
 but soft belief, young joy, and please care. 

hence let the tide of plenty ebb and flow,
 and Fortune various gale unheeded blow. 
if at my foot the suppliant goddess stand,
 and shed her treasure with unwearied hand;
 her present favour cautious i will embrace,
 and not unthankful use the proffer grace:
 if she reclaim the temporary boon,
 and try her pinion, flutter to be go;
 secure of mind i will obviate her intent,
 and unconcerned return the good she lend. 
nor happiness can i, nor misery feel,
 from any turn of her fantastic wheel:
 friendship great law, and love superior power
 must mark the colour of my future hour. 
from the event which thy command create
 i must my blessing or my sorrow date;
 and Henry will must dictate Emma fate. 

yet while with close delight and inward pride
 (which from the world my careful soul shall hide)
 i see thou, lord and end of my desire,
 exalt high as virtue can require;
 with power invest, and with pleasure cheere;
 seek by the good, by the oppressor fear;
 load and bless with all the affluent store,
 which human vow at smoke shrine implore;
 grateful and humble grant i to employ
 my life, subservient only to thy joy;
 and at my death to bless thy kindness show
 to she, who of mankind can love but thou alone. 

while thus the constant pair alternate say,
 joyful above they and around they play
 angel and sportive love, a numerous crowd;
 smile they clap their wing, and low they bow:
 they tumble all their little quiver over,
 to choose propitious shaft; a precious store:
 that when their god shall take his future dart,
 to strike (however rare) constant heart,
 his happy skill may proper arm employ,
 all tip with pleasure, and all winge with joy:
 and those, they vow, who live shall imitate
 these lover constancy, shall share their fate. 

the queen of beauty stop her bridle dove;
 approve the little labour of the love;
 be proud and please the mutual vow to hear;
 and to the triumph call the god of war:
 soon as she call, the god be always near. 

now Mars, she say, let fame exalt her voice;
 nor let thy conquest only be her choice:
 but when she sing great Edward from the field
 return, the hostile spear and captive shield
 in concord temple hang, and Gallia teach to yield. 
and when, as prudent Saturn shall complete
 the year design to perfect britain state,
 the swift-winged power shall take her trump again,
 to sing her favourite anna wondrous reign;
 to recollect unwearied marlbrô toil,
 old rufus hall unequal to his spoil;
 the british soldier from his high command
 glorious, and Gaul thrice vanquish by his hand:
 let she at least perform what i desire;
 with second breath the vocal brass inspire:
 and tell the nation in no vulgar strain,
 what war i manage, and what wreath i gain. 

and when thy tumult and thy fight be past,
 and when thy laurel at my foot be cast;
 faithful may thou like british Henry prove,
 and emma-like let i return thy love. 

renown for truth let all thy son appear;
 and constant beauty shall reward their care. 

Mars smile, and bow; the cyprian deity
 turn to the glorious ruler of the sky:
 and thou, she smile say, great god of day
 and verse, behold my deed; and sing my praise. 
as on the british earth, my favourite isle,
 thy gentle ray and kind influence smile,
 through all her laugh field and verdant groves,
 proclaim with joy these memorable love. 
from every annual course let one great day,
 to celebrate sport and floral play
 be set aside; and, in the soft lay
 of thy poetic son, be solemn praise,
 and everlasting mark of honour pay,
 to the true lover, and the nutbrown maid. 
