consolatory rhyme to mrs. east, on the death of her canary bird. 

since king, and queen, and duchess must die,
 and crown and frokin undistinguished lie;
 the monarch justle by the saucy slave,
 and next a queen perhaps a milk-maid grave;
 since all their flight to other clime must wing,
 and even signor boschi cease to sing;
 grieve not your bird: for though no more his throat
 melodious swell the sweetly-tortured note;
 improper we measure life by breath,
 he cease not to be, who taste of death. 
when life go out, the samian sage say,
 we only change our tenement of clay. 
the quack, once fame for cure every ill,
 lurk in a bolus, or inform a pill. 
the learned dunce, who science seem to shun,
 hum through his next dull stage a bagpipe drone;
 while wit, more pert, the lively note become,
 and teaze, and torture still the tuneless hum. 
the wretch, who fatten on his neighbour spoil,
 now crawl a spider, swell with fraud and guile:
 a soft form the gentle mind put on,
 while harden heart be petrify to stone. 
perhaps your captive now, on wing sublime,
 once more behold his friend, and native clime;
 see all his little race about he throng,
 and tell his rapture in a sweet song:
 or else his soul some farinelli warm,
 and crowd theatre confess his charm;
 his cage, his silken wing, and untaught note,
 (all but his mistress 'favour) quite forget. 

so some poor exile, long in bondage keep,
 dead to his friend, and even by stranger weep,
 disdain bondage, though in chain of gold,
 break through his prison, by resentment bold:
 yet if some generous friend, of soul sincere,
 soften his fate, or smooth his bed of care,
 deep in his heart the grateful sense remain,
 and when he think on he, forget his chain. 

harmonious shade! what honour can atone
 thy music murder, and thy spirit go! 
by thy false guardian leave to foe at large,
 o most unworthy the important charge! —
 what though no solemn mute, of ghastly shape,
 croud silent round thou, and look sad in crape;
 yet shall thy mistress 'tear adorn thy hearse,
 and all the muse can offer, fame and verse:
 fresh flower shall deck thou with their early bloom,
 and yearly rose blossom on thy tomb. 
there too shall mournful philomel complain,
 and on thy stone these last note remain;
 "beneath in silence sleep, and cease his song,
 the farinelli of the feather throng:
 of manner simple, uncorrupt of life,
 a friend to harmony, a foe to strife. 
this turf his mistress to his memory owe,
 and for his song the generous tear bestow." 
