virgil tomb.

Naples 1741. 

i come, great bard, to gaze upon thy shrine,
and over thy relic wait the inspire nine:
for sure, i say, where maro ash sleep,
the weep muse must their vigil keep:
still over their favourite monument they mourn,
and with poetic trophy grace his urn:
have place the shield and martial trumpet here;
the shepherd pipe, and rural honour there:
fancy have deck the consecrate ground,
and scatter never-fading rose round.
and now my bold romantic thought aspire
to hear the echo of celestial lyre;
then catch some sound to bear delight home,
and boast i learn the verse at virgil tomb;
or stretch beneath thy myrtle fragrant shade,
with dream ecstatic hover over my head,
see form august, and laureled ghost ascend,
and with thyself, perhaps, the long procession end.

i come — but soon the phantom disappear;
far other scene, than wanton hope have rear;
no fairy rite, no funeral pomp i find;
no trophy wall with wreath of laurel round:
a mean unhonoured ruin faint show
the spot where once thy mausoleum stand:
hardly the form remain; a nod dome
overgrow with moss be now all virgil tomb.
it be such a scene as give a kind relief
to memory, in sweetly-pensive grief:
gloomy, unplease image it wrought;
no muse, soft complacency of thought:
for time have canker all, and wear away
even the last, mournful grace of decay:
oblivion, hateful goddess, sit before,
and cover with her dusky wing the door:
no silver harp i hear, no muse voice,
but bird obscene in horrid note rejoice:
fancy recoil, and with his tinsel train,
forsake the cheerless scene; no more remain
the warm ambitious hope of airy youth;
severe reflection come, and frown truth:
away each glitter gay idea flee,
and bid a melancholy train succeed,
that form, or seem to form, a mournful call
in feeble echo mutter round the wall.

seek not the muse here! the affright maid
have flee parthenope pollute shade:
her happy shore, the seat of joy and ease,
their favourite mansion once, no long please:
no long, as of old, in transport lose,
the sister rove along the enchant coast;
they turn with horror from each much-loved stream,
and loath the field that be their darling theme:
the tuneful name themselves once fond give
to every swell hill, and mossy cave,
so please then, be only hear with sigh;
and each sad echo bid their sorrow rise.

yet nature smile, as when their Virgil sing,
nor amid a fair scene his lyre be string;
still bloom the sweet of his elysium here,
and the same charm in every grove appear.
but ah! in vain indulgent sun prevail;
health and delight in every balmy gale
be waft now in vain: small comfort bring
to weep eye the beauty of the spring.
to groan slave those fragrant mead belong,
where Tully dictate, and Maro sing.
long since, alas! those golden day be fly,
where here each science wear its proper crown;
pale tyranny have lay their altar low,
and rend the laurel from the muse brow:
what wonder then amid such a scene to see
the art expire with bleed liberty?
pensive and sad, each fair angelic form
droop, like the weary dove beneath a storm:
far other view the poet thought engage,
than the warm glory of the Augustan age.
can misery bid the imagination glow?
or genius brighten amid domestic woe?
to see despond wretch round he pine,
Horace have weep beneath the Alban vine.
sad sit the bard amid his country tear,
and sigh, regardless of the wreath he wear.
do ever want and famine sweet sing?
the fetter hand uncouth strike the string.
lo! stern oppression lift her iron rod,
and ruin wait the imperious harpy nod:
black desolation, and destructive war,
rise at the signal, and attend her car.
from the dire pomp the affright shepherd fly,
and leave his flock the ravenous soldier prize.
where now be all the nymph that bless the plain?
where, the full chorus of content swain?
the song of love, of liberty and peace,
be hear no more; the dance and tabor cease:
to the soft oaten pipe, and pastoral reed,
the din of arm, and clarion blast succeed:
dire shape appear in every open glade;
and fury howl where once the muse stray?

be this the queen of realm, for art renowned?
this captive maid, that weep upon the ground!
alas! how change! — deject and forlorn!
the mistress of the world become the scorn!
around stand rapine, horror and despair;
and ignorance, dark ally of barbarous war:
she, at the usurp vandal dread command,
display her gloomy banner over the land:
beneath its chill shade neglect lie
each sister art; and unlamented die.
lo! sculpture let her useless chisel fall;
while on some ruin temple break wall
sad architecture sit; and see with shame
mis-shapen pile usurp her injure name:
music and verse, unhappy twin! belong
to antique masque, and weak unmanly song:
the gather deluge swell on every side,
and monkish superstition swell the tide.
by the resistless torrent overbear
float every virtue, from its basis tear:
fair learning droop, the sicken art decay;
and every laurel fade, and every bay.
all be confuse, no trace now be see
to show what wretched Italy have be.

thus once Vesuvius, crown with circle wood,
Parthenope, thy beauteous neighbour stand:
perpetual spring clothe the fair mountain side;
and what be now thy terror, be thy pride.
sudden the imprison flame burst forth; and lay
on smoky heap each shriek dryad shade:
now deep in ash sink the myrtle bower,
over bed of flower sulphureous torrent roar;
and exile demi-god their ruin seat deplore.
