the charm of Anthony.

you swain, attend; let every nymph be near;
 be still, you river, that the swain may hear:
 you wind, be calm, and brush with soft wing;
 we mean the charm of Anthony to sing;
 see all around the listen shepherd throng;
 o help, you sister of immortal song. 

LUCY.

sing, Phebe, sing what shepherd rule the plain,
 young colin envy, and aminda pain:
 who none can rival when he mow the field,
 and to who flute the nightingale must yield. 

Phebe.

it be Anthony — it be he deserve the lay,
 as mild as evening, and as morning gay;
 not the fresh bloom on yonder codling-tree,
 nor the white hawthorn half so fair as he;
 nor the young Daisy dress in morning dew;
 nor the pea blossom wear a bright hue. 

LUCY.

none know like he to strew the wheaten grain,
 or drive the plough-share over the fertile plain;
 to raise the sheaf, or reap the wave corn,
 or mow brown stubble in the early morn. 

Phebe.

how mild the youth, when on a sultry day
 in yonder vale we turn the fragrant hay:
 how on his voice the listen shepherd hang,
 not tuneful Stella half so sweet sing. 

LUCY.

whether he bind the sheaf in twist band,
 or turn the pitchfork on his nimble hand;
 he be sure to win a glance from every eye,
 while clumsy Colin stand neglect by. 

Phebe.

his curl lock by far more lovely show,
 than the white wig on squire fopling brow;
 and when the shepherd on a rainy day,
 weave for his hat a wisp of flowery hay,
 the scarlet feather not so gay appear,
 which on his crown sir Ambrose sino wear. 

LUCY.

for Anthony meriah leave her cow,
 and stand to gape at he upon the mow:
 while he (for who but must that wench despise?) 
throw straw and cobweb on her stare eye. 

Phebe.

to the back-door i see proud Lydia hie,
 to see the team with Anthony go by;
 he sly laugh, and turn he from the door,
 i think the damsel will have speak no more. 

LUCY.

i once he meet, it be when from yonder vale,
 each morn i bring the heavy milk pail:
 he take it from my head, and with a smile
 reach out his hand, and help i over the stile. 

Phebe.

as i be dance late among the crew,
 a yellow pippin over my head he throw:
 Sue bite her lip, and barbaretta frown;
 and Phillis look as though she will have swoon. 

thus sing the maid till colinet come by,
 and Rodrigo from weed of the rye;
 each take his lass, and speed they to the town,
 to drink cool cider at the hare and hound:
 the damsel simper like the sparkle beer,
 and Colin shine till Anthony be near. 
