ode on death.

write in french by his majesty the king of Prussia.

translate by the same.

what do the sad presage mean? 
few day, few year, perhaps few moment urge
 my footstep to the dreary verge,
 where fate the curtain drop to close the scene:
 then farewell! life and light! and thou bless sun serene. 

earth, over i roll thy mighty bed;
 the world recede; i view the grave profound:
 of life i touch the utmost bind;
 and rush to mix a victim with the dead,
 where fate embrace all, and none can backward tread. 

while yet i wake or sleep, there stand
 ten thousand death in arm; before, behind,
 they press i round; and every wind
 waft the contagion from each distant land,
 and all the element conspire to arm the dreadful band;

within, without, above, below,
 by turn they sink, or rend my feeble frame,
 now chill, now urge the vital flame,
 till nature torture stream forget to flow,
 and art itself but prove a still more dangerous foe. 

dust to its dust will soon return
 this mortal part, proud tyrant of the mind,
 nor leave of all its pomp behind,
 but horrid lesson human pride shall learn,
 foul worm, and blood, and stench that fill the royal urn. 

recede, you base and servile train,
 i can be the mighty thing you say;
 the wretched object of a day,
 which slatter fancy will exalt in vain,
 i know what i must be, and what i be disdain. 

but warm with heaven eternal flame,
 shall that which live, which think, the mind
 be fleet as the empty wind? 
or say, can death its active effort tame,
 o god, who first inspire this animate frame? 

no: for the mind above the grave
 unfettered spring, and search nature store
 it know itself, and thou adore,
 secure, o god, who word its being give,
 that what create first have certain power to save;

while thus of death dispel the cloud,
 can sensual joy life narrow view confine? 
true virtue feel the hope divine
 of bliss sincere: not so the guilty crowd;
 thy arm for ever blast the wicked and the proud. 

great god! and be eternal pain
 or joy of heaven reserve for i in store? 
thy breath but waft to either shore;
 scarce can the torture mind the thought sustain;
 i fly forbid joy, the sensual, and the vain. 

yet fast to earth be nature bind:
 back on its wonted object turn the mind,
 and lag the slave of life behind:
 while reason effort be too painful find
 to rend the root oak that love its native ground. 

object of every jealous eye,
 you dream of mortal good, that swift decay,
 how do you stop my destine way? 
and force i back the path of sense to try? 
you point the sting of death, and more than once i die. 

scene of astonishment! the world how blind! 
be death deprive of all his mighty power? 
do none expect the fatal hour? 
be there a wish to nature bound confine? 
be there a scheme forget, or toil for this resign? 

see mortal still acquire, assume,
 as if more vigilant they death can shun,
 to honour fly, to combat run,
 and he who footstep tremble over the tomb
 build up new plan of life, and sudden meet his doom. 

rush on, you mad train,
 a thousand rock, a thousand storm despise,
 to reach the good you idolise:
 go, of accumulate wealth be vain:
 go, ravage other world, if other world remain

let neither law, nor power divine,
 nor nature anxious monitor within
 repress each great dare sin;
 go: bid with want the plunder orphan pine,
 and with pollute hand disturb each sacred shrine;

proceed: but soon your view be past;
 accurse; at once you droop, and be no more:
 who will not think, to see your store,
 that all the project your ambition cast
 beyond the grave be stretch, and will for ever last? 

you mighty leader, mighty king,
 with flame, and blood, who battle mark your way;
 do monarch hope eternal sway? 
in vain each distant clime its tribute bring,
 spring from the dust you mix with long-forgotten thing. 

himself the victor can save;
 if but to die be you, how short be glory sum? 
in vain you fight and overcome,
 nor aught avail the spoil ambition give
 to hang with conquer crown the putrid monarch grave. 

on nature theatre display
 all be the sport of death; the change i fear;
 new object rise, then disappear;
 around my brow the cypress cast a shade;
 i scorn the sweet of life, and all its rose fade. 

yet amid this sage, but painful lore,
 while awful truth their sacred light reveal,
 what mean this latent wish i feel? 
be then my bosom lord itself not more? 
wretch! that i drag new chain more ponderous than before. 

rule then the mind, this lord supreme? 
which every weak, and vain allurement draw
 to pleasure throne, and tyrant law. 
quick we return in life from what we seem
 to what we be, and wake from calm reflection dream. 

as wander fancy lead we go;
 by turn we reason, or submit to sense,
 and incoherent part commence
 that fill the stage of folly, shame, and woe;
 nor from the hook escape again the bait we know. 

Voltaire, in this eternal round
 how swift our active spirit urge their way! 
by both extreme deceive we stray,
 now catch by sense, now lose in thought profound,
 and in the mutual change our happiness be find. 
