the resolution. 

yes, dear philistris, in my love retreat
i will the malice of my star defeat:
i have not deserve my fate, and therefore dare
to brave my fortune when it be most severe:
while innocence and honour guard my breast,
i shall in spite of my worst foe be bless:
in spite of all the rage the fury can inspire,
when into mortal breast they breath infernal fire,
with eye that dart malignant horror round,
and voice which affright with their tremendous sound,
they fierce may the cruel fight begin,
and hope by violence the day to win;
but all in vain; i will smile ward each blow,
and where my duty call undaunted go:
secure within, their shock i dare sustain,
my soul impassive, and can feel no pain:
i have secret joy, delight to they unknown,
in solitude i never be alone:
book be the best companion i can find,
at once they please, at once instruct the mind.

fame Rochester, who athens plague have write
with all the charm of poetry and wit,
do honour on his sacred see bestow;
at once its glory, and its bless too:
he i with pleasure read, each well weigh line,
delight my soul, his thought be all divine.

with awful fear on Stillingfleet i gaze,
his wondrous knowledge and deep sense my ravish soul amaze:

smooth Tillotson afford no less delight,
none ever do with more exactness write,
or with more clearness each dark text unfold,
he sacred truth intelligible tell:
strong be his reason, and his language fine,
and like his subject, every where divine;

much the learn sarum pompous stile do his please,
his thought, though lofty, be express with ease:
what ever he write so captivate the mind,
we there the strength of powerful reason find:
see human nature to its zenith raise,
and virtue with a win sweetness praise:
so charm make, and so majestic too,
we be force to love, what awful we view:
thou wondrous man! who can enough admire
the amaze force of that celestial fire,
which through each line do sacred warmth inspire?
to dark mind clear dazzle light convey,
refulgent beam of intellectual day!

the ingenious Norris in a flow strain,
with various scene of wit do his entertain;
sometime in prose he sweet do invite,
and then in verse take a unbounded flight:
Plato revive, we in his write find,
his sentiment be there, but more refine.
it will be too tedious if i all shall name,
who have a just, unquestioned right to fame.

o happy Albion! in thy clergy bless,
in son that be of every grace possess!
may they increase, and like ascend light
chase hence those spectre that be please with night,
nor can endure a glory so divine bright:
those restless troubler of the church peace;
may their attack, and their reproach cease;
while she support by almighty love,
secure on the watery deep do move;
in sacred pomp on swell surge rise,
and all the monster of the main despise.

philosopher next these, be my delight;
o let i learn from they to think aright:
contend passion timely to restrain,
and over my self a happy conquest gain:
to stand unaltered at the turn of fate,
and undejected in the worst estate.

with secret pleasure i the live survey
of those great man who virtue do obey,
and go unwearied on in her steep painful way;
their bright example fortify my mind,
and i within both strength and calmness find:

when i be wrong, or treat with neglect,
i on the patient Socrates reflect;
that virtuous man, who be severe try,
who injure live, and much more injure die:
methinks i see he laugh at on the stage,
and make a victim to the poet rage;
expose, and ridicule, while he sit by,
and calm bear their spiteful calumny:
in he none couled the least emotion find,
he bear reproach with a constant mind,
and brave meet that fate, which fate for he design;
that fate, which he persuade be to shun;
but he resolve to keep the glory he have win:
he fame, to he than life, be much more dear,
and death be what he never have learn to fear:
brave to the last, and to his virtue true,
without concern he bid his friend adieu,
and with a free, untroubled, cheerful air,
do for another, better state prepare,
and smile drink the welcome cure of all his care:
that happy draught, that balm for all his grief,
his best, his last, his only sure relief.

o who will live, that with such ease can go
from this vile world, this dismal scene of woe,
where most be false, and no compassion show,
where our misfortune but a jest be make,
where by pretend friend we be most betray:
where man be to their interest whole tie,
slave to their glitter gold, and to their pride,
and where ambition, and selflove as sovereign lord preside:
where kindness only do to word extend,
and few be true that which they pretend,
and where the great prodigy a friend.

thrice happy time when riches be despise,
and man for innate worth be only prize:
when none to title their respect do pay,
nor be to bribe a mercenary prey:
when all to rural care their thought do bend,
and on their harmless flock with peace attend;
when underneath some cool delightful shade,
they to their nymph their artless courtship make,
and be with kind vow, and unfeigned truth repay:
when constancy their high boast become,
and friend be hold the most endear name;
when nothing ill be harbour in the mind,
but all be pious, generous, just and kind.
but that bless age, alas! be quick pass,
what be eminent good can never last:
short be the peaceful Saturn golden reign:
but oh! this iron age do his still remain.

betimes the vicious their insult begin,
and fatal be integrity to man:
the virtuous still to hardship be inure,
and still the drudgery of fate endure:
see fool admire, and wealthy fop care,
and rebel with imperial purple dress:
knave make the prop of a unthinking state,
when truth and justice shall support the weight:
ill man adore, and praise above the sky,
while at their foot neglect merit lie,
and Regulus amid his torture die:

an Aristides from his Athens send,
from his ungrateful town to banishment:

a Cato bleed in the noble cause,
a victim to his honour, and the law:
he read with pleasure of the immortal state,
and then with have anticipate his fate;
with the same courage he for Rome have fight,
he for his soul a welcome passage seek.

a petrus struggle with a tyrant rage,
a suffering Arria, wonder of her age!
the best of wife, the kind, true friend;
her spouse in all his trouble do attend:
he grief be she, and so be all his care;
well please she be with he the worst of ill to share.
when he be doom by his own hand to die,
she beg he with the sentence to comply;
tell he a wretched life deserve no care,
and that a roman never ought to fear:
bid he remember with what noble pride
the valiant Curtius, and the Decii die;
and how the immortal Brutus death grisly form defy:
but when she see her reason can not move,
she give a vast, a wondrous proof of love:
with have she snatch his poniard from his side,
and with her dear blood the fatal weapon die;
then draw it undaunted from her breast,
and with a look that no concern express,
she smile give it to his tremble hand,
and say, o petus, thus, thy fate command:
thus, Cæsar malice, and thy star defy;
believe i, it be not difficult to die.
she say no more; he sigh close her eye,
and teach by she, with conscious blush die:
ashamed to think for such a noble deed
he shall the example of a woman need.

a Epictetus in a nero court,
the best of man, a slave, and Fortune sport.

a Belisarius, blind, despise, and poor,
seek precarious alm from door, to door;
and mean strive to prolong his breath,
to save a life more to be fear, than death:
while earth-born monster, a degenerous race,
rise from their slime, and fill the heavenly space;
where, for a while, like meteor they amaze,
and fright the world with their portentous blaze;
till have waste all their stock of light,
they fall unpitied from their tower hight,
and lie despise in the dark shade of night.

thus history show the world in its rude infant state,
and do the progress of mankind relate;
by what slow step they first to greatness rise;
do all their art, their policy disclose:

there, i behold the assyrian empire rise,
and babel lofty tower insult the sky:
see mighty Cyrus all their hope defeat,
and place himself in the imperial seat:
from whence i see the great Darius fall,
and the pellean youth possess of all:
he, full of glory, full of god-like fire
i see amid adore croud expire:
young Ammon all his boast conquest quit,
and early to the law of fate submit:
he, who ambition tower above the sky,
now with a spot of earth scarce cover lie;
and in a dark, a narrow, silent grave,
sleep undistinguished from his mean slave.

i next observe the western empire rise,
the roman eagle wanton in the sky:
those bird of Jove clap their extend wing,
while with the clatter sound the wide expansum ring:
see royal shepherd man usurper chase,
and on his throne their injure grandsire place;
with happy omen the foundation lie
of that great city which the world must sway:
see Rome rash builder, the derider kill,
and a dear brother blood relentless spill.

o what be man, if by his passion lead!
lion and tiger with less cause we dread:
they much the gentle, much the kind prove,
who nothing can against their species move:
but man each other ruin still design,
they break through all the tie, the law divine:
nor blood, nor friendship, can their rage restrain,
entreaty all be lose, and tear be shed in vain:
slave to their will, they every vice obey,
and on their action no restriction lay.

this fatal truth the sad Lucretia find;
methinks in tear i see she almost drown:
confuse she sit among her grieve friend,
while each to her distressful tale attend:
tremble and pale, with sigh, and downcast eye,
the move rhetoric of her sorrow try:
and then by her own hand with wondrous courage die.
pride of thy sex! thy glory still shall live,
to thou we will our loud plaudit give:
my muse with joy shall celebrate thy fame,
and make the groves resound with thy immortal name,
the amaze beholder view the breathless fair,
and for a just a quick revenge prepare:
the proud Tarquinius with his guilty race
they from his undeserved dominion chase:
govern by consul then, with freedom bless,
and of the noble part of earth possess,
Rome long enjoy the glory she have win;
but be enthrall at length by her victorious son,
to his superior fortune she give way,
but do not long his tyranny obey:
the roman soul exert it self once more,
to assert lose right, and liberty restore;
the mighty Cæsar to their rage do yield,
nor can the goddess her love offspring shield.
see, full of wound, the hero gasp lie,
and fierce roll his majestic eye,
seem to call vengeance from his kindred sky.

how vain be greatness, and how frail be power!
those who above their fellow mortal tower,
who with a word can save, or with a word destroy,
can to themselves insure one moment joy:
but soon may tumble from their slippery state,
and feel the pressure of a adverse fate.

sure for our self if we our term can make,
we shall not life on such condition take;
life, which subject we to ten thousand ill,
and every minute with new trouble fill:
by which to fortune we be still captive make,
and to the worst of tyranny betray;
captive to she, who make mankind her sport,
who slight the best, and do the base court;
who low with earth the mighty pompey lay,
and from the dust do aniello's raise.

when such reflection, such sad thought as these
on my deject soul begin to seize,
to pleasant study i my self apply,
and feast upon the sweet of poetry;
those luscious banquet which the mind invite,
where all be to be find that can delight.

sometime in Homer i the grecian view,
see, what the king, and injure husband do;
see, tower Ilium compass round with foe,
and for her sake her son their live expose;
her valiant son, who prodigal of blood,
long in defence of their love country stand:
see, from their seat superior power descend,
and on the phrygian and the greek attend,
and with indecent warmth among themselves contend.
view fierce Achilles full of grief and rage,
victorious Hector with redouble strength engage:
revenge to every blow new force do give;
the hope of Ilium must no long live:
fate sign his doom; the godlike hero fall,
and thrice his body drag around the trojan wall:
the cyprian goddess mourn her favourite slay,
and loud lament fill all the idalian plain.

the wise Ulysses do my wonder raise,
who can enough his prudent conduct praise?
with his ill fortune he do long contest,
and be not with the sight of his love princess bless:
the royal mourner for his absence weep,
and from her heart intrude prince keep;
in vain they sigh, in vain address make,
they can not by their utmost art persuade:
to her first vow she still do constant prove,
double secure by honour, and by love.

the prince of lyric, full of heavenly fire,
well please i read, and as i read, admire:
of god and hero, and of god-like king,
he with unequalled strength, and sweetness sing:
sometime his muse fly near, and keep in sight,
then on a sudden take a tower flight,
and soar as high as the bright realm of light.
the help of mean and servile art disdain,
while in each charm line luxuriant nature reign:
his pregnant fancy from its boundless store,
select the rich, and the noble oar,
which his unerring judgement so refine,
that through the whole a please lustre shine;
virtue the darling subject of his lay,
in every ode he piety display,
and to the god due veneration pay.
great be the power of his immortal song,
that can his fame in ancient Greece prolong:
twice save his house, when Thebes be make a prey
untouched that stand, while Thebes in ash lay.

the force of number warlike Sparta know,
for she what wonder do Tyrtæus do!
he sing the glory which on fame attend;
and honour gain by those who shall the state defend:
who full of courage, full of heat divine,
no hazard for their god, and law, decline;
who fear not death, when the reward be praise,
that bless exchange for all their come day:
the listen soldier with fresh ardor fire;
as if they be by Mars himself inspire,
with furious transport to the field repair,
and meet those danger, which before they fear:
nothing Messene from their rage can shield,
she to her former lord be force to yield:
she who to martial power will not submit,
be make a prey to all-commanding wit.

Theocritus in soft harmonious strain,
describe the joy of the sicilian swain,
when with their flock they grace the flowery plain,
and on their pipe to listen beauty play,
who with their kind regard the love musician pay:
he, nature in her native plainness draw,
he, who the spring of tendere passion know,
do love in all its infant grace show;
love, unacquainted with deceitful art,
and only aim at exchange of heart.

Lucretius with his philosophic strain,
my mind at once delight, and entertain:
through path untrod, i see he fearless go;
his step i tread, with eager have to know:
with he explore the boundless realm of chance,
and see the little busy atom dance:
see, how without direction they combine,
and form a universe without design,
while careless deity supreme bless,
enjoy the pleasure of eternal rest,
resolve that nothing here their quiet shall molest.
strange that a man of such a strength of thought,
can think a world be to perfection bring
without assistance from the power above,
from the bless source of wisdom, and of love!
all frightful thought he from my soul do chase,
and in their room glad, bright idea place:
tell i that happiness in virtue lie,
and bid i death, that dread ill, despise:
that phantom, which if we but judge aright,
will never once disturb, nor once affright;
the shock prospect of a future state,
do in our soul a anxious fear create;
that unknown somewhere which we must explore,
that strange, that distant, undiscovered shore,
where we must land, make we the passage dread:
but be we by enlighten reason lead,
be false opinion banish from the mind,
and we to the strict search of truth incline,
we sure shall meet it with as much delight
as the cool pleasure of a silent night,
and to our grave with cheerfulness shall run,
please that our tedious task of life be do.

Virgil with sacred rapture fill my mind,
in he i unexhausted treasure find:
while he my ravish soul do entertain,
malice and rage employ their shaft in vain:
easy and please, by he I be lead along,
and hear the wise Silenus charm song:
among his nymph and swain with pleasure live,
and to their music glad attention give:
then hear his shepherd have for some prize contend,
and see his husbandman their much love toil attend:
next with he to the burn Ilium go,
where he display ten thousand scene of woe:
amid the flame the pious prince i view,
fearless, unmoved, his great design pursue:
like great alcides he with toil and pain,
to the utmost height of glory do attain,
and unrelenting Juno hate sustain;
a due reward at length his virtue find,
and he with glory and with love be crown.

Horace be full of wit, and full of art,
my mind he please, and inflame my heart,
and fill my breast with his poetic fire:
o that he can his wondrous heat inspire:
but i be a pale, a languid, feeble flame,
whole unworthy such a poet name:
my humble muse her eye can only raise,
please that she have the liberty to her gaze,
and leave to offer up the tribute of her praise.

when by soft move Ovid i be tell,
of those strange change which be wrought of old,
when god in brutal shape do mortal court,
and unbecoming action make their sport,
when helpless wretch flee from impious power,
and hide themselves in bird, beast, tree, and flower:
when none from outrage can secure dwell,
but feel the rage of heaven, of earth, and hell:
methinks, i see those passion well express,
which play the tyrant in the mortal breast:
they to ten thousand misery expose,
and be our only, and our deadly foe:
they like the Vultur on our entrails prey,
and in our path the golden apple lie,
but from we snatch our dear eurydice have away.
up the steep hill the ponderous torment roll,
and cheat with empty show the famish soul:
those who be still submit to their sway,
must in the gloomy realm of Pluto stay,
and never more revisit cheerful day:
but those who be from their earthly dross calcine,
who taste the pleasure of a virtuous mind,
who will rather choose to die, than once their conscience stain,
who midst temptation innocence retain,
and over themselves a undisputed empire gain:
in the elysian field shall be for ever bless,
and with the happy, there enjoy the sweet of rest.

how well do he express unhappy love!
each page do melt, and every line do move.
the fair Oenone do so well complain,
that i can choose but blame her faithless Swain:
good Hypermnestra much lament her fate,
forsake Phyllis her deplore estate;
her absent lord sad Laodamia mourn,
and Sappho for her perjure Phaon burn:
o wondrous woman! prodigy of wit!
why do thou man to thy fond heart admit?
man, treacherous man, who still a riddle prove,
and by the dictate of his fancy move,
who look be snare, and every word a bait,
and who be compose of nothing but deceit?
what pity it be thou shall to love give way,
to love, to vicious love, become a prey,
and by a guilty, inauspicious flame,
eclipse the splendour of so bright a name.

on Juvenal i look with great delight,
both he and Persius with much keeness write,
they grave teach, as well as sharp bite.

think not to the ancient bard i be alone confine,
they please, but never shall ingross my mind;
in modern writer i can beauty find.
Phœbus have be propitious to this isle,
and on our poet still be please to smile.

Milton be warm by his enliven fire,
who Denham, Waller, Cowley do inspire,
Roscommon too, who the learn world admire:

the tuneful dryden feel his hot ray,
and long with honour wear his fresh bay:
the art, the muse, and the grace try
to raise his name, and lift he to the sky,
and bless he with a fame that never shall die:
but he be go! extinguish be that light,
which with its lustre so long charm our sight:
yet at his loss we dare not once repine,
while we see Dorset with such glory shine,
while we see Normanby adorn the sky,
and Halifax with dazzle brightness rise:
that fame triumvirate of wit and sense,
who law to the whole under-world dispense;
who praise for i to attempt, will be a fau't,
so much be they beyond the high flight of thought.

Granville the charm of virtue do rehearse,
bright it appear in his majestic verse:
forsake honesty his chief delight,
to that, and honour, he do all invite:
commend that peace, that quiet of the mind,
which those enjoy, who to themselves confine
forsake the noisy world, and leave its care behind,
who live in shade, where true contentment find,
and fly from court, as from unhallowed ground.
how wondrous good have he Chryseis make!
how full of charm be that fair captive maid!
what noble proof of kindness do she give!
for she atrides she can wretched live!
who she so much above her self do prize,
that when his safety in the balance lie,
from his love sight, and all her bliss she fly;
and rather than he happiness destroy,
will take a everlasting leave of joy.
such a affection, such a generous flame,
sure, the severe censor can blame.
as firm, as last, will our friendship prove,
if, as we ought, we know but how to love:
do honour choose, and truth unite our heart,
if we be free from sordid wheedle art,
from avarice, pride, and narrowness of mind,
we shall to other, as our self be kind,
and all the pleasure of a virtuous union find.
the love commerce will more and more endear,
we with our friend in all concern shall share.
with they rejoice, and grieve, and hope, and fear;
and by degree to such a ardor rise,
that we for they shall life it self despise,
and much above our own, their satisfaction prize.

than Dennis none with great judgement write,
fancy with vigor in his stile unite.

a place with these, vanbrook may just claim,
his thought be full of wit, and full of flame:
instruct sharpness run through every page;
his Æsop the Thersites of our age.

than Garth none can with great smoothness write,
just be his stile, his satyr be polite:
not rude like those which in the wood be breed,
each pierce truth be with courtly softness say:
but when he glorious action do rehearse,
and make the great the subject of his verse,
he soar aloft above the reach of thought,
and all be with wondrous art, with wondrous fancy wrought.
like he, methinks, i mighty hero view;
see fame Camillus fly Gauls pursue,
the prudent Fabius Rome from danger shield,
and Carthage to victorious Scipio yield:
the great nassaw unwithering laurel gain,
unmoved the shock of gallic force sustain,
fierce as the god of war on the phlegraean plain:
but he be no more: the fair ascend throne,
and we with joy the love Minerva own;
please that we heaven peculiar care be grow.

Congreve to every theme do beauty give,
his fair Almeria will for ever live.
Homer look great in his rich english dress;
so well he priam sorrow do express,
that i with he for valiant Hector grieve;
his suffering on my mind a deep impression leave.
with sad Andromache a part i bear,
with she in all her lamentation share:
with Hecuba bewail a darling son,
who for his country glorious thing have do:
he country, which its prop thus snatch away,
she know must to the græcians fall a prey;
and she with all her house must foreign lord obey.

Rowe to the sky do his great hero raise;
his tamerlane deserve immortal praise:
no pen but he can every feature trace,
no pen but his describe each martial grace:
with noble ardor to the war he go,
and all around command glance throw,
and fearless view ten thousand thousand foe:
unwilling to destroy, he mourn their fate,
the ensue slaughter do his thirst of fame abate:
when he from bajazet have win the field,
and all to his superior virtue yield,
he be still the same; still humble, just, and kind;
in he we still the god-like scythian find,
the same compassionate, forgive, generous mind.

who for arpasia can from tear abstain?
or hear unmoved, her much wrong prince complain?
with melt softness they their woe express;
their sorrow charm in his attract dress.
Ovid himself can not with great art
describe the tender motion of the heart,
the grief they feel, who must for ever part.

who beauteous Selima expose can see
to her inhuman father cruelty
without concern? and when in such distress
not her axalla, her deliverer bless?

may he go on, still thus adorn the stage,
still show such bright example to our age,
till he to we lose virtue shall restore,
and we see honour flourish here once more:
till justice all her ancient right regain,
and in she once love Albion unmolested reign.

when these have for some time employ my mind,
in other author i fresh pleasure find,
and meet with various scene of thought behind:

lose Montezuma in Accosta view,
see what for gold the barbarous Spaniard do:
see the good inca bend beneath their fate,
and die mourn the downfal of their state:
then with he lofty Andes height ascend;
see the fame Amazon her stream extend,
and to the sea her wide-stretched current bend.

then view in other asiatic pride,
see a few man the spacious east divide:
who hard command poor wretch must obey,
doom to the mischief of tyrannic sway:
to toil condemn, they pass their time in pain,
but dare not of their rigurous fate complain:
nothing be they, their live be not their own,
to they no pity, no regard be show:
like beast they be use, and little more they know,
and every place like they, do sign of slavery show:
their plain once fruitful, now neglect lie;
and glorious structure which once brave the sky,
can hardly now their awful relic show,
we scarce can their majestic ruin know,
while china govern by the wise rule,
and all her noble breed in great Confutius school,
show i what art and industry can do:
please i their moral and politeness view:
delight see how happy they remain,
who still the love of learning entertain,
and where, pure uncorrupted reason still do reign.

then look on their reverse, who all deride,
who seem design to pull down human pride:
those rude inhabitant of africk shore,
who seek no future good, no god adore:
who ornament be nauseous to the sight,
and who seem make with a design to fright:
from such loathe object i divert my eye,
and pity those i do at first despise,

why, o you heavenly power, i sigh say,
be soul condemn to such vile load of clay,
to body which their faculty confine,
through which not one celestial ray can shine?

we shall, alas! as despicable prove,
be we not make the care of unexhausted love:
to that the difference we must still assign,
and every proud aspire thought decline:
when we by flatterer be raise too high,
and man, vain man, beyond his sphere do fly,
narcissus-like on his own perfection gaze,
he ought to turn his vanity to praise,
and study to be grateful all his day.

while thus employ, i no misfortune fear,
and can unmoved the great trouble bear:
quiet, and please, on my own stock i live,
and to my self content, and riches give.
