the vision,

write in a dangerous fit of sickness.

dissolve in sleep near a complain stream,
my fancy strive with a important dream.
methought i be with violence bear away
through a dark vault, who cavern do convey
to death sad court; the brazen gate i pass,
which on my entrance be again make fast.
the dismal cell with horror i survey,
for dead man bone in pile be round i lay,
and skull of large size the pavement make.
the sun to this dark mansion dart no ray,
but glimmer lamp make a imperfect day:
by their faint light i search the cave around,
and in each nook amaze object find.
in a long row stand glass store with sand,
which of some mortal year the tale contain:
he or her name the bloody letter spell,
the number of who year the hourglass hold.
grim fate stand by to watch the hindmost grain,
and cut the slender thread of life in twain;
then down the tablet drop t'a stream below,
suppose from the lethaean lake to flow:
a while it float until bear under-ground,
it be in the abyss of deep oblivion drown.
while into fate arcana thus i pry,
my own name on a tablet i descry.
but oh the pang and agony that rend
my pant breast to find my glass near spend!
the tragic scene begin (forgive i fate
that thy occult proceed i relate.)
strait be i summon to receive my doom,
for death with horrid grace approach the room
array majestic in a mourn robe,
a dart his sceptre, and a skull his globe. 
he sit, the attendant on his person stand,
all arm for slaughter, and distain with blood.
disease next be place a numerous train,
produce each a bedroll of his slay.
no soon be my scatter thought restore,
but i with mental prayer heaven aid implore;
then thus with hollow voice the tyrant speak —
in vain fond youth heaven succour you invoke,
stand to the bar, and hear th'inditement read;
for ere thou dy thou be allow to plead:
thy charge be deep, but for thy self reply,
oh i be guilty and deserve to die!
my year in vanity pursuit i spend,
too oft transgress, too rare do repent;
some vice (heaven assist) i suppress,
and last war proclaim with all the rest;
but oft in the combat i shrink back and flee,
by passion oft surprise and captive lead.
but be this court proceed so severe,
that youth can challenge no indulgence here?
have fate my life to manly year promove,
perhaps my skill and courage have improve:
mortal thy doom already be decree,
(the judge reply) and sentence must proceed!
this court record with instance abound
of young brow than thy with laurel crown,
approach you minister of fate, and bear
th'offender hence to th'region of despair,
in liquid flame of sulphur let he roll,
in sharp agony of a hell-wrecked soul:
thus let he howl eternity away,
refresh with no short glimpse of heavenly day.
confusion now my torture bosom fill;
cold sweat down my lifeless joint distil.
a guard of daemon at the tyrant call
with hideous yell rush into the hall
monstrous of shape, of size, prodigious tall.
in this distress behold a heavenly ray,
around i do his cheerful light display.
the lamp grow pale and shrink into their case,
the fright daemon vanish from the place;
the haughty tyrant self confuse appear;
amongst the dead bone a rattle noise be hear,
as summon to the universal doom,
they justle with each other in their tomb.
not dare yet to hope relief i spy
my guardian-angel smile by my side;
a silent joy through all my vital run,
while thus in charm language he begin.
rejoice my charge, for from heaven court i come
with gracious order to revoke thy doom.
thy sun be set, thy life-glass almost run,
thy virtue race imperfect begin.
but heaven in pity to thy sickly pace,
have lincence i or to contract the space,
or on my wing thy linger spirit convey
to blissful mansion of eternal day.
to heaven and he my humble thanks i pay,
and beg to be to those glad seat convey;
but first admit the lot of all mankind
and leave (say he) that load of earth behind,
prisoner absolve, less glad quit their chain
than i this flesh that do my spirit detain.
but when my soul her naked self survey,
leprous and soul by sin contagion make,
she blush and seek to cover her disgrace,
retreat back into her fleshy case.
the guardian-spirit her fond attempr withstood,
and straight with hyssop dip in sacred blood,
baptise she; and behold, while i enquire
intent o'th ceremony, i grow inspire
with mental joy, and now descry no more
those blemish that stain my soul before:
thought of new world my mind have so engross,
that all remembrance of the old it lose:
that body too (which once i fond think
can never be from my remembrance wrought)
have now quite escape my memory, till i spy
the pale and lifeless engine by my side.
bless i (say i) what ghastly thing lie there?
be this the mansion where so many a year,
i linger betwixt successive hope and fear?
be this the thing i take such care to improve,
teach it to cringe, and in just measure move?
the thing that late do in business sweat,
that talk so much of being rich and great!
that seek with verse to make its love renowned,
and hope ere long to see its passion crown;
behold where the design machine lie,
prey to those insect it do once despise.
suppose that body now lie cover over
in perfume bring from ormus spicy shore;
what courteous female will vouchsafe the grace
to curl those lock, or kiss that ghastly face?
why be the corpse so long detain from ground,
it be more than time those hand and foot be bind;
close the dull eye, support the fall chin,
with grassy turf suppress the swell skin:
go, let the funeral peal be ring aloud,
in winding-sheet th'offensive carcase shrow
and in some nook the useless lumber crow.
insult thus i speak, and more have say,
but be by my assistant angel stay;
my charge, say he, (these gloomy shade withdraw)
behold of everlasting day the dawn:
at th'entrance to elysian land (a grace
confer on soul when first they arrive the place)
the blissful throng be meet to welcome thou
to their fair world of immortality. 
he say, and strait his threaten wand upheave,
the neighbour wall obey the stroke and cleave;
such be the blow give by the hebrew guide,
when force his foot-passage through the tide,
the water there congeal and stand in wall,
the building here like break water fall.
but now the part stone bring heaven in view,
when (fatal chance!) my rapturous dream withdraw
the grateful slumber from my temple fall,
round i i view the grove, and think it hell;
aloud i call my guide! oblige
the echo rock keep up th'expiring cry,
but the false vision flee without reply.
