the war of Caros: a poem.

bring, daughter of toscar, bring the harp; the light of the song rise in ossian soul. it be like the field, when darkness cover the hill around, and the shadow grow slow on the plain of the sun.

i behold my son, o Malvina, near the mossy rock of crona; but it be the mist of the desert tinge with the beam of the west: lovely be the mist that assume the form of Oscar! turn from it, you wind, when you roar on the side of ardven.

who come towards my son, with the murmur of a song? his staff be in his hand, his grey hair loose on the wind. surly joy lighten his face; and he often look back to Caros. it be ryno of the song, he that go to view the foe.

what do Caros king of ship, say the son of the now mournful Ossian? spread he the wing of his pride, bard of the time of old?

he spread they, Oscar, reply the bard, but it be behind his gather heap. he look over his stone with fear, and behold thou terrible, as the ghost of night that roll the wave to his ship.

go, thou first of my bard, say Oscar, and take the spear of Fingal. fix a flame on its point, and shake it to the wind of heaven. bid he, in song, to advance, and leave the roll of his wave. tell to Caros that i long for battle; and that my bow be weary of the chace of cona. tell he the mighty be not here; and that my arm be young.

he go with the murmur of his song. Oscar rear his voice on high. it reach his hero on ardven, like the noise of a cave; when the sea of togorma roll before it; and its tree meet the roar wind. — they gather round my son like the stream of the hill; when, after rain, they roll in the pride of their course.

ryno come to the mighty Caros, and strike his flame spear. come to the battle of Oscar, o thou that sit on the roll of water. Fingal be distant far; he hear the song of his bard in Morven: and the wind of his hall be in his hair. his terrible spear be at his side; and his shield that be like that darken moon. come to the battle of Oscar; the hero be alone.

he come not over the streamy carun; the bard return with his song. grey night grow dim on crona. the feast of shell be spread. a hundred oak burn to the wind, and faint light gleam over the heath. the ghost of ardven pass through the beam, and show their dim and distant form. comála be half-unseen on her meteor; and hidallan be sullen and dim, like the darken moon behind the mist of night.

why be thou sad? say ryno; for he alone behold the chief. why be thou sad, hidallan, have thou not receive thy fame? the song of Ossian have be hear, and thy ghost have brighten in the wind, when thou do bend from thy cloud to hear the song of morven bard.

and do thy eye behold the hero, say Oscar, like the dim meteor of night? say, ryno, say, how fall the chief that be so renown in the day of our father? — his name remain on the rock of cona; and i have often see the stream of his hill.

Fingal, reply the bard, have drive hidallan from his war. the king soul be sad for comála, and his eye can not behold hidallan.

lonely, sad along the heath he slow move with silent step. his arm hang disorder on his side. his hair fly loose from his helmet. the tear be in his down-cast eye; and the sigh half-silent in his breast.

three day he stray unseen, alone, before he come to lamor hall: the mossy hall of his father, at the stream of balva. — there lamor sit alone beneath a tree; for he have send his people with hidallan to war. the stream run at his foot, and his grey head rest on his staff. sightless be his age eye. he hum the song of other time. — the noise of hidallan foot come to his ear: he know the tread of his son.

be the son of lamor return; or be it the sound of his ghost? have thou fall on the bank of carun, son of the age lamor? or, if i hear the sound of hidallan foot; where be the mighty in the war? where be my people, hidallan, that be wont to return with their echo shield? — have they fall on the bank of carun?

no: reply the sigh youth, the people of lamor live. they be renown in battle, my father; but hidallan be renown no more. i must sit alone on the bank of balva, when the roar of the battle grow.

but thy father never sit alone, reply the rise pride of lamor; they never sit alone on the bank of balva, when the roar of battle rise. — do thou not behold that tomb? my eye discern it not; there rest the noble garmállon who never flee from war. — come, thou renown in battle, he say, come to thy father tomb. — how be i renown, garmállon, for my son have flee from war?

king of the streamy balva! say hidallan with a sigh, why do thou torment my soul? lamor, i never fear. — Fingal be sad for comála, and deny his war to hidallan; go to the grey stream of thy land, he say, and moulder like a leafless oak, which the wind have bend over balva, never more to grow.

and must i hear, lamor reply, the lonely tread of hidallan foot? when thousand be renown in battle, shall he bend over my grey stream? spirit of the noble garmállon! carry lamor to his place; his eye be dark; his soul be sad; and his son have lose his fame.

where, say the youth, shall i search for same to gladden the soul of lamor? from whence shall i return with renown, that the sound of my arm may be pleasant in his ear? — if i go to the chace of hind, my name will not be hear. — lamor will not feel my dog, with his hand, glad at my arrival from the hill. he will not inquire of his mountain, or of the dark-brown deer of his desert.

i must fall, say lamor, like a leafless oak: it grow on a rock, but the wind have overturn it. — my ghost will be see on my hill, mournful for my young hidallan. will not you, you mist, as you rise, hide he from my sight? — my son! — go to lamor hall: there the arm of our father hang. — bring the sword of garmállon; — he take it from a foe.

he go and bring the sword with all its stud thong. — he give it to his father. the gray-haired hero feel the point with his hand. —

my son! — lead i to garmállon tomb: it rise beside that rustle tree. the long grass be wither; — i hear the breeze whistle there. — a little fountain murmur near, and send its water to balva. there let i rest; it be noon: and the sun be on our field.

he lead he to garmállon tomb. lamor pierce the side of his son. — they sleep together: and their ancient hall moulder on balva bank. — ghost be see there at noon: the valley be silent, and the people shun the place of lamor.

mournful be thy tale, say Oscar, son of the time of old! — my soul sigh for hidallan; he fall in the day of his youth. he fly on the blast of the desert, and his wander be in a foreign land. —

son of the echo Morven! draw near to the foe of Fingal. send the night away in song; and watch the strength of Caros. Oscar go to the people of other time; to the shade of silent ardven; where his father sit dim in their cloud, and behold the future war. — and be thou there, hidallan, like a half-extinguished meteor? come to my sight, in thy sorrow, chief of the roar balva!

the hero move with their song. — Oscar slow ascend the hill. — the meteor of night set on the heath before he. a distant torrent faint roar. — unfrequent blast rush through age oak. the half-enlighten moon sink dim and red behind her hill. — feeble voice be hear on the heath. — Oscar draw his sword.

come, say the hero, o you ghost of my father! you that fight against the king of the world! — tell i the deed of future time; and your converse in your cave; when you talk together and behold your son in the field of the valiant.

trenmor come, from his hill, at the voice of his mighty son. — a cloud, like the steed of the stranger, support his airy limb. his robe be of the mist of lano, that bring death to the people. his sword be a green meteor half-extinguished. his face be without form, and dark. he sigh thrice over the hero: and thrice the wind of the night roar around. many be his word to Oscar: but they only come by half to our ear: they be dark as the tale of other time, before the light of the song arise. he slow vanish, like a mist that melt on the sunny hill.

it be then, o daughter of toscar, my son begin first to be sad. he foresee the fall of his race; and, at time, he be thoughtful and dark; like the sun when he carry a cloud on his face; but he look afterwards on the hill of cona.

Oscar pass the night among his father, grey morning meet he on the bank of carun.

a green vale surround a tomb which arise in the time of old. little hill lift their head at a distance; and stretch their old tree to the wind. the warrior of Caros sit there, for they have pass the stream by night. they appear, like the trunk of age pine, to the pale light of the morning.

Oscar stand at the tomb, and raise thrice his terrible voice. the rock hill echo around: the start roe bound away. and the tremble ghost of the dead flee, shriek on their cloud. so terrible be the voice of my son, when he call his friend.

a thousand spear rise around; the people of Caros rise. — why, daughter of toscar, why that tear? my son, though alone, be brave. Oscar be like a beam of the sky; he turn around and the people fall. his hand be like the arm of a ghost, when he stretch it from a cloud: the rest of his thin form be unseen: but the people die in the vale.

my son behold the approach of the foe; and he stand in the silent darkness of his strength. — "be i alone, say Oscar, in the midst of a thousand foe? — many a spear be there! — many a darkly-rolling eye! — shall i fly to ardven? — but do my father ever fly! — the mark of their arm be in a thousand battle. — Oscar too will be renown. — come, you dim ghost of my father, and behold my deed in war! — i may fall; but i will be renown like the race of the echo Morven ".

he stand, grow in his place, like the flood of the narrow vale. the battle come, but they fall: bloody be the sword of Oscar.

the noise reach his people at crona; they come like a hundred stream. the warrior of Caros flee, and Oscar remain like a rock leave by the ebb sea.

now dark and deep, with all his steed, Caros roll his might along: the little stream be lose in his course; and the earth be rock round. — battle spread from wing to wing: ten thousand sword gleam at once in the sky. — but why shall Ossian sing of battle? — for never more shall my steel shine in war. i remember the day of my youth with sorrow; when i feel the weakness of my arm. happy be they who fall in their youth, in the midst of their renown! — they have not behold the tomb of their friend: or fail to bend the bow of their strength. — happy be thou, o Oscar, in the midst of thy rush blast. thou often go to the field of thy fame, where Caros flee from thy lift sword.

darkness come on my soul, o fair daughter of toscar, i behold not the form of my son at carun; nor the figure of Oscar on crona. the rustle wind have carry he far away; and the heart of his father be sad.

but lead i, o Malvina, to the find of my wood, and the roar of my mountain stream. let the chace be hear on cona; that i may think on the day of other year. — and bring i the harp, o maid, that i may touch it when the light of my soul shall arise. — be thou near, to learn the song; and future time shall hear of Ossian.

the son of the feeble hereafter will lift the voice on cona; and, look up to the rock, say, "here Ossian dwell."they shall admire the chief of old, and the race that be no more: while we ride on our cloud, Malvina, on the wing of the roar wind. our voice shall be hear, at time, in the desert; and we shall sing on the wind of the rock.

