to the queen most excellent majesty.

1. 

permit i at your royal foot to lay
this humble offer of a tremble muse;
permit i there to pay
this tribute to transcendent merit due;
to that transcendent merit which conspicuous be in you.
bold be the address, and the presumption high!
but she all mean object do refuse,
to this vast height will fly,
and hope your goodness will the ambitious flight excuse.
i strive a while her ardor to conceal,
unseen it burn within my breast;
but now impetuous grow, and will it self reveal;
it be much too strong to be suppress.
what be at first but warmth, now to a flame do his rise,
on you she gaze with admire eye,
and every low object do despise:
pardon her transport, since from zeal they spring,
and give her leave of you to sing;
of you, the noble theme that she can choose,
of you, who be with ten thousand grace fraught,
of you, who far exceed the wide bound of thought:
in who as to their centre line be draw,
all those bright quality in one combine,
which do till now with scatter glory shine;
appear till now but in their dawn:
you be the Meridian splendour of your line;
and on your sex entail a last fame;
we shall be ever proud of your illustrious name.

2. 

long may you reign, long fill the british throne,
and make the haughty gallic foe our english valour own:
assert the right of your imperial crown,
and vie with ancient hero for renown:
tread in his step who fate have snatch away,
like he the terror of your arm display;
but long, long much your happy subject sway,
his mighty act can not the victor save,
those conquest he have gain
can not preserve his life:
death to his vast design a period give,
send he amid his triumph to the grave:
for you he fight, for you he wreath obtain,
for you he strive to humble France:
for you have be the toil, for you the strife,
for you the Battels he have win,
the wondrous thing which he have do:
to he there nothing now remain,
but empty fame, that mean reward for all his pain.
heaven bring he here your grandeur to advance,
that be the kind design of fate,
and take he hence when he have aggrandise your state.
to you he all his trophy yield,
to you the dusty honour of the bloody field:
he at your foot lay all his laurel down.
and add his great achievement to the glory of your crown.

3. 

if poet may to prophesy pretend,
if they be allow to pry,
into the hide secret of futurity,
they dare presage, you will your power extend,
and spite of salic law, the gallic throne ascend:
for you that noble task assign,
it be you be bear mankind to free,
from arbitrary sway, and hateful tyranny:
you, none but you, be for that work design;
we no where can a fit champion find:
go on great heroin, and exalt your name,
go fearless on in the bright track of fame:
when beauty lead, and virtue show the way,
the man will soon with joyful have obey,
none then will show a great zeal than they:
they for your service with a noble pride
will all your enemy defy,
will all their vain effort deride,
and strive who first for you shall die;
who first the ambitioned honour have,
who first lie down in the contest grave.

4. 

where you reside, may pleasure still abound,
may bloom joy disperse themselves around,
and may there nothing there but soft delight be find:
still may your subject make your bliss their care,
contend party in your cause unite:
no more within our british sphere
may threaten cloud appear,
or deafen storm affright,
but all be calm, and all be bright;
bright as those virtue which adorn your mind,
those virtue, which we not where else can in perfection find,
may heaven indulgent to your wish prove,
and make you still chief object of its love:
bless you with all the favour it can give,
and let you in a numerous offspring live;
a offspring worthy of your princely line,
great as your merit, like your self divine.

5. 

my pious prayer have quick acceptance find,
propitious omen heaven be please to send,
please nature do this glorious change approve;
on you she seem to attend
commission from above:
each hour of your auspicious reign,
have be with wondrous blessing crown;
the sun restore his heat again,
again restore revive ray,
again we be bless with radiant day:
no noxious vapor now dare rise,
no stream of earth pollute the sky,
back to their gloomy source each darken atom fly:
a balmy swetness fill the air,
health and pleasure revel there;
the flower rise beauteous from the ground,
and spread their fragrant odour round;
the tree prepare
their verdant crown to wear;
amid their bough soft zephyr play:
and in low whisper murmur their glad homage pay:
the warble bird resound your praise,
and welcome you with cheerful lay:
joy do in every face appear,
in every face be see to smile;
a joy till now to we unknown,
a joy which you can give alone;
you to your subject be more dear,
to we the happy native of this isle,
than life, and all the pleasure we possess below,
all, all the gay delight your Albion can bestow,
which rich in you, and your immortal fame,
the title now of fortunate may claim,
and just be allow to glory in so great a name.
