a epistle of m.  de Voltaire

upon his arrival at his estate near the lake of Geneva, in march, mdcclv.

from the french.

o take, o keep i, ever bless domain,
 where lovely Flora with Pomona reign;
 where art fulfil what nature voice require,
 and give the charm to which my verse aspire;
 take i, the world with transport i resign,
 and let your peaceful solitude be mine! 

yet not in these retreat i boast to find
 that perfect bliss that leave no wish behind;
 this, to no lonely shade kind nature bring,
 nor art bestow on courtier, or on king;
 not even the sage this boon have ever possess,
 though join with wisdom, virtue share his breast;
 this transient life, alas! can never suffice
 to reach the distant goal, and snatch the prize;
 yet, soothe to rest, we feel suspense from woe,
 and though not perfect joy, yet joy we know. 

enchant scene! what pleasure you dispense
 wherever i turn, to every wonder sense! 
a ocean here, where no rude tempest roar,
 with crystal water lave the hallow shore;
 here flowery field with rise hill be crown,
 where cluster vine empurple all the ground;
 now by degree from hill to Alps they rise,
 hell groan beneath, above they pierce the sky! 
see the proud summit, white with endless frost,
 eternal bulkwark of the blissful coast! 
the blissful coast the hardy lombard gain,
 and frost and mountain cross their course in vain;
 here glory beckon mighty chief of old,
 and plant laurel to reward the bold;
 Charles, Otho, Conti hear her trumpet sound,
 and, bear on victory wing, they spurn the mound. 

see, on those bank where yond calm water swell,
 the hair-clad epicure luxurious cell! 
see fame ripaille, where once so grave, so gay,
 great amedeus pass from prayer to play:
 fantastic wretch! thou riddle of thy kind! 
what strange ambition seize thy frantic mind? 
prince, hermit, lover! bless through every hour
 with blissful change of pleasure and of power,
 can thou, thus paradise, from care remote,
 rush to the world, and fight for Peter boat? 
now by the god of sweet repose i swear,
 i will not thus have barter ease for care,
 spite of the key that move our fear and hope,
 i never will quit such penance to be pope. 

let he who Rome stern tyrant stoop to praise,
 the tuneful chanter of sweet georgic lay,
 let Maro boast of stream that nature pour
 to lave proud villa on italia shore;
 superior far the stream that court my song,
 superior far the shore they wind along:
 bless shore! the dwelling of that sacred power
 who rule each joyful, and each glorious hour,
 queen of whatever the good or great desire,
 the patriot eloquence, the hero fire,
 shrined in each breast, and near the tyrant sword
 invoke in whisper, and in sigh adore,
 immortal liberty, who generous mind
 with all her gift will bless all humankind! 
see, from morat she come in martial charm,
 and shine like Pallas in celestial arm,
 her sword the blood of boastful Austria stain,
 and Charles, who threaten with opprobrious chain. 

now hostile crowd geneva tower assail,
 they march in secret, and by night they scale;
 the goddess come — they vanish from the wall. 
their lance shiver, and their hero fall,
 for fraud can never elude, nor force withstand
 the stroke of liberty victorious hand. 

she smile; her smile perpetual joy diffuse;
 a shout nation where she turn pursue;
 their heart-felt paean thunder to the sky,
 and echo appenines from far reply:
 such wreath their temple crown as Greece entwine
 her hero brow at Marathon to bind;
 such wreath the son of freedom hold more dear,
 than circle gold and gem that crown the peer,
 than the broad hat which shade the pontiff face,
 or the cleave mitre venerable grace. 
insult grandeur, in gay tinsel dress,
 show here no star embroider on the breast,
 no tissue ribbon on the shoulder tie,
 vain gift implore by vanity from pride! 
nor here stern wealth, with supercilious eye,
 the falter prayer of weep want deny;
 here no false pride at honest labour sneer,
 man here be brother, equal but in year;
 here heaven, o! liberty, have fix thy throne,
 fill, glorious liberty! by thou alone. 

Rome see thy face, since Brutus fall, no more,
 a stranger thou on many a culture shore:
 the polish lord, of thy embrace vain,
 prick his proud courser over sarmatia plain;
 erect his haughty front in martial pride,
 and spurn the burgher, grovel at his side;
 the grovel burgher burn with secret fire,
 look up, behold thou, sigh, despair, expire. 

britain rough son in thy defence be bold,
 yet some pretend at London thou be sell;
 i heed they not, to sell too proud, too wise,
 if blood must buy, with blood the briton buy. 

on belgic bog, it be say, thy footstep fail,
 but thou secure may scorn the whisper tale;
 to late time the race of great Nassau,
 who raise seven altar to thy sacred law,
 with faithful hand thy honour shall defend,
 and bid proud faction to thy fasces bend. 

thou Venice keep, thou Genoa now regain;
 and next the throne thy seat the Swede maintain;
 how few in safety thus with king can vie! 
if not supreme, how dangerous to be high! 
o! still preside wherever the law thy friend,
 and keep thy station, and thy right defend:
 but take no factious league reproachful name,
 still prone to change, and zealous still to blame,
 cloud not the sunshine of a conquer race,
 who wisdom govern, and who manner grace;
 fond of their sovereign, of subjection vain,
 they wish no favour at thy hand to gain,
 nor need such vassal at their lord repine,
 who easy sway they fond take for thy. 

through the wide east less gentle be thy fate,
 where the dumb murderer guard the sultan gate;
 here pale and tremble, in the dust overturn,
 with chain dishonour, and by eunuch spurn,
 the sword and bowstring place on either side
 thou mourn, while slave of life and death decide. 

spoil of thy cap through all the bright Levant
 tell give thou he, and well supply the want,
 o! come my goddess, in thy choose hour,
 and let my better fortune hail thy power;
 fair friendship call thou to my green retreat,
 o! come, with friendship share the mossy seat;
 like thou she fly the turbulent and great,
 the craft of business, and the farce of state;
 to you, propitious power, at last i turn,
 to you, my vow ascend, my altar burn;
 let i of each the please influence share,
 my joy now heighten, and now soothe my care;
 each rude passion banish from my breast,
 bid the short remnant of my day be bless. 
