ODE to SPRING.

SWEET daughter of a rough and stormy sire,
 Hoar Winter's blooming child; delightful Spring! 
Whose unshorn locks with leaves
 And swelling buds are crown'd;

From the green islands of eternal youth,
 (Crown'd with fresh blooms, and ever springing shade,)
 Turn, hither turn thy step,
 O thou, whose powerful voice

More sweet than softest touch of Doric reed,
 Or Lydian flute, can sooth the madding winds,
 And thro' the stormy deep
 Breathe thy own tender calm. 

Thee, best belov'd! the virgin train await
 With songs and festal rites, and joy to rove
 Thy blooming wilds among,
 And vales and dewy lawns,

With untir'd feet; and cull thy earliest sweets
 To weave fresh garlands for the glowing brow
 Of him, the favour'd youth
 That prompts their whisper'd sigh. 

Unlock thy copious stores; those tender showers
 That drop their sweetness on the infant buds,
 And silent dews that swell
 The milky ear's green stem. 

And feed the flowering osier's early shoots;
 And call those winds which thro' the whispering boughs
 With warm and pleasant breath
 Salute the blowing flowers. 

Now let me sit beneath the whitening thorn,
 And mark thy spreading tints steal o'er the dale;
 And watch with patient eye
 Thy fair unfolding charms. 

O nymph approach! while yet the temperate sun
 With bashful forehead, thro' the cool moist air
 Throws his young maiden beams,
 And with chaste kisses woes

The earth's fair bosom; while the streaming veil
 Of lucid clouds with kind and frequent shade
 Protect thy modest blooms
 From his severer blaze. 

Sweet is thy reign, but short; The red dog-star
 Shall scorch thy tresses, and the mower's scythe
 Thy greens, thy flow'rets all,
 Remorseless shall destroy. 

Reluctant shall I bid thee then farewel;
 For O, not all that Autumn's lap contains,
 Nor Summer's ruddiest fruits,
 Can aught for thee atone

Fair Spring! whose simplest promise more delights
 Than all their largest wealth, and thro' the heart
 Each joy and new-born hope
 With softest influence breathes. 
