Abba thule lament for his son prince le boo.

i climb the high cliff; i hear the sound
of dash wave; i gaze intent around;
i mark the grey cope, and the hollowness
of heaven, and the great sun, that come to bless
the isle again; but my long-straining eye,
no speck, no shadow can, far off, descry,
that i may weep tear of delight, and say,
it be the bark that bear my child away!

sun, that return bright, beneath who eye
the world unknown, and outstretch water lie,
do thou behold he now! on some rude shore,
around who crag the cheerless billow roar,
watch the unwearied surge do he stand,
and think upon his father distant land!
or have his heart forget, so far away,
these native wood, these rock, and torrent grey,
the tall banana whisper to the breeze,
the shore, the sound of these encircle sea,
hear from his infant day, and the pile heap
of holy stone, where his forefather sleep!

ah, i! till sink by sorrow, i shall dwell
with they forgetful in the narrow cell,
never shall time from my fond heart efface
his image; oft his shadow i shall trace
upon the glimmer water, when on high
the white moon wander through the cloudless sky.
oft in my silent cave, when to its fire
from the night rush tempest we retire,
i shall behold his form, his aspect bland;
i shall retrace his footstep on the sand;
and, when the hollow-sounding surge swell,
still think i listen to his echo shell.

will i have perish ere that hapless day,
when the tall vessel, in its trim array,
first rush upon the sound surge, and bear
my age comfort from this shelter shore!
i see it spread its white wing to the wind,
too soon it leave these hill and wood behind,
gaze, its course i follow till my eye
no long can its distant track descry;
till on the confine of the billow hoar
a while it hang, and then be see no more,
and only the blue hollow cope i spy,
and the long waste of water toss wide.

more mournful then each fall surge i hear,
then drop the stagnant tear upon my beard.
methinks the wild wave say, amid their roar
at midnight, thou shall see thy son no more!

now thrice twelve moon through the mid heaven have roll
and many a dawn, and slow night, have i tell:
and still as every weary day go by,
a knot record on my line i tie;
but never more, emerge from the main,
i see the stranger bark approach again.
have the fell storm overwhelm he! have its sweep
bury the bound vessel in the deep! 
be he cast bleed on some desert plain!
upon his father do he call in vain!
have pitiless and bloody tribe defile
the cold limb of my brave, my beauteous child!

oh! i shall never, never hear his voice;
the springtime shall return, the isle rejoice,
but faint and weary i shall meet the morn,
and 'amid the cheer sunshine droop forlorn!

the joyous conch sound in the high wood loud,
over all the beach now stream the busy crowd;
fresh breeze stir the wave plantain grove;
the fisher carol in the wind cove;
and light canoe along the lucid tide
with paint shell and sparkle paddle glide.
i linger on the desert rock alone,
heartless, and cry for thou, my son, my son.
