ode to adversity;

inscribe to miss H—.

thou touchstone of the human soul! 
of virtue the stern, awful test,
 who fierce, terrific, high, control,
 subdue the lofty, plume crest,
 and make the meek heart repine:
 the thunder scath the mountain pine;
 it blast the foliage of the Dale,
 nor turn aside to spare the Lilly of the vale. 

against thou, where be the panoply? 
impregnable to thou what place? 
nor cot too low, nor throne too high,
 over all thy ravage we trace. 
one only champion have the force
 to stand erect against thy course,
 arm with invulnerable shield, —
 exalt fortitude, — thou never subdu to yield. 

ah, ruthless power! dare i complain,
 that against i thy shaft be speed? 
while peace, while self-content remain,
 nor hope of happiness be flee? 
like sickness, thou be hard to bear,
 but real friend come round to cheer:
 kindness can soothe the throb of pain,
 when gilead balm shall fail, and opiate be in vain. 

yet when thy storm be hover near,
 false friend to drop the mask presume,
 as blossom fall, never mean to bear,
 fair, but deceitful, sterile bloom. 
but yet of friend how few pass by,
 avert their stern, alter eye? 
how many faithful, gather round,
 pour oil and wine to cheer, and bind up every wound? 

for heart there be where still preside
 virtue, in all her health sublime;
 where every duty fix reside,
 proof against Fortune wreck, or time. 
for native worth, from selfish pride,
 the winnow storm will sure divide;
 as the light chaff, along the plain,
 fly devious far away, and leave the golden grain. 

when first the storm burst over my head,
 you, Anna! never keep aloof;
 such kindness through your heart be shed,
 your friendship have be tempest proof. 
for fraught with candour, sweetness, truth,
 in the gay prime of smile youth,
 when pleasure on each hour attend,
 i then you generous seek, your choose, early friend

your kind attention pour a balm
 over trouble, which my soul must bear;
 console by you, it feel a calm;
 you lessen grief you deign to share. 
the noble virtue of your mind,
 with all the social grace join,
 distinguish what you owe your birth,
 and in my Anna shine her father be genuine worth. 

pity full oft be sympathy,
 when we ourselves have feel like woe;
 unwounded by adversity,
 you heal the ill you never can know. 
this be that virtue those attain
 who happy fate be free from pain;
 it be godlike other grief to share:
 for mortal, angel feel, themselves exempt from care. 
