elegy, on a favourite dog, suppose to be poison.

to miss Molly Clayton. 

o all you spot brute that guard the fair,
 lie on their lap, or wait upon their chair;
 you cupid, cloe, phillis, or shock,
 you who defend the household, or the flock:
 but chief you in lady 'chamber nurse,
 who leap at sweetmeat, nift at a crust,
 come and bemoan poor sparky poison dust. 
hither your little whimper offspring lead,
 and join the dismal howl, to wail he dead. 

shame on the wretch, who deal the deadly draught! 
thou human brute! who very name be a blot. 
o that kind fate will poison all thy life
 with some smart vixen, very much a wife! 
and when the end of thy chastisement near,
 may thou want ratsbane then — to poison she. 

while the cold drug be struggle hard with life,
 and sense awhile maintain the doubtful strife;
 with much of gratitude and sorrow mix,
 on i his scarce-perceiving eye he fix:
 then to these arm with stagger step do haste,
 there, where he oft have sleep, to sleep his last. 
the tear be vain; nor will i blush to own
 a heart of soft workmanship than stone:
 yet lest the wise my weakness shall reprove,
 the tear i drop to gratitude, and love. 

now die, o tabby! all you favourite fall! 
dog, parrot, squirrel, monkey, beau and all! 
for thou be all those tender name in one;
 that thou can yet survive! — but thou be go. 

ah! what avail thy honour now to trace! 
thy high descent, thy ancient royal race! 
thy length of ear proclaim the generous seed,
 hereditary heir of Charles breed;
 and have not William change the face of thing,
 may still have bark beneath the throne of king. 

no more shall thou, with each revolve day,
 expect the warm repast of milk and tea;
 nor when the balmy slumber i prolong,
 ascend the stair, and wake i with thy tongue:
 no more shall thy discern nose descry
 they savoury steam, that speak the dinner nigh. 
soon do thou wake, and every cat assail,
 then, strut, shake the honour of thy tail. 
with look importunate, and beg face,
 scarce can he wait the tediousness of grace:
 but that perform, he bark exult round;
 the cat be scar, the neighbour roof resound. 

whether by instinct, or by reason teach,
 his just conclusion speak the use of thought. 
when smart toupèe exhale the soft perfume,
 he smell a beau, and sullen leave the room. 
or when the ruddy 'squire grow loud and vain,
 and practise all the noise of the plain;
 with sneak step, at distance he will retire,
 then mount his tail, and even out-bark the well-mouthed' squire. 
but most the fool be his inveterate foe,
 that thing all over talk, all over beau:
 well he distinguish betwixt brocade and sense,
 and growl contempt beneath the sevenfold fence. 

o ever-watchful! ever-faithful guard! 
no more shall i thy gratitude reward. 
that cream, that bread and butter soak in tea,
 be now lap up as puss lawful fee:
 while she, proud vixen! often seem to say,
 "peace to his shade! — each dog must have his day." 

yet thou, his mistress once, and late his friend,
 awhile the softly-falling tear suspend:
 and think, whenever your lark shall be no more,
 how vain be tear, since spark be weep before. 
or rather, how uncertain life be short date,
 since even your favourite must submit to fate. 
but can your smile, which sure give life to all,
 back from the grave his much-loved form recall;
 then shall these hand the welcome office pay,
 to wipe the dust from his revive clay:
 with pleasure guard he from a world of ill,
 and aid his vengeance at the pois'ner heel —
 ah! smile then; try, exert your save power! 
be spark your present now, as once before. 
