ode on lyric poetry.

by mr. Marriot.

i 1. 

inmate of smoke cot, who rustic shed,
within its humble bed,
her twitter progeny contain,
the swallow sweep the plain,
or light skim from level lake the dew.
the ringdove ever true
in plaintive accent tell of unrelenting fate,
far from the raven croak, and bird of night,
that shriek wing her flight
when, at his mutter rite,
hide in the dusky desert vale,
with start eye, and visage pale
the grim visard see the spectre rise unholy;
but haunt the wood that hold her beauteous mate,
and woo the echo soft with murmur melancholy.

i 2. 

sublime alone the feather monarch fly,
his nest dark mist upon the mountain shroud;
in vain the howl storm arise,
when bear on outstretch plume aloft he spring,
dash with many a stroke the part cloud,
or to the buoyant air commit his wing
float with even sail down the liquid sky;
then dart upward, swift his wing aspire,
where thunder keep their gloomy seat,
and lightning arm with heaven avenge ire.
none can the dread artillery meet,
or through the airy region rove,
but he who guard the throne of Jove,
and grasp the flame bolt of sacred fire.

i 3. 

know, with young ambition bold,
in vain, my muse, thy dazzle eye explore
distant aim, where wont to soar,
their burn way the kindle spirit hold.
height too arduous wise shun;
humble flight thy wing attend;
for heaven-taught genius can alone ascend
back to her native sky,
and with direct eagle eye
pervade the lofty sphere, and view the blaze sun.

ii. 1. 

but hark! over all the flower-enameled ground
what music breathe around!
i see, i see the virgin train
unlock their stream again,
roll to many a vale their liquid lapse along,
while at the warble song
which hold entranced attention wakeful ear,
break be the magic band of iron sleep.
love, wayward child, oft wont to weep,
in tear his robe to steep
forget; and care that count his store,
now think each mighty business over;
while sit on ruin city, war wide-wasting glory,
ambition, cease the proud pile to rear,
and sigh; unfinished leave half her ample story.

ii. 2. 

then once more, sweet enthusiast, happy lyre,
thy soothe solace deign awhile to bring.
i strive to catch the sacred fire,
and wake thou emulous on granta plain,
where all the muse haunt his hallow spring,
and where the grace shun the sordid train
scornful of heaven-born art which thou and peace inspire:
on life sequester scene they silent wait,
nor heed the baseless pomp of power,
nor shine dream that crowd at Fortune gate;
but smooth the inevitable hour
of pain, which man be doom to know,
and teach the mortal mind to glow
with pleasure place beyond the shaft of fate.

ii. 3. 

but, alas! the amusive reed
ill suit the lyre that ask a master hand,
and fond fancy vain feed
a breast that life be more active scene demand.
sloth ignoble to disclaim
it be enough: the lyre unstring.
at other foot the victor palm i fling
in granta glorious shrine;
where crown with radiance divine
her smile shall nurse the muse; the muse shall list her fame.
