the pleasure of hope. part first.

pleasure of hope. 

part i 

at summer eve, when heaven aerial bow
 span with bright arch the glitter hill below,
 why to yond mountain turn the muse eye,
 who sun-bright summit mingle with the sky? 
why do these cliff of shadowy tint appear
 more sweet than all the landscape smile near? 
it be distance lend enchantment to the view,
 and robe the mountain in its azure hue. 

thus, with delight, we linger to survey
 the promise joy of life unmeasured way;
 thus, from afar, each dim-discovered scene
 more please seem than all the past have be;
 and every form that fancy can repair
 from dark oblivion, glow divine there. 

what potent spirit guide the rapture eye
 to pierce the shade of dim futurity? 
can wisdom lend, with all her heavenly power,
 the pledge of joy anticipate hour? 
ah, no! she dark see the fate of man —
 her dim horizon bound to a span;
 or, if she hold a image to the view,
 it be nature picture too severe true. 

with thou, sweet hope! reside the heavenly light,
 that pour remote rapture on the sight;
 thy be the charm of life bewilder way,
 that call each slumber passion into play. 
wake by thy touch, i see the sister band,
 on tiptoe watch, start at thy command,
 and fly wherever thy mandate bid they steer,
 to pleasure path, or glory bright career. 

primeval hope, the aonian muse say,
 when man and nature mourn their first decay;
 when every form of death, and every woe,
 shoot from malignant star to earth below;
 when murder bare his arm, and rampant war
 yok the red dragon of her iron car;
 when peace and mercy, banish from the plain,
 spring on the viewless wind to heaven again;
 all all forsake the friendless guilty mind,
 but hope, the charmer, linger still behind. 

thus, while Elijah burn wheel prepare,
 from carmel height to sweep the field of air,
 the prophet mantle, ere his flight begin,
 drop on the world — a sacred gift to man. 

auspicious hope! in thy sweet garden grow
 wreath for each toil, a charm for every woe:
 win by their sweet, in nature languid hour,
 the way-worn pilgrim seek thy summer bower;
 there, as the wild bee murmur on the wing,
 what peaceful dream thy handmaid spirit bring;
 what viewless form the aeolian organ play,
 and sweep the furrow line of anxious thought away! 

angel of life! thy glitter wing explore
 earth lonely bound, and ocean wild shore. 
lo! to the wintery wind the pilot yield
 his bark career over unfathomed field;
 now on atlantic wave he ride afar,
 where Andes, giant of the western star,
 with meteor-standard to the wind unfurled,
 look from his throne of cloud over half the world. 

now far he sweep, where scarce a summer smile,
 on behrring rock, or greenland naked isle;
 cold on his midnight watch the breeze blow,
 from waste that slumber in eternal snow;
 and waft, across the wave tumultuous roar,
 the wolf long howl from oonalaska shore. 

poor child of danger, nursling of the storm,
 sad be the woe that wreck thy manly form! 
rock, wave, and wind, the shatter bark delay;
 thy heart be sad, thy home be far away. 

but hope can here her moonlight vigil keep,
 and sing to charm the spirit of the deep:
 swift as yond streamer light the starry pole,
 her vision warm the watchman pensive soul. 
his native hill that rise in happy clime,
 the grot that hear his song of other time,
 his cottage home, his bark of slender sail,
 his glassy lake, and broomwood blossom vale,
 rush on his thought; he sweep before the wind,
 tread the love shore he sigh to leave behind;
 meet at each step a friend familiar face,
 and fly at last to helen long embrace;
 wipe from her cheek the rapture-speaking tear,
 and clasp, with many a sigh, his child dear! 
while, long neglect, but at length caress,
 his faithful dog salute the smile guest,
 point to the master eye (wherever they roam)
 his wistful face, and whine a welcome home. 
friend of the brave! in peril dark hour,
 intrepid virtue look to thou for power;
 to thou the heart its tremble homage yield,
 on stormy flood, and carnage-covered field,
 when front to front the banner host combine,
 halt ere they close, and form the dreadful line. 
when all be still on death devote soil,
 the march-worn soldier mingle for the toil;
 as ring his glitter tube, he lift on high
 the dauntless brow, and spirit-speaking eye. 
hail in his heart the triumph yet to come,
 and hear thy stormy music in the drum! 

and such thy strength-inspiring aid that bear
 the hardy Byron to his native shore —
 in horrid clime, where chiloe tempest sweep
 tumultuous murmur over the trouble deep,
 it be his to mourn misfortune rude shock,
 scourge by the wind, and cradle on the rock,
 to wake each joyless morn, and search again
 the famish haunt of solitary man;
 who race, unyielding as their native storm,
 know not a trace of nature but the form;
 yet, at thy call, the hardy tar pursue,
 pale but intrepid, sad but unsubdued,
 pierce the deep wood, and, hail from afar,
 the moon pale planet, and the northern star;
 pause at each dreary cry, unheard before,
 hyaena in the wild, and mermaid on the shore;
 till, lead by thou over many a cliff sublime,
 he find a warm world, a mild clime,
 a home to rest, a shelter to defend,
 peace and repose, a briton and a friend! 

congenial hope! thy passion-kindling power
 how bright, how strong, in youth untroubled hour! 
on yond proud height, with genius hand in hand,
 i see thou light, and wave thy golden wand. 

 "go, child of heaven (thy wing word proclaim)
 it be thy to search the boundless field of fame! 
lo! Newton, priest of nature, shine afar,
 scan the wide world, and number every star! 
will thou, with he, mysterious rite apply,
 and watch the shrine with wonder-beaming eye? 
yes, thou shall mark, with magic art profound,
 the speed of light, the circle march of sound;
 with franklin grasp the lightning fiery wing,
 or yield the lyre of heaven another string. 

 "the swedish sage admire, in yonder bower,
 his wing insect, and his rosy flower;
 call from their woodland haunt the savage train
 with sound horn, and count they on the plain —
 so once, at heaven command, the wanderer come
 to eden shade, and hear their various name. 

 "far from the world, in yond sequester clime,
 slow pass the son of wisdom, more sublime;
 calm as the field of heaven, his sapient eye
 the love athenian lift to realm on high,
 admire Plato on his spotless page,
 stamp the bright dictate of the father sage:
 'shall nature bound to earth diurnal span
 the fire of god, the immortal soul of man?" 

 "turn, child of heaven, thy rapture-lightened eye
 to wisdom walk, the sacred nine be nigh:
 hark! from bright spire that gild the delphian height,
 from stream that wander in eternal light,
 range on their hill, harmonia daughter swell
 the mingle tone of horn, and harp, and shell;
 deep from his vault, the loxian murmur flow,
 and pythia awful organ peal below. 

 "belove of heaven! the smile muse shall shed
 her moonlight halo on thy beauteous head;
 shall swell thy heart to rapture unconfined,
 and breathe a holy madness over thy mind. 
i see thou roam her guardian power beneath,
 and talk with spirit on the midnight heath;
 inquire of guilty wanderer whence they come,
 and ask each blood-stained form his earthly name;
 then weave in rapid verse the deed they tell,
 and read the tremble world the tale of hell. 

 "when Venus, throne in cloud of rosy hue,
 fling from her golden urn the vesper dew;
 and bid fond man her glimmer noon employ,
 sacred to love, and walk of tender joy;
 a mild mood the goddess shall recall,
 and soft as dew thy tone of music fall;
 while beauty deeply-pictured smile impart,
 a pang more dear than pleasure to the heart —
 warm as thy sigh shall flow the lesbian strain,
 and plead in beauty ear, nor plead in vain. 

 "or will thou orphean hymn more sacred deem,
 and steep thy song in mercy mellow stream;
 to pensive drop the radiant eye beguile —
 for beauty tear be lovely than her smile; —
 on nature throb anguish pour relief,
 and teach impassion soul the joy of grief? 

 "yes; to thy tongue shall seraph word be give,
 and power on earth to plead the cause of heaven;
 the proud, the cold untroubled heart of stone,
 that never muse on sorrow but its own,
 unlock a generous store at thy command,
 like horeb rock beneath the prophet hand. 
the live lumber of his kindred earth,
 charm into soul, receive a second birth;
 feel thy dread power another heart afford,
 who passion-touched harmonious string accord
 true as the circle sphere to nature plan;
 and man, the brother, live the friend of man! 

 "bright as the pillar rise at heaven command,
 when Israel march along the desert land,
 blaze through the night on lonely wild afar,
 and tell the path — a never-setting star:
 so! heavenly genius, in thy course divine,
 hope be thy star, her light be ever thy." 

propitious power! when rankle care annoy
 the sacred home of hymenaean joy;
 when doom to poverty sequester dell,
 the wed pair of love and virtue dwell,
 unpitied by the world, unknown to fame,
 their woe, their wish, and their heart the same —
 oh there, prophetic hope! thy smile bestow,
 and chase the pang that worth shall never know —
 there, as the parent deal his scanty store
 to friendless babe, and weep to give no more;
 tell that his manly race shall yet assuage
 their father wrong, and shield his late age. 
what though for he not Hybla sweet distil,
 nor bloomy vine wave radiant on the hill;
 tell, that when silent year have pass away,
 that when his eye grow dim, his tress grey,
 these busy hand a lovely cot shall build,
 and deck with fair flower he little field;
 and call from heaven propitious dew to breathe
 arcadian beauty on the barren heath:
 tell, that while love spontaneous smile endear
 the day of peace, the sabbath of his year,
 health shall prolong to many a festive hour
 the social pleasure of his humble bower. 

lo! at the couch where infant beauty sleep,
 her silent watch the mournful mother keep;
 she, while the lovely babe unconscious lie,
 smile on her little son with pensive eye,
 and weave a song of melancholy joy —
 "sleep, image of thy father, sleep my boy:
 no linger hour of sorrow shall be thy;
 no sigh that rend thy father heart and i;
 bright as his manly sire, the son shall be
 in form and soul; but, ah! more bless than he! 
thy fame, thy worth, thy filial love at last,
 shall soothe this ache heart for all the past —
 with many a smile my solitude repay,
 and chase the world ungenerous scorn away. 

 "and say, when summon from the world and thou,
 i lay my head beneath the willow tree;
 will thou, sweet mourner! at my stone appear,
 and soothe my part spirit linger near? 
oh, will thou come! at evening hour, to shed
 the tear of memory over my narrow bed;
 with ache temple on thy hand recline,
 Muse on the last farewell i leave behind,
 breathe a deep sigh to wind that murmur low,
 and think on all my love, and all my woe?" 

so speak affection, ere the infant eye
 can look regard, or brighten in reply;
 but when the cherub lip have learn to claim
 a mother ear by that endear name;
 soon as the playful innocent can prove
 of tear of pity, or a smile of love,
 or con his murmur task beneath her care,
 or lisp with holy look his evening prayer,
 or gaze, mute pensive, sit to hear
 the mournful ballad warble in his ear;
 how fond look admire hope the while,
 at every artless tear, and every smile;
 how glow the joyous parent to descry
 a guileless bosom, true to sympathy! 

where be the trouble heart consign to share
 tumultuous toil, or solitary care,
 unblest by visionary thought that stray
 to count the joy of Fortune better day! 
lo, nature, life, and liberty relume
 the dim-eyed tenant of the dungeon gloom,
 a long lose friend, or hapless child restore,
 smile at his blaze hearth and social board;
 warm from his heart the tear of rapture flow,
 and virtue triumph over remember woe. 

chide not his peace, proud reason! nor destroy
 the shadowy form of uncreated joy,
 that urge the linger tide of life, and pour
 spontaneous slumber on his midnight hour. 

hark! the wild maniac sing to chide the gale
 that waft so slow her lover distant sail;
 she, sad spectatress, on the wintery shore
 watch the rude surge his shroudless corpse that bear,
 know the pale form, and, shreak in amaze,
 clasp her cold hand, and fix her madden gaze:
 poor widow wretch! it be there she weep in vain
 till memory flee her agonize brain; —
 but mercy give, to charm the sense of woe,
 ideal peace, that truth can never bestow: —
 warm on her heart the joy of fancy beam,
 and aimless hope delight her dark dream. 

oft when yond moon have climb the midnight sky,
 and the lone sea-bird wake its wild cry,
 pile on the steep her blaze faggot burn
 to hail the bark that never can return;
 and still she wait, but scarce forbear to weep
 that constant love can linger on the deep. 

and, mark the wretch, who wander never know
 the world regard, that soothe, though half untrue,
 who err heart the lash of sorrow bear,
 but find not pity when it err no more. 
yond friendless man, at who deject eye
 the unfeeling proud one look — and pass by,
 condemn on penury barren path to roam,
 scorn by the world, and leave without a home —
 even he, at evening, shall he chance to stray
 down by the hamlet hawthorn-scented way,
 where round the cot romantic glade, be see
 the blossom beanfield, and the slope green,
 lean over its humble gate, and think the while —
 oh! that for i some home like this will smile,
 some hamlet shade, to yield my sickly form,
 health in the breeze, and shelter in the storm;
 there shall my hand no stint boon assign
 to wretched heart with sorrow such as i; —
 that generous wish can soothe unpitied care,
 and hope half mingle with the poor man prayer. 

hope! when i mourn, with sympathize mind,
 the wrong of fate, the woe of human kind,
 thy blissful omen bid my spirit see
 the boundless field of rapture yet to be;
 i watch the wheel of nature mazy plan,
 and learn the future by the past of man. 

come, bright improvement! on the car of time,
 and rule the spacious world from clime to clime:
 thy handmaid art shall every wild explore,
 trace every wave, and culture every shore. 
on erie bank, where tiger steal along,
 and the dread indian chant a dismal song,
 where human fiend on midnight errand walk,
 and bathe in brain the murderous tomahawk;
 there shall the flock on thymy pasture stray,
 and shepherd dance at summer open day;
 each wander genius of the lonely glen
 shall start to view the glitter haunt of man;
 and silence watch, on woodland height around,
 the village curfew, as it toll profound. 

in lybian grove, where damn rite be do
 that bathe the rock in blood, and veil the sun,
 truth shall arrest the murderous arm profane,
 wild obi fly — the veil be rend in twain. 

where barbarous horde on scythian mountain roam,
 truth, mercy, freedom, yet shall find a home;
 wherever degrade nature bleed and pine,
 from guinea coast to sibir dreary mine,
 truth shall pervade the unfathomed darkness there,
 and light the dreadful feature of despair: —
 hark! the stern captive spurn his heavy load,
 and ask the image back that heaven bestow! 
fierce in his eye the fire of valour burn,
 and, as the slave depart, the man return! 

oh! sacred truth! thy triumph cease awhile,
 and hope, thy sister, cease with thou to smile,
 when league oppression pour to northern war
 her whisker pandoor and her fierce hussar,
 wave her dread standard to the breeze of morn,
 peal her loud drum, and twang her trumpet horn;
 tumultuous horror brood over her van,
 presage wrath to Poland — and to man! 

warsaw last champion from her height survey,
 wide over the field, a waste of ruin lay, —
 oh! heaven! he cry, my bleed country save! —
 be there no hand on high to shield the brave! 
yet, though destruction sweep these lovely plain,
 rise, fellow man! our country yet remain! 
by that dread name we wave the sword on high,
 and swear for she to live! — with she to die! 

he say, and, on the rampart-height, array
 his trusty warrior, few, but undismayed;
 firm-paced and slow, a horrid front they form,
 still as the breeze, but dreadful as the storm;
 low murmur sound along their banner fly,
 revenge, or death, — the watchword and reply;
 then peal the note, omnipotent to charm,
 and the loud tocsin toll their last alarm! —

in vain, alas! in vain, the gallant few! 
from rank to rank your volleyed thunder fly: —
 oh! bloody picture in the book of time,
 Sarmatia fall, unwept, without a crime;
 find not a generous friend, a pity foe! 
strength in her arm, nor mercy in her woe! 
Dropt from her nerveless grasp the shatter spere,
 close her bright eye, and curb her high career; —
 hope, for a season, bid the world farewell,
 and freedom shriek — as Kosciusko fall! 

the sun go down, nor cease the carnage there,
 tumultuous murder shake the midnight air —
 on prague proud arch the fire of ruin glow,
 his blood-died water murmur far below; —
 the storm prevail, the rampart yield a way,
 burst the wild cry of horror and dismay! 
hark! as the smoulder pile with thunder fall,
 a thousand shriek for hopeless mercy call! 
earth shake — red meteor flash along the sky,
 and conscious nature shudder at the cry! 

oh! righteous heaven! ere freedom find a grave,
 why sleep the sword, omnipotent to save? 
where be thy arm, o vengeance! where thy rod,
 that smite the foe of Zion and of god,
 that crush proud Ammon, when his iron car
 be yok in wrath, and thunder from afar? 
where be the storm that slumber till the host
 of blood-stained Pharaoh leave their tremble coast,
 then bid the deep in wild commotion flow,
 and heave a ocean on their march below? 

depart spirit of the mighty dead! 
you that at Marathon and Leuctra bleed! 
friend of the world! restore your sword to man,
 fight in his sacred cause, and lead the van! 
yet for sarmatia tear of blood atone,
 and make her arm puissant as your own: —
 oh! once again to freedom cause return
 the patriot tell — the bruce of Bannockburn! 

yes! thy proud lord, unpitied land! shall see
 that man have yet a soul — and dare be free! 
a little while, along thy sadden plain,
 the starless night of desolation reign;
 truth shall restore the light by nature give,
 and, like Prometheus, bring the fire of heaven! 
prone to the dust oppression shall be hurl,
 her name, her nature, wither from the world! 

you that the rise morn invidious mark,
 and hate the light — because your deed be dark;
 you that expand truth invidious view,
 and think, or wish the song of hope untrue;
 perhaps your little hand presume to span
 the march of genius, and the power of man;
 perhaps you watch, at pride unhallowed shrine,
 her victim, new slay, and thus divine:
 "here shall thy triumph, genius, ease, and here
 truth, science, virtue, close your short career." 

tyrant! in vain you trace the visard ring;
 in vain you limit mind unwearied spring;
 what! can you lull the wing wind asleep,
 arrest the roll world, or chain the deep? 
no: — the wild wave contemn your sceptre hand; —
 it roll not back when Canute give command! 

man! can thy doom no bright soul allow? 
still must thou live a blot on nature brow? 
shall war pollute banner never be furl? 
shall crime and tyrant cease but with the world? 
what! be thy triumph, sacred truth, belie? 
why then have Plato live — or Sydney die? 

you fond adorer of depart fame,
 who warm at scipio worth, or tully name! 
you that, in fancy vision, can admire
 the sword of Brutus, and the theban lyre! 
wrap in historic ardour, who adore
 each classic haunt and well-remembered shore,
 where valour tune, amid her choose throng,
 the thracian trumpet and the spartan song;
 or, wander thence, behold the late charm
 of England glory, and helvetia arm! 
see roman fire in hampden bosom swell,
 and fate and freedom in the shaft of tell! 
say, you fond zealot to the worth of yore,
 have valour leave the world — to live no more? 
no more shall Brutus bid a tyrant die,
 and stern smile with vengeance in his eye? 
Hampden no more, when suffer freedom call,
 encounter fate, and triumph as he fall? 
nor tell disclose, through peril and alarm,
 the might that slumber in a peasant arm? 

yes! in that generous cause, for ever strong,
 the patriot virtue and the poet song
 still, as the tide of age roll away,
 shall charm the world, unconscious of decay! 

yes! there be heart, prophetic hope may trust,
 that slumber yet in uncreated dust,
 ordain to fire the adore son of earth
 with every charm of wisdom and of worth;
 ordain to light with intellectual day,
 the mazy wheel of nature as they play,
 or warm with fancy energy, to glow,
 and rival all but Shakspeare name below! 

and say, supernal power! who deep scan
 heaven dark decree, unfathomed yet by man,
 when shall the world call down, to cleanse her shame,
 that embryo spirit, yet without a name, —
 that friend of nature, who avenge hand
 shall burst the lybian's adamantine band? 
who, stern mark on his native soil,
 the blood, the tear, the anguish, and the toil,
 shall bid each righteous heart exult to see
 peace to the slave, and vengeance on the free! 

yet, yet, degrade man! the expect day
 that break your bitter cup, be far away;
 trade, wealth, and fashion, ask you still to bleed,
 and holy man give scripture for the deed;
 scourge and debase, no briton stoop to save
 a wretch, a coward; yes, because a slave! —

eternal nature! when thy giant hand
 have heave the flood, and fix the tremble land,
 when life spring startle at thy plastic call,
 endless her form, and man the lord of all! 
say, be that lordly form inspire by thou,
 to wear eternal chain, and bow the knee? 
be man ordain the slave of man to toil,
 yok with the brute, and fetter to the soil;
 weigh in a tyrant balance with his gold? 
no! — nature stamp we in a heavenly mould! 
she bid no wretch his thankless labour urge,
 nor, tremble, take the pittance and the scourge! 
no homeless lybian, on the stormy deep,
 to call upon his country name and weep! —

lo! once in triumph, on his boundless plain,
 the quiver chief of Congo love to reign;
 with fire proportion to his native sky,
 strength in his arm, and lightning in his eye;
 scour with wild foot his sun-illumined zone,
 the spear, the lion, and the wood his own;
 or lead the combat, bold without a plan,
 a artless savage, but a fearless man! 

the plunderer come: — alas! no glory smile
 for congo chief on yonder indian isle;
 for ever fall! no son of nature now,
 with freedom charter on his manly brow! 
faint, bleed, bind, he weep the night away,
 and, when the sea-wind waft the dewless day,
 start, with a burst heart, for evermore
 to curse the sun that light their guilty shore! 

the shrill horn blow; at that alarm knell
 his guardian angel take a last farewell! 
that funeral dirge to darkness have resign
 the fiery grandeur of a generous mind! —
 poor fetter man! i hear thou whisper low
 unhallowed vow to guilt, the child of woe! 
friendless thy heart; and, can thou harbour there
 a wish but death — a passion but despair? 

the widow indian, when her lord expire,
 mount the dread pile, and brave the funeral fire! 
so fall the heart at thraldom bitter sigh! 
so virtue die, the spouse of liberty! 

but not to lybia barren clime alone,
 to chili, or the wild siberian zone,
 belong the wretched heart and haggard eye,
 degrade worth, and poor misfortune sigh! —
 you orient realm, where ganges water run! 
prolific field! dominion of the sun! 
how long your tribe have tremble and obey! 
how long be timur iron sceptre sway! 
who marshale host, the lion of the plain,
 from scythia northern mountain to the main,
 rage over your plunder shrine and alter bare,
 with blaze torch and gory scymitar, —
 stun with the cry of death each gentle gale,
 and bathe in blood the verdure of the vale! 
yet can no pang the immortal spirit tame,
 when brama child perish for his name;
 the martyr smile beneath avenge power,
 and brave the tyrant in his torture hour! 

when Europe seek your subject realm to gain,
 and stretch her giant sceptre over the main,
 teach her proud bark their wind way to shape,
 and brave the stormy spirit of the cape;
 child of brama! then be mercy nigh
 to wash the stain of blood eternal dye? 
do peace descend, to triumph and to save,
 when free-born briton cross the indian wave? 
ah, no! to more than Rome ambition true,
 the nurse of freedom give it not to you! 
she the bold route of europe guilt begin,
 and, in the march of nation, lead the van! 

rich in the gem of india gaudy zone,
 and plunder pile from kingdom not their own,
 degenerate trade! thy minion can despise
 the heart-born anguish of a thousand cry;
 can lock, with impious hand, their teem store,
 while furnish nation die along the shore;
 can mock the groan of fellow man, and bear,
 the curse of kingdom people with despair;
 can stamp disgrace on nature hollow name,
 and barter, with their gold, eternal shame! 

but, hark! as bow to earth the bramin kneel,
 from heavenly clime propitious thunder peal! 
of india fate her guardian spirit tell,
 prophetic murmur breathe on the shell,
 and solemn sound, that awe the listen mind,
 roll on the azure path of every wind. 

 "foe of mankind! (her guardian spirit say),
 revolve age bring the bitter day,
 when heaven unerring arm shall fall on you,
 and blood for blood these indian plain bedew;
 nine time have brama wheel of lightning hurl
 his awful presence over the prostrate world;
 nine time have guilt, through all his giant frame,
 convulsive tremble, as the mighty come;
 nine time have suffering mercy spare in vain —
 but heaven shall burst her starry gate again! 
he come! dread brama shake the sunless sky
 with murmur wrath, and thunder from on high! 
heaven fiery horse, beneath his warrior form,
 paw the light cloud, and gallop on the storm! 
wide wave his flicker sword, his bright arm glow
 like summer sun, and light the world below! 
earth, and her tremble isle in ocean bed
 be shake; and nature rock beneath his tread! 

to pour redress on india injure realm
 the oppressor to dethrone, the proud to whelm;
 to chase destruction from her plunder shore
 with art and arm that triumph once before,
 the tenth Avater come! at heaven command
 shall Seriswattee wave her hallow wand! 
and Camdeo bright, and Ganesa sublime,
 shall bless with joy their own propitious clime! —
 come, heavenly power! primeval peace restore! 
love! — mercy! — wisdom! — rule for evermore! 

the pleasure of hope. part second.

pleasure of hope. 

part ii.

in joyous youth, what soul have never know
 thought, feeling, taste, harmonious to its own? 
who have not pause, while beauty pensive eye
 ask from his heart the homage of a sigh? 
who have not own, with rapture-smitten frame,
 the power of grace, the magic of a name! 

there be, perhaps, who barren heart avow,
 cold as the rock on torneo hoary brow;
 there be, who loveless wisdom never fail,
 in self-adoring pride secure mail; —
 but, triumph not, you peace-enamoured few! 
fire, nature, genius, never dwell with you! 
for you no fancy consecrate the scene
 where rapture utter vow, and weep between;
 it be you, unmoved, to sever and to meet;
 no pledge be sacred, and not home be sweet! 

who that will ask a heart to dullness wed,
 the waveless calm, the slumber of the dead? 
no; the wild bliss of nature need alloy,
 and fear and sorrow fan the fire of joy! 
and say, without our hope, without our fear,
 without the home that plight love endear,
 without the smile from partial beauty win,
 oh! what be man? — a world without a sun! 

till HYMEN bring his love-delighted hour,
 there dwell no joy in eden rosy bower! 
in vain the viewless seraph linger there,
 at starry midnight, charm the silent air;
 in vain the wild-bird carol on the steep,
 to hail the sun, slow-wheeling from the deep;
 in vain, to sooth the solitary shade,
 aerial note in mingle measure play;
 the summer wind that shake the spangle tree,
 the whisper wave, the murmur of the bee —
 still slow pass the melancholy day,
 and still the stanger wist not where to stray, —
 the world be sad! — the garden be a wild! —
 and man, the hermit, sigh — till woman smile! 

true! the sad power to generous heart may bring
 delirious anguish on his fiery wing! 
bar from delight by fate untimely hand,
 by wealthless lot, or pitiless command;
 or doom to gaze on beauty that adorn
 the smile of triumph, or the frown of scorn;
 while memory watch over the sad review
 of joy that fade like the morning dew;
 peace may depart — and life and nature seem
 a barren path — a wildness, and a dream! 

but, can the noble mind for ever brood,
 the will victim of a weary mood,
 on heartless care that squander life away,
 and cloud young genius brighten into day! —
 shame to the coward think that ever betray
 the noon of manhood to a myrtle shade! —
 if hope creative spirit can raise
 one trophy sacred to thy future day,
 scorn the dull crowd that haunt the gloomy shrine
 of hopeless love, to murmur and repine! 
but, shall a sigh of mild mood express
 thy heart-warm wish true to happiness,
 shall heaven fair harbinger delight to pour
 her blissful vision on thy pensive hour,
 no tear to blot thy memory be picture page,
 no fear but such as fancy can assuage;
 though thy wild heart some hapless hour may miss
 the peaceful tenor of unvaried bliss,
 (for love pursue a ever devious race,
 true to the wind lineament of grace);
 yet still may hope her talisman employ
 to snatch from heaven anticipate joy,
 and all her kindred energy impart
 that burn the bright in the pure heart! 
when first the rhodian mimic be array
 the queen of beauty in her cyprian shade,
 the happy master mingle on his piece
 each look that charm he in the fair of Greece;
 to faultless nature true, he steal a grace
 from every fine form and sweet face;
 and, as he sojourn on the aegean isle,
 woo all their love, and treasure all their smile;
 then glow the tint, pure, precious, and refine,
 and mortal charm seem heavenly when combine! 
love on the picture smile! expression pour
 her mingle spirit there — and Greece adore! 

so thy fair hand, enamour fancy! glean
 the treasure picture of a thousand scene! 
thy pencil trace on the lover thought
 some cottage-home, from town and toil remote,
 where love and lore may claim alternate hour,
 with peace embosom in idalian bower! 
remote from busy life bewilder way,
 over all his heart shall taste and beauty sway! 
free on the sunny slope, or wind shore,
 with hermit step to wander and adore! 
there shall he love, when genial morn appear,
 like pensive beauty smile in her tear,
 to watch the brighten rose of the sky,
 and muse on nature with a poet eye! —
 and, when the sun last splendour light the deep,
 the wood, and wave, and murmur wind asleep;
 when fairy harp the hesperian planet hail,
 and the lone cuckoo sigh along the vale,
 his path shall be where streamy mountain swell
 their shadowy grandeur over the narrow dell,
 where moulder pile and forest intervene,
 mingle with dark tint the live green;
 no circle hill his ravish eye to bound,
 heaven, earth, and ocean, blaze all around! 

the moon be up — the watch-tower dim burn —
 and down the vale his sober step return;
 but pause oft, as wind rock convey
 the still sweet fall of music far away;
 and oft he linger from his home awhile
 to watch the die note! — and start, and smile! 

let winter come! let polar spirit sweep
 the darken world, and tempest-troubled deep! 
though boundless snow the wither heath deform,
 and the dim sun scarce wander through the storm;
 yet shall the smile of social love repay,
 with mental light, the melancholy day! 
and, when its short and sullen noon be over,
 the ice-chained water slumber on the shore,
 how bright the faggot in his little hall
 blaze on the hearth, and warm the picture wall! 

how bless he name, in love familiar tone,
 the kind fair friend, by nature mark his own;
 and, in the waveless mirror of his mind,
 view the fleet year of pleasure leave behind,
 since anna empire over his heart begin! 
since first he call she his before the holy man! 

trim the gay taper in his rustic dome,
 and light the wintery paradise of home;
 and let the half-uncurtained window hail
 some way-worn man benight in the vale! 
now, while the moan night-wind rage high,
 as sweep the shot-star down the trouble sky,
 while fiery host in heaven wide circle play,
 and bathe in livid light the milky way,
 safe from the storm, the meteor, and the shower,
 some please page shall charm the solemn hour —
 with pathos shall command, with wit beguile,
 a generous tear of anguish, or a smile —
 thy woe, Arion! and thy simple tale,
 over all the heart shall triumph and prevail! 
charm as they read the verse too sad true,
 how gallant Albert, and his weary crew,
 heave all their gun, their founder bark to save,
 and toil — and shriek — and perish on the wave! 

yes, at the dead of night, by lonna's steep,
 the seaman cry be hear along the deep:
 there, on his funeral water dark and wild,
 the die father bless his darling child! 
oh! mercy, shield her innocence, he cry,
 spend on the prayer his burst heart, and die! 

or will they learn how generous worth sublime
 the robber moor, and plead for all his crime! 
how poor Amelia kiss, with many a tear
 his hand, bloodstained, but ever ever dear! 
hang on the torture bosom of her lord,
 and weep, and pray perdition from his sword! 
nor seek in vain! at that heart-piercing cry
 the string of nature crack with agony! 
he, with delirious laugh, the dagger hurl,
 and burst the tie that bind he to the world! 

turn from his die word, that smite with steel,
 the shudder thought, or wind they on the wheel —
 turn to the gentle melody that suit
 thalia harp, or pan arcadian lute;
 or, down the stream of truth be historic page,
 from clime to clime descend, from age to age! 
yet there, perhaps, may dark scene obtrude
 than fancy fashion in her wild mood;
 there shall he pause, with horrent brow, to rate
 what million die — that Caesar may be great! 
or learn the fate that bleed thousand boar,
 march by their Charles to dneiper swampy shore,
 faint in his wound, and shiver in the blast,
 the swedish soldier sink — and groan his last! 
file after file, the stormy shower benumb,
 freeze every standard-sheet, and hush the drum! 
horseman and horse confess the bitter pang,
 and arm and warrior fall with hollow clang! 
yet, ere he sink in nature last repose,
 ere life warm torrent to the fountain freeze,
 the die man to Sweden turn his eye,
 thought of his home, and close it with a sigh! 
imperial pride look sullen on his plight,
 and Charles behold — nor shudder at the sight! 

oh! vain wise, the moral muse have sing
 that suasive hope have but a siren tongue! 
true; she may sport with life untutored day,
 nor heed the solace of its last decay,
 the guileless heart her happy mansion spurn,
 and part like ajut — never to return! 

but yet, methinks, when wisdom shall assuage
 the grief and passion of our green age,
 though dull the close of life, and far away
 each flower that hail the dawn of the day;
 yet over her lovely hope, that once be dear,
 the time-taught spirit, pensive, not severe,
 with mild grief her age eye shall fill,
 and weep their falsehood, though she love they still! 

thus, with forgive tear, and reconcile,
 the king of Judah mourn his rebel child! 
muse on day when yet the guiltless boy
 smile on his sire and fill his heart with joy! 
my Absalom! the voice of nature cry! 
oh! that for thou thy father can have die! 
for bloody be the deed, and rash do,
 that slay my Absalom! — my son! — my son! 

unfading hope! when life be last ember burn,
 when soul to soul, and dust to dust return! 
heaven to thy charge resign the awful hour! 
oh! then, thy kingdom come! immortal power! 
what though each spark of earth-born rapture fly
 the quiver lip, pale cheek, and close eye! 
bright to the soul thy seraph hand convey
 the morning dream of life eternal day —
 then, then, the triumph and the trance begin! 
and all the phoenix spirit burn within! 
cease, every joy, to glimmer on my mind,
 but leave — oh! leave — the light of hope behind! 
what though my wing hour of bliss have be,
 like angel visit, few and far between;
 her muse mood shall every pang appease,
 and charm — when pleasure loose the power to please! 

yes! let each rapture, dear to nature, flee;
 close not the light of Fortune stormy sea —
 mirth, music, friendship, love propitious smile,
 chase every care, and charm a little while,
 ecstatic throb the flutter heart employ,
 and all her string be harmonise to joy! —
 but why so short be love delight hour? 
why fade the dew on beauty sweet flower? 
why can not hymn charm of music heal
 the sleepless woe impassion spirit feel? 
can fancy fairy hand no veil create,
 to hide the sad reality of fate? —

no! not the quaint remark, the sapient rule,
 nor all the pride of wisdom worldly school,
 have power to sooth, unaided and alone,
 the heart that vibrate to a feeling tone! 
when step-dame nature every bliss recall,
 fleet as the meteor over the desert fall;
 when, rest of all, yond widow sire appear
 a lonely hermit in the vale of year;
 say, can the world one joyous thought bestow
 to friendship, weep at the couch of woe? 
no! but a bright soothe the last adieu, —
 soul of impassion mould, she speak to you! 
weep not, she say, at nature transient pain,
 congenial spirit part to meet again! —

what plaintive sob thy filial bosom draw,
 what sorrow choke thy long and last adieu! 
daughter of Conrad! when he hear his knell,
 and bid his country and his child farewell! 
doom the lone isle of Sydney cove to see,
 the martyr of his crime, but true to thou. 
thrice the sad father tear thou from his heart,
 and thrice return to bless thou, and to part;
 thrice from his tremble lip he murmur low
 the plaint that own unutterable woe;
 till faith, prevail over his sullen doom,
 as burst the morn on night unfathomed gloom,
 lure his dim eye to deathless hope sublime,
 beyond the realm of nature and of time! 

 "and weep not thus," he cry, "young Ellenor,
 my bosom bleed, but soon shall bleed no more! 
short shall this half-extinguished spirit burn,
 and soon these limb to kindred dust return! 
but not, my child! with life precarious fire,
 the immortal tie of nature shall expire;
 these shall resist the triumph of decay,
 when time be over, and world have pass away,
 cold in the dust this perish heart may lie,
 but that which warm it once shall never die! 
that spark unburied in its mortal frame,
 with live light, eternal, and the same,
 shall beam on joy interminable year,
 unveil by darkness — unassuaged by tear! 

 "yet, on the barren shore and stormy deep,
 one tedious watch be Conrad doom to weep;
 but when i gain the home without a friend,
 and press the uneasy couch where none attend,
 this last embrace, still cherish in my heart,
 shall calm the struggle spirit ere it part! 
thy darling form shall seem to hover nigh
 and hush the groan of life last agony! 

 "farewell! when stranger lift thy father bier,
 and place my nameless stone without a tear;
 when each return pledge have tell my child
 that conrad tomb be on the desert pile;
 and when the dream of trouble fancy see
 its lonely rank-grass wave in the breeze;
 who then will soothe thy grief, when mine be over? 
who will protect thou, helpless Ellenor? 
shall secret scene thy filial sorrow hide,
 scorn by the world, to factious guilt ally! 
ah! no! methinks the generous and the good
 will woo thou from the shade of solitude! 
over friendless grief compassion shall awake,
 and smile on innocence, for mercy sake!" 

inspire thought of rapture yet to be,
 the tear of love be hopeless but for thou! 
if in that frame no deathless spirit dwell,
 if that faint murmur be the last farewell;
 if fate unite the faithful but to part,
 why be their memory sacred to the heart? 
why do the brother of my childhood seem
 restore awhile in every please dream? 
why do i joy the lonely spot to view,
 by artless friendship bless when life be new? 

eternal hope! when yonder sphere sublime
 peal their first note to sound the march of time! 
thy joyous youth begin — but not to fade. —
 when all the sister planet have decay;
 when wrap in fire the realm of either glow,
 and heaven last thunder shake the world below;
 thou, undismayed, shall over the ruin smile,
 and light thy torch at nature funeral pile! 

note on part i 

note on part ii.

moor.

the robber.

moor.

AMELIA.

