[nereid:] eclogue vi.

Lyc.  

Anthis and cete comb their flow hair,
 and tune to please sound the tremble air,
 while hoary Phorcys sit on float weed,
 and slow drive unwilling herd to feed. 
attend, you fish, and all around i throng,
 while i repeat the nymph alternate song. 

Ant.  

think, how to day a gentle western breeze
 with please gale dance on the circle sea,
 it sweep the calm surface of the main,
 and smooth the water to a smile plain;
 but now diffusive sweet from spicy hill
 be bear on eastern wind, and waft their blend smell. 
the dolphin lash the wave with bend tail,
 and every ship with speedy current sail. 
since nothing here we fix or constant find,
 why shall the nereid boast a settle mind? 

the restless fish who leave the open sea,
 and swim to every creek, and wind bay,
 to th'ocean now in shoal return again,
 while empty net deceive the fish Swain. 
now shorten day be grieve by northern isle,
 while from increase cold, and snowy wild
 the starve bird in numerous flock repair
 to happy climate, and to warm air. 
since nothing here we fix or constant find,
 why shall the nereid boast a settle mind? 

though late the tide have threaten all the coast,
 now, since the wane moon her strength have lose,
 they own their weakness, and be hear no more,
 but creep hardly cover half the shore:
 when she direct, the swell flood increase,
 and sound water raise the trouble sea;
 but when she horn frown, the tumult cease,
 the wave be still, and hush in sullen peace. 
since nothing here we fix or constant find,
 why shall the nereid boast a settle mind? 

the conscious fish the heavenly motion feel,
 and thus confine within his native shell,
 all dry and lean the mournful oyster lie,
 (and fisher then the tasteless prey despise)
 but when the moon look down all over bright,
 they juicy grow, nourish with heavenly light. 
since nothing here we fix or constant find,
 why shall the nereid boast a settle mind? 

Calthinoe love a triton-youth, and swear
 her heart (thus fix by he) shall rove no more
 but when repeat love begin to cloy,
 the wise nymph embrace a kind boy. 

Lyc.  

thus Anthis sing, and cete thus reply,
 while angry wind oppose the rise tide. 

cete. 

resistless charm be in a lovely face,
 but spotless vertue have a noble grace. 
Alcon do never yet inconstant rove,
 or break repeat vow, or change his love. 
careful he shun the Streights, and narrow sea,
 where alter scene the fickle mer-man please. 
for all be restless, and unsettled there;
 the wave, and wind alike inconstant be. 
but the unfathomed deep be still the same,
 and always smile with a easy calm. 
the water here a constant peace maintain,
 and in soft murmur love complain. 
the wind themselves be not uncertain here,
 but their fix season know, each circle year. 
from east the summer trade-wind never fail
 to sweep the ocean with a fresh gale. 
such be his love; no change it undergo,
 by reason fix, and no repentance know. 

Lyc.  

thus say the nymph; and now the day retire,
 while sparkle wave appear like kindle fire. 
the distant rock shine with deceitful light,
 and thus increase the terror of the night. 
