the pin.

by mr. woty. 

for once, you critic, let the sportive muse
 her fool cap wear, spite of the shake head
 of stern-eyed gravity — for, though the muse
 to frolic be dispose, no song she chant
 immoral; nor one picture will she hold,
 but virtue may approve it with a smile. 
you sylvan deity! awhile adieu! 
you curl stream! who bank be fringe with flower,
 violet and harebell, or the king-cup bright,
 farewell! for i must leave your rich perfume
 to sing the pin in ever sound lay:
 but not that pin, at who circumference
 rotund, the strong-nerved rustic hurl the bowl
 ponderous and vast: nor that which window bar
 from thief nocturnal: nor that other call
 a skittle; chief find where ale-house snug
 invite mechanic to the flow cup
 of calvert mild, over-canopy with froth. 
no — it be the pin so much by lady use;
 without who aid the nymph of nice taste,
 of neat mould, a slattern will appear. 
hail then, thou little useful instrument! 
though small, yet consequential. for by thou
 beauty set off her charm, as at the glass
 Lucy, or Phillis, best adapt thy point. 
without thy service will the ribbon flaunt
 loose to the fan gale, nor on the head
 of belle will stand her whimsical attire. 
the kerchief from her neck of snow will fall
 with freedom bold, and leave her bosom bare. 
how will the sempstress trim thy want regret
 as she she apron form! and how the man
 of law, sagacious, with his spectacle
 on nose revert! frequent do he want
 thy prompt assistance, to connect his scrap
 and note obliterate over. thou oft
 in alley, path, wide square, and open street,
 the miser pick, as conscious of thy use;
 with frugal hand, accompany with brow
 of corrugate bent, he stick thou safe,
 interior on his coat; then creep along,
 well judge thy proportion to a groat. 
through all thy different storehouse to trace
 thy presence, either in the sculpture dome,
 or tenement clay-built, will ask a pen
 with point almost as various as thy head. 
whereve thou be, or in whatever form,
 magnificent in silver, or in brass,
 or wire more humble, nightly may thou lie
 safe on thy cushion bed, or kiss the lock
 of Chloe, sleep on the pillow down. 
