the goldfinch.

a elegy.

by mr. Jago.

to you, who grove protect the feather quire,
who lend their artless note a will ear,
to you, who pity move, and taste inspire,
the doric strain belong; o Shenstone, hear.

it be gentle spring, when all the tuneful race,
by nature teach, in nuptial league combine:
a goldfinch joy to meet the warm embrace,
and heart and fortune with her mate to join.

through nature spacious walk at large they range,
no settle haunt, no fix abode their aim;
as chance or fancy lead, their path they change,
themselves in every vary scene, the same.

till on a day to weighty care resign,
with mutual choice, alternate, they agree,
on ramble thought no more to turn their mind,
but settle sober, and raise a breed.

all in a garden, on a currantbush,
with wondrous art they build their wave seat:
in the next orchat live a friendly thrush,
nor distant far, a woodlark soft retreat.

here bless with ease, and in each other bless,
with early song they wake the sprightly grove,
until time mature their bliss, and crown their nest
with infant pledge of their faithful love.

and now what transport glow in either eye!
what equal fondness deal the allot food!
what joy each other likeness to descry,
and future sonnet in the chirp brood!

but ah! what earthly happiness can last?
how do the fair purpose often fail?
a truant-school-boy wantonness can blast
their rise hope, and leave they both to wail.

the most ungentle of his tribe be he;
no generous precept ever touch his heart:
with concord false, and hideous prosody
he scrawl his task, and blunder over his part.

on barbarous plunder bend, with savage eye
he mark where wrap in down the youngling lie,
then rush seize the wretched family,
and bear they in his impious hand away.

but how shall i relate in number rude
the pang for poor chrysomitris decree!
when from a neighbour spray aghast she view
the savage ruffian inauspicious deed!

so wrap in grief some heartstruck matron stand,
while horrid flame surround her child room!
on heaven she call, and wring her tremble hand,
constrain to see, but not prevent their doom.

"o grief of grief! with shriek voice she cry,
"what sight be this that i have live to see?
"o! that i have a maiden-goldfinch die,
"from love false joy, and bitter sorrow free!

"be it for this, alas! with weary bill,
"be it for this, i poise the unwieldy straw?
"for this i pick the moss from yonder hill?
"nor shun the ponderous chat along to draw?

"be it for this, i cull the wool with care;
"and strive with all my skill our work to crown?
"for this, with pain i bend the stubborn hair;
"and line our cradle with the thistle down?

"be it for this my freedom i resign;
"and cease to rove from beauteous plain to plain?
"for this i sit at home whole day confine,
"and bore the scorch heat, and peal rain?

"be it for this, my watchful eye grow dim?
"the crimson rose on my cheek turn pale?
pale be my golden plumage, once so trim;
"and all my wonted spirit begin to fail.

o plunderer vile! o more than weezel fall!
"more treacherous than the cat with prudish face!
"more fierce than kite with who the fury dwell!
"more pilfer than the cuckoo prowl race!

"for thou may plumb or goosb'ry never grow,
"no juicy currant cool thy clammy throat:
"but bloody birch-twig work thou shameful woe,
"nor ever goldfinch cheer thou with her note. "

thus sing the mournful bird her piteous tale,
the piteous tale her mournful mate return:
then side by side they seek the distant vale,
and there in silent sadness inly mourn.
