violenta from boccace

begin my muse, the wondrous tale rehearse,
 the various turn of virtue in distress. 
how fate control the council of the wise,
 how often hide in beauty fair disguise,
 foul deceit and treacherous falsehood lie. 
how virtue break the darken cloud away,
 and from misfortune night arise gay,
 give double lustre to the glorious day. 
here may the old a mighty pattern find,
 and view the trial of the noble mind;
 soft love to please the cheerful happy young,
 with strange adventure fill the historic song. 
it be in those warlike day, when grow France
 will with extend power her realm advance:
 the sturdy german, late the roman pride,
 still struggle hard, still push and gore her side;
 vast troop they raise, the king and prince their head,
 fill with their youth, and by their hero lead;
 this do, there follow and important care,
 who they shall trust, their great vicegerent here. 
the Dauphin to his father recommend
 one of his dear, most deserve friend,
 the count of angiers, then in high renown,
 fit to guard and fill the empty throne. 
the choice with universal joy approve,
 never be man like noble angiers love. 
against his will the mourner draw to court,
 who have forsake the world and all resort;
 to the dark groves and silent cave be flee
 to weep in vain, his dear Maria dead;
 for tyrant death have snatch a faithful wife,
 and with her all the joy of hapless angiers life;
 the world to he have now no please charm,
 nor wake he with the once love sound of arm:
 thus live the count to eat grief a prey,
 until by his master voice he be force away,
 he hear, and know he must the king obey. 
he come, and soon the mighty charge receive,
 and for his trust his faith and honour give;
 and now the Dauphin ready to depart,
 press his faithful angiers to his heart:
 Oh! thou my dear and long try friend he say! 
and on his bosom kind lean his head,
 to thou my father leave his kingdom care,
 no subject boast of power a large share:
 the trust be weighty, and the trouble great,
 to rule this potent land and popular state;
 yet my best friend there be more business yet. 

i must engage thy most peculiar care,
 to guard and please that bright illustrious fair,
 my charm wife, who far fame beauty may,
 while i to distant camp be call away,
 by some ill fate, my peace at home betray. 
watch that Cleora undisturbed may rest,
 in serve she thou gain thy master breast:
 this say, he clasp he fast, nor stay reply,
 but cry, i read thy answer in thy eye. 
quick to his warlike troop he take his way,
 who youthful heat can brook no long stay. 
angiers be leave the sole commander now,
 to he the officious courtier crowd and bow;
 he look as bear to the honour of his place,
 his noble soul enrich with every grace,
 shine with majestic sweetness in his face. 
just ripen full from youth delightful bloom,
 enough to promise happy year to come;
 with most judicious policy he reign,
 support the good, the bad his power restrain;
 remember well his master last command,
 he sign all order with cleora hand. 
Cleora bright as the approach day,
 when fair Aurora do her beam display
 and gild the mountain with her bloom ray. 
in her ten thousand grace revel meet,
 the blow rose not half so lovely sweet:
 she look as if her eye command fate,
 form equal to her great imperial state,
 yet on her soul a yield softness sit;
 and noble angiers be her chief care,
 on he she smile with a familiar air;
 try every way that may his grief redress,
 oblige the count (and make that passion less)
 with all delight that prudence can afford,
 or palace yield in the absence of its lord. 
sometime with rural sport they will chase the hind,
 who nimble foot seem to outstrip the wind;
 then dance, ball, and masquerade and play,
 with these they waste the night and cheerful day;
 with these delight Cleora kind strive
 to drive from angiers breast all former love;
 abroad they prosper, courier daily bring
 news of success both by the prince and king. 
now in the height of bliss, just angiers stand
 supreme great, and more supreme good:
 yet short the joy which humane soul allure,
 nor can we make our happiness secure;
 vain man as well on sand may structure lay,
 as hope to fix his fate in moulder clay;
 a thousand accident frail life attend,
 and mortal only know that life must end;
 our path seem hide in the dark book of fate,
 the doom once past, precaution come too late;
 so luckless angiers, thoughtful bold and wise,
 esteem his court another paradise;
 yet to his cost, the noble hero find
 ten thousand snake beneath the enamel ground:
 have he foresee his fate, though but in dream,
 he must have die at terror of the scene,
 which thus begin; Cleora order send
 to the count her councillor, and best of friend,
 to her apartment he must straight repair,
 for business of importance wait he there. 
with have, and loyal zeal, the victim come,
 dress like love goddess be the princely dame,
 her eye have equal brightness, equal flame;
 her mantle azure, fill with star of gold,
 and shine jem adorn each curious fold;
 careless throw, scarce cover half her breast;
 but to the wonder eye expose the rest:
 choice garland crown her lovely flow hair,
 yet seem to lose their lustre plant there,
 the rose not half so fresh, the Lilly half so fair. 
supine on a glorious couch she lie
 as she will rival the bright lamp of day;
 her head she lean upon her snowy hand,
 while angiers kneel to hear her dread command;
 the bright attend nymph that round she wait,
 retire, not pry into affair of state:
 when thus the charm princess silence break,
 and with a smile to faithful angiers speak,
 arise my noble lord, and seat you there,
 for i have much to say, and you must hear;
 you once do feel great love tyrannic reign,
 and sure must kind sigh when i complain;
 the Dauphin write, the war will take much time,
 and i neglect leaf in beauty prime,
 hard fate! a sacrifice to public voice,
 i never know the privilege of choice;
 when in my father court, the wonder croud
 still gaze, and poet sing my praise loud;
 they hail my youth, and wish i all delight,
 but i be condemn to care, and widow night:
 the sad reverse of all their blessing prove,
 and must conclude the Dauphin do not love. 
the flatter world, and each reflect glass,
 own matchless glory in this injure face;
 forgive i if i break our sex law,
 when wrong, we may assert our right, our cause. 
speak angiers, be i circle in thy arm,
 will thou for camp forsake love soft charm? 
up to her cheek a conscious blush straight fly,
 and thousand cupid reveal in her eye. 

angiers arise, with reverence profound
 begin, nor raise his fix eye from the ground:
 most divine princess, you may rest assure,
 you be the treasure of your absent lord;
 by glory tear from love delightful chain,
 yet in his heart alone Cleora reign:
 Oh! have you hear the tender charge he give
 of you (his life reward) to i his slave,
 you never can his constancy suspect,
 but call that violence which now you term neglect. 

scarce can the fair her soft confusion hide,
 and half compose, she blush thus reply,
 to angiers then do he cleora leave? 
for that one act i all his fault forgive. 
to angiers free i my self resign,
 too sure i be his, heaven make the hero mine:
 what rack fire be these that fill my breast,
 my soul distract, and rob my eye of rest! 
Oh! turn not from i, since too much I have say,
 and the soft secret of my soul betray:
 if i be refuse, death be the punishment. 
but love and pleasure wait on kind consent. 

down at her foot the tremble angiers fall,
 his terror and surprise no tongue can tell
 his falter, not know which way to begin,
 the princess he revere, abhor the sin:
 it be a hard task superior to reprove,
 and mighty vertue to resist such love;
 amaze, he speak in the mild phrase he can,
 instruct the charm princess to be good. 
then cry, what frenzy this that dare controul
 the noble greatness of cleora soul? 
you be bear supreme, your lot be pair above:
 bound by fate from a inferior love. 
the Dauphin, first of man, already you,
 by right divine his lawful claim secure:
 i own you beauteous as the bloom may,
 fair as the first, ever nature know decay;
 still in your look you wear all conquer charm,
 but these be destine for my master arm;
 i will give my body to consume flame,
 leave any other blot upon my name,
 ever wrong, in you, that royal master fame. 

she rise with fury, and will hear no more;
 disdain now work her boil spirit over,
 those eye shoot fire, that languish love before. 
she start, then pause, and with a scornful smile,
 foretell the mischief and intend guile. 
the count who know no ill, suspect none;
 blush for her shame, and wish himself alone. 

when straight she throw her mantle on the ground,
 her garland tear, her curl hair unbind;
 then seize angiers, with a scream of woe,
 cry murder, villain, traitor, let i go. 
the voice of terror through the palace fly,
 follow still with loud incessant cry;
 help all, oh help, or lose Cleora die. 
all have, and swift as think the apartment fill,
 where on the Flore the princess they behold;
 the injure earl confuse and pale they view,
 this turn rob he of speech and reason too. 
when false Cleora rear her weep face,
 and beauty give to sorrow double grace,
 look on the base perfidious man she say,
 by who the Dauphin and you be all betray;
 trust his faith, i charge he to declare
 the affair of state, and business of the war,
 the conference strict secrecy require,
 my wait servant by command retire;
 but ever he half the dauphin will declare,
 seize on my hand, around like madness stare,
 and cry, the regent princess now be i,
 she shall her honour or her life resign:
 for i be wild with love ungoverned rage,
 possession only can my flame assuage. 
with the surprise i scarce can raise my breath
 to call your aid which have secure from death. 
who can suppose the raise of the dead
 may see the amazement that each face overspread;
 none but the wicked this sad tale do please,
 nor dare his enemy his person seize. 
alone, disgrace he to his palace go,
 and there reflect on his malicious foe,
 think on the weight of his pretend crime,
 resolve to fly his come fate betimes:
 for if he shall declare his innocence,
 and on the princess cast the black offence,
 the laurel which the prince abroad do gain,
 will wither all at the unhappy stain;
 resolve alone the rigorous fate to bear,
 and own the guilt rather than lay on she. 
his speedy flight be straight condemn by fame,
 and all ill tongue be busy with his name;
 he take two tender pledge wedlock give,
 the only treasure he have power to save:
 with he ernesto fly, faithful and just,
 who long have serve, and never betray his trust:
 thus the great man, who that same rise morn
 see dress in honour that such trust adorn,
 with crowd levee, and a wait train,
 all the gay pomp that can observance gain;
 now strip, forsake, bare, disgrace and lose,
 wander to find some hospitable coast;
 and as he travel towards the distant sea,
 a dreadful light direct his doubtful way;
 he view his castle blaze in one flame;
 the fierce revenge of that inveterate dame;
 unmoved, he see the structure tumble down;
 and cry, thou can not bury my renown:
 in time perhaps my truth may come to light,
 my fame outshine those tower that blaze so bright,
 and the mistaken world, though late, may see
 a conspicuous virtue in unhappy i. 

now in a cell they snatch a short repose;
 soon as the sun the wakeful angiers rise,
 his courage yet unshocked by adverse fate,
 his noble suffer show he true great. 
but oh! when he behold his little pair,
 the mother darling, and the father care,
 in vain upon their nurse and servant call,
 the flood so long restrain, in torrent fall;
 at their sad want he can no more forbear,
 indulge his grief with many a pity fear;
 the tender charge, who thus awake his care,
 a little son, and lovely daughter be,
 both beauteous seem, as form by hand divine,
 the parent grace in the infant shine;
 Lewis the son, a charm sprightly boy,
 the first dear fruit of angiers nuptial joy;
 his other hope, his darling daughter name
 be violent, sacred still to fame:
 the helpless infant, the wrong angiers view,
 their woe, the dear Maria lose renew. 
dash by despair, and grovel on the earth,
 curse the malignant star that rule his birth,
 like some sad wretch, long struggle for the shore,
 he sink and give his hopeless labour over,
 until old ernesto urge he to remove,
 by that fond care and that pater'nal love. 
if you neglect your princess wrath to fly,
 then next prepare to see your child die;
 revenge will touch you in the tender part,
 her rage will wound, through they, your manly heart:
 he find it be vain to make a useless moan,
 the father and the unhappy babe must on. 

at length they calice reach, and there they find
 a passage ship for neighbour England bind;
 he get a humble weed, and poor disguise,
 besmear his face, and vail his noble eye
 to shun the swift pursuit of eager enemy. 
embark, he turn towards his native land,
 though injure much, he sigh to leave the strand;
 and soft murmur over his rige fate,
 undo by love, far worse than mortal hate;
 yet still he bid the listen wind forbear,
 nor waft the story to the dauphin ear;
 for his sweet peace he barter all his own,
 neglect the fame which do his action crown;
 wife error on the husband head remain,
 to keep the Dauphin clear he bear himself the stain. 
Cleora! can thou have a peaceful thought,
 who lawless fire this mighty ruin bring? 
poor angiers still pursue by his ill fate,
 as if the wind join with cleora hate;
 adverse they toss the vessel on the sea,
 like his tempestuous mind, no calm, no ease;
 these toil to old ernesto be unknown,
 a gentle servitude his year do crown;
 unable now, in his decline age,
 to act a long part on this rough stage,
 pale death, the last retreat, and sure relief,
 come to his aid, and end his life and grief:
 the gash tyrant he seem joy to meet,
 and sink beneath his trouble master foot:
 there be no need of this; grieve angiers say,
 will heaven still pursue the wretch it make? 
why be this add to my misery,
 that thou my poor ernesto too must die? 
now of a sudden all the sea grow calm,
 as if his grief have hush the rage storm;
 at length the fair white chalky cliff they spy,
 a joyful sight to every sailor eye;
 only the earl who know not where to go,
 alone expect variety of woe:
 the traveller will fain his sorrow cheer,
 inquire his name, what course he mean to steer? 
he answer with a sigh, i can stray:
 the wretched never fear to lose their way. 
in the same ship, a venerable man
 well mark the count, and then with tear begin,
 whoever thou be, say he, within thy face,
 be write unspotted truth, and matchless grace,
 and thy young cherub seem of heavenly race. 
then haste thou stranger to our nation pride,
 to that great mart where gaudy court abide;
 there, if my foresight fail not, thou shall find
 some noble Brittain to these infant kind;
 he view he well, then press he more to know,
 good man he cry, thou have a scream of woe,
 inquire no more, but where i bid thou, go. 
his word emphatic, strike a awe divine,
 both priest and prophet in his vizage shine;
 angiers, unknown, to London take his way,
 resolve the holy father voice to obey;
 wherever he go there be no avoid fate,
 he to his suffering find no early date:
 the public news his shameful story tell,
 explore his crime, the Dauphin wrath reveal:
 he castle raze, his land confiscate be,
 too poor amends, for that offend fair;
 a vast reward, whoever shall angiers bring
 alive, or dead, to the revengeful king:
 he race to endless exile they condemn,
 and death to those who shall these law contemn. 
i will sing, my muse, his woe in such a strain,
 that no sad reader may from tear retrain:
 sure all the generous world must weep to see
 exalt virtue in such misery. 
who can express his fear and anxious care! 
enough to raise distraction and despair! 
when he look back upon his prosperous day,
 the pleasant path, and the delightful way
 his youth have tread, it rack his thoughtful brain,
 his lot of grief he scarce can sustain,
 but piety forbid that he shall heaven arraign. 
he know the only way to vanquish there,
 be patience, faith unmoved, and fervent prayer;
 so to the temple fly, that ancient pile,
 which long have grace the city and the isle,
 saint Paul, for stately pillar so renowned,
 with all the beauty of the artist crown;
 there he repair, and take his child too,
 in hope their innocence may mercy woo;
 stretch on the pavement, wretched angiers lie,
 and kneel infant, early teach to pray. 
devotion do, a lovely british dame,
 with her attendant from the temple come,
 the lord high marshal wife, of bright fame. 
she stop, and not disdain, to turn her eye
 towards he who bear such mark of misery:
 she say, my friend, from whence, and what be thou? 
why hang that cloud of sorrow on thy brow? 
this little pair, with beam of beauty shine,
 i can think thou poor, if these be thy;
 yet speak, declare, what be thy cause of grief? 
perhaps, by i, kind heaven design relief. 
Oh! wondrous condescension, angiers cry,
 the true great be always free from pride. 
madam, i native be of neighbour Gaul,
 my parent honest, though my portion small;
 it be my hard fate superior to offend,
 who wrath no moderation know, nor end,
 and i be place, too humble to contend:
 i from my peaceful dwelling, straight be hurl,
 and bid to wander over a unknown world:
 nor will they stop their cruel vengeance here,
 but force these babe, my punishment to share,
 too weak, alas, such mighty ill to bear. 
she hear, and pity fill her mind,
 the too long cruel power, now make her kind,
 with soft compassion, and a gracious look,
 to listen angiers thus the lady speak,
 if thou will give thy daughter to my care,
 her breed and her fortune shall be fair:
 in virtue rule we will instruct her youth,
 with love of modesty and sacred truth:
 speak hen, if to my word thou do agree,
 inform her name, and leave the child with i. 
first, up to heaven his watery eye he rear,
 and thank the power who thus his prayer, have hear. 
then to she. 
Oh! thou bright pattern of thy charm sex,
 bless be thy day, may no disquiet vex
 thy peaceful mind, nor lengthen year perplex;
 but all thy joy uninterrupted be,
 thy life one scene of bless prosperity. 
florella be the name o'th wretched child,
 o may she virtuous prove, her temper mild;
 with a kind eye may you her action view,
 for you be parent now, and mistress too:
 with that he turn, and blot out a tear,
 the infant part look he can not bear. 
the courteous dame to he a present give,
 and the poor babe to a attend slave. 
in ancient time, thus do they merit praise,
 by noble act, their name and country raise:
 few wanton dame, no break nuptial bed,
 the wretched they relieve, the poor they say:
 in deed, like this, dwell their renown of old,
 no pride, no falsehood, no curse love of gold,
 but glory reign in every britain soul;
 no lurk vice their greatness dare controul. 
angiers return still sad, his heart still grieve,
 to he the child be lose, though thus relieve;
 and as he measure out his pencive way,
 he meet the bard with who he cross the sea;
 he hail he thus, lift up thy eye from earth,
 no sulien star overrule thy children birth. 
thy daughter now have reach the happy shore,
 destructive fate have lose its poisonous power,
 her innocence the planet hurt no more. 
thy son, good fortune shall attend his bloom,
 and a long train of blessing press to come;
 only thou many tedious year must wait,
 ever thou shall conquer thy malignant fate;
 on i be all their hateful influence shed,
 shower all their wrath on this poor destine head,
 the sufferer cry, i will bear it in their stead;
 and if the roll torrent they withstand,
 i will kneel and bless the persecute hand:
 instruct i, sir, how i this youth may save
 from threaten ill, which oft pursue the brave,
 for i shall soon press to the peaceful grave;
 there undisturbed may find that sweet repose,
 so long deny by my too cruel foe. 
instruct your son in his uncertain way,
 for truth divine shine forth in all you say. 
then thus the bard:
 amid the western mountain, where of old,
 such warlike deed of britain chief be tell;
 where Merlin do his mighty art expose,
 from whence his wonder and his fame arise,
 the lord high president keep there his court,
 and fond seek the stranger kind resort;
 the youth be there breed up to feat of arm:
 thy lovely son have all those manly charm,
 that will attract his eye, his fancy move,
 and fix he to his soul, with bond of love. 
farewell, for i shall never behold thou more;
 my tempest beat age, come near the shore;
 where weary out, i lay i down to rest,
 when thought and care, no more shall load my breast,
 nor vain object my free soul molest;
 but upward mount, through yond bright realm, and see
 all the great maze of vast eternity:
 the wondrous contemplation silence bring,
 and he seem lose in energy of thought:
 then lift his eye, and bless the believe pair,
 but though entreat, will no more declare. 
he deem the council sacred, and from thence
 do his long weary pilgrimage commence:
 oft scraggy rock, and lofty mount they meet,
 where rise ground resist their will foot;
 then reach those britain so renowned of old,
 of who such famous action have be tell;
 there, as the prophet say, the lovely boy,
 (the last, the dear hope of angiers joy)
 at the first sight the president approve,
 make he his care, and soon he grow belove;
 soon angiers see his happy son design
 the darling of that court, and humane kind. 
this be a age when the renown and great,
 make wealth but serve they to assist the state:
 when bounteous nature have the groundwork lay,
 their form hand the worthy hero make;
 like his own child, angiers son be train,
 and from his patron bounty, arm and art he gain. 
in this be britain glory, and her boast,
 from discipline like this, they raise a host;
 then no industrious youth neglect lay,
 but merit to preferment lead the way:
 Lewis dispose as may advance his worth;
 be call perotto to conceal his birth. 
the dauphiness become the queen of France,
 her pride and rage do with her power advance:
 new proclamation all around she send,
 disgrace those who have be angiers friend:
 he fear a stricter search will now be make;
 nor stay he, lest his child be betray,
 but hast to find a more secure retreat
 from woman rage, that be last as it be great:
 distress, he quit fair albion court'ous shore,
 but leave behind, his all, his value store;
 for who he often do the heaven implore. 
he, with regret, now leave the lucky strand,
 look back, and sigh, as on his native land;
 extreme grief, his suffer soul overflow;
 and every breath declare incessent woe;
 then he reflect on his malicious foe. 
inhumane queen, ah! whether must i fly? 
be there no way to scape thou, but to die? 
yes, i will die! throw off these servile chain,
 do not our priest pronounce eternal pain
 to those who weary out with life disease,
 shall dare to cure themselves ever nature please. 
fond fatal princess, can thou see i now,
 nor love, nor rage, will discompose thy brow. 
thus lean and pail (secure from be know)
 i shall move pity for a wretch undo:
 and now my royal friend the Dauphin reign,
 his subject in their native right maintain;
 and valour, justice, mercy, grace the throne,
 no injure wretch make his impatient moan,
 but all the gallic world, the face of joy put on. 
it be only i that be debar of bliss,
 nor can find rest without destroy his:
 then let i never accuse the imperial dame,
 but suffer still the punishment and shame. 
he who have once a nation at command,
 now seek a master in hibernia land. 
it be his fate, a haughty lord to find,
 fierce and severe, nor can he bend his mind;
 and he who in his mild and gentle sway,
 his servant make, through love, not fear, o bey,
 no slave to pride, in plenty and in ease,
 they live content, for it be no task to please;
 yet their good master diligent in vain,
 faultless be chide, nor dare he to complain;
 not hebrew job at length to ill inure
 so much, or half so patient endure. 

but now my weary muse, his woe forsake,
 begin another scene, and turn the prospect back;
 over pass the roll year of fly time,
 and show florella in her beauty prime,
 divine fair, as the first Eden maid. 
ever she for knowledge, innocence betray:
 when in her eye sit smile every grace,
 and the immortal bloom be on her face,
 and bright unsullied glory, new creation grace. 
only one son preserve the marshal line,
 who form be lovely, and his soul divine:
 his tour through France, and Italy have be,
 and europe world the travel youth have see;
 return, improve, by skilful master teach,
 with all their language, and their learning fraught;
 please his mean, so gay, but true brave,
 nor yet to vice, or passion make a slave:
 the court delight, for who each lady strive,
 and put on all her charm, to make he love. 
lord mandevil be now the only theam,
 their daily pleasure, and their nightly dream;
 florella at a rural mansion stay,
 leave to the conduct of the lovely maid;
 content with what her fortune do afford,
 the virgin think not of her new come lord:
 the joyful parent show their darling round,
 and every pleasure his return have crown;
 then leave the town, their country seat to view,
 and with variety their joy renew:
 soon as arrive, florella duty pay;
 but heaven! how gaze the youth, when he behold the maid! 
in all the realm that he have travel over,
 he think he never have beauty see before;
 he sigh, and look, and fasten there his eye,
 and scarce can he hide the vast surprise. 
she see he fix, the doubtful virgin fear
 she have do some fault, so, blush, disappear. 
as if the sun have straight he beam withdraw,
 and leave no gladsome ray, no twilight dawn,
 so seem to he the place, dark and forlorn,
 when fair florella from his sight be go;
 absent, her lovely form remain behind,
 fix be her image on his tender mind:
 he soon enquire who the virgin be,
 and smile say, she have a charm face. 
the indulgent mother, who delightful aim
 be to please he, from who her pleasure come,
 with graceful air, the whole adventure tell,
 and to his listen ear, each circumstance reveal. 
he blush, and sigh at what she do relate,
 and cry, it be sure some mystery of fate! 
her look, do awe, and admiration strike! 
such charm from want? not court can show the like. 
sure heaven mistake, and with a hasty hand,
 form she a slave, when it design command;
 the talk be change, but still his think soul,
 be with the glorious bright idea full:
 he struggle hard, nor yield to the snare,
 but often cry, she be not sure so fair;
 beside her birth be mean, not worth my care. 
urge by desire, a second sight he seek,
 as if he will correct his former thought;
 thus treacherous love draw the unwary on,
 the more they gaze, the more they be undo. 
the point ray have fill his youthful breast,
 the amorous fire, his dare soul possess,
 and quick grow too great to be suppress. 
the brave, the soon be to love incline,
 and love delight to sooth a generous mind. 
in vain the youth with fate passion strive,
 for every breast must yield to powerful love. 
the son of art no recipee have find;
 in all their store, to heal this please wound:
 have there in herb or plant a balm be know,
 the god of Physick sure have cure his own;
 he pine and sicken now with love excess,
 his sigh and languish his pain confess;
 his wonted sport grow tasteless to his soul,
 triumphant pashon all his joy control:
 he hate the court, shun every charm fair,
 they can please, unless florella there. 
to some dark grot, or melancholy grove,
 the youth retire, and breathe his hapless love;
 there vent his kill grief, and there complain,
 and only tell the silent tree his pain. 
a little distance from the palace stand,
 a stately shade of venerable wood,
 which full a hundred year the season bear,
 and reverend trunk with moss, be cover over;
 who dusky shade defy the ray of light,
 and spite of noon-day-beam, seem sacred still to night:
 in this retreat, the lovesick hero choose,
 to nurse his flame, and to indulge his woe;
 florella too, to solitude incline,
 but her amusement of another kind:
 various theam delight she easy breast,
 and no prevail thought disturb her rest;
 pensive she walk to take the evening air,
 at her approach, the green fresh verdure wear;
 for her companion, flow Horace choose,
 and can her self harmonious air compose;
 officious love, her wander step betray,
 and bring the despair youth, the lovely maid;
 stretch on the earth, beneath a maple shade,
 as root there, poor mandevil be lay;
 his absent soul be wait on his fair,
 but sense and life return, as she draw near;
 straight with convulsive transport he be seize
 at the surprise, alarm, disturb, and please. 
the modest maid, blush, her lord espy,
 obeisance make, and turn her step aside:
 but when he see the virgin haste away,
 confuse, he rise, and thus bespeak she, stay
 dear nymph! you seem the goddess of this grove;
 or, what be more, the immortal queen of love! 
let that soft form, a tender heart contain,
 with pity, hear a die youth complain,
 for i be real woe, and real pain:
 these wood be witness to my constant flame,
 each tree thy cypher bear, though not thy name;
 least jealous eye the mighty secret find,
 and to my charmer, grow from thence unkind;
 but when alone, my tongue nought else will sound,
 i reach the vault sky, and pierce the hallow ground:
 to echo care, i send florella name,
 and kind she reverberate the same. 
Oh! do not look with such relentless eye,
 if you be unmoved, your faithful lover die. 
all night, on bed of down, i restless rave,
 on this cold earth, i measure out my grave;
 it be you alone can help, it be you alone can save. 
the maid, who soul be suit to her birth,
 with noble scorn, raise her fair eye from earth;
 then with a voice majestic and severe
 thus speak, and give the lovesick youth despair:
 because i to your mother bounteous hand,
 for food and raiment do indebt stand,
 you think, perhaps, you may the slave command. 
but though, my lord, my niggard star deny
 i wealth and title, they have give i pride:
 if from my want, your wanton hope you frame,
 know i prize honour, and a virtuous name. 
my heart be unconquered, and my soul unstained,
 a fortitude by heaven it self maintain;
 nor force, nor flattery, can my mind subdue,
 behold i then, great and resolve like you. 
surprise at this! the wretched lover cry,
 if you be displease, i wish ere this i will die:
 in my unhappy speech, what have i say
 the offend my dear belove bewitch maid! 
beneath thy foot let i for ever lie,
 or by your just command, condemn to die
 if against your honour i have least design;
 my thought, though they be kind, be chaste as thy;
 when of my love i make a offer,
 with flame less pure then pious vestal bring,
 when in their temple they sincere pray,
 and bright devotion, at their altar pay,
 may all my day and night be dash with woe,
 nor ever the bless of possession know:
 may no self-joy my longing wish crown,
 but curse i still with a remorseless frown;
 never think i will destroy the worship shrine,
 or wrong that honour which i court for i:
 it be hymen torch be my auspicious guide,
 direct my love to seek you for my bride:
 bless with that hope, i bear the pain of life,
 (i ask you, not a mistress, but a wife)
 else on the instant will i quit this breath,
 and seek my peace in the cold arm of death:
 Oh! it will overwhelm my soul with black despair,
 if after all my service, all my care,
 i do not hope to gain my charm fair. 
florella, cease to think my love a crime,
 and let my faith be try, by that sure test of time:
 enjoin i any thing that may convince
 of my flame durance, and its innosence,
 (the great torture i will undergo)
 if you will except it, and believe it so. 
she listen now more calm, and more sedate,
 yet seem resolve, as the decree of fate:
 then thus reply, such virtue sure have charm,
 but i be place inferior to your arm;
 such honour may the most ambitious move,
 who will not prize the treasure of your love? 
but i be unworthy your exalt state,
 and must except a more convenient fate. 
let not ignoble fire your youth mislead,
 with equal fortune grace your nuptial bed;
 a father will direct you in your choice,
 there be no true joy without the parent voice;
 therefore no long feed this fond desire,
 but here, in silence, let your flame expire:
 and that from guilt florella may remain,
 that no ungrateful act her duty stain,
 thus in the face of heaven firm swear,
 your ill place passion i no more will hear,
 except your father free consent you gain;
 and reason tell you, that attempt be vain;
 for he be cold, in his decline year,
 a dowerless wife, the great ill he fear:
 old man be always fond of darling gold,
 still strive to grasp the earth they can hold. 
among the great, some wealthy fair adore,
 consult with duty, urge this suit no more;
 then with redouble haste she fly away,
 he call in vain, she will no answer stay. 

what pen can paint the sinner in despair,
 when heaven, regardless, will not hear his prayer! 
terror like those, the hopeless youth oppress,
 and fill the torture mansion of his breast:
 now he submit to health-destroying grief,
 bend down beneath he load, nor seek relief;
 a deadly pale his youthful cheek over spread,
 continual sigh have chase from thence the red,
 his languy eye the cheerful light refuse,
 and in pale fire their former lustre lose. 
scarce will this wanton age my tale believe;
 a constant youth their vice will never forgive. 
now love be grow the universal sport,
 the man design to leave, ever they begin to court;
 fickle their nature, rove their desire,
 in various heat, there be no real fire. 
of old, to one the passion be confine,
 they will wait a age to make the fair one kind;
 changing' the mode; a lover be a fool,
 and to be very faithful, to be very dull. 
but to return to our kind faithful youth,
 and all the wonder of his love and truth;
 the mother do with careful eye survey
 his grief, and find a sensible decay;
 she try with all delight, his soul to cheer,
 and when he sigh, cry out, what ail my dear? 
in vain her fondness, the inquiry frame,
 guess in vain, a thousand thing she name;
 fruitless her aid, he still the wrack endure,
 beneath the moon but one elixer cure;
 that deny, all other help be vain,
 he only with his life, can end his pain;
 a languid sickness make his youth a prey,
 and canker like, eat the fine form a way:
 apollo son be bribe to use their art,
 to save this darling of the mother heart:
 their cordial juilp they apply in vain;
 they can cool the heat, nor suage the pain. 
who can the sigh, the pierce woe express,
 the fear which his sad parent soul distress? 
his noble father cry', his hope be go;
 his name be lose, his heir, his only son;
 but his great courage help his grief to bear:
 the lady seem distract with her care. 
sorrow no sleep, no balmy peace allow,
 and heaven she weary with incessant vow;
 no cheerful guest the wonted mirth maintain,
 but through the house a solemn sadness reign. 
florella too, who do these woe create,
 in secret mourn the youth unhappy fate;
 blame the cross star that have to love incline,
 and make her cause the ill she never design. 
now at a stand be all the learned tribe,
 they find it vain to visit or prescribe;
 the active spirit weary of their course,
 and droop life appear detain by force:
 he servant all be drown in black despair,
 he only lose in thought, seem void of fear;
 reserve and cold to his officious friend,
 he chide their care, their diligence offend. 
when in her turn the fair florella come,
 the lovely source of this consume flame,
 he rear his die eye, and faint say,
 come near, thou too too lovely charm maid;
 now see how pale and languish i lie,
 and still remember it be for you i die. 
death, cold as your disdain, come over my bloom,
 and ah! sweet nimph, in age yet to come,
 as none in beauty ever can rival thou,
 so none in constancy shall equal i. 
oh cruel fair! hereafter prove so just,
 when i be lose, forget in the dust,
 to all the listen swain my story tell,
 proclaim how much i love, how early fall:
 no other way, i will court a last fame,
 but as love victim eternise my name. 
yes goddess, the bright tract i have in view,
 be that the world may say i die for you. 
at this the tear fall from her conquer eye,
 and sigh uncalled from her fair bosom rise;
 the faint youth behold the blush maid,
 and to his tremble lip her hand convey. 
enough, my first, my everlasting dear,
 i die content, since i be worth a tear. 
he say no more, the approach friend may spair
 their useless aid, for all the help be there. 
among apollo son that crowd there
 one to his skill add peculiar care,
 resolve, if art will do it, to save the important heir. 
upon his life he see their hope depend,
 nor unconcerned, hear every mourn friend;
 though some unmoved, can see the parent cry,
 lament wife, or friend stand sigh by,
 and grave answer, man be bear to die,
 when they, perhaps, have hasten nature date,
 and lie their own mistake, on guiltless fate:
 but this, with utmost care, consult health,
 like generous Garth aim not alone at wealth;
 the mean, the great, his equal influence find,
 as send by heaven, to heal and bless mankind. 
in he the grace with the art combine,
 like poetry and wealth, but seldom join,
 yet here they triumph all, while he with ease,
 can charm, relieve, and conquer a disease;
 a stranger to the new fantastic way,
 which dress first, and bid the die stay,
 he weigh each c rcumstance ever give his vote,
 take not the common way, and kill by rote;
 and by his nice observance, can find
 the body struggle with a torture mind. 
healthful, reluctant to the imperial sway,
 contend still, unwilling to obey:
 no hective fever lodge within his blood,
 the sullen soul deny the body food,
 and sigh and sorrow rob his eye of rest,
 he sooth the grief which his sad mind oppress. 
see he thus resolve, the ill to endure,
 and that he neither strive, nor wish a cure,
 the only care must be to search the wound,
 there be no receipt have power, till that be find:
 he wait and watch the slow pass sand,
 though bid retire, he mind not the command;
 but still observe and grasp his feeble hand. 
the pulse be low as at the ebb of life,
 and weaken nature scarce maintain the strife. 

when fair florella to the chamber come,
 send by his mother, that despair dame,
 straight the small minister fetch nimble stroke,
 and fresh Vermillion die his languid look;
 new strength, new vigour now his eye inspire,
 and glow cheek, with conscious blush fire,
 relapse again, soon as the nymph retire. 
the wise physician, this with judgement weigh,
 he find the youth be die for the maid. 
he smile rise, and hasten to depart,
 and murmur to himself, how vain our art? 
we have no medicine, for a lovesick heart. 
he leave the room, that inquire mother fly
 to ask what hope, examine first his eye,
 long the truth to know, yet truth she fear,
 her tremble voice be choke with rise tear. 
say he, i long have view your deep concern,
 and study much your son disease, to learn
 what lead his youth towards a untimely grave,
 and why my drug now lose their power to save;
 in vain my utmost art and care i use,
 my medicine all their heal power lose,
 and the sick youth do all relief refuse. 
at this amaze! at length i true guest
 some pain hide in the closet of his breast:
 there like destructive fire, in secret mine,
 consume his strength, and baffle our design. 

the impatient mother, interrupt now,
 surprise, she cry, can there be ought below,
 my darling son eager as life require
 and wait not i too crown his fond desire? 
it be love, he then reply, have rack he long,
 love, that delightful torture of the young,
 the world great lord, subdure of the strong;
 the subtle fire have pierce his ache heart,
 and drink his vital blood with ceaseless smart:
 he life be a prey to the all powerful flame,
 unless he be cure, from whence the torment come. 
and be there then, she haughty reply,
 a dame too great, to be lord mand'vil bride? 
why pine my son upon the wrack of love,
 when to be he, each charm nymph have strive? 
name but the fair, who bear such conquer eye,
 be sure my lord high marshal gain the prize,
 how great soever she, noble parent be;
 my son can boast descent with any she. 
the blood that fill his vein, from either source,
 have a glorious spring, and untaunted course;
 title and flow wealth, his name adorn,
 what cruel nymph can pay he back with scorn! 
then the good man, who speech only tend
 to calm her wrath, and to preserve his friend,
 go on;
 if thus he'ad place his love, why shall he mourn? 
or fear your kind consent, or her return? 
but if forget the honour of his race,
 he dote upon a beauteous form and face,
 of birth unknown, though most divine fair,
 who utmost glory be to be your care:
 he reason by his conquer love betray,
 and the sad choice, be death, or that bright maid;
 i need not now pronounce she well know name,
 there be but one can kindle such a flame. 

the mother say, what ill must i endure,
 ever my stern lord will yield to such a cure? 
for this misfortune he will i upbray,
 because i succour first the tender maid. 
vertue and grace florella do possess,
 my cruel lord build there no happiness:
 however my utmost tear, and prayer i will try;
 it be better far, to see he she, than dye. 
this speak, she hast to find her mourn lord,
 in the soft phrase her language can afford;
 with move tear the unhappy tale relate,
 oft blame her son, but more the cruel fate,
 that thus ordain to rob their soul of rest,
 to lose the youth, by who their age be bless
 or give consent, she sigh, that ill the least. 
her soothe softness can not stop his rage,
 nor gentle shower, his mad fury suage:
 from his fierce eye the fiery tempest come,
 tumultuous passion set he in a flame,
 let he then die, he cry, ever thus disgrace his name. 
Oh! barbarous sound! Oh! most unnatural breath
 she say! to doom a only son to death! 
when first, my lord, to i your vow you pay,
 how oft you wish i bear some humble maid,
 that you may great prove your generous fire,
 and grieve, your fortune can not raise i high:
 have i be so, you the same Risque have run;
 then, oh! forgive your too too amorous son! 
yet all her plead agony be vain,
 her unpersuasive grief can only gain
 that she may sooth her son, in his destructive pain;
 that she with hope may lull his care a sleep,
 make promise, which he never mean to keep. 
with this dear cordial, to the youth she fly,
 sit down, and view he with the kind eye:
 he sigh, and beg she will his fault forgive,
 and cry, do ask your wretched child to live;
 nor torture thus, my soul, to see you grieve:
 your bless on your hapless son bestow;
 excuse the debt i to your goodness owe:
 it be a vast sum, which i can never pay,
 yet i will rather die than disobey. 
weep, the lady speak:
 Oh! thankless child! oh! most ungrateful boy! 
too well thou know, thou be alone my joy;
 thy death will my remains of life destroy:
 therefore no more of thy false duty boast,
 when you indulge the ill by which my peace be lose:
 since after day, and night, of wrack pain,
 scarce to be endure, or think again,
 since the first happy hour the gladsome morn,
 when the wish news go round, a son be bear;
 i have indulge thou every anxious year,
 no mother ever such tenderness do bear,
 why do thou then distract i with despair? 
upon my love and pain thou never look back
 nor the successive care which i do take;
 so forward still the eager stream be bear,
 and to the nurse fountain rare turn. 
he only groan, here let my life have end,
 too long i have live such goodness to offend. 
she can not bear the grief she see he feel,
 fear to increase the pang she mean to heal:
 then mild, with a soft air begin,
 and kind cheere her poor deject son:

thy father hope, and i, be build in thou,
 his pride thou be, and every wish to i;
 yet cautious youth, in this you be to blame,
 you do not prize aright a mother name;
 but hide from i, your very best of friend,
 the secret woe, on which your life depend,
 while your physician, the true cause display,
 and say, it be inward grief, your youth decay. 
officious fool! the pensive son reply! 
his nauseous draught he long shall have try! 
not the dear secret of my soul impart! 
and thereby show the weakness of his art! 
Oh! mandevill, his mother mild say,
 confess the truth, i will no more upbraid,
 for now his care thy wish have betray! 
thy healthful bloom, let grief no more devour,
 but seek my aid, and trust mother power. 
what silent still! will nought your spirit cheer? 
go quick one, and call florella here:
 look up, my son, and now believe i kind,
 i have bring the balm for thy distemper mind:
 your life in Ballance, we this choice prefer,
 your only task to live and conquer she. 
too much transport at this change of fate,
 he cry, your proffer kindness be too late. 
the mighty tide of joy come on too fast,
 and weaken life be go too far to last;
 a dreadful sound add terror to their fear,
 and fill the room with pierce shriek and tear;
 the mother from the pillow snatch her son,
 and cry, help all, or i be lose, undo. 
then on her breast the darling youth she lay,
 and bid florella bring her useful aid:
 he strait revive at touch of the maid. 
then conscious what transport joy have do,
 he blush at what extravagance he will show,
 and she, as if the fault have be her own. 
this be his crisis, this the lucky hour,
 and death, and sickness, quit malignant power. 

now winge with joy, the happy minute fly;
 he still behold the fair, and still the sigh be new;
 soft tale of love he whisper in her ear,
 not so reserve, butshe seem please to hear;
 and when he beg she will his fear remove,
 and bless he with that charm sound, i love;
 her tongue be silent, but her eye proclaim,
 she love the youth, and catch the infectious flame:
 he health return, and every bloom grace
 revive and sparkle in its wonted place,
 with transport in his mein, and rapture in his face. 
a new respect be to florella pay,
 all hail with joy, the beauteous happy maid:
 throughout the land be spread she wondrous fame,
 each sonnet raise new trophy to her name;
 with such a grace as scarce can be believe,
 these flow honour the fair nymph receive:
 the courtly youth now envy mand'vill more
 for this rich prize, than what his title bear. 
paint now the pleasure of the happy pair,
 who joy be innocent, and most sincere;
 from garden grot, to purl stream they rove,
 endless their talk, and all that talk be love. 
new rapture still, from conversation grow,
 ten thousand joy, which only lover know:
 such sancyed bliss, her charm presence bring,
 the bless transport youth, look down on king;
 implore, that HYMEN make his joy secure,
 and tie that knot, which do for life endure. 
those be the sun shine day, when Cupid play,
 and every laugh hour be joyful make;
 they dream not of the black approach shade:
 (mankind, when he enjoy the smile of fate,
 but vain think to fix a prosperous state:
 and when ill fortune do his life attend,
 as vain fear his woe will never end:
 alas! it be foolish! all our life be a dream,
 and every season have its change scene!) 
fearless, supine, and bless with sweet repose,
 the lover be, when unthought storm arise. 

the father to his closet take his son,
 and with a air severe, his speech begin:
 i will know when you will quit this sluggish pace,
 when banish honour reassume its place,
 and you maintain the glory of your race. 
be not thy fancy sate, foolish boy? 
love be a sweet, design to please and cloy,
 nor mean the noble faculty top employ. 
license i give to the ignoble fire,
 that thou may glut thy insatiate desire;
 and feed like some ill-mannered eager guest,
 until thou grow sick, and loathe the luscious feast. 
nay, turn not pale; thou can not change my mind,
 nor think i ever otherwise design. 
the impatient son, then eager reply,
 under love Vail, can you such baseness hide? 
compel by duty, i have hear too long,
 the sacred business of my love you wrong. 
florella vertue be above your thought;
 nor will the Jem with all your wealth be buy:
 for the fair maid, good angel be her guard,
 may she just worth still meet a just reward:
 kind providence! preserve her youth from harm! 
Oh! may she ever live, and live to charm! 
his father be enrage at this reply,
 and with a stern tremendous voice, do cry,
 audacious boy! and dare thou to my face,
 bless one bear for thy shame, and my disgrace! 
go to the grave, and hide thy abject flame:
 can hope i will give to she a daughter name;
 or vain think i will thy choice applaud,
 though i do yield to a fond mother fraud;
 i will rather see thou and thy sorceress die,
 than to the marriage but in thought comply:
 he calm answer;
 enough, my lord, your furious rage give over;
 take your son word, you will hear of this no more:
 with look compose, he leave the hateful room;
 nor can his father guess the fate to come. 
no image of delight now fill his mind;
 he never can hope to make his father kind. 
deep struggle grief his doubtful thought oppress,
 all day no dawn of peace, all night no rest;
 torture with pain, too great to be express,
 disturb he walk, revolve in his breast,
 what course he shall his wretched footstep, steer,
 that most may show his love and his despair. 
florella fear he weary of his flame;
 nor gay, nor please, he to her toilet come;
 no tuneful air her gentle slumber break;
 no song salute she, ever she be well awake,
 and sweet melodious note, compose for her dear sake:
 nor one soft billet deaux so kind do prove,
 to whisper the dear tale of truth and love:
 if she approach, he hang his pensive head,
 his look strait change, from pale, to glow red. 
he sigh, as if around destruction fall,
 and his full eye, a fatal story tell. 
these bode symptom fright the charm fair,
 who find, when love do faithful breast ensnare,
 they be wrack with jealous fear, and every tender care. 
retire alone, she soft do complain,
 and wish for her former peace in vain;
 reflect upon her hour of downy rest,
 before enchant love, that cruel guest,
 usurp, with tyrant power, her mild breast. 
Oh! happy day, she say, from passion free! 
when all be peace, and calm felicity:
 if eager joy, i neither wish nor know,
 i live without the pain and pleasure too. 
oh happy state of cold indifference! 
bless in that seem want of nice sense,
 who nothing please, nothing give offence. 
no fierce pursuit, their thoughtless mind employ,
 they feel no sorrow, as they taste no joy. 
in bound the stagnate water sullen lie,
 no tempest raise they like mountain high;
 while curl wave, form by the rapid stream,
 can never rest, nor ever be serene. 
oh friendless maid! if he unkind shall prove,
 or so untrue, but to dissemble love,
 and i, the public talk, the public jest,
 become of every meet, every feast:
 but hold! there be something tell i i be bear,
 above their laughter, and above their scorn;
 yes, mand'vill,
 if thou disdain thy humble victory,
 know i can triumph too, and brave die:
 thus her despair fear, her hope overcome,
 thus she accuse her lord, and curse the fatal flame. 
while love alone possess young mand'vills mind,
 to give the great proof he now design,
 and quit the wait grandeur of his birth,
 and with his love, forsake the glory of the earth;
 for since florella be deny his wife,
 he will wed himself to a monastic life;
 and though within his own dear native land,
 many fair abbey do invite stand,
 garden and groves, delightful to the eye,
 as if they mean to sooth austerity;
 (the best of all the realm the priest still choose,
 they look as if design for soft repose;
 but we be to believe they watch and pray,
 and tear and Pennance wear their hour away)
 these he avoid, lest power his will restrain,
 and force he from their convent, home again. 
in France he mean to find some lovely cell,
 and there in solemn silence, ever dwell:
 now all thing for his voyage he provide,
 but from his dear friend, the secret hide:
 the marshal, daily, table do ordain,
 the weary travel pilgrim to maintain,
 who always find a welcome; there refresh
 with hospitable food, the gracious donor bless:
 like one of these, his son design to dress,
 and escape unknown, amid the throng press. 
thus his design the wander scene have lay,
 and thus the hapless youth himself betray;
 not to his love, he will his thought reveal,
 yet can not part without a last farewell;
 though it be a pang that life can hardly bear,
 for she to health and life he do prefer,
 nothing beneath the sun he hold so dear. 
he to the beauteous nymph apartment go,
 pain in his heart, and look of discontent;
 he find her read to divert her mind,
 it be ariadne prayer breathe to the wind,
 when faithless Theseus leave the fair behind;
 he take the book, and when he see the place,
 a burn blush fly to his lovely face. 
she force a smile, and cry, what find you there,
 that in your cheek such sign of guilt appear? 
say he, have Theseus be compel to go,
 to purchase fame, and fight a distant foe,
 and leave the nymph in some bless happy place,
 will that, and sigh, not alter much the case? 
if left, the maid reply,
 though in a palace where she bear command,
it will soon grow hateful as the barren sand;
 since there be no amends for perjure love,
 no pleasure will the bitter pain remove. 
heaven it self, take cognisance of break vow,
 and its strict justice there, no mercy show,
 whither, oh whither, do thy speech lead? 
with die eye, the torture mand'vil say,
 do thou unjust think thou be betray. 
i, my florella! i, do thou accuse! 
or tax with perjure love, or break vow! 
do not my suffering dwell upon thy mind? 
oh thou too kill fair! and too unkind! 
know that in all the tale of love thou have find,
 no heart with great truth be ever crown,
 my thought have still be fix, my eye never stray,
 since first love mighty law my soul obey,
 and if my adverse star, such woe ordain,
 that i be still condemn to endless pain. 
if i be doom to lose what i hold dear,
 a punishment which nature can bear. 
add not my fair, to the too cruel weight,
 but think it be the hard necessity of fate. 
ah little, little of my pang you know! 
nor kind guess the wrack i under go;
 the rend grief, that tear my labour heart,
 when i with you, and all my joy must part;
 such woe as these fond nurse mother feel;
 to see their infant on the soldier steel,
 such pierce pain, when we behold from far,
 the vessel sink, where all our treasure be;
 yet these sad woe, compare to i, be small,
 a part lover grief, exceed they all. 

must we then part? she say: oh most unkind! 
and for what wretched place be i design? 
friendless, forsake, must i wander now,
 or to some new imperious mistress bow. 
you unauspicious star, that rule my birth,
 why be i form? why do i crow the earth,
 when no provision for my life be make,
 and not one place my own, to rest my head. 

let not such thought, affright thy tender mind,
 here thou shall stay; my mother will be kind. 
that parent for the other do atone;
 she mild as dove, he hard as petre stone:
 my charmer, she thy life will easy make,
 and love florella, for her mand'vil sake. 
she answer,
 why such disjointed thought do you express? 
you will leave i, yet talk of happiness:
 ruin thou! sure, my ruin be design by fate;
 and must love more destructive prove than hate? 
why my calm virgin hour do you molest? 
flatter i with possession of your breast? 
make i exchange my peace, for this unrest? 
if still, he cry, i do not love thou more,
 than greedy miser, gold, or monarch power;
 than sick man ease, the happy life increase;
 town besiege, relief; or pious matron peace;
 if thou be not my joy, my life my health,
 prize like my soul, my only value wealth,
 then send just heaven, upon my perjure head
 ten thousand plague, and strike i with they dead. 
but, oh! my fair! my hope! my only wish! 
a father stand betwixt i, and happiness;
 deceive in his dissemble false consent,
 who specious word disguise a foul intent:
 in rage, he bid i quench my faithful flame,
 in term so vile, my soul abhor to name. 
i oft have hear your cruel fatal vow,
 your virtue no steal marriage will allow;
 therefore we must for ever, everpart;
 why do i live? why do thou hold my heart? 
why do not fate, quick, sure destruction bring,
 burst torture nature tie, and break each tremble string? 
why, when life tedious march be almost over,
 be i bring back, to suffer on the shore? 
my cruel father, worse than death destroy,
 death be a good, when life be bereave of joy. 
cease my love lord, the fair florella cry,
 will i have never be bear, or bear, that moment die. 
all thing to your kind family i owe,
 and in return, curse alone bestow:
 i will go where you shall never behold i more,
 and with my absence, former peace restore. 
peace without thou! the dote youth reply,
 no grief will all my day and night divide:
 despair and sorrow, all my restless hour betide. 
since from what my soul desire i be debar,
 forgive my earnest suit, nor think it hard:
 i beg you never will yield to a new lover charm,
 for i shall die, to see you in another arm;
 and (as my first, last dear) with lovely you,
 i bid the world, and all your sex adieu:
 so let i hope that snowy virgin breast,
 will never entertain another guest;
 if i have first your heart to love incline,
 Oh! still preserve i in your chaster mind;
 will you be so kind? can these tear persuade
 the fair nymph that ever nature make? 
can she, for the poor hapless mand'vill sake,
 resolve a last leave of all mankind to take? 
it look like sullen pride, i must confess,
 that i shall other bar of happiness,
 but oh! impute it to my love excess. 
grant this my charm dear, my heart desire,
 the only suit that i shall ever require. 
like sorrow image then, he silent stand,
 and strive in vain to hide the fall flood:
 pale, at her foot, the die hero fall,
 and let those sign of grief, his inward sorrow tell,
 distress, she raise he with her lovely hand,
 and cry, what will my lord his slave command? 
Oh! poor return, for all his wondrous love,
 that to no other youth i kind shall prove;
 without injunction, i will have make that vow,
 immortal passion, be your merit due,
 no maid can love again, after once love you;
 no thou dear idol of my conquer soul! 
thy empire in my breast, no power shall ever control;
 each tender wish i will dedicate to thou,
 for wheresoever confine, still thought be free,
 and i shall ever faithful, ever constant be. 
Oh! for my sake, each desperate purpose shun,
 if thou be lose, florella be undo:
 with patience, let we our misfortune wait,
 and hope, from innocence, a better fate. 
he with glad pleasure listen to the fair,
 his heart rejoice to hear her love and care;
 yet still resolve his purpose to pursue,
 and mean this visit for a last adieu. 
he can not take his longing eye away,
 but root stand, and add another moment stay;
 another, and another, to the mighty sum,
 grudge the past, and fear the rest to come:
 at length he clasp she in his faithful arm,
 and say, thou mistress of eternal charm,
 remember mand'vill, thou soft lovely maid,
 and let no scandal on my name be lay;
 my love be pure, from thought of interest free,
 virtue i seek, find the rich Jem in thou,
 more worth than boundless heap of hoard gold,
 or gawdy title, which be buy and sell:
 a mighty stock of beauty nature give,
 beauty that will all humane kind enslave;
 judge then my fair, the wrack, such worth to leave! 
he say no more, but force himself away
 with sigh, that do his truth and pang betray. 
the nymph distract, know not what to guess,
 but find ill fate on every side do press;
 while secret mean for his escape he make,
 and trust none, can be by none betray:
 he pilgrim weed, to all, unknown he buy,
 and to his chamber undiscovered bring;
 and send his page on errand several way,
 that must detain the youth the space of many day;
 then leave the key of his own private chest,
 and say, when he return, therein his will express:
 so fit for the purpose, when alone,
 his robe throw off, and the poor weed put on;
 with a false beard, and hair, he hide his face,
 and among the travel pilgrim take his place;
 with they he pass through the house unknown,
 leave the gay pompous roof, design his own,
 to search some dismal melancholy cell,
 some cave where sorrow self will choose to dwell. 
Oh! mighty love! behold, look down and see
 this glorious victim, sure, be worthy thou;
 and if over mortal thou will still maintain
 dispotick sway, and undisputed reign,
 this story, in thy annal, still preserve,
 from he let constant lover learn to serve:
 he birthright leave, the honour of his name,
 a wondrous tale, fit for the book of fame;
 let sigh virgin, endless praise rehearse,
 crown he the poet with immortal verse. 
you shepherd, and you nymph, new song ordain,
 he be, indeed, the glory of the plain. 
when a forsake fair lament her friend,
 if her complaint to exclamation tend,
 name but this faithful youth, and all her wrath shall end. 
mand'vill, thy constancy, thy worth alone,
 shall for the falsehood of thy sex atone;
 when amorous youth shall meet in plain or groves,
 and there repeat the story of their love,
 thy last truth, in all their song shall shine,
 thy eager love, and constancy divine,
 and each shall wish his fame may equal thy! 
mean time florella busy in her mind,
 some quick expedient she resolve to find,
 her mand'vill of his dangerous love to cure,
 though she, her hapless self, the pain endure;
 conclude to hide she in a live tomb,
 forsake the world, religious straight become. 
sympathy give to each the same design,
 both mean to raise their love to that divine,
 and aim to show what mighty flame can do,
 for each have vow to bid the world adieu;
 yet still they hide the secret work thought,
 until the form purpose to effect be bring:
 mand'vill succeed in what he fear to own,
 and with the holy pilgrim fly unknown. 
now in her turn, night gloomy shade invest
 the ruddy glory of the shine west,
 and weaken nature seek recruit by rest:
 when round the palace the inquiry pass,
 who see their absent lord, and where he be? 
near his apartment they express their care
 with duteous love, expect to find he there:
 he want no service from officious hand,
 they wait in vain for his desire command:
 when darkness come, they can no more forbear,
 to the fierce marshal tell their cause of fear. 
with furious rage, he to his lodging fly,
 no lock nor bar, the impetuous way deny,
 but all be expose to his inquire eye:
 sad tremble fear the mother step retare,
 complain, the cruel power have no regard
 to worth, but hinder mortal of their wish reward. 
when enter, soon their busy search do find
 he go; his scatter garment leave behind;
 a thousand fear they in their fancy frame,
 and many danger, which they dare not name;
 in this distress, each meddle fool grow wise,
 the helpless still be ready to advise,
 with fly speed, florella send for there;
 pale look the virgin, almost dead with fear:
 to their demand, she can no answer give,
 but that he seem to take a everlasting leave. 
his lady cry, this do my soul presage,
 see now the effect of your too cruel rage,
 we be childless leave in our decline age:
 your boundless wrath destroy a faithful pair,
 and heap on i the terror of despair. 
can this fair weep maid create offence? 
have she not charm enough, in truth and innocence,
 to match with so much vertue, no disgrace? 
they to your joy may have bring forth a race,
 the uphold the honour of your name and place:
 but now your hoard wealth, your seat and land,
 will fall to some ungrateful stranger hand;
 and i shall curse my prudence, and my care,
 compel, with the effect, to bless some foreign heir. 
sting with reproach, and loss, the marshal swear,
 if he will return, to oppose his love no more;
 that his fix flame shall be with joy repay,
 and he will yield his son to that all-charming maid. 
if with strict search, that son can ever be find,
 for which the servant be dispatch around;
 he bind his promise, with a solemn vow,
 that the wish marriage free he will allow:
 nor by reproach, his passion disapprove,
 but crown his constancy with last love. 
thus do affection bend the stubborn mind,
 pierce with the smart, turn pious, and grow kind;
 each road they take, and pry with eager eye,
 but miss their lord, unknow his disguise:
 they only find the page, and force he home,
 examine oft where his love master go? 
the affright boy, the truth of all reveal,
 his lord command, and secret letter tell:
 his cabinet be in a moment bring,
 and there, with ease, they find what they have seek. 

to florella, this inscribe. 

the letter.

 'ever this (my dear) will reach thy lovely hand,
' i shall have ever leave my native land;
 'cast out from thou, no matter where i roam,
' the trial have over, I have suffer all at home. 
'to rough unpolished cell, i now retire,
 'and leave behind fond hope, and fierce desire;
' yet love will there maintain a languid flame,
 'like lamp in tomb, though useless, burn the same. 
' do my florella now her pilgrim view,
 'she will own the wonder mighty love can do;
' will say, i in this part suffer more
 'than ever wretched mortal do before. 
' do she my tremble, and my torture see,
 'i be sure she will pity and remember i,

the virgin faint, as she the letter read,
 like dewy rose, hang her droop head:
 their search again renew, they take their way,
 to all the port that lie along the sea;
 and that their message may his flight prevent,
 bless news they bring, to give his mind content,
 his father letter, full of kind consent. 
his better fate overrule that work sea,
 and for a wind, the wait pilgrim lay:
 now the general cry be, all aboard,
 just as the man arrive, and find their lord. 
rejoice, amaze, and fill with glad surprise,
 delight and wonder struggle in their eye;
 his be cast down, ashamed of his disguise. 
great mind be constant to their purpose still,
 and take from fate a disappointment ill;
 resolve he hold a pon'yard to his breast,
 and say, my friend, i be not now in jest;
 my father will, i own i shall obey,
 but love, over duty, have imperial sway:
 you force my certain death, if you come on,
 i own my self a most ungrateful son:
 but quit that belove illustrious maid,
 with double punishment my fault be pay. 
affright, they the headstrong passion wait,
 and scarce can cool this most intemperate heat:
 at length, they humble do their letter give,
 beg he will hear, and be at peace and live;
 he read his parent with a double joy,
 his rise fear, his rapture do destroy;
 until fair florella hand, and signet come,
 she fix his hope, it be sacred, with her name. 
and thus her letter speak her kind concern:
 'return my dear, faithful, lord, return;
' give i not endless cause, your loss to mourn. 
 'can you pretend you love, and yet prepare,
' for your florella, worse than death, despair? 
 'oh most unkind! can you for ever go,
' and let not i your fatal purpose know? 
 'if with a flame sincere your heart do burn,
' i charge you, by that sacred flame, return. 

so, royal mandate, the last hour arrive,
 when pity queen bid malefacture live;
 with such vast joy the innocent and brave,
 receive the only cordial that have power to save;
 forget the penance that his soul design,
 and with his garb, resume a cheerful mind;
 by her command, his speed outfly the wind. 
a general joy through all the house be spread,
 welcome! as if our voice can raise some darling, dead:
 he father, speedy marriage do command,
 and join in he, the fair florella hand;
 yet there be a fix regret he be force to hide,
 so much the marriage mortify his pride:
 not so, the mother; that kind british dame,
 she like the maid, and well approve the flame:
 what be their concern to the glad lover bliss! 
all day they gaze, and talk, and vow, and kiss,
 until that dear joyful, long desire morn,
 that day, which mand'vill think, will year adorn,
 be come; when charm bridal virgin wait,
 and jolly youth throng to the palace gate;
 then bright florella, lovely as the rose,
 ten thousand glory in her eye disclose;
 by curious art, deck in the british pride,
 to wonder crowd, appear the fair bride
 that ever fame alhion grace in all her store,
 so bright a nymph be never see before. 
then the bridegroom, gay as the eastern sun,
 yet seem in haste, and wish his race be run;
 challenge his shine rival of the day,
 and bid he hasten towards the ebb sea;
 pay all his vow to sacred solemn night,
 his prayer, the sober foot matron do invite,
 and call her darken gloom, his heart delight. 
at length the happy joyful day be past,
 and the dear welcome shade be come at last. 
new sport the longing bridegroom joy retard,
 farce and dance, which have but small regard;
 he hast to the last scene, the gawdy bed,
 with indian odour, native rose spread,
 each busy hand employ to undress the fair,
 no need of sweet, when young florella there. 
how many fear the blush virgin awe! 
she know not what she say, nor who she see,
 bless mand'vill come, my muse, the curtain draw:
 leave now, in perfect bliss, the happy pair,
 and let perotto next become thy care. 
in all that court, he be the youth alone,
 who act immortal fame, and endless glory crown;
 in sport, or in great exercise of war,
 then all the rest he still exceed far:
 his mother beauty, and his father grace,
 be stamp upon the lovely hero face;
 kind fortune do his glorious youth befriend,
 and all he undertake, success do still attend. 
judgement, and pierce wit, which all approve,
 and various charm, to gain a universal love. 
the president, who do his title grace,
 have bounteous nature, bless with numerous race,
 all thing in court, wear a auspiceous face;
 and that experience may his arm advance,
 he be send a volentier to serve in France:
 such strange adventure do blind fortune bring,
 unknown, he tread his native shore, defend his king;
 but while expose, he court a early name,
 and with expense of blood, secure that darling, fame. 
at home
 a pestelential sickness rage round,
 destructive mist ascend, thick vapour from the ground,
 the unwholesome blast do man and beast confound. 
perotto hear their state, and evil case,
 and quick fly to the infect place:
 rumour but half the desolation speak,
 it be such a scene, as noble heart may break:
 that palace which he gawdy leave, and gay,
 now midnight silence reign at noon of day;
 a cause that do incessent grief afford,
 death have destroy his patron, and his lord,
 and all his son, with who he have be breed;
 even all the heroic youth be dead. 
cammilla, the only daughter still survive,
 and in the midst of this destruction live;
 so tender plant do sometime brave the storm,
 when oak, and tower, be from their basis tear:
 she live, indeed, but shut from humane eye,
 for above her life, she do her father prize:
 that be near her dead, and die race,
 she be confine in the infect place:
 and she, who form do all the world delight,
 be shun like death, or some destructive spright:
 until to the place, the bold perotto come,
 he love, and danger but increase his flame. 
through all the avenue, eager he fly,
 still complicate horror meet his eye,
 and noisome steam, from the unburied dead arise. 
here lift hand, in vain, for help do call,
 the servant at his master foot do fall. 
in one promiscuous heap, lay old and young,
 the rich, the fair, the healthful and the strong;
 then angry heaven send the destroyer forth,
 who can express the terror of his wrath! 
the plague, with rapid force, devour rage,
 seem as it will clear this crowd busy stage
 of all that think stock of humane kind,
 insect the body, sink the form mind;
 despair, and black idea fill the soul,
 such thought as all religion will control:
 all tie be break, the father fly the son,
 the mother from her bosom infant run;
 dire hate, in each infect breast preside,
 and new make bridegroom shun their charm bride:
 death grow so common, none will shed a tear,
 nature and love be both overcome by fear;
 only perotto, he his fair will save,
 or else, in worse than charnel, find a grave. 

amidst these ruin, bright cammilla fate,
 expect still, her tender parent fate. 
perotto come, implore that she will leave
 that wretched place, and fly with he, and live. 
at first, she will not believe her weep eye,
 and view perotto with a strange surprise! 
be thou come, she say, to this house of death? 
approach not, lest i insect thou with my breath,
 shun this contagious and destructive air,
 i be a prey to sickness, sorrow, and despair:
 with untaught sigh, the lover make reply,
 consent with i, your faithful slave, to fly,
 or give i leave to stay with you and die. 
dread of these horror, soon the point do gain,
 and with those few that do alive remain,
 they quit the castle for the open plain. 
perotto skill in business of the war,
 a tent for fair cammilla strait prepare;
 and though their little troop infect round,
 he from their sight, nor touch, no danger find;
 whether love, with his all powerful dart,
 and burn flame, secure his manly heart,
 fill all, and for contagion leave no room;
 or whether fate decree defer his doom;
 with cheerful health, the faithful youth be bless
 with strength, and ardent power, to serve the rest. 
bleak winter, now, with nip frost draw near,
 court, desire, and hollow wind that clear
 the hot, unwholesome, and pollute air:
 thin the people town appear again,
 the ruin clime begin to look serene;
 the untilled land, again the labourer care,
 and temple now, resound with praise and prayer. 
noble, to long desert house come,
 and straight invite the brave perotto home:
 for have learn his honour, love, and truth,
 they court cammilla to espouse the youth;
 and that he may not want deserve grace,
 adorn his merit, with her father place. 
cammilla, pious, just, and true good,
 his worth, and her obligement, understand;
 beside the meddle world may tax her fame,
 and fix some blot on her unsullied name:
 when she with he, flee to preserve her life,
it will stain she honour, not to be his wife. 

it be do, in solemn pomp, the knot be tie,
 the great cammilla be unknown perotto bride. 
Oh! angiers,
 thus providence make up what thou do lose,
 no better fortune, if thy self have choose:
 that guide fate, which do our step direct,
 we fall not by it, but our own neglect;
 we tread forbid path, without a guide,
 it be not heaven fault, but our own selfish pride. 
thus man be curse, with what we call free will,
 in error live, and wondrous prone to ill.
 why be we make? why, from our unsought birth,
 be the immortal seed condemn to earth? 
why do we think, and judge, above the bruit,
 yet gain no farther knowledge by dispute! 
why endless bliss, and torment do we frame? 
yet can give the joy, nor punishment, a name. 
happy, alone, that thoughtless mortal life,
 who feed on faith, and, as the church, believe;
 who never wrong commit, and who calm breast,
 no deep inquiry make, to break his rest,
 this man, my muse pronounce true bless. 
you undistiuguished notion, hence begone,
 let we to our story, let our tale go on:
 thus angiers race, be in due honour place,
 with plenteous wealth, and shine glory grace. 
now my muse, the father woe depaint,
 the various hardship of that suffering saint,
 who twenty year remain in servile state,
 with patience bear the rude insult of fate;
 humble in sorrow, in affliction wise,
 conform his action to that base disguise:
 as on the lowly flower, he sleep lie,
 heaven, to his work thought, this vision do display:
 he room seem fill with dazzle light divine,
 immortal ray, with glorious splendour shine;
 scarce can his humane eye, the brightness bear,
 the dart beam shine forth so radiant clear:
 when in a garment of unspotted white,
 too heavenly fair for earthly mortal sight:
 close by his side, the reverend hermit stand,
 who twice have teach he, for his children good;
 and with a voice, who sweetness charm his ear,
 thus speak, bid he his word observe and hear:

from the eternal realm of endless light,
 where there be no shadow of approach night;
 where all with beatific joy be crown,
 where sin and sorrow never to be find,
 but bliss and praise take their tuneful round,
 from thence, by gracious providence, i be send
 to cheer thou in thy race of punishment;
 to tell thou thy reproach draw near a end,
 and pity heaven will thy last year befriend:
 angiers, again, to courteous Albion have,
 good Fortune welcome, if it come at last:
 thy daughter be there, match equal to her blood,
 thy son magnificent great, and true good. 
then thou again shall view thy native land,
 again be raise in the state, and fix in high command. 
from calumny and guilt, discover free,
 and after all, my son, shall share those joy with i,
 look up, anticipate what shall hereafter be. 
he see ten thousand angel on the wing,
 straight hear the loud immortal praise sing;
 behold the golden lyre, feel melt strain,
 that strike his soul, and tremble through his vein;
 the ecstasy, for nature grow too strong,
 nor can he bear the mighty vision long;
 but as he struggle hard, and will have speak,
 the weak band of flatter sleep, be break;
 he wake, and find it almost perfect day,
 it be darkness, when compare to the bright ray,
 which late, his soul and wander eye have see;
 the glorious transport of this heavenly dream:
 to doubt the truth, he deem a mortal sin,
 part with his cruel lord, his voyage do begin;
 safe he cross the boisterous watery main,
 and now behold the british cliff again:
 in pilgrim weed, the noble earl be dress,
 beg all his humble food; and where at night to rest,
 to the marshal house, direct his weary foot;
 the first glad object his sad eye do meet,
 be violent, lead by her court'ous lord,
 with all the pomp such greatness do afford;
 the gawdy scene of joy he scarce can bear,
 to see his child so wondrous great and fair:
 yet still no sign of gladness he betray,
 but humble with his fellow pilgrim stay,
 until summon by the appoint servant call,
 they press, and fill the hospitable hall. 
angiers distress, his servitude and woe,
 have turn his curl lock, as white as snow;
 his meager face, with many a wrinkle plough,
 and sun burn skin, no former beauty show. 
the pilgrim feed, and dinner take away,
 two lovely infant be bring forth to play;
 kind heaven have bless young mand'vill marriage joy,
 with two bright beauteous charm boy. 
the child straight to the pilgrim angiers run,
 as if they know the root from whence they spring;
 he kiss they; joy, that stranger to his breast,
 at their love sight, become once more his guest:
 they walk with he, and hang about his knee,
 while he find way, their childish heart to please;
 and when the time be come for their return,
 when they their little study must perform;
 their master call, and servant ask, in vain,
 they will not the pilgrim leave, nor to their book again. 
the mother from within, behold this sight,
 and smile to see they in such high delight,
 bid they their innocent desire obey,
 and let they long with the pilgrim stay. 
then the stern marshal, and his noble son,
 walk cross the court, and through that spacious room;
 with a proud smile, the scornful marshal cry,
 there let they stay, to beggary they be ally,
 too near, by the ignoble mother side. 
when that reproach, poor suffering angiers hear,
 the tear run down his cheek and snowy beard. 
young mand'vill fume, his inward rage boil over,
 his father only dare his wife explore,
 who he with true devotion do adore. 
mand'vill, the unknown pilgrim thus bespeak,
 what sorrow thy, be it for the children sake? 
know then thou good old man, who tender heart
 be move, i feel than thou a great smart
 in the reproach; the little babe be i,
 all virtue in the charm mother shine;
 of birth unknown, the tale too long to tell,
 raise by my love, she wear her honour well;
 no power, nor pomp, oversway her steady mind,
 she be just great, yet affable and kind:
 forgive i father (unaware) he say,
 that on this subject, i so long have stay;
 florella merit more than i can say,
 more faithful love than my whole life can pay. 
angiers reply, Oh! noble constant youth,
 with pleasure i have hear thy wondrous truth. 
the bright tale in the last book of fame,
 among lover ever sacred be thy name:
 let virtuous maid, garland for thou prepare,
 virtue be find, thy most peculiar care. 
the humble maid be whole in your power,
 yet you sosook the loose luxuriant hour;
 and to make your amorous wish complete,
 preserve your passion good, so make it great:
 no band be soft than the nuptial tie,
 th renegade that do the form despise,
 m ets with ten thousand arrow as he fly. 
(charm with his speech) mana'vill of nature kind,
 ask he from whence he be, and where design? 
he say, he be a bark by tempest hurl,
 and leave a stranger in this cruel world. 
here be thy harbour, generous mand'vill cry,
 here thou shall find no frown, no ebb tide;
 in thy devotion quiet and serene,
 in safety, view thy past tempestuous scene. 
angiers, with thanks, reply, if i partake
 thy kindness still do for virtue sake,
 accept what service feeble age can pay thou back. 

again the german against the french prepare,
 and all be hostile grow, and open war:
 England be then a friend, and dear ally,
 with her bold britain, do their troop supply;
 to head they, mand'vill and perotto choose,
 for their unquestioned merit, none oppose. 
the next delight that charm old angiers heart,
 he view his son perform the great commander part;
 behold he lead a troop of gallant man,
 who sight bring former glory back again:
 when young, such valiant band himself have lead,
 and be a kingdom, and a army head:
 now bow with age, unknown his life he pass,
 and seem to travel to his grave in haste. 

thus the two brother link in joint command,
 know not that they be tie in a much stricter band. 
let we vail cammilla and florella fear,
 their vow, their part sigh, and flow tear;
 together they be leave, each to condole,
 that by divide grief, neither may bear the whole. 
mand'vill design to leave the pilgrim here,
 but the poor count, beg to attend he there;
 resolve to view where he have be undo,
 the ungrateful land that cast forth such a son. 
the jolly soldier now be get aboard,
 and the auspicious wind, quick passage do afford;
 their plume and wave banner they advance,
 and with their succour, bring new joy to France. 

now let our just historic tale remove,
 the queen must give account for lawless love;
 to all-devouring time, her charm give way,
 her look not lovely now, nor brisk gay;
 no fire her eye, her vein no amorous flame;
 but in her heart remorse, repentance, shame,
 confusion, sorrow, a melancholy train
 perplex her soul, and keep her mind in pain;
 angiers vile wrong, stand glare in her view;
 that thought do all her secret step pursue,
 the hag that nightly load her torture breast,
 and never let she taste the sweet of balmy rest;
 a linger sickness follow, pine grief;
 nor can the son of art bring wish relief:
 with down-cast eye, they approach the die fair,
 their solemn look discover their despair:
 gash the king of terror do appear;
 black guilt add horror to torment fear:
 she look around, and see no comfort nigh,
 spite of imperial greatness, she must die;
 to bear the shock, she summons former pride,
 she be grow too weak, all aid be now deny:
 then let we yield; she sigh, and faint say,
 and sink upon the bosom of a faithful maid;
 fetch here the council, and the injure king,
 than death, my friend, i have a sharp sting;
 i can die in peace, while it be conceal,
 and i must die, for shame, when it be reveal. 
the wait slave straight her command obey,
 eager the king, to hear what she will say:
 with weep eye, he view depart life,
 and call she by the tender name of love and wife. 
oh prince! she cry, behold Cleora lose! 
and sink down, a guilty, guilty ghost;
 unless great angier race you can restore,
 i be wrack on earth with pang, and plunge into more. 
forgive your wife, let mountain hide her shame,
 i be the sin, mine the impetuous flame,
 and curse Cleora only be to blame. 
in this cabinet you will find the story write,
 if it be possible, my fatal crime forget. 
angiers to honour straight, and grace retrieve,
 and nature fault, let heav'en and you forgive:
 this say,
 nature ashamed, her soul to earth incline,
 break the weak tie of her majestic mind,
 that it may mount to pure region unconfined. 
reason and sense, from the affright king be flee,
 to hear the unsuspected guilt, and see her dead;
 revive, the search of truth his soul pursue,
 and with amazement, he the paper view,
 where every secret thought, he see confess,
 and every guilty wish that fill her breast;
 he groan to think how much he will be deceive,
 and say, no beauteous woman ever shall be believe. 

now to she tomb convey the unhappy fair;
 but busy fame will not be bury there:
 fame seem to join with our inveterate foe,
 spread our bad deed, and gather as it go;
 and with the rumour, royal mandate come,
 to call the injure suffering angiers home:
 reward, whoever bring the absent lord,
 and all his castle, and his land restore. 
angiers can scarce resolve to trust again
 the uncertain world, and faithless cruel man,
 hide in a lowly state, a mean retreat,
 he find some plague, but none like being great. 
now with a gentle lord, his age do rest,
 no care, nor envy, do his hour molest,
 and innocence and peace possess his breast. 
his child want the greatness of his name,
 nay he grow fond of the exalt fame:
 and as his son revolve in a tent,
 discant on change, death, and this strange event,
 both commiserate the guiltless hero fate;
 noble nature still, be most compassionate. 
attend angiers hear, and strait come forth,
 and with a look, that stamp his word for truth,
 begin:
 my lord, in pity, lend a ear,
 they be bless, who will not disdain the poor to hear:
 if you will admission to the king obtain,
 (for my endeavour, will, alas, prove vain)
 of that unhappy angiers, i may tell,
 i have meet he oft; indeed, i know he well:
 they say the favour lessen, when with pain it be seek,
 my friend, thou sure shall to the king be bring;
 to the royal tent, they strait their step direct,
 and have pay the king their due respect,
 thus mand'vill speak:
 this age man of my domestic train,
 who beg with i, to cross the british main;
 to your majesty, he sais, he can relate
 the history of your loft angiers fate:
 let he speak (hasty the king begin)
 for much i long to hear of that great injure man. 

as noble angiers speak, and form his tale,
 in such pathetic word, as must prevail;
 the king observe, with a intensive view,
 then start from his seat, cry angiers, it be you;
 those graceful look, and that dear faithful voice,
 in which my youth, with pleasure, do rejoice:
 quick to my arm, my constant wish restore,
 and fate shall never, never part we more. 
who can express the joy in every face,
 when they behold he kneel, and see the king embrace! 
the courtier flock, he be circle in the crowd,
 of those who strive to speak their welcome loud;
 soon to his wonder son, the story tell,
 how in the east their father they behold:
 in silence they their inward joy suppress,
 blush they not soon know their happiness. 
mand'vill sink with shame, when reflection bring
 his father sharp reproach to his revolve thought. 
angier soul be to that calmness grow,
 that he forgive the ill design, and those unknown:
 with tear, the worthy kneel hero raise,
 and to the king their deed and virtue praise. 
to make the earl return joy complete,
 a victory they gain, with wealth and honour great;
 they lead in triumph, the long suffering lord,
 and he be to thrice his former wealth restore. 
the news to violent, fame convey,
 and soon as that, she be beg to cross the sea:
 the king own yatch attend on her command,
 with all the greatness of the gallic land. 
florella here, see Fortune smoothe brow,
 great in her birth, as in her marriage now;
 of all her ill, wrong angiers may bemoan,
 he the chief notice take, of this alone,
 that she be brand mean, because unknown. 
to the earl marshal, this say, he declare,
 let he not still despise his charm heir:
 tell he the blood the female side supply,
 do from as old and great a fountain rise:
 the haughty marshal, do from she receive,
 the wondrous news, which they with joy believe,
 they all congratulate, then she take her leave. 
the bark be drive by auspicious gale,
 and prosperous wind fill all the swell sail;
 safe she be land in her father arm,
 add to the court, with her superior charm. 
now feast and joy, throughout the realm abound,
 revel and mask make up the circle round:
 thus they forget the tempest they have pass,
 and thus heroic virtue crown at last. 
