spring.

a pastoral ballad.

by mr. though. Brerewood.

when approach by the fair dewy finger of spring,
 swell bud open first, and look gay,
 when the bird on the bough by their mate sit and sing,
 and be dance by the breeze on each spray:

when gentle descend, the rain in soft shower,
 with its moisture refresh the ground,
 and the drop, as they hang on the plant and the flower,
 like rich gem beam a lustre around:

when the wood-pigeon sit on the branch and cooe,
 and the cuckoo proclaim with his voice,
 that nature mark this for the season to woo,
 and for all that can love to rejoice:

in a cottage at night may i spend all my time,
 in the field and the meadow all day,
 with a maiden who charm be as yet in their prime,
 young as April, and bloom as may:

when the lark with shrill note sing aloft in the morn,
 may my fair and i sweet wake,
 view the far distant hill which the sun beam adorn,
 then arise, and our cottage forsake. 

when the sun shine so warm, that my charmer and i
 may recline on the turf without fear,
 let we there all vain thought and ambition defy,
 while we breathe the first sweet of the year. 

be this spot on a hill, and a spring from its side
 bubble out and transparent flow,
 creep gentle along in meander, and glide
 through the vale strow with daisy below. 

while the bee fly from blossom to blossom and sip,
 and the violet their sweetness impart,
 let i hang on her neck, and so taste from her lip
 the rich cordial that thrill to the heart. 

while the dove sit lament the loss of its mate,
 which the fouler have catch in his snare,
 may we think ourselves bless that it be not our fate,
 to endure such a absence as they. 

may i listen to all her soft, tender, sweet note
 when she sing, and no sound interfere,
 but the warble of bird, which in stretch their throat
 be at strife to be loud than she. 

when the daisy, and cowslip, and primrose blow,
 and chequer the mead, and the lawn,
 may we see bound there the swift light-footed doe,
 and pursue with our eye the young fawn. 

when the lapwing just fledge over the turf take their run,
 and the sirstling be all at their play,
 and the harmless young lamb skip about in the sun,
 let we then be as frolic as they. 

when i talk of my love, shall i chance to espy,
 that she seem to mistrust what i say,
 by a tear that be ready to fall from her eye,
 with my lip let i wipe it away. 

if we sit, or we walk, may i cast round my eye,
 and let no single beauty escape,
 but see none to create so much love, and surprise,
 as her eye, and her face, and her shape. 

thus each day let we pass, till the bud turn to leaf;
 and the meadow around we be mown,
 when the lass on the sweet-smelling haycock receive,
 what she afterwards blush to own. 

when evening grow cool, and the flower hang their head
 with the dew, then no long we will roam,
 with my arm round her waist, in a path through the mead,
 let we hasten to find our way home. 

when the bird be at roost, with their head in their wing,
 each one by the side of its mate;
 when a mist that arise a drowsiness bring
 upon all but the owl and the bat:

when soft rest be require, and the star lend their light,
 and all nature lie quiet and still;
 when no sound break the sacred repose of the night,
 but, at distance, the clack of a mill:

with peace for our pillow, and free from all noise,
 so that voice in whisper be know,
 let we give and receive all the nameless soft joy,
 that be muse on by lover alone. 
