the library.

when the sad soul, by care and grief oppress,
 look round the world, but look in vain for rest;
 when every object that appear in view,
 partake her gloom and seem deject too;
 where shall affliction from itself retire? 
where fade away and placid expire? 
alas! we fly to silent scene in vain;
 care blast the honour of the flowery plain:
 care veil in cloud the sun meridian beam,
 sigh through the grove, and murmur in the stream;
 for when the soul be labour in despair,
 in vain the body breathe a pure air:
 no storm-tossed sailor sigh for slumber sea, —
 he dread the tempest, but invoke the breeze;
 on the smooth mirror of the deep reside
 reflect woe, and over unruffled tide
 the ghost of every former danger glide. 
thus, in the calm of life, we only see
 a steady image of our misery;
 but lively gale and gentle cloud sky
 disperse the sad reflection as they rise;
 and busy thought and little care avail
 to ease the mind, when rest and reason fail. 
when the dull thought, by no design employ,
 dwell on the past, or suffer or enjoy,
 we bleed anew in every former grief,
 and joy depart furnish no relief. 

not hope herself, with all her flatter art,
 can cure this stubborn sickness of the heart:
 the soul disdain each comfort she prepare,
 and anxious search for congenial care;
 those lenient care, which, with our own combine,
 by mix sensation ease the afflict mind,
 and steal our grief away, and leave their own behind;
 a light grief! which feeling heart endure
 without regret, nor even demand a cure. 

but what strange art, what magic can dispose
 the trouble mind to change its native woe? 
or lead we will from ourselves, to see
 other more wretched, more undo than we? 
this, book can do; — nor this alone; they give
 new view to life, and teach we how to live;
 they soothe the grieve, the stubborn they chastise,
 fool they admonish, and confirm the wise:
 their aid they yield to all: they never shun
 the man of sorrow, nor the wretch undo:
 unlike the hard, the selfish, and the proud,
 they fly not sullen from the suppliant crowd;
 nor tell to various people various thing,
 but show to subject, what they show to king. 

come, child of care! to make thy soul serene,
 approach the treasure of this tranquil scene;
 survey the dome, and, as the door unfold,
 the soul best cure, in all her care, behold! 
where mental wealth the poor in thought may find
 and mental physic the disease in mind;
 see here the balm that passion wound assuage;
 see cooler here, that damp the fire of rage;
 here alt'rative, by slow degree control
 the chronic habit of the sickly soul;
 and round the heart and over the ache head,
 mild opiate here their sober influence shed. 
now bid thy soul man busy scene exclude,
 and view compose this silent multitude: —
 silent they be — but, though deprive of sound,
 here all the live language abound;
 here all that live no more; preserve they lie,
 in tomb that open to the curious eye. 

bless be the gracious power, who teach mankind
 to stamp a last image of the mind! 
beast may convey, and tuneful bird may sing,
 their mutual feeling, in the open spring;
 but man alone have skill and power to send
 the heart warm dictate to the distant friend;
 it be his alone to please, instruct, advise
 age remote, and nation yet to rise. 

in sweet repose, when labour child sleep,
 when joy forget to smile and care to weep,
 when passion slumber in the lover breast,
 and fear and guilt partake the balm of rest,
 why then deny the studious man to share
 man common good, who feel his common care? 

because the hope be he, that bid he fly
 night soft repose, and sleep mild power defy;
 that after-age may repeat his praise,
 and fame fair meed be he, for length of day. 
delightful prospect! when we leave behind
 a worthy offspring of the fruitful mind! 
which, bear and nurse through many a anxious day,
 shall all our labour, all our care repay. 

yet all be not these birth of noble kind,
 not all the child of a vigorous mind;
 but where the wise shall alone preside
 the weak will rule we, and the blind will guide;
 nay, man best effort taste of man, and show
 the poor and trouble source from which they flow:
 where most he triumph, we his want perceive,
 and for his weakness in his wisdom grieve. 
but though imperfect all; yet wisdom love
 this seat serene, and virtue self approve: —
 here come the grieve, a change of thought to find;
 the curious here to feed a crave mind;
 here the devout their peaceful temple choose;
 and here the poet meet his favour muse. 

with awe, around these silent walk i tread;
 these be the last mansion of the dead: —
 "the dead!" methinks a thousand tongue reply;
 "these be the tomb of such as can die! 
" crown with eternal fame, they sit sublime,
 "and laugh at all the little strife of time." 

hail, then, immortal! the who shine above,
 each, in his sphere, the literary Jove;
 and you the common people of these sky,
 a humble crowd of nameless deity;
 whether it be you to lead the will mind
 through history maze, and the turn find;
 or whether, lead by science, you retire,
 lose and bewilder in the vast desire;
 whether the muse invite you to her bower,
 and crown your placid brow with live flower;
 or godlike wisdom teach you to show
 the noble road to happiness below;
 or man and manner prompt the easy page
 to mark the fly folly of the age:
 whatever good you boast, that good impart;
 inform the head and rectify the heart. 

lo, all in silence, all in order stand,
 and mighty folio first, a lordly band;
 then quarto their well-ordered rank maintain,
 and light octavo fill a spacious plain:
 see yonder, range in more frequent row,
 a humble band of duodecimo;
 while undistinguished trifle swell the scene,
 the last new play and fritter magazine. 
thus it be in life, where first the proud, the great,
 in league assembly keep their cumbrous state;
 heavy and huge, they fill the world with dread,
 be much admire, and be but little read:
 the commons next, a middle rank, be find;
 profession fruitful pour their offspring round;
 reasoner and wit be next their place allow,
 and last, of vulgar tribe a countless crowd. 

first, let we view the form, the size, the dress;
 for these the manner, nay the mind express;
 that weight of wood, with leathern coat overlay;
 those ample clasp, of solid metal make;
 the close-pressed leaf, unclosed for many a age;
 the dull red edge of the well-filled page;
 on the broad back the stubborn ridge roll
 where yet the title stand in tarnish gold;
 these all a sage and labour work proclaim,
 a painful candidate for last fame:
 no idle wit, no trifle verse can lurk
 in the deep bosom of that weighty work;
 no playful thought degrade the solemn style,
 nor one light sentence claim a transient smile. 

hence, in these time, untouched the page lie,
 and slumber out their immortality:
 they have their day, when, after all his toil,
 his morning study, and his midnight oil,
 at length a author one great work appear,
 by patient hope, and length of day, endear:
 expect nation hail it from the press;
 poetic friend prefix each kind address;
 prince and king receive the ponderous gift,
 and lady read the work they can not lift. 
fashion, though folly child, and guide of fool,
 rule even the wise, and in learn rule;
 from crowd and court to wisdom seat she go
 and reign triumphant over her mother foe. 
for lo! these favourite of the ancient mode
 lie all neglect like the birthday ode. 

Ah! needless now this weight of massy chain;
 safe in themselves, the once-loved work remain;
 no reader now invade their still retreat,
 none try to steal they from their parent-seat;
 like ancient beauty, they may now discard
 chain, bolt, and lock, and lie without a guard. 

our patient father trifle theme lay by,
 and roll, over labour work, the attentive eye:
 page after page, the much-enduring man
 explore, the deep and shallows of the pen;
 till, every former note and comment know,
 they mark the spacious margin with their own:
 minute correction prove their studious care;
 the little index, point, tell we where;
 and many a emendation show the age
 look far beyond the rubric titlepage. 

our nice palate light labour seek,
 cloy with a folio- once a week;
 bible, with cut and comment, thus go down:
 even light Voltaire be number through the town:
 thus physic fly abroad, and thus the law,
 from man of study, and from man of straw;
 abstract, abridgement, please the fickle time,
 pamphlet and play, and politics and rhyme:
 but though to write be now a task of ease,
 the task be hard by manly art to please,
 when all our weakness be expose to view
 and half our judge be our rival too. 

amid these work, on which the eager eye
 delight to fix, or glide reluctant by,
 when all combine, their decent pomp display,
 where shall we first our early offer pay? —

to thou, divinity! to thou, the light
 and guide of mortal, through their mental night;
 by who we learn our hope and fear to guide;
 to bear with pain, and to contend with pride;
 when grieve, to pray; when injure, to forgive;
 and with the world in charity to live. 

not truth like these inspire that numerous race,
 who pious labour fill this ample space;
 but question nice, where doubt on doubt arise,
 awake to war the long-contending foe. 
for dubious meaning, learn polemic strive,
 and war on faith prevent work of love;
 the brand of discord far around be hurl,
 and holy wrath inflame a sinful world: —
 dull though impatient, peevish though devout,
 with wit disgust, and despise without;
 saint in design, in execution man,
 peace in their look, and vengeance in their pen. 

methinks i see, and sicken at the sight,
 spirit of spleen from yonder pile alight;
 spirit who prompt every damn page,
 with pontiff pride and still-increasing rage:
 lo! how they stretch their gloomy wing around,
 and lash with furious stroke the tremble ground! 
they pray, they fight, they murder, and they weep, —
 wolf in their vengeance, in their manner sheep;
 too well they act the prophet fatal part,
 denounce evil with a zealous heart;
 and each, like Jonah, be displease if god
 repent his anger, or withhold his rod. 

but here the dormant fury rest unsought,
 and zeal sleep sound by the foe she fight;
 here all the rage of controversy end,
 and rival zealot rest like bosom-friend:
 an Athanasian here, in deep repose,
 sleep with the fierce of his Arian foe;
 socinian here with Calvinists abide,
 and thin partition angry chief divide;
 here wily jesuit simple Quakers meet,
 and Bellarmine have rest at luther foot. 
great author, for the church glory fire,
 be, for the church peace, to rest retire;
 and close beside, a mystic, maudlin race,
 lie "crumb of comfort for the babe of grace." 

against her foe religion well defend
 her sacred truth, but often fear her friend;
 if learn, their pride, if weak, their zeal she dread,
 and their heart 'weakness, who have sound head:
 but most she fear the controversial pen,
 the holy strife of disputatious man;
 who the bless gospel peaceful page explore,
 only to fight against its precept more. 

near to these seat, behold yond slender frame,
 all close fill and mark with modern name;
 where no fair science ever show her face,
 few spark of genius, and no spark of grace;
 there sceptic rest, a still-increasing throng,
 and stretch their widen wing ten thousand strong;
 some in close fight their dubious claim maintain;
 some skirmish light, fly and fight again;
 cold profane, and impious gay,
 their end the same, though various in their way. 

when first religion come to bless the land,
 her friend be then a firm believe band;
 to doubt be then to plunge in guilt extreme,
 and all be gospel that a monk can dream;
 insult reason flee the grovel soul,
 for fear to guide, and vision to control:
 but now, when reason have assume her throne,
 she, in her turn, demand to reign alone;
 reject all that lie beyond her view,
 and, be judge, will be a witness too:
 insult faith then leave the doubtful mind,
 to seek for truth, without a power to find:
 Ah! when will both in friendly beam unite,
 and pour on err man resistless light? 

next to the seat, well store with work divine,
 a ample space, philosophy! be thy;
 our reason guide, by who assist light
 we trace the moral bound of wrong and right;
 our guide through nature, from the sterile clay,
 to the bright orb of yond celestial way! 
it be thy, the great, the golden chain to trace,
 which run through all, connect race with race. 
save where those puzzle, stubborn link remain,
 which thy inferior light pursue in vain: —

how vice and virtue in the soul contend;
 how wide differ, yet how near blend;
 what various passion be on either part,
 and now confirm, now melt the yield heart:
 how fancy love around the world to stray,
 while judgement slow pick his sober way;
 the store of memory, and the flight sublime
 of genius, bind by neither space nor time; —
 all these divine philosophy explore,
 till, lose in awe, she wonder and adore. 

from these, descend to the earth, she turn,
 and matter, in its various form, discern;
 she part the beamy light with skill profound,
 Metes the thin air, and weigh the fly sound;
 it be she the lightning from the cloud to call,
 and teach the fiery mischief where to fall. 

yet more her volume teach, — on these we look
 as abstract draw from nature large book:
 here, first describe, the torpid earth appear,
 and next, the vegetable robe it wear;
 where flowery tribe, in valley, field, and grove,
 nurse the still flame, and feed the silent love;
 love, where no grief, nor joy, nor bliss, nor pain,
 warm the glad heart or vex the labour brain;
 but as the green blood move along the blade,
 the bed of Flora on the branch be make;
 where, without passion, love instinctive life,
 and give new life, unconscious that it give. 
advance still in nature maze, we trace,
 in den and burn plain, her savage race;
 with those tame tribe who on their lord attend,
 and find, in man, a master and a friend;
 man crown the scene, a world of wonder new,
 a moral world, that well demand our view. 

this world be here; for, of more lofty kind,
 these neighbour volume reason on the mind;
 they paint the state of man ere yet endue
 with knowledge; — man, poor, ignorant, and rude;
 then, as his state improve, their page swell,
 and all its care, and all its comfort, tell:
 here we behold how inexperience buy,
 at little price, the wisdom of the wise;
 without the trouble of a active state,
 without the care and danger of the great,
 without the misery of the poor, we know
 what wisdom, wealth, and poverty bestow;
 we see how reason calm the rage mind,
 and how contend passion urge mankind:
 some, win by virtue, glow with sacred fire;
 some, lure by vice, indulge the low desire;
 while other, win by either, now pursue
 the guilty chase, now keep the good in view;
 for ever wretched, with themselves at strife,
 they lead a puzzle, vex, uncertain life;
 for transient vice bequeathe a linger pain,
 which transient virtue seek to cure in vain. 

while thus engage, high view enlarge the soul,
 new interest draw, new principle control:
 nor thus the soul alone resign her grief,
 but here the torture body find relief;
 for see where yonder sage arachnè shape
 her subtle gin, that not a fly escape! 
there physic fill the space, and far around,
 pile above pile her learned work abound:
 glorious their aim — to ease the labour heart;
 to war with death, and stop his fly dart;
 to trace the source whence the fierce contest grow,
 and life short lease on easy term renew;
 to calm the phrensy of the burn brain;
 to heal the torture of implore pain;
 or, when more powerful ill all effort brave,
 to ease the victim no device can save,
 and smooth the stormy passage to the grave. 

but man, who know no good unmixed and pure,
 oft find a poison where he seek a cure;
 for grave deceiver lodge their labour here,
 and cloud the science they pretend to clear:
 scourge for sin, the solemn tribe be send;
 like fire and storm, they call we to repent;
 but storm subside, and fire forget to rage. 
these be eternal scourge of the age:
 it be not enough that each terrific hand
 spread desolation round a guilty land;
 but train to ill, and harden by its crime,
 their pen relentless kill through future time. 

say you, who search these record of the dead —
 who read huge work, to boast what you have read;
 can all the real knowledge you possess,
 or those — if such there be — who more than guess,
 atone for each impostor wild mistake,
 and mend the blunder pride or folly make? 

what think so wild, what airy dream so light,
 that will not prompt a theorist to write? 
what be so prevalent, what proof so strong,
 that will convince he his attempt be wrong? 
one in the solid find each lurk ill,
 nor grant the passive fluid power to kill;
 a learned friend some subtle reason bring,
 absolve the channel, but condemn their spring;
 the subtle nerve, that shun the doctor eye,
 escape no more his subtle theory;
 the vital heat, that warm the labour heart,
 lend a fair system to these son of art;
 the vital air, a pure and subtle stream,
 serve a foundation for a airy scheme,
 assist the doctor, and support his dream. 
some have their favourite ill, and each disease
 be but a young branch that kill from these:
 one to the gout contract all human pain;
 he view it rage in the frantic brain;
 find it in fever all his effort mar,
 and see it lurk in the cold catarrh:
 bilious by some, by other nervous see,
 rage the fantastic demon of the spleen;
 and every symptom of the strange disease
 with every system of the sage agree. 

you frigid tribe, on who i waste long
 the tedious hour, and never indulge in song;
 you first seducer of my easy heart,
 who promise knowledge you can not impart;
 you dull deluder, truth destructive foe;
 you son of fiction, clad in stupid prose;
 you treacherous leader, who, yourself in doubt,
 light up false fire, and send we far about; —
 still may yond spider round your page spin,
 subtle and slow, her emblematic gin! 
bury in dust and lose in silence, dwell,
 most potent, grave, and reverend friend — farewell! 

near these, and where the set sun display,
 through the dim window, his depart ray,
 and gild yond column, there, on either side,
 the huge abridgement of the law abide;
 fruitful as vice the dread corrector stand,
 and spread their guardian terror round the land;
 yet, as the best that human care can do,
 be mix with error, oft with evil too,
 skill in deceit, and practise to evade,
 knave stand secure, for who these law be make,
 and justice vain each expedient try,
 while art elude it, or while power defy. 
 "Ah! happy age," the youthful poet sing,
 "when the free nation know not law nor king;
" when all be bless to share a common store,
 "and none be proud of wealth, for none be poor;
" no war nor tumult vex each still domain,
 "no thirst of empire, no desire of gain;
" no proud great man, nor one who will be great,
 "drive modest merit from its proper state;
" nor into distant clime will avarice roam,
 "to fetch delight for luxury at home:
" bind by no tie which keep the soul in awe,
 "they dwell at liberty, and love be law!" 

 "mistake youth! each nation first be rude,
" each man a cheerless son of solitude,
 "to who no joy of social life be know,
" none feel a care that be not all his own;
 "or in some languid clime his abject soul
" bow to a little tyrant stern control;
 "a slave, with slave his monarch throne he raise,
" and in rude song his rude idol praise;
 "the mean care of life be all he know;
" bound his pleasure, and his wish few:
 "but when by slow degree the art arise,
" and science waken from her long repose;
 "when commerce, rise from the bed of ease,
" run round the land, and point to the sea;
 "when emulation, bear with jealous eye,
" and avarice, lend their spur to industry;
 "then one by one the numerous law be make,
" those to control, and these to succour trade;
 "to curb the insolence of rude command,
" to snatch the victim from the usurer hand;
 "to awe the bold, to yield the wrong redress,
" and feed the poor with luxury excess. " 

like some vast flood, unbounded, fierce, and strong,
 his nature lead ungoverned man along;
 like mighty bulwark make to stem that tide,
 the law be form, and place on every side:
 whenever it break the bound by these decree,
 new statute rise, and strong law succeed;
 more and more gentle grow the die stream,
 more and more strong the rise bulwark seem;
 till, like a miner work sure and slow,
 luxury creep on, and ruin all below;
 the basis sink, the ample pile decay;
 the stately fabric shake and fall away;
 primeval want and ignorance come on,
 but freedom, that exalt the savage state, be go. 

next, history rank; — there full in front she lie,
 and every nation her dread tale supply;
 yet history have her doubt, and every age
 with sceptic query mark the pass page;
 record of old nor late date be clear,
 too distant those, and these be place too near;
 there time conceal the object from our view,
 here our own passion and a writer too:
 yet, in these volume, see how state arise! 
guard by virtue from surround foe;
 their virtue lose, and of their triumph vain,
 lo! how they sink to slavery again! 
satiate with power, of fame and wealth possess,
 a nation grow too glorious to be bless;
 conspicuous make, she stand the mark of all,
 and foe join foe to triumph in her fall. 

thus speak the page that paint ambition race,
 the monarch pride, his glory, his disgrace;
 the headlong course, that madden hero run,
 how soon triumphant, and how soon undo;
 how slave, turn tyrant, offer crown to sale,
 and each fall nation melancholy tale. 

lo! where of late the book of martyr stand,
 old pious tract, and bible bind in wood;
 there, such the taste of our degenerate age,
 stand the profane delusion of the stage:
 yet virtue own the tragic muse a friend,
 fable her mean, morality her end;
 for this she rule all passion in their turn,
 and now the bosom bleed, and now it burn;
 pity with weep eye survey her bowl,
 her anger swell, her terror chill the soul;
 she make the vile to virtue yield applause,
 and own her sceptre while they break her law;
 for vice in other be abhor of all,
 and villain triumph when the worthless fall. 

not thus her sister comedy prevail,
 who shoot at folly, for her arrow fail;
 folly, by dullness arm, elude the wound,
 and harmless see the feather shaft rebound;
 unhurt she stand, applaud the archer skill,
 laugh at her malice, and be folly still. 
yet well the muse portray, in fancy scene,
 what pride will stoop to, what profession mean;
 how formal fool the farce of state applaud;
 how caution watch at the lip of fraud;
 the wordy variance of domestic life;
 the tyrant husband, the retort wife;
 the snare for innocence, the lie of trade,
 and the smooth tongue be habitual masquerade. 

with she the virtue too obtain a place,
 each gentle passion, each become grace;
 the social joy in life secure road,
 its easy pleasure, its substantial good;
 the happy thought that conscious virtue give,
 and all that ought to live, and all that life. 

but who be these? methinks a noble mien
 and awful grandeur in their form be see,
 now in disgrace: what though by time be spread
 pollute dust over every reverend head;
 what though beneath yond gild tribe they lie,
 and dull observer pass insult by:
 forbid it shame, forbid it decent awe,
 what seem so grave, shall no attention draw! 
come, let we then with reverend step advance,
 and greet — the ancient worthy of romance. 

hence, you profane! i feel a former dread,
 a thousand vision float around my head:
 Hark! hollow blast through empty court resound
 and shadowy form with stare eye stalk round;
 See! moat and bridge, wall and castle rise,
 ghost, fairy, demon, dance before our eye;
 lo! magic verse inscribe on golden gate,
 and bloody hand that beckon on to fate: —
 "and who be thou, thou little page, unfold? 
" say, do thy lord my Claribel withhold? 
 "go tell he straight, sir knight, thou must resign
" the captive queen; — for Claribel be i. " 
away he fly; and now for bloody deed,
 black suit of armour, mask, and foam steed;
 the giant fall; his recreant throat i seize,
 and from his corslet take the massy key: —
 duke, lord, and knight in long procession move,
 release from bondage with my virgin love: —
 she come! she come! in all the charm of youth,
 unequalled love, and unsuspected truth! 

Ah! happy he who thus, in magic theme,
 over world bewitch, in early rapture dream,
 where wild enchantment wave her potent wand,
 and fancy beauty fill her fairy land;
 where doubtful object strange desire excite,
 and fear and ignorance afford delight. 

but lose, for ever lose, to i these joy,
 which reason scatter, and which time destroy;
 too dear buy: maturer judgement call
 my busy mind from tale and madrigal;
 my doughty giant all be slay or flee,
 and all my knight — blue, green, and yellow — dead! 
no more the midnight fairy tribe i view,
 all in the merry moonshine tipple dew;
 even the last linger fiction of the brain,
 the churchyard ghost, be now at rest again;
 and all these wayward wander of my youth
 fly reason power, and shun the light of truth. 

with fiction then do real joy reside,
 and be our reason the delusive guide? 
be it then right to dream the siren sing? 
or mount enrapture on the dragon wing? 
no; it be the infant mind, to care unknown,
 that make the imagine paradise its own;
 soon as reflection in the bosom rise,
 light slumber vanish from the cloud eye:
 the tear and smile, that once together rise,
 be then divorce; the head and heart be foe:
 enchantment bow to wisdom serious plan,
 and pain and prudence make and mar the man. 

while thus, of power and fancy empire vain,
 with various thought my mind i entertain;
 while book, my slave, with tyrant hand i seize,
 please with the pride that will not let they please;
 sudden i find terrific thought arise,
 and sympathetic sorrow fill my eye;
 for, lo! while yet my heart admit the wound,
 i see the critic army range around. 

foe to our race! if ever you have know
 a father fear for offspring of your own;
 if ever, smile over a lucky line,
 you think the sudden sentiment divine,
 then pause and doubt, and then, tire of doubt,
 with rage as sudden dash the stanza out; —
 if, after fear much and pause long,
 you venture on the world your labour song,
 and from the crusty critic of those day
 implore the feeble tribute of their praise;
 remember now the fear that move you then,
 and, spite of truth, let mercy guide your pen. 

what venturous race be we! what mighty foe
 lie wait all around they to oppose! 
what treacherous friend betray they to the fight! 
what danger threaten they! — yet still they write:
 a hapless tribe! to every evil bear,
 who villain hate, and fool affect to scorn:
 stranger they come, amid a world of woe,
 and taste the large portion ere they go. 

pensive i speak, and cast my eye around;
 the roof, methinks, return a solemn sound;
 each column seem to shake, and cloud, like smoke,
 from dusty pile and ancient volume break;
 gather above, like mist condense they seem,
 exhale in summer from the rushy stream;
 like flow robe they now appear, and twine
 round the large member of a form divine;
 his silver beard, that sweep his age breast,
 his pierce eye, that inward light express,
 be see, — but cloud and darkness veil the rest. 
fear chill my heart: to one of mortal race,
 how awful seem the genius of the place! 
so in cimmerian shore, Ulysses see
 his parent-shade, and shrink in pious awe;
 like he i stand, and wrap in thought profound,
 when from the pity power break forth a solemn sound: —

 "care live with all; no rule, no precept save
" the wise from woe, no fortitude the brave;
 "grief be to man as certain as the grave:
" tempest and storm in life whole progress rise,
 "and hope shine dim through overcloud sky;
" some drop of comfort on the favour fall,
 "but shower of sorrow be the lot of all:
" partial to talent, then, shall heaven withdraw
 "the afflict rod, or break the general law? 
" shall he who soar, inspire by lofty view,
 "life little care and little pain refuse? 
" shall he not rather feel a double share
 "of mortal woe, when double arm to bear? 

 "hard be his fate who build his peace of mind
" on the precarious mercy of mankind;
 "who hope for wild and visionary thing,
" and mount over unknown sea with venturous wing:
 "but as, of various evil that befall
" the human race, some portion go to all;
 "to he perhaps the mild lot assign,
" who feel his consolation in his mind;
 "and, lock within his bosom, bear about
" a mental charm for every care without. 
 "even in the pang of each domestic grief,
" or health or vigorous hope afford relief;
 "and every wound the torture bosom feel,
" or virtue bear, or some preserver heal;
 "some generous friend, of ample power possess;
" some feel heart, that bleed for the distress;
 "some breast that glow with virtue all divine;
" some noble Rutland, misery friend and thy. 

 "nor say, the muse song, the poet pen,
" merit the scorn they meet from little man. 
 "with cautious freedom if the number flow,
" not wild high, nor pitiful low;
 "if vice alone their honest aim oppose,
" why so ashamed their friend, so loud their foe? 
 "happy for man in every age and clime,
" if all the son of vision deal in rhyme. 
 "go on, then, son of vision! still pursue
" thy airy dream; the world be dream too
 "ambition lofty view, the pomp of state,
" the pride of wealth, the splendour of the great,
 "strip of their mask, their care and trouble know,
" be vision far less happy than thy own:
 "go on! and, while the son of care complain,
" be wise gay and innocent vain;
 "while serious soul be by their fear undo,
" blow sportive bladder in the beamy sun,
 "and call they world! and bid the great show
" more radiant colour in their world below:
 "then, as they break, the slave of care reprove,
" and tell they, such be all the toy they love. " 
