a love letter.

by the same.

what shall i say to fix thy waver mind,
to chase thy doubt, and force thou to be kind?
what weight of argument can turn the scale,
if intercession from a lover fail?
by what shall i conjure thou to obey
this tender summons, nor prolong thy stay?
if unabated in this constant breast
that passion burn which once thy vow profess;
if absence have not chill the languid flame,
its ardour and its purity the same;
indulge those transport, and no more control
the dictate of thy fond consent soul;
by no vain scruple be thy purpose sway,
and only love implicit obey:
let inclination this debate decide,
nor be thy prudence, but thy heart thy guide:
but real prudence never can oppose
what love suggest, and gratitude avow:
the warm dear rapture which thy bosom move,
it be virtue to indulge, it be wisdom to improve:
for think how few the joy allow by fate,
how mix the cup, how short their long date!
how onward still the stream of pleasure flow!
that no reflux the rapid current know!
not even thy charm can bribe the ruthless hand
of rigid time, to stay his ebb sand;
fair as thou be, that beauty must decay;
the night of age succeed the bright day:
that check where nature sweet garden blow,
her white lily, and her warm rose;
those eye, those mean minister of love,
who, what thy lip can only utter, prove;
these must resign their lustre, those their bloom,
and find with mean charm one common doom:
pass but a few short year, this change must be;
nor one less dreadful shall thou mourn in i:
for though no chance can alienate my flame,
while thy to feed the lamp, shall burn the same,
yet shall the stream of year abate that fire,
and cold esteem succeed to warm desire:
then on thy breast unraptured shall i dwell,
nor feel a joy beyond what i can tell.
or say, shall sickness antedate that woe,
and intercept what time will else allow;
if pain shall pall my taste to all thy charm,
or death himself shall tear i from thy arm;
how will thou then regret with fruitless truth,
the precious squander hour of health and youth?
come then, my love, nor trust the future day,
live while we can, be happy while we may:
for what be life unless its joy we prove?
and what be happiness but mutual love?
our time be wealth no frugal hand can store,
all our possession be the present hour,
and he who spare to use it, ever poor.
the golden now be all that we can boast;
and that (like snow) at once be grasp and lose.
haste, wing thy passage then, no more delay,
but to these eye their sole delight convey.
not thus i languish for thy virgin charm,
when first surrender to these eager arm,
when first admit to that heaven, thy breast,
to i i strain that charm foe to rest;
how leap my conscious heart, while i retrace
the dear idea of that strict embrace?
when on thy bosom quite entranced i lie,
and love unsated the short night away;
while half reluctant you, and half resign,
amid fear, wish, pain and pleasure join,
now hold off, now grow to my breast,
by turn reprove i, and by turn caress.
oh! how remembrance throb in every vein!
i pant, i sicken for that scene again;
my sense ache, i can no word command,
and the pen totter in my tremble hand.
farewell, thou only joy on earth i know,
and all that man can taste of heaven below.
