the dowager.

by the same.

where aged elm in many a goodly row
give yearly shelter to the constant crow,
a mansion stand: — long since the pile be raise,
who gothic grandeur the rude hind amaze.
for the rich ornament on every part,
confess the founder wealth, and workman art:
though as the range of the wide court we tread,
the break arch now totter over the head;
and where of old rose high the social smoke,
now swallow build, and lonely raven croak.
though time, who touch each beauty can deface,
have tear from every tower the sculpture grace;
though round each stone the sluggard ivy crawl,
yet ancient state sit hover on the wall.

where wont the festal chorus to resound,
and jocund dance frequent beat the ground,
now silence spread around her gloomy reign,
save when the mastiff clank his iron chain,
save when his hoarse bark echo dire alarm,
fierce to protect the place from midnight harm,
its only guard; no revel sound late
drive the night villain from the lonely gate.
a hallow matron and her simple train
these solemn battlement alone contain;
a hoary dowager, who placid face
old age have deck with lovely awful grace;
with almost vernal bloom her cheek still strow,
as beauty linger leave her love abode;
that love abode, where join with truth and sense
she form the feature to mute eloquence,
and bid they charm the still attentive throng,
who watch the sacred lesson of her tongue.
for not through life the dame have live retire,
but once have shine, even amid a court admire:
what time the love possessor of her charm
return from the war in victor arm,
call from his monarch tongue the plausive praise,
while honour wreathe he with unfading bay.
she, happy partner of each joyful hour,
then walk serene amid the pomp of power:
while all confess no warrior wish can move
for fair prize, than such accomplish love:
nor to that love can aught more transport yield,
than graceful valour from the victor field.
thus flourish once the beauteous and the brave;
but mortal bliss meet still the untimely grave:
Aurelius die — his relict pious tear
over his love ash frequent flow sincere,
each decent rite with due observance pay,
each solemn requiem offer to his shade,
place amid the brave his urn in holy ground,
and bid his hallow banner wave around.
then leave the gaudy scene of pomp and power,
while prudence beckon to that ancient bower,
and those paternal field, the sole remains
of ample wood and far-extended plain,
which tyrant custom rude tear away
to distant heirship a expect prey.
serene she seek the far-retired grove,
once the bless mansion of her happy love,
please with the thought, that memory oft will raise
a solemn prospect of those bloom day
Aurelius give: her pious purpose now
to keep still constant to her sacred vow;
in lonely luxury her sorrow feed,
and pass her life in widow decent weed.
one pledge of love her comfort still remain,
who in this solitude she careful train
to virtuous lore; and while as year by year
new grace make Aurelia still more dear;
full many a hour unheeded she will trace
the father semblance in the daughter face;
while tender sigh oft heave her faithful breast,
and sudden tear her last love express.
thus long she dwell in innate virtue great,
amid the villager in sacred state:
for every grace to which submission bow,
the power which conscious dignity bestow,
she feel superior; for from ancient race
she glory her long ancestry to trace;
and ever bid aurelia thought aspire
to every grace, each ray of sacred fire,
that full of heaven-born dignity inform
the mortal breast which ardent virtue warm;
then lead she to the venerable hall
where her successive sire adorn the wall,
and arch window with their blazon bright
shed through the herald glow a solemn light:
there clad in rough habiliment of war
full many a hero bear a glorious scar;
there in the civic for the son of peace,
who counsel bid their country tumult cease;
while by their side, grace the ancient scene,
hang gentle lady of most comely mien.
then eager through the wellknown tale she run,
in what fair cause each honour have be win,
what female grace each virgin have possess
to charm to gentle love the manly breast;
please to observe how long her generous blood
through fair and brave have pass a spotless flood.
mean while the young aurelia bosom fire
with emulation by each tale inspire,
in eager transport frequent breathe her prayer
the grace of her ancestry to share:
nor breathe in vain, her fond maternal guide
cherish with care each spark of virtuous pride;
and ever as she give a lesson new,
will point some old example to her view:
inflame by this, her mind be quick fraught
with each sage precept, that her mother teach.
the goodly dame thus bless in she employ,
feel each soft transport of parental joy,
and live content, her utmost wish fulfil
in the fair prospect of a virtuous child:
resign she wait now the awful hour
then death shall raise she to that heavenly bower,
there with her love Aurelius she may share
the please task, to watch with guardian care
their offspring step, and hover over her head,
the gracious dew of heavenly peace to shed;
nor fear her decency of life will prove
a add bliss to all the joy above.
