γνωθι ΣEΑΥΤΟΝ. 

know your self. 

by the late dr. Arbuthnot.

what be i? how produce? and for what end?
whence draw i being? to what period tend:
be i the abandon orphan of blind chance,
drop by wild atom in disorder dance?
or from a endless chain of cause wrought,
and of unthinking substance, bear with thought?
by motion which begin without a cause,
supreme wise, without design or law?
be i but what i seem, mere flesh and blood;
a branch channel, with a mazy flood?
the purple stream that through my vessel glide,
dull and unconscious flow, like common tide:
the pipe through which the circle juice stray,
be not that think i, no more than they:
this frame compact with transcendent skill,
of move joint obedient to my will,
nurse from the fruitful glebe, like yonder tree,
wax and waste; i call it i, not i.
new matter still the moulder mass sustain,
the mansion change, the tenant still remain;
and from the fleet stream, repair by food,
distinct, as be the swimmer from the flood.
what be i then, sure, of a noble birth.
by parent right, i own as mother, earth;
but claim superior lineage by my sire,
who warm the unthinking clod with heavenly fire:
essence divine, with lifeless clay allay,
by double nature, double instinct sway;
with look erect, i dart my longing eye,
seem winge to part, and gain my native sky;
i strive to mount, but strive, alas! in vain,
tie to this massy globe with magic chain.
now with swift thought i range from pole to pole,
view world around their flame centre roll:
what steady power their endless motion guide,
through the same trackless path of boundless void!
i trace the blaze comet fiery trail,
and weigh the whirl planet in a scale:
these godlike thought, while eager i pursue
some glitter trifle offer to my view,
a gnat, a insect, of the mean kind,
erase the new-born image from my mind;
some beastly want, crave, importunate,
vile as the grin mastiff at my gate,
call off from heavenly truth this reason i,
and tell i, i be a brute as much as he.
if on sublime wing of love and praise,
my soul above the starry vault i raise,
lure by some vain conceit, or shameful lust,
i flag, i drop, and flutter in the dust.
the tower lark thus from her lofty strain,
stoop to a emmet, or a barley grain.
by adverse gust of jar instinct toss,
i rove to one, now to the other coast;
to bliss unknown my lofty soul aspire,
my lot unequal to my vast desire.
as among the hind a child of royal birth
find his high pedigree by conscious worth;
so man, among his fellow brute expose,
see he be a king, but it be a king depose.
pity he, beast! you by no law confine,
be bar from devious path by be blind;
while man, through open view of various way
confound, by the aid of knowledge stray;
too weak to choose, yet choose still in haste,
one moment give the pleasure and distaste;
bilk by past minute, while the present cloy,
the flatter future still must give the joy:
not happy, but amuse upon the road,
and (like you) thoughtless of his last abode,
whether next sun his being shall restrain
to endless nothing, happiness or pain.

around i, lo, the think thoughtless crew,
(bewilder each) their different path pursue;
of they i ask the way; the first reply,
thou be a god; and send i to the sky:
down on the turf the next, thou two-legged beast,
there fix thy lot, thy bliss and endless rest:
between these wide extreme the length be such,
i find i know too little or too much.

"almighty power, by who most wise command,
"helpless, forlorn, uncertain here i stand;
"take this faint glimmer of thyself away,
"or break into my soul with perfect day! "
this say, expand lay the sacred text,
the balm, the light, the guide of soul perplex.
thus the benight traveller that stray
through doubtful path, enjoy the morning ray;
the nightly mist, and thick descend dew,
part, unfold the field, and vault blue.
"o truth divine! enlighten by thy ray,
"i grope and guess no more, but see my way;
"thou clear the secret of my high descent,
"and tell i what those mystic token mean;
"mark of my birth, which i have wear in vain,
"too hard for worldly sage to explain.
"zeno be vain, vain epicurus scheme,
"their system false, delusive be their dream:
"unskilled my twofold nature to divide,
"one nurse my pleasure, and one nurse my pride:
"those jar truth which human art beguile,
"thy sacred page thus bid i reconcile."
offspring of god, no less thy pedigree,
what thou once be, be now, and still may be,
thy god alone can tell, alone decree;
faultless thou drop from his unerring skill,
with the bare power to sin, since free of will:
yet charge not with thy guilt his bounteous love,
for who have power to walk, have power to rove:
who act by force impel, can nought deserve;
and wisdom short of infinite may swerve.
Borne on thy new imp wing, thou took thy flight,
leave thy creator, and the realm of light;
disdain his gentle precept to fulfil;
and think to grow a god by do ill:
though by foul guilt thy heavenly form deface,
in nature change, from happy mansion chase,
thou still retain some spark of heavenly fire,
too faint to mount, yet restless to aspire;
angel enough to seek thy bliss again,
and brute enough to make thy search in vain.
the creature now withdraw their kindly use,
some fly thou, some torment, and some seduce;
repast ill suit to such different guest,
for what thy sense desire, thy soul distaste;
thy lust, thy curiosity, thy pride,
curb, or defer, or balk, or gratify,
rage on, and make thou equal unblessed,
in what thou want, and what thou have possess.
in vain thou hope for bliss on this poor clod,
return and seek thy father, and thy god:
yet think not to regain thy native sky,
bear on the wing of vain philosophy;
mysterious passage! hide from human eye;
soar you will sink, and sink you will rise:
let humble thought thy wary footstep guide,
repair by meekness what you lose by pride.
