truth and falsehood.

a fable.

soon as the iron age on earth begin,
 and vice find easy entrance into man;
 forth from her cave infernal falsehood come;
 falsehood, the hate of god, of man the shame:
 a silken robe she wear, of various hue,
 its colour change with each different view:
 studious to cheat, and eager to beguile,
 she mimic truth, and ap she heavenly smile;
 but mimic truth in vain; the vary vest,
 to every search eye, the fiend confess. 

at length she see celestial truth appear:
 serene her brow, and cheerful be her air;
 her silver lock with shine fillet bind,
 with laurel wreath her peaceful temple crown:
 a lily robe be gird round her waist;
 and, over her arm, a radiant mantle cast:
 with decent negligence, it hang behind;
 and, loose flow, wanton in the wind. 
thus truth advance, unknowing of deceit;
 and falsehood, bow low, begin the cheat:

hail, charm maid, bright as the morning star,
 daughter of Jove, and heaven peculiar care! 
it be thy to weigh the world in equal scale,
 and chide the conscious soul, when vice prevail,
 dispense justice with impartial hand,
 the mighty power submit to thy command:
 even god themselves, though in their action free,
 consult, resolve, and act, as you decree:
 great sovereign Jove, the first ethereal name,
 advise with thou to form the heavenly frame:
 as truth approve, he bid the fabric rise,
 and spread the azure mantle of the sky;
 place every planet in its proper sphere,
 nor roll this orb too wide, nor that too near —
 but why thus walk we, mindless of our ease,
 expose beneath the sun meridian blaze? 
better retire, and shun the scorch ray,
 till fan zephyr cool our evening way. 
hear how yond limpid stream run murmur by,
 and tuneful bird their sylvan note apply;
 see fragrant shrub along the border grow,
 and wave shade beneath the poplar bough;
 all these invite we to the river side,
 to bathe our limb, and sport within the tide:
 so cool the stream, the flowery bank so sweet,
 diana self may covet the retreat:
 nor can a short diversion check your haste;
 fresh strength will soon succeed such welcome rest:
 as rapid current, hold awhile at bay,
 with swift force pursue their liquid way. 

so speak the phantom; and, with friendly look
 support what she say, approach the brook:
 truth follow, artless, unsuspicious maid! 
and, in a evil hour, the voice obey. 
both, at the crystal stream arrive, unbind
 their different robe; both cast they to the ground:
 the fiend, upon the margin, linger stand;
 the naked goddess leap into the flood:
 sport, she swim the liquid surface over,
 unmindful of the matchless robe she wear. 
not falsehood so — she hasty seize the vest,
 and with the beauteous spoil herself she dress:
 then, winge with joy, outfly the swift wind,
 her own infernal robe far leave behind. 
straight she aspire above her former state,
 and gain admittance to the rich and great:
 nay, such her dare pride, that some report,
 when thus equip, she bold go to court:
 there speak and look with such a graceful air,
 mistake fame pronounce her wise and fair. 
she fill the wanton tongue with specious name,
 to deal in wound, and death, in dart, and flame;
 he prefaced all his lewd attempt with love;
 and fraud prevail, where reason can not move. 
at length she mingle with the learned throng,
 and tune the muse mercenary song. 
in all the labyrinth of logic skill,
 she teach the subtle reasoner not to yield;
 instruct how to puzzle each dispute,
 and bold baffle man, though not confute. 
now, at the bar, she play the lawyer part;
 and shape out right and wrong by rule of art:
 now, in the senate, raise her pompous tone;
 talk much of public good, but mean she own. 
oft to the olympian field she turn her eye,
 and teach the racer how to gain the prize. 
in school and temple too she claim a share,
 while falsehood self admire her influence there. 

delude truth observe the fraud too late,
 nor know she to repair a loss so great:
 in vain her heavenly robe she, sigh, seek;
 in vain the humid pearl bedew her cheek;
 in vain she tear the laurel from her hair,
 while nature seem to sympathize her care:
 the glow flower, that crown th'enamele mead,
 weep fragrant dew, and hang their droop head;
 the sylvan choirs, as conscious of her pain,
 deplore her loss in melancholy strain. 
thus, pensive and unclothe, upon the shore
 she stand; and see the robe, which falsehood wear:
 detest sight! nor long now she mourn;
 but, grief to rage transform, with anger burn:
 into the stream, the hellish robe she toss;
 and scorn a habit, so unlike the lose. 

hence truth now naked rove, as in disgrace;
 none, but the wise and virtuous, see her face:
 from city far she modest retreat,
 from busy scene of life, to peaceful seat;
 be chief find in lonely field and cell,
 where silence reign, and contemplation dwell. 
hence falsehood cheat we in the fair disguise,
 and seem truth self to all unwary eye;
 triumph and thrive, in power, and wealth, and fame;
 and build her glory on her rival name;
 with safety dare to flatter, fawn, and sooth;
 for who know falsehood, when array like truth? 
