ode for music.

perform at the theatre in OXFORD, on the second of July, mdccli, be the anniversary appoint by the late lord crew, bishop of Durham, for the commemoration of benefactor to the university.

by the same.

i 

where shall the muse, that on the sacred shell
 of man in art and arm renowned
 the solemn strain delight to swell;
 o! where shall Clio choose a race,
 who fame with every laurel, every grace,
 like those of albion envy isle, have crown? 
daughter and mistress of the sea,
 all-honoured Albion, hail! 
whereve thy commerce spread the swell sail,
 never shall she find a land like thou,
 so brave, so learn, and so free;
 all-honoured Albion, hail! 

ii.

but in the princely land of all that be good and great,
 will Clio seek the most distinguish seat,
 most bless, where all be so sublime bless,
 that with superior grace overlook the rest,
 like a rich gem in circle gold enshrine;
 where isis water wind
 along the sweet shore
 that ever feel fair culture hand,
 or spring embroider mantle wear,
 lo! where majestic Oxford stand;
 virtue awful throne! 
wisdom immortal source! 
thou well she best belove may boast Albion own,
 whence each fair purpose of ingenuous praise,
 all that in thought or deed divine be deem,
 in one unbounded tide, one unremitted course,
 from age to age have still successive stream;
 where learning and where liberty have nurse,
 for those that in their rank have shine the first,
 their most luxuriant growth of ever-blooming bay. 

iii.

in ancient day, when she the queen endue
 with more than female fortitude,
 bonduca lead her paint rank to fight;
 ofttime, in adamantine arm array,
 Pallas descend from the realm of light,
 imperial britonesse! thy kindred aid,
 as once, all-glowing from the well-fought day,
 the goddess seek a cool stream,
 by chance, invite with their glassy gleam,
 fair isis water flow not far away. 
eager she view the wave,
 on the cool bank she bare her breast,
 to the soft gale her lock ambrosial give;
 and thus the watery nymph address. 
hear, gentle nymph, whoever thou be,
 thy sweet refresh store impart:
 a goddess from thy mossy brink
 ask of thy crystal stream to drink:
 lo! Pallas ask the friendly gift;
 thy coral crown tress lift,
 rise from the wave, propitious power,
 o listen from thy pearly bower! 

iv.

her accent isis calm attention catch,
 as lonesome, in her secret cell,
 in ever-varying hue, as mimic fancy teach,
 she range the many-tinctured shell:
 then from her work arise the nais mild;
 she rise, and sweet smile
 with many a lovely look,
 that whisper soft consent:
 she smile, and give the goddess in her flood
 to dip her casque, though die in recent blood;
 while Pallas, as the boon she take,
 thus pour the grateful sentiment. 
for this, thy flood the fair name
 of all britannia stream shall glide,
 best favourite of the son of fame,
 of every tuneful breast the pride:
 for on thy border, bounteous queen,
 where now the cowslip paint the green
 with unregarded grace,
 her wanton herd where nature feed,
 as lonesome over the breezy reed
 she bend her silent pace;
 lo! there, to wisdom goddess dear,
 a far-famed city shall her turret rear,
 there all her force shall Pallas prove;
 of classic leaf with every crown,
 each olive, meed of old renown,
 each ancient wreath, which Athens weave,
 i will bid her bloom bower abound;
 and oxford sacred seat shall tower
 to thou, mild nais of the flood,
 the trophy of my gratitude! 
the temple of my power! 

v. 

nor be the pious promise vain;
 soon illustrious Alfred come,
 and pitch fair wisdom tent on isis plenteous plain. 
Alfred, on thou shall all the muse wait,
 Alfred, majestic name! 
of all our praise the spring! 
thou all thy sun shall sing,
 deck with the marshal and the civic wreath;
 in note most awful shall the trumpet breathe
 to thou, great Romulus of learning rich stare. 

vi.

nor alfred bounteous hand alone,
 Oxford, thy rise temple own:
 soon many a man munificent,
 the prince, the prelate, laurel-crowned crowd,
 their ample bounty lend
 to build the beauteous monument,
 that Pallas vow. 
and now she lift her head sublime
 majestic in the moss of time;
 nor want there grecia better part. 
 amid the proud pile of ancient art,
 who fret spire, with rude hand,
 wainfleet and Wickham brave plan;
 nor decent doric to dispense
 new charm amid old magnificence;
 and here and there soft Corinth wear
 her daedal coronet of leaf;
 while, as with rival pride their tower invade the sky,
 Radcliffe and Bodley seem to rye,
 which shall deserve the foremost place,
 or gothic strength, or attic grace. 

vii.

o Isis! ever will i chant thy praise:
 not that thy son have strike the golden lyre
 with hand most skilful; have their brow entwine
 with every fair flower of Helicon,
 the sweet swan of all the harmonious choir;
 have bid the muse mind
 of every science pierce the pathless way,
 and from the rest the wreath of wisdom win;
 but that thy son have dare to feel
 for freedom cause a sacred zeal;
 with british breast, and patriot pride,
 have still corruption cup defy;
 in dangerous day untaught to fear,
 have hold the name of honour dear. 

viii.

but chief of this illustrious day,
 the muse her loud paean love to pay. 
ere while she strive with accent weak
 in vain to build the lofty rhyme;
 at length, by better day of bounty cheere,
 she dare unfold her wing. 
hail hour of transport most sublime! 
in which, the man revere
 immortal crew command to sing,
 and give the pipe to breathe, the string to speak. 

ix.

bless prelate, hail! 
most pious patron, most triumphant theme! 
from who auspicious hand
 on isis tower new beauty beam,
 new praise her nurse father gain;
 immortal crew! 
bless prelate, hail! 
even now fire fancy see thou lead
 to fame high-seated fane
 the shout band! 
over every hallow head
 fame choice wreath she see thou spread:
 Alfred superior smile the solemn scene to view;
 and bid the goddess lift
 her loud trumpet to proclaim,
 o crew! thy consecrate gift,
 and echo with his own in social strain thy name. 
