Blenheim. 

write at the university of Oxford in the year 1727. 

by the same.

parent of art, who skilful hand first teach
the tower pile to rise, and form the plan
with fair proportion; architect divine,
Minerva, thou to my adventurous lyre
assistant i invoke, the mean to sing
blenhemia, monument of british fame,
thy glorious work! for thou the lofty tower
do to his virtue raise, who oft thy shield
in peril guard, and thy wisdom steer
through all the storm of war. — thou too i call,
Thalia, sylvan Muse, who love to rove
along the shady path and verdant bower
of woodstock happy grove: there tune sweet
thy rural pipe, while all the dryad train
attentive listen; let thy warble song
paint with melodious praise the please scene,
and equal these to pindus honour shade.

when Europe free, confess the save power
of marlb'rough hand; Britain who send he forth
chief of confederate host, to fight the cause
of liberty and justice, grateful raise
this palace sacred to her leader fame;
a trophy of success; with spoil adorn
of conquer town, and glory in the name
of that auspicious field, where Churchill sword
vanquish the might of Gallia, and chastise
rebel Bavar. — majestic in its strength
stand the proud dome, and speak its great design.

hail happy chief, who valour can deserve
reward so glorious! grateful nation hail,
who pay his service with so rich a meed!
which most shall i admire, which worthy praise,
the hero or the people? honour doubt,
and weigh their virtue in a equal scale.
not thus Germania pay the uncancel debt
of gratitude to we. — blush, Caesar, blush,
when thou behold these tower, ingrate to thou
a monument of shame. can thou forget
whence they be name, and what a english arm
do for thy throne that day? but we disdain
or to upbraid, or imitate thy guilt.
steel thy obdurate heart against the sense
of obligation infinite, and know,
Britain, like heaven, protect a thankless world
for her own glory, nor expect reward.

please with the noble theme, her task the muse
pursue untired, and through the palace rove
with ever-new delight. the tapestry rich
with gold, and gay with all the beauteous paint
of various-coloured silk, dispose with skill,
attract her curious eye. here Ister roll
his purple wave; and there the granic flood
with pass squadron foam: here hardy Gaul
fly from the sword of Britain; there to Greece
effeminate Persia yield. — in arm oppose
marlb'rough and Alexander vie for fame
with glorious competition; equal both
in valour and in fortune, but their praise
be different, for with different view they fight;
this to subdue, and that to free mankind.

now through the stately portal issue forth,
the muse to soft glory turn and seek
the woodland shade, delight. not the vale
of Tempé fame in song, or ida grove
such beauty boast. amid the mazy gloom
of this romantic wilderness once stand
the bower of rosamonda, hapless fair,
sacred to grief and love: the crystal fount
in which she use to bathe her beauteous limb
still warble flow, please to reflect the face
of spencer, lovely maid, when tire she fit
beside its flowery brink, and view those charm
which only Rosamond can once excel.
but see where flow with a noble stream,
a limpid lake of pure water roll
beneath the wide-stretched arch, stupendous work,
through which the Danube may collect pour
his spacious urn! silent awhile and smooth
the current glide, till with a headlong force
break and disorder, down the steep it fall
in loud cascade; the silver-sparkling foam
glitter relucent in the dance ray.

in these retreat repose the mighty soul
of Churchill, from the toil of war and state,
splendid private, and the tranquil joy
of contemplation feel, while blenheim dome
triumphal, ever in his mind renew
the memory of his fame, and soothe his thought
with please record of his glorious deed.
so by the rage of faction, home recall,
Lucullus, while he wage successful war
against the pride of Asia, and the power
of Mithridates, who aspire mind
no loss can subdue, enrich with spoil
of conquer nation, back return to Rome,
and in magnificent retirement past
the evening of his life. — but not alone,
in the calm shade of honourable ease,
great marlb'rough peaceful dwell: indulgent heaven
give a companion to his soft hour,
with who converse, he forget all change
of fortune, or of taste, and in her mind
find greatness equal to his own, and love
himself in she. — thus each by each admire,
in mutual honour, mutual fondness join:
like two fair star with intermingle light,
in friendly union they together shine,
aid each other brightness, till the cloud
of night eternal quench the beam of one.
thou Churchill first the ruthless hand of death
tear from thy consort side, and call thou hence
to the sublime seat of joy and love;
where fate again shall join her soul to thy,
who now, regardful of thy fame, erect
the column to thy praise, and sooth her woe
with pious honour to thy sacred name
immortal. lo! where tower on the height
of yond aërial pillar proud stand
thy image, like a guardian god, sublime,
and awe the subject plain: beneath his foot,
the german eagle spread their wing, his hand
grasp victory, its slave. such be the brow
majestic, such thy martial port, when Gaul
flee from thy frown, and in the Danube seek
a refuge from thy sword. — there, where the field
be deep stain with gore, on hochstet plain,
the theatre of thy glory, once be raise
a mean trophy, by the imperial hand;
extort gratitude; which now the rage
of malice impotent, beseem ill
a regal breast, have level to the ground:
mean insult! this with better auspices
shall stand on british earth, to tell the world
how marlb'rough fight, for who, and how repay
his service. nor shall the constant love
of she who raise the monument be lose
in dark oblivion: that shall be the theme
of future bard in age yet unborn,
inspire with chaucer fire, who in these grove
first tune the british harp, and little deem
his humble dwelling shall the neighbour be
of Blenheim, house superb; to which the throng
of traveller approach, shall not pass
his roof unnoted, but respectful hail
with reverence due. such honour do the muse
obtain her favourite. — but the noble pile
(my theme) demand my voice. — o shade adore,
marlb'rough! who now above the starry sphere
dwell in the palace of heaven, enthrone
among the demi-god, deign to defend
this thy abode, while present here below,
and sacred still to thy immortal fame,
with tutelary care. preserve it safe
from time be destroy hand, and cruel stroke
of factious envy more relentless rage.
here may, long age hence, the british youth,
when honour call they to the field of war,
behold the trophy which thy valour raise;
the proud reward of thy successful toil
for europe freedom, and britannia fame:
that fire with generous envy, they may dare
to emulate thy deed. — so shall thy name,
dear to thy country, still inspire her son
with martial virtue: and to high attempt
excite their arm, till other battle win,
and nation save, new monument require,
and other blenheim shall adorn the land.
