BLENHEIM. 

Written at the University of Oxford in the Year 1727.

By the Same.

PARENT of arts, whose skilful hand first taught
The tow'ring pile to rise, and form'd the plan
With fair proportion; architect divine,
Minerva, thee to my advent'rous lyre
Assistant I invoke, the means to sing
BLENHEMIA, monument of British fame,
Thy glorious work! for thou the lofty tow'rs
Didst to his virtue raise, whom oft thy shield
In peril guarded, and thy wisdom steer'd
Through all the storms of war. — Thee too I call,
Thalia, sylvan Muse, who lov'st to rove
Along the shady paths and verdant bow'rs
Of Woodstock's happy grove: there tuning sweet
Thy rural pipe, while all the Dryad train
Attentive listen; let thy warbling song
Paint with melodious praise the pleasing scene,
And equal these to Pindus' honour'd shades.

When Europe freed, confess'd the saving pow'r
Of MARLB'ROUGH'S hand; Britain who sent him forth
Chief of confed'rate hosts, to fight the cause
Of Liberty and Justice, grateful rais'd
This palace sacred to her Leader's fame;
A trophy of success; with spoils adorn'd
Of conquer'd towns, and glorying in the name
Of that auspicious field, where CHURCHILL'S sword
Vanquish'd the might of Gallia, and chastis'd
Rebel Bavar. — Majestick in its strength
Stands the proud dome, and speaks its great design.

Hail happy Chief, whose valour could deserve
Reward so glorious! grateful nation hail,
Who paid'st his service with so rich a meed!
Which most shall I admire, which worthiest praise,
The Hero or the People? Honour doubts,
And weighs their virtues in an equal scale.
Not thus Germania pays th' uncancell'd debt
Of gratitude to us. — Blush, Caesar, blush,
When thou behold'st these tow'rs, ingrate to thee
A monument of shame. Canst thou forget
Whence they are nam'd, and what an English arm
Did for thy throne that day? But we disdain
Or to upbraid, or imitate thy guilt.
Steel thy obdurate heart against the sense
Of obligation infinite, and know,
Britain, like Heav'n, protects a thankless world
For her own glory, nor expects reward.

Pleas'd with the noble theme, her task the Muse
Pursues untir'd, and through the palace roves
With ever-new delight. The tap'stry rich
With gold, and gay with all the beauteous paint
Of various-colour'd silks, dispos'd with skill,
Attracts her curious eye. Here Ister rolls
His purple wave; and there the Granic flood
With passing squadrons foams: here hardy Gaul
Flies from the sword of Britain; there to Greece
Effeminate Persia yields. — In arms oppos'd
MARLB'ROUGH and ALEXANDER vie for fame
With glorious competition; equal both
In valour and in fortune, but their praise
Be diff'rent, for with diff'rent views they fought;
This to subdue, and that to free mankind.

Now through the stately portals issuing forth,
The Muse to softer glories turns and seeks
The woodland shade, delighted. Not the vale
Of Tempé fam'd in song, or Ida's grove
Such beauty boasts. Amid the mazy gloom
Of this romantick wilderness once stood
The bow'r of Rosamonda, hapless fair,
Sacred to grief and love: the crystal fount
In which she us'd to bathe her beauteous limbs
Still warbling flows, pleas'd to reflect the face
Of SPENCER, lovely maid, when tir'd she fits
Beside its flow'ry brink, and views those charms
Which only Rosamond could once excel.
But see where flowing with a nobler stream,
A limpid lake of purest waters rolls
Beneath the wide-stretch'd arch, stupendous work,
Through which the Danube might collected pour
His spacious urn! Silent awhile and smooth
The current glides, till with an headlong force
Broke and disorder'd, down the steep it falls
In loud cascades; the silver-sparkling foam
Glitters relucent in the dancing ray.

In these retreats repos'd the mighty soul
Of CHURCHILL, from the toils of war and state,
Splendidly private, and the tranquil joy
Of contemplation felt, while BLENHEIM'S dome
Triumphal, ever in his mind renew'd
The mem'ry of his fame, and sooth'd his thoughts
With pleasing record of his glorious deeds.
So by the rage of faction, home recall'd,
Lucullus, while he wag'd successful war
Against the pride of Asia, and the pow'r
Of Mithridates, whose aspiring mind
No losses could subdue, enrich'd with spoils
Of conquer'd nations, back return'd to Rome,
And in magnificent retirement past
The evening of his life. — But not alone,
In the calm shades of honourable ease,
Great MARLB'ROUGH peaceful dwelt: Indulgent heav'n
Gave a companion to his softer hours,
With whom conversing, he forgot all change
Of fortune, or of taste, and in her mind
Found greatness equal to his own, and lov'd
Himself in her. — Thus each by each admir'd,
In mutual honour, mutual fondness join'd:
Like two fair stars with intermingled light,
In friendly union they together shone,
Aiding each other's brightness, till the cloud
Of night eternal quench'd the beams of one.
Thee CHURCHILL first the ruthless hand of death
Tore from thy consort's side, and call'd thee hence
To the sublimer seats of joy and love;
Where Fate again shall join her soul to thine,
Who now, regardful of thy fame, erects
The column to thy praise, and sooths her woe
With pious honours to thy sacred name
Immortal. Lo! where tow'ring on the height
Of yon aërial pillar proudly stands
Thy image, like a guardian god, sublime,
And awes the subject plain: beneath his feet,
The German eagles spread their wings, his hand
Grasps Victory, its slave. Such was the brow
Majestick, such thy martial port, when Gaul
Fled from thy frown, and in the Danube sought
A refuge from thy sword. — There, where the field
Was deepest stain'd with gore, on Hochstet's plain,
The theatre of thy glory, once was rais'd
A meaner trophy, by th' Imperial hand;
Extorted gratitude; which now the rage
Of Malice impotent, beseeming ill
A regal breast, has levell'd to the ground:
Mean insult! this with better auspices
Shall stand on British earth, to tell the world
How MARLB'ROUGH fought, for whom, and how repay'd
His services. Nor shall the constant love
Of her who rais'd the monument be lost
In dark oblivion: That shall be the theme
Of future bards in ages yet unborn,
Inspir'd with Chaucer's fire, who in these groves
First tun'd the British harp, and little deem'd
His humble dwelling should the neighbour be
Of BLENHEIM, house superb; to which the throng
Of travellers approaching, shall not pass
His roof unnoted, but respectful hail
With rev'rence due. Such honour does the Muse
Obtain her favourites. — But the noble pile
(My theme) demands my voice. — O shade ador'd,
MARLB'ROUGH! who now above the starry sphere
Dwell'st in the palaces of heav'n, enthron'd
Amongst the demi-gods, deign to defend
This thy abode, while present here below,
And sacred still to thy immortal fame,
With tutelary care. Preserve it safe
From Time's destroying hand, and cruel stroke
Of factious Envy's more relentless rage.
Here may, long ages hence, the British youth,
When Honour calls them to the field of war,
Behold the trophies which thy valour rais'd;
The proud reward of thy successful toils
For Europe's freedom, and Britannia's fame:
That fir'd with gen'rous envy, they may dare
To emulate thy deeds. — So shall thy name,
Dear to thy country, still inspire her sons
With martial virtue: and to high attempts
Excite their arms, till other battles won,
And nations sav'd, new Monuments require,
And other BLENHEIMS shall adorn the land.
