on the general conflagration, and ensue judgement.

a pindaric essay.

i 

now the black day of universal doom,
 which wondrous prophecy foretell, be come;
 what strong convulsion, what stupendous woe,
 must sink nature undergo,
 amid the dreadful wreck, and final overthrow. 
methinks i hear she, conscious of her fate,
 with fearful groan, and hideous cry,
 fill the presage sky;
 unable to support the weight,
 or of the present, or approach misery. 
methinks i hear she summon all,
 her guilty offspring, rave with despair,
 and tremble, cry aloud, prepare,
 you sublunary power to attend my funeral! 

ii.

see, see the tragical portent,
 those dismal harbinger of dire event! 
loud thunder roar, and dart lightning fly
 through the dark concave of the trouble sky:
 the fiery ravage be begin, the end be nigh,
 see how the glare meteor blaze! 
like baleful torch, o they come,
 to light dissolve nature to her tomb! 
and scatter round their pestilential ray,
 strike the affright nation with a wild amaze. 
vast sheet of flame, and globe of fire,
 by a impetuous wind be drive,
 through all the region of the inferior heaven,
 till hide in sulphurous smoke, they seem expire. 

iii.

sad and amaze it be to see,
 what mad confusion rage over all
 this scorch ball! 
no country be exempt, no nation free,
 but each partake the epidemic misery. 
what dismal havoc of mankind be make
 by war, and pestilence, and dearth,
 through the whole mournful earth? 
which with a murder fury they invade,
 forsake by providence, and all propitious aid. 
while fiend let loose, their utmost rage employ
 to ruin all thing here below;
 their malice and revenge not limit know,
 but, in the universal tumult, all destroy. 

iv.

distract mortal from their city fly
 for safety to their champion ground,
 but there no safety can be find;
 the vengeance of a angry deity,
 with unrelenting fury do enclose they round. 
and while for mercy some aloud implore
 the god, they ridicule before;
 and other rave with their woe,
 (for hunger, thirst, despair they undergo,)
 blaspheme and curse the power they shall adore. 
the earth, parch up with drought, her jaw extend,
 and open wide a dreadful tomb,
 the howl multitude, at once, descend,
 together all into her burn womb. 

v. 

the tremble Alps abscond their age head
 in mighty pillar of infernal smoke,
 which from their bellow cavern break,
 and suffocate whole nation where it spread. 
sometime the fire within divide
 the massy river of those secret chain,
 which hold together their prodigious side,
 and hurl the shatter rock over all the plain
 while town and city, every thing below,
 be overwhelm with the same burst of woe. 

vi.

no shower descend from the malignant sky,
 to cool the burn of the thirsty field;
 the tree no leaf, no grass the meadow yield,
 but all be barren, all be dry. 
the little rivulet no more
 to large stream their tribute pay,
 nor to the ebb ocean, they
 which with a strange unusual roar,
 forsake those ancient bound it will have pass before,
 and to the monstrous deep in vain retire;
 for even the deep it self be not secure,
 but belch subterraneous fire,
 increase still the scald calenture,
 which neither earth, nor air, nor water can endure. 

vii.

the sun by sympathy concern,
 at those convulsion, pang, and agony,
 which on the whole creation seize,
 be to substantial darkness turn. 
the neighbour moon, as if a purple flood,
 overflow her totter orb, appear
 like a huge mass of black corrupt blood;
 for she she self a dissolution fear. 
the large planet, which once shine so bright,
 with the reflect ray of borrow light,
 shake from their center, without motion lie,
 unwieldy globe of solid night,
 and ruinous lumber of the sky. 

viii.

amid this dreadful hurricane of woe,
 (for fire, confusion, horror and despair,
 fill every region of the torture earth and air;)
 the great archangel his loud trumpet blow,
 at who amaze sound, fresh agony
 upon expire nature seize;
 for now she will in few minute know
 the ultimate event and fate of all below. 
awake, you dead, awake he cry
 for all must come,
 all that have human breath, arise,
 to hear your last unalterable doom. 

ix.

at this the ghastly tyrant, who have sway
 so many thousand age uncontrolled,
 no long can his sceptre hold,
 but give up all, and be himself a captive make. 
the scatter particle of human clay,
 which in the silent grave dark chamber lie,
 resume their pristine form again,
 and now from mortal, grow immortal man. 
stupendous energy of sacred power,
 which can collect, whereve cast;
 the small atom, and that shape restore,
 which they have wear so many year before,
 though through strange accident and numerous change past. 

x. 

see how the joyful angel fly
 from every quarter of the sky,
 to gather, and to convoy all,
 the pious son of human race,
 to one capacious place,
 above the confine of this flame ball. 
see with what tenderness and love they bear
 those righteous soul through the tumultuous air;
 while the ungodly stand below,
 rage with shame, confusion, and despair,
 amid the burn overthrow,
 expect fierce torment, and acute woe. 
round they infernal spirit howl fly;
 o horror, curse, torture, chain, they cry,
 and roar aloud with execrable blasphemy. 

xi.

hark how the dare son of infamy
 who once dissolve in pleasure lay,
 and laugh at this tremendous day,
 to rock and mountain now to hide they cry;
 but rock and mountain all in ash lie. 
their shame so mighty, and so strong their fear,
 that rather than appear
 before a god incense, they will be hurl
 among the burn ruin of the world,
 and lie conceal, if possible, for ever there. 
time be, they will not own a deity,
 nor after death a future state;
 but now, by sad experience find too late,
 there be, and terrible to that degree,
 that, rather than behold his face, they will cease to be. 
and sure it be better, if heaven will give consent,
 to have no be; but they must remain
 for ever, and for ever be in pain. 
o inexpressible stupendous punishment,
 which can be endure, yet must be undergo. 

xii.

but now the eastern sky expand wide,
 the glorious judge omnipotent descend,
 and to the sublunary world his passage bend;
 where, clothe with human nature, he do once reside. 
round he the bright ethereal army fly,
 and loud triumphant hallelujah sing,
 with song of praise, and hymn of victory
 to their celestial king,
 all glory, power, dominion, majesty,
 now and for everlasting age be,
 to the essential one, and coeternal three. 
perish that world, as it be decree,
 which see the god incarnate bleed! 
perish by thy almighty vengeance those
 who dare thy person, or thy law expose. 
the curse refuse of mankind, and hell proud seed
 now to the unbelieving nation show,
 thou be a god from all eternity;
 not titular, or but by office so;
 and let they the mysterious union see,
 of human nature with the deity. 

xiii.

with mighty transport, yet with awful fear,
 the good behold this glorious sight,
 their god in all his majesty appear,
 ineffable, amaze bright,
 and seat on a throne of everlasting light. 
round the tribunal, next to the most high,
 in sacred discipline and order stand,
 the peer and prince of the sky,
 as they excel in glory or command. 
upon the right hand that illustrious croud
 in the white bosom of a shine cloud,
 who soul abhor all ignoble crime,
 do with a steady course pursue
 his holy precept, in the worst of time;
 maugre what earth, or hell, what man or devil can
 and now that god they do to death adore,
 for who such torment and such pain they bear,
 return to place they on those throne above,
 where undisturbed, uncloyed, they will possess
 divine substantial happiness,
 unbounded as his power, and last as his love. 

xiv.

go bring, the judge impartial, frown cry,
 those rebel son, who do my law despise;
 who neither threat, nor promise can move,
 not all my suffering, nor all my love,
 to save themselves from everlasting misery. 
at this ten million of archangel fly
 swift than lightning, or the swift thought,
 and less than in a instant bring,
 the wretched, curse infernal crew,
 who with distort aspect come,
 to hear their sad intolerable doom. 
alas! they cry, one beam of mercy show,
 thou all-forgiving deity! 
to pardon crime be natural to thou;
 crush we to nothing, or suspend our woe:
 but if it can, can be,
 and we must go into a gulph of fire,
 (for who can with omnipotence contend;)
 grant, for thou be a god, it may at last expire,
 and all our torture have a end. 
eternal burn, o we can bear! 
though now our body too immortal be,
 let they be pungent to the last degree;
 and let our pain innumerable be,
 but let they not extend to all eternity. 

XV. 

lo now, there do not place remain
 for penitence, and tear, but all
 must by their action stand or fall:
 to hope for pity be in vain,
 the dye be cast, and not to be recall again. 
two mighty book be by two angel bring,
 in this, impartial record, stand
 the law of nature, and divine command,
 in that, each action, word and thought,
 whatever be say in secret, or in secret wrought. 
then first the virtuous, and the good,
 who all the fury of temptation stand,
 and brave pass through ignominy, chain and blood;
 attend by their guardian angel, come
 to the tremendous bar of final doom. 
in vain the grand accuser, rail bring,
 a long indictment of enormous thing,
 who guilt wipe off by penitential tear,
 and their redeemer blood and agony,
 no more to their astonishment appear,
 but in the secret womb of dark oblivion lie. 

xvi.

come now, my friend, he cry, you son of grace,
 partaker once of all my wrong and shame,
 despise and hate for my name. 
come to your saviour, and your God embrace! 
ascend, and those bright diadem possess,
 for you by my eternal father make,
 ever the foundation of the world be lay;
 and that surprise happiness,
 immense as my own godhead, and will never be less. 
for when i languish in prison lie,
 naked and starve almost for want of bread,
 you do your kindly visit pay,
 both clothe my body, and my hunger feed. 
weary with sickness, or oppress with grief,
 your hand be always ready to supply:
 wheneve i want, you be always by,
 to share my sorrow, or to give relief. 
in all distress, so tender be your love,
 i can not anxious trouble bear,
 no black misfortune, or vexatious care,
 but you be still impatient to remove,
 and mourn, your charitable hand, shall unsuccessful prove,
 all this you do, though not to i
 in person, yet to mine in misery;
 and shall for ever live
 in all the glory that a god can give,
 or a create being able to receive. 

xvii.

at this the architect divine on high
 innumerable throne of glory raise,
 on which they, in appoint order, place
 the human co-heir of eternity;
 and with unite hymn the god incarnate praise. 
o holy, holy, holy lord,
 eternal god, almighty one,
 be thou for ever, and be thou alone,
 by all thy creature constant adore! 
ineffable coequal three,
 who from nonentity give birth
 to angel, and to man, to heaven and to earth;
 yet always be thy self, and will for ever be. 
but for thy mercy, we have never possess
 these throne, and this immense felicity,
 can never have be so infinite bless:
 therefore all glory, power, dominion, majesty,
 to thou, o lamb of god, to thou,
 for ever, long than for ever be. 

xviii.

then the incarnate godhead turn his face
 to those upon the leave, and cry,
 (almighty vengeance flash in his eye)
 you impious, unbelieving race,
 to those eternal torment go,
 prepare for those rebellious son of light,
 in burn darkness, and in flame night;
 which shall no limit or cessation know,
 but always be extreme, and always will be so. 
the final sentence pass, a dreadful cloud,
 enclose all the miserable croud,
 a mighty hurricane of thunder rise,
 and hurl they all into a lake of fire,
 which never, never, never can expire:
 the vast abyss of endless woe. 
while with their god, the righteous mount on high,
 in glorious triumph pass through the sky,
 to joy immense, and everlasting ecstasy. 
