on the power of the supreme be.

by the same.

 "tremble, thou earth! the anoint poet say,
" at God bright presence, tremble, all you mountain,
 "and all you hillock on the surface bind." 
then once again, you glorious thunder roll,
 the muse with transport hear you, once again
 convulse the solid continent, and shake,
 grand music of omnipotence, the isle. 
it be thy terrific voice, thou god of power,
 it be thy terrific voice; all nature hear it
 awaken and alarm; she feel its force,
 in every spring she feel it, every wheel,
 and every movement of her vast machine. 
behold! quake Apennine, behold! recoil
 Athos, and all the hoaryheaded Alps
 leap from their base at the godlike sound. 
but what be this, celestial though the note,
 and proclamation of the reign supreme,
 compare with such as, for a mortal ear
 too great, amaze the incorporeal world? 
shall ocean to his congregate wave
 call in each river, cataract, and lake,
 and with the watery world down a huge rock
 fall headlong in one horrible cascade,
 it be but the echo of the part breeze,
 when zephyr faint upon the lily breast,
 it be but the cease of some instrument,
 when the last linger undulation
 die on the doubt ear, if name with sound
 so mighty! so stupendous! so divine! 

but not alone in the aërial vault
 do he the dread theocracy maintain;
 for oft, enrage with his intestine thunder,
 he harrow up the bowel of the earth,
 and shock the central magnet — city then
 totter on their foundation, stately column,
 magnific wall, and heaven-assaulting spire. 
what though in haughty eminence erect
 stand the strong citadel, and frown defiance
 on adverse host, though many a bastion jut
 forth from the rampart elevate mound,
 vain the poor providence of human art,
 and mortal strength how vain! while underneath
 triumph his mine vengeance in the uproar
 of shatter tower, rive rock, and mountain,
 with clamour inconceivable uptorn,
 and hurl down the abyss. sulphureous pyrite
 burst abrupt from darkness into day,
 with din outrageous and destructive ire
 augment the hideous tumult, while it wound
 the afflict ear, and terrify the eye,
 and rend the heart in twain. twice have we feel,
 within augusta wall twice have we feel
 thy threaten indignation, but even thou,
 incense omnipotent, be gracious ever,
 thy goodness infinite but mild warn we
 with mercy-blended wrath; o spare we still,
 nor send more dire conviction! we confess
 that thou be he, the almighty: we believe. 
for at thy righteous power whole system quake,
 for at thy nod tremble ten thousand world. 

hark! on the wing whirlwind rapid rage,
 which be and be not in a moment — hark! 
on the hurricane's tempestuous sweep he ride
 invincible, and oak and pine and cedar
 and forest be no more. for conflict dreadful! 
the west encounter east, and notus meet
 in his career the hyperborean blast. 
the lordly lion shudder seek their den,
 and fly like timorous deer; the king of bird,
 who dare the solar ray, be weak of wing,
 and faint and fall and die; — while he supreme
 stand steadfast in the centre of the storm. 

wherefore, you object terrible and great,
 you thunder, earthquake, and you fire-fraught womb
 of fell volcano, whirlwind, hurricane,
 and boil billow, hail! in chorus join
 to celebrate and magnify your maker,
 who yet in work of a minute mould
 be not less manifest, be not less mighty. 

survey the magnet sympathetic love,
 that woo the yield needle; contemplate
 the attractive amber power, invisible
 even to the mental eye; or when the blow
 send from the electric sphere assault thy frame,
 show i the hand that deal it! — baffle here
 by his omnipotence, philosophy
 slow her thought inadequate revolve,
 and stand, with all his circle wonder round she,
 like heavy Saturn in the etherial space
 begird with a inexplicable ring. 

if such the operation of his power,
 which at all season and in every place
 (rule by establish law and current nature)
 arrest the attention; who! o who shall tell
 his act miraculous? when his own decree
 repeal he, or suspend, when by the hand
 of Moses or of Joshua, or the mouth
 of his prophetic seer, such deed he wrought,
 before the astonish sun all-seeing eye,
 that faith be scarce a virtue. need i sing
 the fate of Pharaoh and his numerous band
 lose in the reflux of the watery wall,
 that melt to their fluid state again? 
need i recount how Sampson warlike arm
 with more than mortal nerve be string to overthrow
 idolatrous philistia? shall i tell
 how David triumph, and what job sustain?
 — but, o supreme, unutterable mercy! 
o love unequalled, mystery immense,
 which angel long to unfold! it be man redemption
 that crown thy glory, and thy power confirm,
 confirm the great, the uncontroverted claim. 
when from the virgin unpolluted womb
 shine forth the sun of righteousness reveal,
 and on benight reason pour the day;
 let there be peace (he say) and all be calm
 among the war world — calm as the sea,
 when o be still, you boisterous wind, he cry,
 and not a breath be blow, nor murmur hear. 
his be a life of miracle and might,
 and charity and love, ever yet he taste
 the bitter draught of death, ever yet he rise
 victorious over the universal foe,
 and death and sin and hell in triumph lead. 
he by the right of conquest be mankind,
 and in sweet servitude and golden bond
 be tie to he for ever. — o how easy
 be his ungalling yoke, and all his burden
 it be ecstasy to bear! he, bless shepherd,
 his flock shall follow through the maze of life
 and shade that tend to day-spring from on high;
 and as the radiant rose after fade
 in full foliage and more fragrant breath
 revive in smile spring, so shall it fare
 with those that love he — for sweet be their favour,
 and all eternity shall be their spring. 
then shall the gate and everlasting door,
 at which the king of glory enter in,
 be to the saint unbar: and there, where pleasure
 boast a undying bloom, where dubious hope
 be certainty, and grief-attended love
 be free from passion — there we will celebrate,
 with worthy number, he, who be, and be,
 and in immortal prowess king of king,
 shall be the monarch of all world for ever. 
