ALMEDA and Flavia. 

Flavia.

while dusky shade eclipse the solar ray,
 and fan zephyr among the branch play,
 where vary beauty deck the verdant grove,
 let we recount the story of our love. 
say, dear Almeda, why this pensive mood,
 which do thy wonted cheerfulness exclude? 

ALMEDA.

the cause of this to Flavia i will reveal:
 it be a youth who power i can conceal. 
it be Strephon, who long since obtain my heart,
 when artful Cupid give the kill dart. 
when strephon near, no anxious care molest,
 nor access find to my enrapture breast;
 but when he be go, his absence still i mourn,
 and spend my hour in sigh till he return. 

Flavia.

you kindle into rapture at his name;
 be wise in time, and guard against a flame,
 which cherish, hopeless, will your charm efface,
 and rob your feature of each bloom grace. 
the dear Castalia teach my heart to prove
 the soften charm and please art of love,
 witness you rural walk and verdant vale,
 how charm I have listen to his melt tale;
 while he, unskilled in flattery, do impart,
 in flow strain, the dictate of his heart. 
blind be my passion, long it bear the sway,
 suppress at last by the enliven ray
 of reason wake, by some celestial power,
 to my relief, in a auspicious hour,
 with open eye i do the charmer view;
 deaf to his accent, from his presence fly. 
observe, my precept be with prudence fraught,
 what heart so stubborn will remain untaught? 

ALMEDA.

command the briny wave no more to slow,
 bid southern breeze ever cease to blow;
 say to the flower, no more your fragrance yield,
 nor Ceres crown with joy the fertile field;
 bid Phoebus cease to gild the open morn,
 and Cynthia be of all her beauty shear:
 will these obedient as thy vassal prove? 
no more can i, dear Flavia, cease to love. 
a youth possess of every move art,
 quick access gain to the secure heart. 
when he appear, to cheer the droop plain,
 each nymph enamour spend her sigh in vain:
 and when in soft strain he tune his lay,
 each shepherd, envious, throw his lute away. 
in he all radiant virtue be combine,
 true greatness centre in a humble mind;
 truth, candour, justice, in his generous breast,
 firm fortitude and soft compassion rest. 
nor can the god on mortal more bestow,
 a bright example of their work below. 
young strephon charm, no tongue can ever express;
 i may be silent, but can love he less. 

Flavia.

enough be say, Almeda dear, to prove
 no fault be see in those we true love. 
the son of Venus, by a magic art,
 deceive the sight, soon as he wound the heart. 
blind as himself do all his votary make,
 extreme happy in their own mistake. 
in all his charm i have young Strephon see,
 yet never by the youth have wound be,
 yet be he, as you paint he, thus complete,
 and fond to lay his garland at your foot,
 sure young man mind still subject be to change,
 though from our plain he be not doom to range. 
a change of scene may, with distort brow,
 pour swift contempt on all your former vow. 
but let indifference lodge within your breast,
 nor strephon absence ever your mind molest;
 the more his charm, the sure he will succeed
 among powerful rival, who you now may dread. 

ALMEDA.

i know his charm the gentle dame may move,
 but he will admit no rival in his love:
 my image still remain within his breast,
 true to that hour i first my love confess. 
this please hope will soothe my anxious soul,
 nor let stern care its peaceful sway countroul,
 diffuse into my heart its soft relief,
 dispel my fear and dissipate my grief. 
i will say the youth, for i by heaven design,
 be good, as lovely, constant, as he be kind;
 so smooth shall the season glide along,
 till strephon presence animate my song,
 then shall my pleasure as my love abound,
 until Hymen rite with pure joy be crown. 

Flavia.

so may you sing, and sigh your year away,
 with flatter hope, perch on the feeble spray
 of strephon faith, the effort render vain
 of such as will essay your love to gain,
 till his own choice, or some disaster show,
 your promise pleasure vanish like the snow. 
your charm be flee, no lover then in view,
 the path of discontent you will pursue. 
that you despise Philander then you will mourn,
 nor give lothario suit a just return;
 or for Alonzo sigh when it be too late,
 and with reluctance meet your destine fate. 
this will your slight lover laugh to see
 Almeda then a maiden old will be. 

ALMEDA.

the path you paint i will not tread alone,
 while Flavia live i shall be sure of one. 
then hand in hand we will smooth the rugged way,
 and sigh for sigh shall bear our grief away. 

Flavia.

why shall we sigh? in smile we will contend,
 and laugh at what we have no power to mend. 
shall fate deprive i of my darling swain,
 some brave youth perhaps may grace the plain,
 and make i happy by the nuptial band,
 when cheerful he give his heart and hand. 
or if despise and unadmired i rest,
 i will call my own sad destiny the best. 
i will bliss the fate i oft have seek to shun,
 and scorn the fool who will to wedlock run. 
see nature now in contrast with thy grief;
 the warble songster seem to chant relief;
 their note be cheerful, nor with sigh depress;
 in concert join and soothe your care to rest. 

ALMEDA.

no warbler can give i delight,
 how mournful and pensive their strain;
 nought sweet can appear to my sight,
 since strephon forsake the plain. 

with joy i these bank do survey,
 with pleasure i have pore on the stream:
 young Strephon then with i do stray,
 and of nought but delight i can dream. 

while he by my side do recline,
 the flower seem to brighten their bloom;
 the sun with more lustre do shine,
 and fragrance the field do perfume. 

still please with his whisper of love,
 still charm with his amorous tale;
 now beauty forsake the grove,
 and his absence i will ever bewail. 

how gloomy and dismal the shade,
 where Strephon be wont to appear,
 where oft his address he make,
 and his accent delight my ear. 

those path i revisit in pain;
 yet love they without know why. 
when fortune no favour will deign,
 i deem it a pleasure to sigh. 

in vain have my visitant strive
 my woe to divert by a smile;
 though i seem of their jest to approve,
 my heart be with Strephon the while. 

society, spoil of each charm,
 without he no pleasure can give;
 in solitude care will alarm,
 in his absence it be painful to live. 

when Sol, from the watery main,
 ascend to illumine the sky,
 my thought to the lovely swain,
 more swift than the lightning can fly. 

i muse on his charm all the day;
 the theme seem enchant sweet,
 nor end with bright phoebus ray;
 in dream i my wish repeat. 

you angel that succour the brave,
 prove guardian to the sweet youth;
 still may he with honour behave,
 integrity, wisdom and truth. 

while through distant clime he may rove,
 his image be fix in my view;
 let Strephon be constant in love,
 and Almeda will ever be true. 
