the gratitude.

my injure love, thy anthem cease awhile,
 and hear my vow with a accept smile. 
by thou i swear, by thou as sacred now,
 i will pay thou all the passion that i owe. 
forgive, that i so negligent do prove,
 be such a careless debtor to thy love:
 as some wild Gallant who profuse spend
 that on his frolick, which shall pay his friend;
 yet give good word, be complaisant and kind,
 and with small present show his thankful mind. 
so do i manage my vast stock of love,
 do neither just, nor yet ungrateful prove;
 heaven know, to pay thou all i have begin,
 but the neglect score too far have run. 
fatal delay, for now the dreadful sum,
 i with kind horror offer at thy tomb;
 whatever i owe thy life, i will pay thy dust,
 bring all the arrears of passion, and be just;
 accept it now, although alas too late,
 and pity this sad pressure of my fate. 
thou be it so please with what thou have below,
 it will raise thy bliss can thou my passion know,
 that be great and last as thy joy be now. 
not the least thought shall to ought else be give,
 i offer all to thou, and what retain thou, heaven. 
though at thy death no sable scene of state,
 nor solemn pageantry do gild thy fate;
 no pompous grief of a mechanic throng
 of hire mourner usher thou along;
 nor gaudy scutcheon daub thy early Herse,
 yet it be adorn with thy clarinda verse:
 one moment grief of i be of more cost,
 than a majestic thirty day can boast. 
those pageant sorrow on the dead bestow,
 but touch the fancy of the gaze croud,
 where scarce one tear in earnest be allow. 
amid a thousand torture pang i live,
 too well i know, both who and how to grieve. 
it be more honour to be mourn by i. 
than all their stately dark solemnity,
 who riches purchase a force obsequey. 
though on thy grave no statue i erect,
 yet the smooth stone shall with my tear be deck. 
no, take a tomb more fit thy desert,
 yes, i will inshrine thou in my generous heart. 
so far for thou a Niobe i be grow,
 that now it be fit for that use alone. 
no monument more glorious or safe,
 grace with a vital crimson epitaph. 
my bleed heart shall this inscription give,
 not here you lie, but here for ever live. 
