a ode. inscribe to the memory of the honblehonble col. George Villiers, drown in the river Piava, in the country of friuli. 1703. 

in imitation of Horace, ode 28.  Lib. 1. 

say, dear Villiers, poor depart friend
 (since fleet life thus sudden must end)
 say, what do all thy busy hope avail,
 that anxious thou from pole to pole do sail;
 ever on thy chin the spring beard begin
 to spread a doubtful down, and promise man? 
what profit thy thought, and toil, and care,
 in vigour more confirm, and riper year? 
to wake ever morning-dawn to loud alarm,
 and march until close of night in heavy arm? 
to scorn the summer sun and winter snow,
 and search through every clime thy country be foe? 
that thou may fortune to thy side engage;
 that gentle peace may quell bellona rage;
 and anna bounty crown her soldier hoary age? 

in vain we think, that free-willed man have power
 to hasten or protract the appoint hour. 
our term of life depend not on our deed:
 before our birth our funeral be decree. 
nor awe by foresight, nor mislead by chance,
 imperious death direct his ebon lance;
 people great Henry tomb, and lead up Holben dance. 

alike must every state, and every age
 sustain the universal tyrant rage:
 for neither William power, nor Mary charm
 can or repel, or pacify his arm:
 young Churchill fall, as life begin to bloom:
 and bradford tremble age expect the tomb. 
wisdom and eloquence in vain will plead
 one moment respite for the learned head:
 judge of write and of man have die;
 Mecænas, Sackville, Socrates, and Hyde:
 and in their various turn the son must tread
 those gloomy journey, which their sire have lead. 

the ancient sage, who do so long maintain,
 that body die, but soul return again,
 with all the birth and death he have in store,
 go out Pythagoras, and come no more. 
and modern al, who capricious thought
 be yet with store of wild notion fraught,
 too soon convince, shall yield that fleet breath,
 which play so idle with the dart of death. 

some from the strand vessel force their way:
 fearful of fate, they meet it in the sea:
 some who escape the fury of the wave,
 sicken on earth, and sink into a grave:
 in journey or at home, in war or peace,
 by hardship many, many fall by ease. 
each change season do it be poison bring:
 rheum chill the winter; ague blast the spring:
 wet, dry, cold, hot, at the appoint hour,
 all act subservient to the tyrant power:
 and when obedient nature know his will,
 a fly, a grapestone, or a hair can kill. 

for restless Proserpine for ever tread
 in path unseen, over our devote head;
 and on the spacious land, and liquid main
 spread slow disease, or dart afflictive pain:
 variety of death confirm her endless reign. 

on curse piava bank the goddess stand;
 show her dire warrant to the rise flood;
 when what i long must love, and long must mourn,
 with fatal speed be urge his return;
 in his dear country to disperse his care,
 and arm himself by rest for future war;
 to chide his anxious friend officious fear,
 and promise to their joy his elder year. 

oh! destine head; and oh! severe decree:
 nor native country thou, nor friend shall see;
 nor war have thou to wage, nor year to come:
 impend death be thy, and instant doom. 

hark! the imperious goddess be obey:
 wind murmur; snow descend; and Waters spread:
 oh! kinsman, friend, — o! vain be all the cry
 of human voice; strong destiny reply:
 weep you on earth; for he shall sleep below:
 thence none return; and thither all must go. 

whoever thou be, who choice or business lead
 to this sad river, or the neighbour mead;
 if thou may happen on the dreary shore
 to find the object which this verse deplore;
 cleanse the pale corpse with a religious hand
 from the pollute weed and common sand;
 lay the dead hero graceful in a grave;
 (the only honour he can now receive)
 and fragrant mould upon his body throw;
 and plant the warrior Lawrel over his brow:
 light lie the earth; and flourish green the bough. 

so may just heaven secure thy future life
 from foreign danger, and domestic strife:
 and when the infernal judge dismal power
 from the dark urn shall throw thy destine hour;
 when yield to the sentence, breathless thou
 and pale shall lie, as what thou buri now;
 may some kind friend the piteous object see,
 and equal rite perform to that which once be thou. 
