elegy. 

 'dark gather cloud involve the threaten sky,
' the sea heave conscious of the impend gloom,
 'deep, hollow murmur from the cliff arise;
' they come — the spirit of the tempest come! 

 'oh! may such terror mark the approach night
' as reign on that these stream eye deplore! 
 'flash, you red fire of heaven, with fatal light,
' and with conflict wind, you water roar! 

 'loud, and more loud, you foam billow burst! 
' you war element more fierce rave! 
'till the wide wave overwhelm the spot accurse,
 "where ruthless avarice find a quiet grave!" 

thus with clasp hand, wild look and stream hair,
 while shriek of horror break her tremble speech,
 a wretched maid — the victim of despair,
 survey the threaten storm and desert beech;

then to the tomb where now the father sleep,
 who rugged nature bid her sorrow flow,
 frantic she turn — and beat her breast and weep,
 invoke vengeance on the dust below. 

 'lo! rise there above each humble heap,
' yond cypher stone his name and wealth relate,
 'who give his son — remorseless — to the deep,
' while i, his live victim, curse my fate. 

 'oh! my lose love! no tomb be place for thou,
' that may to stranger eye thy worth impart;
' thou have no grave, but in the stormy sea,
 'and no memorial, but this break heart. 

 'forth to the world, a widow wanderer drive,
' i pour to wind and wave the unheeded tear,
 'try with vain effort to submit to heaven,
' and fruitless call on he — "who can hear." 

 'oh! may i fond clasp he once again,
' while over my head the infuriate billow pour,
 'forget in death this agonize pain,
' and feel his father cruelty no more! 

 'part, rage water, part, and show beneath,
' in your dread cave, his pale and mangle form;
 'now, while the demon of despair and death
' ride on the blast, and urge the howl storm! 

 'lo! by the lightning momentary blaze,
' i see he rise the whiten wave above,
 'no long such as when in happy day
' he give the enchant hour — to i and love. 

 'such, as when dare the enchafe sea,
' and court dangerous toil, he often say,
 'that every peril, one soft smile from i,
' one sigh of speechless tenderness, overpay. 

 'but dead, disfigure, while between the roar
' of the loud wave his accent pierce my ear,
 'and seem to say — ah! wretch, delay no more,
' but come, unhappy mourner — meet i here. 

 'yet, powerful fancy, bid the phantom stay,
' still let i hear he! — it be already past;
 'along the wave his shadow glide away,
' i lose his voice amid the deafen blast. 

 'ah! wild illusion, bear of frantic pain! 
' he hear not, come not from his watery bed;
 'my tear, my anguish, my despair be vain,
' the insatiate ocean give not up its dead. 

 'it be not his voice! hark! the deep thunder roll;
' up heave the ground; the rocky barrier fail;
 'approach, you horror that delight my soul,
' despair, and death, and desolation — hail!' 

the ocean hear — the embody water come —
 rise over the land, and with resistless sweep
 tear from its base the proud aggressor tomb,
 and bear the injure to eternal sleep! 
