Elegy. 

 'DARK gath'ring clouds involve the threat'ning skies,
' The sea heaves conscious of th'impending gloom,
 'Deep, hollow murmurs from the cliffs arise;
' They come — the Spirits of the Tempest come! 

 'Oh! may such terrors mark th' approaching night
' As reign'd on that these streaming eyes deplore! 
 'Flash, ye red fires of Heav'n, with fatal light,
' And with conflicting winds, ye waters roar! 

 'Loud, and more loud, ye foaming billows burst! 
' Ye warring elements more fiercely rave! 
'Till the wide waves o'erwhelm the spot accurst,
 "Where ruthless Avarice finds a quiet grave!" 

Thus with clasp'd hands, wild looks and streaming hair,
 While shrieks of horror broke her trembling speech,
 A wretched maid — the victim of Despair,
 Survey'd the threat'ning storm and desert beech;

Then to the tomb where now the father slept,
 Whose rugged nature bade her sorrows flow,
 Frantic she turn'd — and beat her breast and wept,
 Invoking vengeance on the dust below. 

 'Lo! rising there above each humbler heap,
' Yon cypher'd stones his name and wealth relate,
 'Who gave his son — remorseless — to the deep,
' While I, his living victim, curse my fate. 

 'Oh! my lost love! no tomb is plac'd for thee,
' That may to strangers' eyes thy worth impart;
' Thou hast no grave, but in the stormy sea,
 'And no memorial, but this breaking heart. 

 'Forth to the world, a widow'd wand'rer driv'n,
' I pour to winds and waves th' unheeded tear,
 'Try with vain effort to submit to Heav'n,
' And fruitless call on him — "who cannot hear." 

 'Oh! might I fondly clasp him once again,
' While o'er my head th' infuriate billows pour,
 'Forget in Death this agonizing pain,
' And feel his father's cruelty no more! 

 'Part, raging waters, part, and shew beneath,
' In your dread caves, his pale and mangled form;
 'Now, while the demons of Despair and Death
' Ride on the blast, and urge the howling storm! 

 'Lo! by the light'ning's momentary blaze,
' I see him rise the whitening waves above,
 'No longer such as when in happier days
' He gave th' enchanted hours — to me and love. 

 'Such, as when daring the enchafed sea,
' And courting dang'rous toil, he often said,
 'That every peril, one soft smile from me,
' One sigh of speechless tenderness, o'erpaid. 

 'But dead, disfigur'd, while between the roar
' Of the loud waves his accents pierce mine ear,
 'And seem to say — Ah! wretch, delay no more,
' But come, unhappy mourner — meet me here. 

 'Yet, powerful Fancy, bid the phantom stay,
' Still let me hear him! — 'Tis already past;
 'Along the waves his shadow glides away,
' I lose his voice amid the deaf'ning blast. 

 'Ah! wild Illusion, born of frantic Pain! 
' He hears not, comes not from his wat'ry bed;
 'My tears, my anguish, my despair are vain,
' Th' insatiate ocean gives not up its dead. 

 ''Tis not his voice! Hark! the deep thunders roll;
' Up heaves the ground; the rocky barriers fail;
 'Approach, ye horrors that delight my soul,
' Despair, and Death, and Desolation — hail!' 

The ocean hears — th' embodied waters come —
 Rise o'er the land, and with resistless sweep
 Tear from its base the proud aggressor's tomb,
 And bear the injured to eternal sleep! 
