ode.

by the same.

i 1. 

'ruin seize thou, ruthless king!
'confusion on thy banner wait,
'though fan by conquest crimson wing
'they mock the air with idle state.
'helm, nor hauberk twist mail,
'nor even thy virtue, tyrant, shall avail
'to save thy secret soul from nightly fear,
'from cambria curse, from cambria tear!'
such be the sound, that over the crest pride
of the first Edward scatter wild dismay,
as down the steep of snowdon shaggy side
he wind with toilsome march his long array.
stout Gloster stand aghast in speechless trance:
to arm! cried Mortimer, and couch his quiver lance.

i 2. 

on a rock, who haughty brow
frown over old conway foam flood,
robe in the sable garb of woe,
with haggard eye the poet stand;
(loose his beard, and hoary hair
stream, like a meteor, to the trouble air)
and with a master hand, and prophet fire,
strike the deep sorrow of his lyre.
'hark, how each giant-oak, and desert cave,
'sigh to the torrent awful voice beneath!
'over thou, oh king! their hundred arm they wave,
'revenge on thou in hoarse murmur breathe;
'vocal no more, since cambria fatal day,
'to highborn hoel harp, or soft llewellyn lay.

i 3. 

'cold be cadwallo tongue,
'that hush the stormy main:
'brave urien sleep upon his craggy bed:
'mountain, you mourn in vain
'modred, who magic song
'make huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-topped head.
'on dreary arvon shore they lie,
'smear with gore, and ghastly pale:
'far, far aloof the affright raven sail;
'the famish eagle scream, and pass by.
'dear lose companion of my tuneful art,
'dear, as the light, that visit these sad eye,
'dear, as the ruddy drop that warm my heart,
'you die amid your die country cry —
'no more i weep. they do not sleep.
'on yonder cliff, a grisly band,
'i see they sit, they linger yet,
'avenger of their native land:
'with i in dreadful harmony they join,
'and weave with bloody hand the tissue of thy line.

ii. 1. 

"weave there warp, and weave the woof,
"the winding-sheet of Edward race,
"give ample room, and verge enough
"the character of hell to trace.
"mark the year, and mark the night,
"when Severn shall re-echo with affright
"the shriek of death, through berkley roof that ring,
"shriek of a agonize king!
"she-wolf of France, with unrelenting fang,
"that tear the bowel of thy mangle mate,
"from thou be bear, who over thy country hang
"the scourge of heaven. what terror round he wait!
"amazement in his van, with flight combine,
"and sorrow fade form, and solitude behind.

ii. 2. 

"mighty victor, mighty lord,
"low on his funeral couch he lie!
"no pity heart, no eye afford
"a tear to grace his obsequy.
"be the sable warrior flee?
"thy son be go. he rest among the dead.
"the swarm, that in thy noontide beam be bear,
"go to salute the rise morn.
"fair laugh the morn, and soft the zephyr blow,
"while proud ride over the azure realm
"in gallant trim the gild vessel go;
"youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm;
"regardless of the sweep whirlwind sway,
"that, hush in grim repose, expect his evening-prey.

ii. 3. 

" fill high the sparkle bowl,
"the rich repast prepare,
"rest of a crown, he yet may share the feast:
"close by the regal chair
"fall thirst and famine scowl
"a baleful smile upon their baffle guest.
"hear you the din of battle bray,
"lance to lance, and horse to horse?
"long year of havoc urge their destine course,
"and through the kindred squadron mow their way.
"you tower of Julius, London last shame,
"with many a foul and midnight murder feed,
"revere his consort faith, his father fame,
"and spare the meek usurper holy head.
"above, below, the rose of snow,
"twine with her blush foe, we spread:
"the bristle boar in infant-gore
"wallow beneath the thorny shade.
"now brother, bend over the accurse loom,
"stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.

iii. 1. 

"Edward, lo! to sudden fate
"(weave we the woof. the thread be spin)
" half of thy heart we consecrate,
"(the web be weave. the work be do.)"
'stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
'leave i unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn:
'in yond bright track, that fire the western sky,
'they melt, they vanish from my eye.
'but oh! what solemn scene on snowdon height
'descend flow their glitter skirt unroll?
'vision of glory, spare my ache sight,
'you unborn age, crowd not on my soul!
'no more our long-lost Arthur we bewail,
'all hail, you genuine king, britannia issue, hail!

iii. 2. 

'gird with many a baron bold,
'sublime their starry front they rear;
'and gorgeous dame, and statesman old
'in beard majesty, appear.
'in the midst a form divine!
'her eye proclaim she of the briton-line;
'her lion-port, her awe-commanding face,
'attempered sweet to virgin-grace.
'what string symphonious tremble in the air,
'what strain of vocal transport round she play!
'hear from the grave, great taliessin, hear;
'they breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
'bright rapture call, and soar, as she sing,
'wave in the eye of heaven her many-coloured wing.

iii. 3. 

'the verse adorn again
'fierce war, and faithful love,
'and truth severe, by fairy fiction dress.
'in buskin measure move
'pale grief, and please pain,
'with horror, tyrant of the throb breast.
'a voice, as of the cherub-choir,
'gale from bloom Eden bear;
'and distant warble lessen on my ear,
'that lose in long futurity expire.
'fond impious man, think thou, yond sanguine cloud,
'raise by thy breath, have quench the orb of day?
'tomorrow he repair the golden flood,
'and warm the nation with redouble ray.
'enough for i: with joy i see
'the different doom our fate assign.
'be thy despair, and sceptre care,
'to triumph, and to die, be i.'
he speak, and headlong from the mountain height
deep in the roar tide he plunge to endless night.
