[translation] from Tasso [gerusalemme liberata] Canto 14, stanza 32-9

dismiss at length, they break through all delay
to tempt the danger of the doubtful way;
and first to Ascalon their step they bend,
who wall along the neighbour sea extend.
nor yet in prospect rise the distant shore,
scarce the hoarse wave from far be hear to roar,
when thwart the road a river roll its flood
tempestuous, and all further course withstand:
the torrent-stream his ancient bound disdain,
swell with new force and late-descending rain.
irresolute they stand, when lo! appear
the wondrous sage: vigorous he seem in year,
awful his mien; low as his foot there flow
a vestment unadorned, though white as new-fallen snow;
against the stream the wave secure he tread,
his head a chaplet bear, his hand a rod.

as on the Rhine when Boreas' fury reign
and winter bind the flood in icy chain,
swift shoot the village-maid in rustic play,
smooth, without step, down the shine way,
fearless in long excursion love to glide,
and sport and wanton over the freeze tide;
so move the seer, but on no harden plain:
the river boil beneath and rush towards the main.
where fix in wonder stand the warlike pair
his course he turn and thus relieve their care:

'vast, o my friend, and difficult the toil
to seek your hero in a distant soil!
no common help, no common guide, you need,
art it require and more than wing speed.
what length of sea remain, what various land,
ocean unknown, inhospitable sand!
for adverse fate the captive chief have hurl
beyond the confine of our narrow world.
great thing and full of wonder in your ear
i shall unfold; but first dismiss your fear,
nor doubt with i to tread the downward road
that to the grotto lead, my dark abode.'

scarce have he say, before the warriors eye
when mountain-high the wave dispart rise:
the flood on either hand its billow rear,
and in the midst a spacious arch appear.
their hand he seize and down the steep he lead,
beneath the obedient river inmost bed.
the watery glimmer of a faint day
discover half, and half conceal, their way,
as when athwart the dusky wood by night
the uncertain crescent gleam a sickly light.
through subterraneous passage they go,
earth inmost cell and cave of deep descent.
of many a flood they view the secret source,
the birth of river, rise to their course;
whatever with copious train its channel fill,
float into lake or bubble into rill.
the po be there to see, danubius bed,
euphrates fount and nile mysterious head.
further they pass, where ripen mineral flow,
and embryon metal undigested glow;
sulphureous vein and live silver shine,
which soon the parent sun warm power refine,
in one rich mass unite the precious store,
the part combine and harden into over.
here gem break through the night with glitter beam,
and paint the margin of the costly stream.
all stone of lustre shoot their vivid ray,
and mix attemper in a various day.

here the soft emerald smile, of verdant hue,
and ruby flame, with sapphire heavenly blue;
the diamond there attract the wonder sight,
proud of its thousand dye and luxury of light.
