every man the architect of his own fortune: or the art of rise in the church.

a satire.

by mr. SCOTT, of trinity-college, Cambridge.

F. 

good friend, forbear — the world will say it be spite,
 or disappointment goad you thus to write —
 some lord have frown; some bishop past dispute
 at surly distance spurn your eager suit,
 prefer a dull vile clod of noble earth,
 and left neglect genius, wit, and worth. 

p. 

regard it i what snarl critic say? 
it be honest indignation point the way. 
thanks to my star my infant sleep be over,
 and dream delusive catch my thought no more. 
let clumsy dogmatus, with simper face,
 supply the nurse, or the footman place,
 make coffee, when my lady call, or whey,
 and fetch, and carry, like a two-legged tray;
 let bluster gnatho swear with patriot rage,
 to poor, old, totter Timon bend with age,
 "have you, my lord, the horse at Minden lead,
"'sdeath, what destruction will your grace have make? 
 "like wantley dragon you have roar, and thunder,
"and eat up frenchman hundred after hundred; "
thus mean and vile let other live, not i,
 who scorn to flatter, and who fear to lie. 
what honest man —

F. 

stop, or you never can thrive —
 sure you be the strange, squeamish wretch alive! 
what, in the name of wonder, friend, have you,
 in life low vale, with honesty to do? 
it be a dead weight, that will retard you still,
 oft as you strive to clamber up the hill. 
strip, and be wise — strip off all bashful pride,
 throw cumbrous honour, virtue, truth aside,
 trust up, and gird like virro, mend your pace,
 the first, the nimble scoundrel in the race. 
go copy Trebius —

p. 

copy Trebius? — hum —
 and forfeit peace for all my life to come. 
shall i devote my sister virgin charm
 to the vile lewdness of a patron arm,
 too sure my father injure ghost will rise,
 rage on his brow, and horror in his eye;
 will haunt, will goad i in the social hall,
 or break my rest — though slumber in a stall. 
oh gracious god, of what thin flimsy gear
 be some man conscience? —

F. 

hold, you be too severe —
 think when temptation every sense assail,
 how strong they prove, and human flesh how frail! 
when satan come, by righteous heaven ordain
 to tempt the leader of the christian band,
 he draw, he catch he from the barren waste,
 and on the temple tower summit place;
 and nowadays, or sage experience lie,
 from church preferment great temptation rise. 
spare Trebius then — even you yourself may yield —

p. 

not, friend, until vanquish reason quit the field:
 then i, poor madman, amid the mad and vain,
 may judas-like betray my god for gain;
 at helluo board, where smoke the eternal treat,
 and all the fat on earth bow down, and eat,
 a genuine son of Levi may adore
 the golden calf, as Aaron do before. 
then welcome the full levee, where resort
 croud of all rank to pay their morning court,
 the well-robed dean with face so sleek, and fair,
 and tatter Codrus pale and wan with care,
 who yearly-breeding wife, in mean attire,
 to feed her hungry brat must spin for hire. 
hail medley dome, where like the ark we find
 clean, and unclean, of every sort and kind! 
hail medley dome, where three whole hour together,
 (shiver in cold, and faint in sultry weather)
 we brook, athirst and hungry, all delay,
 and wear in expectation life away! 
but hush! in come my lord — important, big,
 squint through his glass, and bustle shake his wig,
 who saucy curl, confine in triple tie,
 with constant work his busy hand supply. 
he stop, bow, stare — and whisper out aloud
 "what spark be you, that jostle through the crowd?"
sir William heir — "enough — my dear, good friend,
"sir William live — i think — at ponder end;
 "yes — yes — sir William live"— then on he go,
 and whisper this grand secret cram his nose
 into your wig, and squeeze every hand,
 "it be mine to serve you, sir — you to command"—
 thus kind breathe many a promise fair,
 he feed two row of gape fool with air;
 unmeaning gabble set rotine of speech,
 as papist pray, or prelate use to preach,
 make himself over in trust, to keep his ground,
 and fair cull his creditor all round. 

with warm delight his word poor Codrus hear,
 sweet as the fancy music of the sphere;
 then trudge jocund home through mire and clay,
 while please thought beguile the long long way;
 a snug warm living skim before his eye,
 his tithe pig gruntle, and his grey goose fly;
 his lonely shatter cot, all patch with mud,
 and hem around by many a fragrant flood,
 change to a neat, and modern house he see,
 build on high ground, and shelter well with tree;
 spacious in front the chequer lawn extend,
 with useful pond, and garden at the end,
 where art and nature kind join to bring
 the fruit of autumn, and the flower of spring. 
no more a sun-burnt bob the preacher wear,
 or coat of serge, where every thread appear:
 behold he deck in spruce and trim array,
 with cassock short, and vest of raven-grey;
 in powder pomp the spacious grizzle flow,
 and the broad beaver tremble over his nose. 
ah dear delusion tempt his thought no more,
 leave he untortured by desire, though poor! 
what can advance, in these degenerate day,
 when gold, or interest all preferment sway,
 a wretch unblest by fortune, and by birth? 
alas, not terrick part, or talbot worth! 
else long, long since have honest Butler shine
 high in the church religion spotless sun;
 have beam around his friendly light to cheer
 the lonely, way-worn, wander traveller;
 chace error black and baleful shade away,
 and pour through every mind resistless day. 
alas, the change! far in a lowly vale,
 'midst straggle hut, where some few peasant dwell,
 he live in virtue rich, in fortune poor,
 and tread the path his master tread before. 
oh great, good man, to cheer without request
 the droop heart, and sooth the trouble breast;
 with cord of love the wayward sheep to hold,
 and draw the lose, and wander to the fold;
 to spend so little, yet have some to spare;
 to feed the hungry, and to cloth the bare;
 to visit bed of sickness in the night,
 when rain descend, and roll thunder fright,
 there death deprive of all his terror foul,
 and sing soft requiem to the part soul! 
blush, blush for shame! — your head, you pastor, hide,
 you pamper son of luxury and pride,
 who leave to prowl wolf your helpless care,
 and truck preferment at the public fair;
 in who fat corps the soul supine lie,
 snug at her ease, and wondrous loath to rise! 

F. 

friend, friend, you be warm — why this be downright spleen,
 you flout the fat, because yourself be lean:
 yet laugh to see behind the silver mace
 black-browed Cornutus with his starveling face,
 a wretch so wear with penury and pride,
 his very bone stand stare through his hide. 
why choose the church, if petulant and vain
 you proud shun the path that lead to gain,
 yet rack with envy, when your brother rise,
 revile the prudent art that you despise? 
better some dirty, vile, mechanic trade,
 cobbler, or smith — a fortune may be make;
 the cross-legged wretch, who stitch up the gown,
 be of more worth than half the clerk in town:
 and laugh with purse-proud insolence to see
 the needy curate full-sleeved dignity. —

p. 

why choose the church? a father prudent voice
 determine, friend, and dignify the choice:
 to thou, religion, through the tranquil road,
 himself with honour and with virtue tread,
 he lead i on — and know, no slave to gain,
 undowered i take thou, and undowered retain. 
what? dare the blind philosopher of yore
 choose thy half-sister virtue, vile and poor,
 choose she begird with all the ghastly train
 of ill, contempt, and ridicule, and pain? 
and shall not i, o dear celestial dame,
 love thou with all my soul devout flame? 
shall i not gaze, and dote upon thy charm,
 and fly to catch the heaven within thy arm? 
o my fair mistress, lovely to be see
 than the chaste lily, open on the green;
 sweet as the blush rose in sharon vale,
 and soft as idumea balmy gale! 
of thou enamour martyr hero stand
 firm to their faith, and constant even to blood;
 no view of fame, no fear of sad disgrace,
 have power to tear they from thy love embrace,
 wrap up in thou, though harlot stalkt abroad,
 and persecution shake her iron rod! 
peace to their soul! — but tell i, gentle maid,
 oh tell i be thy beauty all decay? 
have time foul canker every grace devour? 
thy virgin charm have ignorance deflower? 
that thus thou wander helpless and forlorn,
 of knave the hatred, and of fool the scorn! 

F. 

still knave, and fool? — for God sake, sir, refrain! 
this petulance of pride will prove your bane. 
what! you be averse to dash through thick and thin? 
try clean way — it be do, if you begin. 
go with soft flattery, studious to oblige,
 some dull, and self-admiring lord besiege,
 and like the dove, to mecca prophet dear,
 pick a good live from your patron ear:
 Gullion succeed thus, and so may you —
 but rail, rail! — friend, it never can do. 

p. 

good heaven forbid that i a plain blunt man,
 who can fawn, and loath the wretch who can,
 shall brook a trencher-chaplain at the board,
 the loud horse-laugh, and raillery of my lord;
 slave to his joke, his passion, and his pride,
 a dull tame fool for lackey to deride,
 who snort around to hear the wretch abuse
 my person, moral, family, and muse! 
shall i such base egyptian bondage bear,
 and eat my heart through sorrow, grief, and care? 
for twice seven tedious year wait, watch, ride, run,
 nor dare to live, or speak, or think my own? 
observe with awe that fickle vane his mind,
 that shift, and change with the changeful wind? 
read every look, each twinkle of his eye,
 and thence divine the doubtful augury? 
no Pharaoh no! — here in this calm retreat,
 where every muse, and virtue fix their seat,
 here let i shun each lordling proud and vain,
 and scorn the world ere scorn by it again! 
you happy few, that in this stately dome
 where still the soul of Newton deign to roam,
 inspire each youthful candidate for fame,
 his noonday vision, and his midnight dream;
 you happy few, by regal bounty feed,
 here eat in privacy and peace your bread;
 nor tempt the world, that monster-bearing deep,
 where hush in grim repose the tempest sleep,
 where rock, and sand, dread minister of fate,
 to whelm the pilot hope in ambush wait. 

on a huge hill, that brave the neighbour sky,
 wash by the sable gulph of infamy,
 preferment temple stand; the base how wide,
 how steep the top, how cragged every side! 
compact of ice the dazzle mountain glow,
 like rock of crystal, or lapponian snow,
 while all around the storm-clad whirlwind ride,
 dread thunder break, and livid lightning glide,
 hither by hope enliven croud repair,
 thick as the noontide swarm that float in air;
 Dean jostle dean, each suffragan his brother,
 and half the jealous mob keep down the other. 
ah little know the wretch, that have not try,
 what hell it be this shoulder throng to bide,
 where garish art, and falsehood win the day,
 and simple single truth be spurn away:
 where round, and round, with painful step and slow,
 whoever will scale the sudden height must go;
 catch every twig, each brake and open trace,
 pull down his friend, nay father from his place,
 and raise himself by other foul disgrace. 
yet some there be, gay folly flutter train,
 that free from care and toil the summit gain,
 sublime soar on fortune partial wind,
 and leave the son of science far behind. 
thus straw and feather easy can fly,
 and the light scale be sure to mount on high;
 thin air-blown bubble with each breath be bear,
 and wind will raise the chaff, that leave the corn. 
other again with croud contentious strive,
 and through mere dint of opposition thrive;
 stiff in opinion, active, restless wight,
 they rise against the wind like paper kite:
 it be thus proud ramus to the mitre fly,
 oppose, and oppose —

F. 

and thus must you —
 if opposition, faction, broil prevail,
 take courage, friend, for sure you never can fail. 
misguided youth, be satire thus your turn! 
haste while the baleful flame of party burn,
 in history read go join the grand dispute,
 and give one hireling more to PITT, or BUTE. 
oh will you paint his lordship jerkin over
 with imp, and fiend (like base inquisitor)
 then bold hang he out to public view,
 the scorn and laughter of the gape crew,
 how G**A's son will —

p. 

what? 

F. 

exult for joy,
 and lift your grateful praise to the sky. 

p. 

her son exult? your man of part and skill
 change like their dress, their principle at will,
 where Mammon call with haste obsequious run,
 and bow like persian to the rise sun. 
too long alas over britain bleed land
 have fall corruption wave her iron hand,
 too long possess a monarch patient ear,
 while all the son of freedom shrink with fear. 
be there then one, who breast religion warm,
 and virtue deck with all her bright charm;
 who fiery glance the loathsome den pervade,
 where vice, and foul corruption skulk in shade;
 true to his king, and to the public just,
 no dupe to passion, and no slave to lust;
 who all the good revere, the vile abuse,
 a friend to learning, and the gentle muse;
 Scotchman, or Teague — by this his patriot view,
 i will praise he, love he, friend, and so shall you. 
curse be the line (though every thespian maid
 come uninvoked, and lend her timely aid,
 view they, like Thetis, with a mother eye,
 and dip they over in dew of castaly)
 curse by the line, that powerful vice adorn,
 or treat fair virtue, and her friend with scorn:
 let they cloth candle, wrap up cheese, line trunk;
 or flutter on a rail, amid rogue and punk,
 never meet the mild judicious critic praise,
 but die, like those that Fanny sing or say:
 Fanny, dull wight, to who the ghost appear
 of murder Horace, pale and wan with tear;
 Fanny, dull wight, a mammon-serving slave,
 half politician, atheist, parson, knave,
 that drink each night, and liquor every chink,
 dye his red face in port, and his black soul in ink. 

no sly fanatic, no enthusiast wild,
 no party tool, beguile and beguile,
 no slave to pride, no cant pimp to power,
 nor rigid churchman, nor dissenter sour,
 no fawn flatterer to the base and vain,
 no timist vile, or worshipper of gain;
 when gay not dissolute, grave not severe,
 though learn no pedant, civil though sincere;
 nor mean nor haughty, be one preacher praise
 that — if he rise, he rise by manly way:
 yes, he abhor each sordid selfish view,
 and dread the path your man of art pursue;
 who trust some wander meteor dubious ray,
 and fly like owl from truth meridian day. 

F. 

alas, alas! i plain, friend, foresee
 in point like these we never shall agree. 
too sure debar from all the joy of life,
 from heaven best gift, a live, and a wife,
 chain to a college you must waste your day,
 (wrap up in monkish indolence, and ease,)
 in one dull round of sleep, eat, drink,
 a foe to care, but more a foe to think. 
there when ten lustrum be supine spend
 in envious sloth, and mopish discontent;
 when not one friend, one comfort more remain;
 but slow creep the cold blood through your vein,
 and palsy hand, and totter knee betray
 a helpless state of nature in decay;
 while froward youth deride your squalid age,
 and long to shove you tremble off the stage;
 then then you will blame your conduct — but too late,
 and curse your enemy, and friend, and fate. 

p. 

better be wear with age, with ill oppress,
 distress in fame, in fortune too distress;
 better unknown, and unlamented die,
 with no kind friend to close the part eye,
 (so all be calm, and undisturbed within)
 than feel, and fear the bite pang of sin. 
for oh what odds, the curtain once withdraw,
 betwixt a saint in rag, and reverend knave in lawn? 
