to the most learnt, and ingenious, mr. William Congreve. this pastoral be dedicate by the author.

the fond shepherdess.

a pastoral. 

by a soft murmur stream in heat of day,
 remote from all, the sad Larinda lie
 beneath the spread willow gloomy shade,
 (a cool recess by careful nature make;)
 there lose in thought, soothe her amorous pain,
 forget her flock, and business of the plain. 
the shepherd have wonder that she stay so long,
 each leave his pipe, and stop his rural song
 search the adjacent wood and groves around,
 impatient all, till they Larinda find. 
the careful Daphne distant valley try
 and there with joy the pensive wanderer spy:
 run to her arm with a transport have
 a thousand time, the sigh nymph embrace. 

Daph. 

tell i, say she, what make you all neglect,
 nor now from sun, or wolf your sheep protect,
 but let they wander over the unbounded plain,
 scorch by the one, and by the other slay? 
though you may now the great number boast
 unheeded thus your flock will soon be lose. 
nay of your self too, you be careless grow
 shun all the nymph to Muse in shade alone:
 your head be not now, with rosy chaplet dress,
 no fragrant poesy deck your pensive breast,
 nor decent rush strow beneath the shade,
 where smile once with sport lamb you play. 
the little bird you fond teach to sing,
 release from cage, and trust to its wing:
 you tear each tender sonnet you have make,
 wish the pipe break, when sigh Strephon play. 
ah! why thus peevish? can your faithful heart
 conceal a grief from she, who will bear a part? 

Lar.

no kind inquirer when with care oppress,
 i still repose in you, my weary breast;
 but i have now, no secret to reveal,
 i have lose some lamb, as all the plain can tell. 
at the approach of last refresh shower,
 in have i run to yonder well fence bower;
 in the kind shelter too long sleep lie,
 or thief, or wolf, my darling steal away. 

Daph. 

do not evade the truth, but be sincere;
 for long ere this, your eye do sorrow wear,
 beside, i see you ere you be awake
 disturb you sleep, with eager accent speak,
 (oh! my Exalis will you leave i.) then
 fold your tender arm, and sleep again. 
nay, do not blush at the discover truth,
 too well i know you love that charm youth,
 oft you together, your mix flock do feed,
 delight your self with his harmonious reed. 
if any straggler, from your fold do run;
 each, will the other seek, neglect their own:
 such mutual kindness the soul endear,
 Exalis be your joy, and you be all his care. 

Lar.

oh! name he not; yes, ever sound that name,
 for it be in vain to hide the undo flame. 
i love, nay rather the bright youth adore,
 echo never dote on Narcissus more;
 nor have he half of my Exalis charm
 to tempt the nymph to his resist arm
 among all the swain. speak Daphne, have you see
 a shape so fine, or such a please mein,
 fair as the dove which over our cottage fly,
 soft as their down, and just such lovely eye. 
his flow lock in amorous ringlet twine,
 like the young curl tendril of the vine:
 not philomel soft voice, like his, can move,
 his every accent have a air of love;
 all the gay chanter of the welcome spring,
 like i, be hush and joy; if he but speak or sing
 a breath as sweet, as when the evening breeze
 salute we from yond grove of spicy tree;
 his lovely smile, soft brightness do display,
 like glow blush of the infant day. 
when over the mountain-top the bloom light,
 dart its young beam to the early gazer sight,
 like Pan himself, the glory of the wood,
 while other swain seem mean, attendant god:
 then who such mighty charm can ever resist? 
charm like my love, too great to be express. 

Daph. 

oh fatal power of love, that thus can seize
 the nice Larinda, who not Swain can please;
 but now a slave, worse than ever sigh for you,
 you dote to passion; nay, distraction too. 
tell i, sad soften nymph, how long your breast,
 have be by these too mighty grief oppress? 

Lar.

yes, i will tell you; my unwearied tongue,
 speak of he, can never think age long. 
Daphne, you know what time the lovely Swain,
 with his bless flock, have grace our happy plain:
 from the first hour, he do oblige prove;
 (i little think, to pay he back in love)
 he within bound, my wander lamb will keep,
 when i be weary, glad fold my sheep. 
and as i rest, in the verdant shade,
 on oaten reed melodious air he play. 
the listen shepherd not far distant stand,
 please, and yet envy that dear skilful hand:
 not Pan immortal pipe, can more inspire,
 or glad the plain, than my Exalis lyre. 
it joy all heart, to mine do fatal prove,
 and teach my listen soul, the way to love. 
on a fresh bank, by a clear fountain side,
 (where Flora smile with gaudy vernal pride. 
Phoebus be go, to Thetis yield arm,
 but Luna leave her dear, endymion charm;
 smile over the grove, scarce day it self more bright,
 and through the bough, sprinkle the shade with light.) 
there with gay innocence, supine we sit,
 hear injure philomel her wrong relate,
 but no forewarn bird tell my approach fate. 
then as i lean on the enamel ground,
 i crop the fragrant flower all around;
 the various colour, artful i place,
 and with they please Exalis bosom dress. 
to he a Crook and beachen bowl i give,
 (do with my careful hand the last Ingrave,)
 one side, with various silvan nymph, i grace,
 and on the other Pan and Flora place. 
take these, say i; for all the generous care,
 in which, so oft, my flock and i do share;
 and when i die, Exalis take they too,
 though lose to i, they will joy to be with you;
 like i, they be wonted to your gentle call;
 i only grieve their number be so small. 
he smile to hear the tender thing i say,
 while grateful look his please answer make;
 and then half blush on his music play,
 listen; that dear undo face i view,
 to catch each smile, which kind be bestow. 
but oh! too long, too long i gaze sit;
 my soul, with soften air, prepare by fate,
 take the impression of that charm face,
 which, smile, dart glory round the place:
 a thousand love in amorous fire dress,
 with one dear look pierce my too ready breast:
 i think heaven brightness in those radiant eye,
 and blush, and faint at the soft surprise;
 yet hope the mighty transport will be over,
 and the gay youth but please as heretofore:
 but oh! you may as soon yond mountain move,
 as raze out the immortal character of love. 

Daph. 

then with what caution shall we guard the breast,
 and the first glimmer of the flame resist? 
a flame, so fatal, that it do destroy,
 in sad Larinda, every thought of joy:
 if all kind breast be with such torture move,
 may i never love, nor ever be by love? 
no; rather let i and my flock, be drive
 from this fresh pasture, and delightful grove;
 confine to barren sand and scorch sun,
 where no shade near, nor useful water run;
 faint with wander over the fiery dust,
 famish for food, parch up with heat and thirst:
 my darling lamb around i bleat complaint;
 i void of all, that can relieve their want:
 yet i will endure this pierce scene of woe;
 these utmost ill poor daphne state can know:
 rather then love, shall my gay breast subdue,
 with such soft amorous grief as torture you;
 ah why, will you indulge the fond desire. 
and not at first stifle the grow fire? 

Lar.

at its approach, with tender warmth be bless,
 the lambent flame play, with the sport breast,
 and give such joy, none will, or can resist. 
no lover yet, can ever of forecast boast,
 perceive no ruin, till they know they be lose:
 now with the fond flame of love i burn,
 doom to the certain curse of no return. 
when to the fickle youth, i own i love,
 his flock he straight to ida plain remove;
 he never return, to see how my do fare,
 nor i, nor they, be now no more his care. 
curse on my love, which do itself disclose,
 by what shall keep, i do my charmer lose;
 now i no more must see his lovely face,
 hear his enchant voice, his melt lay;
 lay, which in cold breast will rapture move
 make the soul gay, and every pulse beat love. 
god! how he will look and smile; how be i bless,
 when the charm youth, lean on my will breast,
 speak thing as soft, as the kind hand he press? 
but now all be lose, i rage beyond redress,
 (he'l never return, nor i ever love he less.) 
first, i be cautious to conceal my flame,
 now every breath repeat his dear love name:
 i carve, Exalis on each smooth bark tree,
 that if the mangle wood can vocal be,
 they will sure curse my fond barbarity. 
each sigh have such a tender emphasis,
 as move compassion, in all breast but his:
 for all the swain be conscious that i love;
 each tower hill, and every humble grove;
 i have tire they all, with my incessant cry,
 echo grow faint, repeat of my sigh:
 my sigh, who force move every bough to mourn,
 in pity murmur that I have no return:
 oft do i run to the invite shade,
 where first his please smile, my soul betray;
 there lay i down in the dear sacred place,
 which kind once, his lovely form do grace;
 then weep his absence; rage and rave in vain,
 for oh! i never must be so bless again;
 i try if slumber will afford relief,
 but as they sooth, so they augment my grief. 
i clasp he then in my glad wish arm,
 gaze on his eye, and feast i with his charm;
 but when awake; i rage to find he go,
 to lose the lovely prize, i think i will win. 
search every corner of the wind grove;
 ask every shade, to give i back my love. 
there silent all, and empty of such bliss;
 in vain i seek for joy, i be doom to miss:
 too well exalss know he give delight,
 but he industrious avoid my sight,
 though prayer, and tear, and gift, and bloom love invite. 
if he absent, to cure i it be in vain,
 for still his bright idea do remain,
 and every moment charm i into pain. 
other youth may moderate passion move;
 as he be all lovely, i be all over love:
 lose to all else, insensible i seem,
 and only know I be something dote on he
 if i will count my sheep into the Fould,
 forget their number ere they half be tell;
 and when the nymph my heedlessness do blame,
 i answer all, by sigh of his name. 
farewell, my Daphne, i must leave thou now,
 one pity tear, on my sad fate bestow;
 return thou glory of the joyful grove,
 may thou be bless, for may thou never love. 
farewell my once love flock, my rural store;
 Larinda now will never regard you more. 
but winge with love, to ida plain i will fly:
 find my Exalis out; to see i die. 
no long on my tedious grief i will wait,
 that melt name so often i will repeat,
 till the soft sound dissolve the knot of fate. 
curse by his absence, life be tedious grow;
 now he shall see what his neglect have do. 
while i can gaze, it shall be on his charm,
 and though not live; die in those lovely arm;
 but if he envy, think that bliss too great,
 i will sigh my soul out, at his careless foot;
 then let one pity look but grace my death,
 i will bless the cause, with my expire breath. 

hear i great Pan, Sylvanus, all you god,
 who sacred power, protect the plain and wood,
 hear my last prayer; (to you i oft do bow,
 with milk and honey, make your altar flow.) 
while my sad shade, mourn in the dusky grove,
 release from life; (but not the pain of love.) 
bless my Exalis, let he know no care,
 increase his plenteous herd, and peaceful year:
 from fox and wolf, preserve his tender lamb,
 and with twin-birth, enrich the fruitful dam. 
when his fair flock the shearer care demand,
 luxuriant fleece, tire their numerous hand. 
the industrious bee load their mellifluous hive,
 and all his rural wealth, beyond his wish thrive. 
but above all, you god, regard he most,
 save he from parch sun and pierce frost:
 shelter he safe, ever any storm appear,
 and let he be to you, as to Larinda dear. 

i bounteous god, for plenty first bespeak,
 now for his pleasure, Flora thou invoke:
 let my soft prayer, thy vernal glory bring,
 bless ida plain, with glad eternal spring:
 the pasture gay, no hurtful weed be find,
 but pansy, hyacinth, over spread the ground;
 myrtle and firr make every decent mound:
 let lofty Cedars and the stately pine,
 with mingle bough in mutual shade combine:
 then the delicious eglantine and rose,
 with fragrant jasmine humble bower compose
 (where the dear youth may oft supine rest,
 with please dream, in golden slumber bless,)
 when heat or thirst, to flow stream invite,
 let sport naiad entertain his sight;
 bird cheerful note, the wood and valley fill,
 from spicy tree which odourous gum distil. 
among these aromatic rich fruit place,
 fair to the sight, as those hesperian grace,
 which both invite, and please the longing taste. 
the cluster bough, complaisant recline,
 as if they joy the gatherer hand to join,
 and all the choice, still my love be thy. 

and when in honour, goddess, to thy name,
 the joyful swain, in sport their thanks proclaim,
 whether they pipe, or dance, or sing, or play,
 may my Exalis, bear the prize away. 
from shepherd hand the welcome garland wear,
 for oh! i grudge the nymph shall come so near
 yet if it will please he best; then smile come,
 and with glad voice sing the victor home;
 with choice flower strow all the joyful path,
 gay as his look, sweet as his tuneful breath. 
then some kind nymph the fragrant pavement take
 his press foot, give double odour back;
 each rose, anemone, more beauteus make:
 let they fresh mixture with the cypress have,
 then strow they all on my untimely grave. 
they too be lover once, though now transform,
 may i like they, to some kind plant be turn;
 and when Exalis, next in triumph lead,
 make posy for his breast, and garland for his head:
 let not the nymph upbraid, when sh return,
 my grave be fill, and grace with what he scorn:
 lest, he relent, shall one moment grieve,
 to save a sigh, i will be condemn to live:
 with rage madness, mourn my absent bliss,
 and with my cry wound every ear but his. 

here the nymph faint with excess of grief,
 and careful Daphne, strive to give relief. 
