pleasure.

ah, siren pleasure! when thy flatter strain
 lure i to seek thou through thy flowery plain,
 teach from thy sparkle cup full joy to sip,
 and suck sweet poison from thy velvet lip,
 do thou in opiate charm my virtue steep,
 be reason silent, and do conscience sleep? 
how can i else enjoy thy faithless dream,
 and fancy day-light in thy meteor gleam;
 think all be happiness, that smile like joy,
 and with dear purchase seize each glitter toy? 
till rouse at length, deep rankle in my heart,
 i feel the latent anguish of thy dart! 
oh, let the young and innocent beware,
 nor think uninjured to approach thy snare! 
their-sure conquest be, the foe to shun;
 by fight infect, and by truce undo. 
secure, at distance let her shore be past,
 who sight can poison, and who breath can blast. 
contentment bloom not on her glow ground,
 and round her splendid shrine no peace be find. 
if once enchant by her magic charm,
 they seek for bliss in dissipation arm:
 if once they touch the limit of her realm,
 offend principle resign the helm,
 simplicity forsake the treacherous shore,
 and once discard, she return no more. 
thus the charm mariner on every side
 of poison senegal ill-omened tide,
 eye the rich carpet of the vary hue
 and plain luxuriant open to his view:
 now the steep bank with tower forest crown,
 clothe to the margin of the slope ground;
 where with full foliage bend over the wave,
 its verdant arm the spread mangrove lave;
 and now smooth, level lawn of deep green
 betray the richness of the untrodden scene:
 between the open grove such prospect glow,
 as art with mimic hand can never bestow,
 while lavish nature wild profusion yield,
 and spread, unbid, the rank uncultured field;
 fling with fantastic hand in every gale
 ten thousand blossom over each velvet vale,
 and bid unclass their fragrant beauty die
 far from the painter hand or sage eye. 
from cloudless sun perpetual lustre stream,
 and swarm of insect glisten in their beam. 
near and more near the heedless sailor steer,
 spread nil their canvas, and no warn here. 
see, on the edge of the clear liquid glass
 the wonder beast survey they as they pass,
 and fearless bound over their native green,
 adorn the landscape, and enrich the scene;
 ah, fatal scene! the deadly vapour rise,
 and swift the vegetable poison fly,
 putrescence load the rank infect ground,
 deceitful calm deal subtle death around;
 even as they gaze their vital power decay,
 their waste health and vigour melt away;
 till quite extinct the animate fire,
 pale, ghastly victim, they at last expire. 
