the nun return to the world,

by the decree of the national assembly of FRANCE, February, 1790. 

farewell you wall where solitude have throw
 her long dark shadow on each silent stone,
 where the slow pulse but feeble dare to creep,
 or give the wretched the sad leave to weep;
 where struggle sigh break forth from every breast,
 and waste sorrow wear a holy vest;
 where pure religion seldom venture nigh,
 or own the tear that hang within the eye,
 which tremble long, at last in secret fall,
 the heart-wrought offer to relentless wall. 

but nought avail the heart-wrought offer here,
 nor aught avail the earth-unhallowed prayer;
 sigh, that so oft for worldly care be give,
 no listen seraph fond bear to heaven,
 but through the cloister corridor be bear,
 hear oft at eve and at return of morn. 
some sister may revere the cloister gloom,
 and, warm with life, yet hover over the tomb;
 may wing their soul to the supreme abode,
 and, quit earth, place every thought with god. 
thrice happy they who taste this early heaven,
 and feel while here their every fault forgive. 

when the slow organ swell the lengthen note,
 and heaven-born music pour from every throat;
 when warm devotion breathe the fervent prayer,
 and holy saint the pious rapture share;
 when watchful slumber state minute know,
 and, wake, teach the ready knee to bow;
 when faith and hope both animate the breast,
 and habit only make religion vest;
 when strong conviction hold a steady light,
 and clear show the vestal life be right;
 when conscience dictate the prompt will obey,
 and make response both to prayer and praise;
 be it then we taste the promise joy of heaven,
 and trust, and feel, our every fault forgive? 
not so! — my year over many a sand have run,
 and still my sigh have count one by one. 
still self-willed thought will bear my soul away,
 and quick transport i to some blissful day,
 when social intercourse her sweet will lend,
 mix the lover with the tender friend;
 when father be, mother, sister, voice be hear,
 with every name that sense of life endear;
 when future plan of dear domestic ease
 be fond suffer every wish to seize;
 when useful life be hold a female part,
 and it be not sin to feel i have a heart,
 or link the soft affection in my chain,
 and hope to please — nor strive to please in vain;
 to see the wish before it take a form,
 to mark the cloud or break the come storm,
 to shield the heart from every sense of pain,
 and tell my own it do not beat in vain! 
this! this be life! the life my faith approve,
 a useful current to some friend belove;
 if not a friend belove, at least to those
 who length of suffering call for sweet repose;
 and seek the soothe of the gentle breast,
 in every form that pity can be dress. 

once through a vale of tempt wile i stray,
 till dusky evening draw her silent shade,
 and night approach before i guess the hour,
 wrap in a cloud, and usher by a shower. 
a cottage, shelter by a fringe wood,
 on a green carpet sweet and lonely stand;
 the rise hill on either side will show
 where the wild rose uncropped may safe blow,
 where the soft murmur of a low cascade
 may join the stream that gurgle through the glade;
 along the pasture nibble sheep be see,
 who new-washed fleece bright make the green;
 two lamb run frisk to avoid the shower,
 and knock their little head against the door;
 the open door a will shelter lend,
 for here sweet innocence and man be friend;
 two little cherub, rosy as the morn,
 the sweet wild flower wreathe around each horn,
 the little playmate know the gentle hand,
 and, pat soft, take a patient stand;
 then skip and frolic, fond to lead the way,
 and show the world how innocence shall play. 

in a warm corner sit the age sire,
 his cushion spread, and place beside the fire;
 respect from all unasked he seem to draw, —
 respect from love, and not from silent awe. 
he thankful look, and seem to bless his race,
 hope lit his eye, and piety his face;
 few man more bless, more fortunate have be,
 or sweet, better child child see;
 his daughter cheek have not yet cease to glow,
 the rose can yet upon occasion blow;
 when the dear partner of her useful life
 will fond call she his belove wife,
 the sweet feeling all her heart will charm,
 beam in her eye, and on her cheek grow warm! 

close to her heart a young cherub press,
 smile in her face, and sink upon her breast;
 the happy father at his homely board
 never think the world can great wealth afford;
 while the love prattler many a trick will play,
 tug at his coat, and, peep, run away;
 while nod and whisper, loud enough to hear,
 give certain notice when the foe draw near;
 while his sly hand pretend the rogue to seize,
 the wondrous escape the dare pilferer please;
 and watch, when his eye be turn aside,
 beneath the mother apron seek to hide;
 neatness and comfort wear a shine face,
 and every thing seem well to know its place. 
gay peacock feather wave over pewter row,
 and many a tint the paint rainbow throw;
 the white scour chair even seem a tempt seat,
 but all be invite where all thing be neat;
 the sun look in, and see each corner clean,
 and bright shine as he survey the scene. 
bless through long life, may every pair like these
 feel the full comfort of the wish to please! 

no lot like this attend on my doom,
 destine to live, but live within the tomb. 
false zeal! false pride! but let i hide their shame,
 nor blot the parent with a barbarous name. 
back to the world i now may safe go,
 and kind foster every child of woe;
 soft pity handmaid still i yet may be,
 and every mourner may claim kin with i;
 for keen affliction make the strong tie,
 and fellow-sufferer be the best ally. 

but how shall i the world retrace once more! 
how change that world from what i know before! 
no more i know to form the quick reply,
 or smooth my manner to the expect eye;
 no long know the various turn of mind,
 which now deceive, and now inform mankind;
 the favourite topic which refinement teach,
 and grace with every happy turn of thought;
 the sentimental strain that soft flow
 have but be teach i by instruct woe;
 the wile of fashion (that with eager haste
 arrest the eye, and call her whimsy taste),
 around this form no mystic wreath unfold,
 nor captive fancy in their maze hold,
 which long keep sense uncertain what to say,
 what part to praise, or what to vote away:
 these art unknowing, how shall i appear
 wrap in the garb simplicity will wear,
 and, as a being of a world unknown,
 live much a wonder, or live much alone! 

of friend i leave, alas! how few remain,
 how few to greet my welcome back again! 
a change of manner make a change of thought,
 and i may seem but little what i ought. 
stern bigotry may rail, and blame my choice,
 and superstition raise her hollow voice,
 and priest and prelate may my action scan,
 and scorn with all the power of reason man;
 but let they scorn — for ever may it be,
 that human reason and her act be free! 

one soft regret yet soften over my mind,
 one other self i yet must leave behind;
 in leave she, i leave my better part,
 with half the fair virtue of my heart. 
in scene of sorrow long our love be try,
 oft have she weep, and sigh as i have sigh;
 the sister fate for both alike have weave
 a tale of sorrow in a veil of love;
 the blend light and shade of other woe
 mix in a way none but the wretched know;
 none but the wretched see by what fine thread
 those heart be tie which with one wound have bleed! 

forbid friend the happy union cross,
 and sweet Cecilia to the world be lose;
 the gentl lily not more sweet appear
 when see through all the morning soften tear;
 the melt grace mould her win form,
 pliant as osier bend before the storm;
 tall as the cedar on yond mountain brow,
 that stoop to shade the murmur stream below;
 meek as when patience check the rebel tear,
 and make submission a bless saint appear,
 while plaintive accent swell the soft chord,
 and breathe full harmony on every word;
 in every word the full sense you hear
 exact suit to the listen ear,
 while tender interest every heart inspire,
 and every eye both pity and admire. 

when to the world i urge she to return;
 "what be the world," say she, "to those who mourn,
 to those who have lose their dear interest there,
 the only thing that make life worth a care! 
o! have my friend but be content to see
 this close grate fold all its bar on i;
 nor, as the veil be hover over my head,
 with impious hand the sacred vestment shred; —
 have but the monk the frantic rage forgive,
 nor send his pure and ardent soul to heaven,
 then to the world i may again have fly,
 and not, as now, 'forget myself to stone!' 
but why shall i withdraw from this retreat? 
what friend have i in all the world to meet? 
dead in the breast of every kindred tie,
 for long ere dead to all the world we die;
 indifference heed not where the wretched sleep,
 nor leave one soothe sigh though they shall wake and weep! 

 "no; my saint Agnes, let i here remain,
 these wall be old companion of my pain! 
and to each deep and agonize sigh
 in hollow murmur groan a sad reply;
 these sad reply have bind i to my cell,
 nor, than its gloom, few thing i love so well;
 oft have i mourn — oft tell my story here,
 and now the place, like a try friend, grow dear. 
the mind, in all its habitude of woe,
 cling to the spot that seem its grief to know;
 where fond remembrance people all the scene,
 and friend appear where friend have never be;
 her tear-dipped pencil strong likeness show
 in that love spot where the idea rise;
 there the bless shade for ever haunt the ground,
 and wander with we all the grove around. 
oft have you meet i in yond cloister aisle,
 the half-tear start through the trouble smile;
 it be there, at evening hour, just as the sun
 hang over yond marble, and with languor shine,
 that first of home i dare indulge the thought,
 and with warm fancy many a image wrought;
 worship the relique with a love divine,
 and build to memory the forbid shrine. 
forbid, ah! yet nature will be find,
 though wall of adamant enclose she round;
 though vow, and veil, and cloister, bind she fast,
 the free-born spirit break her bar at last;
 find the sick heart devote to her sway,
 and all her dictate wait to obey;
 wonder not, then, this place become so dear! 
have i not bring my heart devotion here? 
unfit abroad to take a active part,
 with all this load of misery at my heart,
 i only hope to wing my soul to heaven,
 and, for my countless tear and sigh, to be forgive. 

 "you i shall miss! through every lengthen aisle
 your heavenly presence sacred make the pile;
 the long perspective find a open ray
 whenever your image cross my wander way,
 light sudden gleam of joy my breast will seize,
 and the cold blood forget awhile to freeze. 
but go, saint Agnes, bear along with thou
 the many a tale of cloister misery;
 bless that sage council where fair freedom dwell,
 and bid she henceforth close these gloomy cell;
 the smooth chicane of monkish wile unfold,
 and say what wretch half the convent hold;
 drag forth delusion to their wonder sight,
 and let they see their bless decree be right! 
how soon shall freedom cheer the droop swain,
 how soon shall plenty spread along the plain,
 how soon shall labour make a sport of toil,
 and health blow round he as he till the soil;
 the grateful soil her free gift shall lend,
 to prove herself bless freedom steady friend. 
as over the earth she bend her flowery way,
 the swain exult as at return of day;
 the tower wood more tower seem to grow,
 and free-born river free seem to flow;
 the barren rock their little part will bear,
 and tuft of grass grow, nourish here and there;
 all nature see, and hail the hour with i,
 that give to man the mountain-liberty;
 dear liberty! the source of heartfelt ease,
 which still must please while earthly good can please." 
