to one that persuade i to leave the muse.

forgo the charm muse! no, in spite
 of your ill-natured prophecy i will write,
 and for the future paint my thought at large,
 i waste no paper at the hunderds charge:
 i rob no neighbour goose of quill, nor slink
 for a collection to the church for ink:
 beside my muse be the most gentle thing
 that ever yet make a attempt to sing:
 i call no lady punk, nor gallant fop,
 nor set the marry world a edge for rope;
 yet i be so seurvy incline to rhyme,
 that undesigned my thought burst out a chime;
 my active genius will by no mean sleep,
 and let it then its proper channel keep. 
i have tell you, and you may believe i too,
 that i must this, or great mischief do;
 and let the world think i inspire, or mad,
 i will sure write while paper to be have;
 since heaven to i have a retreat assign,
 that will inspire a less harmonious mind. 
all that a poet love i have in view,
 delight some hill, refresh shade, and pleasant valley too,
 fair spread valley clothe with last green,
 and sunny bank with gild stream between,
 gay as elisium, in a lover dream,
 or Flora mansion, seat by a stream,
 where free from sullen care i live at case,
 indulge my muse, and wish, as i please,
 exempt from all that look like want or strife,
 i smooth glide along the plain of life,
 thus fate conspire, and what can i do to it? 
beside, i be vehement in love to boot,
 and that there be not a willow sprig but know,
 in who sad shade i breathe my direful woe. 
but why for these dull reason do i pause,
 when i have at hand my genuine one, because! 

and that my muse may take no counter spell,
 i fair bid the board school farewell:
 no young impertinent, shall here intrude,
 and vex i from this blissful solitude. 
spite of her heart, old puss shall damn no more
 great Sedley play, and never look they over;
 affront my navel, no, nor in a rage,
 force dryden lofty product from the stage,
 while all the rest of the melodious crew,
 with the whole system of Athenians too,
 for study sake out of the window fly. 
but I'to church, shall fill her train no more,
 and walk as if i sojurn by the hour. 

to Stepwel and his Kit i bid adieu,
 fall off, and on, be hang and coopee too
 thy self for i, my dance day be over;
 i will act inspire bachannel no more. 
eight note must for another treble look,
 in burlesque to make face by the book. 
Iapan, and my esteem pencil too,
 and pretty Cupid, in the glass adieu,
 and since the dear friend that be must part,
 old governess farewell with all my heart. 
now welcome all you peaceful shade and spring,
 and welcome all the inspire tender thing;
 that please my genius, suit my make and year,
 unburdened yet with all but lover care. 
