the royal voyage.

by the same.

i 

high on the bound bark the royal fair
 mount over the billow of the watery way;
 serene as Cynthia through the field of air,
 queen of the night extend her cloudless ray,
 when all the forest tremble to the gleam,
 and the transparent sea reflect the silver beam. 
but see the whiten surge, the gather cloud;
 hark! the wind whistle through the shrowd,
 they bow the mast, they rend the sail,
 the sea-worn mariner be pale,
 and view the blacken storm, and hear the increase gale. 
but not, o royal maid,
 let fear thy breast invade:
 know, happy fair! approve by heaven,
 to thou the empire of the main be give,
 in vain loud wind the deep deform,
 love shall triumphant ride the storm. 
peace! every roar child of trouble air:
 unmoved the queen of sea-girt Albion sing;
 her fly finger touch the string;
 around their queen the tremble train repair:
 her courage lift their own;
 her music sooth their care. 

ii.

happy queen of albion isle,
 on who the love and grace smile:
 haste from germania plain, and death-devoted shore,
 soon thy weary step shall try
 a happy land, a mild sky,
 where no din of arm shall roar,
 nor wind, nor swell sea assault thou more. 
thus, amid the storm which blow
 over thracian hill of snow,
 Orpheus tune the golden lyre,
 and see the beast of death retire. 
thus fearless of the night, and watery grave,
 leander bosom meet the wave,
 while love before he fly his way to guide,
 and through the foam tide
 give to his nervous arm redouble power,
 while HYMEN shake the torch bright on the distant tower. 
hail! happy fire of mutual love unknown,
 to purchase dalliance and tumultuous joy;
 true pleasure sit on virtue awful throne;
 there all the love their golden shaft employ:
 mild and unclouded the eternal flame,
 reward of virtuous love, and heaven best blessing come. 

iii.

swift the winge hour shall urge their steal way,
 nor oft the wane moon shall know decay
 ere a new race shall rise of sceptre king. 
from thou, strelisian fair, the future hero spring. 
see, the long line of royal youth extend,
 to britain throne new subject bend;
 wherever her glitter standard rise,
 in other sea, in other sky,
 shall spread the godlike fame of mild victory. 
auspicious youth be bear! 
arise! o haste! your native soil adorn! 
not valorous arm alone
 shall guard the regal throne;
 but shine art, and holy law,
 and ancient freedom well-defended cause,
 shall lift secure your praise sublime
 through all the radiant path of time. 
on dorubernian cliff the muse have tell,
 prophetic child of Druids old,
 whereon she sit, and hear from either pole
 in every wind victorious thunder roll. 
