to dr. Moore,

in answer to a poetical epistle write to i by he in Wales, September 1791. 

while in long exile far from you i roam,
 to soothe my heart with image of home,
 for i, my friend, with rich poetic grace
 the landscape of my native isle you trace;
 her culture meadow, and her lavish shade,
 the river wind through her lovely glade;
 far as where, frown on the flood below,
 the rough welsh mountain lift its craggy brow. 
meanwhile my step have stray where autumn yield
 a purple harvest on the sunny field;
 where, bend with their luscious weight, recline
 the load branch of the cluster vine;
 there, on the loire sweet bank, a joyful band
 cull the rich produce of the fruitful land;
 the youthful peasant, and the village maid,
 and age and childhood lend their feeble aid. 
the labour of the morning do, they haste
 where in the field be spread the light repast;
 the vintage-basket serve, reverse, for chair,
 and the gay meal be crown with tuneless air. 

delightful land! ah, now with general voice,
 thy village son and daughter may rejoice;
 thy happy peasant, now no more a slave,
 forbid to taste one good that nature give,
 no long view with unavailing pain
 the lavish harvest, ripe for he in vain. 
oppression cruel hand shall dare no more
 to seize its tribute from his scanty store;
 and from his famish infant wring the spoil,
 too hard-earned produce of his useful toil;
 for now on gallia plain the peasant know
 those equal right impartial heaven bestow;
 he now, by freedom ray illumine, teach
 some self-respect, some energy of thought,
 discern the blessing that to all belong,
 and live to guard his humble shed from wrong. 

auspicious liberty! in vain thy foe
 deride thy ardour, and thy force oppose;
 in vain refuse to mark thy spread light,
 while, like the mole, they hide their head in night,
 or hope their eloquence with taper-ray
 can dim the blaze of philosophic day;
 those reasoner, who pretend that each abuse,
 sanction by precedent, have some bless use! 
do then a chemic power to time belong,
 extract by some process right from wrong? 
must feudal government for ever last,
 those gothic pile, the work of age past? 
nor may obtrusive reason dare to scan,
 far less reform, the rude, mishapen plan? 
the wind labyrinth, the hostile tower,
 where danger threaten, and where horror lower;
 the jealous drawbridge, and the mote profound,
 the lonely dungeon in the cavern ground;
 the sullen dome above those central cave,
 where live one despot and a host of slave? —
 ah, freedom, on this renovate shore
 that fabric fright the moral world no more! 
shake to its basis by thy powerful spell,
 its triple wall in massy fragment fall;
 while, rise from the hideous wreck, appear
 the temple thy firm arm sublime rear;
 of fair proportion, and of simple grace,
 a mansion worthy of the human race. 
for i, the witness of those scene, who birth
 form a new era in the story earth;
 oft, while with glow breast those scene i view,
 they lead, ah friend belove, my thought to you! 
still every fine emotion they impart
 with your idea mingle in my heart;
 you, who i oft have hear, with generous zeal,
 with all that truth can urge, or pity feel,
 refute the pompous argument, that try
 the common cause of million to deride;
 with reason force the plausive sophist hit,
 or dart on folly the bright flash of wit;
 and warm share, with philosophic mind,
 the great, the glorious triumph of mankind. 
