On seeing the Captives, lately redeem'd from Barbary by His Majesty.

A sight like this, who can unmov'd survey? 
Impartial Muse, can'st thou with-hold thy Lay? 
See the freed Captives hail their native Shore,
 And tread the Land of Liberty once more:
 See, as they pass, the crouding People press,
 Joy in their Joy, and their Dellv'rer bless. 

Now, Slavery! no more thy rigid Hand
 Shall drag the Trader to thy fatal Strand:
 No more in Iron Bonds the Wretched groan;
 Secur'd, Britannia, by thy Guardian Throne. 

Say, mighty Prince! can Empire boast a Bliss,
 Amidst its radiant Pomp, that equals this? 
To see the Captives by thy Pow'r set free,
 Their Supplications raise to Heav'n for Thee! 

The god like Bounty scatters Blessings round;
 As flowing Urns enrich the distant Ground:
 No more shall Woes the fainting Heart destroy;
 The House of Mourning now is turn'd to Joy:
 See Arms in Grief long folded up, extend,
 To clasp a Husband, Brother, Kinsman, Friend:
 See hoary Parents, tott'ring o'er the Grave,
 A Son long-wail'd, to prop their Age, receive:
 And, Have we liv'd to see thy Face? they cry;
 O! 'tis enough — We now in Peace shall die:
 O bless'd be Heaven! and bless'd, while Life remains. 
Shall be the Hand, that has unbound thy Chains! 

Forbear, my Muse; know Art attempts in vain,
 What Nature pictures to the Breast humane. 

To Wager turn; for Wager raise thy Voice;
 To feed the Hungry, long has been his Choice,
 And make the Heart, born down by Care, rejoice. 

Say, ye Luxurious, who indulge your Taste,
 And, by one Riot, might a Thousand feast;
 Do you not blush to see his Care to feed
 The Captives by your Monarch's Bounty freed? 

The bitter Cup of Slavery is past;
 But pining Penury approaches fast. 

And shall the Royal Rage alone bestow? 
Shall not Compassion from the Subject flow? 
Shall not each free-born Briton's Bosom melt,
 To make the Joys of Liberty more felt? 
So, Albion, be it ever giv'n to thee,
 To break the Bonds, and set the Pris'ners free
