on scribble against genius.

a epistle.

no single rule more frequent enjoin,
than this; "observe the bias of your mind."
however just by every one confess,
there be not a rule more frequent transgress,
for mortal, to their interest blind, pursue
the thing they like, not that they be fit to do.

this verro fault, by frequent praise fire,
he several part have try, in each admire.
that verro be not every way complete,
it be long unknown, and may have be so yet:
but musick-mad, the unhappy man pursue
that only thing heaven mean he never shall;
and thus his proper road to fame neglect,
he be ridicule for that he but affect.

will man but act from nature secret call,
or only, where that fail, not act at all:
if not their skill, they will show at least good sense, —
they will get no fame — nor will they give offence.

not that where some one merit be deny,
man must be every way unqualified;
nor hold we, like that wrong-concluding wight,
a man can fish — because he can not write.
view all the world around: each man design
and furnish for some favourite part you find.
that, sometime low: yet this, so small a gift,
prove nature do not turn he quite adrift.
the phlegmatic, dull, awkward, thick, gross-witted,
have all some clumsy work for which they be fit.
it be never know, in man a perfect void,
even i and lead may be well employ;
will we our poverty of part survey,
and follow as our genius lead the way.

what then? obedient to that turn of mind
shall man jog on to one dull path confine;
from that small circle never dare depart,
to strike at large, and snatch a grace from art?
at least with care forbid path pursue?
who quit the road, shall keep it still in view:
from genius some few escape may be allow;
but ever keep within its neighbourhood.

but c—r, faithless to his bias see,
with giant-sin oppose heaven decree.
still fond where he shall not, he blunder on
with all that haste fool make to be undo:
want of success his passion but augment;
like eunuch rage of love, from impotence.

among all the instance of genius cross,
the rhyme tribe be those who err the most.
each piddle wretch who have but common sense,
or think he have, to verse shall make pretence:
why not? it be their diversion, and it be hard
if man of their estate shall be debar.
thus wealth with they give every thing beside;
as people worth so much be qualify:
they have all the requisite for write fit,
all but that one — some little share of wit.
give way, you friend, nor with fond prayer proceed
to stop the progress of a pen full speed.
it be heaven, incense by some prodigious crime,
thus for man sin determine they to rhyme.
bad man, no doubt; perhaps it be vengeance due
for shrine they have plunder, or some wretch they slay.
whatever it be, sure grievous be the offence,
and grievous be (heaven know!) its recompense.
at once in want of rhyme, and want of rest;
plague to themselves, and to mankind a jest:
seduce by empty form of false delight —
such, in some man, their deadly lust to write!

even i, who genius seem as much forget,
(my when i write, as you when you do not;)
who grave thus can other fault condemn,
my self allow, what i blame in they;
with no pretence to phoebus aid divine,
nor the least interest in the tuneful nine,
with all the guilt of impotence in view,
grieve for past sin, but yet commit new;
whatever the wit may say, or wise may think,
be fool every way with pen and ink.
when all who wish i best, begin to advise,
'that be witty, be not being wise;
'that if the voice of interest may be hear,
'for one who wear a gown, — will be prefer —
incorrigible deaf, i feign a yawn;
and mock their just conclusion, ere they be draw.

if to my practice, they oppose my theme;
and point, how i swim against the stream:
with all the rancour of a bard in rage,
i will quote they half the writer of the age;
who in a wrath of verse, with all their might
write on, however unqualified to write,
