Isaiah XXXV. 

when Idumea, and the nation round,
the inveterate foe of Israel, and of god,
lie vanquish, dormant on the dreary waste
of far extend ruin; and involve
in hideous woe, and desolation wide,
then shall Judea lift her cheerful head;
put forth the leaf of glad prosperity;
and, after all the gloomy scene of grief
and sad affliction, flourish and revive
in all the bright serenity of peace.
as the gay rose, when winter storm be past,
warm with the influence of a kind sun,
come from the bud with a vermilion blush,
cheer the sight, and scatter all around
a balmy odour, that perfume the sky.
she shall rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and, fraught with rich blessing from above,
spring forth in all the pride of Lebanon,
who lofty cedar, wondrous to behold,
in body huge, and to the sky erect
stand eminent, branch over branch outspread
in regular distance, and verdant shade,
emblem of happy state. nor shall the hill
of fragrant Carmel, rich in fruitful soil;
nor sharon flowery plain in all its bloom,
array in nature goodly attire,
and breathe fresh a gale of heavenly sweet,
spring forth in great glory. for the lord
his goodness will declare, that know no bound;
and all the people shall behold his might,
and see the wonder of omnipotence.

strengthen the languid nerve, you seer! and bid
the tremble hand be strong. call into life
the dissipate spirit; and confirm
the feeble knee; the unactive joint support;
and bid the lazy blood flow brisk on,
and circulate with joy through every vein.
comfort the oppress; and smooth the ruffle mind;
say to the afflict heart, devoid of hope,
behold! the almighty rush from the sky,
even israel god from his refulgent throne
of glory come, but not with radiant blaze
of light, even light invisible, as when
to Moses on mount Horeb he appear,
and send his faithful servant to redeem
ungrateful Israel from egyptian bond;
nor with the music of a still, soft voice,
as when he inform the prophet of his will;
but in a black and dreadful hemisphere
of darkness, arm with flame thunderbolt,
and flash of red lightning to increase
the woe, and make even darkness visible.
the hill shall tremble at his dire approach;
and fearful mountain, pile up to the cloud,
fall down precipitant with rapid force,
and spread a plain immense. for god will come
full fraught with vengeance to consume your foe;
you in his bounteous mercy to protect.

then shall the eye long close in black night.
to who no gladsome dawn of light appear,
but comfortless, impenetrable shade,
shake off the film of darkness, and behold
the long-expected day. new scene of joy.
shall then appear, and various prospect rise
to cheer the new-born sight. the deafen ear,
on who dull nerve sad-moping silence dwell,
and lock from music note, or voice of man,
shall open glad its labyrinth of sound,
again the string instrument shall feel,
and the sweet word of social converse hear.

the lame, infirm, creep with slow advance,
drag with pain reluctant foot along,
and scarce by the friendly crutch sustain,
shall throw the unserviceable prop aside,
and stand erect, exult like a roe
upon mount Tabor, frisk nimble round
on the soft verdant turf, with wanton tread
skim along the surface of the plain,
or light bound over the rise ground.
the dumb for melancholy silence frame,
cut off from friendly converse with mankind,
strive in vain the sad defect to mend
with gabb'r noise of break syllable
confuse, shall talk in dialect complete;
and tongue, that know not how to speak, shall sing.
new scene of joy shall gladden every face;
and universal peace overspread the land.

the glow ground, gape with burn thirst,
shall greedy suck in the humid tide,
pour from cavern of the craggy hill
in limpid stream, still warble, as they fall,
melodious murmur down the ample glade,
and crystal spring refresh the thirsty land.
where heretofore the curl serpent lie
in many a wily labyrinth self-rolled,
or sweep deceitful over the dusty plain
in horrid spire, and many a tower maze,
the tremble reed shall wave his fringe top;
and the tall rush in slender spire uprise.
the swampy marsh shall its broad flag produce,
with bend willow, sport of every wind;
and vegetable earth new bloom display
delightful, with prolific verdure clothe,
a wasteful desert now, and barren soil.

a way shall be prepare, a path direct,
mark out by line with a unerring hand,
even a straight path, which god himself shall make;
it shall be call, the way of holiness;
a way to sacred footstep only know,
where the unhallowed shall no entrance find,
nor impious foot profane the sacred ground.
god shall attend the motion of the just,
watch over their step, and guide they as they go;
and none shall wander from the obvious path,
for who can err, when god direct the way?

the rampant lion shall not wander there,
nor fiery tiger, roar for his prey;
nor prowl wolf, that howl along the plain,
with the keen pang of rage hunger sting;
nor surly bear in nebo mountain breed,
or carmel forest range merciless;
such as come furious from the neighbour grove
of ancient Bethel with voracious speed,
grin destruction as they roam along,
and slay the mocker of the good old seer.
but free, and unmolested shall they walk
who heaven protect, and god vouchsafe to guide.
the ransom captive, weary of the yoke,
the heavy yoke of long oppressive thrall,
shall cheerful return to happy clime,
in melody break forth the gladden heart,
that speak deliverance, and the voice of joy.
Judah shall witness to the grateful song;
and faithful Zion echo back the sound.
no sign of woe shall hang upon the cheek,
no shudder fear, nor horrible despair;
but grief with all its melancholy train
of huge dismay shall fly from every face.
gladness shall crown the head, peace fill the heart,
and endless rapture dwell on every brow.
