the enthusiast.

the pious sire of ARLA rear her youth
 strong to feel the great creator power;
 in her pure bosom sow the seed of truth,
 and open nature inexhaustless store:
 early he lead her mind
 to pure religion unadulter stream;
 the young musician catch the ecstatic theme,
 and sing God glory to the sound wind. 
call by his king to war,
 he leave her young,
 to those impression which his tender care
 have on her pliant heart imprint strong. 

her lively sense music influence find;
 her finger strike the sacred organ key;
 with pious hope and heavenly ecstasy
 her soul fly upward, winge by lofty sound. 
so sweet she sing
 that infidel will hear;
 the hallow note which fire her sacred tongue
 infuse her faith, and teach they to revere. 
her soul be meek, her energy be strong,
 and force divine fire each seraphic song. 

her simple frame no ornament adorn,
 no earthly radiance blush,
 but every look her mental force inform;
 the infant soul with beam immortal dawn,
 and break forth her eye and bosom flush. 
her temperament be so replete with fire
 she scarce seem to feel the earthly part;

her genius with eccentric force aspire,
 its boundless flight with strong conception dart:
 but dazzle by its light, and lead astray,
 her inexperienced reason fall a prey;
 the entrance muse seduce her early youth,
 more fraught with energy than feed with truth. 

her soul, enrich by nature noble store,
 give to wild fancy mad and sovereign sway;
 imagination draw she fine power,
 until the balance of her soul give way;
 and, its pure tenor thus destroy and break,
 the dormant passion of her nature wake:
 for mind with innate force and quickness fire,
 to their own operation leave in youth,
 too oft, by foster prejudice inspire,
 be warp from the more simple path of truth. 
strong inclination point the unknown way,
 and licence passion blind lead astray. 

her strengthen muse still more enchant glow;
 delude the frail mortal strain her power,
 while giant weed in her rich soil arise,
 vain the self-supposed saint adore. 
till lose in feverish dream,
 amid fancy fire she heavenly vision see,
 as rapt she sing her wild melodious theme,
 nature she think relax its rigid law;
 angel she see descend from on high,
 unfold all the wonder of the sky,
 and catch a glimpse of the divinity. 

one noon amid the sea-girt rock she stray,
 the expansive ocean and the heaven survey;
 her soul be awe, while lose in zeal she stand,
 and the majestic wild of nature view. 
the air condense, to sullen mist transform,
 the sky frown awful, big with threaten storm,
 and gather cloud unite;
 the blacken ocean foam upon the shore,
 while distant thunder amid the mountain roar,
 and pelt drop fast over the rock alight. 

the angry cloud in troop convolving part,
 the dun horizon gleam with horrid dye;
 from sulphurous vapour burst lighten dart,
 and loud thunder echo through the sky. 
shelter amid the rocky cave she seek,
 from the large shower and vivid flash retire,
 while solemn peal wake every awful thought,
 and the fierce lighten fill the cave with fire. 
still roll on terrific over her head,
 the rain in hasty torrent burst the cloud,
 which spend like smoke cross the blue ether flee,
 who brightness follow vapour dim shroud;
 tremble her face amid the rock she hide,
 till the fierce horror of the storm subside. 

flush by her fear, with awe she rear her head,
 by all the grandeur of the scene inspire;
 as distant the solemn cloud retire,
 she quit the cave, and hail they as they flee,
 with wild imagination strong fire:
 while lambent still the lightning flash around,
 and the hoarse thunder roll a sullen sound;
 her lift eye the cloud heaven transpierce,
 divine strain she sing of heavenly verse. 

thus, with enthusiastic rapture blind,
 a heavenly vision fire her feverish mind;
 God voice she think amid the tempest roll. 
and fancy stream of glory fill the sky! 
the fire of heaven the awful cloud unfold,
 ethereal essence flush her mortal eye! 
more wild she dream a cherub downward fly,
 and dim the sun as towards the earth he draw. 

her spirit see he cut the ambient sky,
 while ocean burn with radiance as he fly;
 such hue empyreal his bright frame adorn,
 he seem a ray of the eternal morn! 
so fraught with live fire, his ardent eye
 shoot forth long beam, which sparkle through the sky;
 from he bright emanation dart round,
 and his wave pinion give celestial sound! 

entranced, nor doubt what her fancy see,
 her youthful bosom heave with sacred awe;
 she view he on the strong rock point height,
 thence breathe strain enchant mortal ear,
 such as he tune amid the eternal sphere,
 genius immortal winge its ardent flight! 
the sea responsive mighty surge roll,
 bear each other on, a voice they find,
 heave, inspire, they labour with the sound,
 and awful their wondrous nature tell. 

the wind which roll the cloud along the sky
 in every blast sing forth the maker praise;
 the spirit seem descend from on high
 to catch the song, and to the almighty raise. 

then, like a meteor, fierce he shoot along;
 (refulgence brake, for mortal eye too strong)
 amid the cloud emerge his radiant head,
 waft the tribute which all nature pay;
 day seem as twilight while the spirit flee,
 the amber cloud receive his part ray. 
then round the shore the enthusiast throw her eye;
 (still foam the main, and trouble be the sky)
 dazzle, through cloud the watery sunbeam view,
 while part vapour wild and various stray;
 faint her lucid bow fair Iris show;
 ARLA conceive it a remain ray,
 and wild stretch her arm implore its stay. 

not unobserved her ecstacy have fly,
 nor the vibration of her heavenly tongue;
 for edran amid the rock survey her charm,
 and the seraphic frenzy of her eye,
 her hair long-streaming over her tremble arm,
 as from her lip the note of rapture fly. 
he see she with fanatic ardour blind,
 and smile, while passion in his bosom wrought,
 and mischief mingle in the villain thought
 with triumph over religion puff his mind. 

he in the world base school have study long,
 vain of his part, devotion to decry,
 and learn bewitch eloquence of tongue
 to palliate vice with shift sophistry:
 his ample front deep penetration show,
 beneath his powerful brow
 strong flash his eye,
 and with invention strength of action vie. 

potent in ill; he bend his subtle power
 to draw young ARLA in his wily snare,
 join in her rapture, while sublime she pour
 entrance strain of music on his ear. 
her pious fancy he enrich with thought,
 she listen to the wisdom of his tongue,
 and from his eye fresh inspiration catch,
 while he enamour on her accent hang. 
her passion be already set on fire,
 without a guard her heart defenceless lie;
 soon to his art her virtue fall a prey;
 her sweet affection glide to his desire. 

ruin, he leave she plunge in deep despair;
 the love delusion of her soul be break,
amid anarchy and horror she awake,
 tumultuous passion her sad bosom tear:
 love warm linger in her memory sit,
 urge her wound soul to desperate hate;
 the rapturous dream her heart have cherish long
 fly, like the empty echo of a song. 

devoid of basis, all support decay,
 her frantic mind can no where find relief;
 the bubble burst which shine with glitter ray,
 and nought remain save passion, guilt, and grief. 
rob in religion, edran win her heart;
 her faith be break while she resent the wrong,
 wild-panting with love agonize smart
 she burn, convulse with feeling deep and strong;
 and oft disease
 with mingle passion, fiery ecstasy
 her tremble lip pour potent in song. 
