the equality of mankind.

by mr. wodhull.

there be a time when from those hapless school,
 where science droop, and pension Litchfield rule,
 inhale faction, with the Tory race
 on right divine, hereditary grace,
 much do i waver, much do i unite
 the name of patriot, and of jacobite:
 thanks to my friendly star those day be over,
 and now, not mean pinion as before,
 untaught to bend the pliant knee, and join
 the slave, who flock to grandeur tinsel shrine,
 kindle at thy perpetual flame the brand
 of honest satire, with officious hand
 to thou, o truth, i consecrate the blaze; —
 receive, exalt, invigorate my lay. 

the studious pilgrim, as his bare foot tread
 over holy Carmel! with religious dread,
 if, sink in moulder rubbish, he descry
 where some old fane, or massive altar lie,
 kneel adore it with a steadfast gaze,
 and ruminate the work of mighty day,
 feast his rapt soul on pure devotion fire,
 and slow from the much-loved spot retire. 
lead by dark legend on from clime to clime
 amid the historic ravage of time,
 thus the bold muse assert her liberal plan
 to mark the genuine privilege of man,
 to prove how fiction, and how fact agree,
 that god be just, and all mankind be free. 

from jura mount, from those inclement sky,
 (where pale and wan helvetia genius lie,
 his arm reverse, his shield throw idle by,
 to note the sad decay of liberty;)
 come, stern philosophy, — that garb of woe
 befit thou most, majestical flow
 thy gait, while raise aloof thy red right hand
 wave in the gale resentment flame brand,
 such as, from seine proud bank when Rosseau flee,
 thy vengeance hurl at mitred beaumont head:
 beneath thy auspices in albion plain,
 while justice triumph in a George reign,
 alone, yet scorn caution coward mask,
 will i encounter this adventurous task;
 though far too sanguine to conceal their rage,
 my foe already curse each open page,
 and friend, half shrink at so rude a test,
 glance over my title, and forswear the rest. 

back to creation infancy, when earth
 few revolution date from its birth,
 my theme invite: — poor exile doom to rove
 far from the sweet of eden happy grove
 behold our first progenitor; — his race
 plunge in a lineal series of disgrace,
 become a prey from that ill-fated hour
 to pain, disease, and death remorseless power. 

some evil soon attain their utmost prime,
 to perfect other be a work of time. 
perhaps in those rude age, when no law
 keep the warm passion of mankind in awe,
 rapine be frequent; from his neighbour fold
 some proud oppressor, of gigantic mould,
 his fleecy charge, his only treasure bear,
 and leave the shepherd welter in his gore:
 yet then no dire necessity have make
 murder a system, be a needful trade;
 no Frederick, foe to nature and to man,
 justice his pretext, tyranny his plan,
 bear every right of nation to betray,
 over leipzick wall have force his desperate way;
 coarse be their food, their sordid dwelling small,
 such be the lot of one, the lot of all:
 in some deep vale their shapeless altar stand
 raise with the casual turf, or unhewn wood;
 thither, by grateful adoration teach,
 on some choice festival the rustic bring
 a decent offer from his little stock,
 fruit of the ground, or firstling of his flock:
 no temple rear its fret roof on high,
 no golden censer blaze perfume the sky,
 no vain high-priest with surly grandeur tread,
 as if to shame the meanness of his god. 

when, like the titan, earth rebellious crew
 to heaven high bulwark raise their hostile view,
 in vain, their boastful arrogance to quell,
 their leader be disperse, their turret fall;
 on shinar plain despotic power unfurled
 her banner, and to vex the groan world
 from shore to shore the strange contagion run;
 fraternal concord cease, and monarchy begin. 

thus while the storm in hollow cavern sleep,
 and scarce a zephyr fan the quiet deep,
 sudden from the rock impend brow
 a cumbrous fragment on the tide below
 come rush downwards; boil the vast profound,
 wave upon wave dash on the beach resound. 

detest hunter! Nimrod lead the way,
 war be his savage pastime, man his prey;
 for brutal strength by tremble vassal fear
 the wall of ancient Babylon he rear:
 in his high dome, with crayon rude portray,
 the warrior dread achievement be display;
 here pierce with dart the expire tiger lie,
 there rush embattle host in firm array;
 there in his car the thick rank he break,
 and nation yield to his gall yoke. 

such empire origin: — with horrid yell
 from the black confine of his native hell
 emerge the demon of tyrannic pride,
 and vice come onward with a large stride:
 ungrateful be the task, and endless toil
 to trace its progress through each distant soil
 fertile of tyrant. craft with prowess join
 soon tame the generous fierceness of mankind. 
dominion first be gain by lawless might;
 the claim of long hereditary right
 succeed; when to varnish over each flaw,
 and bow the world with superstitious awe,
 the priest dress up some bugbear of their own,
 call he a king, and place he on a throne;
 then catch the weakness of those dark time,
 and drag in heaven to sanctify his crime. 

search well its inmost source, and tell whence spring
 this sacred claim of israel vaunt king:
 when that audacious crew renounce their god,
 despise his mercy, brave his heavy rod;
 and for his patronage too mighty grow
 set up a little idol of their own:
 say, do their prophet urge saul right divine? —
 his incense blaze not at so vile a shrine. 
or do some ill in mystic leaf foretell,
 and chronicle by grave seer of old,
 while on delusive hope they fond build,
 overwhelm they with involuntary guilt? 
no; it be their baffle pride who last resource
 drag this perdition on their head by force. 

from that black period each intenser crime,
 that brand with infamy its parent clime,
 assail the palace, overspread the land,
 and in their temple take its guilty stand. 

the seat of chemosh by the purple vine
 be plant, and at moloch brazen shrine,
 as with inhuman zeal the tremble sire
 consign his shriek infant to the fire,
 while with loud din their hideous cymbal ring,
 his worshipper obscene their uncouth orgy sing. 

belief, in various sense understand,
 be man severe curse, or sure good. 
thus, in the mead where hallow Jordan glide,
 enrich Palestine with copious tide,
 where spring the branch palm, where stream the oil,
 where fruitful vineyard bless the peasant toil;
 deep in the heart of siddim odious vale,
 impregnate with death each taint gale,
 the black asphalt from its slimy bed
 see pitchy cloud, sulphureous vapour, spread. 

let Mecca tell, big with aspire scheme,
 seraphic trance, counterfeit dream,
 how subtle Mahomet, of servile birth,
 diffuse his tenet through the astonish earth,
 by fire and sword the nation undeceived
 confess their former error, and believe. 

in judah soil the tree of knowledge grow,
 who fruit unsound, yet specious to the view,
 entrust to the treacherous levite care,
 fall, ere it ripen, in that baleful air;
 relentless coward! with a brutal hand
 urge their fraudful progress through the land,
 over nature part agony they tread,
 and slaughter million in the name of god,
 each right of arm infringe, nor forbear
 to dip their reek blade in infant gore;
 till mighty conscience, who prevail call
 open the dread volume of her law to all,
 bewail they darken by so strong a taint;
 that none discern the villain from the saint. 

far other fame the christian doctrine gain,
 from heaven transmit, and by heaven maintain,
 with sceptre arrogance to vex the earth,
 yet most those realm which give his grandeur birth,
 to make divide faith and virtue foe,
 on its firm base no second David rise:
 yet from this pure and unpolluted source,
 ere long, the stream in a pervert course
 run foul: fanatics soon begin to call
 merit a sound, religion all in all;
 infuriate priest the bond of nature tear,
 and persecution drench the world with gore. 
arm with the cross, over asia ravage land,
 see saint champion pour their desperate band,
 a dream hermit lead they, and aloud
 preach salvation to the frantic crowd:
 zeal whet the poniard, and with ruthless joy
 they come, they sack, they ravish, they destroy. 

the muse reject this historic draught
 with bitter truth, strict testimony fraught,
 its civil discord, and religious strife
 overlook, to take a fair view of life;
 bear on the rapid wing of thought she fly,
 open new creation, seek for other sky,
 revolve all that sportive Ovid tell
 of cloudless sun, of age winge with gold,
 those age, when in peneus cheerful grove
 man know no sorrow, no disease but love;
 when nature self be unconstrained and young,
 and bard range lawless as the god they sing. 

you happy time of innocence and truth,
 please instructor of my thoughtless youth,
 when none the image of his god belie,
 no Minions crouch beneath a sultan pride,
 no wealth ensnare, no poverty distress,
 no ruffian plunder, and no king oppress;
 though doom to grovel in a base age,
 will i from memory enchant page
 retrace your scatter annal. — when of old
 arcadia peaceful shepherd uncontrolled
 their range flock through boundless pasture drive,
 or tune their pipe beneath the myrtle grove,
 their law on brazen tablet unimpressed
 be deep grave on each ingenuous breast,
 no proud vicegerent of astrea reign,
 astrea self her own decree maintain. 

book, useless lumber, yet in embryo sleep,
 no Damon rave in rhime, no Delia weep;
 nor have, nor need they the casuist page,
 plain be the duty of that simple age:
 for nature, best of mother, please to teach
 virtue no modern theorist can reach;
 with character indelible, on high
 blazon her system of equality. 

alas! how glad will illusion beam
 for ever vibrate on this glitter theme:
 here let i finish; nor, my soul to wring,
 from fable sweet proceed to fable sting:
 i must; — these fairy dream have have their space,
 and now the dreadful sequel claim a place. 
like the presumptuous mariner, who sail,
 waste from port with soft etesian gale,
 urge his overween eagerness to brave
 without a pilot the perfidious wave,
 soon over who bark the impetuous tempest sweep,
 and bury all his fortune in the deep:
 seduce by fancy charm, amid a grove
 of please error have i dare to rove,
 till, half despond, comfortless, aghast,
 i but survey bright freedom form at last,
 to see she perish by as sure a wound
 amid these enchantment, as on vulgar ground. 

fond Epimetheus! when thy luckless hand
 scatter pandora curse over the land,
 forth from the casket glitter to the view
 sceptre, and crown, delusive trumpery, fly;
 man eye the bait, and with a idiot joy
 eager rush to snatch the gild toy:
 freedom thenceforth, and peace, and justice flee,
 infernal discord rear her snaky head
 from black Erebus, who scorpion hurl
 by dread oppression curb a wretched world;
 too late remorse congeal each guilty soul,
 and forky lightning flash from pole to pole. 

whereve we search the vast instructive page
 of fact, or fiction, we in every age
 see saint impale and torture at the stake
 through fervent zeal, and for religion sake;
 murder and sorcery, and man, who heart
 never prompt one humane, one generous part,
 while some vain mortal, arbiter os ill.,
 govern the rest; at who imperious will
 million of slaughter hero bite the dust
 to soothe a tyrant pride, a strumpet lust;
 till loathe both the present, and the past,
 we learn this melancholy truth at last;
 "on life rough sea by stormy passion toss,
" freedom and virtue be together lose. " 

shame on our vaunt reason, when we find
 no creature else so senseless, and so blind;
 the brute indeed to force superior yield,
 and leave the strong master of the field,
 yet this imperial claim to none descend,
 with the possessor strength his title end;
 nor, if their enterprize leader call,
 do they forsake their well-replenished stall,
 and with heroic frenzy risk their life,
 foment some unnecessary strife. 
unfallen, and uncorrupted, they fulfil
 their nature end, their mighty maker will:
 stoop then, you son of reason, stoop, and own
 the very beast more worthy of a throne. 

the chain, who two extremity unite,
 present still a middle to our sight,
 where link by link in fruitless search we tend,
 yet find not a beginning, or a end,
 talk as we please, dissemble how we can,
 present a just similitude of man;
 who, in each state of life constrain to own
 a strict dependence, useless when alone,
 cleave, though a monarch, to his native dung,
 and venerate the soil from whence he spring. 

view first the slave, who his unhappy fate
 in gall fetter to some foreign state
 tear from his dear home; there base sell
 by those, who truck humanity for gold,
 abuse, neglect, sink with distress,
 when all be dark, and hope alone can bless;
 even then through life dim curtain he descry
 some happy region, and serener sky,
 where commerce never rear her impious head,
 no fiend approach, no missionary tread. 

next he the peasant, who incessant toil,
 harsh requite, till the rugged soil,
 press by the barbarous insult of the great,
 the foolish prodigality of state:
 yet his low couch no thorny care molest,
 his even spirit yield unbroken rest. 

those restless being next in order place,
 who motley station wear a doubtful face,
 who drag by fortune into middle life,
 that vortex of malevolence and strife,
 envy the great, and scoff at the mean,
 or swell with pride, or waste with chagrin,
 like mahomet unsettled ash, dwell,
 midway suspend, between heaven and hell. 

clad with those title ancient justice give
 to grace the wise, the generous, and the brave,
 over these ascend the sycophant of power,
 their master tool, the minion of a hour. 

last of the group, to close this irksome scene,
 childish great, and eminent mean,
 behold the monarch, who exalt throne,
 dupe to their fear, his eastern vassal own;
 when by the toil, which earn the hind hard bread,
 his splendour be maintain, his luxury feed;
 be not a wretch like this, to either side
 of life perverse extremity ally? 
here to its source the line revolve tend,
 here close the point, and here the circle end. 

when lust, when rapine, when ungoverned rage
 strong characterise the iron age,
 law soon become a necessary ill,
 vice edge the sword, and give it force to kill;
 monarch, we see, be then at first design
 a general good, a blessing unconfined:
 for public welfare, not for private end,
 from sire to son the regal crown descend. 
when king support afflict virtue cause,
 curb potent vice, and vindicate the law,
 our high respect deserve they share,
 not for themselves, but for the trust they bear. 

as on the slippery pinnacle they stand
 of brittle grandeur, with rapacious hand
 if they assume unlimited domain,
 and mad govern with pervert rein
 the vast machine of empire; to the sky
 ascend the widow tear, the orphan cry;
 a Cato spirit, or a cicero tongue
 with keen resentment animate the throng;
 some Hampden hear his gasp country groan,
 and in just vengeance shake a guilty throne. 

shall inauspicious fortune tear away
 from virtue grasp the triumph of a day,
 shall tyranny, by long success grow great,
 crush the defenceless victim of her hate,
 grim superstition with a haggard eye
 point to the spoil, and rear her torch on high,
 from regal conquest her own inference draw,
 and blend with that of heaven its dear cause. 

blind to the treacherous snare, when fate decree
 that Troy shall perish by the wooden steed;
 the rest stand fix with hesitate fear,
 while bold Laocoon hurl his forcesul spear
 against the monster, from who knotty side
 resound arm, and grecian shriek reply:
 sting by a snake the pious priest expire,
 while folly gaze, and ignorance admire;
 this moral curb the infatuate crew —
 "the sacrilegious wretch Minerva slay." 

when virtuous Greville thus in civil strife
 crown with that honest prayer his close life;
 can we unmoved with indignation bear
 to see grave Clarendon, who stile, who air,
 betwixt torture fact, and scripture-phrase quaint,
 show half the royalist, and half the saint,
 stamp on his ash with a dotard pride,
 and execrate the cause for which he die? 

you field of Naseby, where the thunder hand. 
of freedom great prosper; where that band
 of hardy patriot resolute bear,
 through storm of horror, and through sea of gore,
 their country charter, snatch in happy hour
 from sacerdotal wrath, and kingly power:
 oft as your tower, on which dread vengeance write
 strong character, and blast where she smite,
 in youth gay season fix my rove eye,
 how do i hail that scene of victory! 
even now methinks i see brave Fairfax tread
 the ensanguine plain; — to grace the warrior head
 from fame unsullied grove let virtue bring
 those laurel green with everlasting spring:
 illustrious meed, too oft profuse strew
 to deck the precinct of ambition throne,
 to crown some proud infringer of the law:
 but due to vengeance, due to britain cause. 

nor, though the muse forlorn and helpless stray
 over thy bare coast, nor glean one fragrant bay,
 bleak Caledonia, shall thou pass unsung,
 for freedom on thy hill she arm new-strung:
 when thy firm son, who love the public weal,
 or inly burn to see tyrannic zeal
 against their altar lift a impious hand,
 and threat the accustom worship of the land,
 from their huge cliff descend like a flood,
 stand forth, prepare to seal their faith with blood;
 at their approach while perjure holland flee,
 false to his master cause, his master bed;
 and hierarchy, that fiend, who scripture paint
 drink with the blood of martyr and of sai n t,
 consign by fate in penal chain to dwell,
 slink unregarded to her native hell. 

curse on the shout of that licentious throng,
 who merriment (more brutal than the song
 of mad Agave, when wild Haemus over
 her pentheus mangle limb the mother bear;)
 proclaim the fall of liberty: — you shade
 of mighty chief, from your elysian glade
 look down benign, avert the dire presage,
 nor with two Charles brand one sinful age. 
o, my poor country! what capricious tide
 of fortune swell the tyrant motley pride! 
around his brow yond servile prelate twine
 the stale and blast wreath of right divine;
 while harlot, like the Coan Venus fair,
 move their light foot to each lascivious air. 

hence with your orgy! — righteous heaven ordain
 a pure worship, less audacious strain. 
when fall by William sword (as soon it must)
 this edifice of bigotry and lust,
 the muse shall start from her inglorious trance,
 and give to satire grasp her vengeful lance,
 at truth be historic shrine shall victim smoke,
 and a fresh Stuart bleed at every stroke:
 thy too, perfidious Albemarle (who steel,
 draw to protect embroil britannia weal,
 shrink from thy coward arm, consign the reins
 of power to Charles, and forge a nation chain)
 compare with noble villainy or old,
 high deed, on plate of adamant enrol,
 shall meet the felon undistinguished fate,
 sure of contempt, unworthy of our hate. 

once more emerge from this baleful reign
 of Stuart king, and from the pontiff chain,
 by boyne swift current freedom rear her head,
 when from those bank the Papal tyrant flee;
 then every vale with lo paean ring
 as the glad reaper at his harvest sing,
 thou, great Nassau, benevolent brave,
 equal bear to conquer, and to save,
 when glory sound trump to gallia shore,
 the exult shout of british freedom bear,
 dismay she see the kindle ardor burn,
 and Seine hang tremble over her waste urn. 

warm with the same benevolence of mind,
 friend to the native right of human kind,
 succeed king extend the generous plan,
 and Brunswick perfect what Nassau begin. 
thrice happy Albion! in who favour land
 impartial justice with a steady hand
 poise the scale of empire; where the name
 of servile tenure, and the feudal claim
 of norman peer in musty tome decay,
 sweep by obliterate year away. 

but if in faction loud and empty strain
 yond frontless rabble vex a gentle reign,
 in peace itself ideal danger find,
 provoke new war, and challenge half mankind;
 what though another Tully at their head
 from breast to breast the rank contagion spread:
 say, what be we? some pension patriot tool,
 mere artless, unsuspecting, british fool. 

bear in a changeful clime, beneath a sky
 whence storm descend, and hover vapour fly,
 sting with the fever, torture with the spleen,
 boisterous merry, churlish serene,
 by each vague blast deject or elate,
 dupe in their love, immoderate in their hate,
 with strange formality, or bearish ease,
 then most disgufiful, when they strive to please,
 no happy mean the son of Albion know,
 their waver temper ever ebb and flow,
 rank contrary, in nothing they agree;
 untaught to serve, unable to be free. 

while party rage, o truth! with honest zeal
 to thou, protectress of my lay, i kneel;
 o deign to show i in their real light,
 strip of that glare which cheat the dazzle sight,
 the chief, who blazon deed and sound worth
 usurp a sphere above the son of earth;
 open dark futurity instructive womb,
 conduct i to the mansion of the tomb,
 where title cease, where worldly pomp be over,
 mute be the nine, and flattery soothe no more:
 so may i take a more impartial view,
 forget the rank, and give the man his due. 

yet what regard it or the world, or i,
 how fame award her posthumous decree,
 if man, unconscious of her loud breath,
 sleep a cold tenant of the vale of death? 
let the delirious siamois compute
 how sommonokodon his worship brute,
 through being long progressive stage tread,
 begin a ox, and end in a god. 
our fleet soul let the weak samian trace
 in bird, in beast, and all the finny race;
 these baseless structure, fiction light and vain,
 coin in the fold of a idle brain,
 to their absurd inventor i resign,
 they be not in the church creed, or i. 

but shall the peasant from his turf-bound grave
 or rise no more, or wake again a slave? 
and shall the monarch in a future state,
 with the same visionary pomp elate,
 resume the trappings of his lose command,
 and wield a mimic sceptre in his hand? 

though gloomy bigot paint a partial god,
 bear his red arm, and lift his scorpion rod;
 though on a text pervert zealot dwell,
 till scripture suit the purpose of hell;
 think for thyself; — suppose life voyage over;
 think for thyself, and envy king no more:
 resign and calm await that awful hour,
 that crisis of all sublunary power,
 when wreath of glory shall adorn the just,
 and empire proud colossus sink to dust. 
