Allen and Ella.

a fragment.

by —

on the bank of that crystalline stream
 where Thames, oft, his current delay;
 and charm, more than poet can dream,
 in his Richmond bright villa survey;

fair Ella! of all the gay throng
 the fair that nature have see,
 now, draw every village, along,
 from the day she first dance on the green. 

ah! boast not of beauty fond power,
 for short be the triumph, you fair! 
not fleet the bloom of each flower;
 and hope be but gild despair. 

his affection each swain now, behold,
 by riches endeavour to prove! 
but Ella still cry, what be gold,
 or wealth, when compare to his love? 

yes! Allen, together we will wield
 our sickle in summer bright day;
 together we will lease over the field,
 and smile all our labour away:

in winter! i will winnow the wheat
 as it fall from thy flail on the ground;
 that flail will be music as sweet
 when thy voice in the labour be drown. 

how oft will he speak of his bliss! 
how oft will he call she his maid! 
and Allen will seal with a kiss
 every promise and vow that he say. 

but, hark! over the grass-level land,
 the village bell sound on the plain;
 false Allen! this morn give his hand,
 and ella fond tear be in vain. 

sad Ella, too soon, hear the tale! 
too soon the sad cause she be tell! 
that he be a nymph of the vale:
 that he break his fond promise for gold. 

as she walk by the margin so green,
 which befringe the sweet river side,
 how oft be she languish see! 
how oft will she gaze on the tide! 

by the clear river, then, as she sit,
 which reflect herself and the mead;
 awhile! she beweep her sad fate,
 and the green turf, still, pillowed her head. 

there, there! be it Ella, i see? 
it be Ella, the lose, undo maid! 
ah! no, it be some Ella, like i,
 some hapless young virgin betray! 

like i! she have sorrow and weep;
 like i! she have, fond, believe;
 like i! her true promise she keep,
 and, like i, too, be just deceive. 

i come, dear companion in grief! 
gay scene and fond pleasure, adieu! 
i come! and we will gather relief
 from bosom so chaste and so true! 

like you! i have mourn the long night,
 and weep out the day in despair! 
like you! i have banish delight,
 and bosom a friend in my care. 

you meadow! so lovely, farewell,
 your velvet, still, Allen shall tread! 
all deaf to the sound of that knell
 which toll for his Ella when dead. 

your wish will, too sure! be obey;
 nor Allen she loss shall bemoan! 
soon, soon! shall poor Ella be lay
 where her heart shall be cold as your own. 

then, twine in the arm of that fair,
 who wealth have be ella sad fate:
 as, together, you draw the free air,
 and a thousand dear pleasure relate:

if chance, over my turf, as you tread,
 you dare to affect a fond sigh! 
the primrose will shrink her pale head,
 and the violet languish and die. 

ah! weep not, fond maid! it be in vain;
 like the tear which you lend to the stream;
 tear! be lose in that watery plain;
 and your sigh be still lose upon he. 

scarce! echo have gather the sound,
 but she plunge from her grass-spring bed:
 the liquid stream part to the ground,
 and the mirror close over her head. 

the swain of the village at eve,
 oft meet at the dark-spreading yew;
 there wonder how man can deceive
 a bosom so chaste and so true. 

with garland, of every flower,
 (which Ella herself shall have make)
 they raise up a short-living bower;
 and, sigh! cry, "peace to her shade." 

then! hand-lock'd-in-hand, as they move
 the green-platting hillock, around:
 they talk of poor Ella, and love;
 and freshen, with tear, the fair ground. 

nay, wish! they have never be bear,
 or live the sad moment to view! 
when her Allen can thus be forswear,
 and his Ella can still be so true. 
