the thresher labour.

to the Revd. mr. Stanley.

the grateful tribute of these rural lay,
 which to her patron hand the muse convey,
 deign to accept: it be just she tribute bring
 to he, who bounty give her life to sing;
 to he, who generous favour tune her voice;
 and bid she, amid her poverty, rejoice. 
inspire by these, she dare herself prepare,
 to sing the toil of each revolve year;
 those endless toil, which always grow anew,
 and the poor thresher destine to pursue:
 even these, with pleasure, can the muse rehearse,
 when you and gratitude demand her verse. 

soon as the golden harvest quit the plain,
 and ceres gift reward the farmer pain;
 what corn each sheaf will yield, intent to hear,
 and guess from thence the profit of the year,
 he call his reaper forth: around we stand,
 with deep attention, wait his command. 
to each our task he ready divide,
 and point, to our different station guide. 
as he direct, to distant barn we go;
 here two for wheat, and there for barley two. 
but first, to show what he expect to find,
 these word, or word like these, disclose his mind:

 "so dry the corn be carry from the field,
" so easy it will thresh, so well it will yield;
 "sure large days-work i well may hope for now:
" come, strip and try; let we see what you can do. " 

divest of our clothes, with flail in hand,
 at proper distance, front to front we stand:
 and first the Threshal gentle swing, to prove
 whether with just exactness it will move:
 that once secure, we swift whirl they round;
 from the strong plank our crabtree staff rebound,
 and echo barn return the rattle sound. 
now in the air our knotty weapon fly,
 and now with equal force descend from high;
 down one, one up, so well they keep the time,
 the cyclops hammer can not true chime;
 nor with more heavy stroke can Aetna groan,
 when Vulcan forge the arm for thetis son. 
in briny stream our sweat descend apace,
 drop from our lock, or trickle down our face. 
no intermission in our work we know;
 the noisy threshal must for ever go. 
their master absent, other safe play;
 the sleep threshal do itself betray. 
nor yet, the tedious labour to beguile,
 and make the pass minute sweet smile,
 can we, like shepherd, tell a merry tale;
 the voice be lose, drown by the loud flail. 
but we may think — alas! what please thing,
 here, to the mind, can the dull fancy bring? 
our eye behold no please object here,
 no cheerful sound divert our listen ear. 
the shepherd well may tune his voice to sing,
 inspire with all the beauty of the spring. 
no fountain murmur here, no lambkin play,
 no linnet warble, and no field look gay;
 it be all a gloomy, melancholy scene,
 fit only to provoke the muse spleen. 
when sooty pease we thresh, you scarce can know
 our native colour, as from work we go. 
the sweat, the dust, and suffocate smoke,
 make we so much like ethiopian look,
 we scare our wife, when evening bring we home;
 and fright infant think the bugbear come. 
week after week, we this dull task pursue,
 unless when winn'w day produce a new:
 a new, indeed, but frequent a worse! 
the threshal yield but to the master curse. 
he count the bushel, count how much a day;
 then swear we have idle half our time away:
 "why, look you, rogue, do you think that this will do? 
" your neighbour thresh as much again as you. " 
now in our hand we wish our noisy tool,
 to drown the hate name of rogue and fool. 
but want these, we just like school-boy look,
 when angry master view the blot book:
 they cry," their ink be faulty, and their pen; "
we," the corn thresh bad, it be cut too green. " 

but soon as winter hide his hoary head,
 and nature face be with new beauty spread;
 the lovely spring appear, refresh shower
 new cloth the field with grass, and bloom flower. 
next she, the ripen summer press on,
 and Sol begin his long race to run. 
before the door our welcome master stand;
 tell we, the ripen grass require our hand. 
the grateful tiding present impart
 life to our look, and spirit to our heart. 
we wish the happy season may be fair;
 and, joyful, long to breathe in opener air. 
this change of labour seem to give such ease,
 with thought of happiness ourselves we please. 
but, ah! how rarely happiness complete! 
there be always bitter mingle with the sweet. 
when first the lark sing prologue to the day,
 we rise, admonish by his early lay;
 this new employ with eager haste to prove,
 this new employ, become so much our love. 
alas! that human joy shall change so soon! 
our morning pleasure turn to pain at noon. 
the bird salute we, as to work we go,
 and with new life our bosom seem to glow. 
on our right shoulder hang the crooked blade,
 the weapon destine to unclothe the Mead:
 our left support the whetstone, Scrip, and beer;
 this for our scythe, and these ourselves to cheer. 
and now the field, design to try our may,
 at length appear, and meet our longing sight. 
the grass and ground we view with careful eye,
 to see which way the best advantage lie;
 and, hero-like, each claim the foremost place. 
at first our labour seem a sportive race:
 with rapid force our sharpen blade we drive,
 strain every nerve, and blow for blow we give. 
all strive to vanquish, though the victor gain
 no other glory, but the great pain. 

but when the scorch sun be mount high,
 and no kind barn with friendly shade be nigh;
 our weary scythe entangle in the grass,
 while stream of sweat run trickle down apace. 
our sportive labour we too late lament;
 and wish that strength again, we vain spend. 

thus, in the morn, a courser have i see
 with headlong fury scour the level green;
 or mount the hill, if hill be in his way,
 as if no labour can his fire allay;
 till Phoebus, shine with meridian heat,
 have bathe his pant side in briny sweat:
 the lengthen chace scarce able to sustain,
 he measure back the hill and Dales with pain. 

with heat and labour tire, our scythe we quit,
 search out a shady tree, and down we sit:
 from Scrip and bottle hope new strength to gain;
 but Scrip and bottle too be try in vain. 
down our parch throat we scarce the bread can get;
 and, quite overspend with toil, but faint eat. 
nor can the bottle only answer all;
 the bottle and the beer be both too small. 
time flow: again we rise from off the grass;
 again each mower take his proper place;
 not eager now, as late, our strength to prove;
 but all content regular to move. 
we often whet, and often view the sun;
 as often wish, his tedious race be run. 
at length he veil his purple face from sight,
 and bid the weary labourer good-night. 
homeward we move, but spend so much with toil,
 we slow walk, and rest at every stile. 
our good expect wife, who think we stay,
 get to the door, soon eye we in the way. 
then from the pot the dumplin catch in haste,
 and homely by its side the Bacon place. 
supper and sleep by morn new strength supply;
 and out we set again, our work to try;
 but not so early quite, nor quite so fast,
 as, to our cost, we do the morning past. 

soon as the rise sun have drink the dew,
 another scene be open to our view:
 our master come, and at his heel a throng
 of prattle female, arm with rake and prong;
 prepare, while he be here, to make his hay;
 or, if he turn his back, prepare to play:
 but here, or go, sure of this comfort still;
 here be company, so they may chat their fill. 
ah! be their hand so active as their tongue,
 how nimble then will move the rake and prong? 

the grass again be spread upon the ground,
 till not a vacant place be to be find;
 and while the parch sunbeam on it shine,
 the haymaker have time allow to dine. 
that soon dispatch, they still sit on the ground;
 and the brisk chat, renew, afresh go round. 
all talk at once; but seem all to fear,
 that what they speak, the rest will hardly hear;
 till by degree so high their note they strain,
 a stander by can nought distinguish plain. 
so loud their speech, and so confuse their noise,
 scarce puzzle echo can return the voice. 
yet, spite of this, they brave all go on;
 each scorn to be, or seem to be, outdo. 
meanwhile the change sky begin to lour,
 and hollow wind proclaim a sudden shower:
 the tattle crowd can scarce their garment gain,
 before descend the thick impetuous rain;
 their noisy prattle all at once be do,
 and to the hedge they soon for shelter run. 

thus have i see, on a bright summer day,
 on some green brake, a flock of sparrow play;
 from twig to twig, from bush to bush they fly;
 and with continue chirp fill the sky:
 but, on a sudden, if a storm appear,
 their chirp noise no long din your ear:
 they fly for shelter to the thick bush;
 there silent sit, and all at once be hush. 

but better fate succeed this rainy day,
 and little labour serve to make the hay. 
fast as it be cut, so kind shine the sun,
 turn once or twice, the please work be do. 
next day the cock appear in equal row,
 which the glad master in safe rick bestow. 

the spacious field we now no long range;
 and yet, hard fate! still work for work we change. 
back to the barn we hasty be send,
 where late so much time we pensive spend:
 not pensive now, we bless the friendly shade;
 and to avoid the parch sun be glad. 
yet little time we in the shade remain,
 before our master call we forth again;
 and say, "for harvest now yourself prepare;
" the ripen harvést now demand your care. 
 "get all thing ready, and be quick dress;
" early next morn i shall disturb your rest. " 
strict to his word! for scarce the dawn appear,
 before his hasty summons fill our ear. 
his hasty summons we obey; and rise,
 while yet the star be glimmer in the sky. 
with he our guide we to the wheat-field go,
 he to appoint, and we the work to do. 

you reaper, cast your eye around the field;
 and view the various scene its beauty yield:
 then look again, with a more tender eye,
 to think how soon it must in ruin lie! 
for, once set in, wherever our blow we deal,
 there be no resist of the well-whet steel:
 but here or there, wherever our course we bend,
 sure desolation do our step attend. 

thus, when arabia son, in hope of prey,
 to some more fertile country take their way,
 how beauteous all thing in the morn appear! 
there rural cot, and pleasant villa here! 
so many grateful object meet the sight,
 the ravish eye can will gaze till night. 
but long ere then, wherever their troop have pass,
 these please prospect lie a gloomy waste. 

the morning past, we sweat beneath the sun;
 and but uneasy our work go on. 
before we we perplex thistle find,
 and corn blow adverse with the ruffle wind. 
behind our master wait; and if he spy
 one charitable ear, he grudge cry,
 "you scatter half your wage over the land." 
then scrape the stubble with his greedy hand. 

let those who feast at ease on dainty fare,
 pity the reaper, who their feast prepare:
 for toil scarce ever cease press we now;
 rest never do, but on the sabbath, show;
 and bare that our master will allow. 
think what a painful life we daily lead;
 each morning early rise, go late to bed:
 nor, when asleep, be we secure from pain;
 we then perform our labour over again:
 our mimic fancy ever restless seem;
 and what we act awake, she act in dream. 
hard fate! our labour even in sleep do cease;
 scarce Hercules ever feel such toil as these! 

but soon we rise the beard crop again,
 soon phoebus ray well dry the golden grain. 
please with the scene, our master glow with joy;
 bid we for carry all our force employ;
 when strait confusion over the field appear,
 and stun clamour fill the workman ear;
 the bell and clash whip alternate sound,
 and rattle waggon thunder over the ground. 
the wheat, when carry, pease, and other grain,
 we soon secure, and leave a fruitless plain;
 in noisy triumph the last load move on,
 and loud huzza proclaim the harvest do. 

our master, joyful at the please sight,
 invite we all to feast with he at night. 
a table plentiful spread we find,
 and jug of hum ale, to cheer the mind;
 which he, too generous, push round so fast,
 we think no toil to come, nor mind the past. 
but the next morning soon reveal the cheat,
 when the same toil we must again repeat;
 to the same barn must back again return,
 to labour there for room for next year corn. 

thus, as the year revolve course go round,
 no respite from our labour can be find:
 like Sisyphus, our work be never do;
 continual roll back the restless stone. 
new-growing labour still succeed the past;
 and grow always new, must always last. 
