health,

 a eclogue.

now early shepherd over the meadow pass,
 and print long foot-step in the glitter grass;
 the cow neglectful of their pasture stand,
 by turn obsequious to the milker hand. 

when Damon soft tread the shave lawn,
 Damon a youth from city care withdraw;
 long be the please walk he wander through,
 a cover arbour close the distant view;
 there rest the youth, and while the feather throng
 raise their wild music, thus contrive a song. 

here waft over by mild etesian air,
 thou country goddess, beauteous health! repair;
 here let my breast through quiver tree inhale
 thy rosy blessing with the morning gale. 
what be the field, or flower, or all i see? 
ah! tasteless all, if not enjoy with thou. 

joy to my soul! i feel the goddess nigh,
 the face of nature cheer as well as i;
 over the flat green refresh breeze run,
 the smile dazy blow beneath the sun,
 the brook run purl down with silver wave,
 the plant lane rejoice with dance leaf,
 the chirp bird from all the compass rove
 to tempt the tuneful echo of the grove:
 high sunny summit, deep shade Dales,
 thick mossy bank, and flowery wind vale,
 with various prospect gratify the sight,
 and scatter fix attention in delight. 

come, country goddess, come, nor thou suffice,
 but bring thy mountain-sister, exercise. 
call by thy lively voice, she turn her pace,
 her wind horn proclaim the finish chace;
 she mount the rock, she skim the level plain,
 dog, hawk, and horse, crow her early train;
 her hardy face repel the tan wind,
 and line and mesh loose float behind. 
all these as mean of toil the feeble see,
 but these be help to pleasure join with thou. 

let sloth lie softning'till high noon in down,
 or loll fan she in the sultry town,
 unnerved with rest; and turn she own disease,
 or foster other in luxurious ease:
 i mount the courser, call the deep mouth hound,
 the fox unkennel fly to covert ground;
 i lead where stag through tangle thicket tread,
 and shake the sapling with their branch head;
 i make the falcon wing their airy way,
 and soar to seize, or stoop strike their prey;
 to snare the fish i fix the lure bait;
 to wound the fowl i load the gun with fate. 
it be thus through change of exercise i range,
 and strength and pleasure rise from every change. 
here beauteous health for all the year remain,
 when the next come, i will charm thou thus again. 

oh come, thou goddess of my rural song,
 and bring thy daughter, calm content, along,
 dame of the ruddy cheek and laugh eye,
 from who bright presence cloud of sorrow fly:
 for she i mow my walk, i platt my bower,
 clip my low hedge, and support my flower;
 to welcome she, this summer seat i dress,
 and here i court she when she come to rest;
 when she from exercise to learned ease
 shall change again, and teach the change to please. 

now friend converse my soft hour refine,
 and tully Tusculum revive in i:
 now to grave book i bid the mind retreat,
 and such as make i rather good than great. 
or over the work of easy fancy rove,
 where flute and innocence amuse the grove:
 the native bard that on sicilian plain
 first sing the lowly manner of the swain;
 or maro Muse, that in the fair light
 paint rural prospect and the charm of sight;
 these soft amusement bring content along,
 and fancy, void of sorrow, turn to song. 
here beauteous health for all the year remain,
 when the next come, i will charm thou thus again. 
