the battle of ramillia: or, the power of union.

LIB. i 

of belgian province by union power
deliver in ramillia plain i sing.
i sing the triumph of that wondrous field,
which raise the fame of pious anna reign
above the glory of great Henry day,
and equal Marlbro' to heroic chief
in nature youth and happy climate bear.

o thou who wisdom and resistless power
have bring to light this wondrous birth of
celestial guardian of this sacred isle,
genius of warlike Britain, who awhile
have, left eternal glory and the sway
of some triumphant hierarchy of heaven,
to shelter and protect these happy realm;
thou who with blissful charity inspire,
infuse charity through every heart,
and every soul subject to thy sway,
teach thy much loud briton to subdue
the rage of France and hell by love divine;
o dart such ray of that seraphic flame
into my breast, that all my ravish soul
may with immortal charity be fire,
with sacred love of britain godlike son,
that raise to heaven by that celestial fire,
it may attain a song of wondrous height,
may take a flight above theanonian hill,
and may proclaim thy wisdom and thy power
and their heroic deed in such a strain
as no fictitious Muse can ere inspire.

now be the sun in Taurus mount high,
and dart down his genial ray from heaven
direct to the bosom of the earth,
call forth each plant and every tender flower
from out their wintery, secret warm retreat,
and restore nature and renew the world;
when the confederate troop call out by fate,
and by their great commander awful voice
be from their wintery warlike station draw
to appear near tongeren in fierce array.
full of that conquer spirit they appear,
which drive the vanquish french over blenheim field.
and in their eye a penetrate view
may easy discern their triumph past,
and their amaze victory to come.
all nature seem transport at that sight,
for tyranny, oppression, discord, fraud,
injustice, violence, and barbarous rage
be all about to be expel the earth,
and in their room simplicity and truth,
justice, security and gentle ease,
and peace and spotless innocence, shall reign;
therefore all nature smile upon that sight
and god, and man, and earth, and heaven rejoice.

but hell black tyrant soon take fierce alarm
which to infernal torment add sting,
and to infernal fury fierce flame,
and double the damnation in his breast.
upon the steerage of his dusky wing,
up through the ocean of the air he sail;
in the midway he stop between the moon
resplendent globe, and earth refulgent ball,
at his great palace there by magic hang.
and thither a tremendous council call
of friend who now be roam round the earth,
in order to subject it to his sway.
up strait upon the wing the spirit spring
at the tartarean trumpet thunder call,
and high above the atmosphere they fly,
the world be in convulsion at the flight,
earth tremble, sigh the air, the ocean groan,
frequent, and full the accurse assembly grow,
direful appearance, amaze form,
which bare see have power to look despair
and death into the heart of wretched man,
and wither in one moment all their strength.

as soon as the infernal crew be sit,
up from his throne outrageous tyrant rise,
his wrathful forehead to a frown he roll
that darken all the sky, in fix plague,
inexprimable terror through the soul
of his tartarean minister, that now
with sable wing their flame eye they veil,
and they who have the obdurate heart of fiend,
they who to all hell horror be inure,
they who eternal torment can endure,
they can not bear their rage tyrant wrath
but shake like man who frightful fiend behold.
collect in himself a while he stand,
but when the horrid silence have prepare
the accurse assembly for his dreadful voice
thus from his breast his rage in thunder break.

be you assemble then at my dread call?
by hell i think you dare to have disobey,
so light, so despicable in your ear
have be of late the tempest of my voice.
but you not only be assemble here,
but what be stranger, with those cruel look
and that relentless air, with which when last
i meet you here, you vain make your boast
you will subdue the world to my fell sway,
will constitute i universal king,
and pull the thunderer from his noisy throne.
yes, yes, you have the look and meens of fiend.
but o dire shame, to hell, to i, to all!
your deed be so unworthy the great name,
so poor, so mean, so almost dull good,
that one will swear you be grow friend to man,
and servant to my rival of the sky;
can you be they who make your threaten vaunt,
that ever yond planet turn about the sun,
(with that he point to resplendent earth
as towards the east her magnitude she roll)
it a subject province shall become,
like these bright tract of all surround air,
to our black empire of the boundless deep?
can it be you who promise to or'erturn
the kingdom there establish by heaven king,
who there bear sway wherever reason rule?
who empire be where ever law command?
for reason be his secret whisper voice,
and law his proud command promulge to all?
can it be you who promise to extend
my empire over all yond spotty globe?
a empire rule by man instead of law,
where human passion sway and human will;
passion infuse by we, and will by we
suggest and insensible inspire?
have you perform what vaunt you swear?
no, though your interest and your glory both
demand it: for know aerial god,
where humane passion reign, and human will,
there we not only reign but be adore.
of this be sure religion come from heaven,
will never support a empire raise by hell;
nor can the dreadful empire raise by we,
where tyrant man instead of law control,
endure religion that from heaven descend,
cast but your eye wherever we command;
and man our proxy reign instead of law;
there man adore some vegetable power,
or their old crazy priest they make their god
or mad to fanatic prophet fall.
there they bow down to stock and senseless stone;
that be, to we and our delusion bow,
and tremble at the god they can create
why have you then round earth supine roam
regardless of the grand concern of hell?
or be your old seduce art forget?
or know you not my interest or your own?
cast but your eye upon her silver globe,
as through the vast abyss of sky she roul,
see that peculiar people choose by heaven
to propagate its empire upon earth,
which they, it seem, call liberty, call law
see how with heart too large to be confine
within the eternal fence of the main,
they pass the limit of the boundless deep,
and every where my rival rule extend!
survey earth shine ball with sharp ken.
what portion of her planet can you find,
but where the glory of the british name,
or of her council or her arm resound?
look what even now the briton bold act
in rough Germania, in hesperian land,
in celtiberian and in belgian field!
Mark yond assemble squadron near the dyle! 
behold the conquer spirit in their eye!
hell! you have suffer it to rise so high,
it be irresistible by human power
unless by our auxiliar band sustain.
see yonder their accurse commander come,
and yonder conquest tower over he fly,
who well know voice, the goddess strait obey
as at his master call the falcon stoop,
and his august appearance be the lure
that bring she swift rush from the sky.
if once he join those squadron we be lose,
his high appearance, when they once behold,
hell can show nought so dreadful and so dire
as can dismay the greatness of their soul.
you host of terror, you remember well,
that when our fierce auxiliar band sustain
our dear ally in blenheim deathless field,
the briton, though to every human power,
invincible, be force to yield to we;
but when great Marlborough come impetuous on,
and rally they with that heroic air
with which he fire the warlike squadron soul:
you Stygian god, what miracle we see,
how they who tremble but the moment past,
before the king of terror awful view,
now fight like god above the reach of fate!
his god-like presence in a moment raise
their sink spirit and dispel their fear;
his voice, his sole appearance make they bold.
with what resistless fury they press on:
drive you with matchless bravery on our friend?
though i look on, and though i menace high,
but all my clamour be in thunder drown,
till french and fiend together vanish all,
and howl sink through danube ghastful yawn
down to our empire of the neither deep.
you know, you Stygian god, and oft have read,
within the adamantine book of fate,
that more amaze wonder be reserve
to be perform by Marlborough conquer arm,
unless with all our power we interpose.
Lewis by i, and destiny design,
to extend my empire and exalt my name,
above all name that be adore on earth;
Lewis, the great, the wise, the second hope of hell,
the man, the monarch after my own heart;
who never yet transgress my dread com ¦ mand,
but make they his employment all the day,
and meditation all the watchful night;
he, the great image of my self express,
presumptuous, fraudulent, revengeful, proud,
implacable, inexorable, false,
even great and heroical false:
who watchful as a roar lion roam
with jaw expand to devour his prey,
and make religion his pretence for fraud,
for cruelty, for dire revenge, for murder,
and every noble, every flagrant vice;
o way to banish virtue from the world!
o great invention envy even by i!
his genius now from Marlborough genius shrink,
and unless we support he, he must fall:
and can we then forsake the immortal man?
ah no! such merit claim that at his need
to guard he from our fierce insult foe,
we raise the noble arrierban of hell.
if Lewis fall, our empire with he sink,
we meet a second more opprobrious fall,
for even from earth, for even from dust we fall.
o shameful fall for we who aspire to heaven,
for we who make divinity our aim!
then law and reason will victorious reign,
then liberty eternal will become.
then odious virtue will possess the earth,
and every glorious vice be drive to hell.
exert your self, you fury then, and act
deed worthy the antagonist of heaven.
can you forget? what? utter forget
what once we act, and what once we be?
ah no! you never can, for in your breast
some spirit unextinguished yet remain,
some of those godlike spirit that inspire
our angel mind in that eternal field,
when gird with adamant and glorious flame,
against the empire of great heaven we fight.
i must confess we lose the immortal day,
but yet, we fight, you Stygian god, we fight
with spirit equal to the vast design.
fate give our enemy the field, but we,
we be the triumph, and the glory we
of great, aspire, unexampled mind
who dare against the omnipotent to war.

can you remember this? can you reflect
that you for angel be a equal match,
and yield at last to man, to woman yield?
for it be a woman, o you power, destroy
this mighty champion of our cause and we;
for she direct, she animate, she fire
those who over earth the rule of heaven extend.
it be she who out of pure despite to i,
contemn a boundless arbitrary reign,
and think it lovely empire, fair fame,
upon my rival poor to depend,
poor to wear a crown that law may rule,
and to make reason and the almighty reign,
than be her self a sovereign goddess own
and by the kingdom of the earth adore.

have you the spirit with which once you flame,
there need not this long and powerful speech
the godlike cause in which you stand engage,
the cause of empire and eternal fame,
will move alone your adamantine heart,
and urge you to great act, though i be mute,
behold yond world, that fluctuate in the void
know that be the victor recompense decree,
now see your female adversary there,
see she a suppliant, earnest, humble, meek,
behold she prostrate, abject on her knee,
and tremble at that monarch of the sky
who so magnanimous we defy.
no, you can never see this and not disdain
that she shall make that float world a heaven,
which we so great strive to make a hell.

thus he blaspheme aloud, and while he speak
th'assembly all the several movement feel
the various passion that their direful king,
who know so well their heart design to inspire
now please, now sad, now tremble, now enrage
with envy wrack, or burn with disdain,
or with desire of fierce revenge inflame.
when he have do, unanimous they rend
the trouble Aether with a stormy shout,
and to the heaven of heaven defiance hurl,
when sudden a burst of thunder break
from the empyrean, and the avenge bolt
through thousand drive, and thousand lightning blast;
then as a flock of timorous fowl take wing,
and seek the inmost covert of the grove,
on hear of the fowler fatal gun,
that have of old their tender pinion gall;
so on the wing the infernal angel spring
upon the empyrean thunder roar,
and seek the midmost region of the air,
and the black hemisphere and realm of night
but soon their impious dare they resume,
and up once more to the pure Aether slay.

among the rest, there be a fantom dire
of all that fall from heaven the fierce fiend,
the fierce and most cruel fiend that fall,
discord, the daughter of dire Lucifer,
beget when his prodigious lust run high
on pride, when with her hot flame she burn;
gigantic be her stature and she look
like demogorgon be, at which hell shake.
her native country be the heaven of heaven,
but heaven, as soon as bear, disclaim the fiend,
with lightning and with thunder drive she out,
for happiness still fly the rave fiend,
and peace and joy with she can never dwell.

as from her birth she be expel from heaven
so by her cruel father dire decree,
she banish be from all the bound of hell,
as one who may elsewhere far better serve,
the grow empire of her dreadful sire,
but at her part, half her serpent brood
she leave behind, and to the very heart
her own inexorable father sting,
that with the torment ever since he roar.

thus banish from high heaven, and drive from hell,
she among miserable mortal dwell,
a false and most inhospitable guest,
who all her warm friend torment the most:
though banish from her father realm below,
yet not one fiend of all the infernal host
endeavour to extend, with so much zeal,
the spread empire of hell horrid sway.

to other, or her self, no rest she allow,
alternate afflict with th'extream,
of burn fury, and torment fear,
and sharp remorse, with all her deadly sting,
arm all the fear and fury of her soul;
to this infernal council she be call:
and when the whirlwind of applause be over,
up rise the subtle and the cruel fiend.
as rise, her gorgonian head she shake,
with all its snake, that from their livid eye,
shoot hell blue fire, and from their baleful mouth
dart a thousand forky poisonous tongue,
a thousand hiss at th'assembly throw;
each fright spectre give a fearful start,
as a poor Swain that underneath his foot,
spy a fell adder bloat with his rage;
and lift up his angry crest on high,
spring back, while to his heart his blood retire
and none but Lucifer himself have power,
to cast one look npon the rage fiend,
and he himself grow stupid at the sight,
like old laoeoon dismal statue look,
that seem not fashion by the sculptor art,
but show a wretch with horror stupid grow,
and petrify with woe and with despair,
and as the hideous hag begin to scream,
the accurse assembly give a second start,
the accurse assembly give a dreadful yell:
with equal fright shall all the infernal host,
and equal horror hear at the last day,
the sound clangour of the eternal trump,
which universal nature shall untune,
and the bad angel roar drive to hell,
then bar the gate with adamantine bolt,
which then shall to eternity be close.

such be her air unutterable dire,
and such her hideous voice, and thus she speak.

have we the patience then of stupid saint,
you god, to hear all this without reply?
nay, our insult tyrant to applaud,
for his unjust and barbarous reproach?
but this, though speak to all, be mean to i;
for without i, not all the host of hell
have power to enlarge its dreadful monarch sway.
be i of want of knowledge then accuse,
or want of diligence to extend thy power?
o burn indignation! o disdain!
o slander, worthy of dire Lucifer;
and dare thou thus accuse i false here,
upon this throne of thy imperial power,
encompass with ten thousand spirit round,
by mighty angel serve, and even by i?
from whence be all this pomp, this power derive?
this emulation of the thunderer state?
before i know thou, what be thou in heaven?
a servile ministrel breed to cringe and fawn,
and flatter thy proud arbitrary lord.
but i a emperor make thou of a slave;
of a base flatterer, a blasphemer bold,
the rival and the antagonist of he,
who thou so slavish obey'dst before.
million of angel to thy side i draw,
i give they spirit to assert thy cause
against thy thunder rival and his slave;
in that eternal day, which though we lose,
we triumph in defeat; o matchless fame!
for we dissolve his universal sway,
a empire by our overthrow we gain:
and thou a poor precarious lord before
became the independent king of hell.
i found thy dominion upon earth,
i propagate in humane heart thy sway:
for where i dwell not, thou can never reign;
no, there dull union dwell, there lazy peace
and reason, and thy hate rival law.
have i not Lewis now for fifty year
inspire, possess all his mighty soul?
i fire that soul to all those vast design
that make it worthy thou, and worthy i.
his sanguinary order i inspire,
and then perform they with this bloody hand,
and all the european world lay bare.
it be i embrue his fierce dragoon slave,
in father and in brother guiltless blood:
a sea of guiltless blood this hand have spill:
thy rival image by million i
in rancour to the original deface,
that thou may triumph over the vanquish world,
and Lewis might thy great vicegerent reign.
if now he fly before victorious Anne,
can i with justice be condemn or blame?
think thou it be to the woman that i yield?
no, it be to he from who thou fledst amain,
with this assembly here of potent god,
and all the great, unite host of hell.
it be to that wisdom, and that power divine,
which day and night on that victorious queen,
as on the conquer hierarchy attend;
be it my fault if that religious queen,
by every action and by every voice,
inspire her briton with celestial love?
if by thy rival she be teach to employ,
great soul by he and destiny design,
and by profound depth of reason fit,
unite her subject first, and then mankind?
be i to be condemn, if while abroad
great Marlborough in indissoluble bond,
the thwart interest of the nation join?
at home Godolphin temperate the rage
of faction, which for mastery contend,
and make confusion, which be weakness, yield
to order, which be strength, as he above
the rage of war atom reconcile;
or cause they to engage with moderate strife;
yet strife, where that prevail, which most agree
with those eternal law that rule the whole,
mingle the element, and make the world.
i free own, that those our mortal foe
grow more pernicious to we every hour.
they be come t'associate now with William friend;
William, who name we fiend with horror hear;
even with his firm faithful friend they advise
who never shrink from his detest side,
though with a thousand danger compass round,
by homebred traitor and by foreign foe.
the audacious man, who insolent dare
to set up liberty and pull down we,
when France and hell reign paramount on earth,
when they have nought but ruin to expect
from such a curse desperate attempt:
with these they now consult, in these confide,
and these victorious Anne delight to employ.
to Spain she mordant and ravigni send,
and Montague himself to german plain
be hurry, in extreme despite to i,
where his wise council and his powerful voice
threaten my very be to destroy,
and menace all this dreadful host in i.
therefore unless we make one last effort,
one great attempt that be worthy of my rage,
Britain farewell, and tyranny adieu,
adieu, the reign of hell despotic sway!
Britain unanimous as well as free,
will soon enfranchise and unite the world,
but not the powerfull fiend of all that fall
from heaven, of all that own thy boundless sway,
dare make that horrible attempt but i.
and now, even now, i form the glorious plan,
as the confederate by unite thrive,
success continue will cement they more:
but their felicity to come, depend
upon yond squadron in the belgian plain;
shall they adverse event of battle feel,
all that great Anne have do unite mankind,
i can with ease in one campaign overthrow.
yond squadron i have view and have review
with all the inquisition of my eye.
i view they, and i sigh, to find their head
and heart unite by great Marlborough care,
which make they the just terror of we all.
but here by hell, and all hell power i swear,
hear it you God, who rule the unbounded air,
hear it you horror of th'abiss profound,
you black attendant on eternal night!
hear it you deity, assemble here
in council, to maintain hell horrid sway!
and thou who all these dreadful power obey,
who frown make god above, and god below,
and all the fright universe, except
the steadfast empyraean tremble; hear,
hear i great Lucifer, while by thy self,
thy dire inviolable self i swear
that i with spirit great as the design,
great as the glorious cause, and worthy i,
i that audacious general will destroy,
i those victorious squadron will overthrow,
and still in spite of earth, in spite of heaven,
discord, and Lucifer, and hell shall reign.

she say, and not expect a reply,
down towards the earth she wheel her airy flight;
and Lucifer dismiss the infernal power.

LIB. ii.

now in the midmost region of the air,
descend discord meet the beldame night,
as westward she her sable chariot drive,
old night the fury place by her side,
and her black shaggy mantle over her throw.
as discord sit by the dark grizzly hag,
discord more hideous seem, and night more foul.
as they be hurry by their coal black steed,
and the soft chariot slide through midnight air,
a motley equipage before, behind,
and on each side the journey fury fly.
for there fly treason with her look askew,
and subornation clad in dismal black,
and Stygian envy of a livid hue;
and yellow jealousy with eye suffuse,
and faithless fraud in particoloured robe,
and murder pale distain with sanguine dye,
and ugly slander speckle like a toad,
with livid spot upon a saffron hue
over her arm, her belly, and her thigh;
but serpentine her head and deadly eye,
and from her mouth she hurl her forky tongue,
and hideous be her hiss, and mortal be her sting.
then lame adultery, and incest blind,
and sly hypocrisy, with holy leer,
come lag in the rear with reverend gown,
and dart many a sour grimace he fly,
and sigh profound with invert eye,
and bang his stomacher with sound stroke;
but all affect be, and all be false;
for nervous be his limb, and bold his brow;
his dimple cheek be of Vermilion dye;
his chin a fabric with two story build;
his wanton eye-ball sparkle as they roll;
his pamper side be with a sevenfold shield,
defend of impenetrable brawn;
his paunch be prominent above the rest,
and like a goodly promontory hang.

the silver moon above the horizon peep,
and fright at the monstrous scene retire;
the conscious star withdraw their sicken fire,
and nature that abhor the dismal sight,
redouble all the terror of the dark.

as over campania viney down they fly,
the centinel of nature take the alarm,
the watchful dog in every village bay,
and hungry wolf forsake their prey to howl,
and the winge prophet of nocturnal sky,
the fatal raven croak, the ghastful scriech-owl scream.

when to the glitter palace they approach,
where Lewis in a restless slumber lie
upon the uneasy down, from the black Carr
discord alight, the golden turret shake,
the door fly open with a hollow groan,
and the fiend enter where the tyrant lie.
then throw off her immense gigantic form,
and the gorgonian terror of her front,
and Maintenon appear in shape and air;
and she, who a fall angel be before,
be a decay affect beauty now.
when she the royal curtain draw, she see
the tyrant toss on the restless plume;
haughty and stern, and thoughtful even in sleep;
revolve mighty mischief in his mind;
his forehead furrow by a angry frown,
and on his cloud brow sit cruel care.
and now and then he give a fearful start,
and from his heart draw many a guilty groan.
even discord gaze with pleasure at that sight,
and the fiend smile that never smile before.

and can thou sleep in this malignant hour,
say she, when every star against thou league?
how fall, how change from that transcendant state,
in which the gaze world admire thou once,
when thou be grow the terror even of king,
and dreadful scourge of the world potent lord!
when thou the earth so rapid lay waste,
that victory come pant in thy rear,
and want wing t'o'rtake thy impetuous march,
when emulous of the meridian sun
thy glory blaze, and thou have hope to shine
sole monarch of the desolate earth,
as he sole tyrant of the desert sky.
yet in those happy, in those glorious day,
no profound sleep can ever lull thy soul,
and rare, rare slumber close thy eye.
but all the day, and all the live long night,
care keep thou watch, to inflame the world,
and to divide and to destroy mankind.
now by victorious Marlborough bring low,
here thou lie bury in inglorious ease,
while with unwearied vigilance he wake,
and even this now the volley thunder grasp,
that be about to part with hideous roar,
and all thy tremble province amaze;
strike forty thousand of thy veteran dead,
strike even thou dead their arbitrary lord,
and with thy person kill thy very fame,
unless this moment thou prevent the blow.
what fatal hour be lose in soft repose?
have adverse fortune cool thy tower pride,
or have age quench thy noble lust of soul,
and that aspire flame that raise thy thought
to affectation even of godhead once?
can he who aim erewhile at nothing less
than reign king of king and lord of lord,
can he a rival bear in empire now?
and be thou to a poor despondence grow,
of lord it over all this western world?
yet have thou reason to despond indeed,
unless thou be eternal intent
to disunite who thou pretend t'o'rthrow
the few gigantic hunter of mankind,
who universal empire here acquire,
all of they vast advantage enjoy,
which heaven and nature have deny to thou.
Cyrus, great Caesar, and the son of Jove,
young Hammon, lead their conquer troop themselves,
be themselves brave, sometime to rashness brave;
and the undaunted squadron which they lead,
when they be conqueror, be always free,
and can a more exalt virtue boast
than those who yield to their conquer arm.
but here thou lie supine at thy ease,
and bury in opprobrious sloth, pretend
to do thy work by journey man of war;
yes, by thy baffle mareschal thou pretend,
day labourer, who for thy glory drudge,
to conquer hero fight for their own,
fierce warlike people, thou pretend t'o'rcome
by the inhabitant of soft Anjou,
or squadron in delicious Touraine breed,
and by deject and despond slave,
Freeborn magnanimous nation to overthrow;
but Freemen never be vanquish yet by slave,
nor warlike nation by a wanton crew.
if in thy great design thou will succeed,
divide those foe, and fight they with themselves,
then by each other arm enslave they all,
and what thou want in personal command,
or valour; or the hardness of thy troop,
supply by fraud and old notorious art.
but take occasion by the forelock still,
and let no minute pass, no moment slip,
that may be employ to disunite their force,
and by divide to confound their power.
such a important moment be this now,
in which thou lie dissolve in fatal sleep,
the reins of empire yield up to chance,
and dead and stupid to the charm of fame.
but though thou slumber, know i always wake
and day and night over thy dear interest brood
to cherish it like tender bird their young.
and now be come, thou dear of mankind,
dear than pleasure to i, dear as pride,
dear as the godlike pleasure of revenge,
be come to rouse thou from thy inglorious ease,
and my own empire to advance in thy.

true, say the tyrant, who have all this while
be shake off the Downey band of sleep,
if that a strong desire to rule the world,
inspire and agitate my highborn soul,
it be but to lay it at thy lovely foot,
and that the ruler of the land and main
may be a happy slave and worthy thou.
and let the boundless liberty you take,
which have be death to any one but thou,
declare the boundless power thy wondrous charm
have give thou over even my ambitious soul.
but why do thou, who have the power to pierce
the intimat'st recess of my heart,
who rule it with as arbitrary sway
as i my self will all the world controul,
so cruel upbraid i without cause?
can thou believe, i poor have give over
my great design of universal sway?
can thou believe i lie extend here
out of a low inglorious indolence,
or mean despondence of success, which never
can seize a tower fiery soul like i?
no, never shall my soul abatement feel
of its high passion for eternal fame,
but as i thou adore with fierce flame
than all that in my warm youth i feel,
even for the bright of thy charm sex,
for montespan, or lovely la fontange,
or tender la valiere, so age it self
do but augment my noble lust of fame;
it be my first principle of life, by which
i speak, and move, and act, and think, and be,
and Lewis, when that fail, must be no more.
o can i but the weakness suppress
of this frail flesh, and conquer the desire
and need of nutriment and soft repose,
as i th'infirmity have overcome
of my great mind, extinguish remorse,
drive compassion out, and stifle shame,
then without interval the glorious care
of empire shall employ my aspire soul,
under which now sometime my nature sink,
and i by sordid element be force
to feed the think part expire flame,
and seek new life within the arm of death.
but soon i shake off his dull chain, and then
at once to life and glory i return.
whether it be partial destiny or chance
that give victorious Marlborough the day
in a dire hour, at bleinem fatal field,
(o fatal field to all my aspire thought,
i will forget that ever thou have be,
and think of universal sway again)
yet to the terror of my wonder foe,
i still recover that amaze blow,
renew the faint courage of troop,
my loss recruit and retrieve my power.
i can thou then of indolence accuse,
or of despondence or abate fire?
i, who unwearied care have since oppress
the dilatory german on the Rhine;
oppress they on verona wonder stream,
and oblige fortune, in her own despite,
against her worthless favourite to declare.
o i have lay a scheme which will have sink,
and utter confound all my foe,
if fate in tempest have not interpose,
upon theAdige and the Rhine i fight.
only with man, and there i find success,
in Spain i be constrain to yield to heaven,
for it be the loud artillery of heaven
that from i snatch the celtiberian tower,
and baffle my whole providence at once;
but whence can this transport fury spring,
or what make this the great decide hour?

to who the fury eager reply:
by that disastrous disappointment Spain,
the pride for which contend nation fight,
depend upon this very fatal hour,
which here thou squander in inglorious ease.
Spain be in utmost danger to be lose,
unless thou rouse will prevent the blow.
and Spain in danger will deject our friend,
and give more dare spirit to our foe;
and bind they in indissoluble bond.
consider how they all prepare unite,
England and Scotland stretch their sinewey arm,
both eager in a strict embrace to meet,
and for the future like two sister live;
by their great mother wisdom reconcile.
in England too by wise Godolphin care,
faction have lose its ferment and grow mild;
the very tigress faction be grow tame;
the listless german who thy wondrous art
so noble have divide and bring low,
some lucid interval of concord find,
and public spirit and will sure leave,
their shameful quarrel and opprobrious sloth,
if Spain shall from thy baffle arm be tear,
that loss will calm the fierce hungarian rage,
and spirit jealous Venice to declare
against the invader of fair Italy. 
if Spain the golden prize of battle lose,
no stratagem, nor violence, nor art,
can thy exhaust treasury supply.
and then thy numerous army vanish all,
and leave thou to the scorn of thy proud foe,
even thy own slave (and that be the blow of fate)
even thy own vile obsequious slave will rise
and take rebellious arm against their king:
then from the pyrenaean to the Rhine. 
adieu thy conquest, and perhaps thy crown,
but nought, assure thy self can Spain retrieve,
but a surprise and stupendous blow
strike sudden upon the belgian dyle. 
a sudden and surprise blow strike there,
while this the great campaign of fate be ¦ begin
will give thou sure occasion to detach
part of thy conquer troop to philip aid,
to push thy advantage on the astonish Rhine,
thy friend the lose elector to restore,
and penetrate to inmost austria clime,
which then in vain shall wait great Marlborough aid,
that will constrain the empire to recall
the new supply to illustrious Eugene send,
and give thou time to finish savoy fate.
that fatal blow will once again divide
confederate power, will Venice awe,
exasperate the fierce pannonian Mars,
amaze the german, and the dutch confound,
prevent that union now design between
the english and the caledonian state,
and in both realm rekindle factious rage,
rouse up thy sleep arbitrary friend,
ferment they still with more fanatic rage,
that our decline empire will sustain,
and will advance through all the christian world,
and wipe away the stain of bleinem shameful day.

to who the grizzly tyrant thus reply:
o why have thou once more so rash rouse
the serpent slumber in my wound breast,
which when awake still gnaw my mangle hear,
and greedy devour my vital blood.
o bleinem! bane to my aspire thought!
at who idea all come tumble from their height.
bleinem! the hag that in the dead of night,
my fancy ride and drive soft sleep away;
the very tyrant of my ambitious soul,
blast to my hope of universal sway,
which wither ail and die when thou appear,
and only by forget thou revive.
it be there by such a rash presumptuous fight,
as what thou now provoke i to repeat,
that forty thousand of my conquer troop,
that always conquer till that curse hour,
be, like ripe corn in autumn, mow in heap;
those heap in rank extend on the plain,
too plenteous harvest of that bloody field?
which break the heart and spirit of the rest,
and interrupt all my vast design,
make all my friend despond, my foe insult,
and lay my weakness open to the world:
for as my greatness, and my awful power,
lay in opinion more than real strength,
the opinion which the nation have conceive,
fortune be grow immutable as fate,
and always will attend my conquer arm,
that fatal day calamitous event,
undeceive all the christian world at once,
and make i grow the very scorn of those
to who i be most terrible before.
i will thou have repeat, the dangerous risk
of battle, when thou have thy self observe,
that to subdue, i must divide my foe,
and then enslave they by each other arm,
that warlike nation never be vanquish yet
by soft one, nor free bear soul by slave;
know thou not then, that to divide my foe,
i must remain, not only without fight,
but without war, o god, for that bless hour!
one short live truce will more advance my fame,
and spread my empire, than ten victory.

he say, and thus the subtle fiend reply:
true, if fallacious truce thou can obtain,
i before victory will truce advise;
but since thy foe have be so oft betray,
and mock, all hope of faithless peace be vain,
therefore the mischief ill success have do,
must be by sudden victory repair.
nor need thou run a dangerous risk to overcome,
what lose the fatal day at blenheim field?
what but presumption grow from long success,
which cause thou to abandon thy old art,
and vain to rely on fancy power;
because aetheral victory have oft
perch on thy wave streamer, when thy troop,
by odds of number overwhelm their foe,
by long success grow insolent vain;
thou fond think overcome on equal term,
unknowing of the troop thou be to engage,
and wondrous merit of their matchless chief.
hence the disaster of that fatal day;
but when to your old method you return,
with they success and victory return.
for the prevent german you surprise
upon theAdige and the astonish Rhine,
and both their army easy overthrow,
both by superior number overwhelm,
and in their leader absence both oppress.
ruin th'ally upon the belgian plain
oppress by the same odds, before their chief
arrive, before their various power be join.
then with success return to thy old art,
and by division break their potent league,
thy order strait to the bavarian send
thy numerous belgian garrison to drain,
and swell thy troop assemble on the dyle;
then as a torrent to a deluge swell,
disdain its bank, and make its roar way
with dreadful devastation, so may they,
scorn their line, overflow th'adjacent plain,
while desolation mark their hideous course,
and the surprise confederate force leave
the same eternal monument of power,
which at morat the fame burgundian leave.
but Rouze, lay hold upon this fatal hour,
think that the very next may be too late:
this hour great Marlborough for his camp set forth,
who thou must still industrious avoid,
avoid Marlborough, Lewis may be great;
thou have already feel his nervous arm,
who tower genius all the genii dare,
of thy weak marshal, which before it cower;
he the great quality alone enjoy,
of all thy chief who be, and who have be.
great condè spirit and his wondrous fire,
join with that presence of command soul,
that keep entire master of it self,
and master of the furious god of war;
when with dire look, and with a dreadful roar,
he foam, and all the god run mad with rage.
great Marlborough have luxemburgh dispatch,
his subtle turn, and his sagacious view;
the wisdom and sedateness of Turenne,
his dauntless valour with his thought profound,
and vast capacity, and all that skill,
so admirable in the art of death,
which fix inconstancy of fortune will,
and make she dote on wisdom charm divine.
Rouze thy self then, beware that fatal man,
issue thy dread command this moment out,
and let the great decide blow be give,
e'r destiny and Marlborough arrive.

the fury say, the tyrant give consent,
to the bavarian strait his order send,
his numerous belgian garrison to drain,
and swell his troop assemble on the dyle,
which to the army, through the dreary shade,
thence to the various town the impetuous daemon bear.

LIB. iii.

Aurora have not paint yet the world,
with various dye, restore every hue,
that night have with her miscreant hand expunge;
nor be th'attendant on the night retire,
the starry host of heaven, and host of hell;
and still the wakeful dog take soft repose,
and still the prowl wolf pursue his prey,
no shepherd pipe be on the mountain hear,
nor hunter bugle in the echo vale;
when the shrill trumpet rouse up drowsy Mars,
death bugle in the chase of humane blood,
the beast of nature to their den retire,
and the whole Forrest tremble at the sound:
the beast of nature fear, alas, in vain,
though fate a solemn hunt have prepare,
for man the huntsman be, and man the prey.

before the dawn, throughout the belgian plain,
the garrison their tyrant voice obey;
forth from their several fortress they march,
from oudenard, courtray, dendermond, and liere,
from Brussels, Louvain, mechlin, Antwerp, Ghent. 
belgia, that late cast to heaven her eye
for help, her eye, for chain her arm restrain;
belgia, the mother of a hundred town,
now beautiful, and rich, and great, and gay,
once more with secret pride her son survey,
and once more boast of her immortal race;
that joyous lift their towry front on high,
as when kind nature by the help of art,
and secret influence of indulgent heaven,
throw off a long and dangerous disease;
once more she to her self delightful grow,
and once more beauty and long absent grace,
and strength and joy, unspeakable return;
so the disburden belgian town rejoice,
from which the squadron march by several way,
to reach the camp by false Bavaria form,
and there like torrent in the ocean join:
now a more potent numerous host they seem,
than that with which the son of Jove, the east,
or mighty Julius overcome the west.
confide in their number they grow fierce,
haughty, presumptuous, insolent vain,
and their dilate heart distend with pride,
their line disdain with a roar they pass,
and the mad torrent towards ramillia rowl:
they the confederate troop resolve to attack,
before their various nation all be join;
before victorious Marlborough arrive.
now, with a choose few, ride Villeroy,
and false Bavaria, to survey th'ally;
with hideous air, and with gigantic stalk,
before they the infernal goddess stride.
approach victorious Malborough she find
arrive, and curse the provoke sight,
she find that from his presence all the troop
assume immortal spirit, and a air
so dreadful that it make even fury shake,
even she the fierce fiend of all the damn.

now discord to the gallic camp return
the false bavarian's shape and air assume,
and thus she anxious Villeroy accost.
have thou observe, how yond confederate troop
inferior in their number far to we,
yet carry conquest in their flame eye;
and yet their veteran and their bold troop
have often flee before the gallic power,
whence now this spirit, this superior fire?

from liberty the mareschal strait reply,
it be from the bravery of the english troop,
who with immortal liberty inspire,
and with the love of glory all inflame,
insect the nation with their noble fire,
as man be form to lord it over beast
Freemen be preordained to vanquish slave,
and this the event have show in William reign
have but his honest mind suspect thou.

to who the fury instant reply,
it be true, the english merit all our praise,
a nation fierce, magnanimous and free,
valiant from freedom, from their climate brave,
who in their fierce attack with fury make,
and in their firmness to sustain the effort
of their outrageous and their press foe,
equal the warlike nation of the world,
but in their rally rage surpass they all.
your gallic troop with fury know to assault,
but never yet endure the fierce attack
of their bold foe when obstinate urge,
our german with much constancy sustain
but when our squadron once be break they be lose,
the english rally still with great rage
than they at first attack the astonish foe,
while with their eager shout the welkin ring.
as a fierce bull who furious contend
for the fair she that have his heart subdue,
and for the empire of the flowery mead,
recede from his proud rival to return
with more impetuous shock, more dreadful rage
while with his clash the echo vale resound,
so when the briton from the field retreat
they rally with no less amaze fire.

but the great change of the world below
be bring about by heaven and not by man;
for it be a jealous god who rule the sky,
jealous of glory and in love with praise.
and when the wonder of he may he show
and bring to pass astonish event,
event which all the under world amaze,
it be not by strength of nation that he work
for that will look mere human may to all;
but by select celestial spirit send
for that design from his own heaven and form
of fine clay, and in a noble mould
than be the vulgar race of mortal man,
and animate with divine fire.
that when to all the astonish world they appear
with more than human quality endue,
astonish world may be constrain to own,
and they themselves confess, that what they do
be by th'immediate hand of heaven perform.
the noble nation have derive their fame,
and all their greatness from the god-like few,
and when these fail they, they be lose, undo,
and grow the scorn of their insult foe,
or be quite swallow in th'abyss of time.
mareschal, reflect on ancient day, and say,
what wondrous act do persian ever perform
before or after their great Cyrus reign?
say, be not Macedon ever Philip sway
obscure, unworthy of the voice of fame?
and when victorious Alexander die,
do not its spirit and its matchless fame
and empire with the god-like man expire?
the roman owe the glory of their state,
and vast extent of empire to a few.
as by their noble writer be confess.
as far as now fair England glory fly,
what have it do before great Edward reign?
except but his and conquer Henry day,
where be its glory till Eliza come?
and by her wisdom and heroic mind
sustain the freedom of the labour world.
with she even England life and soul expire,
and then its neighbour mean it betray,
or turn upon it self its own inglorious arm,
till at the last the god-like William come,
he come, and their decline spirit raise,
he give they their religion, and their Anne,
she freedom and the may of malb'rough give.

as William be betray, undo by i,
mareschal by we great Malborough too must fall,
on which depend to morrow fatal day.
for from his presence yond audacious troop
derive the dauntless spirit in their eye,
from which they flash intolerable fire.
even thou thy self, for i remark it well;
thou be agreeable surprise and raise
when his august appearance thou behold
worthy the grandeur of the immortal mind,
command as the form of the first man,
while his great maker image he retain,
and empire sit upon his lordly brow,
the world imperial ruler and his own,
before celestial reason have be teach
her subject passion poor to obey,
and the degenerate mind debase
the majesty and empire of the meen.

when ever his troop behold that noble form,
all his great action, all his high exploit,
present themselves before their wonder mind,
gelderland conquer with its warlike town,
and liege and limbourgh as by magic rise,
and to their view present their stately tower,
dire schellenbourg impenetrable fort
carry against the choice of all our power,
and bleinem everlasting day appear
and stunn with rapture their astonish mind.
the trumpet with its clangour tear their ear,
and then they charge, and once again they fight
their battle over, and triumph once again,
and then the world want force to oppose their power,
who to defeat we Malborough must destroy,
for firm yond audacious troop believe
it be not from fortune these success flow,
but from the wisdom of their wondrous chief,
his vast capacity, his flame zeal,
his restless labour and perpetual thought,
his dreadless spirit and his just design,
indeed so just have be his great design,
so exquisite his conduct, so profound,
not one false step in four renowned campaign,
so bright his humble modesty have shine
in still consult his illustrious friend,
his counsellor so few, so just choose,
his secret keep from the most pierce eye,
his constancy in execute all
that have so well consult be, so firm,
his spirit as a captain so sublime
and as a soldier so invincible,
that mareschal to remove he we must hire
the fierce and most desperate of thy man,
for my bavarian will that task refuse,
or twenty thousand of yond brave troop
will less obstruct our great success than he.
have thou behold at bleinem dreadful field
in the distress of the stupendous day,
this matchless man at once a prudent chief
and a most dare combatant, supply
with his own valour every press brigade,
each brave battalion of his faint host;
for wheresoever death and danger fly
t'appall his squadron with their ghastly glare,
there Malborough on the wing of thunder fly
till he bring conquest back and win the day,
till fate he with majestic meen dispense,
and seem the dreadful delegate of Jove;
have thou see this at bleinem dreadful field,
mareschal, thou will of victory despair,
or else conclude this fatal man must die.
but can thou with a sharp sagacious eye
survey the wonder of his matchless mind,
what apprehension then will pierce thy breast,
then what astonishment will strike thy mind?
for, o the jar talent which appear,
unite all their faction in his soul!
the heat, the cold, the liveliness, the weight,
the gravity, astonish dispatch,
the providence, the intrepidity,
the fire and the sedateness of his soul,
and the revenge thunder of he may
discharge without a tempest on his breast,
or a black lower cloud upon his brow!
tempest without he raise and he calm,
but his great mind immovable remains.
and these great quality by turn he show,
not as his fancy, humour, passion call,
but guide all by wisdom sacred law,
as he who make this all the season guide,
and alter hot and dry, and moist and cold,
by what the change universe require.
be it possible we can a moment doubt
if we this dangerous general shall destroy,
who have these repugnant talent join
confederate in his mighty soul,
talent which none beside of human kind
enjoy, appear design by alwise heaven,
who nought create in vain to perform deed
surpass all the rest of mortal race.
who the great quality of twenty chief
possess still achieve the exploit of more,
who passion for his own accurse cause
so flame be, so deadly be his hate,
and so invincible to we and we,
that not content to act in his own sphere,
and every hour new wonder to perform,
he do the duty with unwearied pain
of foreign general, which with all their thought,
and all the god-like greatness of their soul
they be unable to perform themselves.
whereve the ally appear in arm
their brave battalion malb'rough influence feel.
with he their noble action they concert,
he furnish their brave chief with troop,
and with unhoped for treasure he supply.
yet while to other he give power to act
his own unwearied vigilence be such,
his care, his labour, his eternal thought,
as if all other have refuse to act,
as if the inimitable man be leave
with atlantean shoulder to sustain
the more than mortal burden of the war.

indeed whatever have be great do
in Germany, or in the belgian plain,
have under his auspicious power be do:
for he observe with judicious thought,
that through a tedious war your gallic power
by the division of th'ally prevail,
or owe their conquest to my secret art.
or by their number gain their great success,
that they the field eternal decline
unless by vast advantage sustain,
as conscious of the weakness of their cause,
the weakness of their bold veteran troop
and falseness of imaginary power,
which two set battle fight on equal term
will soon demonstrate to the christian world,
that even in fight they close engagement shun
till they have tame their most intrepid foe
by odds of number weary and oppress,
he this remark with sagacious thought
his conduct in each point to they oppose,
and change the form and fortune of the war.

by his eternal vigilance his troop
be still too numerous to be flank by we;
and while he meditate his great exploit,
his secret, his impenetrable heart
defend stand from treason pierce eye,
(that caution from great William fate he draw)
then he the fatal hour of combat seek
and find with penetrate thought, or make
either half-way, he bald occasion meet,
or like a hunter he pursue her flight,
till she at bay her cluster forelock turn,
then in the dreadful field assail your power,
nor suffer you with fury to assault;
for which you by the christian world be fame.
nor wage then a cool and distant war,
but press on you with redouble may;
and in upon your firm squadron break
till with his horse their shatter rank he tear,
nor make by nature, nor by climate form
the thunder of such fury to sustain;
and chief, which have render he to we
a dangerous and a formidable foe,
that no division fraudulent sow
among th'ally may hurt the general cause,
there be but one who breathe the aetherial air,
and even that one be malborough second self,
so careful to augment or to maintain
among the various potentate abroad;
that union which with a celestial voice
great Anna to her britain recommend;
he obviate grow feud, dissension grow
he reconcile, the interest he adjust,
and he concert of each confederate power,
and in one general interest mingle all,
as stream from east and west, and north and south,
be mix in ocean vast abyss, and lose.
he nation, and their king, with thought inspire,
above all little, selfish, low design,
and fill they with a public glorious fire.

in all these thing the wondrous man concern,
which so destructive be to we and we;
with so much zeal, with such assiduous thought,
with such unwearied pain, no length of time,
nor any distance of remote place,
nor the intemperance of heat and cold,
nor pleasure specious and allure bait,
(the god like man, alas, no pleasure know,
but what the ruler of yond heaven pursue,
to do great good and glory to acquire)
no, nor the base ingratitude of those,
who day and night he watch to preserve,
nor ought that earth, nor ought that hell invent;
nought but the stroke of destiny alone
be able to obstruct his generous course,
be able to retard his noble speed
in the carrier of everlasting fame.
but with himself he high design revolve,
or those who execute those high design
with that familiar greatness he receive,
which make he the delight of all the good,
and the felicity of all the brave.

as from these wondrous talent in he join
all that astonish success proceed
which be become the darling theme of fame,
the theme on which the eternal talker dote,
so by that high success be malbrough grow
the joy of all the happy nation round,
the hope and consolation of the rest,
the confident of the most jealous state,
the great example of earth demigod,
and the just wonder of the christian world.
but with the squadron who his voice obey
so sacred his authority be grow,
so be he honour, love, almost adore
by the brave soldier his adopt care,
who with a pious father tender love
he guard from danger and from want he shield,
that when, nor interest loud and powerful voice,
nor smart shame, nor their dear country have love,
nor love of glory long can prevail
upon their faint spirit to sustain
the fierce attack of our assault band,
his meen, his great appearance fire their soul,
his potent voice the squadron new create,
give they new life, new spirit and new hope,
nay, certainty of conquest and of fame,
but marshal for some time i have observe
surprise, and joy, and wonder in thy eye.

to who transport Villeroy reply;
it be true, with joy and wonder i have hear
thy generous praise of such a deadly foe:
for when so many english have be find
who have with base calumny repay
his mighty benefit as great and strong
as ever hero on his country lay,
that thou shall do the glorious hero right,
thou, who by force of his victorious arm
be fall from such a height, o whither fall!
fall from thy empire, from thy glory fall,
from those which thou enjoy'dst, and from the hope
of those at which thy vast ambition aim,
that thou shall do the wondrous hero right,
that thou shall draw the lovely feature like,
and place the noble piece in its true light,
show something so magnanimous great
as all the generous english will extol,
and god-like Malborough himself admire.

to who the fury in bavaria form,
the praise i merit not, i must refuse,
it be not a generous frailty in my mind,
but great revenge, the attribute of god,
that make i just to malborough hateful name.
small generosity require to praise
a merit which by all the world be extol,
and which in spite of slander canker bite,
will be the eternal ornament of fame.
if keen detraction can have hurt his name
or person, i detraction will have use.
for it be with bitter Gall that i extol
the hero, who to crush i must commend.
since calumny have be essay in vain,
and slander of the black hue be try
at once his fame and person to destroy,
and against both have signify no more
than morning mist against the Julian sun,
his rise glory have dispel they all;
it be time to try what truth may effect at last,
and on her own loud champion turn her arm.
this hero i in just proportion draw,
that thou may be convince by the rich draught,
the way to attack th'ally with wish success
be this pernicious general to destroy,
that whole brigade less dangerous be than he.
that while yond troop his noble form inspire,
they will impenetrable still remain,
and fate will follow he as it do Jove. 

if then our interest be precious in our eye,
if victory have charm for our great mind,
if glory, if the vast, the inspire cause
for which great Lewis steels our nervous arm,
which be the empire of the universe,
can thaw our blood, our droop spirit raise,
we must the bold of your man suborn
this formidable hero to destroy,
or else expect a second bleinem here,
thou will in shameful bond once more be lead
as thou by conquer Eugene be before,
or grow the object of the Peoples scorn
and the parisian rabble headstrong rage,
and i shall from my government be chase,
as from Bavaria i before be drive.

the fury say, and Villeroy turn pale,
and look with eye unwilling to consent,
yet fearful to deny; which when the fiend
observe, she with imperious tone rejoin,
think it be thy absolute, thy awful lord,
it be Lewis who command thou to obey,
can thou assist a arbitrary king,
to make his boundless will his only law,
and then examine if that will be just?
know thou not that it be criminal in slave
to affect more virtue than their tyrant show.

she say, when with prevail shade the night
come on, and Villeroy confusion hide;
under who pitchy mantle both conceal
to execute their dire design retire.

LIB. iv.

while discord by great malb'rough fate contrive
to extend the empire of hell dreadful sway
the world almighty ruler with that eye,
that see through all th'infinitude of space,
that see through all th'infinitude of time,
from theempyrean view the rave fiend,
and to the son the eternal father speak,
and while he speak the angel drop their lyre,
and all their melt hallelujah cease;
the heaven with all their jocund orb be still,
be hush, attentive to the voice divine,
to which their sound be discord, all the globe
that roll through space immense a moment rest,
a moment their eternal course suspend,
and tremble while their great creator speak.

behold, he to the filial godhead say,
with how much fury our outrageous foe
proceed his impious vice-roy to maintain,
against our servant and vicegerent Anne,
how against malb'rough life he discord arm,
and she the fierce of the french suborn
to assault he in to morrow wrathful field.
let we against the rage fiend oppose
one of our angel burn most with zeal,
and most with blissful charity inspire,
let he descend and with celestial may
resist the malice of infernal rage,
and betwixt Malborough interpose and fate,
that he may conquer and that we may reign,
and all the nation join in bond of love,
and quiet to the weary world return.

he say, the angelic band resume their lyre,
and their transport symphony renew,
th'harmonious sphere renew their wondrous dance,
with hallelujah heaven again resound,
immortal transport run through every mind,
immortal pleasure brighten every face,
in circle the angelic band embrace,
and rush into each other arm with joy
which tongue of angel never can express,
and never can the heart of man conceive,
and every circle in seraphic song
the god of union sing, the god of peace.

next to the deity there stand a orb
of glorious Seraphim, a wondrous orb,
who have the wing, the brightness and the power
of mighty Seraphim, but human form,
of all the bright inhabitant of heaven,
none burn with blissful charity like they,
or copy the eternal son like they;
like he in human shape they appear in heaven,
like he they once have body of frail flesh,
and sojourn here in mortal limb below,
and long with death and danger here they shine,
and mortal misery and mortal care
the nation to unite in bond of peace,
and vindicate the war saint below
from the abhor usurp reign of hell,
from foul idolatry and lawless power,
and spread messiah righteous kingdom here
of sacred liberty and sacred law,
and of religion undefiled and pure.
and here, when they have suffer much and long,
and bear what none but godlike mind can bear,
the immortal spirit break their mortal band,
and swift ascend to the heaven of heaven
triumphant, there in human likeness sit
(that human likeness which on earth they grace)
near to the son of man in bliss enthrone,
and some resemblance of his glory bear
as of his suffering they before have bear.

to this refulgent and this wondrous orb
the filial godhead thus himself address,
you host of Seraphim who once be man
who bear the misery of mortal life
like i, and bear the cruel pain of death
unite mankind among themselves in love,
and spread my father kingdom over earth;
which of you free will descend to save
the british hero from impend fate,
he who in charity the nation bind
and pious anna conquer host command,
that we may triumph, and that we may reign,
he Lucifer and discord rage fiend
contrive with hellish fury to destroy.

forth from the spirit of that shine orb
a glorious spirit shoot on gorgeous wing,
wing with bright purple and with gold array,
and down before the sovereign throne he light.
of all th'angelick sanctity of heaven
none fill the empyrean with the fame
of what he act and he suffer here
like he, no angel of all heaven like he
breathe forth immortal love to mortal man.
a crown of radiant beam adorn his head,
and winge his shoulder be, and winge his foot,
lightning serene fly dart from his eye,
and lightning round his radiant temple play.
and in his face there much resemblance shine
of he who once this happy island sway.
who move by charity for wretched man
that he the labour nation may preserve
come fly on the wing of all the wind,
and rescue sink Brittain from her fate.
his face much likeness of his earthly bloom,
but a more heighten beauteous likeness bear,
for now instead of misery and care,
and fatal disappointment, fatal woe,
and all the frailty that on dust attend,
upon his countenance perpetual youth,
celestial vigour and celestial bloom,
and immortality appear, and joy
eternal, inexpressible, divine.

on his first motion empyrean heaven
with tuneful shout of acclamation ring,
th'harmonious thunder of ecstatic joy.
when every angel clape his golden wing,
and every angel strike his wondrous lyre,
and sing his praise in high seraphic song,
who can vouchsafe to leave eternal joy,
and can to earth the seat of woe descend,
where he have bear what never mortal bear,
to rescue malb'rough his adopt care.

it be like thy self, like thy own fervent zeal,
thou good and faithful servant, say the son.
with speed then to the roll earth descend,
and thereupon to morrow wrathful day
the day for vengeance preordained by we,
defend thy Malborough in ramillia plain,
and he the christian world will there defend.
but ever the sun dispel the shade of night,
present thy self in vision to his eye,
and with celestial hope his soul inspire
of present conquest, and of future fame
on earth, and of eternal glory here.
tell he of province by union power
deliver in ramillia fatal plain;
lay his own danger too before his eye
but hide the event of that, that his great soul
and dreadless virtue may be full try,
and may to earth and heaven more glorious shine.
with joy descend, to honour thy descent
on it, a wondrous birth of fate attend,
a wondrous change in Europe shall be wrought,
ten thousand terror shall attend thy flight
and vengeance to amaze the impious world.
the time by high foreknowledge preordained
at last be come when Satan shall no more,
nor his vicegerent tyrant plague the earth.
but Lewis be permit to attain
to such uncommon height of lawless power,
as pelgia, Italy and Spain to add
to former country impious obtain,
to grasp the Indies in his threaten hand,
and in his thought the empire of the earth,
that vengeance send from we may pierce he more
by his surpize unexpected fall;
and the example strike the impious world
with great terror, and our hand appear.
when he who have be fifty roll year
raise the fabric of his power to heaven
shall find it in a moment dash to hell
by the revenge thunder of our may;
when all the turbant tyrant of the east
from Bosphorus to farther Indies climb
shall hear their western brother fall, shall hear
and tremble at his ruin hideous sound:
when man turn atheist by his long success
shall be confound and turn pale and shake,
and own there be a be far-above
and a amaze providence beyond
what their weak mind have power to comprehend;
then impious war shall vex the earth no more,
but love divine shall human heart unite,
and peace shall to the weary world return.

he end, and the angel bow low
towards earth precipitate his glorious flight
while that empyrean thunder loud roar:
th'angelick lyre, and dulcimer, and lute,
and solemn organ change their melt strain,
and with fierce warlike symphony resound;
and when the instrument divine repose
again the thunder bellows through the sky;
to that the instrument again respond,
and thrice the thunder, thrice the wrathful lyre
alternate dreadful sound throughout the sky.
tremendous signal of revenge divine
of vengeance to be execute now,
the terror of the almighty take the alarm,
and after the descend angel fly.
as through the atmosphere he wheel his flight,
and cleave with his eternal plume the air,
of golden light he draw a glorious Trail,
he gild the pale moon resplendent beam,
he gild the silver cloud with golden dye;
and all that illustrious horror of the night.
the infernal spirit from his passage fly,
and all the winge ill omen of the air;
and care, and pain, and sorrow, and despair
fly from his sacred presence far away.
before he peace, tranquillity and joy,
immortal pleasure march before, behind
the amaze terror of the almighty march.

as near to judoignes fatal plain he fly,
like a descend star direct he shoot
into the tent where mighty malb'rough lie,
and in a dream fight great ramillia field.
but even in sleep his passion he control
with independent and with lordly sway,
his very dream be regular, serene,
no fear nor rage disturb his god-like mind
who th'angel now descend thus salute.

hail champion of the sacred cause of heaven!
hail ornament of earth! hail dread of hell!
illustrious soul call out by i and fate
to turn the fortune of the western world.
from the bright realm of everlasting joy
with pleasure i be send to visit thou,
o worthy successor to i in arm!
o care of heaven! o delegate of fate!
how have i be solicitous beyond
what be allow to blissful mind above
for Anna, for Britannia, and for thou!
and yet when i ascend up to heaven
i neither she nor thou entire leave;
for at my part i leave friend below —
o man, with who even angel may consult,
and on the firmness of their faithful zeal,
and on their vast capacity depend!
for all my friend be anna friend and thy,
and will unchangeable respect my choice;
but hell and hell dire missionary here
with rage implacable thy life pursue,
for bleinem in their mind have fix deep wound,
wound which no length of day can cure, but time
exulcerate, and fester, and gangrene.
from bleinem mortal day worse day they expect
no less than ruin of their empire here;
therefore to morrow all their mortal dart
will level be at thy illustrious head,
and imminent the danger be and great.
but danger will but raise the noble fire
of thy exalt soul intent on thing
above this grovel and this worthless world.
and if thou fall, like Samson thou will fall,
and bitter thy foe lament thy fate;
whatever for thy person heaven ordain,
yet heaven its champion never will permit
to leave the world inglorious, unrevenged,
a wondrous victory attend thy arm,
great in it self and in its sequel vast,
who echo sound through all the west shall run.
transport the glad nation all around,
who oft shall doubt, and oft suspend their joy,
and oft imagine all a empty dream;
the conqueror himself shall cry amaze,
it be not our work, alas we do it not,
the hand of god, the hand of god be here
for thou, so great shall be thy high renown,
that fame shall think no music like thy name:
around the circle globe it shall be spread,
and to the world last age shall endure.
hero of ancient time thou shall eclipse,
and the most lofty most aspire man,
shall want th'assurance in his secret prayer
to ask such high felicity and fame
as heaven have free grant thou, yet this
that seem so great, so glorious to thou now
will look how low, how vile to thy great mind,
if i can set before thy astonish eye
th'excess of glory and th'excess of bliss
that be prepare for thy aspire soul
when thou arrive at everlasting day.
o can embody mind but comprehend
the glory of the intellectual world,
or i the blissful Secret be allow;
but fate forbid, to mortal to reveal,
o i can lay a scene before thy eye
which will distract thou with transport joy;
fire the rich blood in thy illustrious vein,
make every nerve with fierce convulsion start,
blast all thy spirit and thy life destroy,
thou can not taste ecstatic bliss and live:
as one who have live thirty tedious year,
and ever since his wretched birth be dark,
his visual orb with cloudy film overcast,
and in the dungeon of the body dwell
in utter ignorance of nature work
and wonder of this vast material world,
and have no notion ever conceive of light,
or colour, or the verdant flowery earth,
or the stupendous prospect of the sky;
if then he find some artist who nice hand
couch the cataract and clear his eye,
and all at once a flood of glorious light,
and this bright temple of the universe,
the crystal firmament, the blaze sun,
all the amaze glory of the heaven,
all the great maker high magnificence
come rush through his eye upon his soul,
he can bear astonish delight,
but start, exclaim, and stamp, and rave, and die:
so the vast glory of the upper world,
if they be set before embody mind
will oppress nature and extinguish life.
for all the beauty of the world that be see
as glorious as they look to human eye
be little, be contemptible to they,
like glimmer star-light to the blaze of day.
for thou let this suffice the share of bliss
and glory that be prepare for thou above,
be such as shall distinguish thou from most:
for since the glory of the just in heaven
be equal to their charity on earth,
what must be thy who labour to unite,
who labour to felicitate a world.

i say not this to fortify thy mind
against the fear of death, thou have no fear,
for thou have be familiar with he long,
be often dauntless with he face to face,
and calm look upon his Gorgon eye,
as find nothing there affright a soul
that conscious be of glory, bliss and life,
unbounded all as vast eternity.
even i not more intrepid be on earth
than thou, nor be not more undaunted now:
but this be say, that on this dreadful day
thou may do deed that may excel even thy,
and surpass he who all the world transcend.
thou shall have million of immortal mind
glorious spectator of thy immortal act,
and tower over thou still thou shall behold
bright victory and i, he say, and now
the stormy drum awake the power of war,
and now the angel disappear from sight,
and his bright shape dissolve into the morn.

LIB. v. 

full of the glorious vision Malborough wake,
for when the angel vanish from his eye,
he shoot half heaven into the hero mind,
his mind be with immortal hope inspire,
celestial confidence, celestial fire,
a flame that in his noble breast aspire
to thing above the greatness of this world,
and joy which human heart can never conceive,
unspeakable, transport, yet serene,
wisdom serene companion and her friend,
prophetic of felicity and fame.
awake, he rise from his bed in haste,
and after he in have the sun arise,
impatient to behold his wondrous deed.
gaze he see the grandeur of his meen
exalt with a dreadful majesty;
and all the honour heighten of his eye,
and all th'heroick virtue of his mind,
all but his great contempt of death increase,
for that be sovereign in his soul before,
and while the sun above the horizon rise
ten thousand bright glory from the sky
descend to behold, or to assist
in the contention of the eternal day.
for the immortal day be to decide
no trifle small affair, no mean dispute,
the limit of small kingdom, or the bound
of poor provincial tributary lord,
but the contention of the eternal day
be to decide in great ramillia field,
if god shall reign over his own work below,
or hell usurp they with tyrannic sway.

and now the dreadful trumpet sound to arm,
when distant clangour be like echo hear,
th'angelick trumpet of celestial fame,
which to immortal deed excite their soul.
and now they march to attack the embattle foe,
and now in terrible array appear,
await their commander awful voice,
like tempest lower in the heaven they look
that blacken all the sky in silence stand
before outrageous wrack of heaven begin,
like the virgilian god of wind their chief,
who muster sound storm and rule their rage.
with pleasure he their martial eye survey
and find they with heroic rage inspire,
he find they want no speech to raise their soul
to mighty deed, for in their eye he see
they have already gain the glorious day.
up to the heaven his eye the hero cast,
and there the angel with his flame sword
and victory with eagle wing he spy
tower along the vast aethereal space.
and now a glorious flame from heaven descend
and agitate and shake his mighty soul:
and this be the first hour that ever he find
its movement difficult to be restrain,
with ardor strait he give the fatal word,
and now the trumpet sound the dreadful charge,
and like the last eternal trump it sound,
for now at hand the end of time appear,
and the expire world last ghastful hour,
for hideous be the face of nature now,
the heaven be all on fire, the welkin burn,
earth tremble, and the air torment groan.
the war element, earth, air and fire
be rage in stupendous motion all,
and earth with air confound, and with fire.
and burst of horrid thunder rend the heaven
and seem to be expire nature groan;
but no swift motion, no impetuous rage
of missive earth, or of explode air,
or of expand fire can equal half
outrageous motion of undaunted mind
divine swift in tenement of clay.

while to th'attack th'embattel squadron move,
and clash with amaze fury join,
on one side th'angel and bright victory,
on the other discord with the infernal power
and all the auxiliary of heaven and hell
their mighty movement for a while suspend
the motion of frail mortal to behold,
who transport of immortal fury show
above the weak condition of poor dust
above the frail concern of wretched man.

while wonder they behold with all their eye
the whole confederate and the gallic power
rage and work like divide sea
which adverse storm against each other drive,
while Jove artillery rattle over they fly,
all their admire eye be chief bend
on malborough every motion, every look,
next he Argyle draw all their wonder eye,
Argyle the young, the beautiful, the brave,
fit for deep counsel even in early bloom,
of thought profound, without experience wise,
without the ruinous expense of year;
in counsel all sedateness and all thought
but in the bloody field all rage, all fire;
champion of union in the bloody field,
where still the god-like youth make war for peace.
in cabinet he union too advise,
and in grave senate constant he strive
the jar nation to unite in love.
with dreadful majesty great Malborough march,
and like the fancy god of war he look,
when he fly thunder over the plain of Thrace,
and terror march before his iron Carr,
and sound devastation come behind.
Argyle be like the fancy god of love
when he contract his brow and bend his bow,
and draw his inevitable shaft
wound deep human breast unite their heart.
without their furious briton both appear,
and foreign squadron to the charge they lead.
but german, Dane and dutch turn briton all
when briton genius in its god-like chief
shine out, and fire they to immortal deed,
and lead they to the charge, unknowing to retire.

o will some angel give i force to paint
the dreadful stalk of discord sound march,
between conflict host, before she march
ten thousand terror, native all of hell,
command by their grizzly monarch death.
each stride entrench the earth on which she stride,
the air be tempest, the Aether frown,
mean while the snaky horror of her head
be wrap in pitchy cloud, from which her eye
red lightning dart, and thunder be her voice.
as stern she the field of death survey,
and find that fate in every other part
be doubtful, but where mighty malb'rough shine,
there victory, there destiny declare;
she give a monstrous yell that fright shake
the utmost fortress of belgian land;
the mountain tremble at the horrid din,
the vale re-bellow to the monstrous roar.
when thus the terror and their grizzly king
the fury in a frightful tone accost.

have you then find a overmatch at last?
be you content base to submit
to the effort of yond confederate power?
over which till malb'rough at their head appear
you always have prevail, nay now prevail
over squadron which remote from he engage,
but see he come, this thunderbolt of war!
look how against the storm he headlong drive!
by all that be impious upon we he drive!
nay now, he be in the midst of we! he be here!
he unconcerned and only we amaze!
be it then possible that one frail man
can thus resist the force of all your power,
and drive you fright back upon your friend?
and can you poor bear extreme affront?
you host of terror and thou grizzly death,
if you be terror arm with deadly sting,
if thou be death, my cruel offspring death,
and not a empty bugbear to scare boy;
oh fly, oh seize, dispatch the audacious wretch
oh pierce he, stab he in the vital st part!
ha! how aghast with stupid eye thou stare,
to see this briton amid all thy power
serene, and with a dauntless brow appear!
thou fool! with all this calm and dreadless brow,
this be no god, but a mere mortal man,
as subject to thy arm as the vile slave.
muster thy terror then in dire array!
and scare this hitherto undaunted brave,
then, then be ready with thy fatal dart,
let i alone to give thou certain aim
and so dispatch one we conquer all.

but who, though master of a angel force,
a angel genius, and a angel voice,
of song celestial, eloquence divine,
can worthy describe in dreadful style
the fearful march of the infernal power
who now prepare to attack great malb'rough life!
grim death his meager skeleton expand
into a form immense, then muster all
his terror in astonish array,
and charge they to appear to mortal eye.
his terror put on their most hideous form,
form which with horror nature see and shake,
and from its outwork tremble life retreat,
and to the heart its citadel retire.
in phalanx then the hero they assail,
the god-like hero view they and review,
consider they, disdain they and repel:
but into madness start the generous steed
at the dire sight, he fly, he bound, he foam,
flash of lightning from his eye-ball fly,
and from his nostril curl cloud of smoke;
then shriek on his hindmost foot he spring,
then groan, and flounder with his rider fall.
the Gaul and the bavarian rend the sky,
discord return the roar of vast applause,
and death and all the infernal power rejoice;
but through th'ally a mortal murmur run,
and all their spirit with their hero fall,
and victory have charm for they no more;
the heavenly spirit be themselves concern,
and for a moment wonder what this mean,
and doubt lest they mistake the voice of fate.
the ruffian now who discord have suborn
present a hundred fusee at his life,
at once a hundred fiery globe discharge,
but a strong unseen hand divert they all.
grim death bestride he with a giant stride,
and scowl upon he with a wall-eyed glare;
then lift brandish his fatal dart,
yet want the power to strike but look askew,
and can bear the hero dauntless eye,
when discord cry aloud, o strike my son!
be not our dreadful adversary fall,
yes from the pinnacle of glory fall,
fall in a moment to the abject state?
o foolish sentence! judgement false past!
for hear the angel in aethereal space.
o great thou, he cry, of mortal man,
who be as dauntless in the arm of death
as we who heaven have place above his reach!
serene as when thou o'recam at bleinem field!
then conquest see thou humble and serene,
death find thou firm and undejected now.
o great thou, he cry, of mortal man,
courage surpass human, god-like state,
which nothing can depress and nothing raise!
never be mortal more severe try,
but now it be past, and perfect be thou find,
and worthy find to free the labour world.
for since within the very arm of death
thou have the high security enjoy
of blissful being who can die no more,
thou shall their high felicity enjoy,
for thy unshaken mind can bear it all.

what angel dictate, and what angel do
(who word and act be swift than our thought)
in moment, mortal can speak in hour.
down he come shoot on his golden wing,
and on the spot in all his glory light
where in the arm of death his malb'rough lay.
the hero quicken by the approach of heaven
spring from the embrace of death, and on his foot
as swift as be the wing of lightning bound.
the heavenly spirit in the aetherial space,
and all the empyrean shout for joy,
when he who while he sojourn here on earth
first his command to god-like Malbro' give,
send down from heaven now give it he once more.
the troop be wild with ecstasy of joy
to see their general from the bond of death
to conpu and eternal glory rise;
death from immortal splendour roar fly
and yell discord fly from love divine.
now the brave squadron to his aid arrive,
and now another fiery steed present,
and with their cry the eager hero urge
to lead they on to everlasting fame,
the hero mount, the squadron rend the sky,
mount with he to heaven their spirit soar.
the hero mount, but discord while he mount
and death outrageous to be thus repulse
level a Canon at his sacred head,
but from his sacred head the ponderous ball
divert, bringfield who remount he kill,
and consecrate he to eternal fame
who die for such a chief in such a cause.
through the confederate troop the angel now
the spirit of celestial union spread,
and he who while he sojourn here on earth
first bind the nation in the bond of love
be send from heaven that union to confirm
and to augment in great ramillia field.
malb'rough remount feel the joy of heaven,
the wisdom and the force of god he feel.
and now he lead the shout squadron on
dare as if they be immortal all;
with heart and soul unanimous they advance,
unite as they be one nation all,
one family, relation all, and friend.
one interest have they all, one noble cause,
with fury inexpressible they advance,
and great each resolve to die for all.
the french who brave resistance make till now,
now can their fierce attack no long bear.
they can no long bear their very eye
and fatal meens, but faint all recoil,
and death and discord with their hellborn host
headlong upon their gallic friend be dve,
the rout Gauls divide, disband, disperse,
they fly, the angel wave his flame sword,
at which expect signal on the wing
the amaze terror of the almighty stoop,
and persecute and plague their break rear;
make some precipitate their shameful flight,
while other base beg for wretched life,
and other tremble faint, and sink, and die
thus discord and the Gaul be force to yield
to malb'rough and to union sacred power.
