night.

solemn be night, when silence hold her reign,
 and the hush wind die on the heave main;
 when no short gleam of scatter light appear,
 nor lunar beam make faint the noble star;
 then those who inward care deprive of rest
 pour forth the secret sorrow of the breast. 

such be the night-smooth glide the bark along,
 from whence young HENRY breathe his thoughtful song;
 pace the deck, he throw his eye around
 the thick-starred firmament, and vast profound;
 the patient wind scarce whistle over the waist,
 the burn wave the vessel prow embrace;
 the nitrous air unclouded glow on high,
 with northern meteor tremble through the sky. 

 "eternal power!" he cry, "with justice fraught,
" O! teach a wretch to curb each stubborn thought,
 "who passion reason power no more restrain,
" grow wanton midst intolerable pain. 

 "pierce by ingratitude, i rove forlorn,
" my faithful heart by strong affection tear;
 "a will exile on the dangerous main,
" unshook by storm, while calm breathe peace in vain. 
 "oft with unmanly tenderness i mourn;
" and, torture by imagination, burn;
 "sigh in a natural cadence close each song,
" and tone of anguish vibrate on my tongue. 

 "all be now hush, still as the silent grave,
" the breeze scarce swell the smooth unruffled wave,
 "which glitter with celestial lustre bright,
" reflect the spangle heaven ethereal light:

 "O! how sublime this tract, for man design! 
" vast the perception of his rapid mind! 
 "strong to earth his young affection cling,
" while fancy wave her bright and various wing;
 "but soon each hope of earthly bliss be cross,
" nip in the bud, or in possession lose;
 "blush, our empty wish we survey,
" when we our passion with their motive weigh. 

 "deep i feel this still and solemn hour,
" impress with God immeasurable power;
 "while world unnumbered amid yond ether burn,
" and thought immense pour in wherever i turn. 
 "how much man err, who soul, with thought sublime,
" look on towards endless bliss through boundless time! 
 "when he to earthly passion give dire sway,
" or mourn those joy which of themselves decay! 
