NIGHT.

SOLEMN is night, when Silence holds her reign,
 And the hush'd winds die on the heaving main;
 When no short gleam of scatter'd light appears,
 Nor lunar beams make faint the nobler stars;
 Then those whom inward cares deprive of rest
 Pour forth the secret sorrows of the breast. 

Such was the night-smooth glides the bark along,
 From whence young HENRY breath'd his thoughtful song;
 Pacing the deck, he threw his eyes around
 The thick-starr'd firmament, and vast profound;
 The patient winds scarce whistled o'er the waist,
 The burning waves the vessel's prow embrac'd;
 The nitrous air unclouded glow'd on high,
 With northern meteors trembling through the sky. 

 "Eternal Power!" he cried, "with justice fraught,
" O! teach a wretch to curb each stubborn thought,
 "Whose passions reason's powers no more restrain,
" Grown wanton midst intolerable pain. 

 "Pierc'd by ingratitude, I rove forlorn,
" My faithful heart by strong affection torn;
 "A willing exile on the dangerous main,
" Unshook by storms, while calms breathe peace in vain. 
 "Oft with unmanly tenderness I mourn;
" And, tortur'd by imagination, burn;
 "Sighs in a natural cadence close each song,
" And tones of anguish vibrate on my tongue. 

 "All is now hush'd, still as the silent grave,
" The breeze scarce swells the smooth unruffled wave,
 "Which glittering with celestial lustre bright,
" Reflects the spangled heaven's ethereal light:

 "O! how sublime this tract, for man design'd! 
" Vast the perceptions of his rapid mind! 
 "Strongly to earth his young affections cling,
" While Fancy waves her bright and various wing;
 "But soon each hope of earthly bliss is cross'd,
" Nipt in the bud, or in possession lost;
 "Blushing, our empty wishes we survey,
" When we our passions with their motives weigh. 

 "Deeply I feel this still and solemn hour,
" Impress'd with GOD'S immeasurable power;
 "While worlds unnumber'd 'mid yon ether burn,
" And thoughts immense pour in where'er I turn. 
 "How much man errs, whose soul, with thought sublime,
" Looks on tow'rds endless bliss thro' boundless time! 
 "When he to earthly passions gives dire sway,
" Or mourns those joys which of themselves decay! 
