[nereid:] eclogue i 

Cym.  

think, Glaucus, you be once a fish Swain,
 till urge by potent herb you leave the plain;
 that you be breed on earth, you full prove,
 and thence you know to feign deceitful love. 
but think, ingrate, when first you hither come,
 how strange you look, how awkward you swim. 
when artless first you try the unknown sea,
 i teach you how to blow the liquid way;
 i show you all the secret of the deep,
 and vault rock where weary Triton sleep. 
i show you island yet unknown to man,
 where wanton nereid meet, and sport unseen. 
oft have i wind in plait the yield reed,
 and place the well-wrought garland on your head. 
oft have i choice fish with labour catch,
 and the sweet prey to you a present bring. 
to i in vain lovesick Palæmon cry,
 while i regardless pass with sullen pride;
 oft the kind youth will near Cymothoe swim,
 and fond ask, if i will bath with he. 
yet you, a earth-born wretch, ungrateful prove,
 no more Cymothoe, but cyano love;
 blue-eyed cyano love, that matchless fair,
 though flat her nose, and thin her fall hair;
 the nymph, who most despise, and none admire,
 Glaucus alone pursue with fond desire. 
since then i be (too credulous) betray,
 i will live no more a wretched worthless maid;
 since you be false, i will leave the hate sea,
 and yield my self to fisherman a prey. 
i shall on shore be as a monster show,
 and trumpete for penny through every town,
 while you well-pleased with love cyano toy,
 and in some conscious cliff the beauteous nymph enjoy. 
thus sad plain fond Cymothoe say,
 and Glaucus thus appease the angry maid. 

Glauc. 

Cymothoe wrong she Glaucus, and her self,
 to think i languish for that scaly elf.
 the wanton nymph indeed have often strive
 to bribe my service, and engage my love,
 with gift of shine pearl, and think to please
 with coral twig, and fragrant ambergriese;
 but still i seek the trifle maid to shun;
 (your love preserve what first your beauty win)
 nor shall i ever that happy time forget,
 when first i leave my boat, and fishing-net;
 and how you teach i artful to swim,
 to dive for pearl, and steepy rock to climb;
 you teach to hunt the shark, and bold stride
 the flounce horse, and quell his foamy pride. 
believe not, fair, that i can prove untrue,
 or any water-beauty love, but you. 
no, first the wave shall lose their bite salt,
 the wind shall cease to sound in hollow vault,
 and wanton fish shall leave their native sea,
 and bask on earth, or browze on leavy tree. 

Cymo. 

if Glaucus will be kind, and constant prove,
 let we review those scene of former love,
 and sink embrace to th'abyss below,
 where spiry herb, and lovely coral grow;
 the ocean have its groves, and gloomy shade,
 and crystal spring below, and cool glade. 
fond you once think that nothing here can please,
 but we have fair mead, and tall tree
 than you on sun-burnt, sapless earth can boast,
 who fade beauty be too quick lose. 
the glory of their spring be soon deface
 by miry storm, and toss by every blast. 

but see, the bird in noisy troop be join,
 i hear the distant murmur of the wind. 
the vapour into dark confusion blend,
 and will ever long in sudden spout descend. 
the angry wave begin their uncouth noise,
 and teem cloud bring down the fall sky. 
have then, my Glaucus, to those peaceful mead
 and reedy plain, where hoary Phorcys feed
 his numerous herd; where neither storm nor rain
 molest the tree, nor incommode the Swain;
 where unmixed water be as crystal clear,
 and warm as summer gloom, and fine as air. 
a faintish light shine through the watery green,
 and let we see enough, but — not be see,
 the spangle glory of the plain reveal
 with pebble chequer, and with azure shell. 
dive, Glaucus, swift, and let we sink move
 down to the center of the world, and — love. 
