write in the winter of mdccxci, while on Barnet field.

the northern wind howl over the dreary plain,
 and thick and frequent fall the drift snow:
 please, desolation view her waste domain,
 and torpid vegetation dead repose. 

yet here my pensive muse delight to stray,
 and silent over this barren wild to tread;
 for well the prospect suit my solemn lay,
 which sing of battle and the mighty dead. 

yes, you cold relic of what once be great,
 to you alone my homage shall be pay:
 i scorn to flatter live power or state,
 but bend with reverence to the hero shade. 

soon the gay pageant vulgar mind adore
 shall rest neglect in the lonely grave,
 where adulation sooth their ear no more,
 and vanity no long can enslave. 

the wise and brave attend a different fate;
 their name shall flourish to remote time;
 fame shall for they her golden trump inflate,
 and sound their praise in each distant clime. 

then cease, you bard, to stoop to gild pride;
 on genuine worth alone your praise bestow:
 for wealth, or rank, to merit unallied,
 serve but the owner littleness to show. 

what slaughter once empurple over this field! 
here constant loyalty in vain expire:
 her sanguine votary here ambition steel,
 while frantic hate each hostile bosom fire. 

here princely Warwick, generous, wise, and brave,
 pour from unnumbered wound life crimson flood:
 here die Montague a token give
 of love fraternal ratify in blood. 

hard fate of war! when warwick rebel hand
 against his sovereign grasp the direful sword,
 that victory shall on his banner stand,
 and leave he when to virtue cause restore! 

yet let not man, presumptuous, weak, and vain,
 murmur at God inscrutable decree —
 but own, whatever his wisdom shall ordain
 be right, though man too blind the cause to see. 

by tie of blood here fickle Clarence sway,
 base betray his unsuspecting friend:
 but the transgression soon his life repay,
 by Glo'ster doom to a inglorious end. 

here faint Exeter, by wound oppress,
 mix with the dead, lie senseless on the plain,
 till friendly night outspread her sable vest,
 when his slow step a neighbour cottage gain. 

nor, though his ensign lose the doubtful day,
 shall Oxford lose the well-earned meed of praise;
 for long he fight, nor leave the dire affray
 till even fond hope withdraw its late ray;

then flee with somerset to tewks'bury plain,
 to join, unwearied Margaret hostile band:
 but all thy courage, somerset, be vain,
 who life relentless destiny demand. 

a doom less rigorous be thy, de Vere! 
for, deep though you drink the cup of woe,
 at length you see, relieve from every fear,
 the tyrant Richard blood at Bosworth flow. 

to march victorious over this plain be thy,
 where first severe fortune you have know,
 and to behold the great lancastrian line
 once more secure place on albion throne. 

but in what plaintive accent shall my muse,
 unhappy Henry, weep thy lorn estate! 
what heart to thou compassion can refuse? 
for thy meek virtue ill deserve thy fate. 

when the sad tiding reach thy anxious ear
 of Warwick slay, thy bright hope undo,
 do not thy mind presage new anguish near,
 thy captive princess, and thy murder son? 

do not prophetic fancy paint the steel
 by Glo'ster point to thy harmless breast,
 design by heaven thy sharp woe to heal,
 and grant thou long-lost liberty and rest? 

far different hope deceitful fortune give,
 who bright influence shine upon thy birth,
 when, form each adverse nation to enslave,
 thy warlike sire adorn the wonder earth;

when happy England bless his equal sway,
 and gallia sceptre fill his conquer hand. 
how change thy prospect at life part ray! 
a bleed captive in thy native land. 

thus goodness infinite will wean the mind,
 by strange vicissitude and endless strife,
 from earth dull joy, to happiness refine
 in the pure region of eternal life —

where crown of glory for the good await,
 who dazzle splendour, to our eye unknown,
 shall far surpass the eastern monarch state
 amid all the gaudy glitter of his throne. 

no more then, Henry, i lament thy fall,
 or envy guilty Richard his renown:
 nor pain nor death the virtuous man appall;
 cheere by his god, he scorn their idle frown. 

but though prosperity and vain parade
 through life short path the wicked may sustain;
 yet a few hour, and all their glory fade,
 and nought but grief and bitterness remain. 

farewell, you scene of anarchy and woe! 
from you henceforth be dread rebellion far! 
and never again may thou, Britannia, know
 the dire misfortune of intestine war! 

let fickle France indulge each wild extreme,
 while peace and virtue mourn their injure cause;
 but long may England baffle every scheme
 by faction form against her matchless law! 

for real liberty be they alone
 who bend submissive, justice, at thy shrine;
 where, studious to support thy equal throne,
 the subject and the monarch both combine. 
