Ovid to his wife: imitate from different part of his tristia.

my age head now stoop its honour low,
 bow with the load of fifty winters snow;
 and for the raven glossy black assume
 the downy whiteness of the cygnet plume:
 loose scatter hair around my temple stray,
 and spread the mournful shade of sickly grey:
 i bend beneath the weight of break year,
 averse to change, and chill with causeless fear. 
the season now invite i to retire
 to the dear lares of my household fire;
 to homely scene of calm domestic peace,
 a poet leisure, and a old man ease;
 to wear the remnant of uncertain life
 in the fond bosom of a faithful wife;
 in safe repose my last few hour to spend,
 nor fearful nor impatient of their end. 
thus a safe port the wave-worn vessel gain,
 nor tempt again the danger of the main;
 thus the proud steed, when youthful glory fade,
 and creep age his stiffen limb invade,
 lie stretch at ease on the luxuriant plain,
 and dream his morning triumph over again:
 the hardly veteran from the camp retire,
 his joint unstring, and feed his household fire,
 satiate with fame enjoy well-earned repose,
 and see his stormy day serene close. 

not such my lot: severe fate decree
 my shatter bark must plough a unknown sea. 
force from my native seat and sacred home,
 friendless, alone, through scythian wild to roam;
 with tremble knee over unknown hill i go,
 stiff with blue ice and heap with drift snow:
 pale sun there strike their feeble ray in vain,
 which faint glance against the marble plain;
 red Ister there, which mad lash the shore,
 his idle urn seal up, forget to roar;
 stern winter in eternal triumph reign,
 shut up the bounteous year and starve the plain. 
my fail eye the weary waste explore,
 the savage mountain and the dreary shore,
 and vain look for scene of old delight;
 no love familiar object meet my sight;
 no long remember stream, or conscious bower,
 wake the gay memory of youthful hour. 
i fond hope, content with learned ease,
 to walk amid cotemporary tree;
 in every scene some favourite spot to trace,
 and meet in all some kind domestic face;
 to stretch my limb upon my native soil,
 with long vacation from unquiet toil;
 resign my breath where first that breath i draw,
 and sink into the spot from whence i grow. 
but if my feeble age be doom to try
 unusual season and a foreign sky,
 to some more genial clime let i repair,
 and taste the heal balm of mild air;
 near to the glow sun directer ray,
 and pitch my tent beneath the eye of day. 
can not the winter in my vein suffice,
 without the add rage of scythian sky? 
the snow of time my vital heat exhaust,
 and hoary age, without sarmatian frost? 
you tuneful maid! who once, in happy day,
 beneath the myrtle grove inspire my lay,
 how shall i now your wonted aid implore;
 where seek your footstep on this savage shore,
 who rude echo never be teach to bear
 the poet number or the lover care? 

yet storm and tempest be of ill the least
 which this inhospitable land infest:
 society than solitude be worse,
 and man to man be still the great curse. 
a savage race my fearful step surround,
 practise in blood and discipline to wound;
 unknown alike to pity as to fear,
 hard as their soil, and as their sky severe. 
skilled in each mystery of dire art,
 they arm with double death the poison dart:
 uncombed and horrid grow their spiky hair;
 uncouth their vesture, terrible their air:
 the lurk dagger at their side hang low,
 leap in quick vengeance on the hapless foe:
 no steadfast faith be here, no sure repose;
 a arm truce be all this nation know:
 the rage of battle work, when battle cease;
 and war be brood in the lap of peace. 
since Caesar will, and i a wretch must be,
 let i be safe at least in misery! 
to my sad grave in calm oblivion steal,
 nor add the woe i fear to all i feel! 

yet here, forever here, your bard must dwell,
 who sing of sport and tender love so well. 
here must he live: but when he yield his breath
 o let he not be exile even in death! 
lest mix with scythian shade, a roman ghost
 wander on this inhospitable coast. 
Caesar no more shall urge a wretch doom;
 the bolt of Jove pursue not in the tomb. 
to thou, dear wife, some friend with pious care
 all that of Ovid then remain shall bear;
 then will thou weep to see i so return,
 and with fond passion clasp my silent urn. 
o check thy grief, that tender bosom spare,
 hurt not thy cheek, nor soil thy flow hair. 
press the pale marble with thy lip, and give
 one precious tear, and bid my memory live:
 the silent dust shall glow at thy command,
 and the warm ash feel thy pious hand. 
