the triumph of superstition.

Raphael and Ianthe.

in gothic time, when feudal law obtain,
 and tyranny with superstition reign,
 mysterious rite with dazzle show confine
 to narrow bound the darken human mind;
 enslave form exclude truth be pure light,
 and wrap the world in shade of mental night;
 where genius dawn it shoot forth sanguine gleam,
 its fire infuse ambition frantic dream;
 scar by the sword, fair freedom distant fly,
 and man machine to guilty conqueror grow;
 while gloomy ignorance the earth pervade,
 and science fly to deep romantic shade:
 yet still the active mind retain some power,
 the fruit be lose, but strong bloom the flower;
 poetic thought and deed the brave combine,
 and strong imagination seize the blind. 

but when amid those superstitious day
 some potent mind shed truth obtrusive ray,
 suspicious priestcraft tremble at the sight,
 and strive by horid crime to eclipse the light. 

the fair Ianthe, bright as rise day,
 or the wild blossom which unfold in may,
 a victim fall to those tyrannic time,
 accuse by priest of supernatural crime,
 because some ray, with native genius fire,
 shoot through her graceful eye, and love inspire;
 while still she dare be innocent and free,
 with wisdom arm, and saint-like chastity. 

by virtuous precept form, this lovely maid
 be on the cold helvetian mountain breed;
 but thither chase, flee with her age sire
 from civil feud, and persecution dire. 
they seek some spot where they may free live,
 and undisturbed fair nature gift receive. 
o, wanderer vain! to seek for certain good,
 though king and priest have stain the earth with blood;
 who pride-swoln heart, of tinseled virtue vain,
 no feeling for man misery retain;
 hunt for fame, they idle sport with life,
 while clash interest urge perpetual strife. 

ianthe mind, pure, subtle, and profound,
 with genuine force through light on all around;
 through her clear eye the fire of fancy glow,
 while wisdom flourish beauteous on her brow:
 her nerve, with force and quick sensation string,
 deepen her rosy lip, and fire her tremble tongue. 
a glimpse of truth her native genius catch,
 for all around wake analyse thought;
 she see, abhorrent, persecution rod,
 and in her heart she seek the unknown god;
 the god who light the heaven, and rule the storm,
 mix the pure element, and give they form! 

Europe be in destructive war engage,
 the imperial eagle and the pontiff rage;
 the sword vast desolation spread around,
 and swain unheeded feel the fatal wound:
 SELMO (such be ianthe father name)
 feel his blood freeze through his enfeeble frame;
 prone to repine, with age fastidious grow,
 he make the sorrow of mankind his own. 
seek for peace, through various realm they speed,
 still hope of bliss like airy vision flee;
 Ianthe see with grief her father mind,
 while shun ill, to nature blessing blind:
 her youthful sense oft with pleasure glow,
 she feel some good still mix with human woe. 

on spring sweet close, when foster nature strow
 the earth with flower, and all creation glow,
 they rest in italia pleasant vale,
 till vernal shower be chase by warm gale;
 then SELMO seek to rove, who nought can charm,
 though placid peace here breathe a transient calm;
 for still he see, with acrimonious eye,
 the power of priestcraft and of tyranny,
 with indignation hear the uplift rod
 of vile oppressor term the hand of god. 

his fix design when fair Ianthe find,
 invountary sigh her bosom wind;
 suffuse with tear, her eye the field survey,
 she press his hand, and warm urge his stay. 

 "look round," she cry; "here smile plenty bloom,
" the ambient air breathe nature rich perfume. 
 "stay, o my father! at my urgent prayer,
" these vale obscure our maker bounty share;
 "the bliss we seek the world may not contain,
" we rove romantic, and our toil be vain;
 "in every spot we have various misery find,
" though transient joy be scatter all around. " 

ardent she speak, while hope a ray diffuse,
 but, still resolve, the restless sire refuse;
 long on life trouble ocean he have toss,
 and now his relish of the calm be lose:
 ianthe eye stream over the love retreat,
 of all the world this spot alone seem sweet;
 her heave breast unusual anguish wring,
 and never so persuasive be her tongue. 

whence in her bosom do those care arise? 
say, be her genius fire by raphael eye? 
or do the heavenly music of his song
 infuse its warmth to urge her glow tongue? 
frequent their bland society he seek,
 his genuine converse wake expand thought;
 oft mingle lay with such transcendent art
 as fire her fancy while they reach her heart. 
tear he see glisten in ianthe eye,
 her bosom heave with the part sigh;
 with quick sympathy he catch her smart,
 while mix emotion vibrate in his heart:
 ianthe fire, her form replete with grace,
 the rosy blush which crimson over her face,
 pervade his soul; her graceful hand he press,
 and, with consent, the feeble sire address,
 urge their stay: with fear he rapid speak,
 while anxious feeling tinge his ardent cheek;
 though fretful anger from old SELMO break,
 with ardour irresistible he speak. 
both plead at once, strong argument they pour,
 with anxious tear, and each persuasive power;
 his first resolve before their wish melt,
 for latent motive in their force he feel:
 he yield; — young Raphael point his pierce eye,
 quick warm suffusion over Ianthe rise;
 a sudden shower fall over her blush cheek,
 and her delight too eloquent speak. 

then SELMO choose a more obscure retreat,
 to build a humble mansion, plain neat,
 distant from where the feudal lord reside,
 amid a wood, and on a hill warm side;
 her wild profusion nature strow around,
 and friendly rill refresh the shaggy ground;
 Raphael assistance yield; his skilful hand
 hew the rough tree, and plough the unfurrowed land;
 to nature true, by pure thought refine,
 no idle scorn of toil debase his mind. 
Ianthe with fine taste the flower combine,
 and round their mansion spread the swell vine. 

oft Raphael work beside the inspire maid,
 and tender passion all his power invade;
 celestial be the music of her tongue,
 he add force, and write the ecstatic song;
 his tuneful lay fair nature work disclose,
 and latent truth draw forth reflect glow;
 mute on his burn lip love tremble hang,
 while strong expression mark each feeling song;
 her kindle cheek with deep blushess glow,
 and tremulous her warble measure flow. 

the jealous SELMO view, with watchful eye,
 their mutual passion as they strengthen rise;
 a parent care hang heavy at his breast,
 till free they their artless love confess;
 then late he feel fresh happiness to dawn,
 and amid life winter view one glow morn. 
the eye of Raphael, pierce as the light,
 speak his whole soul, and sparkle with delight. 
Ianthe strive her transport to conceal,
 and amid her ringlet her deep blush veil. 
old SELMO bless they, while a grateful tear
 flow from his eye, and mingle with the prayer. 

one eve the kindle heaven resplendent shine,
 while sink Phoebus gird his crimson zone,
 who glorious beam through tract immense be shed,
 and not one cloud over heaven vast arch be spread:
 among the wood Ianthe stray afar,
 mark the lustre of the evening star;
 on her fair face the set sunbeam glow,
 to nature god her song enrapture flow:
 as on she wander, fearless of alarm,
 Arno from far behold her graceless charm:

Arno, the child of fortune and of fame,
 who nervous manhood early deed proclaim;
 a noble strength of thought his soul inspire,
 but foster passion feed vindictive fire;
 in his large eye strong sense and feeling glow,
 but anger rise like thunder on his brow:
 vast his design, with rise pride he stride,
 and wild ambition taint his youthful blood;
 lawless he trample over the peasant corn,
 overleap the fence, and tread their flowery lawn. 
at night he walk the wood, steal hour from sleep,
 to give his thought a large unbounded sweep;
 muse on the bard * who godlike hero sing,
 and catch their fire from his inspire tongue;
 strong to endure, he nurse a ardent flame,
 mistake virtue, call it thirst of fame;
 each generous thought his ample heart can move,
 though violent in hate, yet boundless in his love. 

while over the field his roll eye he throw,
 Ianthe like a seraph meet his view;
 almost a vision of his brain she seem
 (who warmth indulge with thousand phantom teem);
 uncertain what she be, her path he cross,
 he stop, he gaze, in admiration lose. 
the fire of love seem glance from her eye,
 her glow cheek be tinge with heavenly die;
 over her light frame bewitch grace stray,
 and amid her smile a thousand charm portray. 
entranced he gaze — at once her power confess,
 and youthful transport fire his manly breast. 
the blind restore scarce feel more strong delight,
 when heaven vast orb first strike the astonish sight. 
he catch her hand, and breathe impassion sigh,
 while fear and anger flush her cheek and eye;
 quick from his grasp her hand she tremble draw,
 and, winge with terror, swift as light she fly. 

I will by the virtue sacred on her brow,
 unusual feeling through his bosom glow;
 he see she shoot before he as a star
 which, meteor-like, dart through the hemisphere;
 her magic limb he view, while on the wind
 her long luxuriant tress stream behind:
 ardent he gaze, lose in romantic bliss,
 and doom with strong resolve Ianthe he. 

to boundless passion all his heart resign,
 he shake each shackle from his haughty mind,
 and follow quick, sting at his own delay,
 bound over each barrier which obstruct his way:
 the wood awhile conceal the fly fair,
 torture he fly, more rapid from despair;
 one glance he catch — to sight her mansion rise;
 he see she enter, and the portal close. 
rash in resolve, and conscious of his power,
 with mad tyrannic force he wrench the door;
 in fierce rush; — but start as he view
 Raphael, who by his love Ianthe stand. 
spend with her flight, she on his arm recline,
 smile in his eye, and calm her flutter mind. 
the tyrant see, but scarce stop to look,
 his inmost soul with grief and anger shake:
 Raphael he love, have patronise his lay,
 raise he from want, and crown with live bay;
 dare he, the admit partner of his board,
 triumphant thwart the affection of his lord? 
his horror-shedding brow in curl arise,
 a threaten vengeance in his eye-ball glow;
 flash with its ungovernable sway,
 he like a angry tempest burst away. 

SELMO his eye towards Ianthe raise —
 Ianthe, conscious, tremble as he gaze;
 whatever have pass with faulter lip declare,
 spend with fatigue, and shake with rise fear. 
as Raphael hear, a secret pang possess
 his anxious mind, and agitate his breast;
 but this repress, her love hand he take,
 and from the ardour of his passion speak;
 their nuptial day he urge, while inward smart
 tone each persuasive word, and fire her heart. 
while yet he speak loud tumult burst the door,
 and soldier enter, round young Raphael pour;
 from Arno send, his stern command they bring,
 quick to convey he where his army fight —
 to distant region, scene to he unknown,
 where arno's power uphold a tyrant throne:
 thus force along, resistance be as vain
 as if a pebble strive to stem the main. 

raphael pure breast, where virtue make abode,
 by early thought with fortitude endow,
 too deep pierce, no long can control
 the desperate sorrow which overwhelm his soul;
 those love-attractive orb, his vivid eye,
 convulsive roll, each thought confuse fly;
 scarce the drown word a passage break,
 while rave, thus with agony he speak:

 "alas! each promise blessing tear away,
" Ianthe fall the mighty victor prey! 
 "O! dire effect of arbitrary power! 
" in vain their bitter tear the wretched pour! 
 "vain thou beat thy breast, in vain thy cry,
" thy Raphael only guess at thy sigh! " 

her quick-presaging mind foresee the stroke,
 and all her frame with inward tremble shake;
 yet, struggle with her pang, she powerful strive
 to calm his fear, and prove her steadfast love;
 infuse fair hope, to snatch he from despair,
 and claim protection of their maker care;
 vow of eternal constancy she pay,
 and firmness amid her tender tear display. 

he see her virtue with such strength combine,
 that, trust in the god who arm her mind,
 he strive sublime to meet his fate resign. 

SELMO, by arno's lawless power dismay,
 far from his reach have bear the unhappy maid;
 but ruin threat he if he fly the abode
 where all his little wealth be now bestow. 
ianthe mind, with conscious worth elate,
 fearless decide her father waver state:
 secure within, though sting with deep smart,
 she feel resentment fire her dare heart;
 she long the tyrant spirit to control,
 to probe his vice, and humble his high soul;
 and SELMO, proud of virtue he have rear,
 secure in they, no more the despot fear. 

impassion Arno, anxious to remove,
 unrivalled now, each barrier to his love,
 skill in the world, and each seduce art,
 study to wind around her widow heart;
 all mean he try — too well his ardent mind,
 fertile in thought, can vary pleasure find:
 he force a charm through every sense to steal,
 and strive each base motive to conceal;
 yet vain his power, no passion they impart,
 her mind despise and pervade his art. 
till now his spirit never have bear controul,
 she curb his fire, but captivate his soul;
 still from her rosy lip sweet music fly,
 and radiant glance still escape her eye. 
seek revenge, she triumph in her power,
 and teach the haughty tyrant to adore:
 wild satire vibrate from her scornful tongue,
 and point truth each conscious passion sting;
 the flash of wit, inspire and severe,
 display her hate, and fill he with despair. 
baffle and anger now, he sue no more,
 but ask advice of saint Theodore. 

 "alas!" reply the priest, "why shall my son
" consult with i, since power be all his own? 
 "nature to adorn thy name with fortune vie,
" at thy command the unyielding rebel die;
 "if such thy wish, say what power restrain? 
" O! force the bliss which ignorance disdain;
 "for must thy youth be blast amid its bloom,
" and all thy glory wither in the tomb? —
 thus speak the priest; impetuous he comply,
 and rush joy burst from his large black eye. 

vile Theodore be early train in sin,
 but outward meekness hide the fiend within;
 religion cloak close veil a atheist breast,
 which lust and gross appetite possess. 
soon a dire scheme his brain inventive lay,
 and prompt to execute, he seek the maid;
 but soon as he behold her glow charm,
 his own frail breast a guilty passion warm;
 her graceful eye, which glow with innate fire,
 her mental power his wonder soul inspire. 
to Arno soon he show a alter mind,
 and, plead conscience, the base act resign. 
the impassion baron see the vile intent,
 quick to perceive, and ardent to resent. 

 "and whence," with burn rage, aloud he cry,
 "this new-born conscience? whence so late wise? 
" o, fool! to trust my secret to a breast
 "by falsehood, craft, and selfishness possess. 
" yet guard thy action, lest my wrath be hurl,
 "and all thy crime blaze forth before the world." 

he speak abrupt, and from his presence break,
 but sting with deep remorse in secret shake;
 he feel the other baseness, while deep shame
 paint his own crime, and glow throughout his frame. 

with pure thought again he seek the maid,
 passion and grief his noble breast pervade,
 not more by beauty than her virtue fire,
 and by her force and harmony inspire. 
sincerity and ardour fire his eye,
 his manly bosom heave with potent sigh;
 spite of herself, such force his flame impart,
 that all her constancy scarce save her heart. 

unknown of Arno, Theodore meanwhile
 oft visit SELMO, and with subtle guile
 in vile colour paint the baron mind,
 and charge he with crime himself design. 
Ianthe catch the alarm, with deep smart
 tremble perceive his power pervade her heart;
 sting to the quick, repentance wring her breast,
 humble, her mind its impotence confess;
 blush within, each though inflict a wound,
 and refuge oft near Theodore she find;
 to he she fly, as a instructive friend,
 in who sage converse all her power extend. 

Arno repulse, with wound pride retire,
 and seek with noble thought to quench his fire;
 too long to idle grief a will prey,
 with strength of soul he curb its powerful sway. 

to theodore intent Ianthe blind,
 seek for instruction from his well store mind:
 her heart, for pure affection fine frame,
 seem torpid when its tribute be unclaimed;
 unconscious of the flame which burn his heart,
 with he she stray, her open thought to impart:
 and as he hear, beneath his shadowy brow
 his eye drink love, and swell feature glow. 

once, in the bosom of a silent grove,
 the unhallowed priest profane urge his love. —
 shock and astonish, while she call for aid,
 with lawless force he seize the struggle maid;
 but her loud shriek transpierce the air around:
 in vain he strive to suffocate the sound;
 advance foot of man and horse he hear —
 he start confuse, and fly, overwhelm with fear:
 scarce she breathe, her cheek with anger flush,
 over her whole frame deep spread the crimson blush;
 from those who proffer aid, with flash eye,
 confuse, enrage, the tremble virgin fly. 

her succourer advance, a noble train
 of royal hunter, bound over the plain. 
the prince command to stop she as she fly,
 and ask from whence arise those pierce cry? 
pant and spend, the wretched nymph they catch,
 and faint to the prince and noble bring:
 by man surround, pierce by curious eye,
 her heart within her flutter bosom die;
 the wretch she name, his vile intention speak,
 her quicken pulse throb, shame die her burn cheek. 

each youthful bosom, by her beauty fire,
 touch by her wrong, be with revenge inspire;
 but most the prince, enrage, and threaten loud,
 destruction to the wretched miscreant vow;
 charm with her youth, he bid she not to fear;
 himself conduct she to her father care:
 her eye beam thanks, her cheek speak modesty;
 he gaze, and leave she with a ardent sigh. 

by fair Ianthe into fury wrought,
 the prince with eager haste the culprit seek;
 the soldier seize he, at their lord command;
 humble before the assemble court he stand. 
the priest surround cast a lower eye,
 aloud the youthful lord for justice cry;
 the prince, inflame, a faithful witness bear,
 and menac, the vile attempt declare;
 dauntless he stand, as if to vice unknown,
 (for well he know the weakness of the throne.) 

 "thy will, o god! be do," he cry aloud,
 then to the court with low submission bow;
 "but hear, just power, a guiltless wretch resign,
" and guard from witchcraft the king sacred mind;
 "before her spell young arno bloom decay,
" and fierce on i the infernal poison prey. " 
he say no more, but firm raise his eye,
 and with mock prayer insult the the awful sky. 

then amid the priest rise up a reverend sire,
 who roll eye-ball flash romantic fire,
 the visionary ROBERT, friend of song,
 rapt in wild dream, fanatic, rash, and strong;
 those power which may have form he wise and good,
 lose in the bigot, make he thirst for blood;
 his brother he command to speak more plain,
 and full his mysterious word explain. 

then Theodore his crafty bosom bare: —
 "this heart," he cry, "by innocence prepare,
" can firm stand the test, or brave bleed,
 "shall the base art of hell over truth succeed;
" yet here i vow, by all my hope in heaven,
 "that by her spell to desperation drive,
" i flee before she, scorch by mad desire,
 "burn by the flame of a internal fire;
" writhe to the soul, i smart with secret pain,
 "for still her magic art infest my vein." 

with tremble heart the bigot monarch hear,
 who govern mind teem with religious fear;
 in he the slave and tyrant be combine,
 impotent, cruel, and with priestcraft blind;
 through his own vein he feel unusual heat,
 and, as possess, his nerve and pulse beat;
 fearful he sit, and dare not give command. 
when ROBERT rise, to stretch a save hand
 over the vile priest, and bid he not to fear,
 "truth be sacred ray," he cry, "shall falsehood clear;"
 then urge with zeal the sorceress shall be try,
 and the just ordeal on her crime decide. 

the prince assent; the ill-fated maid they seek,
 and quick, with her age father, bring;
 his wrinkle visage, wash in briny tear,
 dawn not a ray to chase his daughter fear;
 over her fair breast, by many sorrow wring,
 her long light hair in wave tress hang;
 the pure innocence illume her face,
 and every action speak superior grace. 
a universal horror fill each breast,
 all sue for she and criminate the priest;
 who claim the sacred ordeal to decide,
 and chide their zeal with priestly art and pride:
 "that pity which you feel her spell inspire,
" her eye will pierce you with their magic fire. " 

her voice be silence when she strive to speak;
 the guiltless blood run warm through her cheek;
 devout, on high she raise her lucid eye,
 resign, on conscious innocence rely,
 for well she know the author of her breath
 with lengthen life may curse, or bless with death. 

vile Theodore each crafty engine ply,
 to prove her guilty false expedient try. 
virtue no justice on this earth command;
 convict by each trial now she stand,
 past all dispute — though grief assail each eye,
 the prince condemn she as a witch to die. 

SELMO, who restless mind and waver breast
 no strength from calm philosophy possess,
 nor from religion resignation draw,
 despond, wild, with fierce distraction fly:
 the hoary sire behold she drag along,
 while direful horror freeze his speechless tongue;
 with tremble hand he smite his hopeless breast;
 his roll eye depart sense express;
 aghast he stand, his feeble brain turn round,
 high swell his heart, his thought no utterance find; —
 then sudden fly, like one possess and blind,
 or wither leaf of aspen drive by wind;
 feel not his age, with transient fury strong;
 loud cry break forth, with which the mountain ring:
 he climb a clift, on his Ianthe call,
 and, start backward, from its summit fall. 

confine, to solitude a lonely prey,
 in dreary cell the saint-like sufferer lie,
 by ardent prayer and deep reflection strive
 from her warm heart to shake the tie of love,
 (which to the earth her sweet affection bind,)
 and raise in hope towards heaven her pious mind
 yet her young breast oft pant with inward fear,
 while love and nature force impassion tear. 

involve in science, arno's injure mind
 all pleasure and the pomp of court resign;
 strong disappointment noble lesson teach,
 his heart he learn, and purify each thought:
 to he when rumour those dire tiding bear,
 his rage relapse while aghast he hear;
 with passion fire, and wild resentment wrought,
 his arm force with eager haste he seek;
 through his swell vein the blood in torrent fly,
 while fury blaze from his threaten eye;
 convulsive passion half suppress his breath,
 burn he rush on to snatch the maid from death. 

summon, his vassal all unite around,
 and the earth tremble with the warlike sound;
 his limb he arm, and shake his well-tried spear,
 then fly impetuous, menac from far. 

Raphael, compel, in arno's army fight,
 and among his troop promiscuous be bring;
 ianthe fate be still to he unknown,
 deep-stung, the past absorb his thought alone;
 such strong dejection long have bind his mind,
 he seem strike off the chain of human kind;
 lose in a dreary retrospect of woe,
 of all unconscious, to the field he go. 
Arno impatient rush over the plain,
 and fire with fierce revenge the hostile train. 

this day be fair Ianthe doom to bleed;
 the long procession to the pile proceed;
 already on the baneful faggot rear,
 with elevate soul the maid appear;
 amid her fear one beam of ecstasy
 shoot over her face, and lighten in her eye;
 fire by immortal hope, each ardent thought
 aspire to heaven, and her redeemer seek;
 her soul resign, trust that each earthly tie
 will there unite in bless eternity. 

the prince with terror hear loud shout from far,
 and the dire sound of unexpected war;
 soon selfish fear his coward heart dismay,
 with voice confuse, unknowing what he say,
 he bid the kindle flame to be allay. 

Arno rush on to snatch she from her fate,
 and whelm in ruin the tyrannic state;
 when Theodore, with quickness all his own,
 apart to ROBERT cry, "to thou alone
" the prince can safety owe; — say, can thou stand
 "and see a sacrilegious foe command?" 

 "short be his date," austere the priest reply;
 "soon shall the haughty rebel rue his pride." 

a ponderous crucifix his right hand hold,
 the left a sacred pompous relic fill;
 reverend his form, mysterious his attire,
 his haggard eye teem with religious fire;
 as one inspire he rush on the plain,
 and spread his robe before the royal train;
 then rear high the cross and holy band,
 he hurl defiance with a fierce command. 

 "foe to your mother church, ah! whither drive,
" like fall angel will you be with heaven? 
 "it be Satan lead you on, thus proud great;
" death be your portion, hell your last fate,
 "unless you timely bow to heaven command,
" and seize yond ruffian with your hostile hand,
 "which impious against your god you have rear,
" nor his high law, nor burn vengeance fear. 
 "heaven! while i speak convulsive pant my breath,
" lest god in wrath denounce some awful death! 
 "remember korah fate! and tremble know
" judgment await each sacrilegious foe. " 

he speak; — amaze, they fling their arm away,
 some cross their breast, while ardent they pray;
 some seize their chief, but, brook no controul,
 he feel despair sharp sting inflict his soul. 

 "before unconquered, now shall priest subdue? 
" and shall Ianthe fall in arno view? 
 "can he amid flame behold the maid expire,
" and want the power to quench the hellish fire? " 
wild he rave; the priestly train advance
 to lead he captive, and to seize his lance;
 sullen he turn, while rage and deadly smart
 swell his proud breast, and almost burst his heart;
 his power, his spirit, can no aid afford,
 sudden he rush on his desperate sword. 
" hold his rash hand! "command ROBERT cry,
 but vain, for as he speak the hero die. 

a mingle murmur run, some shout aloud,
 the distant troop around their leader crowd;
 Raphael indignant, among the rest draw nigh,
 and over the field throw a inquire eye;
 far in the rear, unconscious he have be,
 till now too distant to survey the scene;
 but as he look around with dumb surprise,
 confuse, a distant spectre seem to rise,
 ianthe form, in direful garb array,
 appear on pile of kindle faggot lay —
 wild he fly towards the horrid shade. —

by priest withhold, he rage like the wind
 within the hollow of a rock confine;
 but strong as wind, with unremitting force
 he break their hold, and wing his active course;
 he run, disarm and wound in the fray,
 and to the pile force his intrepid way; —
 no spectre mock, no empty shade descend,
 in horrid certainty the vision end. 

bleed and pale he gaze, with horror fill,
 his soul be shake, and every nerve be thril;
 ere he can speak they tear he from the maid,
 while round the pile the crackle flame invade. 
she catch his eye; — her resignation shake: —
 she strike her breast, but the voluminous smoke
 wild rise to the wind obscure her view,
 and kindle flame to vivid fierceness blow;
 bloodthirsty bigotry exult glow,
 and ROBERT shout as the flame arise. 
wild rage the fire, the crackle pile give way,
 the involve smoke obscure the face of day,
 and flame upon the crumble ruin prey. 
the priest triumphant hail the heavenly king,
 and even amid murder, song of worship sing. 

Raphael, who virtue snatch from rash despair,
 now seem the test of what the heart can bear:
 as he behold the barbarous flame ascend,
 and over the pile the circle smoke extend,
 awhile, by each sublime thought forsake,
 all that be human in his bosom shake;
 a frantic wish of death alone inspire
 to mingle soul, and rush amid the fire;
 desperate he fly towards where the faggot blaze,
 but, ere he plunge, from pious habit raise
 his heart to god; that sacred name impress
 the sense of duty on his rebel breast;
 he feel a power divine his rage controul,
 a inward voice restrain his dare soul;
 awful against self-murder conscience rise;
 tremble he stop; his heart with horror freeze:
 "can the rash suicide ever hope to join
" ianthe spirit in the realm divine? " 

his heart he prostrate, though convulse with woe,
 and as a christian bear the deadly blow,
 mingle amid a dreary world again,
 suffer a life of labour and of pain;
 from sorrow more sublime, more firm from thought,
 those truth he study which the saviour teach;
 and from reflection and the gospel draw
 strength, which on faith and hope firm basis grow,
 and virtue pure, unmixed with bigotry,
 which breathe forbearance, justice, charity! 
illume within, even in that bloody hour
 when priestcraft reign with arbitrary power,
 he see their sway dissolve all human tie,
 and darkness veil the law, and truth be fair eye,
 yet can impart no ray of sacred light:
 so thick the mist which cloud human sight. 

thus dark, in error wrap, long groan mankind,
 please with vain show, and to oppression blind;
 till freedom, dawn over the injure earth,
 clear some rank weed, and give true knowledge birth. 
O! may we ever sanctify her fane! 
and never her hallow path with slaughter stain;
 love of mankind, not novelty, be we;
 for general good may man exert his power! 
