to Alexander pope, ESQ; entreat he to write verse to the memory of Thomas, late earl of thanet.

shall for the man of Ross thy lyre be string,
 and sleep illustrious thanet yet unsung? 
since to distinguish merit be thy care,
 let thanet in thy deathless praise share:
 let i, unequal to the task, excite
 thy matchless muse, to do his merit right. 
number, like thy, shall call his virtue forth;
 poetic mirror shall be true to worth;
 disdain to reflect those glitter ray,
 which flow from pomp, or from ambition blaze. 

from scene of woe, unmoved, while other fly,
 and turn from anguish the unmelt eye;
 thanet pursue the footstep of the poor,
 and silent enter through the lonely door;
 fair plenty in his train, and joy, and health,
 seek distress, as other seek for wealth;
 with god like pity every prayer receive,
 each wish fulfil, and every want relieve:
 where sickness reign, he, to his utmost power,
 soften the anguish of each dismal hour:
 he smooth the rugged brow of anxious care,
 and gild the gloomy prospect of despair:
 while libertine on vice their wealth employ,
 he make the widow heart to sing for joy:
 orphan not more their parent lose complain;
 in thanet bounty they revive again. 
nor for this life alone will he provide;
 to life eternal thanet be their guide:
 nor on morality alone depend;
 but to the noble height of faith ascend:
 devotion heavenly flame inspire his breast;
 still in the temple be his vow address:
 though he in virtue path, delight, tread,
 studious to please, and imitate his god;
 the hallow altar, grateful, he survey,
 and there his lowly adoration pay. 

see the pale, childless miser hoard up wealth,
 and, tremble, snatch a anxious view by stealth;
 amass the shine over with guilty care,
 to aggrandise some distant, worthless heir;
 who long, impatient, for the solemn toll,
 which, slow, proclaim the sad-departed soul;
 then eye with joy the care-collected hoard,
 and spend, profuse, what avarice have store;
 by Fortune sudden smile to madness fire,
 he waste on every vice, what guilt acquire. 

so dwell on mountain-top the northern snow,
 congeal by frost, for year untaught to flow;
 till hot sun more vigorous beam display;
 the mass relent, the glitter pile decay;
 sudden, from high, resound torrent flow,
 impetuous rush on the vale below;
 overwhelm the harvest of the pine Swain,
 and curse with flood, which shall have bless the plain. 

on thanet heaven its happy influence shed;
 a numerous offspring grace his nuptial bed:
 and yet those motive to paternal care
 steel not his breast against the suppliant prayer. 
studious to draw down blessing on his race,
 his bountic with his progeny increase. 
like egypt flood, beneficent he rise;
 silent, though vast, his well-judged bounty flow;
 over the parch earth it spread its ample course,
 profuse of good, but, modest, hide its source. 
ask not, to what his charity amount;
 so many myriad swell the vast account. 

you vain pretender to superior sense,
 you empty boaster of beneficence,
 who in the scorner seat, exult, sit,
 and vaunt your impious raillery for wit,
 the gospel-rule defective you pretend,
 when you the social duty recommend;
 in thanet see they heighten and refine;
 in thanet see the friend of human kind;
 heighten by faith, see every virtue force;
 by faith, their sure sanction, noble source. 
loud you boast a more than christian zeal,
 for virtue interest, and the public weal;
 best by effect be boast understand;
 come, prove your ardor for the public good! 
the mighty hero of your tribe survey,
 their every hide excellence display;
 or dead, or live, set their virtue forth;
 let all, unite, vie with thanet worth;
 freethinker, moralist, on you i call,
 can thanet worth be equal by you all? 

accept, illustrious shade! these artless lay;
 my soul this homage, to thy virtue pay:
 lead by that sacred light, a Stranger-Muse
 attempt those path, which able foot refuse;
 in distant clime thy virtue she admire,
 in distant clime thy worth her strain inspire. 

long to thy tomb the wretched shall repair,
 and to thy ash pay a silent tear;
 shall to the traveller thy worth relate,
 and emulation through the world create:
 age to come shall celebrate thy fame,
 and orphan, yet unborn, shall bless thy name. 

when the firm basis of the earth give way,
 and nature self shall feel her last decay;
 when those, who from the wretched turn their eye. 
too late relent, shall for mercy cry;
 the thousand thou have feed, shall, in thy praise,
 their loud hosanna to Jehovah raise;
 thy modest worth shall veil itself not more;
 angel shall tell what thanet hide before. 
