night.

when foe insult, and prudent friend dispense,
 in pity strain, the worst of insolence,
 oft with thou, Lloyd, i steal a hour from grief,
 and in thy social converse find relief. 
the mind, of solitude, impatient grow,
 love any sorrow rather than her own. 

let slave to business, body without soul,
 important blank in nature mighty roll,
 solemnise nonsense in the day broad glare,
 we night prefer, which heal or hide our care. 

rogue justify and by success make bold,
 dull fool and coxcomb sanctify by gold,
 free may bask in fortune partial ray,
 and spread their feather open to the day;
 but threadbare merit dare not show the head
 until vain prosperity retire to bed. 
misfortune, like the owl, avoid the light;
 the son of care be always son of night. 

the wretch breed up in method drowsy school,
 who only merit be to err by rule,
 who never through heat of blood be trip catch,
 nor guilty deem of one eccentric thought,
 who soul direct to no use be see
 unless to move the body dull machine;
 which, clock-work like, with the same equal pace,
 still travel on through life insipid space,
 turn up his eye to think that there shall be
 among God creature too such thing as we. 
then for his nightcap call, and thank the power
 which kind give he grace to keep good hour. 

good hour — fine word — but be it ever see
 that all man can agree in what they mean? 
florio, who many year a course have run
 in downright opposition to the sun,
 expatiate on good hour, their cause defend
 with as much vigour as our prudent friend. 
the uncertain term no settle notion bring,
 but still in different mouth mean different thing. 
each take the phrase in his own private view,
 with prudence it be ten, with florio two. 

go on, you fool, who talk for talk sake,
 without distinguish distinction make;
 shine forth in native folly, native pride,
 make yourself rule to all the world beside;
 reason, collect in herself disdain
 the slavish yoke of arbitrary chain,
 steady and true each circumstance she weigh,
 nor to bare word inglorious tribute pay. 
man of sense live exempt from vulgar awe,
 and reason to herself alone be law. 
that freedom she enjoy with liberal mind
 which she as free grant to all mankind. 
no idol title name her reverence stir,
 no hour she blind to the rest prefer,
 all be alike, if they be alike employ,
 and all be good if virtuous enjoy. 

let the sage doctor (think he one we know)
 with scrap of ancient learning overflow,
 in all the dignity of wig declare
 the fatal consequence of midnight air,
 how damp and vapour as it be by stealth,
 undermine life, and sap the wall of health. 
for i let Galen moulder on the shelf,
 i will live, and be physician to myself. 
while soul be join to body, whether fate
 allot a long or a short date;
 i will make they live, as brother shall with brother,
 and keep they in good humour with each other. 

the sure road to health, say what they will,
 be never to suppose we shall be ill. 
most of those evil we poor mortal know
 from doctor and imagination flow. 
hence to old woman with your boast rule,
 stale trap, and only sacred now to fool;
 as well may son of physic hope to find
 one medicine, as one hour, for all mankind. 

if Rupert after ten be out of bed
 the fool next morning can hold up his head,
 what reason this which i to bed must call
 who head (thank heaven) never ache at all? 
in different course different temper run,
 he hate the moon, i sicken at the sun. 
wound up at twelve, at noon his clock go right,
 my better go, wound up at twelve at night. 

then in oblivion grateful cup i drown
 the gall sneer, the supercilious frown,
 the strange reserve, the proud affect state
 of upstart knave grow rich and fool grow great. 
no more that abject wretch disturb my rest
 who mean overlook a friend distress. 
purblind to poverty the worldling go,
 and scarce see rag a inch beyond his nose. 
but from a crowd can single out his grace
 and cringe and creep to fool who strut in lace. 

whether those classic region be survey
 where we in early youth together stray,
 where hand in hand we tread the flowery shore,
 though now thy happy genius run before,
 when we conspire a thankless wretch to raise,
 and teach a stump to shoot with pilser praise,
 who once for reverend merit famous grow
 grateful strive to kick his maker down,
 or if more general argument engage,
 the court or camp, the pulpit, bar, or stage,
 if half-bred surgeon, who man doctor call,
 and lawyer, who be never breed at all,
 those mighty-lettered monster of the earth,
 our pity move, or exercise our mirth,
 or if in tittle-tattle tooth-pick way
 our ramble thought with easy freedom stray,
 a gainer still thy friend himself must find,
 his grief suspend, and improve his mind. 

while peaceful slumber bless the homely bed,
 where virtue, self-approved, recline her head;
 while vice beneath imagine horror mourn,
 and conscience plant the villain couch with thorn,
 impatient of restraint, the active mind,
 no more by servile prejudice confine,
 leap from her seat, as waken from a trance,
 and dart through nature at a single glance. 
then we our friend, our foe, ourselves, survey,
 and see by night what fool we be by day. 

strip of her gaudy plume and vain disguise
 see where ambition mean and loathsome lie! 
reflection with relentless hand pull down
 the tyrant bloody wreath and ravish crown. 
in vain he tell of battle brave win,
 of nation conquer, and of world undo;
 triumph like these but ill with manhood suit,
 and sink the conqueror beneath the brute. 
but if in search round the world we find
 some generous youth, the friend of all mankind,
 who anger, like the bolt of Jove, be speed
 in terror only at the guilty head,
 who mercy, like heaven dew, refresh fall
 in general love and charity to all,
 please we behold such worth on any throne,
 and double please we find it on our own. 

through a false medium thing be show by day,
 pomp, wealth, and title judgement lead astray. 
how many from appearance borrow state
 who night disdain to number with the great! 
must not we laugh to see you lordling proud
 snuff up vile incense from a fawn crowd? 
while in his beam surround client play,
 like insect in the sun enliven ray,
 while, Jehu like, he drive at furious rate,
 and seem the only charioteer of state,
 talk himself into a little god,
 and rule empire with a single nod,
 who will not think, to hear he law dispense,
 that he have interest, and that they have sense? 
injurious thought! beneath night honest shade
 when pomp be bury and false colour fade,
 plain we see at that impartial hour
 they dupe to pride, and he the tool of power. 

god help the man, condemn by cruel fate
 to court the seem, or the real great. 
much sorrow shall he feel, and suffer more
 than any slave who labour at the oar. 
by slavish method must he learn to please,
 by smooth-tongued flattery, that curse court-disease,
 supple to every wayward mood strike sail,
 and shift with shift humour peevish gale. 
to nature dead he must adopt vile art,
 and wear a smile, with anguish in his heart. 
a sense of honour will destroy his scheme,
 and conscience never must speak unless in dream. 
when he have tame bear for many year
 cold look, forbid frown, contemptuous sneer,
 when he at last expect, good easy man,
 to reap the profit of his labour plan,
 some cringe lackey, or rapacious whore,
 to favour of the great the sure door,
 some catamite, or pimp, in credit grow,
 who tempt another wife, or sell his own,
 step cross his hope, the promise boon deny,
 and for some minion Minion claim the prize. 

foe to restraint, unpractised in deceir,
 too resolute, from nature active heat,
 to brook affront, and tame pass they by;
 too proud to flatter, too sincere to lie,
 too plain to please, too honest to be great;
 give i, kind heaven, a humble, happy state:
 far from the place where man with pride deceive,
 where rascal promise, and where fool believe;
 far from the walk of folly, vice and strife,
 calm, independent, let i steal through life,
 nor one vain wish my steady thought beguile
 to fear his lordship frown, or court his smile. 
unfit for greatness, i her snare defy,
 and look on riches with untainted eye. 
to other let the glitter bawble fall,
 content shall place we far above they all. 

spectator only on this bustle stage. 
we see what vain design mankind engage. 
vice after vice with ardour they pursue,
 and one old folly bring forth twenty new. 
perplex with trifle through the vale of life,
 man strive against man, without a cause for strife;
 army embattle meet, and thousand bleed,
 for some vile spot which can fifty feed. 
squirrel for nut contend, and, wrong or right,
 for the world empire king ambitious fight,
 what odds? — to we it be all the self-same thing,
 a nut, a world, a squirrel, and a king. 

briton, like roman spirit fame of old,
 be cast by nature in a patriot mould;
 no private joy, no private grief they know,
 their soul engross by public weal or woe. 
inglorious ease like we, they great scorn:
 let care with noble wreath their brow adorn. 
glad they toil beneath the statesman pain,
 give they but credit for a statesman brain. 
all will be deem even from the cradle fit
 to rule in politics as well as wit. 
the grave, the gay, the fopling, and the dunce,
 start up (god bless we!) statesman all at once. 

his mighty charge of soul the priest forget,
 the court-bred lord his promise and debt,
 soldier their same, miser forget their pelf,
 the rake his mistress, and the fop himself,
 while thought of high moment claim their care,
 and their wife head the weight of kingdom bear. 

female themselves the glorious ardour feel,
 and boast a equal, or a great zeal. 
from nymph to nymph the state infection fly,
 swell in her breast, and sparkle in her eye. 
over whelm by politics lie malice, pride,
 envy and twenty other fault beside. 
no more their little flutter heart confess
 a passion for applause, or rage for dress;
 no more they pant for public raree-show,
 or lose one thought on monkey or on beaux. 
coquette no more pursue the jilt plan,
 and lustful prude forget to rail at man. 
the darling theme caecilia's self will choose,
 nor think of scandal while she talk of news. 

the cit, a common-council-man by place,
 ten thousand mighty nothing in his face,
 by situation as by nature great,
 with nice precision parcel out the state,
 prove and disprove, affirm and then deny,
 object himself, and to himself reply,
 wield aloft the politician rod,
 make P— by turn a devil and a god,
 maintain even to the very tooth of power
 the same thing right and wrong in half a hour,
 now all be well, now he suspect a plot,
 and plain prove, whatever be, be not. 
fearful wise, he shake his empty head,
 and deal out empire as he deal out thread. 
his useless scale be in a corner fling,
 and europe balance hang upon his tongue. 

peace to such trifler, be our happy plan
 to pass through life as easy as we can. 
who be in or out, who move this grand machine,
 nor stir my curiosity nor spleen. 
secret of state no more i wish to know
 than secret movement of a puppet-show;
 let but the puppet move, i have my desire,
 unseen the hand which guide the master-wire. 

what be it to we, if tax rise or fall,
 thanks to our fortune we pay none at all. 
let muckworm, who in dirty acre deal,
 lament those hardship which we can feel. 
his grace, who smart, may bellow if he please,
 but must i bellow too, who sit at ease? 
by custom safe the poet number flow,
 free as the light and air some year ago. 
no statesman ever will find it worth his pain
 to tax our labour, and excise our brain. 
burden like these vile earthly building bear,
 no tribute lay on castle in the air. 

let then the flame of war destructive reign,
 and england terror awe imperious Spain;
 let every venal clan and neutral tribe
 learn to receive condition, not prescribe;
 let each new-year call loud for new supply,
 and tax on tax with double burden rise;
 exempt we sit, by no rude care oppress,
 and, have little, be with little bless. 
all real ill in dark oblivion lie,
 and joy, by fancy form, their place supply. 
night laugh hour unheeded slip away,
 nor one dull thought foretell approach of day. 

thus have we live, and while the fate afford
 plain plenty to supply the frugal board,
 while mirth, with decency his lovely bride,
 and wine gay god, with temperance by his side,
 their welcome visit pay; while health attend
 the narrow circle of our choose friend,
 while frank good-humour consecrate the treat,
 and — make society complete,
 thus will we live, though in our tooth be hurl
 those hackney strumpet, prudence and the world. 

prudence, of old a sacred term, imply
 virtue with godlike wisdom for her guide,
 but now in general use be know to mean
 the stalking-horse of vice, and folly screen. 
the sense pervert we retain the name,
 hypocrisy and prudence be the same. 

a tutor once, more read in man than book,
 a kind of crafty knowledge in his look,
 demure sly, with high preferment bless,
 his favourite pupil in these word address:

will thou, my son, be wise and virtuous deem,
 by all mankind a prodigy esteem? 
be this thy rule; be what man prudent call;
 prudence, almighty prudence give thou all. 
keep up appearance; there lie the test,
 the world will give thou credit for the rest. 
outward be fair, however foul within;
 sin if thou will, but then in secret sin. 
this maxim into common favour grow,
 vice be no long vice unless it be know. 
virtue indeed may barefaced take the field,
 but vice be virtue, when it be well conceal. 
shall rage passion drive thou to a whore,
 let prudence lead thou to a postern door;
 stay out all night, but take especial care
 that prudence bring thou back to early prayer. 
as one with watch and with study faint,
 reel in a drunkard, and reel out a saint. 

with joy the youth this useful lesson hear,
 and in his memory store each precious word,
 successful pursue the plan, and now,
 "room for my lord — virtue, stand by and bow."

and be this all — be this the worldling art,
 to mask, but not amend a vicious heart? 
shall lukewarm caution and demeanour grave,
 for wise and good stamp every supple knave? 
shall wretch who no real virtue warm,
 gild fair their name and state with empty form,
 while virtue seek in vain the wished-for prize,
 because, disdain ill, she hate disguise;
 because she frank pour forth all her store,
 seem what she be, and scorn to pass for more? 
well — be it so — let vile dissembler hold
 unenvied power, and boast their dear-bought gold,
 i neither power shall tempt, nor thirst of pelf,
 to flatter other, or deny myself,
 may the whole world be place within my span,
 i will not be that thing, that prudent man. 

what, cry sir pliant, will you then oppose
 yourself, alone, against a host of foe? 
let not conceit, and peevish lust to rail,
 above all sense of interest prevail. 
throw off for shame this petulance of wit,
 be wise, be modest, and for once submit:
 too hard the task against multitude to fight,
 you must be wrong, the world be in the right. 

what be this world? a term which man have get
 to signify, not one in ten know what;
 a term, which with no more precision pass
 to point out herd of man than herd of ass;
 in common use no more it mean we find,
 than many fool in same opinion join. 

can number then change nature state law? 
can number make the worse the better cause? 
vice must be vice, virtue be virtue still,
 though thousand rail at good and practise ill. 
will thou defend the gaul destructive rage
 because vast nation on his part engage? 
though to support the rebel caesar cause
 tumultuous legion arm against the law,
 though scandal will our patriot name impeach,
 and rail at virtue which she can reach,
 what honest man but will with joy submit
 to bleed with Cato, and retire with PITT? 

steadfast and true to virtue sacred law,
 unmoved by vulgar censure or applause,
 let the world talk, my friend; that world we know
 which call we guilty, can make we so. 
unawed by number, follow nature plan,
 assert the right, or quit the name of man. 
consider well, weigh strict right and wrong;
 resolve not quick, but once resolve be strong. 
in spite of dullness, and in spite of wit,
 if to thyself thou can thyself acquit,
 rather stand up assure with conscious pride
 alone, than err with million on thy side. 
