the picture of human life.

translate from the greek of Cebes the theban.

by mr. T. SCOTT.

while Saturn fane with solemn step we tread,
and view the votive honour of the god,
a picture tablet, over the portal raise,
attach our eye: in wonder lose, we gaze.
the pencil there some strange device have wrought,
and fable, all its own, disguise the thought.
nor camp it seem, nor city: the design,
who moral mock our labour to divine,
be a wall court, where rose another bind,
and, high still, a third still lessen ground. 
the nether area open, at a gate
where a vast crowd impatient seem to wait.
within, a group of female figure stand,
in motley dress, a sparkle multitude.
without, in station at the porch, be see
a venerable form, in act and mien
like some great teacher who with urgent tongue,
authoritative, warn the rush throng.
from doubt to doubt we wander; when appear
a sire, who thus the hard solution clear. 

stranger, that allegoric scene, i guess,
conquer your skill, our homeborn wit no less.
a foreigner, long since, who noble mind
learning best culture to strong genius join,
here live, converse, and show the admire age
another samian or elean sage.
he rear this dome to Saturn awful name,
and give that portrait to eternal same.
he reason much, high argument he choose,
high as his theme his great conception rise. 
such wisdom flow from a mouth but young
i hear astonish, and enjoy it long:
he oft i hear this moral piece expound,
with nervous eloquence and sense profound.
father, if leisure with thy will conspire,
yield, yield that comment to our warm desire. 
free to bestow, i warn you first, beware:
danger impend, which summons all your care.
wise, virtuous, bless, who heart our precept gain,
 abandon, blind, and wretched, who disdain. 
for know, our purpose theme resemble best
the fame enigma of the theban pest:
the interpreter a plight crown enjoy,
the stupid perish, by the Sphinx destroy.
count folly as a Sphinx to all mankind,
her problem, how be good and ill define?
misjudge here, by folly law we die,
not instant victim of her cruelty;
from day to day our reason part she wound,
devour its strength, its noble power confound:
awake the lash of punishment, and tear
the mind with pang which guilty life prepare,
with opposite effect, where thoughtful skill
discern the boundary of good and ill,
folly must perish; and the illumine breast
to virtue save, be like the immortal bless.
give audience, then, with no unheeding ear.
o haste, no heedless auditor stand here,
with strong desire, in dread suspense we wait,
so great the blessing, and the bane so great. 
instant, he raise his oratorial hand,
and say (our eye he guide with a wand)
behold life pencil scene, the natal gate,
the number throng into mortal state.
which danger path, and which to safety bear,
that ancient, genius of mankind, declare.
see he aloft, benevolent he bend,
one hand be point, one a roll extend
reason imperial code; by heaven impress
in live letter on the human breast. 
oppose to he, delusion ply her part,
with skin of borrow snow, and blush of art,
with hypocritic fawn, and eye askance
whence soft infection steal in every glance,
her faithless hand present a crystal bowl,
who poisonous draught intoxicate the soul.
error and ignorance infuse, compose
the fatal beverage which her fraud bestow.
be that the hard condition of our birth? 
must all drink error who appear on earth? 
all; yet in some their measure drown the mind,
other but taste, less err and less blind.

the opinion, and desire, and pleasure rise
behind the gate, thick-glittering on our eye;
thick as bright atom in the solar ray,
diverse their drapery and profuse gay.
these tempt form, each like a mistress dress,
our early step with powerful charm arrest:
soon as we enter life, with various art
of dalliance they assail the unguarded heart. 
all promise joy, we rush to their embrace;
to bliss or ruin here begin our race.
happy, thrice happy, who intrust their youth
to right opinion, and ascend to truth:
who wisdom tutor, who the virtue hail,
and with their own substantial feast regale.
the rest be harlot: by their flattery win,
in chase of empty science we run:
or Fortune vanity pursue, and stray
with sensual pleasure in more dangerous way. 
see the mad round their giddy follower tread,
delusion cup strong-working in their head.
fast as one shoal of fool have deluge through,
succeed shoal the busy farce renew.
who on that globe stand stretch to her flight? 
wild seem her aspect, and bereave of sight. 
fortune, blind, frantic, deaf. with restless wing
the world she range, and her favour fling:
fling and resume, and plunder and bestow,
caprice divide the blessing and the woe. 
her grace unstable as her totter ball,
whenever she smile she meditate our fall.
when most we trust she, we be cheat most,
in desolate loss we mourn our boast:
her cruel blast invade our hasty fruit,
and withereth all our glory at the root.
what mean those multitude around she? why
such motley attitude perplex our eye? 
some, in the act of wild rapture, leap,
in agony some wring their hand, and weep. 
the unreason crowd; to passion sequel blind,
by passion fire and impotent of mind:
competitor in clamorous, suit to share
the toy she toss with regardless air;
trifle, for solid worth by most pursue,
bright-coloured vapour and fantastic good:
the pageantry of wealth, the blaze of fame,
title, a offspring to extend the name,
huge strength, or beauty which the strong obey,
the victor laurel, and despotic sway. 
these, humour in their vow, with lavish praise
the glory of the gracious goddess raise:
those other, loser in her chance full game,
shear of their all, or frustrate in their aim,
in murmur of their hard mishap complain,
and curse her partial and malignant reign.

now, further still in this low sensual ground,
traverse yond flowery mount sequester bound.
in the green centre of those citron shade,
among garden, fountain, bowery walk, and glade,
voluptuous sin her powerful spell employ,
soul to seduce, seduce she destroy.
see! lewdness, loose zon, her bosom bare,
see! riot her luxurious bowl prepare:
there stand avidity, with ardent eye,
there dimple adulation smooth she lie.
there station to what end? 
in watch for prey,
Fortune infatuate favourite of a day.
these they caress, they flatter, they entreat
to try the pleasure of their soft retreat,
life disencumber, frolicsome, and free,
all ease, all mirth, and high felicity.
whomever by their inveigle art they win
to tread that magic paradise of sin,
in airy dance his jocund hour skim round,
sparkle the bowl, the festal song resound:
he blood ferment, fire by the wanton glance,
and his loose soul dissolve in amorous trance.
while circulate joy to joy succeed,
while new delight the sweet delirium feed;
the prodigal, in rapture fancy, rove
over fairy field and through elysian grove:
see glitter vision in succession rise,
and laugh at Socrates the chaste and wise.
till, sober by distress, awake, confuse,
amaze, he know himself a wretch abuse;
a short illusion his imagine feast,
himself the game, himself the slaughter beast.
now, rave for his squander wealth in vain,
slave to those tyrant jilt he drag their chain:
compel to suffer hard and hungry need,
compel to dare each foul and desperate deed.
villain, or knave, he join the sharp tribe,
rob altar, or be perjure for a bribe:
stab for a purse, his country pawn for gold,
to every crime of black horror sell.
shiftless at length, of all resource bereave,
in the dire gripe of punishment he be leave.

observe this strait-mouthed cave: the unwilling light
just show the dismal deep descent to night. 
in centry see these haggard crone, who brow
rude lock overhang, a frown their forehead plough:
swarthy and foul their shrivel skin behold,
and flutter shred their vile defence from cold.
high-brandishing her lash, with stern regard,
stand punishment, a ever-waking ward;
while sullen melancholy mope behind,
fix, with her head upon her knee recline:
and, frantic with remorseful fury, there
fierce anguish stamp, and rend her shaggy hair. 
who that ill-featured spectre of a man,
shiver in nakedness, so spare and wan? 
and she, who eye aghast with horror stare,
who meager form a sister likeness bear? 
loud lamentation, wild despair. all these,
fall praetor, the devote caitiff seize.
ah dreadful durance! with these fiend to dwell!
what tongue the terror of his soul can tell?
worry by these foul fiend, the wretch begin
sharp penance, wage of remember sin:
then deep sink, plunge in the pit of woe,
worse suffering in worse hell to undergo:
unless, rare guest, repentance over the gloom
diffuse her radiance, and repeal his doom.
she come! meek-eyed, array in grave attire,
see right opinion, join with good desire,
handmaid of truth: with those, a adverse pair
(false wisdom minion, that deceive fair)
attend her solemn step: the fury flee.
come forth, she call, come forth to liberty,
guilt-harrassed thrall: thy future lot decide,
and, ponder well, elect thy future guide.
momentous option! choose right he will find
a sovereign medicine for his ulcer mind;
lead to true wisdom, who cathartic bowl
recover and beatify the soul.
misguided else, a counterfeit he will gain,
who art be only to amuse the brain:
from vice to studious folly now he fly,
from bliss still err, still betray by lie. 
o heaven! where end the risk we mortal run? 
how dreadful this, and yet how hard to shun! 
say, father, what distinctive mark declare
that counterfeit of wisdom? 
view she there.
at yonder gate, with decent port, she stand,
her spotless form that second court command:
style wisdom by the crowd, the think few
know she disguise, the phantom of the true:
skill in all learning, skill in every art
to grace the head, not meliorate the heart. 
the save, who meditate their noble flight
from a bad world, to wisdom lofty height,
just touch at this inn, for short repast,
then speed their journey forward to its last.
this the sole path? 
another path there lie,
the plain man path, without proud science wise.
who they, which traverse this deluder bound? 
a busy scene, all thought or action round. 
her lover, who her specious beauty warm,
who grasp, in vision, truth be immortal charm,
vain of the glory of a false embrace:
fierce syllogistic tribe, a wrangle race,
bard rapt beyond the moon on fancy wing,
and mighty master of the vocal string:
those who on labour speech waste their oil,
those who in crabbed calculation toil,
who measure earth, who climb the starry road,
and human fate by heavenly sign forebode,
pleasure philosopher, lyceum pride,
disdainful soar up to height untried. 
all who in learned trifle spin their wit,
or comment on the work by trifler write.
who be yond active female, like in face
to the lewd harlot, in the nether space,
vile agent of voluptuous sin? 
the same. 
admit here? 
even here, eternal shame!
they boast some rare less ignoble spoil,
art, wit, and reason, tangle in their toil.
and fancy, with the opinion in her rear,
enjoy these studious walk, no stranger here:
where wild hypothesis, and learn romance
too oft lead up the philosophic dance.
still these ingenious head alas! retain
delusion dose, still the vile dregs remain
of ignorance with mad folly join,
and a foul heart pollute the embellish mind.
nor will presumption from their soul recede,
nor will they from one vicious plague be free,
until, weary of these vanity, they have find
the exalt way to truth be enlighten ground,
quaff her cathartic, and all cleanse within,
by that strong energy, from pride and sin,
be heal and save. but loiter here they spend
life precious hour in think to no end:
from science up to science let they rise,
and arrogate the swell style of wise,
their wisdom folly, impotent and blind,
which cure not one distemper of the mind.
enough. discover now the faithful road,
which mount we to the joy of truth be abode. 
survey this solitary waste, which rear
nor bush nor herb, nor cottage there appear.
at distance see yond strait and lonely gate
(no crowd at the forbid entrance wait)
its avenue a rugged rocky soil,
travel with painful step and tedious toil.
beyond the wicket, tower in the sky
see difficulty cragged mountain rise,
narrow and sharp the ascent; each edge a brink,
whence to vast depth dire precipice sink. 
be that the way to wisdom? dreadful way! 
the landskip frown with danger and dismay. 
yet high still, around the mountain brow
wind yond huge rock, who steep smooth side allow
no track. its top two sister figure grace,
health rosy habit glow in their face.
with arm portend over the verge they lean,
the promptitude of friendship in their mien.
the power of continence and patience, there
station by wisdom, her commission bear
to rouse the spirit of her faint son
thus far advance, and urge and urge he on.
courage! they call, the coward sloth disdain,
yet, yet awhile, the noble toil sustain:
a lovely path soon open to your sight. 
but ah! how climb that rock bare slippery height? 
these generous guide, who virtue course befriend,
in succour of her pilgrim, swift descend,
draw up their tremble charge; then, smile, greet
with kind command to rest his weary foot,
with their own force his pant breast they arm,
and with their own intrepid spirit warm:
next, plight their guidance in his future way
to wisdom, and in rapturous view display
the blissful road (there it invite your eye)
how smooth and easy to the foot it lie,
through beauteous land, from all annoyance clear,
of thorny evil and perplex fear.

yond lofty grove delicious bower to gain,
you cross the expanse of this enamel plain;
a meadow with eternal beauty bright,
beneath a pure heaven, overflow with light.
full in the centre of the plain, behold
a court far-flaming with its wall of gold
and gate of diamond, where the righteous rest;
this clime their home, the country of the bless:
here all the virtue dwell, communion sweet!
with happiness, who rule the peaceful seat.
in station at the effulgent portal, see
a beauteous form of mild majesty. 
her eye how pierce! how sedate her mien!
mature in life, her countenance serene:
spirit and solid thought each feature show,
and her plain robe with state unstudied flow.
she stand upon a cube of marble, fix
as the firm rock, two lovely nymph betwixt,
her daughter, copy of her look and air,
here candid truth, and sweet persuasion there:
she, she be wisdom. in her steadfast eye
behold the oppressive type of certainty:
certain her way, and permanent the deed
of gift substantial to her friend decree.
she give the confidence erect and clear,
she give magnanimous contempt of fear,
and bid the invulnerable mind to know
her safety from the future shaft of woe.
o treasure, rich than the sea or land! 
but why without the wall her destine stand? 
there stand, she present her potent bowl,
divine cathartic, which restore the soul. 
this ask a comment. 
in some dire disease,
machaon skill first purge off the lees:
then clear and strong the purple current flow,
and life renew in every member glow:
but if the patient all controul despise,
just victim of his stubborn will he die.
so wisdom, by her rule, with heal art
expel delusion mischief from the heart;
blindness, and error, and high-boasting pride,
intemperance, lust, fierce wrath impetuous tide,
hydropic avarice, all the plague behind
which in the first mad court oppress the mind.
thus purge, her pupil through the gate she bring,
the virtue hail their guest, the guest enrapture sing.
behold the spotless band, celestial charm! 
scene that with awe chastise who it warm:
no harlotry, no paint, no gay excess,
but beauty unaffected as their dress.
see knowledge grasp a refulgent star,
see fortitude in panoply of war:
justice her equal scale aloft display,
and right both human and divine she weigh.
there moderation, all the pleasure bind
in brazen chain her dread foot surround.
there bounteous liberality expand
to want, to worth, her ever-loaded hand.
the florid hue of temperance, her side
adorn by health, a nymph in bloom pride.
lo, soft-eyed meekness hold a curb rein,
anger high-mettled spirit to restrain:
while moral order tune her golden lyre,
and white-robed probity complete the choir.
o fair of all fair! o blissful state! 
what hope sublime our ravish soul dilate! 
substantial hope, if by the doctrine teach,
the fashion manner be to habit wrought.
yes, it be resolve. we will every nerve employ. 
live, then, restore; and reap the promise joy.
but whither do the virtue lead their trust? 
to happiness, rewarder of the just. 

look upward to the hill beyond the grove,
a sovereign pile extend its front above:
stately and strong, the lofty castle stand,
its boundless prospect all the court command.
within the porch, high on a jasper throne,
the imperial mother by her form be know;
bright as the morn, when smile on the hill
earth, air, and sea with vernal joy she fill.
rich without lavish cost her vest behold
in colour of the sky, and fringe with gold:
a tiar, wreathe with every flower that blow
of lively tint, around her temple glow:
eternal bloom her snowy temple bind,
fearless of burn sun and blast wind.
now, with a crown of wondrous power, her hand
(assistant, round she, all the virtue stand)
adorn her hero, honourable meed
of conquest win by many a valiant deed.
what conquest? 
formidable beast subdue:
labour he fight, he rout, he pursue. 
once, a weak prey, beneath their force he cower,
overthrow, and worry, and well-nigh devour:
till rouse from his inglorious sloth, possess
with generous ardour kindle in his breast,
lord of himself, the victor now constrain
those hostile monster in his powerful chain.
explain those savage beast at war with man. 
error and ignorance, which head the van,
heart-gnawing grief, and loud-lamenting woe,
incontinence, a wild-destroying foe,
rapacious avarice; cruel number more:
over all he triumph now, their slave before.
o great achievement! more illustrious far
these triumph, than the bloody wreath of war. 
but, say; what salutary power be shed
by the fair crown, which deck the hero head? 
most beatific. for possess this
he live, rich owner of man proper bliss:
bliss independent or on wealth or power,
fame, birth, or beauty, or voluptuous hour. 
his hope be divorce from all exterior thing,
within himself the fount of pleasure spring;
spring ever in the self-approving breast,
and his own honest heart be a constant feast.
where, next, his step? 
he measure back his way,
conduct by the virtue, to survey
his first abode. the giddy crowd, below,
waste their wretched span in crime, they show;
how in the whirl of passion they be toss,
and, shipwreck on the lurk shelf, be lose:
here fierce ambition hale in her chain
the mighty, there a despicable train
impure in lust inglorious setter bind,
and slave of avarice root up the ground:
thrall of vain-glory, thrall of swell pride,
unnumbered fool, unnumbered plague beside.
all-pow'rless they to burst the gall band,
to spring aloft, and reach yond happy land,
entangle, impotent the way to find,
the clear instruction blot from their mind
which the good genius give; guilt gloomy fear
becloud their sun and sadden all their year.
i stand convince, but yet perplex in thought
why to review a wellknown scene he be bring. 
scene rude knowh. uncertain and confuse,
his judgement by illusion be abuse.
his evil be not evil, nor his good
aught else but vanity misundestood.
confound good and evil, like the throng,
his life, like they, be action always wrong. 
enlighten now in the true bliss of man,
he shape his alter course by wisdom plan:
and, bless himself, behold with weep eye
the mad world a hospital of sigh.
this retrospection end, where succeed
his course? 
wherever his wise volition lead.
wherever it lead, safety attend he still:
not safe, shall he on apollo hill,
among the nymph, among the vocal power,
dwell in the sanctum of corycian bower:
honour by all, the friend of human kind,
belove physician of the sin-sick mind;
not Esculapius more, who power to save
redeem his patient from the yawn grave.
but never more shall his old restless foe
awake his fear, nor trouble his repose? 
never. in righteous habitude inure,
from passion baneful anarchy secure,
in each entice scene, each instant hard,
that sovereign antidote his mind will guard:
like he, who, of some virtuous drug possess,
grasp the fell viper coil within her nest,
hear her dire hiss, see her terror rise,
and, unappalled, destruction tooth defy.
yond troop in motion from the mount explain,
various to view; for there a goodly train,
with garland crown, advance with comely pace,
noble their port, and in each tranquil face
joy sparkle: other, a bareheaded throng,
batter and gash, drag their slow step along,
captive of some strange female crew. 
the crown,
long seek, safe arrive at wisdom bound,
exult in her impart grace. the rest,
those on who wisdom, unprevailing, press
her heal aid; reject from her care,
in evil plight their wicked day they wear:
those too, who difficulty hill have gain,
there base stop, by dastard sloth detain:
apostate now, in thorny wild they rove,
pursue fury scourge the caitiff drive;
sorrow which gnaw, remorseful thought which tear,
blindness of mind, and heart-oppressing fear,
with all the contumelious rout of shame,
and every ill, and every hateful name.
relapse to lewdness, and her sensual queen,
unblushing at themselves, but drink with spleen,
wisdom high worth their canker tongue dispraise,
revile her child, and blaspheme her way.
delude wretch, (thus their madness cry)
dull mope, weak dupe of philosophic lie,
uncomforted, unjoyous, and unblest,
lose from the pleasure here at large possess.
what pleasure boast they? 
pleasure of the stew,
pleasure which riot frantic bowl infuse.
these high fruition their gross soul repute,
and man chief good to sink into a brute.
but who that lovely bevy, blithe and gay,
so smooth glide down the hilly way? 
those be the opinion, who have guide right
the unexperienced to the plain of light:
return, new adventurer to bring,
the blessing of the last-arrived they sing.
why ingress yield to their favour ward
among the virtue, to themselves debar? 
opinion foot be never never find
where knowledge dwell, it be interdict ground,
at wisdom gate the opinion must resign
their charge, those limit their employ confine.
thus trade bark, skill in the watery road,
to distant clime convey their precious load,
then turn their prow, light bound over the main,
and with new traffic store their keel again.
thus far be clear. but yet untold remains
what the good genius to the crowd ordain,
just on the verge of life. 
he bid they hold
a spirit with erect courage bold.
never (he call) on Fortune faith rely,
nor grasp her dubious gift as property.
let not her smile transport, her frown dismay,
nor praise, nor blame, nor wonder at her sway
which reason never guide: it be fortune still,
capricious chance and arbitrary will,
bad banker, vain of treasure not their own,
with foolish rapture hug the trust loan:
impatient, when the powerful bond demand
its unremembered covenant from their hand.
unlike to such, without a sigh restore
what fortune lend: anon she will lavish more:
repent of her bounty snatch away,
yea seize your patrimonial fund for prey. 
embrace her proffer boon, but instant rise,
spring upward, and secure a last prize,
the gift which wisdom to her son divide;
knowledge, who beam the doubt judgement guide,
scatter the sensual fog, and clear to view
distinguish false interest from the true.
flee, flee to this, with unabate pace,
nor parley for a moment at the place
where pleasure and her harlot tempt, nor rest
but at false wisdom inn, a transient guest:
for short refection, at her table sit,
and taste what science may your palate hit:
then wing your journey forward, till you reach
true wisdom, ae imbibe the truth she will teach.

such be the advice the friendly genius give,
he perish who scorn, who follow life.
and thus this moral piece instruct; if aught
be mystic still, reveal your doubt thought.
thanks, generous sire; tell, then, the transient bait,
the genius grant we at false wisdom gate. 
whatever in art or science be find
of solid use, in their capacious round,
these, Plato reason, like a curb rein,
unruly youth from devious start restrain.
must we, solicitous our soul to save,
assistance from these previous study crave? 
necessity there be none. we will not deny
their merit in some less utility;
but they contribute, we aver, no part
to heal the manner and amend the heart. 
a author meaning, in a tongue unknown,
may glimmer through translation in our own:
yet master of his language, we may gain
some trivial purpose by tedious pain.
so in the science, though, rude teach,
we may attain the little that we ought;
yet, accurate know they may convey
more light not whole useless in its way.
but virtue may be reach, through all her rule,
without the curious subtlety of school. 
how! not the learn excel the common shoal,
in powerful aid to meliorate the soul? 
blind as the crowd alas! to good and ill,
entangle by the like corrupt will,
what boast the man of letter over the rest? 
skilled in all tongue, of all the art possess,
what hinder but he sink into a sot,
a libertine, or villain in a plot,
miser, or knave, or whatsoever you will name
of moral lunacy and reason shame? 
scandal too rife! 
how, then, for live right
avail those study, and their vaunt light
beyond the vulgar? 
nothing. but disclose
the cause from whence this strange appearance grow. 
Held by a potent charm in this retreat
they dwell, content with nearness to the seat
of virtuous wisdom. 
near, methinks, in vain:
since number, oft, from out the nether plain,
'scape from the snare of lewdness and excess,
undevious to her lofty station press,
yet pass these letter clan. 
what, then, be these
in moral thing, advantage over the lees
of human race? in moral thing, we find
these dull or less tractable of mind.
decypher that. 
pride, pride avert their eye
from offer light: in self-sufficience wise,
although unknowing, they presume to know:
clog with that vain conceit they creep below,
nor can mount up to yond exalt bound,
true wisdom mansion, by the humble find. 
not find by these, till the vain vision spread,
by false opinion, in the learned head,
repentance scatter; and deceive no more,
they own the illusion which deceive before,
that for true wisdom they embrace her shade,
and hence the heal of their soul delay.

stranger, these lesson, oft revolve, hold
fast to your heart, and into habit mould:
to this high scope life whole attention bend,
despise aught else as err from your end. 
do thus, or unavailing be my care,
and all the instruction die away in air.
