a prospect of death.

a pindaric essay.

i 

since we can die but once, and after death
 our state no alteration know;
 but, when we have resign our breath,
 the immortal spirit go
 to endless joy, or everlasting woe. 
wise be the man who labour to secure
 that mighty and important stake;
 and, by all method, strive to make
 his passage safe, and his reception sure. 
mere to die no man of reason fear,
 for certain we must,
 as we be bear, return to dust:
 it be the last point of many linger year. 
but whither then we go,
 whither, we fain will know;
 but human understanding can show,
 this make we tremble, and create
 strange apprehension in the mind;
 fill it with restless doubt, and wild debate
 concern what, we live, can find. 
none know what death be, but the dead,
 therefore we all by nature, die dread,
 as a strange, doubtful way, we know not how to tread. 

ii.

when to the margin of the grave we come,
 and scarce have one black painful hour to live. 
no hope, no prospect of a kind reprieve,
 to stop our speedy passage to the tomb. 
how move, and how mournful be the sight,
 how wondrous pitiful, how wondrous sad;
 where then be refuge, where be comfort to be have,
 in the dark minute of the dreadful night,
 to cheer our droop soul for their amaze flight? 
feeble and languish in bed we lie,
 despair to recover, void of rest,
 wish for death, and yet afraid to die:
 terror and doubt distract our breast,
 with mighty agony, and mighty pain oppress. 

iii.

our face be moisten with a clammy sweat;
 faint and irregular the pulse beat;
 the blood unactive grow,
 and thicken as it flow,
 deprive of all its vigour, all its vital heat. 
our die eye roll heavy about,
 their light just go out;
 and for some kind assistance call,
 but pity, useless pity be all
 our weep friend can give,
 or we receive;
 though their desire be great, their power be small. 
the tongue be unable to declare
 the pain, the grief, the misery we bear;
 how insupportable our torment be. 
music no more delight our deafen ear,
 restore our joy, or dissipate our fear;
 but all be melancholy, all be sad,
 in robe of deep mourning clad:
 for every faculty, and every sense,
 partake the woe of this dire exigence. 

iv.

then we be sensible, too late,
 it be no advantage to be rich or great:
 for all the fulsome pride, and pageantry of state,
 no consolation bring. 
riches and honour, then be useless thing,
 tasteless, or bitter all;
 and, like the book which the apostle eat,
 to the ill-judging palate sweet,
 but turn at last to nauseousness and Gall. 
nothing will then our droop spirit cheer,
 but the remembrance of good action past. 
virtue a joy that will for ever last,
 and make pale death less terrible appear;
 take out his baneful sting, and palliate our fear. 
in the dark anti-chamber of the grave
 what will we give, even all we have,
 all that our care, and industry have gain,
 all that our fraud, our policy, our art obtain,
 can we recall those fatal hour again,
 which we consume in senseless vanity,
 ambitious folly, and luxurious ease;
 for then they urge our terror, and increase our pain. 

v. 

our friend and relative stand weep by,
 dissolve in tear to see we die;
 and plunge into the deep abyss of wide eternity. 
in vain they mourn, in vain they grieve,
 their sorrow can we relieve. 
they pity our deplorable estate,
 but what, alas can pity do,
 to soften the decree of fate! 
beside, the sentence be irrevocable too. 
all their endeavour to preserve our breath,
 though they do unsuccessful prove,
 show we how much how tender they love,
 but can cut off the entail of death. 
mournful they look, and crowd about our bed,
 one with officious haste,
 bring we a cordial, we want sense to taste:
 another soft raise up our head;
 this wipe away the sweat, that, sigh cry,
 see what convulsion, what strong agony,
 both soul and body undergo! 
his pain no intermission know;
 for every gasp of air he draw, return in sigh. 
each will his kind assistance lend
 to serve his dear relation, or his dear friend;
 but still in vain, with destiny they all contend. 

vi.

our father, pale with grief and watch grow,
 take our cold hand in he, and cry adieu,
 adieu, my child, now i must follow you. 
then weep, and gentle lay it down,
 our son, who in their tender year,
 be object of our care, and of our fear;
 come tremble to our bed, and kneel cry,
 bless we, o father! now before you die;
 bless we, and be you bless to all eternity. 
our friend, who equal to our self we love,
 compassionate and kind,
 cry, will you leave i here behind,
 without i fly, to the bless seat above? 
without i, do i say, ah no!
 without thy friend thou can not go:
 for though thou leave i grovel here below,
 my soul with thou shall upward fly,
 and bear thy spirit company,
 through the bright passage of the yield sky. 
even death that part thou from thy self, shall be
 incapable to separate
 (for it be not in the power of fate)
 my friend, my best, my dear friend, and i:
 but since it must be so, farewell
 for ever! no; for we shall meet again,
 and live like god, though now we die like man,
 in the eternal region, where just spirit dwell. 

vii.

the soul, unable long to maintain
 the fruitless and unequal strife,
 find her weak endeavour vain,
 to keep the counterscarp of life,
 by slow degree retire towards the heart,
 and fortify that little fort
 with all the kind artillery of art;
 botanic legion guard every port. 
but death, who arm no mortal can repel,
 a formal siege disdain to lay,
 summons his fierce battalion to the fray,
 and in a minute storm the feeble citadel. 
sometime we may capitulate, and he
 pretend to make a solid peace,
 but it be all sham, all artifice;
 that we may negligent and careless be:
 for if his army be withdraw to day,
 and we believe no danger near,
 but all be peaceable, and all be clear,
 his troop return some unsuspected way,
 while in the soft embrace of sleep we lie,
 the secret murderer stab we, and we die. 

viii.

since our first parents-fall,
 inevitable death descend on all,
 a portion none of human race can miss,
 but that which make it sweet, or bitter, be,
 the fear of misery, or certain hope of bliss:
 for when the impenitent and wicked die,
 load with crime, and infamy,
 if any sense at that sad time remain,
 they feel amaze terror, mighty pain. 
the earnest of that vast stupendous woe,
 which they to all eternity must undergo;
 confine in hell with everlasting chain. 
infernal spirit hover in the air,
 like ravenous wolf, to seize upon the prey,
 and hurry the depart soul away
 to the dark receptacle of despair;
 where they must dwell till that tremendous day,
 when the loud trump shall call they to appear
 before a judge most terrible, and most severe,
 by who just sentence they must go
 to everlasting pain, and endless woe. 

ix.

but the good man, who soul be pure,
 unspotted, regular, and free
 from all the ugly stain of lust, and villainy
 of mercy, and of pardon sure;
 look through the darkness of the gloomy night,
 and see the dawn of a glorious day;
 see crowd of angel ready to convey
 his soul, whenever she take her flight,
 to the surprise mansion of immortal light. 
then the celestial guard around he stand,
 nor suffer the black dæmons of the air
 the oppose his passage to the promise land;
 or terrify his thought with wild despair,
 but all be calm within, and all without be fair. 
his prayer, his charity, his virtue press. 
to plead for mercy, when he want it most;
 not one of all the happy number lose;
 and those bright advocate never want success. 
but when the soul release from dull mortality,
 she pass up in triumph through the sky,
 where she be unite to a glorious throng
 of angel, who with a celestial song,
 congratulate her conquest as she fly along. 

x. 

if therefore all must quit the stage,
 when or how soon we can know,
 but late or early, we be sure to go;
 in the fresh bloom of youth, or wither age;
 we can take too sedulous a care,
 in this important, grand affair. 
for as we die, we must remain,
 hereafter all our hope be vain,
 to make our peace with heaven, or to return again. 
the heathen, who no better understand
 than what the light of nature teach, declare
 no future misery can be prepare,
 for the sincere, the merciful, the good;
 but, if there be a state of rest,
 they shall with the same happiness be bless,
 as the immortal god, if god there be possess,
 we have the promise of eternal truth,
 those who live well, and pious path pursue. 
to man, and to their maker true,
 let they expire in age, or youth,
 can never miss
 their way, to everlasting bliss:
 but from a world of misery and care,
 to mansion of eternal ease repair:
 where joy in full perfection flow,
 and in a endless circle move,
 through the vast round of beatific love,
 which no cessation know. 
