the liberty.

shall i be one, of those obsequious fool,
 that square there life, by custom scanty rule;
 condemn for ever, to the puny curse,
 of precept teach, at boarding-school, or nurse,
 that all the business of my life must be,
 foolish, dull trifle, formality. 
confine to a strict magic complaisance,
 and round a circle, of nice visit dance,
 nor for my life beyond the chalk advance:
 the devil censure, stand to guard the same,
 one step awry, he tear my venturous fame. 
so when my friend, in a facetious vein,
 with mirth and wit, a while can entertain;
 though never so pleasant, yet i must not stay,
 if a command clock, bid i away:
 but with a sudden start, as in a fright,
 i must be go indeed, it be after eight. 
sure these restraint, with such regret we bear,
 that dread censure, can be more severe,
 which have no terror, if we do not fear;
 but let the bugbear, timorous infant fright,
 i will not be scar, from innocent delight:
 whatever be not vicious, i dare do,
 i will never to the idol custom bow,
 unless it suit with my own humour too. 
some boast their fetter, of formality,
 fancy they ornamental bracelet be,
 i be sure their gyve, and manacle to i. 
to their dull fulsome rule, i will not be tie,
 for all the flattery that exalt their pride:
 my sexs forbid, i shall my silence break,
 i lose my jest, cause woman must not speak. 
mystery must not be, with my search profane,
 my closet not with book, but sweatmeat cram
 a little china, to advance the show,
 my prayer book, and seven champion, or so. 
my pen if ever use employ must be,
 in lofty theme of useful housewifery,
 transcribe old receipt of cookery:
 and what be necessary among the rest,
 good cure for ague, and a cancered breast,
 but i can here, write my probatum est. 
my dare pen, will bold sally make,
 and like my self, a unchecked freedom take;
 not chain to the nice order of my sex,
 and with restraint my wish soul perplex:
 i will blush at sin, and not what some call shame,
 secure my virtue, slight precarious fame. 
this courage speak i, brave, it be sure worse,
 to keep those rule, which private we curse:
 and i will appeal, to all the formal saint,
 with what reluctance they endure restraint. 
