ode to fancy.

by the same.

where be thou, fancy, visionary maid? 
who lenient artifice and easy aid
 can quell the fierce disorder of the breast,
 and soothe the pensive soul to rest? 
whether along the daisy bank recline,
 with foliage veil, you court the fan wind,
 or by the brook loquacious channel stray,
 where the deep dimple eddy play;
 haste thou, from the blend glow
 of beauty in yond lucid bow,
 with fine spin light, and golden beam,
 soft weave thy wake dream:
 bid the range idea fly,
 open to the ravish eye
 a glimpse of bliss, where gay desire be find
 sport with youth while music wake around. 

behold the variegate prospect rise! 
what gallant harmony! what glad surprise! 
the sweet mygdonian pipe with rural strain
 collect the nymph and shepherd swain. 
secure in yonder vale their fleecy breed,
 and heifer amid the neighbour pasture feed. 
meanwhile, with flowret deck, each blithsome pair
 have bid adieu to pine and care. 
see they hand in hand advance
 circle in the smooth pace dance;
 now to number quaint they stray,
 bound on the mazy way! 
the goldfinch and the linnet nigh
 join the simple minstrelsy:
 the simple note, and merry gambol fire
 (place by the hawthorn-hedge) each ancient fire. 

but see! where solitude, of sober mien,
 with health and modesty, her charm maid,
 leave the straw-roofed neighbourhood, be see
 to rove beneath the venerable shade! 
o harmless cottage! o happy glade! 
where no misfortune factious rage deplore,
 no discontent the quiet breast invade:
 how pleasant it be from this far season shore
 to hear the tumble ocean wavy roar! 
now whither, with the sun-beam's dart speed,
 thy rapt enthusiast, fancy, will thou lead? 
what other scene of more sincere delight
 the goddess and her guest invite? 

she, like the Sybil with her golden bough,
 descend to search the sacred realm below,
 in amaranthine bower the bless appear,
 by pearly grot or fountain clear:
 to hero ghost, or sceptre king,
 the laureled bard divine sing. 
hark! the animate strain
 warble through the elysian plain:
 when the pause admit delay
 thus the immortal seem to say,
 (close the accent of each tuneful voice)
 "for ever thus, for ever we rejoice." 

what sad transition! mean this rise show
 to drive out real pain with fancy woe? 
i see the mourner in the darken room,
 the rustic hearse, the letter tomb. 
still, still the wayward, wild idea take
 the solemn livery of death, and wake
 tender-eyed pity, as the village train
 the shroud husbandman sustain. 
what semblance of wretched plight
 amid the procession strike the sight! 
ah! it be grief herself appear,
 her flow tress steep in tear;
 her garment tear, her bosom bare,
 reckless of the inclement air
 three orphan child mark their mother moan,
 hang down their head, and answer groan for groan. 

hence, hence, you hapless image; away
 delusive fancy; with thy subtle heat
 no more thy vain machinery display,
 now the dark grave, and now the green retreat:
 contentment truth surpass thy deceit. 
sister of wisdom she; of aspect mild:
 who make the golden mean her certain seat,
 and look on casualty as nature child;
 to heaven behest still noble reconcile. 
