a prologue, by way of satyr, speak before king CHARLES ii. at new-market.

expect no more the old fawn prologue way,
for the rash spleenful poet write to day
something of you, gallant, and not the play.
since freedom give to each man here resort,
he take the privilege to abuse your sport;
then thus begin, this court a theatre,
and every jockey be a actor here,
from the dull knight up to the bawl peer.
new-market be in general a place,
make of Crimp and chouse of cock and race,
much noise, much nonsense, little wit, or grace,
where man all seem as nature have design they,
to lose their wit, then Gallop hard to find they:
pray where be the jest, for faith i fain will know
in Yap, hoh, pugh, they start, they come, they go,
chatter one tooth the while in frost and snow.
this and fox-hunting, the ancient do detest,
where you ride ten or twenty mile at least,
follow the eager chase in busy swarm,
over hedge and ditch, venture leg, neck and arm
to kill, when at the journey end you come
a stink creature not worth bring home:
this may be your delight, but it be to i,
as the monsieur say, diable de plasire;
yet one thing we must own, no sport we find
in the world like that, to try if man be sound;
therefore all you that carry tender fleece,
shun this rude sport, or god you will shake to piece;
another thing i know be worth your care,
clap be all fatal in new-market air:
this cause a amorous groom that know the danger
late to hang himself over a manger,
and though a vassal suffer this disaster,
my friend, it be ominous to every master.
drink brimmer then, wine make your bliss complete,
locket a loyal fellow, let he cheat,
though stumed wine at three shilling be too dear,
Bacchus have safe joy than Venus here,
especial for you who to your cost
keep run nag all the late bitter frost.
jesting in fashion, it be the modish way
and for example, if you please you may
at the king dinner, hear they every day:
jest show a wit, if modest they come,
but such as blunt and too high presume,
make learning and good manner quit the room.
yet you all laugh, and in as please a fit,
as if your panegyric have be write.
so in a village have i see a clown
with break noddle lie the cudgel down,
and sneer to feel his bloody mangle Scull,
as if the blow have dignify the fool.
jockey, joke on then, without fear or awe,
cheat on, be friend, do any thing but draw,
Crimp be no treason, by new-market law.
