[the pleasure of imagination.

a poem.]

the pleasure of imagination.

book the first.

with what attractive charm this goodly frame
of nature touch the consent heart
of mortal man; and what the please store
which beauteous imitation thence derive
to deck the poet, or the painter toil;
my verse unfold. attend, you gentle power
of musical delight! and while i sing
your gift, your honour, dance around my strain.
thou, smile queen of every tuneful breast,
indulgent fancy! from the fruitful bank
of Avon, whence thy rosy finger cull
fresh flower and dew to sprinkle on the turf
where Shakespeare lie, be present: and with thou
let fiction come, upon her vagrant wing
waft ten thousand colour through the air,
and, by the glance of her magic eye,
combine each in endless, fairy form,
her wild creation. goddess of the lyre
which rule the accent of the move sphere,
will thou, eternal harmony! descend,
and join this festive train? for with thou come
the guide, the guardian of their lovely sport,
majestic truth; and where truth deign to come,
her sister liberty will not be far.
be present all the genii who conduct
the wander footstep of the youthful bard,
new to your spring and shade: who touch his ear
with fine sound: who heighten to his eye
the bloom of nature, and before he turn
the gay, happy attitude of thing.

oft have the law of each poetic strain
the critic-verse employ; yet still unsung
lay this prime subject, though import most
a poet name: for fruitless be the attempt
by dull obedience and the curb of rule,
for creep toil to climb the hard ascent
of high Parnassus. nature kindle breath
must fire the choose genius; nature hand
must point the path, and imp his eagle-wing
exult over the painful steep to soar
high as the summit: there to breathe at large
aethereal air; with bard and sage old,
immortal son of praise. these flatter scene
to this neglect labour court my song;
yet not unconscious what a doubtful task
to paint the fine feature of the mind,
and to the most subtle and mysterious thing
give colour, strength and motion. but the love
of nature and the muse bid explore,
through secret path erewhile untrod by man,
the fair poetic region, to detect
untasted spring, to drink inspire draught;
and shade my temple with unfading flower
cull from the laureate vale profound recess,
where never poet gain a wreath before.

from heaven my strain begin; from heaven descend
the flame of genius to the human breast,
and love and beauty, and poetic joy
and inspiration. ere the radiant sun
spring from the east, or amid the vault of night
the moon suspend her serener lamp;
ere mountain, wood, or stream adorn the globe;
or wisdom teach the son of man her lore;
then live the eternal one: then deep-retired
in his unfathomed essence, view at large
the uncreated image of thing;
the radiant sun, the moon nocturnal lamp,
the mountain, wood and stream, the roll globe,
and wisdom form celestial. from the first
of day, on they his love divine he fix,
his admiration: till in time complete,
what he admire and love, his vital smile
unfold into being. hence the breath
of life inform each organic frame,
hence the green earth, and wild resound wave;
hence light and shade alternate; warmth and cold;
and clear autumnal sky and vernal shower,
and all the fair variety of thing.

but not alike to every mortal eye
be this great scene unveiled. for since the claim
of social life, to different labour urge
the active power of man; with wise intent
the hand of nature on peculiar mind
imprint a different bias, and to each
decree its province in the common toil.
to some she teach the fabric of the sphere,
the changeful moon, the circuit of the star,
the golden zone of heaven: to some she give
to weigh the moment of eternal thing,
of time, and space, and fate unbroken chain,
and will quick impulse: other by the hand
she lead over vale and mountain, to explore
what heal virtue swell the tender vein
of herb and flower; or what the beam of morn
draw forth, distil from the clift rind
in balmy tear. but some, to high hope
be destine; some within a fine mould
she wrought, and tempere with a pure flame.
to these the sire omnipotent unfold
the world harmonious volume, there to read
the transcript of himself. on every part
they trace the bright impression of his hand:
in earth or air, the meadow purple store,
the moon mild radiance, or the virgin form
bloom with rosy smile, they see portray
that uncreated beauty, which delight
the mind supreme. they also feel her charm,
enamour; they partake the eternal joy.

as Memnon marble harp, renowned of old
by fable Nilus, to the quiver touch
of titan ray, with each repulsive string
consent, sound through the warble air
unbidden strain; even so do nature hand
to certain species of external thing,
Attune the fine organ of the mind:
so the glad impulse of congenial power,
or of sweet sound, or fair-proportioned form,
the grace of motion, or the bloom of light,
thrill through imagination tender frame,
from nerve to nerve: all naked and alive
they catch the spread ray: till now the soul
at length disclose every tuneful spring,
to that harmonious movement from without,
responsive. then the inexpressive strain
diffuse its enchantment: fancy dream
of sacred fountain and elysian grove,
and vale of bliss: the intellectual power
bend from his awful throne a wonder ear,
and smile: the passion gentle soothe away,
sink to divine repose, and love and joy
alone be wake; love and joy, serene
as air that fan the summer. o! attend,
whoever thou be who these delight can touch,
who candid bosom the refine love
of nature warm, o! listen to my song;
and i will guide thou to her favourite walk,
and teach thy solitude her voice to hear,
and point her lovely feature to thy view.

know then, whatever of nature pregnant store,
whatever of mimic art reflect form
with love and admiration thus inflame
the power of fancy, her delight son
to three illustrious order have refer;
three sister-grace, who the painter hand,
the poet tongue confess; the sublime,
the wonderful, the fair. i see they dawn!
i see the radiant vision, where they rise,
more lovely than when Lucifer display
his beam forehead through the gate of morn,
to lead the train of Phoebus and the spring.

say, why be man so eminent raise
amid the vast creation; why ordain
through life and death to dart his pierce eye,
with thought beyond the limit of his frame;
but that the omnipotent may send he forth
in sight of mortal and immortal power,
as on a boundless theatre, to run
the great career of justice; to exalt
his generous aim to all divine deed;
to shake each partial purpose from his breast;
and through the mist of passion and of sense,
and through the toss tide of chance and pain
to hold his course unfalt'r, while the voice
of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
of nature, call he to his high reward,
the applaud smile of heaven? else wherefore burn
in mortal bosom, this unquenched hope
that breathe from day to day sublime thing,
and mock possession? wherefore dart the mind,
with such resistless ardor to embrace
majestic form? impatient to be free,
spurn the gross controul of wilful might;
proud of the strong contention of her toil;
proud to be dare? who but rather turn
to heaven broad fire his unconstrained view,
than to the glimmer of a waxen flame?
who that, from alpine height, his labour eye
shoot round the wide horizon to survey
the Nile or Ganges roll his wasteful tide
through mountain, plain, through empire black with shade,
and continent of sand; will turn his gaze
to mark the wind of a scanty rill
that murmur at his foot? the highborn soul
disdain to rest her heaven-aspiring wing
beneath its native quarry. tire of earth
and this diurnal scene, she spring aloft
through field of air; pursue the fly storm;
ride on the volleyed lightning through the heaven;
or yok with whirlwind and the northern blast,
sweep the long tract of day. then high she soar
the blue profound, and hover over the sun,
behold he pour the redundant stream
of light; behold his unrelenting sway
bend the reluctant planet to absolve
the fate round of time. thence far effuse
she dart her swiftness up the long career
of devious comet; through its burn sign
exult circle the perennial wheel
of nature, and look back on all the star,
who blend light, as with a milky zone,
invest the orient. now amaze she view
the empyreal waste, where happy spirit hold,
beyond this concave heaven, their calm abode;
and field of radiance, who unfading light
have travel the profound six thousand year,
nor yet arrive in sight of mortal thing.
even on the barrier of the world untired
she meditate the eternal depth below;
till, half recoil, down the headlong steep
she plunge; soon overwhelm and swallow up
in that immense of being. there her hope
rest at the fate goal. for from the birth
of mortal man, the sovereign maker say,
that not in humble or in brief delight,
not in the fade echo of renown,
power purple robe, or pleasure flowery lap,
the soul shall find enjoyment: but from these
turn disdainful to a equal good,
through all the ascent of thing enlarge her view,
till every bind at length shall disappear,
and infinite perfection close the scene.

call now to mind what high, capacious power
lie fold up in man; how far beyond
the praise of mortal, may the eternal growth
of nature to perfection half divine,
expand the bloom soul? what pity then
shall sloth unkind fog depress to earth
her tender blossom; choke the stream of life,
and blast her spring! far otherwise design
almighty wisdom; nature happy care
the obedient heart far otherwise incline.
witness the sprightly joy when aught unknown
strike the quick sense, and wake each active power
to brisk measure: witness the neglect
of all familiar prospect, though behold
with transport once; the fond, attentive gaze
of young astonishment; the sober zeal
of age, comment on prodigious thing.
for such the bounteous providence of heaven,
in every breast implant this desire
of object new and strange, to urge we on
with unremitted labour to pursue
those sacred store that wait the ripen soul,
in truth exhaustless bosom. what need word
to paint its power? for this, the dare youth
break from his weep mother anxious arm,
in foreign clime to rove: the pensive sage
heedless of sleep, or midnight harmful damp,
hang over the sickly taper; and untired
the virgin follow, with enchant step,
the maze of some wild and wondrous tale,
from morn to eve; unmindful of her form,
unmindful of the happy dress that steal
the wish of the youth, when every maid
with envy pine. hence final, by night
the village-matron, round the blaze hearth,
suspend the infant-audience with her tale,
breathe astonishment! of witch rhyme,
and evil spirit; of the death-bed call
to he who rob the widow, and devour
the orphan portion; of unquiet soul
rise from the grave to ease the heavy guilt
of deed in life conceal; of shape that walk
at dead of night, and clank their chain, and wave
the torch of hell around the murder bed.
at every solemn pause the crowd recoil
gaze each other speechless, and congeal
with shiver sigh: till eager for the event,
around the beldame all arrect they hang,
each tremble heart with grateful terror quell.

but lo! disclose in all her smile pomp,
where beauty onward move claim the verse
her charm inspire: the freely-flowing verse
in thy immortal praise, o form divine,
smooth her mellifluent stream. thou, beauty, thou
the regal dome, and thy enliven ray
the mossy roof adore: thou, better sun!
for ever beam on the enchant heart
love, and harmonious wonder, and delight
poetic. bright progeny of heaven!
how shall i trace thy feature? where select
the roseate hue to emulate thy bloom?
haste then, my song, through nature wide expanse,
haste then, and gather all her comely wealth,
whatever bright spoil the florid earth contain,
whatever the water, or the liquid air,
to deck thy lovely labour. will thou fly
with laugh autumn to th'atlantic isle,
and range with he th'hesperian field, and see,
wherever his finger touch the fruitful grove,
the branch shoot with gold; wherever his step
mark the glad soil, the tender cluster glow
with purple ripeness, and invest each hill
as with the blush of a evening sky?
or will thou rather stoop thy vagrant plume,
where, glide through his daughter honour shade,
the smooth Penéus from his glassy flood
reflect purpureal tempe pleasant scene?
fair Tempe! haunt belove of fylvan power,
of nymph and faun; where in the golden age
they play in secret on the shady brink
with ancient Pan: while round their choral step
young hour and genial gale with constant hand
shower blossom, odour, shower ambrosial dew,
and spring elysian bloom. her flowery store
to thou nor Tempe shall refuse; nor watch
of wing Hydra guard hesperian fruit
from thy free spoil. o bear then, unreproved,
thy smile treasure to the green recess
where young Dione stay. with sweet air
entice she forth to lend her angel-form
for beauty honour image. hither turn
thy graceful footstep; hither, gentle maid,
incline thy polish forehead: let thy eye
effuse the mildness of their azure dawn;
and may the fan breeze waft aside
thy radiant lock, disclose as it bend
with airy softness from the marble neck
the cheek fair-blooming, and the rosy lip
where win smile and pleasure sweet as love,
with sanctity and wisdom, temper blend
their soft allurement. then the please force
of nature, and her kind parental care,
worthy i will sing: then all the enamour youth,
with each admire virgin to my lyre
shall throng attentive, while i point on high
where beauty living image, like the morn
that wake in zephyr arm the blush may,
move onward; or as Venus, when she stand
effulgent on the pearly car, and smile,
fresh from the deep, and conscious of her form,
to see the Triton tune their vocal shell,
and each coerulean sister of the flood
with fond acclaim attend she over the wave,
to seek the idalian bower. you smile band
of youth and virgin, who through all the maze
of young desire with rival-step pursue
this charm of beauty; if the please toil
can yield a moment respite, hither turn
your favourable ear, and trust my word.
i do not mean to wake the gloomy form
of superstition dress in wisdom garb,
to damp your tender hope; i do not mean
to bid the jealous thunderer fire the heaven,
or shape infernal rend the groan earth
to fright you from your joy: my cheerful song
with better omen call you to the field,
please with your generous ardour in the chace,
and warm as you. then tell i, for you know,
do beauty ever deign to dwell where health
and active use be stranger? be her charm
confess in aught, who most peculiar end
be lame and fruitless? or do nature mean
this awful stamp the herald of a lie;
to hide the shame of discord and disease,
and catch with fair hypocrisy the heart
of idle faith? o no! with better care,
the indulgent mother, conscious how infirm
her offspring tread the path of good and ill,
by this illustrious image, in each kind
still most illustrious where the object hold
its native power most perfect, she by this
illume the headlong impulse of desire,
and sanctify his choice. the generous glebe
who bosom smile with verdure, the clear tract
of stream delicious to the thirsty soul,
the bloom of nectar fruitage ripe to sense,
and every charm of animate thing,
be only pledge of a state sincere,
the integrity and order of their frame,
when all be well within, and every end
accomplish. thus be beauty send from heaven,
the lovely ministress of truth and good
in this dark world: for truth and good be one,
and beauty dwell in they, and they in she,
with like participation. wherefore then,
o son of earth! will you dissolve the tie?
o wherefore, with a rash, imperfect aim,
seek you those flowery joy with which the hand
of lavish fancy paint each flatter scene
where beauty seem to dwell, nor once inquire
where be the sanction of eternal truth,
or where the seal of undeceitful good,
to save your search from folly? want these,
lo! beauty withereth in your void embrace,
and with the glitter of a idiot toy
do fancy mock your vow. nor let the gleam
of youthful hope that shine upon your heart,
be chill or cloud at this awful task
to learn the lore of undeceitful good,
and truth eternal. though the poisonous charm
of baleful superstition, guide the foot
of servile number, through a dreary way
to their abode, through desert, thorn and mire;
and leave the wretched pilgrim all forlorn
to muse, at last, amid the ghostly gloom
of grave, and hoary vault, and cloister cell;
to walk with spectre through the midnight shade,
and to the scream owl accurse song
Attune the dreadful work of his heart;
yet be not you dismay. a gentle star
your lovely search illumine. from the grove
where wisdom talk with her athenian son,
can my ambitious hand intwine a wreath
of Plato olive with the mantuan bay,
then shall my powerful voice at once dispel
these monkish horror: then in light divine
disclose the elysian prospect, where the step
of those who nature charm, through bloom walk,
through fragrant mountain and poetic stream,
amid the train of sage, hero, bard,
lead by their wing genius and the choir
of laureled science and harmonious art,
proceed exult to the eternal shrine,
where truth enthrone with her celestial twin,
the undivided partner of her sway,
with good and beauty reign. o let not we,
lull by luxurious pleasure languid strain,
or crouch to the frown of bigot-rage,
o let not we a moment pause to join
the god-like band. and if the gracious power
that first awaken my untutored song,
will to my invocation breathe anew
the tuneful spirit; then through all our path,
never shall the sound of this devote lyre
be want; whether on the rosy mead,
when summer smile, to warn the melt heart
of luxury allurement; whether firm
against the torrent and the stubborn hill
to urge bold virtue unremitted nerve,
and wake the strong divinity of soul
that conquer chance and fate; or whether strike
for sound of triumph, to proclaim her toil
upon the lofty summit, round her brow
to twine the wreathe of incorruptive praise;
to trace her hallow light through future world,
and bless heaven image in the heart of man.

thus with a faithful aim have we presume,
adventurous, to delineate nature form;
whether in vast, majestic pomp array,
or dress for please wonder, or serene
in beauty rosy smile. it now remain,
through various being fair-proportioned scale,
to trace the rise lustre of her charm,
from their first twilight, shine forth at length
to full meridian splendour. of degree
the least and lowly, in th'effusive warmth
of colour mingle with a random blaze,
do beauty dwell. then high in the line
and variation of determine shape,
where truth be eternal measure mark the bound
of circle, cube, or sphere. the third ascent
unite this vary symmetry of part
with colour be bland allurement; as the pearl
shine in the concave of its azure bed,
and paint shell indent their speckle wreathe.
then more attractive rise the bloom form
through which the breath of nature have infuse
her genial power to draw with pregnant vein
nutritious moisture from the bounteous earth,
in fruit and seed prolific: thus the flower
their purple honour with the spring resume;
and such the stately tree which autumn bend
with blush treasure. but more lovely still
be nature charm, where to the full consent
of complicate member, to the bloom
of colour, and the vital change of growth,
life holy flame and pierce sense be give,
and active motion speak the tempere soul:
so move the bird of Juno; so the steed
with rival ardour beat the dusty plain,
and faithful dog with eager air of joy
salute their fellow. thus do beauty dwell
there most conspicuous, even in outward shape,
where dawn the high expression of a mind:
by step conduct our enrapture search
to that eternal origin, who power,
through all the unbounded symmetry of thing,
like ray effulge from the parent sun,
this endless mixture of her charm diffuse.
mind, mind alone, bear witness, earth and heaven!
the live fountain in itself contain
of beauteous and sublime: here hand in hand,
sit paramount the grace; here enthrone,
celestial Venus, with divine air,
invite the soul to never-fading joy.
look then abroad through nature, to the range
of planet, sun, and adamantine sphere
wheel unshaken through the void immense;
and speak, o man! do this capacious scene
with half that kindle majesty dilate
thy strong conception, as when Brutus rise
refulgent from the stroke of caesar fate,
amid the crowd of patriot; and his arm
aloft extend, like eternal Jove
when guilt bring down the thunder, call aloud
on tully name, and shake his crimson steel,
and bid the father of his country, hail!
for lo! the tyrant prostrate on the dust,
and Rome again be free? — be aught so fair
in all the dewy landscape of the spring,
in the bright eye of Hesper or the morn,
in nature fair form, be aught so fair
as virtuous friendship? as the candid blush
of he who strive with fortune to be just?
the graceful tear that stream for other woe?
or the mild majesty of private life,
where peace with ever-blooming olive crown,
the gate; where honour liberal hand effuse
unenvied treasure, and the snowy wing
of innocence and love protect the scene?
once more search, undismayed, the dark profound
where nature work in secret; view the bed
of mineral treasure, and the eternal vault
that bound the hoary ocean; trace the form
of atom move with incessant change
their elemental round; behold the seed
of being, and the energy of life
kindle the mass with ever-active flame:
then to the secret of the work mind
attentive turn; from dim oblivion call
her fleet, ideal band; and bid they, go!
break through time barrier, and overtake the hour
that see the heaven create: then declare
if aught be find in those external scene
to move thy wonder now. for what be all
the form which brute, unconscious matter wear,
greatness of bulk, or symmetry of part?
not reach to the heart, soon feeble grow
the superficial impulse; dull their charm,
and satiate soon, and pall the languid eye.
not so the moral species, or the power
of genius and design; the ambitious mind
there see herself: by these congenial form
touch and awaken, with intenser act
she bend each nerve, and meditate well-pleased
her feature in the mirror. for of all
the inhabitant of earth, to man alone
creative wisdom give to lift his eye
to truth eternal measure; thence to frame
the sacred law of action and of will,
discern justice from unequal deed,
and temperance from folly. but beyond
this energy of truth, who dictate bind
assent reason, the benignant sire,
to deck the honour path of just and good,
have add bright imagination ray:
where virtue rise from the awful depth
of truth mysterious bosom, do forsake
the unadorned condition of her birth;
and dress by fancy in ten thousand hue,
assume a various feature, to attract,
with charm responsive to each gazer eye,
the heart of man. amid his rural walk,
the ingenuous youth who solitude inspire
with pure wish, from the pensive shade
behold she move, like a virgin-muse
that wake her lyre to some indulgent theme
of harmony and wonder: while among
the herd of servile mind, her strenuous form
indignant flash on the patriot eye,
and through the roll of memory appeal
to ancient honour; or in act serene,
yet watchful, raise the majestic sword
of public power, from dark ambition reach
to guard the sacred volume of the law.

genius of ancient Greece! who faithful step
well-pleased i follow through the sacred path
of nature and of science; nurse divine
of all heroic deed and fair desire!
o! let the breath of thy extend praise
inspire my kindle bosom to the height
of this untempered theme. nor by my thought
presumptuous count, if, amid the calm
that sooth this vernal evening into smile,
i steal impatient from the sordid haunt
of strife and low ambition, to attend
thy sacred presence in the sylvan shade,
by their malignant footstep never profane.
descend, propitious! to my favour eye;
such in thy mien, thy warm, exalt air,
as when the persian tyrant, foil and sting
with shame and desperation, gnash his tooth
to see thou rend the pageant of his throne;
and at the lightning of thy lift spear
crouch like a slave. bring all thy martial spoil,
thy palm, thy laurel, thy triumphal song,
thy smile band of art, thy godlike sire
of civil wisdom, thy heroic youth
warm from the school of glory. guide my way
through fair lycéum walk, the green retreat
of Academus, and the thymy vale,
where oft enchant with socratic sound,
ilissus pure devolve his tuneful stream
in gentle murmur. from the bloom store
of these auspicious field, may i unblamed
transplant some live blossom to adorn
my native clime: while far above the flight
of fancy plume aspire, i unlock
the spring of ancient wisdom; while i join
thy name, thrice honour! with the immortal praise
of nature; while to my compatriot youth
i point the high example of thy son,
and tune to attic theme the british lyre.

the pleasure of imagination.

book the second.

the pleasure of imagination.

book the second.

when shall the laurel and the vocal string
resume their honour? when shall we behold
the tuneful tongue, the promethean hand
aspire to ancient praise? alas! how faint,
how slow the dawn of beauty and of truth
break the reluctant shade of gothic night
which yet involve the nation! long they groan
beneath the fury of rapacious force;
oft as the gloomy north, with iron-swarms
tempestuous pour from her freeze cave,
blast the italian shore, and sweep the work
of liberty and wisdom down the gulph
of all-devouring night. as long immure
in noontide darkness by the glimmer lamp,
each muse and each fair science pine away
the sordid hour: while foul, barbarian hand
their mystery profane, unstring the lyre,
and chain the soar pinion down to earth.
at last the muse rise, and spurn their bond,
and wild warble scatter, as they fly,
their bloom wreath from fair valclusa bower
to arno myrtle border from the shore
of soft Parthenope. but still the rage
of dire ambition and gigantic power,
from public aim and from the busy walk
of civil commerce, drive the bold train
of penetrate science to the cell,
where studious ease consume the silent hour
in shadowy search and unfruitful care.
thus from their guardian tear, the tender art
of mimic fancy and harmonious joy,
to priestly domination and the lust
of lawless court, their amiable toil
for three inglorious age have resign,
in vain reluctant: and torquato tongue
be tune for slavish paean at the throne
of tinsel pomp; and raphael magic hand
effuse its fair creation to inchant
the fond adore herd in latian fane
to bind belief; while on their prostrate neck
the sable tyrant plant his heel secure.
but now behold! the radiant aera dawn,
when freedom ample fabric, fix at length
for endless year on albion happy shore
in full proportion, once more shall extend
to all the kindred power of social bliss
a common mansion, a parental roof.
there shall the virtue, there shall wisdom train,
their long-lost friend rejoin, as of old,
embrace the smile family of art,
the muse and the grace. then no more
shall vice, distract their delicious gift
to aim abhor, with high distaste and scorn
turn from their charm the philosophic eye,
the patriot-bosom: then no more the path
of public care or intellectual toil,
alone by footstep haughty and severe
in gloomy state be tread: the harmonious muse
and her persuasive sister then shall plant
their shelter laurel over the bleak ascent,
and shed their flower along the rugged way.
arm with the lyre, already have we dare
to pierce divine philosophy retreat,
and teach the muse she lore; already strive
their long-divided honour to unite,
while temper this deep argument we sing
of truth and beauty. now the same task
impend; now urge our ambitious toil,
we hasten to recount the various spring
of adventitious pleasure, which adjoin
their grateful influence to the prime effect
of object grand or beauteous, and enlarge
the complicate joy. the sweet of sense,
do they not oft with kind accession flow,
to raise harmonious fancy native charm?
so while we taste the fragrance of the rose,
glow not her blush the fair? while we view
amid the noontide walk a limpid rill
gush through the trickle herbage, to the thirst
of summer yield the delicious draught
of cool refreshment; over the mossy brink
shine not the surface clear, and the wave
with sweet music murmur as they flow?

nor this alone; the various lot of life
oft from external circumstance assume
a moment disposition to rejoice
in those delight which at a different hour
will pass unheeded. fair the face of spring,
when rural song and odour wake the morn,
to every eye; but how much more to his
round who the bed of sickness long diffuse
its melancholy gloom! how double fair,
when first with fresh-born vigour he inhale
the balmy breeze, and feel the bless sun
warm at his bosom, from the spring of life
chase oppressive damp and languid pain!

or shall i mention, where celestial truth
her awful light disclose, to effuse
a more majestic pomp on beauty frame?
for man love knowledge, and the beam of truth
more welcome touch his understanding eye,
than all the blandishment of sound, his ear,
than all of taste his tongue. nor ever yet
the melt rainbow vernal-tinctured hue
to i have shine so please, as when first
the hand of science point out the path
in which the sunbeam gleam from the west
fall on the watery cloud, who darksome veil
involve the orient; and that trickle shower
pierce through every crystalline convex
of cluster dew-drop to their flight oppose,
recoil at length where concave all behind
the internal surface of each glassy orb
repel their forward passage into air;
that thence direct they seek the radiant goal
from which their course begin; and, as they strike
in different line the gazer obvious eye,
assume a different lustre, through the breed
of colour change from the splendid rose
to the pale violet deject hue.

or shall we touch that kind access of joy,
that spring to each fair object, while we trace,
through all its fabric, wisdom artful aim
dispose every part, and gain still
by mean proportion her benignant end?
speak, you, the pure delight, who favour step
the lamp of science through the jealous maze
of nature guide, when haply you reveal
her secret honour: whether in the sky,
the beauteous law of light, the central power
that wheel the pensile planet round the year;
whether in wonder of the roll deep,
or smile fruit of pleasure-pregnant earth,
or fine-adjusted spring of life and sense,
you scan the counsel of their author hand.

what, when to raise the meditate scene,
the flame of passion, through the struggle soul
deep-kindled, show across that sudden blaze
the object of its rapture, vast of size,
with fierce colour and a night of shade?
what? like a storm from their capacious bed
the sound sea overwhelm, when the might
of these eruption, work from the depth
of man strong apprehension, shake his frame
even to the base; from every naked sense
of pain or pleasure dissipate all
opinion feeble cover, and the veil
spin from the cobweb-fashion of the time
to hide the feeling heart? then nature speak
her genuine language, and the word of man,
big with the very motion of their soul,
declare with what accumulate force,
the impetuous nerve of passion urge on
the native weight and energy of thing.

yet more; her honour where nor beauty claim,
nor show of good the thirsty sense allure,
from passion power alone our nature hold
essential pleasure. passion fierce illapse
rouze the mind whole fabric; with supply
of daily impulse keep the elastic power
intense poise, and polish anew
by that collision all the fine machine:
else rust will rise, and foulness, by degree
encumber, choke at last what heaven design
for ceaseless motion and a round of toil.
— but say, do every passion man endure
thus minister delight? that name indeed
become the rosy breath of love; become
the radiant smile of joy, the applaud hand
of admiration: but the bitter shower
that sorrow shed upon a brother grave,
but the dumb palsy of nocturnal fear,
or those consume fire that gnaw the heart
of pant indignation, find we there
to move delight? — then listen, while my tongue
the unaltered will of heaven with faithful awe
reveal; what old harmodious wont to teach
my early age; Harmodius, who have weigh
within his learned mind whatever the school
of wisdom, or thy lonely-whispering voice,
o faithful nature! dictate of the law
which govern and support this mighty frame
of universal being. oft the hour
from morn to eve have steal unmarked away,
while mute attention hang upon his lip,
as thus the sage his awful tale begin.

it be in the wind of a ancient wood,
when spotless youth with solitude resign
to sweet philosophy the studious day,
what time pale autumn shade the silent eve,
muse i rove. of good and evil much,
and much of mortal man my thought revolve;
when start full on fancy gush eye,
the mournful image of parthenia fate,
that hour, o long belove and long deplore!
when bloom youth, nor gentle wisdom art,
nor Hymen honour gather for thy brow,
nor all thy lover, all thy father tear
avail to snatch thou from the cruel grave;
thy agonize look, thy last farewell
strike to the inmost feeling of my soul
as with the hand death. at once the shade
more horrid nod over i, and the wind
with hoarse murmur shake the branch. dark
as midnight storm, the scene of human thing
appear before i; desert, burn sand,
where the parch adder die; the freeze south,
and desolation blast all the west
with rapine and with murder: tyrant-power
here sit enthrone in blood; the baleful charm
of superstition there insect the sky,
and turn the sun to horror. gracious heaven!
what be the life of man? or can these,
not these portent thy awful will suffice?
that propagate thus beyond their scope,
they rise to act their cruelty anew
in my afflict bosom, thus decree
the universal sensitive of pain,
the wretched heir of evil not its own!

thus i, impatient; when at once effuse,
a flash torrent of celestial day
burst through the shadowy void. with slow descent
a purple cloud come float through the sky,
and poise at length within the circle tree,
hang obvious to my view: till open wide
its lucid orb, a more than human form
emerge lean majestic over my head,
and instant thunder shake the conscious grove.
then melt into air the liquid cloud,
and all the shine vision stand reveal.
a wreath of palm his ample forehead bind,
and over his shoulder, mantl to his knee,
flow the transparent robe, around his waist
collect with a radiant zone of gold
aethereal: there in mystic sign engrave,
i read his office high and sacred name,
genius of human kind. appal i gaze
the godlike presence; for athwart his brow
displeasure, tempere with a mild concern,
look down reluctant on i, and his word
like distant thunder break the murmur air.

vain be thy thought, o child of mortal birth,
and impotent thy tongue. be thy short span
capacious of this universal frame?
thy wisdom all-sufficient? thou, alas!
do thou aspire to judge between the lord
of nature and his work? to lift thy voice
against the sovereign order he decree
all good and lovely? to blaspheme the band
of tenderness innate and social love,
holy of thing! by which the general orb
of being, as with adamantine link,
be draw to perfect union and sustain
from everlasting? have thou feel the pang
of soften sorrow, of indignant zeal
so grievous to the soul, as thence to wish
the tie of nature break from thy frame;
that so thy selfish, unrelenting heart
may cease to mourn its lot, no long then
the wretched heir of evil not its own?
o fair benevolence of generous mind!
o man by nature form for all mankind!

he speak; abash and silent i remain,
as conscious of my lips offence, and awe
before his presence, though my secret soul
disdain the imputation. on the ground
i fix my eye; till from his airy couch
he stoop sublime, and touch with his hand
my dazzle forehead, raise thy sight, he cry,
and let thy sense convince thy err tongue.

i look, and lo! the former scene be change;
for verdant alley and surround tree,
a solitary prospect, wide and wild,
rush on my sense. it be a horrid pile
of hill with many a shaggy forest mix,
with many a sable cliff and glitter stream.
aloft recumbent over the hang ridge,
the brown wood wave, while ever-trickling spring
wash from the naked root of oak and pine,
the crumble soil; and still at every fall
down the steep wind of the channel rock,
remurmur rush the congregate flood
with hoarse inundation; till at last
they reach a grassy plain, which from the skirt
of that high desert spread her verdant lap,
and drink the gush moisture, where confine
in one smooth current, over the lilied vale
clear than glass it flow. autumnal spoil
luxuriant spread to the ray of morn,
blush over the cliff, who half-incircling mound
as in a sylvan theatre enclose
that flowery level. on the river brink
i spy a fair pavilion, which diffuse
its float umbrage amid the silver shade
of osier. now the western sun reveal
between two part cliff his golden orb,
and pour across the shadow of the hill,
on rock and flood, a yellow stream of light
that cheere the solemn scene. my listen power
be awe, and every think in silence hang,
and wonder expectation. then the voice
of that celestial power, the mystic show
declare, thus my deep attention call.

inhabitant of earth, to who be give
the gracious way of providence to learn,
receive my say with a steadfast ear —
know then, the sovereign spirit of the world,
though self-collected from eternal time,
within his own deep essence he behold
the circle bound of happiness unite;
yet by immense benignity incline
to spread around he that primaeval joy
which fill himself, he raise his plastic arm,
and sound through the hollow depth of space
the strong, creative mandate. strait arise
these heavenly orb, the glad abode of life
effusive kindle by his breath divine
through endless form of being. each inhale
from he its portion of the vital flame,
in measure such, that from the wide complex
of coexistent order, one may rise,
one order, all-involving and entire. 
he too behold in the sacred light
of his essential reason, all the shape
of swift contingence, all successive tie
of action propagate through the sum
of possible existence, he at once,
down the long series of eventful time,
so fix the date of being, so dispose,
to every live soul of every kind,
the field of motion and the hour of rest,
that all conspire to his supreme design,
to universal good: with full accord
answer the mighty model he have choose,
the best and fair of unnumbered world
that lie from everlasting in the store
of his divine conception. nor content,
by one exertion of create power
his goodness to reveal; through every age,
through every moment up the tract of time,
his parent-hand with ever-new increase
of happiness and virtue have adorn
the vast harmonious frame: his parent-hand,
from mute shell-fish gasp on the shore,
to man, to angel, to celestial mind,
for ever lead the generation on
to high scene of being; while supply
from day to day by his enliven breath,
inferior order in succession rise
to fill the void below. as flame ascend,
as body to their proper centre move,
as the poise ocean to the attract moon
obedient swell, and every headlong stream
devolve its wind water to the main;
so all thing which have life aspire to god,
the sun of being, boundless, unimpaired,
center of soul! nor do the faithful voice
of nature cease to prompt their eager step
aright; nor be the care of heaven withhold
from grant to the task proportion aid;
that in their station all may persevere
to climb the ascent of being, and approach
for ever near to the life divine.

that rocky pile thou see, that verdant lawn
fresh-watered from the mountain. let the scene
paint in thy fancy the primaeval seat
of man, and where the will supreme ordain
his mansion, that pavilion fair-diffused
along the shady brink, in this recess
to wear the appoint season of his youth;
till riper hour shall open to his toil
the high communion of superior mind,
of consecrate hero and of god.
nor do the sire omnipotent forget
his tender bloom to cherish; nor withhold
celestial footstep from his green abode.
oft from the radiant honour of his throne,
he send who most he love, the sovereign fair,
the effluence of his glory, who he place
before his eye for ever to behold;
the goddess from who inspiration flow
the toil of patriot, the delight of friend;
without who work divine, in heaven or earth,
nought lovely, nought propitious come to pass,
nor hope, nor praise, nor honour. her the sire
give it in charge to rear the bloom mind,
the fold power to open, to direct
the growth luxuriant of his young desire,
and from the law of this majestic world
to teach he what be good. as thus the nymph
her daily care attend, by her side
with constant step her gay companion stay,
the fair euphrosyné, the gentle queen
of smile, and graceful gladness, and delight
that cheer alike the heart of mortal man
and power immortal. see the shine pair!
behold, where from his dwelling now disclose,
they quit their youthful charge and seek the sky.

i look, and on the flowery turf there stand,
between two radiant form, a smile youth
who tender cheek display the vernal flower
of beauty; sweet innocence illume
his bashful eye, and on his polish brow
sit young simplicity. with fond regard
he view the associate, as their step they move;
the young chief his ardent eye detain,
with mild regret invoke her return.
bright as the star of evening she appear
amid the dusky scene. eternal youth
over all her form its glow honour breathe;
and smile eternal, from her candid eye,
flow like the dewy lustre of the morn
effusive tremble on the placid wave.
the spring of heaven have shed its blush spoil
to bind her sable tress: full diffuse
her yellow mantle float in the breeze;
and in her hand she wave a live branch
rich with immortal fruit, of power to calm
the wrathful heart, and from the brighten eye
to chase the cloud of sadness. more sublime
the heavenly partner move. the prime of age
compose her step. the presence of a god,
high on the circle of her brow enthrone,
from each majestic motion dart awe,
devote awe! till, cherish by her look
benevolent and meek, confide love
to filial rapture soften all the soul.
free in her graceful hand she poise the sword
of chaste dominion. a heroic crown
display the old simplicity of pomp
around her honour head. a matron robe,
white as the sunshine stream through vernal cloud,
her stately form invest. hand in hand
the immortal pair forsake the enamel green,
ascend slow. ray of limpid light
gleam round their path; celestial sound be hear,
and through the fragrant air aethereal dew
distil around they; till at once the cloud
dispart wide in midway sky, withdraw
their airy veil, and leave a bright expanse
of empyréan flame, where spend and drown,
afflict vision plunge in vain to scan
what object it involve. my feeble eye
endure not. bend down to earth i stand,
with dumb attention. soon a female voice,
as watery murmur sweet, or warble shade,
with sacred invocation thus begin.

father of god and mortal! who right arm
with reins eternal guide the move heaven,
bend thy propitious ear. behold well-pleased
i seek to finish thy divine decree.
with frequent step i visit yonder seat
of man, thy offspring; from the tender seed
of justice and of wisdom, to evolve
the latent honour of his generous frame;
till thy conduct hand shall raise his lot
from earth dim scene to these aethereal walk,
the temple of thy glory. but not i,
not my direct voice he oft require,
or hear delight: this enchant maid,
the associate thou have give i, her alone
he love, o father! absent, her he crave;
and but for her glad presence ever join,
rejoice not in i: that all my hope
this thy benignant purpose to fulfil,
i deem uncertain; and my daily care
unfruitful all and vain, unless by thou
still farther aid in the work divine.

she cease; a voice more awful thus reply.
o thou! in who for ever i delight,
fair than all the inhabitant of heaven,
best image of thy author! far from thou
be disappointment, or distaste, or blame;
who soon or late shall every work fulfil,
and no resistance find. be man refuse
to harken to thy dictate; or allure
by mean joy, to any other power
transfer the honour due to thou alone;
that joy which he pursue he never shall taste,
that power in who delight never behold.
go then once more, and happy be thy toil;
go then! but let not this thy smile friend
partake thy footstep. in her stead, behold!
with thou the son of nemesis i send;
the fiend abhor! who vengeance take account
of sacred order violate law.
see where he call thou, burn to be go,
fierce to exhaust the tempest of his wrath
on yond devote head. but thou, my child,
control his cruel frenzy, and protect
thy tender charge. that when despair shall grasp
his agonize bosom, he may learn,
then he may learn to love the gracious hand
alone sufficient in that hour of ill,
to save his feeble spirit; then confess
thy genuine honour, o excel fair!
when all the plague that wait the deadly will
of this avenge daemon, all the storm
of night infernal, serve but to display
the energy of thy superior charm
with mild awe triumphant over his rage,
and shine clear in the horrid gloom.

here cease that awful voice, and soon i feel
the cloudy curtain of refresh eve
be close once more, from that immortal fire
shelter my eye-lid. look up, i view
a vast gigantic spectre stride on
through murmur thunder and a waste of cloud,
with dreadful action. black as night his brow
relentless frown involve. his savage limb
with sharp impatience violent he writhe,
as through convulsive anguish; and his hand
arm with a scorpion-lash, full oft he raise
in madness to his bosom; while his eye
rain bitter tear, and bellow loud he shake
the void with horror. silent by his side
the virgin come. no discomposure stir
her feature. from the gloom which hang around,
no stain of darkness mingle with the beam
of her divine effulgence. now they stoop
upon the river-bank; and now to hail
his wonted guest, with eager step advance
the unsuspecting inmate of the shade.

as when a famish wolf, that all night long
have range the alpine snow, by chance at morn
see from a cliff incumbent over the smoke
of some lone village, a neglect kid
that stray along the wild for herb or spring;
down from the wind ridge he sweep amain,
and think he tear he: so with tenfold rage,
the monster spring remorseless on his prey.
amaze the stripling stand; with pant breast
feeble he pour the lamentable wail
of helpless consternation, strike at once,
and root to the ground. the queen behold
his terror, and with look of tender care
advance to save he. soon the tyrant feel
her awful power. his keen, tempestuous arm
hang nerveless, nor descend where his rage
have aim the deadly blow: then dumb retire
with sullen rancour. lo! the sovereign maid
fold with a mother arm the faint boy,
till life rekindle in his rosy cheek;
then grasp his hand, and cheer he with her tongue.

o wake thou, rouse thy spirit! shall the spite
of yond tormentor thus appal thy heart,
while i, thy friend and guardian, be at hand
to rescue and to heal? o let thy soul
remember, what the will of heaven ordain
be ever good for all; and if for all,
then good for thou. nor only by the warmth
and soothe sunshine of delightful thing,
do mind grow up and flourish. oft mislead
by that blind light, the young unpractised view
of reason wander through a fatal road,
far from their native aim: as if to lie
inglorious in the fragrant shade, and wait
the soft access of ever-circling joy,
be all the end of being. ask thyself,
this please error do it never lull
thy wish? have thy constant heart refuse
the silken fetter of delicious ease?
or when divine euphrosyné appear
within this dwelling, do not thy desire
hang far below that measure of thy fate,
which i reveal before thou? and thy eye,
impatient of my counsel, turn away
to drink the soft effusion of her smile?
know then, for this the everlasting sire
deprive thou of she presence, and instead,
o wise and still benevolent! ordain
this horrid visage hither to pursue
my step; that so thy nature may discern
its real good, and what alone can save
thy feeble spirit in this hour of ill
from folly and despair. o yet belove!
let not this headlong terror quite overwhelm
thy scatter power; nor fatal deem the rage
of this tormentor, nor his proud assault,
while i be here to vindicate thy toil,
above the generous question of thy arm.
brave by thy fear, and in thy weakness strong,
this hour he triumph; but confront his might,
and dare he to the combat, then with ease
disarm and quell, his fierceness he resign
to bondage and to scorn: while thus inure
by watchful danger, by unceasing toil,
the immortal mind, superior to his fate,
amid the outrage of external thing,
firm as the solid base of this great world,
rest on his own foundation. blow, you wind!
you wave! you thunder! roll your tempest on;
shake, you old pillar of the marble sky!
till all its orb and all its world of fire
be loosen from their seat; yet still serene,
the unconquered mind look down upon the wreck,
and ever strong as the storm advance,
firm through the close ruin hold his way,
where nature call he to the destine goal.

so speak the goddess; while through all her frame
celestial rapture flow, in every word,
in every motion kindle wrath divine
to seize who listen. vehement and swift
as lightning fire the aromatic shade
in aethiopian field, the stripling feel
her inspiration catch his fervid soul,
and start from his languor thus exclaim.

then let the trial come! and witness thou,
if terror be upon i; if i shrink
to meet the storm, or falter in my strength
when hard it beset i. do not think
that i be fearful and infirm of soul,
as late thy eye behold: for thou have change
my nature; thy command voice have wake
my languid power to bear i bold on,
wherever the will divine my path ordain
through toil or peril: only do not thou
forsake i; o be thou for ever near,
that i may listen to thy sacred voice,
and guide by thy decree my constant foot.
but say, for ever be my eye bereave?
say, shall the fair euphrosyné not once
appear again to charm i? thou, in heaven!
o thou eternal arbiter of thing!
be thy great bid do: for who be i
to question thy appointment? let the frown
of this avenger every morn overcast
the cheerful dawn, and every evening damp
with double night my dwelling; i will learn
to hail they both, and unrepining bear
his hateful presence: but permit my tongue
one glad request, and if my deed may find
thy awful eye propitious, o restore
the rosy-featured maid; again to cheer
this lonely seat, and bless i with her smile.
he speak; when instant, through the sable gloom
with which that furious presence have involve
the ambient air, a flood of radiance come
swift as the light'ning-flash; the melt cloud
fly diverse, and amid the blue serene
euphrosyné appear. with sprightly step
the nymph alight on the irriguous lawn,
and to her wonder audience thus begin.

lo! i be here to answer to your vow,
and be the meeting fortunate! i come
with joyful tiding; we shall part no more —
hark! how the gentle echo from her cell
talk through the cliff, and murmur over the stream
repeat the accent; we shall part no more.
o my delightful friend! well-pleased on high
the father have behold you, while the might
of that stern foe with bitter trial prove
your equal do: then for ever speak
the high decree: that thou, celestial maid!
however that grisly phantom on thy step
may sometime dare intrude, yet never more
shall thou descend to the abode of man,
alone endure the rancour of his arm,
or leave thy love euphrosyné behind.
she end; and the whole romantic scene
immediate vanish: rock, and wood, and rill,
the mantling tent, and each mysterious form
fly like the picture of a morning dream,
when sunshine fill the bed. a while i stand
perplex and giddy; till the radiant power
who bid the visionary landscape rise,
as up to he i turn, with gentle look
prevent my inquiry, thus begin.

there let thy soul acknowledge its complaint
how blind, how impious! there behold the way
of heaven eternal destiny to man,
for ever just, benevolent and wise:
that virtue awful step, however pursue
by vex fortune and intrusive pain,
shall never be divide from her chaste,
her fair attendant, pleasure. need i urge
thy tardy thought through all the various round
of this existence, that thy soften soul
at length may learn what energy the hand
of virtue mingle in the bitter tide
of passion swell with distress and pain,
to mitigate the sharp with gracious drop
of cordial pleasure? ask the faithful youth,
why the cold urn of she who long he love
so often fill his arm; so often draw
his lonely footstep at the silent hour,
to pay the mournful tribute of his tear?
o! he will tell thou, that the wealth of world
shall never seduce his bosom to forgo
that sacred hour, when steal from the noise
of care and envy, sweet remembrance sooth
with virtue kind look his ache breast,
and turn his tear to rapture — ask the crowd
which fly impatient from the village-walk
to climb the neighbour cliff, when far below
the cruel wind have hurl upon the coast
some helpless bark; while sacred pity melt
the general eye, or terror icy hand
smite their distort limb and horrent hair;
while every mother close to her breast
catch her child, and point where the wave
foam through the shatter vessel, shriek aloud
as one poor wretch that spread his piteous arm
for succour, swallow by the roar surge,
as now another, dash against the rock,
drop lifeless down: o deem thou indeed
no kind indearment here by nature give
to mutual terror and compassion tear?
no sweetly-melting softness which attract,
over all that edge of pain, the social power
to this their proper action and their end?
— ask thy own heart; when at the midnight hour,
slow through that studious gloom thy pause eye
lead by the glimmer taper move around
the sacred volume of the dead: the song
of graecian bard, and record write by fame
for graecian hero, where the present power
of heaven and earth survey the immortal page,
even as a father blessing, while he read,
the praise of his son. if then thy soul,
spurn the yoke of these inglorious day,
mix in their deed and kindle with their flame;
say, when the prospect blacken on thy view,
when root from the base, heroic state
mourn in the dust and tremble at the frown
of curse ambition; when the pious band
of youth who fight for freedom and their sire,
lie side by side in gore; when ruffian-pride
usurp the throne of justice, turn the pomp
of public power, the majesty of rule,
the sword, the laurel, and the purple robe,
to slavish empty pageant, to adorn
a tyrant walk, and glitter in the eye
of such as bow the knee; when honour urn
of patriot and of chief, the awful bust
and story arch, to glut the coward-rage
of regal envy, strew the public way
with hallow ruin; when the muse haunt,
the marble porch where wisdom wont to talk
with Socrates or Tully, hear no more,
save the hoarse jargon of contentious monk,
or female superstition midnight prayer;
when ruthless rapine from the hand of time
tear the destroy scythe, with sure blow
to sweep the work of glory from their base;
till desolation over the grass-grown street
expand his raven-wing, and up the wall,
where senate once the price of monarch doom,
hiss the glide snake through hoary weed
that clasp the moulder column; thus deface,
thus wide mournful when the prospect thrill
thy beat bosom, when the patriot tear
start from thy eye, and thy extend arm
in fancy hurl the thunderbolt of Jove
to fire the impious wreath on philip brow,
or dash Octavius from the trophy car;
say, do thy secret soul repine to taste
the big distress? or will thou then exchange
those heart-ennobling sorrow for the lot
of he who sit amid the gaudy herd
of mute barbarian bend to his nod,
and bear aloft his gold-invested front,
and say within himself, "i be a king,
"and wherefore shall the clamorous voice of woe
"intrude upon my ear? — the baleful dregs
of these late age, this inglorious draught
of servitude and folly, have not yet,
bless be the eternal ruler of the world!
defile to such a depth of sordid shame
the native honour of the human soul,
nor so efface the image of its sire.

the pleasure of imagination.

book the third.

the pleasure of imagination.

book the third.

what wonder therefore, since endear tie
of passion link the universal kind
of man so close, what wonder if to search
this common nature through the various change
of sex, and age, and fortune, and the frame
of each peculiar, draw the busy mind
with unresisted charm? the spacious west,
and all the teem region of the south
hold not a quarry, to the curious flight
of knowledge, half so tempt or so fair,
as man to man. nor only where the smile
of love invite; nor only where the applause
of cordial honour turn the attentive eye
on virtue graceful deed. for since the course
of thing external act in different way
on human apprehension, as the hand
of nature tempere to a different frame
peculiar mind; so haply where the power
of fancy neither lessen nor enlarge
the image of thing, but paint in all
their genuine hue, the feature which they wear
in nature; there opinion will be true,
and action right. for action tread the path
in which opinion say he follow good,
or fly from evil; and opinion give
report of good or evil, as the scene
be draw by fancy, lovely or deform:
thus her report can never there be true,
where fancy cheat the intellectual eye,
with glare colour and distort line.
be there a man, who at the sound of death,
see ghastly shape of terror conjure up,
and black before he; nought but death-bed groan,
and fearful prayer, and plunge from the brink
of light and being, down the gloomy air,
a unknown depth? alas! in such a mind,
if no bright form of excellence attend
the image of his country; nor the pomp
of sacred senate, nor the guardian voice
of justice on her throne, nor aught that wake
the conscious bosom with a patriot flame;
will not opinion tell he, that to die,
or stand the hazard, be a great ill
than to betray his country? and in act
will he not choose to be a wretch and live?
here vice begin then. from the enchant cup
which fancy hold to all, the unwary thirst
of youth oft swallow a circaean draught,
that shed a baleful tincture over the eye
of reason, till no long he discern,
and only guide to err. then revel forth
a furious band that spurn he from the throne;
and all be uproar. thus ambition grasp
the empire of the soul: thus pale revenge
unsheath her murderous dagger; and the hand
of lust and rapine, with unholy art,
watch to overturn the barrier of the law
that keep they from their prey: thus all the plague
the wicked bear, or over the tremble scene
the tragic muse disclose, under shape
of honour, safety, pleasure, ease or pomp,
steal first into the mind. yet not by all
those lie form which fancy in the brain
engender, be the kindle passion drive
to guilty deed; nor reason bind in chain,
that vice alone may lord it: oft adorn
with solemn pageant, folly mount his throne,
and play her idiot-antick, like a queen.
a thousand garb she wear; a thousand way
she wheel her giddy empire. — lo! thus far
with bold adventure, to the mantuan lyre
i sing of nature charm, and touch well-pleased
a stricter note: now haply must my song
unbend her serious measure, and reveal
in light strain, how folly awkward art
excite impetuous laughter gay rebuke;
the sportive province of the comic muse.

see! in what croud the uncouth form advance,
each will outstrip the other, each prevent
our careful search, and offer to your gaze,
unasked, his motley feature. wait awhile,
my curious friend! and let we first arrange
in proper order your promiscuous throng.

behold the foremost band; of slender thought,
and easy faith; who flatter fancy sooth
with lie spectre, in themselves to view
illustrious form of excellence and good,
that scorn the mansion. with exult heart
they spread their spurious treasure to the sun;
and bid the world admire! but chief the glance
of wishful envy draw their joy-bright eye,
and list with self-applause each lordly brow.
in number boundless as the bloom of spring,
behold their glare idol, empty shade
by fancy gild over, and then set up
for adoration. some in learning garb,
with formal band and sable-cinctured gown,
and rag of mouldy volume. some elate
with martial splendour, steely pike, and sword
of costly frame, and gay phoenician robe
inwrought with flower gold, assume the port
of stately valour: listen by his side
there stand a female form; to she, with look
of earnest import, pregnant with amaze,
he talk of deadly deed, of breach, storm,
and sulphurous mine, and ambush: then at once
break off, and smile to see she look so pale,
and ask some wonder question of her fear.
other of grave mien; behold, adorn
with holy ensign, how sublime they move,
and bend oft their sanctimonious eye,
take homage of the simple-minded throng;
ambassador of heaven! nor much unlike
be he who visage, in the lazy mist
that mantle every feature, hide a brood
of politic conceit; of whisper, nod,
and hint deep-omened with unwieldy scheme,
and dark portent of state. ten thousand more,
prodigious habit and tumultuous tongue,
pour dauntless in and swell the boastful band.

then come the second order; all who seek
the debt of praise, where watchful unbelief
dart through the thin pretence her squint eye
on some retire appearance which belief
the boast virtue, or annul the applause
that justice else will pay. here side by side
i see two leader of the solemn train,
approach: one a female, old and grey,
with eye demure and wrinkle-furrowed brow,
pale as the cheek of death; yet still she stun
the sicken audience with a nauseous tale;
how many youth her myrtle chain have wear,
how many virgin at her triumph pine!
yet how resolve she guard her cautious heart;
such be her terror at the risque of love,
and man seduce tongue! the other seem
a beard sage, ungentle in his mien,
and sordid all his habit; peevish want
grin at his heel, while down the gaze throng
he stalk, resound in magnific phrase
the vanity of riches, the contempt
of pomp and power. be prudent in your zeal,
you grave associate! let the silent grace
of she who blush at the fond regard
her charm inspire, more eloquent unfold
the praise of spotless honour: let the man
who eye regard not his illustrious pomp
and ample store, but as indulgent stream
to cheer the barren soil and spread the fruit
of joy, let he by juster measure fix
the price of riches and the end of power.

another tribe succeed; delude long
by fancy dazzle optic, these behold
the image of some peculiar thing
with bright hue resplendent, and portray
with feature noble far than ever adorn
their genuine object. hence the severe heart
pant with delirious hope for tinsel charm;
hence oft obtrusive on the eye of scorn,
untimely zeal her witless pride betray;
and serious manhood, from the tower aim
of wisdom, stoop to emulate the boast
of childish toil. behold yond mystic form,
bedeck with feather, insect, weed and shell!
not with intenser brow the samian sage
bent his fix eye on heaven eternal fire,
when first the order of that radiant scene
swell his exult thought, than this survey
a muckworm entrails or a spider fang.
next he a youth, with flower and myrtle crown,
attend that virgin form, and blush kneel,
with fond gesture and a suppliant tongue,
to win her coy regard: adieu, for he,
the dull engagement of the bustle world!
adieu the sick impertinence of praise!
and hope, and action! for with her alone,
by stream and shade, to steal the sigh hour,
be all he ask, and all that fate can give!
thou too, facetious momion, wander here,
thou, dread censor! oft have i behold
bewilder unaware: alas! too long
flush with thy comic triumph and the spoil
of sly derision! till on every side
hurl thy random bolt, offend truth
assign thou here thy station with the slave
of folly. thy once formidable name
shall grace her humble record, and be hear
in scoff and mockery bandy from the lip
of all the vengeful brotherhood around,
so oft the patient victim of thy scorn.

but now, you gay! to who indulgent fate,
of all the muse empire have assign
the field of folly, hither each advance
your sickle; here the teem soil afford
its rich growth. a favourite brood appear;
in who the daemon, with a mother joy,
view all her charm reflect, all her care
at full repay. you most illustrious band!
who scorn reason tame, pedantic rule,
and order vulgar bondage, never mean
for soul sublime as you, with generous zeal
pay vice the reverence virtue long usurp,
and yield deformity the fond applause
which beauty wont to claim; forgive my song,
that for the blush diffidence of youth,
it shun the unequal province of your praise.

thus far triumphant in the please guile
of bland imagination, folly train
have dare our search: but now a dastard-kind
advance reluctant, and with falter foot
shrink from the gazer eye: infeeble heart,
who fancy chill with visionary fear,
or bend to servile tameness with conceit
of shame, of evil, or of base defect,
fantastic and delusive. here the slave
who droop abash when sullen pomp survey
his humble habit: here the tremble wretch
unnerved and freeze with terror icy bolt
spend in weak wail, drown in shameful tear,
at every dream of danger: here subdue
by frontless laughter and the hardy scorn
of old, unfeeling vice, the abject soul
who blush half resign the candid praise
of temperance and honour; half disown
a freeman hatred of tyrannic pride;
and hear with sickly smile the venal mouth
with foul licence mock the patriot name.

last of the motley band on who the power
of gay derision bend her hostile aim,
be that where shameful ignorance preside.
beneath her sordid banner, lo! they march,
like blind and lame. whatever their doubtful hand
attempt, confusion strait appear behind,
and trouble all the work. through many a maze,
perplex they struggle, change every path,
overturn every purpose; then at last
sit down dismay, and leave entangle scene
for scorn to sport with. such then be th'abode
of folly in the mind; and such the shape
in which she govern her obsequious train.
though every scene of ridicule in thing
to lead the tenor of my devious lay;
through every swift occasion, which the hand
of laughter point at, when the mirthful sting
distend her sally nerve and choke her tongue;
what be it but to count each crystal drop
which morning dewy finger on the bloom
of may distil? suffice it to have say,
wherever the power of ridicule display
her quaint-eyed visage, some incongruous form,
some stubborn dissonance of thing combine,
strike on the quick observer: whether pomp,
or praise, or beauty mix their partial claim
where sordid fashion, where ignoble deed,
where foul deformity be wont to dwell,
or whether these with violation loathe,
invade resplendent pomp imperious mien,
the charm of beauty, or the boast of praise.

ask we for what fair end, the almighty sire
in mortal bosom wake this gay contempt,
these grateful sting of laughter, from disgust
educe pleasure? wherefore, but to aid
the tardy step of reason, and at once
by this prompt impulse urge we to depress
the giddy aim of folly? though the light
of truth slow-dawning on the inquire mind,
at length unfold, through many a subtle tie,
how these uncouth disorder end at last
in public evil; yet benignant heaven
conscious how dim the dawn of truth appear
to thousand; conscious what a scanty pause
from labour and from care, the wide lot
of humble life afford for studious thought
to scan the maze of nature; therefore stamp
the glare scene with character of scorn,
as broad, as obvious to the pass clown,
as to the letter sage curious eye.

such be the various aspect of the mind —
some heavenly genius, who unclouded thought
attain that secret harmony which blend
the aethereal spirit with its mould of clay;
o! teach i to reveal the grateful charm
that searchless nature over the sense of man
diffuse, to behold, in lifeless thing,
the inexpressive semblance of himself,
of thought and passion. Mark the sable wood
that shade sublime yond mountain nod brow;
with what religious awe the solemn scene
command your step! as if the reverend form
of Minos or of Numa shall forsake
the elysian seat, and down the embower glade
move to your pause eye! behold the expanse
of yond gay landscape, where the silver cloud
flit over the heaven before the sprightly breeze:
now their grey cincture skirt the doubtful sun;
now stream of splendour, through their open veil
effulgent, sweep from off the gild lawn
the aerial shadow; on the curl brook,
and on the shady margin quiver leaf
with quick lustre glance: while you view
the prospect, say, within your cheerful breast
play not the lively sense of win mirth
with cloud and sunshine chequer, while the round
of social converse, to the inspire tongue
of some gay nymph amid her subject-train,
move all obsequious? whence be this effect,
this kindred power of such discordant thing?
or flow their semblance from that mystic tone
to which the new-born mind harmonious power
at first be string? or rather from the link
which artful custom twine around her frame?

for when the different image of thing
by chance combine, have strike the attentive soul
with deep impulse, or connect long,
have draw her frequent eye; however distinct
the external scene, yet oft the idea gain
from that conjunction a eternal tie,
and sympathy unbroken. let the mind
recall one partner of the various league,
immediate, lo! the firm confederate rise,
and each his former station strait resume:
one movement govern the consent throng,
and all at once with rosy pleasure shine,
or all be sadden with the gloom of care.
it be thus, if ancient fame the truth unfold,
two faithful needle, from the inform touch
of the same parent-stone, together draw
its mystic virtue, and at first conspire
with fatal impulse quiver to the pole;
then, though disjoin by kingdom, though the main
roll its broad surge betwixt, and different star
behold their wakeful motion, yet preserve
the former friendship, and remember still
the alliance of their birth: whatever the line
which one possess, nor pause, nor quiet know
the sure associate, ere with tremble speed
he find its path and fix unerring there.
such be the secret union, when we feel
a song, a flower, a name at once restore
those long-connected scene where first they move
the attention; backward through her mazy walk
guide the wanton fancy to her scope,
to temple, court or field; with all the band
of paint form, of passion and design
attendant: whence, if please in itself,
the prospect from that sweet accession gain
redouble influence over the listen mind.

by these mysterious tie the busy power
of memory her ideal train preserve
entire; or when they will elude her watch,
reclaim their fleet footstep from the waste
of dark oblivion; thus collect all
the various form of being to present,
before the curious aim of mimic be,
their large choice: like spring unfolded bloom
exhal sweetness, that the skillful bee
may taste at will, from their select spoil
to work her dulcet food. for not the expanse
of live lake in summer noontide calm,
reflect the border shade and sun-bright heaven
with fair semblance; not the sculpture gold
more faithful keep the graver lively trace,
than he who birth the sister-power of art
propitious view, and from his genial star
shed influence to the seed of fancy kind;
than his attemper bosom must preserve
the seal of nature. there alone unchanged,
her form remain. the balmy walk of may
there breathe perennial sweet: the tremble chord
resound for ever in the abstract ear,
melodious; and the virgin radiant eye,
superior to disease, to grief, and time,
shine with unbating lustre. thus at length
endow with all that nature can bestow,
the child of fancy oft in silence bend
over these mix treasure of his pregnant breast,
with conscious pride. from they he oft resolve
to frame he know not what excel thing;
and win he know not what sublime reward
of praise and wonder. by degree the mind
feel her young nerve dilate: the plastic power
labour for action: blind emotion heave
his bosom; and with lovely frenzy catch,
from earth to heaven he roll his dare eye,
from heaven to earth. anon ten thousand shape,
like spectre troop to the wizard call,
fleet swift before he. from the womb of earth
from ocean bed they come: the eternal heaven
disclose their splendor, and the dark abyss
pour out her birth unknown. with fix gaze
he mark the rise phantom. now compare
their different form; now blend they, now divide;
enlarge and extenuate by turn;
oppose, range in fantastic band,
and infinite vary. hither now,
now thither fluctuate his inconstant aim,
with endless choice perplex. at length his plan
begin to open. lucid order dawn;
and as from chaos old the jar seed
of nature at the voice divine repair
each to its place, till rosy earth unveiled
her fragrant bosom, and the joyful sun
spring up the blue serene; by swift degree
thus disentangle, his entire design
emerge. colour mingle, feature join,
and line converge: the faint part retire;
the fair eminent in light advance;
and every image on its neighbour smile.
a while he stand, and with a father joy
contemplate. then with promethean art,
into its proper vehicle he breathe
the fair conception; which embody thus,
and permanent, become to eye or ear
a object ascertain: while thus inform,
the various organ of his mimic skill,
the consonance of sound, the feature rock,
the shadowy picture and impassion verse,
beyond their proper power attract the soul
by that expressive semblance, while in sight
of nature great original we scan
the lively child of art; while line by line,
and feature after feature we refer
to that sublime exemplar whence it steal
those animate charm. thus beauty palm
betwixt they waver hang: applaud love
doubt where to choose; and mortal man aspire
to tempt creative praise. as when a cloud
of gather hail with limpid crust of ice
enclose and obvious to the beam sun,
collect his large effulgence; strait the heaven
with equal flame present on either hand
the radiant visage: Persia stand at gaze,
appal; and on the brink of Ganges wait
the snowy-vested seer, in mithra name,
to which the fragrance of the south shall burn,
to which his warble orison ascend.

such various bliss the well-tuned heart enjoy,
favour of heaven! while plunge in sordid care,
the unfeeling vulgar mock the boon divine:
and harsh austerity, from who rebuke
young love and smile wonder shrink away,
abash and chill of heart, with sage frown
condemn the fair enchantment. on, my strain,
perhaps even now some cold, fastidious judge
cast a disdainful eye; and call my toil,
and call the love and beauty which i sing,
the dream of folly. thou grave censor! say,
be beauty then a dream, because the gloom
of dullness hang too heavy on thy sense
to let she shine upon thou? so the man
who eye never open on the light of heaven,
may smile with scorn while rapture vision tell
of the gay, colour radiance flush bright
over all creation. from the wise be far
such gross, unhallowed pride; nor need my song
descend so low; but rather now unfold,
if human thought can reach, or word unfold,
by what mysterious fabric of the mind,
the deep-felt joy and harmony of sound
result from airy motion; and from shape
the lovely phantom of sublime and fair.
by what fine tie have god connect thing
when present in the mind; which in themselves
have no connection? sure the rise sun,
over the caerulean convex of the sea,
with equal brightness and with equal warmth
may roll his fiery orb; nor yet the soul
thus feel her frame expand, and her power
exult in the splendour she behold;
like a young conqueror move through the pomp
of some triumphal day. when join at eve,
soft-murmuring stream and gale of gentle breath
melodious philomela wakeful strain
attempre, can not man discern ear
through all its tone the symphony pursue;
nor yet this breath divine of nameless joy
steal through his vein and fan th'awakened heart,
mild as the breeze, yet rapturous as the song?

but be not nature still endow at large
with all which life require, though unadorned
with such enchantment? wherefore then her form
so exquisite fair? her breath perfume
with such aethereal sweetness? whence her voice
inform at will to raise or to depress
the impassion soul? and whence the robe of light
which thus invest she with more lovely pomp
than fancy can describe? whence but from thou,
o source divine of ever-flowing love,
and thy unmeasured goodness? not content
with every food of life to nourish man,
by kind illusion of the wonder sense
thou make all nature beauty to his eye,
or music to his ear: well-pleased he scan
the goodly prospect; and with inward smile
tread the gay verdure of the paint plain;
behold the azure canopy of heaven,
and live lamp that overarch his head
with more than regal splendour; bend his ear
to the full choir of water, air, and earth;
nor heed the please error of his thought,
nor doubt the paint green or azure arch,
nor question more the music mingle sound
than space, or motion, or eternal time:
so sweet he feel their influence to attract
the fix soul; to brighten the dull gloom
of care, and make the destine road of life
delightful to his foot. so fable tell,
the adventurous hero, bind on hard exploit,
behold with glad surprise, by secret spell
of some kind sage, the patron of his toil,
a visionary paradise disclose
amid the dubious wild: with stream, and shade,
and airy song, the enchant landscape smile,
cheer his long labour and renew his frame.

what then be taste, but these internal power
active, and strong, and feel alive
to each fine impulse? a discern sense
of decent and sublime, with quick disgust
from thing deform, or disarrange, or gross
in species? this, nor gem, nor store of gold,
nor purple state, nor culture can bestow;
but god alone, when first his active hand
imprint the secret bias of the soul.
he, mighty parent! wise and just in all,
free as the vital breeze or light of heaven,
reveal the charm of nature. ask the swain
who journey homeward from a summer day
long labour, why, forgetful of his toil
and due repose, he loiter to behold
the sunshine gleam as through amber cloud,
over all the western sky; full soon, i ween,
his rude expression and untutored air,
beyond the power of language, will unfold
the form of beauty smile at his heart,
how lovely! how command! but though heaven
in every breast have sow these early seed
of love and admiration, yet in vain,
without fair culture kind parental aid,
without enliven sun, and genial shower,
and shelter from the blast, in vain we hope
the tender plant shall rear its bloom head,
or yield the harvest promise in its spring.
nor yet will every soil with equal store
repay the tiller labour; or attend
his will, obsequious, whether to produce
the olive or the laurel. different mind
incline to different object: one pursue
the vast alone, the wonderful, the wild;
another sigh for harmony, and grace,
and gentle beauty. hence when lightning fire
the arch of heaven, and thunder rock the ground;
when furious whirlwind rend the howl air,
and ocean, groan from the low bed,
heave his tempestuous billow to the sky;
amid the mighty uproar, while below
the nation tremble, Shakespear look abroad
from some high cliff, superior, and enjoy
the elemental war. but Waller long,
all on the margin of some flowery stream
to spread his careless limb amid the cool
of plantane shade, and to the listen deer,
the tale of slight vow and love disdain
resound soft-warbling all the live-long day:
consent zephyr sigh; the weep rill
join in his plaint, melodious; mute the grove;
and hill and dale with all their echo mourn.
such and so various be the taste of man.

oh! bless of heaven, who not the languid song
of luxury, the siren! not the bribe
of sordid wealth, nor all the gaudy spoil
of pageant honour can seduce to leave
those ever-blooming sweet, which from the store
of nature fair imagination cull
to charm the enliven soul! what though not all
of mortal offspring can attain the height
of envy life; though only few possess
patrician treasure or imperial state;
yet nature care, to all her child just,
with rich treasure and a ampler state
indow at large whatever happy man
will deign to use they. he the city pomp,
the rural honour his. whatever adorn
the princely dome, the column and the arch,
the breathe marble and the sculpture gold,
beyond the proud possessor narrow claim,
his tuneful breast enjoy. for he, the spring
distil her dew, and from the silken gem
its lucid leaf unfold: for he, the hand
of autumn tinge every fertile branch
with bloom gold and blush like the morn.
each pass hour shed tribute from her wing;
and still new beauty meet his lonely walk;
and love unfelt attract he. not a breeze
fly over the meadow, not a cloud imbibe
the set sun effulgence, not a strain
from all the tenant of the warble shade
ascend, but whence his bosom can partake
fresh pleasure, unreproved. nor thence partake
fresh pleasure only: for the attentive mind,
by this harmonious action on her power,
become herself harmonious: wont so long
in outward thing to meditate the charm
of sacred order, soon she seek at home
to find a kindred order, to exert
within herself this elegance of love,
this fair-inspired delight: her tempere power
refine at length, and every passion wear
a chaster, mild, more attractive mien.
but if to ampler prospect, if to gaze
on nature form where negligent of all
these less grace, she assume the port
of that eternal majesty that weigh
the world foundation, if to these the mind
exalt her dare eye; then mighty far
will be the change, and noble. will the form
of servile custom cramp her generous power?
will sordid policy, the barbarous growth
of ignorance and rapine, bow she down
to tame pursuit, to indolence and fear?
lo! she appeal to nature, to the wind
and roll wave, the sun be unwearied course,
the element and season: all declare
for what the eternal maker have ordain
the power of man: we feel within ourselves
he energy divine: he tell the heart,
he mean, he make we to behold and love
what he behold and love, the general orb
of life and being; to be great like he,
beneficent and active. thus the man
who nature work can charm, with god himself
hold converse; grow familiar, day by day,
with his conception; act upon his plan;
and form to he, the relish of their soul.
