the death of Arachne,

a heroi-comi-tragic-poem.

the shrink brook and russet mead complain
 that summer tyrant, fervid Sirius, reign;
 full west the sun from heaven descend ride,
 and six the shadow on the dial show. 
Philo, though young, to muse much incline,
 a shameless sloven, in his gown have dine,
 from table sneak with a sheepish face,
 before the circle be dismiss with grace,
 and smoke now, his desk with book overspread,
 thick cloud of incense roll around his head:
 he head, which save a quarter growth of hair,
 his woollen cap long since scratch off, be bare:
 he beard three day have grow, of golden hue,
 black be his shirt, uncomely to the view;
 cross-legged he sit, and his ungartered hose
 of each lean limb half hide, and half expose;
 his cheek he lean upon his hand; below
 his nutbrown slipper hang upon his toe. 

now with abstract flight he climb apace,
 high and more high, through pure unbounded space;
 now mere privation fail the wing of thought,
 he drop down headlong through the vast of nought;
 a friendly vapour mathesis supply,
 bear on the surge smoke he joy to rise;
 matter through mode and quality pursue,
 now catch, entranced its naked essence view;
 now wake; the vision fade from his sight
 leave doubt behind, the mist of mental night:
 exist not, but possible alone,
 he deem all substance, and suspect his own;
 like wave by wave impel, now question roll —
 do soul in ought subsist, or all in soul? 
be space, extension, nothing but a name,
 and mere idea nature mighty frame? 
all power, all form, to intellect confine:
 place, agent, subject, instrument combine? 
be spirit diverse, yet from number free,
 conjoin by harmony in unity? —
 truth be spotless white what pierce eye descry,
 when the ray break take opinion dye! —
 in vain now philo seek the sacred light,
 in chaos plunge, where embryo system fight. 

in this dark hour, unnoticed, cloe come,
 his study-door admit the shine dame;
 with nature charm she join the charm of art,
 wife of his choice, and mistress of his heart;
 what on her head she wear, erect and high,
 unnamed above, be call on earth a fly;
 in wanton ringlet her fair tress fall,
 her breast beneath transparent muslin swell;
 stud with flame gem a buckle bind
 the embroider zone her slender waist around;
 thence to her foot a vast rotund display
 the mingle colour of the rich brocade;
 this aid fancy, blend shame and pride,
 inflame with beauty it be mean to hide:
 with careless ease the nymph first snap her fan,
 roll round her radiant eye, and thus begin;
 "how can thou, Philo, here delight to sit,
" immerse in learning, nastiness, and wit? 
 "clean from the chest, where various odour breathe,
" and die rose their last sweet bequeathe,
 "a shirt for thou, by my command, the maid
" three hour ago before the fire display;
 "the barber, wait to renew thy face,
" hold thy wig powder in the pasteboard case;
 "thy silken breech, and thy hose of thread,
" coat, waistcoat, all, lie ready on the bed. 
 "renounce that odious pipe, this filthy cell,
" where silence, dust, and pagan author dwell:
 "come! shall the lady wait in vain for thou? 
" come! taste with we the charm of mirth and tea, " 

as Philo hear confuse the silver sound,
 his soul emerge from the dark profound,
 on the bright vision full he turn his eye;
 touch, as he gaze, with pleasure and surprise,
 the first faint dawn of a smile appear,
 and now in act to speak, he stroke his beard,
 when from a shelf just over the fair one head,
 down drop Arachne by the viscous thread. 
back start the nymph, with terror and dismay,
 "the spider! oh!" — be all that she can say. 

at this the sage resume the look severe,
 "renounce, with woman folly, woman fear!" 
he say, and careful to the shelf convey
 the hapless rival of the blue-eyed maid. 

the enormous deed astonish cloe-viewed,
 and rage the crimson on her cheek renew. 
 "must then, say she, such hideous vermin crawl
" indulge, protect, over the cobwebbed wall? 
 "destroy she quick — here her life i claim,
" if not for love or decency, for shame. " 

 "shame be to guilt, reply the man of thought,
" to slave of custom, never by reason teach,
 "who spare no life that touch not their own,
" by fear their cruelty restrain alone. 
 "no blameless insect live its destine hour,
" catch in the murder vortex of their power. 
 "for i, the virtue of the mind i learn
" from sage Arachne, for who life you burn;
 "from her, when busy all the summer day
" she weave the curious woof that snare her prey,
 "i learn fair industry and art to prize,
" admire nature provident wise,
 "who, though her bounty unexhausted flow,
" not daily bread on idleness bestow. 

 "Arachne, still superior to despair,
" restore with art what accident impair,
 "the thousand time the break thread renew,
" and one great end with fortitude pursue;
 "to i her toil be never renew in vain,
" teach what the wise by perseverance gain,
 "warm by example to the glorious strife,
" and teach to conquer in the fight of life. 

 "when now with rest amid her labour crown,
" she watchful, patient, eye the circle round,
 "i learn, when toil have well deserve success,
" hope placid, calm, expectance to possess,
 "with care to watch, with patience still to wait
" the golden moment, though delay by fate. " 

impatient cloe thus again reply;
 "how soon be error through each veil descry! 
" still boast reason power, how weak be we! 
 "how blind, alas! to all we will not see! 
" else how can philo, in a spider cause,
 "talk thus of mercy with deserve applause? 
" or call aught virtuous industry and skill,
 "exert only to surprise and kill? 
" the blameless insect, who no murder feed,
 "for her, the victim of her cunning, bleed;
" cunning! which when to wisdom we compare,
 "be but to she, to man what monkey be." 

 "hold! Philo cry, and know, the same decree
" give she the fly, which give the lamb to thou;
 "or why those wing adapt to the snare,
" why interceptive hang the net in air? 
 "as plain in these the precept," kill and eat, "
" as in thy skill to carve the live treat. " 

to this, she cry, "persuade i, if you can,
" man lord of all, and all be make for man. " 
" vain thought! the child of ignorance and pride! " 
" disdainful smile, quick he reply;
 "to man, vain reptile! tell i of what use
" be all that afric people waste produce? 
 "the nameless monster of the swarm sea,
" the pigmy nation waft on the breeze? 
 "the happy myriad, by his eye unseen,
" that bask in flower, and quicken all the green? 
 "why live these number bless in nature state? 
" why live this spider object of thy hate? 
 "why man? but life in common to possess,
" wide to diffuse the stream of happiness;
 "bless stream! the overflow of the parent mind,
" great without pride, and without weakness kind. " 

with downcast eye, and sigh, and modest air,
 thus in soft sound reply the wily fair:
 "this fatal subtlety thy book impart
" to baffle truth, when unsustained by art;
 "for this, when cloe go at twelve to bed,
" till three you sit in converse with the dead:
 "no wonder then, in vain my skill employ
" to prove it best that vermin be destroy —
 "but though you proud triumph over my sex,
" joy to confute, and reason but to vex,
 "yet, if you love i, to oblige your wife,
" what can you less! you will take a spider life. 
 "once to prevent my wish Philo fly,
" but time that alter all, have alter you. 
 "yet still unchanged poor cloe love remain;
" these tear my witness, which your pride disdain;
 "these tear, at once my witness and relief." 
here pause the fair, all eloquent in grief. 

he, who have often, and alone, overturn
 witling, and sophist, when his fury burn,
 now yield to love the fortress of his soul:
 he eye with vengeance on Arachne roll:
 "curse wretch, thou poisonous quintessence of ill,
" those precious drop, unpunished, shall thou spill? " 
he say, and stoop, from his foot he draw,
 black as his purpose, what be once a shoe;
 now, high in air the fatal heel ascend,
 reason last effort now the stroke suspend;
 in doubt he stand — when, breathe from cloe breast,
 a struggle sigh her inward grief express. 
fire by the sound," die, sorceress, die, "he cry,
 and to his arm his utmost strength apply:
 crush fall the foe, one complicate wound,
 and the smite shelf return a jar sound. 

on ida top thus Venus erst prevail,
 when all the sapience of Minerva fail:
 thus to like art a prey, as poet tell,
 by Juno love in vain, great Dido fall. 
and thus for ever beauty shall control
 the saint, the sage, and the hero soul. 

but Jove with hate behold the atrocious deed,
 and vengeance follow with tremendous speed;
 in philo mind she quench the ray that fire
 with love of science, and with verse inspire,
 expunge at once the philosophic theme,
 all sage think and all that poet dream;
 yield he thus change a vassal to the fair;
 and forth she lead he with a victor air:
 dress to her wish, he mix with the gay,
 as much a trifle, and as vain as they;
 to fix their power, and rivet fast the chain,
 they lead where pleasure spread her soft domain;
 where, drown in music reason hoarse call,
 love smile triumphant in thy grove, vauxhall. 
