calthon and colmal: a poem.

pleasant be the voice of thy song, thou lonely dweller of the rock. it come on the sound of the stream, along the narrow vale. my soul awake, o stranger! in the midst of my hall. i stretch my hand to the spear, as in the day of other year. — i stretch my hand, but it be feeble; and the sigh of my bosom grow. — will thou not listen, son of the rock, to the song of Ossian? my soul be full of other time; the joy of my youth return. thus the sun appear in the west, after the step of his brightness have move behind a storm; the green hill lift their dewy head: the blue stream rejoice in the vale. the age hero come forth on his staff, and his grey hair glitter in the beam.

do thou not behold, son of the rock, a shield in ossian hall? it be mark with the stroke of battle; and the brightness of its boss have fail. that shield the great dunthalmo bear, the chief of streamy teutha. — dunthalmo bear it in battle, before he fall by ossian spear. listen, son of the rock, to the tale of other year. —

rathmor be a chief of clutha. the feeble dwell in his hall. the gate of rathmor be never close; his feast be always spread. the son of the stranger come, and bless the generous chief of clutha. bard raise the song, and touch the harp: and joy brighten on the face of the mournful. — dunthalmo come, in his pride, and rush into the combat of rathmor. the chief of clutha overcome: the rage of dunthalmo rise — he come, by night, with his warrior; and the mighty rathmor fall. he fall in his hall, where his feast be often spread for stranger. —

colmar and calthon be young, the son of carborne rathmor. they come, in the joy of youth, into their father hall. they behold he in his blood, and their burst tear descend. — the soul of dunthalmo melt, when he see the child of youth; he bring they to al-teutha. wall; they grow in the house of their foe. — they bend the bow in his presence; and come forth to his battle.

they see the fall wall of their father; they see the green thorn in the hall. their tear descend in secret; and, at time, their face be mournful. dunthalmo behold their grief: his darken soul design their death. he close they in two cave, on the echo bank of teutha. the sun do not come there with his beam; nor the moon of heaven by night. the son of rathmor remain in darkness, and foresee their death.

the daughter of dunthalmo weep in silence, the fair-haired, blue-eyed colmal. her eye have roll in secret on calthon; his loveliness swell in her soul. she tremble for her warrior; but what can colmal do? her arm can not lift the spear; nor be the sword sorm for her side. her white breast never rise beneath a mail. neither be her eye the terror of hero. what can thou do, o colmal! for the fall chief? — her step be unequal; her hair be loose: her eye look wild through her tear. — she come, by night, to the hall; and arm her lovely form in steel; the steel of a young warrior, who fall in the first of his battle. — she come to the cave of calthon, and loose the thong from his hand.

arise, son of rathmor, she say, arise, the night be dark. let we fly to the king of Selma, chief of fall clutha! i be the son of lamgal, who dwell in thy father hall. i hear of thy dark dwelling in the cave, and my soul arise. arise, son of rathmor, for the night be dark. —

bless voice! reply the chief, come thou from the darkly-rolling cloud? for often the ghost of his father descend to calthon dream, since the sun have retire from his eye, and darkness have dwell around he. or be thou the son of lamgal, the chief i often see in clutha? but will i fly to Fingal, and colmar my brother low? will i fly to Morven, and the hero close in night? no: give i that spear, son of lamgal, calthon will defend his brother.

a thousand hero, reply the maid, stretch their spear round carborne colmar. what can calthon do against a host so great? let we fly to the king of Morven, he will come with battle. his arm be stretch forth to the unhappy; the lightning of his sword be round the weak. — arise, thou son of rathmor; the shadow will fly away. dunthalmo will behold thy step on the field, and thou must fall in thy youth.

the sigh hero rise; his tear descend for carborne colmar. he come with the maid to selma hall; but he know not that it be colmal. the helmet cover her lovely face; and her breast rise beneath the steel. Fingal return from the chace, and find the lovely stranger. they be like two beam of light, in the midst of the hall.

the kind hear the tale of grief; and turn his eye around. a thousand hero half-rose before he; claim the war of teutha. — i come with my spear from the hill, and the joy of battle rise in my breast: for the king speak to Ossian in the midst of the people.

son of my strength, he say, take the spear of Fingal; go to teutha mighty stream, and save the carborne colmar. — let thy fame return before thou like a pleasant gale; that my soul may rejoice over my son, who renew the renown of our father. — Ossian! be thou a storm in battle; but mild when the foe be low! — it be thus my fame arise, o my son; and be thou like selma chief. — when the haughty come to my hall, my eye behold they not. but my arm be stretch forth to the unhappy. my sword defend the weak.

i rejoice in the word of the king: and take my rattle arm. — diaran rise at my side, and dargo king of spear. — three hundred youth follow our step: the lovely stranger be at my side. dunthalmo hear the sound of our approach; he gather the strength of teutha. — he stand on a hill with his host; they be like rock break with thunder, when their bend tree be singe and bare, and the stream of their chink have fail.

the stream of teutha roll, in its pride, before the gloomy foe. i send a bard to dunthalmo, to offer the combat on the plain; but he smile in the darkness of his pride. — his unsettled host move on the hill; like the mountain-cloud, when the blast have enter its womb, and scatter the curl gloom on every side.

they bring colmar to teutha bank, bind with a thousand thong. the chief be sad, but lovely, and his eye be on his friend; for we stand, in our arm, on the opposite bank of teutha. dunthalmo come with his spear, and pierce the hero side: he roll on the bank in his blood, and we hear his break sigh.

calthon rush into the stream: i bound forward on my spear. teutha race fall before we. night come roll down. dunthalmo rest on a rock, amid a age wood. the rage of his bosom burn against the carborne calthon. — but calthon stand in his grief; he mourn the fall colmar; colmar slay in youth, before his fame arise.

i bid the song of woe to rise, to sooth the mournful chief; but he stand beneath a tree, and often throw his spear on earth. — the humid eye of colmal roll near in a secret tear: she foresee the fall of dunthalmo, or of clutha battle chief.

now half the night have pass away. silence and darkness be on the field; sleep rest on the eye of the hero: calthon settle soul be still. his eye be half-closed; but the murmur of teutha have not yet fail in his ear. — pale, and show his wound, the ghost of colmar come: he bend his head over the hero, and raise his feeble voice.

sleep the son of rathmor in his night, and his brother low? do we not rise to the chace together, and pursue the dark-brown hind? colmar be not forget till he fall; till death have blast his youth. i lie pale beneath the rock of lona. o let calthon rise! the morning come with its beam; and dunthalmo will dishonour the fall.

he pass away in his blast. the rise calthon see the step of his departure. — he rush in the sound of his steel; and unhappy colmal rise. she follow her hero through night, and drag her spear behind. — but when calthon come to lona rock, he find his fall brother — the rage of his bosom rise, and he rush among the foe. the groan of death ascend. they close around the chief. — he be bind in the midst, and bring to gloomy dunthalmo. — the shout of joy arise; and the hill of night reply. —

i start at the sound: and take my father spear. diaran rise at my side; and the youthful strength of dargo. we miss the chief of clutha, and our soul be sad. — i dread the departure of my fame; the pride of my valour rise.

son of Morven, i say, it be not thus our father fight. they rest not on the field of stranger, when the foe do not fall before they. — their strength be like the eagle of heaven; their renown be in the song. but our people fall by degree, and our fame begin to depart. — what shall the king of Morven say, if Ossian conquer not at teutha? rise in your steel, you warrior, and follow the sound of ossian course. he will not return, but renown, to the echo wall of Selma.

morning rise on the blue water of teutha; colmal stand before i in tear. she tell of the chief of clutha: and thrice the spear fall from her hand. my wrath turn against the stranger; for my soul tremble for calthon.

son of the feeble hand, i say, do teutha warrior fight with tear? the battle be not win with grief; nor dwell the sigh in the soul of war. — go to the deer of carmun, or the low herd of teutha. — but leave these arm, thou son of fear; a warrior may lift they in battle. —

i tear the mail from her shoulder. her snowy breast appear. she bend her red face to the ground. — i look in silence to the chief. the spear fall from my hand; and the sigh of my bosom rise. — but when i hear the name of the maid, my crowd tear descend. i bless the lovely beam of youth, and bid the battle move. —

why, son of the rock, shall Ossian tell how teutha warrior die? they be now forget in their land; and their tomb be not find on the heath. — year come on with their tempest; and the green mound moulder away. — scarce be the grave of dunthalmo see, or the place where he fall by the spear of Ossian. — some grey warrior, half blind with age, sit by night at the flame oak of the hall, tell now my action to his son, and the fall of the dark dunthalmo. the face of youth bend sidelong towards his voice; surprise and joy burn in their eye. —

i find the son of rathmor bind to a oak; my sword cut the thong from his hand. and i give he the white-bosomed colmal. — they dwell in the hall of teutha; and Ossian return to Selma.

