the enthusiast. song of ARLA.

song i 

wild wing my note, fierce passion urge the strain;
 strong flame the fire that kindle in my soul;
 i strike the wiry harp, nor will refrain;
 mad be despair, and scorn each feeble rein,
 feeling like my no virtue can control. 
stifle, the inflate heart with pain respire,
 my crimson vein with struggle blood be press,
 my cheek be flush with passion transient fire;
 my brain with agony distract fly,
 till the fierce stream burst from my burn eye,
 and drown torrent cool my pant breast. 

song ii.

with awe my soul the wreck of nature view,
 the storm amid the echo mountain hear;
 the sigh of autumn, mingle with my tear,
 mourn the sad ravage which time pursue. 
hear the wild roar of the tempestuous blast,
 whirl the forest leave to distant air! 
see bloom flower in scatter fragment cast,
 while torrent pour thunder on the ear! 
the sun be bright beam in dreary winter lose,
 not joyless be, as i, on passion tempest toss. 

my youthful charm fade beneath my burn eye,
 the soul-entrancing morn of pleasure fly;
 a rage sorrow sweep without control
 those germ of genius which alone inspire:
 the sensual passion which consume my soul,
 burn my distemper bosom with their fire. 
long lightning glance still from my stream eye,
 though vain around the fiery circle roll;
 virtue and pleasure vanish from my soul;
 the transient shadow of my glory fly. 

song iii.

impassion strain my tremble lip rehearse,
 echo my soul the number pierce the sky,
 i seem (delusion thus my mind impair)
 to catch the potent fire of edran eye:
 on lofty pinion then, more noble verse
 burst into sound, and float upon the air,
 till memory burst on my delude heart,
 mingle discordant strain of deep despair. 
distract thought upon my spirit pour,
 no long in delusive dream i rest,
 such passion mingle with each bitter shower! 
a father image meet my trouble breast;
 Ah! wander heart! how bitter distress! 
consume flame will soon thy strength overpower,
 and thou abandon die, with guilt oppress. 

her father, soon return, hear her fate,
 while he anticipate his child embrace,
 and empty hope his joyful heart elate;
 overwhelm at once he be blast with disgrace:
 no deep pang his bosom can endure;
 the laurel fade on his victorious brow;
 from his uplift arm, in fraud secure,
 the villain flee, and shun the impend blow. 

the parent view his lose despond child,
 but do not chase the sufferer from his breast,
 for christian charity, benign and mild,
 be deep on his noble heart impress:
 patient enquiry teach he the base art
 with which the vile seducer spread his snare,
 the weakness of her lose delude heart,
 and present struggle of her wild despair;
 to snatch she from the abyss with haste he run,
 and warm thus the tender sire begin:

father.

 "O! tremble not to meet thy parent eye,
" but to my open arm for refuge fly;
 "from dark despondency, o ARLA! rise;
" child of my bosom, calm the struggle sigh. " 

ARLA.

 "fast fall, you tear, till you have drown my sight;
" quicken, you pulse, your increase fire;
 "O! let i lose myself in endless night,
" i burn with shame, i sicken at the light:
 "when will my passion in the grave expire? 
" through wild excess my hope be all overthrow,
 "my genius blight, and each virtue fly." 

father.

 "alas! what fiend be harass thy breast,
" urge thy passion like impetuous wind? 
 "convulsive they rage, and unsuppress
" will wreck the noble function of thy mind:
 "be pure religion then no long know? 
" how be thy heart thus from thy maker fly? " 

ARLA.

 "short-breathing, deep with recent wound i smart,
" and burst in my bosom heave my heart;
 "in vain my soul the overwhelm storm will calm,
" nor can the dream of wild devotion charm. 
 "delusive faith! seducer of my youth! 
" thy wild transport my young fancy catch,
 "delirious vision lead i far from truth,
" provoke my passion, and my misery wrought;
 "from ignorance i wak'ad to bitter thought,
" see clear the folly that have lead astray,
 "guilt burn blush meet the dawn day." 

father.

 "talk not of day; O! wrap in dark night! 
" still deepen the dire shade which truth shall break;
 "enthusiastic mist have dim thy sight,
" from which alone to guilt thou do awake;
 "unknowing truth, religion you mistake:
" it be not the rage of a zealot fire,
 "nor vision which from pamper fancy spring,
" nor strain which a distemper zeal inspire,
 "though harmony awake its lofty string. 
" religion be the tribute of a heart
 "which strong feel God goodness and his power,
" and humble strive to strengthen its desert,
 "and, firm in hope, his attribute to adore. 
" it be thus i teach thou, when i fire thy soul
 "with God omnipotence and wondrous love,
" but mad thou have start from control,
 "and overstrained rapture deadly poison prove:
" prayer be but sound that mount to heaven in vain,
 "while uncurbed passion rage with boundless sway;
" strong principle must potent mind restrain,
 "or dire extreme will on the reason prey." 

ARLA.

 "with ineffectual sound wound not my ear,
" light as the wind, they can reach the soul:
 "she, like a hollow blast, thy voice can hear,
" and fold on herself rebuke control. 
 "to death alone my spirit look for aid,
" for all around i teem with dire dismay;
 "each earthly bliss, alas! be tear away,
" and fierce distraction my weak soul pervade. 
 "pierce by my fate, sting with delusion power,
" i pant for death, and urge the mortal hour. " 

father.

 "thou have forget thy soul can never die,
" that to the virtuous only death be rest;
 "cover with guilt, overwhelm with infamy,
" while earthly passion canker at thy breast,
 "will thou thus rush into eternity?" 

the strong rebellious spirit hear he speak,
 as fix on death her desperate passion wrought;
 a sudden paleness smite her crimson cheek,
 and tremble horror chill awaken thought. 
she roll her fiery eye, but find no rest,
 her pant heart congeal with sudden fear;
 then, rush on her father suffering breast,
 burst in a agonize shower of tear. 

nor do he strive her anguish to control,
 but let it rage till all its force be spend,
 then touch the filial feeling of her soul,
 till to his word a will ear she lend;
 and then the heavenly precept he diffuse
 which breathe forgiveness to the guilty heart,
 the simple tenet she have once abuse
 now snatch she from despondency and smart:
 but, ere the tumult of her soul have rest,
 the sun of truth her mental darkness clear;
 burst the thick cloud which have her mind oppress,
 while hope divine her woe-fraught bosom cheere. 

to depth of solitude she will have fly
 to purify the passion of her breast,
 to cherish truth sequester and alone,
 with meditation pensive pleasure bless:
 but her wise parent check her err mind,
 who piety with strong reflection join. 
he cry, "what new delusion will thou try? 
" to what romantic wild will ARLA fly? 
 "a mind prone to extreme these wish fire,
" it be passion, and not virtue, which inspire. 
 "large power, with deep experience, scarce be food
" for the reflective cave of solitude. 
 "over what will thy sad meditation roll? 
" still idle dream will rise and cloud thy soul;
 "which practical devotion must efface,
" and the strong exercise of virtue chase:
 "thy mind already on itself have prey,
" blind through inexperience, and betray;
 "from nature grand trait conception catch,
" have wake thy genius and enrich thy thought;
 "but weak at root, though lofty and overgrow,
" thy mind be by each casual blast overthrow;
 "let strengthen virtue, then, each thought inspire,
" and cherish reason check wild fancy fire. " 

he speak; she feel the wisdom of his word,
 her heart, resign, to simple truth accord. 

song of ARLA,

write during her enthusiasm.

flush, from my restless pillow i arise,
 to calm my thought, sad stranger to repose;
 wander through wood, by night dread shadow gloom,
 at every glade i pensive rear my eye,
 and view the fleecy cloud fleet over the sky,
 which gather thick a thousand form assume. 
sudden, while yet i gaze, the heaven grow bright;
 the graceful star of night
 shoot, amid the dark assemble host of cloud,
 a pure resplendent light. 

the part vapour float on the air
 seem spirit teem with immortal fire,
 bright emanation of the eternal sire
 unto my soul reveal by ardent prayer. 

clear, by the moon, a numerous host i view,
 circle its orb, the unclad spirit wing,
 on music pinion mystic flight pursue,
 glide through the air, and heavenly number sing;
 while from on high
 descend long beam of light;
 a thousand vision crowd upon my sight;
 i seem to mount, and, bear along the sky,
 rapturous i sing, in frenzied ecstasy:

 "whither fly my soul, amid the lunar night? 
" glory rush on my sight! 
 "seraphic music fill my ear,
" visionary form appear
 "in solemn grandeur dight! 
" draw by silver ray
 "round the all-attracting orb,
" while night her sable wing display,
 "which every vivid beam absorb. 
" amid the sacred host i fly,
 "fraught with solemn harmony. 
" mingle with the lunar beam,
 "from every eye immortal genius gleam;
" the soul of sound
 "pervade the shadowy space around:
" from each wild harp a nightly spirit spring,
 "and peal of heavenly music sing;
" grand cloud of darkness, hurry by the wind,
 "bear the emanation of the mind:
" the touch most fine,
 "the gleam most magic;
" the voice most rapt'rous divine,
 "strain most wild and energetic! 
" all, all combine,
 "they gather, stream;
" the sound increase, they join,
 "while still we fly the circle round,
" we dart along, wake every sound,
 "and amid the harmony, and light, and darkness, shine." 

now open the starry region on my sight,
 and thwart dark space shoot radiant stream of light;
 the aereal form in mist dissolve rise,
 yet still i hear the grand concordant song,
 echo by all the offspring of the sky,
 who each in their eternal language sing,
 while all around break forth ethereal ray:
 from high i hear a new and awful sound,
 swell with voice divine the song of praise. 
my feeble sense no long bear the light,
 oppose my eye-lid close,
 the heavenly form i lose
 amid the all-piercing light. 
my ear resound no more, my pulse cease,
 and for a while my soul be hush to peace. 

till, wake in the field, with chill affright,
 i feel a shiver being wander in the night. 
