Llangollen vale,

inscribe to the right honourable lady Eleanor Butler, and miss Ponsonby.

luxuriant vale, thy country be early boast,
 what time great glendour give thy scene to fame;
 teach the proud number of the english host,
 how vain their vaunt force, when freedom flame
 fire he to brave the myriad he abhor,
 winge his unerring shaft, and edge his victor sword. 

here first those orb unclose drink the light,
 cambria bright star, the meteor of her foe;
 what dread and dubious omen mark the night,
 that lour, ere yet his natal morn arise! 
the steed paternal, on their cavern floor,
 foam, and horror-struck, "fret fetlock-deep in gore." 

plague, in her livid hand, over all the isle,
 shake her dark flag, impure with fetid stain;
 while "death, on his pale horse, "with baleful smile,
 smite with its blare hoof the fright plain. 
soon through the grass-grown street, in silence lead,
 slow move the midnight cart, heap with the naked dead. 

yet in the festal dawn of Richard reign,
 thy gallant glendour sunny prime arise;
 virtuous, though gay, in that circean fane,
 bright science twine here circlet round his brow;
 nor can the youthful, rash, luxurious king
 dissolve the hero worth on his icarian wing. 

sudden it drop on its meridian flight! —
 ah! hapless Richard! never do thou aim
 to crush primeval briton with thy might,
 and their brave Glendour tear embalm thy name. 
back from thy victor-rival vaunt throng,
 sorrow, and stern, he sink llangollen shade among. 

soon, in imperious Henry dazzle eye,
 the guardian bound of just dominion melt;
 his scarce-hoped crown imperfect bliss supply,
 till cambria vassalage be deep feel. 
now up her craggy steep, in long array,
 swarm his exult band, impatient for the fray. 

lo! through the gloomy night, with angry blaze,
 trail the fierce comet, and alarm the star;
 each wane orb withdraw its glance ray,
 save the red planet, that delight in war. 
then, with broad eye upturned, and start hair,
 gaze the astonish crowd upon its vengeful glare. 

gleam the wan morn, and through llangollen vale
 see the proud army stream over her mead. 
her fright echos warn sound assail,
 loud, in the rattle car, the neigh steed;
 the double drum, the trumpet pierce breath,
 and all the ensign dread of havoc, wound, and death. 

high on a hill as shrink cambria stand,
 and watch the onset of the unequal fray,
 she see she Deva, stain with warrior-blood,
 lave the pale rock, and wind its fateful way
 through mead, and glen, and wild wood, echo far
 the din of clash arm, and furious shout of war. 

from rock to rock, with loud acclaim, she spring,
 while from her chief the rout legion flee;
 see Deva roll their slaughter heap among,
 the check wave eddy round the ghastly dead;
 see, in that hour, her own Llangollen claim
 thermopylæ bright wreath, and aye-enduring fame. 

thus, consecrate to glory. — then arise
 a mild lustre in its bloom maze;
 through the green glen, where lucid Deva flow,
 rapt cambria listen with enthusiast gaze,
 while more enchant sound her ear assail,
 than thril on sorga bank, the love-devoted vale. 

 amid the gay tower on steep din branna cone,
 her hoel breast the fair MIFANWY fire. —
 o! harp of cambria, never have thou know
 note more mellifluent float over the wire,
 than when thy bard this bright Laura sing,
 and with his ill-starred love llangollen echos ring. 

though genius, love, and truth inspire the strain,
 through hoel vein, though blood illustrious flow,
 hard as the eglwiseg rock her heart remain,
 her smile a sun-beam play on their snow;
 and nought avail the poet warble claim,
 but, by his well-sung woe, to purchase deathless fame,

thus consecrate to love, in age fly, —
 long age flee din's-branna's ruin show,
 bleak as they stand upon their steepy cone,
 the crown and contrast of the vale below,
 that, screen by mural rock, with pride display
 beauty romantic pomp in every sylvan maze. 

now with a vestal lustre glow the vale,
 thy, sacred friendship, permanent as pure;
 in vain the stern authority assail,
 in vain persuasion spread her silken lure,
 highborn, and high-endowed, the peerless twain,
 pant for coy nature charm amid silent dale, and plain. 

through eleanora, and her zara mind,
 early though genius, taste, and fancy flow,
 though all the graceful art their power combine,
 and her last polish brilliant life bestow,
 the lavish promiser, in youth soft morn,
 pride, pomp, and love, her friend, the sweet enthusiast scorn. 

then rise the fairy palace of the vale,
 then bloom around it the arcadian bower;
 screen from the storm of winter, cold and pale,
 screen from the fervour of the sultry hour,
 circle the lawny crescent, soon they rise,
 to letter ease devote, and friendship bless repose. 

smile they rise beneath the plastic hand
 of energy, and taste; — nor only they,
 obedient science hear the mild command,
 bring every gift that speed the tardy day,
 whatever the pencil shed in vivid hue,
 the historic tome reveal, or sing the rapture muse. 

how sweet to enter, at the twilight grey,
 the dear, minute lyceum of the dome,
 when, through the colour crystal, glare the ray,
 sanguine and solemn amid the gather gloom,
 while glowworm lamp diffuse a pale, green light,
 such as in mossy lane illume the starless night. 

then the coy scene, by deepen veil o'erdraw,
 in shadowy elegance seem lovely still;
 tall shrub, that skirt the semilunar lawn,
 dark wood, that curtain the oppose hill;
 while over their brow the bare cliff faint gleam,
 and, from its paly edge, the evening-diamond stream. 

what strain æolian thrill the dusk expanse,
 as rise gale with gentle murmur play,
 wake the loud chord, or every sense intrance,
 while in subside wind they sink away! 
like distant choirs, "when peal organ blow,"
 and melt voice blend, majestical flow. 

 " but, ah! what hand can touch the string so fine,
 "who up the lofty diapason roll
" such sweet, such sad, such solemn air divine,
 "then let they down again into the soul!" 
the proud sex as soon, with virtue calm,
 may win from this bright pair pure friendship spotless palm. 

what boast tradition, what the historic theme,
 stand it in all their chronicle confess
 where the soul glory shine with clear beam,
 than in our sea-zoned bulwark of the west,
 when, in this cambrian valley, virtue show
 where, in her own soft sex, its steady lustre glow? 

say ivy Valle crucis, time decay,
 dim on the brink of deva wander flood,
 your rive arch glimmer through the tangle glade,
 your grey hill tower over your night of wood,
 deep in the vale recess as you stand,
 and, desolate great, the rise sigh command,

say, lonely, ruin pile, when former year
 see your pale train at midnight altar bow;
 see superstition frown upon the tear
 that mourn the rash irrevocable vow,
 wear one young lip gay eleanora smile? 
do zara look serene one tedious hour beguile? 

for your sad son, nor science wake her power;
 nor ever do art her lively spell display;
 but the grim idol vain lash the hour
 that drag the mute, and melancholy day;
 drop her dark cowl on each devote head,
 that over the breathe corpse a pall eternal spread. 

this gentle pair no gloom of thought infest,
 nor bigotry, nor envy sullen gleam
 shed wither influence on the effort bless,
 which most shall win the other dear esteem,
 by add knowledge, by endowment high,
 by charity warm boon, and pity soothe sigh. 

then how shall summer-day or winter-night,
 seem long to they who thus can wing their hour! 
o! never may pain, or sorrow cruel blight,
 breathe the dark mildew through these lovely bower,
 but lengthen life subside in soft decay,
 illume by rise hope, and faith pervade ray. 

may one kind ice-bolt, from the mortal store,
 arrest each vital current as it flow,
 that no sad course of desolate hour
 here vain nurse the unsubside woe! 
while all who honour virtue, gentle mourn
 llangollen vanish pair, and wreath their sacred urn. 
