immortality:

or, the consolation of human life. a monody.

by THOMAS Denton, m. a. 

i 

when black-browed night her dusky mantle spread,
and wrap in solemn gloom the sable sky;
when soothe sleep her opiate dew have shed,
and seal in silken slumber every eye:
my wakeful thought admit no balmy rest,
nor the sweet bliss of soft oblivion share;
but watchful woe distract my ache breast,
my heart the subject of corrod care:
from haunt of man with wander step and slow
i solitary steal, and sooth my pensive woe.

ii.

yet no fell passion rough discordant rage
untune the music of my tranquil mind;
ambition tinseled charm can never engage,
no harbour there can sordid avarice find:
from lust foul spring my grief disdain to flow,
no sigh of envy from my bosom break,
but soft compassion melt my soul to woe,
and social tear fast trickle down my cheek;
ah i! when nature give one general groan,
each heart must beat with woe, each voice responsive moan.

iii.

wherever i cast my moisten eye around,
or stretch my prospect over the distant land,
there foul corruption taint step be find,
and death grim-visaged wave his iron hand.
though now soft pleasure gild the smile scene,
and sportive joy call forth her festive train,
sink in night each vital form be see,
like air-blown bubble on the watery plain;
 fell death, like brood harpy, the repast
will snatch with talon foul, or sour its grateful taste.

iv.

you smile glory of the youthful year,
that open your fragrant bosom to the day,
that clad in all the pride of spring appear,
and steep in dew your silken leaf display:
in nature rich robe though thus bedight,
though her soft pencil trace your various dye,
though lure your roseate hue the charm sight,
though odour sweet your nectarous breath supply,
soon on your leaf time be cankerous tooth shall prey,
your dulcet dew exhale, your beauteous bloom decay.

v. 

you hedgerow elm, beneath who spread shade
the graze herd defy the rattle shower;
you lofty oak, in who wide arm display
the clamorous rook build high his airy bower;
strip by hoar winter rough inclement rage,
in mournful heap your leafy honour lie,
even your hard rib shall feel the force of age,
and your bare trunk the friendly shade deny;
no more by cheerful vegetation green,
your sapless boll shall sink, and quit the evanid scene.

vi.

you feather warbler of the vernal year
that careless sing, nor fear the frown of fate,
tune your sad note to death and winter drear!
ill suit these mirthful strain your transient state.
no more with cheerful song nor sprightly air
salute the blush of the rise day,
with doleful ditty, droop wing repair
to the lone covert of the nightly spray:
where love-lorn Philomela strain her throat,
surround the bud thorn, and swell the mournful note.

vii.

come, sigh elegy, with sweet air
of melt music teach my grief to flow,
i too must mix my sad complaint with they,
our fate be equal, equal be our woe.
come, melancholy, spread thy raven wing,
and in thy ebon car, by fancy lead,
to the dark charnel vault thy votary bring,
the murky mansion of the moulder dead,
where dank dew breathe, and taint the sickly sky,
where in sad loathsome heap all human glory lie.

viii.

wrap in the gloom of uncreated night
secure we sleep in senseless matter arm,
nor pain can vex, nor pallid fear affright,
our quiet fancy feel no dream alarm.
soon as to life our animate clay
awake, and conscious being open our eye,
care fretful family at once dismay,
with ghastly air a thousand phantom rise,
sad horror hang over all the deepen gloom,
grief prompt the labour sigh, death open the marble tomb.

ix.

yet life strong love intoxicate the soul,
and thirst of bliss inflame the feverous mind,
with eager draught we drain the poisonous bowl,
and in the dregs the cordial hope to find.
o heaven! for this light end be mortal make,
and place on earth, with happiness in view,
to catch with cheat grasp the flit shade,
and with vain toil the fancy form pursue,
then give their short-lived being to the wind,
as the winge arrow fly, and leave no track behind!

x. 

thus lonely wander through the nightly shade
against the stern decree of stubborn fate,
to mockful echo my complaint i make,
of life short period, or its toilsome state.
it be deathlike silence all, no sound i hear,
save the hoarse raven croak from the sky,
or scaly beetle murmur through the air,
or screech-owl scream with ill-o mened cry;
save when with brazen tongue from yond high tower
the clock deep-sounding speak, and count the pass hour.

xi.

pale Cynthia mount on her silver car
over heaven blue concave drive her nightly round:
see a tear abbey, wrap in gloom, appear
scatter in wild confusion over the ground.
here ravenous ruin lift her wasteful hand
over bri'ar-grown grot and bramble-shaded grave;
safe from her wrath one weep marble stand,
over which the mournful yew its umbrage wave;
open, open thy ponderous jaw, thou friendly tomb,
close the sad deathful scene, and shroud i in thy womb!

xii.

forth issue lovely from the gloomy shade,
which stately pine in phalanx deep compose,
fair above mortal come a smile maid
to sooth my sigh, and cheer my heart-felt woe.
here nurse by contemplation, matron sage,
where with mute solitude she love to dwell,
in truth fair lore she form her early age,
and trim the midnight lamp in lonely cell,
here learn clear reason heaven-sprung light to raise
over passion low-born mist, or pleasure spurious blaze.

xiii.

her azure mantle flow with easy grace,
nor fashion fold constrain, nor custom tie;
a optic tube she bear, each sphere to trace
that roll its rapid orbit round the sky:
yet not to heaven alone she view have confine;
a clear reflect plane she hold, to show
the various movement of the reason mind,
how strange idea link, and habit grow,
passion fierce impulse, will free power to scan,
to paint the feature soul, and mark the internal man.

xiv.

whence these sad strain, say she, of plaintive grief,
which pierce the sleep-closed ear of peaceful rest?
oft have the sicken mind here find relief,
here quell the throb tumult of the breast:
lift up thy load eye to yond fair cloud,
where moon-sprung Iris blend her beauteous dye:
i lift they soon, and as i gaze stand,
the fleet phantom in a moment fly;
where beam the gild arch of gaudy hue,
frown the dark lou'ring cloud all gloomy to the view.

XV. 

life emblem fit, say i, that roscid bow!
the gay illusive pageant of a hour
to real semblance trick her air show,
then sink in night dull arm, and be no more!
ah! fool, say she, though now to fancy sight
the violet pale, the blush red decay,
though now no paint cloud reflect the light,
nor drop prismatic break the fall ray,
yet still the colour live, though none appear,
glow in the dart beam that gild yond crystal sphere.

xvi.

then let not fancy with her vagrant blaze
mislead in trackless path of wild deceit;
on reason steady lamp still ardent gaze;
lead by her sober light to truth be retreat.
though wonder ignorance see each form decay,
the breathless bird, bare trunk, and shrivel flower:
new form successive catch the vital ray,
sing their wild note, or smile the allot hour,
and search creation ample circuit round,
though mode of be change, all life immortal find.

xvii.

see the slow reptile grovel over the green,
that trail through slimy path its cumbrous load,
start in new beauty from the lowly scene,
and wing with flutter pride the aetherial road;
burst their shell-prison, see the feather kind,
where in dark durance pen awhile they lie,
dispread their paint plumage to the wind,
brush the brisk air, swift shoot through the sky,
hail with their choral hymn the new-born day,
distend their joy-swoln breast, and carol the sweet lay.

xviii.

see man by vary period fix by fate
ascend perfection scale by slow degree;
the plantlike foetus quit its senseless taste,
and helpless hang sweet-smiling on the knee;
soon outward object steal into the brain,
next prattle childhood lisp with mimic air,
then memory link her fleet ideal train,
and sober reason rise to compare,
the fullgrown breast some manly passion warm,
it pant for glory meed, or beat to love alarm.

xix.

then say, since nature high behest appear
that live form shall change of being prove,
in which new joy the novel scene endear,
new object rise to please, new wing to move;
since man too, teach by sage experience, know
his frame revolve tread life be vary stage,
that the man-plant first vegetate grow,
then sense direct, then reason rule in age;
say, be it strange, shall death all-dreaded hour
waft to some unknown scene, or wake some-untried power?

xx.

the wise creator wrap in fleshly veil
the ray divine, the pure aetherial mate;
though wear by age the brittle fabric fail,
the smile soul survive the frown of fate:
each circle year, each quick-revolving day
touch with moulder tooth thy flit frame,
with furtive slight repair the unseen decay;
for ever change, yet in change the same,
oft have thou drop unhurt thy mortal part,
dare the grim terror then, nor dread his guiltless dart.

xxi.

the twinkle eye, who various-humoured round
take in soft net the invert form behind,
the listen ear, that catch the wave sound,
be but mere organ of the feeling mind:
external matter thus can lend its aid,
and distant shape with foreign power supply;
thus the long tube by galilaeo make
bring home the wonder of the people sky:
the power percipient then feel no decay,
though blind the tube, and darkness blot the visual ray.

xxii.

when lock in short suspense by sleep soft power
in temporary death the sense lie,
when solemn silence reign at midnight hour,
deaf the dull ear, and close the curtained eye;
object of sense, each conscious sense asleep,
with lively image strike the wakeful soul,
some frown rock that threat the foam deep,
or wood-hung vale, where stream meander roll,
some long-lost friend return voice you hear,
clasp the life-pictured shade, and drop the please tear.

xxiii.

each outward organ, as idea rise,
give easy entrance to the motley train;
reflection calm, with retrospective eye
survey her treasure in the formful brain;
though death relentless shed his baleful dew,
in Lethe dip each form-conveying power,
unhurt reflection may her theme pursue,
smile at the ruin, safe amid her store;
without one sense aid in life low vale,
fancy can furnish joy, and reason lift her scale.

xxiv.

thus the lone lover in the pensive shade
in day-dream rapt of soft ecstatic bliss,
pursue in thought the visionary maid,
feast on the fancy smile, and favour kiss:
thus the young poet at the close of day
lead by the magic of some fairy song
through the dun umbrage wind his heedless way,
nor hear the babble brook that brawl along:
thus deathless Newton deaf to nature cry
will measure time and space, and travel round the sky.

xxv.

when just expire hang life be tremble light,
and fall disease strike deep the deadly dart,
reason and memory burn with ardour bright,
and generous passion warm the throb heart;
oft will the vigorous soul in life last stage
with keen relish taste pure mental joy:
since the fierce effort of distemper rage
nor 'bate her vigour, nor her power destroy,
say, shall her lustre death itself impair?
when in high noon she ride, then set in dark despair?

xxvi.

though through the heart no purple tide shall flow,
no quiver nerve shall vibrate to the brain,
the mental power no mean dependence know;
thought may survive, and each fair passion reign;
as when Lucina end the pangful strife,
lift the young babe, and light her lambent flame,
some power new-waking hail the dawn life,
some unsuspended live, unchanged, the same;
so from our dust fresh faculty may bloom,
some posthumous survive, and triumph over the tomb.

xxvii.

this fibrous frame by nature kindly law,
which give each joy to keen sensation here,
over pure scene of bliss the veil may draw,
and cloud reflection more exalt sphere.
when death cold hand with all-dissolving power
shall the close tie with friendly stroke unbind,
alike our mortal as our natal hour
may to new being raise the wake mind:
on death new genial day the soul may rise,
bear to some high life, and hail some bright sky.

xxviii.

the moss-grown tree, that shrink with roll year,
the droop flower that die so soon away,
let not thy heart alarm with bode fear,
nor thy own ruin date from their decay:
the blush rose that breathe the balmy dew,
no please transport of perception know,
the reverend oak, that circle spring renew,
think not, nor by long age experience grow;
thy fate and they confess no kindred tie:
though their frail form may fade, shall sense and reason die?

xxix.

nor let life ill, that in dire circle rage,
steal from thy heave breast those labour sigh;
these, the kind tutor of thy infant age,
train the young pupil for the future sky:
unschool in early prime, in riper year
wretched and scorn still strut the beard boy;
the tingle rod bedew with briny tear
shoot forth in graceful fruit of manly joy:
the painful care that vex the toilsome spring
shall plenteous crop of bliss in life last harvest bring.

xxx.

she cease, and vanish into sightless wind —
over my tear breast alternate passion sway,
now doubt despond damp the waver mind,
now hope revive shed her cheerful ray.
soon from the sky in heavenly white array,
faith to my sight reveal, fair cherub! stand,
with life replete the volume she display,
seal with the ruddy stain of crimson blood;
each fear now start away, as spectre fly
when the sun orient beam first gild the purple sky.

xxxi.

mean while the faithful herald of the day
the village cock crow loud with trumpet shrill,
the warble lark soar high, and morning grey
lift her glad forehead over the cloud-wrap hill:
nature wild music fill the vocal vale;
the bleat flock that bite the dewy ground,
the low herd that graze the woodland dale,
and cavern echo, swell the cheerful sound;
homeward i bend with clear unclouded mind,
mix with the busy world, and leave each care behind.
