November,

1784. 

now yellow autumn leafy ruin lie
 in fade splendour, on desert plain,
 far from the mad crowd, alone i fly,
 to wake in solitude the mystic strain. 
on theme of high import i dare to sing,
 while fate impel my hand to strike the tremble string. 

bright on my harp the meteor gleam,
 as through the shade they glance shine;
 now the wind howl, the night bird scream,
 and yell ghost the chorus join:
 chimeras dire, from fancy deep hell,
 fly over yond hallow tower, and toll the pass bell. 

November hear the dismal sound,
 as slow advance from the pole;
 he lead the month their wintery round;
 see blacken cloud attendant roll,
 where frown a giant band, the son of care,
 dark thought, presage fell, and comfortless despair! 

over britain isle they spread their wing,
 and shade of death dismay the land;
 November wide his mantle fling,
 and lift high his vengeful hand,
 hurl down the demon spleen, with power combine,
 to check the spring of life, and crush the enfeeble mind. 

his drear dominion he maintain,
 beneath a cold inclement sky;
 while noxious fog, and drizzle rain,
 on nature sicken bosom lie. 
the open rose of youth untimely fade,
 and hope fair friendly light beam dim through the shade. 

now prowl abroad the ghastly fiend,
 fall suicide, who frenzy bear;
 his brow with writhe serpent twine;
 his mantle steep in human gore! 
the livid flame around his eye-ball play,
 stern horror stalk before, and death pursue his way! 

hark! be not that the fatal stroke? 
see where the bleed victim lie;
 the bond of social feeling break,
 dismay the frantic spirit fly:
 creation start, and shrink nature view
 appal, the blow which heaven first right subdue. 

behold! the weight of woe combine,
 a woman have the power to scorn;
 her infant race to shame consign,
 a name disgrace, a fortune tear,
 she meet resolve; and combat despair,
 support alone the ill a coward dare not share. 

on languid luxury and pride
 the subtle fiend employ his spell;
 where selfish, sordid passion bide,
 where weak impatient spirit dwell;
 where think oppressive from itself will fly,
 and seek relief from time in dark eternity. 

far from the scene of guilt and death
 my weary spirit seek to rest;
 why sudden stop my struggle breath,
 why heave so strong my ache breast? 
hark! sound of horror sweep the trouble glade! 
far on a whirlwind bear the fatal month be flee! 

i watch his flight, and see he bear
 to Saturn orb the sullen band;
 where winter chill the linger year,
 and gloom eternal shade the land. 
on a lone rock, far in a stormy main,
 in cheerless prison pen, i hear the ghost complain. 

some power unseen deny my verse
 the hallow veil of fate to rend;
 now sudden blast the sound disperse,
 and fancy inspiration end:
 while rush wind in wild discordance jar,
 old Hyem call the storm around his icy car. 
