oriental eclogue.

by mr. WILLIAM Collins.

eclogue i 

Selim; or, the shepherd moral.

you persian maid, attend your poet lay,
 and hear how shepherd pass their golden day,
 not all be bless, who Fortune hand sustain
 with wealth in court, nor all that haunt the plain;
 well may your heart believe the truth i tell;
 it be virtue make the bliss wherever we dwell. 

thus Selim sing, by sacred truth inspire;
 nor praise, but such as truth bestow, desire:
 wise in himself, his meaning song convey
 inform moral to the shepherd maid;
 or teach the swain that sure bliss to find,
 what grove nor stream bestow, a virtuous mind. 

when sweet and blush, like a virgin bride,
 the radiant morn resume her orient pride,
 when wanton gale along the valley play,
 breathe on each flower, and bear their sweet away:
 by tygris wander wave he sit, and sing
 this useful lesson for the fair and young. 

you persian dame, he say, to you belong,
 well may they please, the moral of my song:
 no fair maid, i trust, than you be find,
 grace with soft art, the people world around! 
the morn that light you, to your love supply
 each gentle ray delicious to your eye:
 for you those flower her fragrant hand bestow,
 and you there love that king delight to know. 
yet think not these, all beauteous as they be,
 the best kind blessing heaven can grant the fair! 
who trust alone in beauty feeble ray,
 boast but the worth balsora pearl display;
 draw from the deep we own their surface bright,
 but, dark within, they drink no lustrous light:
 such be the maid, and such the charm they boast,
 by sense unaided, or to virtue lose. 
self-flattering sex! your heart believe in vain
 that love shall blind, when once he fire the swain;
 or hope a lover by your fault to win,
 as spot on ermine beautify the skin;
 who seek secure to rule, be first her care
 each soft virtue that adorn the fair;
 each tender passion man delight to find
 the love perfection of a female mind! 

bless be the day, when wisdom hold her reign,
 and shepherd seek she on the silent plain;
 with truth she wed in the secret grove,
 immortal truth, and daughter bless their love. 

o haste, fair maid! you virtue come away,
 sweet peace and plenty lead you on your way! 
the balmy shrub for you shall love our shore,
 by ind excel or Araby no more. 

lose to our field, for so the fate ordain,
 the dear deserter shall return again. 
come thou, who thought as limpid spring be clear,
 to lead the train, sweet modesty, appear:
 here make thy court amid our rural scene,
 and shepherd-girl shall own thou for their queen. 
with thou be chastity, of all afraid,
 distrust all, a wise suspicious maid;
 but man the most — not more the mountain doe
 hold the swift falcon for her deadly foe. 
cold be her breast, like flower that drink the dew;
 a silken veil conceal she from the view. 
no wild desire amid thy train be know,
 but faith, who heart be fix on one alone:
 despond meekness, with her down-cast eye,
 and friendly pity, full of tender sigh;
 and love the last: by these your heart approve,
 these be the virtue that must lead to love. 

thus sing the swain; and ancient legend say,
 the maid of bagdat verify the lay:
 dear to the plain, the virtue come along,
 the shepherd love, and Selim bless his song. 

eclogue ii.

Hassan; or, the camel-driver.

in silent horror over the boundless waste
 the driver Hassan with his camel past:
 one cruise of water on his back he bear,
 and his light scrip contain a scanty store;
 a fan of paint feather in his hand,
 to guard his shade face from scorch sand. 
the sultry sun have gain the middle sky,
 and not a tree, and not a herb be nigh;
 the beast, with pain, their dusty way pursue,
 shrill roar the wind, and dreary be the view! 
with desperate sorrow wild, the affright man
 thrice sigh, thrice strike his breast, and thus begin:
 "sad be the hour, and luckless be the day,
" when first from schiraz wall i bend my way. " 

ah! little thought i of the blast wind,
 the thirst or pinch hunger that i find! 
bethink thou, Hassan, where shall thirst assuage,
 when fail this cruise, his unrelenting rage? 
soon shall this scrip its precious load resign;
 then what but tear and hunger shall be thy? 

you mute companion of my toil, that bear
 in all my grief a more than equal share! 
here, where no spring in murmur break away,
 or moss-crowned fountain mitigate the day,
 in vain you hope the green delight to know,
 which plain more bless, or verdant vale bestow:
 here rock alone, and tasteless sand be sound,
 and faint and sickly wind for ever howl around. 
 "sad be the hour, and luckless be the day,
" when first from schiraz wall i bend my way. " 

curse be the gold and silver which persuade
 weak man to follow far-fatiguing trade! 
the lily peace outshine the silver store,
 and life be dear than the golden over:
 yet money tempt we over the desert brown,
 to every distant mart and wealthy town. 
full oft we tempt the land, and oft the sea;
 and be we only yet repay by thou? 
ah! why this ruin so attractive make,
 or why fond man so easy betray? 
why heed we not, while mad we haste along,
 the gentle voice of peace, or pleasure song? 
or wherefore think the flowery mountain side,
 the fountain murmur, and the valley pride,
 why think we these less please to behold
 than dreary desert, if they lead to gold? 
 "sad be the hour, and luckless be the day,
" when first from schiraz wall i bend my way! " 

o cease, my fear! — all frantic as i go,
 when thought create unnumbered scene of woe. 
what if the lion in his rage i meet! —
 oft in the dust i view his print foot:
 and fearful! oft, when day decline light
 yield her pale empire to the mourner night,
 by hunger rouse, he scour the groan plain,
 gaunt wolf and sullen tiger in his train;
 before they death with shriek direct their way,
 fill the wild yell, and lead they to their prey. 
 "sad be the hour, and luckless be the day,
" when first from schiraz wall i bend my way! " 

at that dead hour the silent asp shall creep,
 if aught of rest i find, upon my sleep:
 or some swell serpent twist his scale around,
 and wake to anguish with a burn wound. 
thrice happy they, the wise content poor,
 from lust of wealth, and dread of death secure! 
they tempt no desert, and no grief they find;
 peace rule the day, where reason rule the mind. 
 "sad be the hour, and luckless be the day,
" when first from schiraz wall i bend my way! " 

o hapless youth! for she thy love have win,
 the tender Zara will be most undo;
 big swell my heart, and own the powerful maid,
 when fast she drop her tear, as thus she say:
 "farewell the youth who sigh can not detain,
" who zara break heart implore in vain! 
 "yet as thou go, may every blast arise,
" weak and unfelt as these reject sigh! 
 "safe over the wild, no peril may thou see,
" no grief endure, nor weep, false youth, like i. " 
o let i safe to the fair return,
 say with a kiss, she must not, shall not, mourn;
 o! let i teach my heart to lose its fear,
 recall by wisdom voice, and zara tear. 

he say, and call on heaven to bless the day,
 when back to schiraz wall he bend his way. 

eclogue iii.

Abra; or, the georgian sultana.

in georgia land, where tefflis tower be see,
 in distant view along the level green,
 while evening dew enrich the glitter glade,
 and the tall forest cast a long shade,
 what time it be sweet over field of rice to stray,
 or scent the breathe maize at set day;
 amid the maid of zagen peaceful grove,
 emyra sing the please care of love. 

of Abra first begin the tender strain,
 who lead her youth with flock upon the plain:
 at morn she come, those will flock to lead
 where lily rear they in the watery mead:
 from early dawn the live-long hour she tell,
 until late at silent eve she pen the fold. 
deep in the grove, beneath the secret shade,
 a various wreathe of odorous flower she make:
 gay motleyed pink and sweet jonquil she choose,
 the violet blue that on the moss-bank grow;
 all-sweet to sense, the flaunt rose be there:
 the finish chaplet well adorn her hair. 

great Abbas chance that fate morn to stray,
 by love conduct from the chace away:
 among the vocal vale he hear her song,
 and seek the vale and echo grove among:
 at length he find, and woo the rural maid;
 she know the monarch, and with fear obey. 
 "be every youth like royal Abbas move,
" and every georgian maid like Abra love. " 

the royal lover bear she from the plain;
 yet still she crook and bleat flock remain:
 oft as she go, she backward turn her view,
 and bad that crook and bleat flock adieu. 
fair happy maid! to other scene remove,
 to rich scene of golden power and love! 
go leave the simple pipe, and shepherd strain;
 with love delight thou, and with Abbas reign. 
 "be every youth like royal Abbas move,
" and every georgian maid like Abra love. " 

yet midst the blaze of court she fix her love
 on the cool fountain, or the shady grove;
 still with the shepherd innocence her mind
 to the sweet vale, and flowery mead incline;
 and oft as spring renew the plain with flower,
 breathe his soft gale, and lead the fragrant hour,
 with sure return she seek the sylvan scene,
 the breezy mountain, and the forest green. 
her maid around she move, a duteous band! 
each bear a crook all-rural in her hand:
 some simple lay, of flock and herd, they sing;
 with joy the mountain and the forest ring. 
 "be every youth like royal Abbas move,
" and every georgian maid like Abra love! " 

and oft the royal lover leave the care
 and thorn of state, attendant on the fair;
 oft to the shade and low roof cot retire,
 or seek the vale where first his heart be fire:
 a russet mantle, like a swain, he wear,
 and thought of crown and busy court no more. 
 "be every youth like royal Abbas move,
" and every georgian maid like Abra love! " 

bless be the life that royal Abbas lead:
 sweet be his love, and innocent his bed. 
what if in wealth the noble maid excel;
 the simple shepherd girl can love as well. 
let those who rule on persia jeweled throne,
 be fame for love, and gentle love alone;
 or wreathe, like Abbas, full of fair renown,
 the lover myrtle with the warrior crown. 
o happy day! the maid around she say;
 o haste, profuse of blessing, haste away! 
 "be every youth like royal Abbas move,
" and every georgian maid like Abra love! " 

eclogue iv.

agib and secander; or, the fugitive.

in fair Circassia, where, to love incline,
 each swain be bless, for every maid be kind;
 at that still hour, when awful midnight reign,
 and none, but wretch, haunt the twilight plain;
 what time the moon have hang her lamp on high,
 and past in radiance through the cloudless sky;
 sad over the dew, two brother shepherd sle,
 where wilder fear and desperate sorrow lead:
 fast as they press their flight, behind they lie
 wide ravage plain, and valley steal away. 
along the mountain bend side they run,
 until faint and weak, secander thus begin:

secander.

o stay thou, agib, for my foot deny,
 no long friendly to my life, to fly. 
friend of my heart, o turn thou and survey,
 trace our sad flight through all its length of way! 
and first review that long-extended plain,
 and yond wide grove, already past with pain! 
yond ragged cliff, who dangerous path we try! 
and last this lofty mountain weary side! 

agib.

weak as thou be, yet hapless must thou know
 the toil of flight, or some severe woe! 
still as i haste, the Tartar shout behind,
 and shriek and sorrow load the sadden wind:
 in rage of heart, with ruin in his hand,
 he blast our harvest, and deform our land. 
yond citron grove, whence first in fear we come,
 drop its fair honour to the conquer flame:
 far fly the swain, like we, in deep despair,
 and leave to russian band their fleecy care. 

secander.

unhappy land, who blessing tempt the sword,
 in vain, unheard, thou call thy persian lord! 
in vain thou court he, helpless, to thy aid,
 to shield the shepherd, and protect the maid! 
far off, in thoughtless indolence resign,
 soft dream of love and pleasure soothe his mind:
 'midst fair sultana lose in idle joy,
 no war alarm he, and no fear annoy. 

agib.

yet these green hill, in summer sultry heat,
 have lend the monarch oft a cool retreat. 
sweet to the sight be zabra flowery plain,
 and once by maid and shepherd love in vain! 
no more the virgin shall delight to rove
 by sargis bank, or irwan shady grove;
 on tarkie mountain catch the cool gale,
 or breathe the sweet of aly flowery vale:
 fair scene! but, ah! no more with peace possess. 
with ease allure, and with plenty bless. 
no more the shepherd whiten tent appear,
 nor the kind product of a bounteous year;
 no more the date, with snowy blossom crown
 but ruin spread her baleful fire around. 

secander.

in vain Circassia boast her spicy grove,
 for ever fame for pure and happy love:
 in vain she boast her fair of the fair,
 their eye blue languish, and their golden hair,
 those eye in tear their fruitless grief must send;
 those hair the Tartar cruel hand shall rend. 

agib.

you georgian swain, that piteous learn from far
 circassia ruin, and the waste of war;
 some weighty arm than crook and staff prepare,
 to shield your harvest, and defend your fair:
 the Turk and Tartar like design pursue,
 fix to destroy, and steadfast to undo. 
wild as his land, in native desert breed,
 by lust incite, or by malice lead,
 the villain Arab, as he prowl for prey,
 oft mark with blood and waste flame the way;
 yet none so cruel as the Tartar foe,
 to death inure, and nurse in scene of woe. 

he say; when loud along the vale be hear
 a shrill shriek, and near fire appear:
 the affright shepherd through the dew of night,
 wide over the moon-light hill renew their flight. 
