a elegy, to a old beauty.

in vain, poor nymph, to please our youthful sight
 you sleep in cream and frontlet all the night,
 your face with patch soil, with paint repair,
 dress with gay gown, and shade with foreign hair. 
if truth in spite of manner must be tell,
 why real fifty five be something old. 

once you be young; or one, who life be so long
 she may have bear my mother, tell i wrong. 
and once (since envy dead before you dye,)
 the woman own, you play a sparkle eye,
 teach the light foot a modish little trip,
 and pout with the pretty purple lip —

to some new charmer be the rose flee,
 which blow, to damask all thy cheek with red;
 youth call the grace there to fix their reign,
 and air by thousand fill their easy train. 
so part summer bid her flowery prime
 attend the sun to dress some foreign clime,
 while wither season in succession, here,
 strip the gay garden, and deform the year. 

but thou (since nature bid) the world resign,
 it be now thy daughter daughter time to shine. 
with more address, (or such as please more)
 she run her female exercise over,
 unfurl or close, rap or turn the fan,
 and smile, or blush at the creature man. 
with quick life, as guild coach pass,
 in sideling courtesy the drop the glass. 
with better strength, on visit-day she bear
 to mount she fifty flight of ample stair. 
her mein, her shape, her temper, eye and tongue
 be sure to conquer. — for the rogue be young;
 and all that be mad wild, or odd gay,
 we call it only pretty Fanny way. 

let time that make you homely, make you sage,
 the sphere of wisdom be the sphere of age. 
it be true, when beauty dawn with early fire,
 and hear the flatter tongue of soft desire,
 if not from virtue, from its grave way
 the soul with please avocation stray. 
but beauty go, it be easy to be wise;
 as harper better, by the loss of eye. 

henceforth retire, reduce your rove air,
 haunt less the play, and more the public prayer,
 reject the mechlin head, and gold brocade,
 go pray, in sober Norwich crape array. 
thy pendent diamond let thy Fanny take,
 (their tremble lustre show how much you shake;)
 or bid she wear thy necklace row with pearl,
 you will find your Fanny a obedient girl. 
so for the rest, with less encumbrance hang,
 you walk through life, unmingled with the young;
 and view the shade and substance as you pass
 with joint endeavour trifle at the glass,
 or folly dress, and ramble all her day,
 to meet her counterpart, and grow by praise:
 yet still sedate your self, and grave plain,
 you neither fret, nor envy at the vain. 

it be thus (if man with woman we compare)
 the wise athenian cross a glitter fair,
 unmoved by tongue and sight, hewalk the place,
 through tape, toy, tinsel, gimp, perfume, and lace;
 then bend from mars hill his awful eye,
 and what a world i never want? he cry;
 but cry unheard: for folly will be free. 
so part the buzz gaudy crowd, and he:
 as careless he for they, as they for he;
 he wrap in wisdom, and they whirl by whim. 
