the season.

in imitation of SPENSER.

by Moses Mendez, ESQ.

spring,

ere yet i sing the round revolve year,
 and show the toil and pastime of the swain,
 at alcon grave i drop a pious tear;
 right well he know to raise his learned strain,
 and, like his Milton, scorn the rhyme chain. 
ah! cruel fate, to tear he from our eye;
 receive this wreath, albe the tribute vain;
 from the green sod may flower immortal rise,
 to mark the sacred spot where the sweet poet lie! 

it be the cuckoo that announce spring,
 and with his wreakful tale the spouse do fray;
 mean while the finch harmless ditty sing,
 and hop, in buxom youth, from spray to spray,
 proud as sir paridel of rich array. 
the little wanton that draw Venus team,
 chirp amorous through the grove in beavies gay;
 and he, who erst gain leda fond esteem,
 now sail on thamis tide, the glory of the stream! 

proud as the turkish soldan, chaunticleer
 see, with delight, his numerous race around:
 he grant fresh favour to each female near;
 for love as well as cherisaunce renowned. 
the waddle dame that do the gaul confound,
 her tawny son do lead to river cold;
 while Juno darling, with majestic bound,
 to charm his leman do his train unfold,
 that glow with vivid green, that flame with burn gold. 

the balmy cowslip gild the smile plain,
 the virgin snowdrop boast her silver hue,
 a hundred tint the gaudy daisy stain,
 and the meek violet, in amis blue
 creep low to earth, and hide from public view:
 but the rank nettle rear her crest on high;
 so ribald loose their front unblushing show,
 while modest merit do neglect lie,
 and pine in lonely shade unseen of vulgar eye. 

see! all around the gall-less culver bill,
 mean while the nightingale becalm lay
 mix with the plaintive music of the rill,
 the which in various gyre the meadow bay. 
behold! the welkin burst into a blaze! 
fast by the car of light the nimble hour,
 in song of triumph, hail his genial ray,
 and, as they wend to Thetis cool bower,
 they bind along the sky, and strew the heaven with flower. 

and now the human bosom melt to love;
 the rapture bard awake his skilful lyre,
 by run stream, or in the laurel grove,
 he tune to amorous note his sound wire:
 all, all his harmony, and all desire. 
the happy number charm the bloom maid;
 her blush cheek pronounce her heart on fire,
 she now consent, then shun the embower shade,
 with faint reluctance yield; desirous, yet afraid. 

now rustic Cuddy, with untutored throat,
 (though much admire, i ween, of nymph and swain)
 by various song will various end promote. 
seek he to prove that woman vow be vain! 
he bateman fortune tell, a baleful strain! 
and if to honour Britain he be lead,
 he sing a apprentice bold, in land profane,
 who, all unarmed, do strike two lion dead,
 tear forth their savage heart, and do a princess wed. 

but hark! the bagpipe summons to the green,
 the jocund bagpipe, that awake sport;
 the blithesome lass, as the morning sheen,
 around the flower-crowned maypole quick resort:
 the god of pleasure here have fix their court. 
quick on the wing the fly moment seize,
 nor build up ample scheme, for life be short,
 short as the whisper of the pass breeze. 
yet, ah! in vain i preach — my heart be ill at ease. 

summer.

beneath yond snubby oak extend shade
 safe let i hide i from the eye of day;
 nor shall the dogstar this retreat invade,
 as through the heaven he speed his burn way:
 the sultry lion rage for his prey. 
ah Phoebus, quench thy wild destroy fire,
 each flower, each shrub do sink beneath thy ray,
 save the fresh laurel, that shall never expire. 
the leaf that crown a bard may brave celestial ire. 

or shall i hie to my own hermitage,
 round which the wanton vine her arm do wind,
 there may i lonely turn the sacred page,
 improve my reason, and amend my mind;
 here against life ill a remedy i find. 
a hundred flower emboss the verdant ground;
 a little brook do my sweet cottage bind,
 its water yield a melancholy sound,
 and sooth to study deep, or lull to sleep profound. 

the playful insect hop in the grass
 do tire the hearer with his sonnet shrill;
 the pool-sprung gnat on sound wing do pass,
 and on the ramp steed do suck his fill;
 ah i, can little creature work such ill! 
the patient cow do, to eschew the heat,
 her body steep within the neighbour rill;
 and while the lamb in faint voice bleat,
 their mother hang their head, in doleful plight i weet. 

rechless of season, see the lusty swain
 along the meadow spread the tawny hay;
 the maiden too undaunted seek the plain,
 ne fear to show their face to the ray;
 but all the honest badge of toil display. 
see how they mould the haycock rise head;
 while wanton Colin, full of amorous play,
 down throw Susan, who do shriek for dread. 
fear not — thou can be hurt upon so soft a bed. 

at length the sun do hasten to repose,
 and all the vault of heaven be streak with light;
 in flamy gold the ruddy welkin glow,
 and, for the noonday heat, our pain do quite,
 for all be calm, serene, and pass bright:
 Favonius gentle skim along the grove,
 and shed sweet odour from his pennon light. 
the little bat in giddy orb do rove,
 and loud the screech-owl shriek, to rouse her blue-eyed love. 

menalcas come to taste the evening gale,
 his cheek empurple with the rose of youth;
 he win each damsel with his piteous tale,
 they think they listen to the word of truth,
 yet their belief do work they muchel ruth. 
his oath be light as gossimer, or air,
 his tongue be poisonous as a aspic tooth. 
ah! cease to promise joy, and give despair:
 it be brave to smite the foe; it be base to wrong the fair. 

the gentle thyrsis, mild as open morn,
 come to the lawn, and Marian there be find;
 Marian who many huswife art adorn:
 right well she know the apple to surround
 with dulcet crust: and thomalin renowned
 for prow achievement in the wrestle ring;
 he hold at nought the vantage of the ground,
 but prone to earth the hardy wight will fling;
 such be alcides erst, if poet sooth do sing. 

from tree-crowned hill, from flower-enameled vale,
 the mild inhabitant in croud appear
 to tread a measure; while night regent pale
 do through the sky her silver chariot steer,
 who lucid wheel be deck with dew-drop clear;
 the which, like pearl, descend on the plain. 
now every youth do clasp his mistress dear,
 and every nymph reward her constant swain. 
thrice happy he who love, and be belove again. 

autumn.

see jolly autumn, clad in hunter green,
 in wholesome lustihood do mount the sphere;
 a leafy garland bind her temple sheen,
 instud rich with the spiky ear. 
her right hand bear a vine-incircled spear;
 such as the crew do wield who Bacchus lad,
 when to the Ganges he his course do steer;
 and in she leave a bugle-horn she have,
 on which she est do blow, and make the heart right glad. 

in slow procession move the totter wain,
 the sun-burnt hind their finish toil ensue;
 now in the barn they house the glitter grain,
 and there the cry of "harvest home" renew. 
the honest farmer do his friend salew;
 and they with jug of ale his wife do treat,
 which for that purpose she at home do brew;
 they laugh, they sport, and homely jest repeat,
 then smack their lass lip, their lip as honey sweet. 

on every hill the purple blush vine
 beneath her leaf her racy fruit do hide:
 albe she pour not flood of foam wine,
 yet be we not potation bland deny;
 see where the peartree do in earth abide! 
bruise her rich fruitage, and the grape disdain;
 the apple too will grant a generous tide,
 to sing who honour thenot raise his strain,
 who soul-inchanting lay still charm the listen plain. 

through greyish mist behold Aurora dawn,
 and to his sport the wary fouler hie;
 crouch to earth his guileful pointer fawn,
 now the thick stubble, now the clover try,
 to find where, with his race, the partridge lie. 
ah! luckless fire, ah! luckless race, i ween,
 who force compel or subtle art surprise;
 more uncle wait to cause thou dolorous teen,
 doom to escape the deep, and perish on the green. 

the full-mouthed hound pursue the timorous hare,
 and the hill echo to the joyful cry;
 ah! borrow the light pennon of the hare,
 if you be arreached, you die, poor wretch, you die. 
nought will avail the pity-pleading eye,
 for our good squire do much against you rail,
 and say you often magic art do try;
 at time you wave grimalkin sooty tail,
 or on a beesom vild you through the welkin sail. 

the stag be rouse; he stem the threaten flood,
 that shall ere long his matchless swiftness quell;
 and, to avoid the tumult of the wood,
 among his well know pheer attempt to mell:
 with horn and hoof his purpose they repel. 
thus, shall a maid from virtue lore ystray,
 your sex, my Daphne, show their vengeance sell;
 your cruel self with gall the shaft embay,
 and lash from pardon shrine the penitent away. 

now silence charm the sage of the gown,
 to pure air do speed each crafty wight;
 the well-squeezed client quit the dusty town,
 grow grey in the assert of his right,
 with head fraught with law, and pocket light,
 well please he wander over the fallow lea,
 and view each rural object with delight. 
never be my lot the brawl court to see;
 who trust to lawyer tongue do much misween, predy. 

right bless the man who free from bitter bale,
 do in the little peaceful hamlet dwell,
 no loud contention do his ear assail,
 save when the tempest whistle over his cell:
 the fruitful down, the flower-depainted dell,
 to please his eye be various array;
 and when in roundelay his flame he will tell,
 he gain a smile from his belove maid;
 by such a gentle smile a age of pain repay. 

winter.

the little brook that erst my cot do lave,
 and over its flinty pavement sweet sing,
 do now forget to roll her wanton wave,
 for winter hoar her icy chain have fling,
 and still the babble music of her tongue. 
the lonely woodcock seek the splashy glen,
 each mountain head with fleecy snow be hang;
 the snipe and duck enjoy the moorish fen,
 like eremites they live, and shun the sight of man. 

the wareless sheep no long bite the mead,
 no more the plough-boy turn the stubborn ground,
 at the full crib the horn labourer feed,
 their nostril cast black cloud of smoke around;
 a squalid coat do the lean steed surround. 
the wily fox do prowl abroad for prey,
 rechless of snare, or of the avenge hound;
 and trusty lightfoot, now no long gay,
 sleep at the kitchen hearth his cheerless hour away. 

where erst the boat, and slow move barge,
 do with delight cut through the dimple plain,
 now wanton boy and man do roam at large;
 the river-god quit their usurp domain,
 and of the wrong at neptune court complain. 
there mote you see mild Avon crown with flower,
 and milky Wey without spot or stain;
 there the fair stream that wash hampton bower,
 and Isis who with pride behold her learned tower. 

intent on sport, the ever jocund throng
 quit their warm cot, and for the game prepare;
 behold the restless football whirl along,
 now near the earth, now mount high in air. 
thus often man, in life wild lottery fare,
 who quit true bliss to grasp a empty toy. 
our honest swain for wealth nor title care,
 but lusty health in exercise employ. 
the distant village hear the rude tumultuous joy. 

the careful hedger look the field around,
 to see what labour may his skill demand;
 he mend the fence, repair the sink mound,
 or in long drain he cut the low land,
 that shall henceforth all sudden flood withstand. 
mean while at home his dame, with silver hair,
 do sit encircle by a goodly band
 of lovely maid, who various work prepare,
 all chaste as Jove wise child, as Cupid mother fair. 

she they discourse not of fashion nice,
 nor of the trill note which eunuch sing;
 allurement vain, that prompt the soul to vice! 
ne tell she they of kesar or of king;
 too great the subject for so mean a ring. 
her lesson teach to swell the capon size;
 to make the hen a numerous offspring bring;
 or how the wayward mother to chastise,
 when from her vetchy nest the weetless vagrant hie. 

when glister spangle deck the robe of night,
 and all their cow in pen avoid the cold,
 the buxom troop, still eager of delight,
 round damon eye a drapet white enfold,
 he darkling grope till he some one can hold. 
next Cori hide his head, and must impart
 what wanton fair-one smite his hand so bold. 
he Delia name, nor do from truth depart;
 for well he know her touch, who long have fire his heart. 

stay, i conjure you by your hope of bliss,
 trust not, my Daphne, the rough-biting air,
 let not rude wind those lip of softness kiss;
 will eurus stern the charm of beauty spare? 
no, he will hurt my rosy-featured fair,
 if aught so bright dare rugged carl invade,
 too tender thou such rough assault to bear;
 the mountain ash may stand though strip of shade,
 but at the slight wound the silken flower will fade. 
