the scottish village: or, Pitcairne green.

why weep the genius of the arid waste,
 bend thus pensive from her fulgent sky? 
can being pure like thou of sorrow taste —
 those next to angel ever breathe a sigh! 

sage, yet unlearned! it be now thy hour to know
 that the dear privilege to feel — to sigh —
 to bid the tear from sacred pity flow,
 be not alone for man, or earth-formed eye. 
where the preeminence that angel boast,
 if cold conscious, in eternal rest
 they form a bright, insensate, vapoury host
 by heaven most precious gift to feel unblest? 
the keen feeling of the human mind
 exist more keen in the angelic frame,
 more elevate, poignant, and refine —
 as earth more sordid than ethereal flame. 

wonder not therefore that a angel brow
 thus droop, shall not cheer lustre shed;
 but give attention — so thy fate allow! 
while i record the woe for which it flee. 
behold this plain, stretch by creation hand,
 when each chaotic element arouse
 spring forth elastic at the dread command —
 flee to its home, and there obedient house. 
since that first instant of the young-born time,
 guiltless the moment of this plain have run;
 each close year, and summer happy prime,
 in sweet simplicity its hour have spin. 
the yellow broom that gild its farther bound,
 and verdant carpet soft spread between,
 mark, where light fairy nightly trip their round,
 happy to gambol secret and unseen. 
here calm zephire waft their airy wing,
 and bird of solitude flit muse by,
 and sometime too the bird that sweet sing,
 chant forth its pleasure to the lucid sky; —
 while in the blush chamber of the west,
 a thousand tender die their tint prepare,
 which rapid the horizon round invest,
 stream prismatic glory through the air! 

that russet mountain, on who farther side
 the modest beam of morn first ever play,
 till from its top the ardent sun look down,
 and gild the valley with a bold ray —
 own in its rive base a cavern dank,
 where ooze, filter drop of doubtful green,
 harden, suspend, hang like willow lank,
 a sparkle, jeweled, vegetative scene! 

in that resplendent grove a hermit read
 mysterious nature law that never swerve,
 his life, the virtue and religion lead
 to sanctify the space you now observe. 
here, rapt in second sight he frequent see
 the future scene appear, and fade away;
 his country groan beneath the feudal law,
 or glut with power, the tyrant of the day:
 its neighbour England with irruptive band
 watch each turn, and shade of its fate,
 to bind with manacle its warlike hand,
 and make it feodal to her haughty state. 
at length with pride he see his Scotland give
 monarch, to wear its rival splendid crown;
 bless in the union, see each kingdom live —
 bind in one empire — taste one renown! 
sacred, to vision grand like these, be keep
 the vary circle this horizon bound,
 and when with seer long past, the hermit sleep,
 still shadowy visitant breathe heavenly sound. 

it be thus when feud unfilial tear the land,
 and horrid war her crimson flag unfurled,
 and dread rebellion, with its sanguine hand,
 midst peaceful swain its sharp misery hurl —
 it be thus this hallow spot misfortune spare,
 nor war nor misery in its precinct dwell,
 no cry of woe its peaceful boundary scar,
 no mother by her bleed offspring kneel. 
do turbid clan ever press this mossy heath,
 have rival thane here proud clash the shield? 
it be not with hostile thought, nor vow of death,
 they come not here to conquer, but to yield. 
here have the oath of mutual peace be bind,
 here melt chief their melt foe embrace,
 and all the sound that martial joy breathe round,
 erst, have reach heaven, from this select place. 
but roll year have draw their veil between,
 nay age, bear of age, past away,
 since the soft calm which bless this modest green,
 know the loud clamour of a martial day:
 repose and peace have hover near,
 while vice and shame their haunt at distance keep;
 unknown alike to violence, and fear,
 here terror shrink not, and no sorrow weep. 

but now approach fast the hour of change;
 even while i speak, the scene i vaunt be past;
 here shall no more the feathery fairy range —
 the late nocturnal revel, be their last! 
see, quick advance the numerous motley crowd,
 mechanic, pedant, trader pour along;
 their joy break forth in carol rude and loud,
 and beauty presence animate the song. 
the verdant face of this once happy plain,
 the sharp-toothed mattock shall deform and tear,
 that evil first, and then a endless train,
 follow the footstep of yond graceful fair! 
they bid! 
the future town, submissive to their will,
 rise from earth, and spread its skirt around —
 oh! that the marble, in its quarry still,
 unhewn, unformed, have keep its rest profound! 
with it, the social evil all rush in,
 the oppose passion that distract mankind,
 the blazon crime, the sly, well-covered sin,
 nor will one petty vice remain behind. 
Slander, and avarice, and penury scant,
 the proud man scorn, the rich man sturdy mien,
 wide-squand'ring luxury, and pallid want,
 all haste to form the vary, wretched scene. 

and shall the mighty woe of hapless love
 be here unfelt; the heart not here be tear? 
oh no! in all their violence they will rove —
 swain shall betray, and maiden feel their scorn. 
already sure, the dismal sound i hear,
 the break vow accuse, the rend sigh —
 ah see! the love-lorn stretch upon her bier,
 rend from all joy, she only know to die! 
false friendship too, spread out its close-wove net,
 and stab the trust with a barb spear;
 its arrow, black ingratitude have set —
 yonder a robber skulk; a murderer here! 
ah, can thou wonder, sage! i mourn the hour? 
thou have hear the cause that swell my start tear;
 haste and reflect within thy secret bower —
 ponder the change, and be thy grief sincere! 

here pause the genius! age bend low its head,
 its hoary tress float on the wind;
 oh bright intelligence! then firm say,
 permit a mortal to unveil his mind. 
sad be your prophecy, and oh too sure
 fate will its utmost latitude fill up;
 each promise ill it be fix we must endure,
 and drink from sorrow still replenish cup; —
 but not unmixed the bitter draught shall flow,
 not unallayed the hover misery sting,
 felicity shall blunt the sense of woe,
 and over it, joy their downy mantle fling. 
if social evil overspread thy plain,
 the social blessing too will haste along,
 and on the spot where vice shall lead its train,
 illustrious virtue eager shall throng. 

yonder rude circuit, where the obtrusive fern
 in "sullen vegetation" chill the glance,
 a few revolve halcyon month shall turn
 to a all-cheering, lucid, gay expanse. 
scotland grand staple there shall glad the sight,
 court the blanch beam of day bright orb,
 who will give endure lustre to its white,
 and every slight impurity absorb:
 there from the loom the costly web be bring,
 by Pallas teach in soft festoon to rise;
 which late from belgia, distant kingdom seek,
 but now it be Caledonia grant the prize! 
there the rich damask spread its fruit and flower,
 for royal table, and for hall of state:
 there the transparent lawn display its power,
 to soften beauty, and new charm create. 
proud Manchester will here her fame divide,
 her vary work, her fashion, and her taste;
 this, bind in snowy vest horatio side,
 that, flow in graceful fold from Chloe waist. 
the stripe so well dispose, the glow bloom
 which overspread the whole, shall here be see:
 go Manchester, and weep thy slight loom —
 its art be cherish now on pi'tcairne green! 
for these, while labour chant her jocund song,
 shall foreign prow be point to our shore;
 each rival port our ample harbour throng,
 pour its tribute, for our native store. 
thus bless, this village shall some unborn age
 behold a city, grace with many a dome;
 of note in commerce, and of art the stage,
 where taste industrious, never shall want a home. 
if here the crave miser heap his gold,
 and frown upon the shiver needy wretch;
 here shall benevolence her charger hold,
 and pity, wide her foster arm outstretch. 

soft elegance shall bid around we rise
 the spell all feel, but never can describe,
 scarce tangible by thought, the pen it fly,
 pride can catch it, nor importance bribe; —
 not sense, not loveliness, nor wealth, nor wit,
 but form of all, the charm phantom rise,
 adorn each time and place with grace fit,
 but in domestic hour supreme glow! 
and who like Scotland daughter so prepare
 to spread the fascinate sweet around? 
when through the sex, great nature beauty share,
 who know not, here the rich gift be find? 
thus, though disastrous love shall find a grave,
 or mourn the violate vow of bliss,
 yet here shall faithful love the maiden save,
 and parent cheer she with the nuptial kiss. 
the song of rapture shall the bridegroom pour,
 as oft he wander through the sunny glade,
 and bride shall bless the sacred bind hour;
 whisper their transport in the secret shade;
 for shade shall be, where now the thistle red
 spread over the heath its slender prickly stalk;
 and where the tangley furze conceal its bed,
 there shall the grove divide its tepid walk. 
for nature self to commerce ever yield,
 commerce, who power each hemisphere adorn —
 which bid the dunny heath bloom forth in field,
 and in the desert pour the naiades urn. 
yes, that bless power will here exert her force,
 and woo sterile nature to its arm,
 bid stranger rivulet wind their silvery course,
 and native moor conceal with foreign charm. 

but happy still! learning shall raise the pile
 design the fret of age to withstand;
 within, the classic scholar form his stile,
 and pour instruction through the listen land. 
ah! from its wall some future sage may burst
 to charm or awe the century to come;
 a Thomson in its cell be haply nurse,
 a Blair shed splendour over the choose dome. 
the lawgiver from thence shall draw the seed
 of grow honour, dignity, and fame,
 here shall ensure the future splendid meed,
 that crown his labour, and extend his name. 
a Mansfield, Erskine, Loughborough shall rise,
 the boast of genius in untasted time,
 spread our glory round the distant sky,
 and mark we envy by more happy clime. 

philosophy profound disciple too,
 shall in its ail a new lyceum find;
 platonic ethics, system plain, and true,
 shall there be honour in the tutor mind. 
a Hume! — a second Hume from thence may shine,
 in lustre like the first, but oh his heart
 shall humble melt before religion shrine,
 and prompt his talent to a better part! 
a Robertson shall bid the copious stream
 of long-collected knowledge fill his page;
 dark age make with light revert gleam,
 and bright-stept freedom trace from stage to stage. 
so a vast reservoir compact flood
 to bless a famish people spend its wealth,
 pour out itself to renovate their blood —
 by heaven supply with future store of health. 
a polish Stuart too will then be know,
 to scatter rose over the slander fair;
 to bind the cypress round the rive crown,
 and steal our tear, for misery so rare! 
his name shall ever tender beauty prize
 first, in the climax of the literate few,
 who from the mould of time still bright arise,
 and every rapid century keep in view. 

and ah! while future Bayes luxuriant spread,
 shall not the myrtle in our garden glow? 
yes; while the laurel crown the manly head,
 the blossom for the fair shall glad blow. 
a scottish Seward shall demand the prize —
 she from who pensive and mellifluous throat,
 where ever misfortune scowl her cheerless eye,
 be pour the pity, melancholy note! 
thus the sad nightingale throughout the night
 her fond complaint ring through the leafy grove;
 and so endear the scene, we dread the light —
 detest the sprightly note, and sorrow love. 

for glow Barbauld shall another isle
 be find, amid some distant freeze wave,
 which deck in all the fervour of her stile,
 shall bloom like that, she from oblivion save. 
perchance that isle, convulsive nature tear
 wrathful! from sad messina once-famed port,
 when the proud marble which adorn its shore,
 be dash on rock, and make the billows sport. 
when the mad mother, and the swallow child,
 the totter palace, and the tower prone,
 give at one view, ruin so vast and wild,
 as chill the quicken flesh almost to stone. 
then! in that labour moment of the earth,
 midst the norwegian sea a island spring —
 let Barbauld celebrate the wondrous birth,
 and all its grandeur by her muse be sing! 
she will lift the veil of time, and show we how,
 the climate work upon the cind'ry mass; —
 what, the vast prospect of the unborn now
 and all its figure, in her magic glass. 
she will show that land which when beneath the sky
 of soft Italia, bloom in scent flower,
 paint its surface with the rich dye,
 and burst in hill, and give its shade in bower; —
 she will show it then, divest of every sweet
 that once endear it to the eye of taste;
 no flower, no rill, the wander eye shall meet —
 no soft embroidery over the snowy waste. 
but though not sweet, the scenery will be grand! 
not rill but torrent, will she muse display;
 that roar when rigid wind become more bland —
 grow dumb and stiffen, in the wintery ray. 
no gentle hill, but mountain vast she will show,
 who crack pine confess strong Boreas' arm,
 where wild volcano from their summit glow,
 and give the plain beneath a awful charm. 
arcade and temple, perhaps her muse will sing,
 but not of marble form, nor part for part —
 o no!
 nature will here the noble sculpture bring
 wild magnificent, not cramp by art. 
the arrest cataract a dome will form,
 and rapid torrent bind, in pillar rise,
 their capital be sculpture from a storm —
 snatch, as it be rush from the zemblian sky;
 on these the polar sun will pour its beam,
 tint the glacid scene with shift hue,
 now strong, now fade into faint gleam —
 and then at once, a ruddy blaze infuse. 
these be but outline — a unskilful sketch;
 a powerful Barbauld must the shade give —
 no cold genius on its utmost stretch,
 can bid the frigid, cheerless landscape live. 

attention tire with fancy scene like these,
 recoil, and wish for familiar hour;
 pant for the pillowed chair, the robe of ease,
 and glad yield to common life, its power. 
what pen but burney then, can sooth the breast? 
who draw from nature with a skill so true? 
in every vary mode it stand confess,
 when bring by she before the enquirer view. 
a power peculiar, all her portrait fill. 
when line be bold and strong, a vulgar pen
 may take the sketch; it ask no mighty skill
 miser to paint, or mad, or wayward man. 
but human nature in its faint dye
 Burney detect; drag it to open day —
 make evident what slip the unmark eye,
 and bid it glare, with truth pervade ray. 
the huddle being of the common mass,
 who to themselves appear of equal sort,
 must not in unawakened error pass —
 and sure it be this, be keen-eyed burney fort! 
touch by her spear, they sudden spring to sight,
 but not new form — she show they as they be;
 she mould no character, but give the light
 which make they clear, as Herschel see a star! 

yes, such as these, thy plain may one day boast:
 prize! — sweet intelligence, oh prize the change! 
laurel will then surround our letter coast,
 and here, the muse from Parnassus range. 
this vacant wild, till now expanse unblest! 
unknown, and useless in the general scale,
 slumber its age in ignoble rest,
 scorn, or unheeded in the historic tale,
 shall hence assume a rank, confess a name —
 nor hide a barren disregard spot,
 but live in the breath of future fame,
 shall bless its happy, though its late-drawn lot. 

thus stop the sage; — the genius pause awhile,
 as though his honeyed word revolve over;
 first raise her eye with a celestial smile,
 which seem to promise she will mourn no more,
 then in sweet tone — oh man of snowy year! 
it be truth inspire thou, and her force i own;
 it be she have chide away the fall tear,
 and bad my fade joy again be blow. 
yes! the create guardian of the general weal
 never give a misery, but he send a cure;
 as herb, their antidote will ever reveal,
 in the same field which poisonous herb endure. 

to thou i leave the bliss which just man know,
 felicity which pious act attend —
 over thy white tress they shall ever flow,
 and cheer the anxious moment of thy end! 
then dart upward as the sage adore,
 her golden pinion clavae the liquid way,
 a blush radiance mark the path she soar,
 till lose amid the blaze of azure day! 
