to sir Joshua Reynolds.

the desert village.

sweet auburn, lovely village of the plain,
 where health and plenty cheere the labour swain,
 where smile spring its early visit pay,
 and part summer linger bloom delay:
 dear lovely bower of innocence and ease,
 seat of my youth when every sport can please,
 how often have i loiter over thy green,
 where humble happiness endear each scene;
 how often have i pause on every charm,
 the shelter cot, the cultivate farm,
 the never-failing brook, the busy mill,
 the decent church that top the neighbour hill,
 the hawthorn bush, with seat beneath the shade,
 for talk age and whisper lover make;
 how often have i bless the come day,
 when toil remit lend its turn to play,
 and all the village train, from labour free,
 lead up their sport beneath the spread tree;
 while many a pastime circle in the shade,
 the young contend as the old survey;
 and many a gambol frolic over the ground,
 and slight of art and feat of strength go round;
 and still as each repeat pleasure tire,
 succeed sport the mirthful band inspire;
 the dance pair that simple seek renown
 by hold out to tire each other down;
 the swain mistrustless of his smut face,
 while secret laughter titter round the place;
 the bashful virgin sidelong look of love,
 the matron glance that will those look reprove. 
these be thy charm, sweet village; sport like these,
 with sweet succession teach even toil to please;
 these round thy bower their cheerful influence shed,
 these be thy charm — but all these charm be flee. 

sweet smile village, lovely of the lawn,
 thy sport be flee, and all thy charm withdraw:
 amid thy bower the tyrant hand be see,
 and desolation sadden all thy green;
 one only master grasp the whole domain,
 and half a tillage stint thy smile plain:
 no more thy glassy brook reflect the day,
 but, choke with sedge, work its weedy way;
 along thy glade, a solitary guest,
 the hollow-sounding bittern guard its nest;
 amid thy desert walk the lapwing fly,
 and tire their echo with unvaried cry;
 sink be thy bower in shapeless ruin all,
 and the long grass overtop the moulder wall;
 and tremble, shrink from the spoiler hand,
 far, far away thy child leave the land. 

ill fare the land, to hasten ill a prey,
 where wealth accumulate, and man decay;
 prince and lord may flourish, or may fade;
 a breath can make they, as a breath have make:
 but a bold peasantry, their country pride,
 when once destroy, can never be supply. 

a time there be, ere England grief begin,
 when every rood of ground maintain its man;
 for he light labour spread her wholesome store,
 just give what life require, but give no more;
 his best companion, innocence and health,
 and his best riches, ignorance of wealth. 

but time be alter; trade unfeeling train
 usurp the land, and dispossess the swain;
 along the lawn, where scatter hamlet rise,
 unwieldy wealth, and cumbrous pomp repose;
 and every want to luxury ally,
 and every pang that folly pay to pride. 
these gentle hour that plenty bid to bloom,
 those calm desire that ask but little room,
 those healthful sport that grace the peaceful scene,
 live in each look, and brighten all the green;
 these far depart seek a kind shore,
 and rural mirth and manner be no more. 

sweet auburn! parent of the blissful hour,
 thy glade forlorn confess the tyrant power. 
here as i take my solitary round,
 amid thy tangle walk, and ruin ground,
 and, many a year elapse, return to view
 where once the cottage stand, the hawthorn grow,
 here, as with doubtful, pensive step i range,
 trace every scene, and wonder at the change,
 remembrance wake with all her busy train,
 swell at my breast, and turn the past to pain. 

in all my wander round this world of care,
 in all my grief — and god have give my share —
 i still have hope, my late hour to crown,
 amid these humble bower to lay i down;
 my anxious day to husband near the close,
 and keep life flame from waste by repose;
 i still have hope, for pride attend we still,
 amid the swain to show my book-learned skill,
 around my fire a evening group to draw,
 and tell of all i feel, and all i see:
 and, as a hare who hound and horn pursue,
 pant to the place from whence at first she fly,
 i still have hope, my long vexation past,
 here to return — and die at home at last. 

o bless retirement! friend to life decline,
 retreat from care that never must be i. 
how bless be he who crown in shade like these,
 a youth of labour with a age of ease;
 who quit a world where strong temptation try,
 and since it be hard to combat, learn to fly. 
for he no wretch, bear to work and weep,
 explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep;
 no surly porter stand in guilty state
 to spurn implore famine from his gate;
 but on he move to meet his latter end,
 angel around befriend virtue friend;
 sink to the grave with unperceived decay,
 while resignation gentle slope the way,
 and all his prospect brighten to the last,
 his heaven commence ere the world be pass! 

sweet be the sound, when oft at evening close,
 up yonder hill the village murmur rise;
 there as i pass with careless step and slow,
 the mingle note come soften from below;
 the swain responsive as the milkmaid sing,
 the sober herd that low to meet their young;
 the noisy goose that gabble over the pool,
 the playful child just let loose from school;
 the watch-dog voice that bay the whisper wind,
 and the loud laugh that speak the vacant mind:
 these all in soft confusion seek the shade,
 and fill each pause the nightingale have make. 
but now the sound of population fail,
 no cheerful murmur fluctuate in the gale;
 no busy step the grass-grown footway tread,
 but all the bloomy flush of life be flee;
 all but yond widow, solitary thing,
 that feeble bend beside the plashy spring;
 she, wretched matron, force, in age, for bread,
 to strip the brook with mantl cress spread,
 to pick her wintery faggot from the thorn,
 to seek her nightly shed, and weep until morn;
 she only leave of all the harmless train,
 the sad historian of the pensive plain. 

near yonder copse, where once the garden smile,
 and still where many a garden flower grow wild;
 there, where a few tear shrub the place disclose,
 the village preacher modest mansion rise. 
a man he be, to all the country dear,
 and pass rich with forty pound a year;
 remote from town he run his godly race,
 nor ever have change, nor wish to change his place,
 unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power,
 by doctrine fashion to the vary hour;
 far other aim his heart have learn to prize,
 more bend to raise the wretched than to rise. 
his house be know to all the vagrant train,
 he child their wander, but relieve their pain:
 the long remember beggar be his guest,
 who beard descend sweep his age breast;
 the ruin spendthrift, now no long proud,
 claim kindred there, and have his claim allow;
 the break soldier kind bid to stay,
 sit by his fire, and talk the night away;
 weep over his wound, or tale of sorrow do,
 shoulder his crutch, and show how field be win. 
please with his guest, the good man learn to glow,
 and quite forget their vice in their woe;
 careless their merit, or their fault to scan,
 his pity give ere charity begin. 

thus to relieve the wretched be his pride,
 and even his fail lean to virtue side;
 but in his duty prompt at every call,
 he watch and weep, he pray and feel, for all,
 and, as a bird each fond endearment try
 to tempt its new-fledged offspring to the sky,
 he try each art, reprove each dull delay,
 allure to bright world, and lead the way. 

beside the bed where part life be lay,
 and sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turn dismay,
 the reverend champion stand. at his controul,
 despair and anguish sle the struggle soul;
 comfort come down the tremble wretch to raise,
 and his last falter accent whisper praise. 

at church, with meek and unaffected grace,
 his look adorn the venerable place;
 truth from his lip prevail with double sway,
 and fool, who come to scoff, remain to pray. 
the service past, around the pious man,
 with ready zeal each honest rustic run;
 even child follow with endear wile,
 and pluck his gown, to share the good man smile;
 his ready smile a parent warmth express,
 their welfare please he, and their care distress;
 to they his heart, his love, his grief be give,
 but all his serious thought have rest in heaven:
 as some tall cliff that lift its awful form,
 swell from the vale, and midway leave the storm,
 though round its breast the roll cloud be spread,
 eternal sunshine settle on its head. 

beside yond straggle fence that skirt the way,
 with blossom furze unprofitable gay,
 there, in his noisy mansion skill to rule,
 the village master teach his little school:
 a man severe he be, and stern to view,
 i know he well, and every truant know;
 well have the bode trembler learn to trace
 the day disaster in his morning face;
 full well they laugh, with counterfeit glee,
 at all his joke, for many a joke have he;
 full well the busy whisper circle round,
 convey the dismal tiding when he frown:
 yet he be kind, or if severe in aught,
 the love he bear to learning be in fault. 
the village all declare how much he know;
 it be certain he can write, and cypher too:
 land he can measure, term and tide presage,
 and even the story run that he can gauge;
 in argue too, the parson own his skill,
 for even though vanquish, he can argue still;
 while word of learned length, and thunder sound,
 amaze the gaze rustic range around;
 and still they gaze, and still the wonder grow,
 that one small head can carry all he know. 
but past be all his fame. the very spot
 where many a time he triumph, be forget. 

near yonder thorn, that lift its head on high,
 where once the signpost catch the pass eye,
 low lie that house where nutbrown draught inspire,
 where greybeard mirth and smile toil retire,
 where village statesman talk with look profound,
 and news much old than their ale go round. 
imagination fond stoop to trace
 the parlour splendour of that festive place:
 the whitewash wall, the nice sand floor,
 the varnish clock that click behind the door;
 the chest contrive a double debt to pay,
 a bed by night, a chest of drawer by day;
 the picture place for ornament and use,
 the twelve good rule, the royal game of goose;
 the hearth, except when winter chill the day,
 with aspen bough, and flower, and fennel gay;
 while break tea-cup, wise keep for show,
 range over the chimney, glisten in a row. 

vain transitory splendour! can not all
 reprieve the totter mansion from its fall! 
obscure it sink, nor shall it more impart
 a hour importance to the poor man heart;
 thither no more the peasant shall repair
 to sweet oblivion of his daily care;
 no more the farmer news, the barber tale,
 no more the woodman ballad shall prevail;
 no more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,
 relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;
 the host himself not long shall be find
 careful to see the mantling bliss go round;
 nor the coy maid, half will to be press,
 shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest. 

yes! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
 these simple blessing of the lowly train;
 to i more dear, congenial to my heart,
 one native charm, than all the gloss of art. 
spontaneous joy, where nature have its play,
 the soul adopt, and own their firstborn sway;
 light they frolic over the vacant mind,
 unenvied, unmolested, unconfined:
 but the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
 with all the freak of wanton wealth array,
 in these, ere trifler half their wish obtain,
 the toil pleasure sicken into pain;
 and, even while fashion bright art decoy,
 the heart, distrust, ask if this be joy. 

you friend to truth, you statesman, who survey
 the rich man joy increase, the poor decay,
 it be you to judge, how wide the limit stand
 between a splendid and a happy land. 
proud swell the tide with load of freight over,
 and shout folly hail they from her shore;
 hoard, even beyond the miser wish abound,
 and rich man flock from all the world around. 
yet count our gain. this wealth be but a name
 that leave our useful product still the same. 
not so the loss. the man of wealth and pride
 take up a space that many poor supply:
 space for his lake, his park extend bound,
 space for his horse, equipage, and hound;
 the robe that wrap his limb in silken sloth,
 have rob the neighbour field of half their growth;
 his seat, where solitary sport be see,
 indignant spurn the cottage from the green;
 around the world each needful product fly,
 for all the luxury the world supply. 
while thus the land adorn for pleasure all,
 in barren splendour feeble wait the fall. 

as some fair female unadorned and plain,
 secure to please while youth confirm her reign,
 slight every borrow charm that dress supply,
 nor share with art the triumph of her eye:
 but when those charm be past, for charm be frail,
 when time advance, and when lover fail,
 she then shine forth, solicitous to bless,
 in all the glare impotence of dress;
 thus fare the land, by luxury betray,
 in nature simple charm at first array;
 but, verge to decline, its splendour rise,
 it vistas strike, its palace surprise;
 while, scourge by famine from the smile land,
 the mournful peasant lead his humble band;
 and, while he sink without one arm to save,
 the country bloom — a garden, and a grave. 

where then, ah, where shall poverty reside,
 to escape the pressure of contiguous pride? 
if to some common fenceless limit stray,
 he drive his flock to pick the scanty blade,
 those fenceless field the son of wealth divide,
 and even the bare-worn common be deny. 

if to the city speed — what wait he there? 
to see profusion that he must not share;
 to see ten thousand baneful art combine,
 to pamper luxury, and thin mankind;
 to see each joy the son of pleasure know,
 extort from his fellow-creature woe. 
here, while the courtier glitter in brocade,
 there the pale artist ply the sickly trade;
 here, while the proud their long-drawn pomp display,
 there the black gibbet gloom beside the way. 
the dome where pleasure hold her midnight reign,
 here rich deck admit the gorgeous train;
 tumultuous grandeur crowd the blaze square,
 the rattle chariot clash, the torch glare;
 sure scene like these no trouble ever annoy! 
sure these denote one universal joy! 
be these thy serious thought? — ah, turn thy eye
 where the poor houseless shiver female lie;
 she once, perhaps, in village plenty bless,
 have weep at tale of innocence distress;
 her modest look the cottage may adorn,
 sweet as the primrose peep beneath the thorn;
 now lose to all, her friend, her virtue flee,
 near her betrayer door she lay her head;
 and pinch with cold, and shrink from the shower,
 with heavy heart deplore that luckless hour,
 when idle first, ambitious of the town,
 she leave her wheel and robe of country brown. 

do thy, sweet auburn, thy, the lovely train,
 do thy fair tribe participate her pain? 
even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger lead,
 at proud man door they ask a little bread! 

ah! no. to distant clime, a dreary scene,
 where half the convex world intrude between,
 to torrid tract with faint step they go,
 where wild altama murmur to their woe. 
far different there from all that charm before,
 the various terror of that horrid shore:
 those blaze sun that dart a downward ray,
 and fierce shed intolerable day;
 those mat wood where bird forget to sing,
 but silent bat in drowsy cluster cling;
 those poisonous field with rank luxuriance crown,
 where the dark scorpion gather death around;
 where, at each step, the strange fear to wake
 the rattle terror of the vengeful snake;
 where crouch tiger wait their hapless prey,
 and savage man, more murderous still than they;
 while oft in whirl the mad tornado fly,
 mingle the ravage landscape with the sky. 
far different these from every former scene,
 the cool brook, the grassy vest green,
 the breezy covert of the warble grove,
 that only shelter theft of harmless love. 

good heaven! what sorrow gloom that part day,
 that call they from their native walk away;
 when the poor exile, every pleasure past,
 hang round their bower, and fond look their last,
 and take a long farewell, and wish, in vain,
 for seat like these beyond the western main;
 and, shudder still to face the distant deep,
 return and weep, and still return to weep. 
the good old sire, the first prepare to go
 to newfound world, and weep for other woe;
 but for himself, in conscious virtue brave,
 he only wish for world beyond the grave. 
his lovely daughter, lovely in her tear,
 the fond companion of his helpless year,
 silent go next, neglectful of her charm,
 and leave a lover for her father arm. 
with loud plaint the mother speak her woe,
 and bless the cot where every pleasure rise;
 and kiss her thoughtless babe with many a tear,
 and clasp they close, in sorrow double dear;
 while her fond husband strive to lend relief
 in all the decent manliness of grief. 

o luxury! thou curse by heaven decree,
 how ill exchange be thing like these for thou! 
how do thy potion with insidious joy,
 diffuse their pleasure only to destroy! 
kingdom by thou, to sickly greatness grow,
 boast of a florid vigour not their own. 
at every draught more large and large they grow,
 a bloat mass of rank unwieldy woe;
 till sap their strength, and every part unsound,
 down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round. 

even now the devastation be begin,
 and half the business of destruction do;
 even now, methinks, as ponder here i stand,
 i see the rural virtue leave the land:
 down where yond anchor vessel spread the sail
 that idle wait flap with every gale,
 downward they move, a melancholy band,
 pass from the shore, and darken all the strand. 
content toil, and hospitable care,
 and kind connubial tenderness, be there;
 and piety with wish place above,
 and steady loyalty, and faithful love. 

and thou, sweet poetry, thou lovely maid,
 still first to fly where sensual joy invade;
 unfit in these degenerate time of shame,
 to catch the heart, or strike for honest fame;
 dear charm nymph, neglect and decry,
 my shame in crowd, my solitary pride;
 thou source of all my bliss, and all my woe,
 that find i poor at first, and keep i so;
 thou guide by which the noble art excel,
 thou nurse of every virtue, fare thou well:
 farewell, and o! wherever thy voice be try,
 on torno cliff, or pambamarca side,
 whether where equinoctial fervour glow,
 or winter wrap the polar world in snow;
 still let thy voice, prevail over time,
 redress the rigour of the inclement clime;
 and slight truth with thy persuasive strain,
 teach err man to spurn the rage of gain;
 teach he that state of native strength possess,
 though very poor, may still be very bless;
 that trade be proud empire hastes to swift decay,
 as ocean sweep the labour mole away;
 while self-dependent power can time defy,
 as rock resist the billow and the sky. 
