a ode to the genius of scandal.

oh! thou, who all-consoling power
 can soothe our care to rest;
 who touch in spleen most vapourish hour
 can calm each female breast;
 thou i invoke! great genius hear —
 pity a lady sigh; —
 without thy kind relief be near
 poor coquetina die!

haste thou, then, and with thou bring
 many a little venom sting;
 many a tale that no one know
 of shall-be-nameless bell and beaux;
 just-imported curtain lecture,
 wink, and nod, and shrewd conjecture;
 half a dozen strange suspicion
 build on strange supposition;
 unknown marriage some twenty,
 private childbed linen plenty;
 and horn just fit to some people head,
 and certain powder coat, and certain tumble bed!

teach i, powerful genius! teach
 thy own mysterious art,
 safe from retaliation reach,
 how i may throw detraction dart!

so shall my hand a altar raise
 sacred to thy transcendent praise,
 and daily with assiduous care,
 some grateful sacrifice prepare.

the first information
 of lose reputation
 as offering to thou i will consign,
 and the early news
 of surprise billet-doux
 shall constant be serve at thy shrine.

intrigue by the score,
 never hear of before,
 shall the sacrifice daily augment;
 and by each morning post
 some favourite toast
 a victim to thou shall be send.

heaven! methinks i see thy train
 soft trip over the plain;
 all the alphabet i view
 step forward two and two.
hush! for as they couple walk,
 sure i hear the letter talk!
though lowly-fearful whisper half smother
 the well concert tale they blab of one another:
 "lord! who will have think our cousin d
"can think of marry mrs. i! 
 "true, i do like these thing to tell,
"but, faith! i pity mr. l;
 "and be i he, the bride to vex,
"i will go and court my lady x.
 "indeed they say that Charlotte u,
"with Fanny m, and we guess who,
 "occasion all — for you must know
"they set their cap at mr. o,
 "and as he court mrs. i,
"they think if she will have cousin d,
 "that thing may be, through captain a,
"just bring about in their own way! "

oh! how the please style regales my ear —!
heaven! what new form be these which now appear?

see yonder, in the thick throng,
 design envy skulk along,
 big with malicious laughter!
fiction and cunning swell her train;
 while, stretch far behind, in vain
 poor truth come pant after.

now, now indeed, i burn with sacred fire —
 it be scandal self that every thought inspire!
i feel, all-potent genius! now i feel
 thy work magic through each artery steal.

at thy command my fancy warm,
 and sweet paint the alter scene —
 her touch now every grace deform,
 and blacken every mien!

each moment to my pry eye
 some fresh disfigure beauty rise:
 each minute i perceive some flaw
 that even ill-nature self never see.

hark! some airy whisp'rer hint,
 in accent wise faint,
 that bright Cleora rather squint —
 rosetta use paint —

that though some fop of Celia prate,
 yet be not she the praise,
 for if she shall be pass straight —
 hem! — she may thank her stay!

each fool of delia figure talk,
 and celebrate her fame;
 but, for my part, whenever she walk,
 i think she be rather lame.

and mind madam Chloe toss her head!
lord! how the creature stare!
well! — i thank god it can be say
 i give myself those air.

but soft! what figure this i now see come?
his awful frown strike even scandal dumb —
 ah i! the blood forsake my tremble cheek,
 while stern thus, methinks, i hear he speak:

peace, snarl woman, peace!
it be candour bid thou cease —
 candour — at who insult name
 even thy face shall burn with shame!
too long I have silent see
 the venom of thy spleen —
 too long, with secret pain,
 observe black scandal reign;
 but now, with indignation sting,
 justice demand my tongue,
 and bid i drag the lurk fiend to light,
 and hold her deed of darkness up to sight.
look on this prospect! and if ever thy brow
 can feel compunction sicken blush, it be now.

Mark yonder weep maid,
 sad desert lay
 beside that mournful willow!
there every day, in silent woe,
 she bid her tear incessant flow;
 and every night forlorn pine,
 mute on her lily hand recline,
 bedew her wake pillow,

sweet girl! she be once most enchant gay,
 each youth feel her charm, and acknowledge their sway;
 no art do she use to acquire a grace,
 it be good humour alone that enliven her face;
 pure nature have leave in her action to speak —
 the wildness of youth give the blush to her cheek,
 and her look uninstructed her thought will impart,
 since her eye only flash from the warmth of her heart.
herself undesigning, no scheme she suspect —
 never dream of ambush, defence she neglect;
 with the youth that she love, at the moon silver hour,
 in confidence tender, she steal to the bower:
 there he hope to have all his desire obtain,
 but she spurn at the insult her virtue sustain;
 and he, in revenge for his baffle endeavour,
 give a hint, — it be enough — she be ruin for ever!
a thousand kind female the story augment —
 each day grin envy addition invent;
 till satiate malice have gain all her end,
 have rob she of character — happiness — friend.

and now, sad innocent — alone —
 shun as a pest she make her moan,
 and in unheard despair,
 yield all resign to soul-consuming care.
yet many a time her wander brain
 turn with its feverish weight of pain,
 and then a thousand childish thing
 the pretty mad one rude sing;
 or mute on the ground she gaze,
 and weep as she scatter her daisy,
 and then, in a strain more distract loud,
 she chant the sad thought of her fancy,
 and shiver and sing of her cold shroud —
 ah poor Nancy!

nay, weep not now! — it be now too late —
 thy friendship may have stop her fate;
 rather now hide thy head in conscious shame —
 thy mouth too buz the tale that stain her fame.

but come — again — turn here thy eye,
 and view another victim rise —
 observe that crest warrior! — his name
 can make whole hostile rank disorder fly,
 victory follow where the hero come,
 and conquest dart from his vengeful eye.
his be true courage on good prudence build —
 a arm prepare to extirpate or save:
 it be only raise to crush presume guilt,
 or lend its vigour to the honest brave.

yet even a man thus form,
 with every noble passion warm,
 at envy infamous command,
 fall by dark scandal secret hand. —
 Lothario, dear of his friend,
 wrong he — he scorn to ask amends —

in real valour calmness we admire,
 it be your mock honour that be so soon on fire.
soul true great no rash resentment seek —
 his friendship pardon ever his rage can speak.
yet, for a deed that challenge bright fame,
 scandal bedamned he with a coward name;
 nay, more secure her vengeance to pursue,
 proclaim the man that own he coward too.

and see! with proud sullen air
 the injure hero stalk alone,
 and, though his look betray his care.
disdain to vent a single groan:
 save when, by some distract thought,
 to wild impatience mad wrought,
 with sudden stamp the ground he beat,
 as memory paint his former feat,
 how once knee-deep in blood
 immoveable he stand,
 and in the howl battle roar,
 with gape wound all cover over,
 his single arm dare firm oppose
 a phalanx of assail foe.
and mark! with start rage possess,
 wild he bare his furrow breast,
 and as his scar he view with ache eye,
 "oh! it be too much!" the falter veteran cry —
 yet scorn still to let his pang appear,
 bite hard his quiver lip, and gulp the start tear!

these be the triumph scandal claim —
 triumph derive from ruin name —
 such as, to generous mind unknown,
 a honest soul will scorn to own.
nor think, vain woman, while you sneer
 at other fault, that you be clear;
 no! — turn your back — you undergo
 the self-same malice you to other show,
 and soon by some malicious tale overthrow,
 like these shall fall, unpitied, and unknown!

oh! then, you bloom fair attend —
 oh! take kind candour for your friend,
 nor forfeit, for a mean delight,
 that power over man that be you by right.

to woman every charm be give,
 design by all indulgent heaven
 to soften every care.
yes! you be form to bless mankind,
 to harmonise and soothe the mind,
 and guard we from despair.
but when from those sweet lip we hear,
 ill-nature whisper, envy sneer,
 your power that moment die.
each coxcomb make your name his sport,
 and fool when angry will retort
 what man of sense despise.

leave, then, such low pursuit as these,
 and take a noble road to please —
 let candour guide your way —
 so shall you daily conquest gain,
 and captive glory in your chain,
 be proud to own your sway.
