ode to the genius of Italy,

occasion by the earl of corke go abroad.

by mr. J. Duncombe.

o thou that, on a pointless spear recline,
in dusk of eve oft take thy lonely way
where tiber slow, neglect water stray,
and pour thy fruitless sorrow to the wind,
grieve to see his shore no more the seat
of art and arm, and liberty retreat,

italia genius, rear thy droop head,
shake off thy trance, and weave a olive crown,
for see! a noble guest appear, well know
to all thy worthy, though in Britain breed;
guard well thy charge, for know, our polish isle
reluctant spare thou such a son as Boyle.

there, while their sweet thy myrtle grove dispense,
lead to the Sabine or the Tuscan plain,
where playful Horace tune his amorous strain,
and Tully pour the stream of eloquence;
nor fail to crown he with that ivy bloom,
which graceful mantle over thy maro tomb,
at that bless spot, from vulgar care refine,
in some soft vision or indulgent dream
inspire his fancy with a glorious theme,
and point new subject to his generous mind,
at once to charm his country, and improve
the last, the young object of his love.
but o! mark well his transport in that shade,
where circle by the bay unfading green,
amid a rural and sequester scene
his much-loved Pliny rest his honour head:
there, rapt in silence, will he gaze around,
and strew with sweet flower the hallow groan.

but see! the sage, to mortal view confess,
thrice wave the hand, and say, or seem to say,
"the debt i owe thou how shall i repay?
"welcome to latium shore, illustrious guest!
"long may thou live to grace thy native isle,
"humane in thought and elegant in style!
"while on thy consort i with rapture gaze
"my own calphurnia rise to my view:
"that bliss unknown but to the virtuous few,
"briton! be thy; charm with domestic praise
"thy be those heart-felt joy that sweeten life,
"the son, the friend, the daughter and the wife. "

content with such approof, when genial spring
bid the shrill blackbird whistle in the vale,
home may he hasten with a prosperous gale,
and health protect he with her foster wing;
so shall Britannia to the wind and sea
entrust no more her favourite orrery.
