eleazer lamentation over Jerusalem; paraphrase out of Josephus.

stanza i 

alas, Jerusalem! alas! where be now
 thy pristine glory, thy unmatched renown
 to which the heathen monarchy do bow,
 ah hapless, miserable town! 
where be all thy majesty, thy beauty go? 
thou once most noble celebrate place,
 the joy, and the delight of all the earth;
 who give to god-like prince birth,
 and breed up hero, a immortal race. 
where be now the vast magnificence which make
 the soul of foreigner adore
 thy wondrous brightness, which no more
 shall shine, but lie in a eternal shade. 
oh misery! where be all her mighty state,
 her splendid train of numerous king,
 her noble edifice, noble thing,
 which make she seem so eminent great? 
that barbarous prince in her gate appear,
 and wealthy present, as their tribute bring,
 to court her friendship, for her strength they fear,
 and all her wide protection seek. 
but now, ah, now they laugh, and cry,
 see how her lofty building lie,
 see how her flame turret gild the sky! 

ii.

where be all the young, the valiant, and the gay
 that on her festival be use to play
 harmonious tune, and beautify the day? 
the glitter troop, which do from far
 bring home the trophy, and the spoil of war. 
who all the nation round with terror view,
 nor dare their god-like valour try,
 whereve they fight, they certain subdue,
 and every combat gain a victory. 
ah! where be the house of the eternal king,
 the beauteous temple of the lord of host,
 to who large treasury our fleet do bring
 the gold, and jewel of remote coast;
 there have the infinite creator place
 his terrible, amaze name:
 and with his more peculiar presence grace
 that heavenly sanctum, where no mortal come,
 the high-priest only, he but once a year,
 in that divine apartment may appear:
 so full of glory, and so sacred then,
 but now corrupt with the heap of slay,
 which scatter round with blood, defile the mighty Fane. 

iii.

alas Jerusalem! each spacious street
 be once so fill, the numerous throng
 be force to justle as they pass along;
 and thousand do with thousand meet,
 the darling then of god, and man belove retreat. 
in thou be the bright throne of justice fix,
 justice impartial, and with fraud unmixed. 
she scorn the beauty of fallacious gold,
 despise the most wealthy bribe;
 but do the sacred balance hold
 with god-like faith to all our happy tribe. 
thy well-built street, and every noble square,
 be once with polish marble lay,
 and all thy lofty bulwarks make
 with wondrous labour, and with artful care. 
thy ponderous gate, surprise to behold,
 be cover over with solid gold;
 who splendour do so glorious appear,
 it ravish and amaze the eye;
 and stranger pass, to themselves will cry,
 what mighty heap of wealth be here! 
how thick the bar of massy silver lie? 
o happy people! and still happy be,
 celestial city! from destruction free,
 may thou enjoy a long entire prosperity. 

iv.

but now, oh wretched, wretched place! 
thy street and palace be spread
 with heap of carcass, and mountain of the dead,
 the bleed relic of the Jewish race:
 each corner of the town, no vacant space,
 but be with breathless body fill;
 some by the sword, and some by famine kill. 
native and stranger be together lay,
 death arrow all at random fly
 among the crowd, and no distinction make
 but both the coward and the valiant slay. 
all in one dismal ruin join,
 (for sword and pestilence be blind;)
 the fair, the good, the brave, no mercy find;
 those that from far, with joyful haste,
 come to attend thy festival,
 of the same bitter potion taste,
 and by the black destructive poison fall,
 for the avenge sentence pass on all. 
oh! see how the delight of human eye
 in horrid desolation lie! 
see how the burn ruin flame,
 nothing now leave, but a sad empty name;
 and the triumphant victor cry,
 this be the fame Jerusalem! 

v. 

the most obdurate creature must
 be grieve to see thy palace in dust,
 those ancient habitation of the just:
 and can the marble rock but know
 the misery of thy fatal overthrow,
 they will strive to find some secret way unknown,
 maugre the senseless nature of the stone,
 their pity, and concern to show. 
for now, where lofty building stand,
 thy son corrupt carass be lay;
 and all by this destruction make
 one common Golgotha, one field of blood. 
see! how those ancient man, which rule thy state,
 and make thou happy, make thou great,
 who sit upon the awful chair
 of mighty Moses, in long scarlet clad,
 the good to cherish, and chastise the bad;
 now sit in the corrupt air,
 in silent melancholy, and in sad despair? 
see! how their murder child round they lie! 
ah dismal scene! hark how they cry! 
woe! woe! one beam of mercy give,
 good heaven! alas, for we will live! 
be pitiful, and suffer we to die! 
thus they lament, thus beg for ease,
 while in their feeble age arm they hold
 the body of the offspring, stiff and cold,
 to guard they from the ravenous savage:
 till their increase sorrow death persuade
 (for death must sure with pity see
 the horrid desolation he have make)
 to put a period to their misery. 
thy wretched daughter that survive,
 be by the heathen keep alive
 only to gratify their lust,
 and then be mix with common dust. 
oh! insupportable, stupendious woe! 
what shall we do? ah! whither shall we go? 
down to the grave, down to those happy shade below! 
where all our brave progenitor be bless
 with endless triumph, and eternal rest. 

vi.

but who without a flood of tear can see
 thy mournful sad catastrophe? 
who can behold thy glorious temple lie
 in ash, and not be in pain to die? 
unhappy, dear Jerusalem! thy woe
 have raise my grief to such a vast excess,
 their mighty weight no mortal know,
 thought can comprehend, or word express,
 nor can they possible, while i survive, be less. 
good heaven have be extreme kind,
 if it have strike i dead, or strike i blind,
 before this curse time, this worst of day. 
be death quite tire, be all his arrow spend? 
if not, why then so many dull delay? 
quick, quick, let the oblige dart be send! 
nay, at i only, let ten thousand fly,
 who ever shall wretched survive, that i
 may, happy, be sure to die. 
yet still we live, live in excess of pain,
 our friend and relative be slay;
 nothing but ruin round we see,
 nothing but desolation, woe, and misery! 
nay, while we thus with bleed heart complain,
 our enemy without, prepare
 their direful engine to pursue the war;
 and you must slavish preserve your breath,
 or seek for freedom in the arm of death. 

vii.

thus then resolve, nor tremble at the thought,
 can glory be too dear buy? 
since the almighty wisdom have decree
 that we, and all our progeny, shall bleed,
 it shall be after such a noble way,
 succeed age will with wonder view,
 what brave despair compel we to:
 no, we will never survive another day. 
bring then your wife, your child, all
 that be valuable, good, or dear,
 with ready hand, and place they here;
 they shall unite in one vast funeral. 
i know your courage be true brave,
 and dare do any thing, but ill;
 who will a age father save,
 that he may live in chain, and be a slave,
 or for remorseless enemy to kill? 
let your bold hand then give the fatal blow;
 for what at any other time will be
 the dire effect of rage and cruelty,
 be mercy, tenderness, and pity now,
 this then perform, we will to the battle fly,
 and there amid our slaughter foe expire. 
if it be revenge and glory you desire,
 now you may have they, if you dare but die;
 nay more, even freedom, and eternity. 
