verse to our own flowery kirtled spring.

welcome, sweet time of bud and bloom, renew
 the early object of delight, and woo
 the notice of the grateful heart! for then
 long-hidden, beauteous friend be see again;
 from the cleave soil, like babe from cradle peep,
 at the glad light, where sound they have be sleep;
 like chicken in their downy coat, just free
 from the chip shell, their newfound active being;
 like spot butterfly, its wing uprear,
 half from the burst chrysalis appear. 
sweet season, so bedight, so gay, so kind,
 right welcome to the sight and to the mind! 

now many a "thing that pretty be" delay
 the wanderer step beneath the sun soft ray. 
gay daffodil, bend over the watery gleam,
 double their flicker image in the stream;
 the woody nook where bell of bright blue
 have clothe the ground in heaven etherial hue;
 the lane's high slope bank, where pale primrose
 with hundred of its gentle kindred blow;
 and speckle daisy that on upland bare
 their round eye open, scatter gladness there. 
man look on nature with a grateful smile,
 and think of nature bounteous lord the while. 

now urchin range the brake in joyous band,
 with new-called nosegay in their dimple hand. 
the cottage maid her household task-work cheat
 in mead or glen to pick the choice sweet,
 with skilful care preserve for Sunday morn,
 her bosom simple kerchief to adorn. 
and even the beldame, as with sober tread,
 she take her sun in the grassy mead,
 stoop down with eager look and find, well please,
 such herb, as in a chest or bible squeeze,
 in former day be deem, by folk of sense,
 a fragrant wholesome virtue to dispense,
 and oft on raftered roof, in bunch string,
 with other winter store be due hang. 

but not alone in simple scene like these,
 thy beauteous offspring our soothe sense please;
 i the city busy street, by rich man door,
 on who white step the flower-girl set her store,
 in wicker basket group to lure the sight,
 they stop and tempt full many a wistful wight. 
flower though they be by artful culture breed,
 upon the suburb-seedsman's crowd bed,
 by fetid manure cherish, gorgeous, bright,
 like civic madam dress for festive night, —
 anemony of crimson, purple, yellow,
 and tulip streak with colour rich and mellow,
 brown wallflower and jonquil of golden glare,
 in dapper posy tie like shop-man ware,
 yet still they whisper something to the heart,
 which feeling kind and gentle thought impart. 

gay sight! that oft a touch of pleasure give
 even to the sad, rude soul that live —
 gay sight! the pass carman grin thereat,
 and stick a purchase posy in his hat,
 and crack his whip and tread the rugged street
 with waggish air and joke with all he meet. 
the sickly child from nursery window spy
 the tempt show, and for a nosegay cry,
 which place in china mug, by linnet cage,
 will for a time his listless mind engage. 
the dame precise, move at the flower-girl cry,
 lay her patch-work or her net by,
 and from the parlour window cast her eye,
 then send across the way her tiny maid;
 and present on mantlepiece display,
 between fair ornament of china ware,
 small bust and lacker parrot station there,
 tulip, anemony and wallflower shine,
 and strange with their new compeer combine
 each visitor with wonder to excite,
 who look and smile, and laud the motley sight. 
that even to the prison wretched thrall,
 those simple gem of nature will recall
 what soothe the sadness of his dreary state,
 yond narrow window, through who iron grate
 a squalid countenance be dim trace,
 gaze on flower in break pitcher place
 upon the sooty sill and wither there,
 sad emblem of himself, most piteous declare. 

of what in gentle lady curtain room,
 on story stand and gild tripod bloom,
 the rich, rare flower of every clime,
 who learned name suit not my simple rhyme,
 i speak not! lovely as they be, we find
 they visit more the sense than the mind. 
their nurture come not from the cloud of heaven,
 but from a paint watering-pot be give;
 and, in return for daily care, with faint
 and sickly sweetness hall and chamber taint. 
i will not speak of those; we feel and see
 they have no kindred, our own spring! with thou. 

welcome, sweet season! though with rapid pace
 thy course be run, and we can scarce grace
 thy joyous come with a grateful cheer,
 ere loose-leaved flower and leaflet shrink and seré,
 and flaccid bend stem, sad bode! tell
 we soon must bid our fleet friend farewell. 
