a epistle to Delia.

as those, who hope hereafter heaven to share,
 a rigurous exile here, can calm bear;
 and with collect spirit undergo
 the sad variety of pain below:
 yet with intense reflection antedate,
 the mighty rapture of a future state:
 while the bright prospect of approach joy,
 create a bliss no trouble can destroy. 
so, though i be toss by giddy fortune hand,
 even to the confine of my native land;
 where i can hear the stormy ocean roar,
 and break its wave upon the foam shore:
 though from my Delia banish, all that be dear,
 that be good, or beautiful, or charm here;
 yet flatter hope encourage i to live,
 and tell i fate will kind minute give. 
that the dark treasury of time contain
 a glorious day, will finish all my pain;
 and while i contemplate on joy to come,
 my grief be silent, and my sorrow dumb. 
believe i, nymph, believe i charm fair,
 (when truth be conspicuous, we need not swear;
 oath will suppose a diffidence in you,
 that i be false, my flame fictitious too,)
 be i condemn by fate imperial power,
 never to return to your embrace more,
 i will scorn whatever the busy world can give,
 it will be the worst of misery to live:
 for all my wish, and desire pursue,
 all i admire, or covet here, be you. 
be i possess of your surprise charm,
 and lodge again within my delia arm,
 then will my joy ascend to that degree,
 can angel envy, they will envy i. 

oft as i wander in a silent shade,
 when bold vexation will my soul invade,
 i banish the rough thought, and none pursue,
 but what incline my will mind to you. 
the soft reflection on your sacred love,
 like sovereign antidote, all care remove;
 compose every faculty to rest,
 they leave a grateful flavour in my breast. 

retire sometime into a lonely grove,
 i think over all the story of our love. 
what mighty pleasure have i oft possess,
 when in a masculine embrace i press,
 the lovely Delia to my heave breast? 
then i remember, and with vast delight,
 the kind expression of the part night:
 methinks, the sun too quick return again,
 and day be never impertinent till then. 
strong and contract be our eager bliss,
 a age pleasure in each generous kiss;
 year of delight, in moment we comprize,
 and heaven it self be there epitomise. 

but when the glory of the eastern light,
 overflow the twinkle taper of the night,
 farewell my Delia, o farewell, say i,
 the utmost period of my time be nigh:
 too cruel fate forbid my long stay,
 and wretched Strephon be compel away. 
but though i must my native plain forgo,
 forsake these field, forsake my Delia too,
 no change of fortune shall for ever move,
 the settle base of my immortal love. 

and must my Strephon, must my faithful Swain,
 be force, you cry, to a remot plain! 
the darling of my soul so soon remove? 
the only value, and the best belove. 
though other swain to i themselves address,
 Strephon be still distinguish from the rest:
 flat and insipid all their courtship seem,
 little themselves, their passion less esteem. 
for my aversion with their flame increase,
 and none but Strephon partial Delia please. 
though i be deprive of my kind shepherd sight,
 joy of the day, and bless of the night;
 yet will you Strephon, will you love i still? 
however flatter i, and say you will. 
for shall you entertain a rival love,
 shall you unkind to i, or faithless prove,
 no mortal ever can half so wretched be,
 for sure no mortal ever love like i. 

your beauty, nymph, say i, my faith secure;
 those you once conquer, must be always you:
 for heart subdue by your victorious eye,
 no force can storm, no stratagem surprise,
 nor can i of captivity complain,
 while lovely Delia hold the glorious chain. 
the cyprian queen in young adonis arm,
 may fear, at last he will despise her charm. 
but i can never such a monster prove,
 to slight the blessing of my delia love. 
will those, who at celestial table sit,
 bless with immortal wine, immortal wit:
 choose to descend to some inferior board,
 which nought but Stum, and nonsense, can afford? 
nor can i ever to those gay nymph address,
 who pride be great, and who charm be less. 
their tinsel beauty may perhaps subdue
 a gaudy coxcomb, or a fulsome beau;
 but seem at best indifferent to i,
 who none but you with admiration see. 

now will the roll orb obey my will,
 i will make the sun a second time stand still;
 and to the low world their light repay,
 when conquer Joshua rob they of a day,
 though our two soul will different passion prove,
 his be a thirst of glory, i be love. 
it will not be; the sun make haste to rise,
 and take possession of the eastern sky:
 yet one kiss more, though million be too few,
 and Delia since we must, must part, adieu. 

as Adam by a injure maker drive
 from eden groves, the visinage of heaven;
 compel to wander, and oblige to bear
 the harsh impression of a rude air,
 with mighty sorrow, and with weep eye,
 look back, and mourn the loss of paradise. 
with a concern like he, do i review
 my native plain, my charm Delia too;
 for i leave paradise in leave you. 

if, as i walk, a pleasant shade i find,
 it bring your fair idea to my mind. 
such be the happy place, i sigh say;
 where i, and Delia, lovely Delia lie;
 when first i do my tender thought impart. 
and make a grateful present of my heart. 
or if my friend in his apartment, show
 some piece of vandyke, or of angelo;
 in which the artist have with wondrous care,
 describe the face of one exceed fair;
 though, at first sight, it may my passion raise,
 and every feature i admire, and praise;
 yet still, methinks, upon a second view,
 it be not so beautiful, so fair as you,
 if i converse with those, who most admit,
 to have a ready, gay, vivacious wit,
 they want some amiable, move grace,
 some turn of fancy that my Delia have. 
for ten good thought, among the crowd they vent,
 methinks ten thousand be impertinant. 

let other shepherd, that be prone to range,
 with each caprice, their giddy humour change. 
they from variety less joy receive,
 than you alone be capable to give. 
nor will i envy those ill-judging swain,
 what they enjoy the refuse of the plain;
 if for my share of happiness below,
 kind heaven upon i, Delia will bestow:
 whatever blessing it can give beside,
 let all mankind among themselves divide. 
