to my lord — 

in the year 1730.  from Worcestershire.

by the same.

favourite of Venus and the tuneful nine,
Pollio, by nature form in court to shine,
will thou once more a kind attention lend
to thy long absent and forget friend;
who after sea and mountain wander over,
return at length to his own native shore,
from all that be gay retire, and all that be great,
beneath the shade of his paternal seat
have find that happiness he seek in vain
on the fame bank of Tiber and of scine?

it be not to view the well-proportioned pile,
the charm of titian and of raphael stile;
at soft italian sound to melt away;
or in the fragrant grove of myrtle stray;
that lull the tumult of the soul to rest,
or make the fond possessor true bless.
in our own breast the source of pleasure lie
still open, and still flow to the wise;
not force by toilsome art and wild desire
beyond the bound of nature to aspire,
but in its proper channel glide fair;
a common benefit, which all may share,
yet half mankind this easy good disdain,
nor relish happiness unbought by pain;
false be their taste of bliss, and thence their search be vain.
so idle, yet so restless be our mind,
we climb the Alps, and brave the rage wind,
through various toil to seek content we roam,
which but with think right be we at home.
for not the ceaseless change of shift place
can from the heart a settle grief erase;
nor can the pure balm of foreign air
heal the distemper mind of ache care.
the wretch by wild impatience drive to rove,
vex with the pang of ill-requited love,
from pole to pole the fatal arrow bear,
who root point his bleed bosom tear,
with equal pain each different clime he try,
and be himself that torment which he fly.

for how shall ill, that from our passion flow,
be change by afric heat, or russia snow?
or how can aught but powerful reason cure,
what from unthinking folly we endure?
happy be he, and he alone, who know
his heart be uneasy discord to compose;
in generous love of other good to find
the sweet pleasure of the social mind;
to bound his wish in their proper sphere;
to nourish please hope, and conquer anxious fear,
this be the wisdom ancient sage teach,
this be the sovereign good they just seek;
this to no place or climate be confine,
but the free native produce of the mind.

nor think, my lord, that court to you deny
the useful practice of philosophy:
Horace, the wise of the tuneful choir,
not always choose from greatness to retire,
but in the palace of Augustus know
the same unnerring maxim to pursue,
which in the Sabine or the velian shade
his study and his happiness he make.

may you, my friend, by his example teach,
view all the giddy scene with sober thought;
undazzled every glitter folly see,
and in the midst of slavish form be free;
in its own centre keep your steady mind;
let prudence guide you, but let honour bind;
in show, in manner, act the courtier part,
but be a country-gentleman at heart.
