Psyche [Canto i.]

let not the rugged brow the rhyme accuse,
 which speak of gentle knight and lady fair,
 nor scorn the light labour of the muse,
 who yet, for cruel battle will not dare
 the low-strung chord of her weak lyre prepare;
 but love to court repose in slumbery lie,
 to tell of goodly bower and garden rare,
 of gentle blandishment and amorous play,
 and all the lore of love, in courtly verse essay. 

and you who gentle heart in thraldom hold
 the power of mighty love already own,
 when you the pain and danger have behold,
 which erst your lord have for his Psyche know,
 for all your sorrow this may well atone,
 that he you serve the same have suffer;
 and sure, your fond applause the tale will crown
 in which your own distress be picture,
 and all that weary way which you yourself must tread. 

most sweet will to my soul the hope appear,
 that sorrow in my verse a charm may find,
 to smooth the brow long bend with bitter cheer,
 some short distraction to the joyless mind
 which grief, with heavy chain, have fast confine
 to sad remembrance of its happy state;
 for to myself i ask no boon more kind
 than power another woe to mitigate,
 and that soft soothe art which anguish can abate. 

and thou, sweet sprite, who sway do far extend,
 smile on the mean historian of thy fame! 
my heart in each distress and fear befriend,
 nor ever let it feel a fierce flame
 than innocence may cherish free from blame,
 and hope may nurse, and sympathy may own;
 for, as thy right i never will disclaim,
 but true allegiance offer to thy throne,
 so may i love but one, by one belove alone. 

that anxious torture may i never feel,
 which, doubtful, watch over a wander heart. 
oh! who that bitter torment can reveal,
 or tell the pine anguish of that smart! 
in those affection may i never have part,
 which easy transfer can learn to rove:
 no, dear Cupid! when i feel thy dart,
 for thy sweet psyche sake may no false love
 the tenderness i prize light from i remove! 

Canto i 

much weary with her long and dreary way,
 and now with toil and sorrow well nigh spend,
 of sad regret and waste grief the prey,
 fair Psyche through untrodden forest go,
 to lone shade utter oft a vain lament. 
and oft in hopeless silence sigh deep,
 as she her fatal error do repent,
 while dear remembrance bid she ever weep,
 and her pale cheek in ceaseless shower of sorrow steep. 

 amid the thick covert of that woodland shade,
 a flowery bank there lay undressed by art,
 but of the mossy turf spontaneous make;
 here the young branch shoot their arm athwart,
 and weave the bower so thick in every part,
 that the fierce beam of Phoebus glance strong
 can never through the leaf their fury dart;
 but the sweet creep shrub that round it throng,
 their love fragrance mix, and trail their flower along. 

and close beside a little fountain play,
 which through the tremble leaf all joyous shine,
 and with the cheerful bird sweet music make,
 kiss the surface of each polish stone
 as it flow past: sure as her favourite throne
 tranquillity may well esteem the bower,
 the fresh and cool retreat have call she own,
 a pleasant shelter in the sultry hour,
 a refuge from the blast, and angry tempest power. 

woo by the soothe silence of the scene
 here Psyche stand, and look round, lest aught
 which threaten danger near she may have be,
 awhile to rest she in that quiet spot
 she lay she down, and piteous bethink
 herself on the sad change of her fate,
 which in so short a space so much have wrought,
 and now have raise she to such high estate,
 and now have plunge her low in sorrow desolate. 

oh! how refresh seem the breathe wind
 to her faint limb! and while her snowy hand
 from her fair brow her golden hair unbind,
 and of her zone unloose the silken band,
 more pass bright unveil her beauty stand;
 for faultless be her form as beauty queen,
 and every win grace that love demand,
 with mild attemper dignity be see
 play over each lovely limb, and deck her angel mien. 

though solitary now, dismay, forlorn,
 without attendant through the forest rude,
 the peerless maid of royal lineage bear
 by many a royal youth have oft be woo;
 low at her foot full many a prince have sue,
 and homage pay unto her beauty rare;
 but all their blandishment her heart withstand;
 and well may mortal suitor sure despair,
 since mortal charm be none which may with she compare. 

yet nought of insolence or haughty pride
 find ever in her gentle breast a place;
 though man she wondrous beauty deify,
 and rash deem such celestial grace
 can never spring from any earthly race,
 lo! all forsake cytherea shrine,
 her sacred altar now no more embrace,
 but to fair Psyche pay those rite divine,
 which, goddess! be thy due, and shall be only thy. 

but envy of her beauty grow fame
 poison her sisters heart with secret gall,
 and oft with seem piety they blame
 the worship which they just impious call;
 and oft, lest evil shall their sire befall,
 beseech he to forbid the err crowd
 which hourly throng around the regal hall,
 with incense, gift, and invocation loud,
 to she who guiltless breast, never feel elation proud. 

for she be timid as the wintery flower;
 that, white than the snow it bloom among,
 droop its fair head submissive to the power
 of every angry blast which sweep along
 spare the lovely trembler, while the strong
 majestic tenant of the leafless wood
 it level low. but, ah! the pity song
 must tell how, than the tempest self more rude,
 fierce wrath and cruel hate their suppliant prey pursue. 

indignant quit she desert fane,
 now cytherea seek her favourite isle,
 and there from every eye her secret pain
amid her thick myrtle bower conceal awhile;
 practise no more the glance, or witch smile,
 but nurse the pang she never feel before,
 of mortify disdain; then to beguile
 the hour which mortal flattery soothe no more,
 she various plan revolve her influence to restore. 

she call her son with unaccustomed voice;
 not with those thrill accent of delight
 which bid so oft enchant love rejoice,
 soft as the breeze of a summer night:
 now choke with rage its change can love affright;
 as all to sudden discontent a prey,
 shun the cheerful day enliven light,
 she feel the angry power malignant sway,
 and bid her favourite boy her vengeful will obey. 

bathe in those tear which vanquish human heart,
 "oh, son belove!" (the suppliant goddess cry,)
 if ever thy too indulgent mother art
 subdue for thou the potent deity
 who rule my native deep, or haunt the sky;
 or if to i the grateful praise be due,
 that to thy sceptre bow the great and wise,
 now let thy fierce revenge my foe pursue,
 and let my rival scorn her vain presumption rue. 

for what to i avail my former boast
 that, fair than the wife of Jove confess,
 i gain the prize thus base to be lose? 
with i the world devotion to contest
 behold a mortal dare; though on my breast
 still vain brilliant shine the magic zone. 
yet, yet i reign: by you my wrong redress,
 the world with humble Psyche soon shall own
 that Venus, beauty queen, shall be adore alone. 

 "deep let she drink of that dark, bitter spring,
 which flow so near thy bright and crystal tide;
 deep let her heart thy sharp arrow sting,
 its temper barb in that black poison dye. 
let she, for who contend prince sigh,
 feel all the fury of thy fierce flame
 for some base wretch to foul disgrace ally,
 forgetful of her birth and her fair fame,
 her honour all defile, and sacrifice to shame." 

then, with sweet pressure of her rosy lip,
 a kiss she give bathe in ambrosial dew;
 the thrill joy he will for ever sip,
 and his moist eye in ecstasy, imbrue. 
but she who soul still angry care pursue,
 snatch from the soft caress her glow charm;
 her vengeful will she then inforce anew,
 as she in haste dismiss he from her arm,
 the cruel draught to seek of anguish and alarm. 

amid the blue wave by circle sea embrace
 a choose spot of fair land be see;
 for there with favour hand have nature place
 all that can lovely make the vary scene:
 eternal spring there spread her mantle green;
 there high surround hill deep-wooded rose
 over placid lake; while marble rock between
 the fragrant shrub their point head disclose,
 and balmy breathe each gale which over the island blow. 

pleasure have call the fertile lawn her own,
 and thick strew they with her choice flower;
 amid the quiet glade her golden throne
 bright shine with lustre through o'erarch bower:
 there her fair train, the ever downy hour,
 sport on light wing with the young joy entwine;
 while hope delight from her full lap shower
 blossom, who fragrance can the ravish mind
 inebriate with dream of rapture unconfined. 

and in the grassy centre of the isle,
 where the thick verdure spread a damp shade,
 amid their native rock conceal awhile,
 then over the plain in devious stream display,
 two gush fountain rise; and thence convey,
 their water through the wood and valley play,
 visit each green recess and secret glade,
 with still unmingled, still meander way,
 nor wide wander far, can each from other stray. 

but of strange contrast be their virtue find,
 and oft the lady of that isle have try
 in rocky den and cavern under ground,
 the black deform stream in vain to hide;
 burst all bound her labour it defy;
 yet many a flowery sod its course conceal
 through plain where deep its silent water glide,
 till secret ruin all corrode steal,
 and every treacherous arch the hideous gulph reveal. 

forbid every kindly prosperous growth,
 wherever it run, a channel bleak it wear;
 the gape bank recede, as though loath
 to touch the poison which disgrace their shore:
 there deadly anguish pour unmixed his store
 of all the ill which sting the human breast,
 the hopeless tear which past delight deplore,
 heart-gnawing jealousy which know no rest,
 and self-upbraiding shame, by stern remorse oppress. 

oh, how unlike the pure transparent stream,
 which near it bubble over its golden sand! 
the impede stone with pleasant music seem
 its progress to detain from other land;
 and all its bank, inwreathe with flowery band,
 ambrosial fragrance shed in grateful dew:
 there young desire enchant ever stand,
 breathe delight and fragrance ever new,
 and bathe in constant joy of fond affection true. 

but not to mortal be it ever allow
 to drink unmingled of that current bright;
 scarce can they taste the pleasurable flood,
 defile by angry Fortune envious spite;
 who from the cup of amorous delight
 dash the sparkle draught of brilliant joy,
 till, with dull sorrow stream despoil quite,
 no more it cheer the soul nor charm the eye,
 but amid the poison bowl distrust and anguish lie. 

here Cupid temper his unerring dart,
 and in the fount of bliss delight to play;
 here mingle balmy sigh and please smart,
 and here the honeyed draught will oft allay
 with that black poison all-polluting sway,
 for wretched man. hither, as Venus will,
 for psyche punishment he bend his way:
 from either stream his amber vase he fill,
 for she be mean the drop which grief alone distil. 

his quiver, sparkle bright with gem and gold,
 from his fair plume shoulder graceful hang,
 and from its top in brilliant chord enrol
 each little vase resplendent be sling:
 still as he fly, around he sportive cling
 his frolic train of wing zephyr light,
 waft the fragrance which his tress fling:
 while odour drop from every ringlet bright,
 and from his blue eye beam ineffable delight. 

wrap in a cloud unseen by mortal eye,
 he seek the chamber of the royal maid;
 there, lull by careless soft security,
 of the impend mischief nought afraid,
 upon her purple couch be Psyche lay,
 her radiant eye a downy slumber seal;
 in light transparent veil alone array,
 her bosom open charm be half reveal,
 and scarce the lucid fold her polish limb conceal. 

a placid smile play over each roseate lip,
 sweet sever lip! while thus your pearl disclose,
 that slumber thus unconscious she may sip
 the cruel presage of her future woe? 
light, as fall the dew upon the rose,
 upon the coral gate of that sweet cell
 the fatal drop he pour; nor yet he know,
 nor, though a god, can he presage tell
 how he himself shall mourn the ill of that sad spell! 

nor yet content, he from his quiver draw,
 sharpen with skill divine, a shine dart:
 no need have he for bow, since thus too true
 his hand may wound her all-exposed heart;
 yet her fair side he touch with gentle art,
 and half relent on her beauty gaze;
 just then awake with a sudden start
 her open eye in humid lustre blaze,
 unseen he still remain, enchant and amaze. 

the dart which in his hand now tremble stand,
 as over the couch he bend with ravish eye,
 draw with its dare point celestial blood
 from his smooth neck unblemished ivory:
 heedless of this, but with a pity sigh
 the evil do now anxious to repair,
 he shed in haste the balmy drop of joy
 over all the silky ringlet of her hair;
 then stretch his plume divine, and breathe celestial air. 

unhappy Psyche! soon the latent wound
 the fade rose of her cheek confess,
 her eye bright beam, in swim sorrow drown,
 sparkle no more with life and happiness
 her parent fond exult heart to bless;
 she shun adore crowd, and seek to hide
 the pine sorrow which her soul oppress,
 till to her mother tear no more deny,
 the secret grief she own, for which she linger sigh. 

a dream of mingle terror and delight
 still heavy hang upon her trouble soul,
 a angry form still swim before her sight,
 and still the vengeful thunder seem to roll;
 still crush to earth she feel the stern control
 of Venus unrelenting, unappeased:
 the dream return, she feel the fancy dole;
 once more the fury on her heart have seize,
 but still she view the youth who all her suffering ease. 

of wondrous beauty do the vision seem,
 and in the fresh prime of youthful year;
 such at the close of her distressful dream
 a graceful champion to her eye appear;
 her love deliverer from her foe and fear
 she seem in grateful transport still to press;
 still his soft voice sound in her ravish ear;
 dissolve in fond tear of tenderness
 his form she oft invoke her wake eye to bless. 

nor be it quite a dream, for as she wake,
 ere heavenly mist conceal he from her eye,
 one sudden transitory view she take
 of love most radiant bright divinity;
 from the fair image never can she fly,
 as still consume with vain desire she pine;
 while her fond parent heave the anxious sigh,
 and to avert her fate seek holy shrine
 the threaten ill to learn by augury and sign. 

and now, the royal sacrifice prepare,
 the milkwhite bull they to the altar lead,
 who youth the gall yoke as yet have spare,
 now destine by the sacred knife to bleed:
 when lo! with sudden spring his horn he free,
 and headlong rush amid the fright throng:
 while from the smoke-veiled shrine such sound proceed
 as well may strike with awe the soul most strong;
 and thus divine speak the heaven inspire tongue. 

 "on nuptial couch, in nuptial vest array,
 on a tall rock high summit Psyche place:
 let all depart, and leave the fate maid
 who never must a mortal HYMEN grace:
 a wing monster of no earthly race
 thence soon shall bear his tremble bride away;
 his power extend over all the bound of space,
 and Jove himself have own his dread sway,
 who flame breath shed fire, who earth and heaven obey." 

with terror, anguish, and astonishment
 the oracle her wretched father hear;
 now from his brow the regal honour rend,
 and now in frantic sorrow wild appear,
 nor threaten plague, nor punishment he fear,
 refuse long the sentence to obey,
 till Psyche, tremble with submissive tear,
 bid they the sacrifice no more delay,
 prepare the funeral couch, and leave the destine prey. 

please by the ambiguous doom the fate promulge,
 the angry goddess and enamour boy
 alike content their various hope indulge;
 he, still explore with a anxious eye
 the future prospect of uncertain joy,
 plan how the tender object of his care
 he may protect from threaten misery;
 ah sanguine love! so oft deceive, forbear
 with flatter tint to paint illusive hope so fair. 

but now what lamentation rend the sky! 
in amaracine wreath the virgin choir
 with io HYMEN mingle funeral cry:
 lose in the sorrow of the lydian lyre
 the breathe flutes melodious note expire;
 in sad procession pass the mournful throng
 extinguish with tear the torches fire,
 while the mute victim weep crowd among,
 by unknown fear oppress, move silent along. 

but on such scene of terror and dismay
 the mournful muse delight not long to dwell;
 she quit well please the melancholy lie,
 nor vain seek the parent woe to tell:
 but what to wonder Psyche then befall
 when thus abandon, let she rather say,
 who shudder look to see some monster fall
 approach the desert rock to seize his prey,
 with cruel fang devour, or tear she thence away. 

when lo! a gentle breeze begin to rise,
 breathe by obedient zephyr round the maid,
 fan her bosom with its soft sigh
 awhile among her flutter robe it stray,
 and bold sportive latent charm display:
 and then, as Cupid will, with tender care
 from the tall rock, where weep she be lay,
 with glide motion through the yield air
 to pleasure bloom isle their lovely charge they bear. 

on the green bosom of the turf recline,
 they light now the astonish virgin lie,
 to placid rest they sooth her trouble mind;
 around her still with watchful care they stay,
 around she still in quiet whisper play;
 till lull slumber bid her eyelid close,
 veil with silky fringe each brilliant ray,
 while soft tranquillity divine flow
 over all her soul serene, in vision of repose. 

refresh she rise, and all enchant gaze
 on the rare beauty of the pleasant scene. 
conspicuous far a lofty palace blaze
 upon a slope bank of soft green;
 a fair edifice be never see;
 the high range column own no mortal hand,
 but seem a temple meet for beauty queen. 
like polish snow the marble pillar stand
 in grace attemper majesty sublime grand. 

gentle ascend from a silvery flood,
 above the palace rise the shade hill,
 the lofty eminence be crown with wood,
 and the rich lawn, adorn by nature skill,
 the pass breeze with their odour fill;
 here ever bloom grove of orange glow,
 and here all flower which from their leaf distil
 ambrosial dew in sweet succession blow,
 and tree of matchless size a fragrant shade bestow. 

the sun look glorious amid a sky serene,
 and bid bright lustre sparkle over the tide;
 the clear blue ocean at a distance see
 bound the gay landscape on the western side,
 while close round it with majestic pride,
 the lofty rock amid citron grove arise;
 "sure some divinity must here reside,"
 as trance in some bright vision, Psyche cry,
 and scarce believe the bliss, or trust her charm eye. 

when lo! a voice divine sweet she hear,
 from unscen lip proceed the heavenly sound;
 "Psyche approach, dismiss thy timid fear,
 at length his bride thy longing spouse have find,
 and bid for thou immortal joy abound;
 for thou the palace rise at his command,
 for thou his love a bridal banquet crown;
 he bid attendant nymph around thou stand
 prompt every wish to serve, a fond obedient band." 

increase wonder fill her ravish soul,
 for now the pompous portal open wide,
 there, pause oft, with timid foot she steal
 through hall high dome, enrich with sculpture pride,
 while gay saloon appear on either side
 in splendid vista open to her sight;
 and all with precious gem so beautify,
 and furnish with such exquisite delight,
 that scarce the beam of heaven emit such lustre bright. 

the amethyst be there of violet hue,
 and there the topaz shed its golden ray,
 the chrysoberyl, and the sapphire blue
 as the clear azure of a sunny day,
 or the mild eye where amorous glance play;
 the snow white jasper, and the opal flame,
 the blush ruby, and the agate grey,
 and there the gem which bear his luckless name
 who death by Phoebus mourn ensure he deathless fame. 

there the green emerald, there cornelian glow,
 and rich carbuncle pour eternal light,
 with all that India and Peru can show,
 or Labrador can give so flame bright
 to the charm mariner half dazzle, sight:
 the coral pave bath with diamond blaze:
 and all that can the female heart delight
 of fair attire, the last recess display,
 and all that luxury can ask, her eye survey. 

now through the hall melodious music steal,
 and self-prepared the splendid banquet stand,
 self-poured the nectar sparkle in the bowl,
 the lute and viol touch by unseen hand
 aid the soft voice of the choral band;
 over the full board a bright lustre beam
 than persia monarch at his feast command:
 for sweet refreshment all invite seem
 to taste celestial food, and pure ambrosial stream. 

but when meek eve hang out her dewy star,
 and gentle veil with gradual hand the sky,
 lo! the bright fold door retire far,
 display to psyche captivate eye
 all that voluptuous ease can ever supply
 to sooth the spirit in serene repose:
 beneath the velvet purple canopy
 divine form a downy couch arise,
 while alabaster lamp a milky light disclose. 

once more she hear the hymeneal strain;
 far other voice now attune the lay;
 the swell sound approach, awhile remain,
 and then retire faint dissolve away:
 the expire lamp emit a feeble ray,
 and soon in fragrant death extinguish lie:
 then virgin terror psyche soul dismay,
 when through the obscure gloom shenought can spy,
 but soft rustle sound declare some be nigh. 

oh, you for who i write! who heart can melt
 at the soft thrill voice who power you prove,
 you know what charm, unutterable feel,
 attend the unexpected voice of love:
 above the lyre, the lute soft note above,
 with sweet enchantment to the soul it steal
 and bear it to elysium happy grove;
 you best can tell the rapture Psyche feel
 when love ambrosial lip the vow of HYMEN seal. 

 "it be he, it be my deliverer! deep impress
 upon my heart those sound i well recall,"
 the blush maid exclaim, and on his breast
 a tear of tremble ecstasy let fall. 
but, ere the breeze of the morning call
 Aurora from her purple, humid bed,
 Psyche in vain explore the vacant hall,
 her tender lover from her arm be flee,
 while sleep his downy wing have over her eye-lid spread. 

again the band invisible attend,
 and female voice sooth the mournful bride;
 light hand to braid her hair assistance lend,
 by some she see the glow bracelet tie,
 other officious hover at her side,
 and each bright gem for her acceptance bring,
 while some, the balmy air diffuse wide,
 fan soft perfume from each odorous wing
 than the fresh bosom shed of early, sweet spring. 

with song divine her anxious soul they cheer,
 and woo her footstep to delicious bower,
 they bid the fruit more exquisite appear
 which at her foot its bright profusion shower:
 for she they cull unknown, celestial flower;
 the gild car they bid her fearless guide,
 which at her wish self-moved with wondrous power,
 the rapid bird velocity defy,
 while round the bloom isle it roll with circuit wide. 

again they spread the feast, they strike the lyre,
 but to her frequent question nought reply,
 her lip in vain her lover name require,
 or wherefore thus conceal he shun her eye. 
but when reluctant twilight veil the sky,
 and each pale lamp successive expire;
 again she tremble hear the voice of joy,
 her spouse a tender confidence inspire,
 but with a fond embrace ere dawn again retire. 

to charm the languid hour of solitude
 he oft invite she to the muse lore,
 for none, have vain ever the muse pursue,
 and those who she delight, regret no more
 the social, joyous hour, while rapt they soar
 to world unknown, and live in fancy dream:
 oh, Muse divine! thou only i implore,
 shed on my soul thy sweet inspire beam,
 and pleasure gay scene insipid folly seem! 

silence and solitude the muse love,
 and who they charm they can alone suffice;
 nor ever tedious hour their votary prove:
 this solace now the lonely Psyche try,
 or, while her hand the curious needle ply,
 she learn from lip unseen celestial strain;
 responsive now with their soft voice she vie,
 or bid her plaintive harp express the pain
 which absence sore inflict where love all potent reign. 

but melancholy poison all her joy,
 and secret sorrow all her hope depress,
 consume languor every bliss destroy,
 and sad she droop repine, comfortless. 
her tender lover well the cause can guess,
 and see too plain inevitable fate
 pursue she to the bower of happiness. 
 "oh, Psyche! most belove, ere yet too late,
 dread the impend ill and prize thy tranquil state." 

in vain his weep love he thus advise;
 she long to meet a parent sweet embrace,
 oh, be their sorrow heart at least apprise
 how psyche wondrous lot all fear may chase;
 for who thy love prepare so fair a place! 
let but my bliss their fond complaint repress,
 let i but once behold a mother face,
 oh, spouse adore! and in full happiness
 this love-contented heart its solitude shall bless. 

oh, by those beauty i must never behold! 
the spicy-scented ringlet of thy hair:
 by that soft neck my love arm enfold,
 crown with a kind consent thy psyche prayer! 
their dear embrace, their blessing let i share;
 so shall i stain our couch with tear no more:
 but, bless in thou, resign each other care,
 nor seek again thy secret to explore,
 which yet, deny thy sight, i ever must deplore. " 

unable to resist her fond request,
 reluctant Cupid thus at last comply,
 and sigh clasp she close to his breast. 
 "go then, my Psyche! go, my lovely bride! 
but let i in thy faith at least confide,
 that by no subtle, impious art betray,
 which, ah! too well i know will all be try,
 thy simple trust heart shall ever be sway
 the secret veil to rend which fate thy screen have make. 

for danger hover over thy smile day,
 one only way to shield thou yet, i know;
 unseen, i may secure guard thy way
 and save thou from the threaten storm of woe;
 but force, if know, my Psyche to forgo,
 thou never, never must again be mine! 
what mutual sorrow hence must ceaseless flow! 
compel thy dear embrace to resign,
 while thou to anguish doom for lose delight shall pine. 

solace thy mind with hope of future joy! 
in a dear infant thou shall see my face;
 bless mother soon of a immortal boy,
 in he his father feature thou shall trace! 
yet go! for thou be free, the bound of space
 be none for thou: attendant zephyr stay,
 speak but thy will, and to the wish for place
 their lovely mistress swift they shall convey:
 yet hither, ah! return, ere fade the festive day. " 

 "light of my soul, far dear than the day!" 
(exult Psyche cry in grateful joy)
 i all the bliss of earth can ill repay
 for thy most sweet, divine society;
 to thou again with rapture will i fly,
 nor with less pleasure hail the star of eve
 than when in tedious solitude i sigh;
 my vow of silent confidence believe,
 nor think thy psyche faith will ever thy love deceive. " 

her suit obtain, in full contentment bless,
 her eye at length in placid slumber close. 
sleep, hapless fair! sleep on thy lover breast! 
ah, not again to taste such pure repose! 
till thy sad heart by long experience know
 how much they err, who to their interest blind,
 slight the calm peace which from retirement flow;
 and while they think their fleet joy to bind,
 banish the tranquil bliss which heaven for man design! 
