the sea-nymph.

down, down a thousand fathom deep,
among the sound sea i go;
play round the foot of every steep
who cliff above the ocean grow.

there, within their secret cave,
i hear the mighty river roar;
and guide their stream through neptune wave
to bless the green earth inmost shore:

and bid the freshen water glide,
for fern-crowned nymph of lake, or brook,
through wind wood and pasture wide,
and many a wild, romantic nook.

for this the nymph, at fall of eve,
oft dance upon the flowery bank,
and sing my name, and garland weave
to bear beneath the wave their thanks.

in coral bower i love to lie,
and hear the surge roll above,
and, through the water, view on high
the proud ship sail, and gay cloud move.

and oft at midnight still hour,
when summer sea the vessel lave,
i love to prove my charmful power
while float on the moon-light wave.

and when deep sleep the crew have bind,
and the sad lover muse lean
over the ship side, i breathe around
such strain as speak no mortal mean!

over the dim wave his search eye
see but the vessel lengthen shade;
above — the moon and azure sky;
entrance he hear, and half afraid!

sometime a single note i swell,
that, soft sweet, at distance die;
then wake the magic of my shell,
and choral voice round i rise!

the tremble youth, charm by my strain,
call up the crew, who, silent, bend
over the high deck, but list in vain;
my song be hush, my wonder end!

within the mountain woody bay,
where the tall bark at anchor ride,
at twilight hour, with triton gay,
i dance upon the lapse tide.

and with my sister-nymph i sport,
until the broad sun look over the flood;
then, swift we seek our crystal court,
deep in the wave, 'amid neptune wood.

in cool arcade and glassy hall
we pass the sultry hour of noon,
beyond wherever sun-beam fall,
weave sea-flower in gay festoon.

the while we chant our ditty sweet
to some soft shell that warble near;
join by the murmur current, fleet,
that glide along our hall so clear.

there, the pale pearl and sapphire blue,
and ruby red, and emerald green,
dart from the dome a change hue,
and sparry column deck the scene.

when the dark storm scowl over the deep,
and long, long peal of thunder sound,
on some high cliff my watch i keep
over all the restless sea around:

until on the ridgy wave, afar,
come the lone vessel, labour slow,
spread the white foam in the air,
with sail and top-mast bend low.

then, plunge i 'amid the ocean roar,
my way by quiver lightning show,
to guide the bark to peaceful shore,
and hush the sailor fearful groan.

and if too late i reach its side
to save it from the 'whelm surge,
i call my dolphin over the tide,
to bear the crew where isle emerge.

their mournful spirit soon i cheer,
while round the desert coast i go,
with warble song they faint hear,
oft as the stormy gust sink low.

my music lead to lofty grove,
that wild upon the sea-bank wave;
where sweet fruit bloom, and fresh spring rove,
and close bough the tempest brave.

the spirit of the air obey
my potent voice they love so well;
and, on the cloud, paint vision gay,
while strain more sweet at distance swell.

and thus the lonely hour i cheat,
soothe the shipwrecked sailor heart,
until from the wave the storm retreat,
and over the east the day-beam dart.

Neptune for this oft bind i fast
to rock below, with coral chain,
until all the tempest overpass,
and drown seaman cry in vain.

whoever you be that love my lay,
come, when red sunset tint the wave,
to the still sand, where fairy play;
there, in cool sea, i love to lave.
