write for my son, and speak by he, at a public examination for victor.

to you, Athenians, we again submit;
 reward, or punish we, as you think fit. 
let idleness, unpitied, meet disgrace;
 for idleness, this year, be double base. 
this be the Æra, this the destine year,
 for art and science to flourish here. 
the muse, exile long, to court repair;
 and — strange to think! be all the fashion there. 

who feel not now a generous emulation,
 when merit raise to the high station? 
scholar may sure hope a better fate,
 while Carteret direct the helm of state. 
o will he govern here by grecian rule,
 and choose a senate, to preside over school;
 honour, alone, to pay the glorious task,
 (a recompense no foreigner will ask!) 
then kind Britannia, doubtless, will consent,
 Hibernia shall supply a president. 

too oft, alas! be talent misapply,
 by parent fondness, ignorance, and pride. 
this grievance then will cease, and we shall be
 regard, as the public property:
 genius alone will be consult then,
 (the only way to make we useful man)
 and each will have his several task assign,
 as nature give the bias to his mind. 

boy of a brutal, cruel disposition,
 shall go to Spain, to serve the inquisition. 
o what a change in landlord will appear! 
next age, not one will rack his tenant here. 

the lad, who study but to dress and dance,
 shall cultivate their worthlessness in France. 

those who love liberty, to Albion roam;
 but, can they bear oppression, — stay at home. 

then glorious ancestor will cease to be
 degrade by a worthless progeny. 
none shall from noble blood their lineage trace,
 unless they add lustre to their race. 
that the degenerate offspring of the great
 may be no more a burden to the state;
 the son of peer, with mean, ignoble heart,
 in holland shall be teach mechanic art;
 and boy of genius to those honour soar,
 which highborn dunce but disgrace before:
 see nature, thus, the generous juice divide;
 the spirit rise, and the dregs subside. 

thus model, we may hope for happy time;
 our isle will be revere by distant clime:
 and, lest posterity shall think we rude,
 and lose, at once, to shame and gratitude;
 a patriot race shall sing the drapier praise,
 and civic crown shall mingle with his bay:
 nor shall his work alone his worth proclaim,
 (though none, like those, can eternise his name)
 his statue shall be raise in every street,
 with proud oppression, writhe at his foot;
 at his right-hand fair liberty shall smile,
 protect by the guardian of our isle;
 on other side, the goddess fame shall stand,
 with his immortal labour in her hand:
 then shall each generous youth, who pass by,
 and see the patriot image, place on high,
 with emulation feel his bosom fire,
 and thus break forth, by gratitude inspire. 

 "o thou, who genius rise, to save the state,
"and snatch thy country from the brink of fate! 
 "when for thy life Hibernia sue in vain,
"and heaven no long will thy crown detain;
 "her grateful son, already rob in white,
"shall hail thou, glorious, in the realm of light. 
