write for my son, and speak by he at his first put on breech.

what be it our mamma bewitch,
 to plague we little boy with breech? 
to tyrant custom we must yield,
 while vanquish reason fly the field. 
our leg must suffer by ligation,
 to keep the blood from circulation;
 and then our foot, though young and tender,
 we to the shoemaker surrender;
 who often make our shoe so strait,
 our grow foot they cramp and fret;
 while, with contrivance most profound,
 across our instep we be bind;
 which be the cause, i make no doubt,
 why thousand suffer in the gout. 
our wise ancestor wear brogue,
 before the surgeon bribe these rogue,
 with narrow toe, and heel like peg,
 to help to make we break our leg. 

then, ere we know to use our fist;
 our mother close bind our wrist;
 and never think our clothes be neat,
 till they be so tight we can eat. 
and, to increase our other pain,
 the hat-band help to cramp our brain. 
the cravat finish the work,
 like bowstring send from the grand Turk. 

thus dress, that shall prolong our date,
 be make to hasten on our fate. 
fair privilege of noble nature,
 to be more plague than other creature! 
the wild inhabitant of air
 be clothe by heaven with wondrous care:
 their beauteous, well-compacted feather
 be coat of mail against all weather;
 enamel, to delight the eye;
 gay, as the bow that deck the sky. 
the beast be clothe with beauteous skin:
 the fish arm with scale and fin;
 who lustre lend the sailer light,
 when all the star be hide in night. 

o be our dress contrive like these,
 for use, for ornament, and ease! 
man only seem to sorrow bear,
 naked, defenceless, and forlorn. 

yet we have reason, to supply
 what nature do to man deny:
 weak viceroy! who thy power will own,
 when custom have usurp thy throne? 
in vain do i appeal to thou,
 ere i will wear his livery;
 who, in defiance to thy rule,
 delight to make we act like fool. 
over human race the tyrant reign,
 and bind they in eternal chain. 
we yield to his despotic sway,
 the only monarch all obey. 
