the lucayan song.

the lucayan song.

the lucayan song.

hail, lonely shore! hail, desert cave! 
to you, overjoy, from man i fly,
 and here i will make my early grave .... 
for what can misery do but die? 

sad be the hour when, fraught with guile,
 Spain cruel son our valley seek;
 unknown to we the christian wile,
 unknown the dark deceiver thought. 

they say, that here, for ever bless,
 our love forefather live and reign;
 and we, by pious fondness press,
 believe the flatter tale they feign. 

but when we learn the mournful truth .... 
no, i will the horrid tale forbear:
 for on our trust, blight youth,
 my brother, who will drop a tear! 

thou treasure of these burn eye,
 where wave thy grove, dear native isle? 
methinks where yond blue mountain rise,
 it be there thy precious valley smile! 

yes .... yes .... these tear of joy that start,
 the softly-soothing truth declare:
 thou whisper right, my beat heart .... 
my love regret home be there! 

but then its tree that wave so high,
 the glitter bird that deck each grove,
 i can, can hence descry,
 nor, dear far, the form i love. 

yet still the wind that cool my brow,
 and over these murmur water come,
 a joy that mock belief bestow;
 for sure they late leave my home. 

then deep i will the breeze inhale,
 to life it yet impart one joy,
 methinks your breath have fill the gale,
 my faithful love, my prattle boy! 

my prattle boy, my beauteous wife! 
say, do you still my name repeat,
 and only bear the load of life
 in hope that we once more may meet! 

my love! in dream thou still be nigh,
 but change and pale thou seem to be;
 yet still the more thou charm my eye,
 i think thou change by love for i: .... 

while oft, to fond remembrance true,
 i see thou seek the sparkle sand,
 in hope the little bark to view
 that bear i to my native land. 

but never more shall Zama eye
 her love return husband see,
 nor more her lock of ebon dye
 shall Zama fond braid for i. 

yet still, with hope chastise by fear,
 watch for my bark from yonder shore,
 and still, my Zama, think i near,
 when this tear bosom throb no more. 

yet sure hope, each day deceive,
 at length to dare deed will fire;
 the Spaniard tale no more believe,
 my fate will fearful doubt inspire. 

and then, bless thought! across the main
 thou will haste, thy injure love to find,
 all danger scorn, all fear disdain,
 and glad trust the wave and wind. 

ha! even now the distant sky
 seem by one spot of darkness cross;
 yes, yes, a vessel meet my eye! ..... 
or else i gaze in phrensy lose! 

it hither steer! ........ no .... beat breast,
 too well i see what bid thou glow;
 the sea-bird hasten to its nest,
 to taste a joy i never shall know. 

moment of hope, too bright to last,
 thou have but deepen my despair;
 but woe severe pang be past,
 for life last close hour be near. 

it be morn when first this beach i seek,
 now evening shadow fill the plain;
 yet here i have stand entrance in thought,
 unheeding thirst, fatigue, or pain. 

it be past .... i faint ... my throb brow
 cold clammy drop i feel bedew;
 dear native shore! where be thou now? .... 
some Spaniard shut thou from my view. 

monster, away! and let i taste
 that joy in death, in life deny! 
still let i over the watery waste
 behold the hill which Zama hide! 

alas! i rave! no foe be near;
 it be death thick mist obscure my sight;
 those precious hill, to memory dear,
 no more shall these fond eye delight! 

but send from thou, my native shore,
 again that precious breeze be nigh .... 
Zama, i feel thy breath once more,
 and now content, transport, die! 
