reason:

a poem.

unhappy man! who through successive year,
 from early youth to life last childhood err;
 no soon bear, but prove a foe to truth;
 for infant reason be overpower in youth:
 the cheat of sense will half our learning share;
 and pre-conception all our knowledge be. 
reason, it be true, shall over sense preside,
 correct our notion, and our judgement guide;
 but false opinion, root in the mind,
 hoodwink the soul, and keep our reason blind. 
reason a taper, which but saint burn,
 a languid flame, that glow, and die by turn;
 we see a little while, and but a little way,
 we travel by its light, as man by day. 
but quick die, it forsake we soon,
 like morning star, that never stay till noon. 

the soul can scarce above the body rise,
 and all we see be with corporeal eye;
 life now do scarce one glimpse of light display,
 we mourn in darkness and despair of day;
 that natural light, once dress with orient beam,
 be now diminish, and a twilight seem,
 a miscellaneous composition make,
 of night, and day, of sunshine, and of shade. 
through a uncertain medium now we look,
 and find that, falsehood, which for truth we take. 
so ray project from the eastern sky,
 show the false day before the sun can rise. 

that little knowledge now which man obtain,
 from outward object and from sense he gain;
 he like a wretched slave, must plod and sweat,
 by day must toil, by night that toil repeat;
 and yet at last what little fruit he gain? 
a beggar harvest glean with mighty pain. 

the passion still predominant will rule,
 ungoverned, rude, not breed in reason school;
 our understanding they with darkness fill,
 cause strong corruption, and pervert the will;
 on these the soul, as on some flow tide,
 must sit, and on the rage billow ride,
 hurry away, for how can be withstand
 the impetuous torrent of the boil blood? 
be go false hope, for all our learning vain,
 can we be free, where these the rule maintain:
 these be the tool of knowledge which we use;
 the spirit heat, will strange thing produce;
 tell i who ever the passion can control,
 or from the body disengage the soul;
 till this be do, our best pursuit be vain
 to conquer truth and unmixed knowledge gain:
 through all the bulky volume of the dead,
 and through those book that modern time have breed. 
with pain we travel, as through moorish ground,
 where scarce one useful plant be ever find;
 overrun with error which so thick appear,
 our search prove vain, no spark of truth be there. 

what be all the noisy jargon of the school,
 but idle nonsense of laborious fool,
 who fetter reason with perplex rule. 
what in Aquinas, bulky work be find
 do not enlighten reason, but confound. 
who travel Scotus swell tome shall find
 a cloud of darkness rise on the mind. 
in controvert point can reason sway,
 when passion or conceit still hurry we away? 
thus his new notion Sherlock will instill,
 and clear the great mystery at will. 
but by unlucky wit perplex they more,
 and make they dark than they be before. 
south soon oppose he out of christian zeal,
 show how well he can dispute and rail:
 how shall we ever discover which be right,
 when both so eager maintain the fight? 
each do the other argument deride,
 each have the church and scripture on his side. 
the sharp ill-natured combat but a jest,
 both may be wrong, one perhaps err the least:
 how shall we know which article be true,
 the old one of the church, or burnet new. 
in path uncertain, and unsafe he tread,
 who blind follow other be fertile head. 
what sure, what certain Mark have we to know,
 the right or wrong, betwixt Burgess, wake, and howe? 

shall untuned nature crave the medic art,
 what health can that contentious tribe impart? 
every physician write a different bill,
 and give no other reason but his will. 
no long boast your art, you impious race,
 let war betwixt alcaly and acid cease;
 and proud g—ll with colbatch be at peace. 
Gibbons and Radcliffe do but rare guess,
 to day they have good, to morrow no success. 
even Garth and Maurus sometime shall prevail,
 when Gibson, learned Hannes, and Tyson fail:
 and more than once, we have see that blunder s—ne
 miss the gout, by chance have hit the stone;
 the patient do the lucky error find,
 a cure he work, though not the cure design. 

custom, the world great idol we adore,
 and know this, we seek to know no more;
 what education do at first receive,
 our ripen age confirm we to believe;
 the careful nurse, and priest be all we need
 to learn opinion and our country be creed;
 the parent precept early be instil,
 and spoil the man, while they instruct the child. 
to what hard fate be human kind betray,
 when thus implicit faith all vertue make? 
when education more than truth prevail,
 and nought be current but what custom seal;
 thus from the time we first begin to know,
 we live and learn, but not the wise grow. 

we seldom use our liberty aright,
 nor judge of thing by universal light;
 our prepossession and affection bind
 the soul in chain, and lord it over the mind;
 and if self-interest be but in the case,
 our unexamined principle may pass. 
good heaven! that man shall thus himself deceive,
 to learn on credit, and on trust believe;
 better the mind no notion have retain,
 but still a fair unwritten blank remain;
 for now, who truth from falsehood will discern,
 must first disrobe the mind, and all unlearn:
 error contract in unmindful youth
 when once remove, will smooth the way to truth:
 to dispossess the child the mortal life,
 but death approach ever the man arrive. 

those who will learning glorious kingdom find,
 the dear buy purchase of the trade mind;
 from many danger must themselves acquit,
 and more than Scylla and charibdis meet;
 oh! what a ocean must be voyage over,
 to gain a prospect of the shine shore;
 resist rock oppose the inquire soul,
 and adverse wave retard it as they roll. 

do not that foolish deference we pay,
 to man that live long since, our passage stay? 
what odd preposterous path at first we tread? 
and learn to walk, by stumble on the dead. 
first we a bless from the grave implore,
 worship old urn, and monument adore. 
the reverend sage with vast esteem we prize,
 he live long since, and must be wondrous wise;
 thus be we debtor to the famous dead,
 for all those error which their fancy breed;
 error indeed! for real knowledge stay
 with those first time, nor farther be convey:
 while light opinion be much low bring,
 for on the wave of ignorance they float;
 but solid truth scarce ever gain the shore,
 so soon it sink and never emerge more. 

suppose those many dreadful danger past,
 will knowledge dawn, and bless the mind at last? 
ah! no, it be now environ from our eye,
 hide all its charm, and undiscovered lie. 
truth like a single point escape the sight,
 and claim intention to perceive it right;
 but what resemble truth be soon descry,
 spread like a surface and expand wide. 
the first man rare, very rare find
 the tedious search of long inquire mind;
 but yet what be worse, we know not when we err;
 what Mark do truth, what bright distinction bear? 
how do we know, that what we know, be true,
 how shall we falsehood fly, and truth pursue;
 let none then here, his certain knowledge boast,
 it be all but probability at most;
 this be the easy purchase of the mind,
 the vulgar treasure, which we soon may find,
 but truth lie hide, and ever we can explore
 the glitter gem, our fleet life be over. 
