the art of dance.

a poem. inscribe to the rt. Hon. the lady Fanny Fielding. write in the year 1730. 

by the same.

Canto i 

in the smooth dance to move with graceful mien,
easy with care, and sprightly though serene,
to mark the instruction echo strain convey,
and with just step each tuneful note obey,
i teach; be present, all you sacred choir,
blow the soft flute, and strike the sound lyre;
when Fielding bid your kind assistance bring,
and at her foot the lowly tribute fling;
oh may her eye (to her this verse be due)
what first themselves inspire, vouchsafe to view!

hail lofty be! thou can all heart ensnare,
and make the fair still appear more fair.
beauty can little execution do,
unless she borrow half her arm from you!
few, like Pygmalion, dote on lifeless charm,
or care to clasp a statue in their arm;
but breast of flint must melt with fierce desire,
when art and motion wake the sleep fire:
a Venus, draw by great apelles hand,
may for awhile our wonder eye command,
but still, though form with all the power of art,
the lifeless piece can never warm the heart;
so fair a nymph, perhaps, may please the eye,
while all her beauteous limb unactive lie,
but when her charm be in the dance display,
then every heart adore the lovely maid:
this set her beauty in the fair light,
and show each grace in full perfection bright;
then, as she turn around, from every part,
like porcupine she send a pierce dart;
in vain, alas! the fond spectator try
to shun the please danger of her eye,
for parthian-like, she wound as sure behind,
with flow curl, and ivory neck recline:
whether her step the minuet maze trace,
or the slow louvre more majestic pace,
whether the rigadoon employ her care,
or sprightly jig display the nimble fair,
at every stop new beauty we explore,
and worship now, what we admire before:
so when Aeneas, in the Tyrian grove,
fair Venus meet, the charm queen of love,
the beauteous goddess, while unmoved she stand,
seem some fair nymph, the guardian of the wood;
but when she move, at once her heavenly mien
and graceful step confess bright beauty queen,
new glory over her form each moment rise,
and all the goddess open to his eye.

now haste, my muse, pursue thy destine way,
what dress best become the dancer, say;
the rule of dress forget not to impart,
a lesson previous to the dance art.

the soldier scarlet glow from afar,
show that his bloody occupation war;
while the lawn band, beneath a double chin,
as plain speak divinity within;
the milkmaid safe through drive rain and snow,
wrap in her cloak, and prop on patten go;
while the soft Belle, immure in velvet chair,
need but the silken shoe, and trust her bosom bare:
the woolly drab, and english broad-cloth warm,
guard well the horseman from the beat storm,
but load the dancer with too great a weight,
and call from every pore the dewy sweat;
rather let he his active limb display
in camblet thin, or glossy paduasoy.
let no unwieldy pride his shoulder press;
but airy, light, and easy be his dress;
thin be his yield foal, and low his heel,
so shall he nimble bind, and safe wheel.

but let not precept know my verse prolong,
precept which use will better teach, than song;
for why shall i the gallant spark command,
with clean white glove to fit his ready hand?
or in his sob enliven spirit wear,
and pungent salt to raise the faint fair?
or hint, the sword that dangle at his side,
shall from its silken bandage be untie?
why shall my lay the youthful tribe advise,
lest snowy cloud from out their wig arise;
so shall their partner mourn their lace spoil,
and shine silk with greasy powder soil?
nor need i, sure, bid prudent youth beware,
lest with erect tongue their buckle stare,
the point steel shall oft their stocking rend,
and oft the approach petticoat offend.

and now, you youthful fair, i sing to you,
with please smile my useful labour view:
for you the silkworm fine-wrought web display,
and labour spin their little life away,
for you bright gem with radiant colour glow,
fair as the die that paint the heavenly bow,
for you the sea resign its pearly store,
and earth unlock her mine of treasure over;
in vain yet nature thus her gift bestow,
unless yourself with art those gift dispose.

yet think not, nymph, that in the glitter ball,
one form of dress prescribe can suit with all;
one bright shine when wealth and art combine
to make the finish piece complete fine;
when least adorn, another steal our heart,
and rich in native beauty, want no art:
in some be such resistless grace find,
that in all dress they be sure to wound;
their perfect form all foreign aid despise,
and gem but borrow lustre from their eye.

let the fair nymph, in who plump cheek be see
a constant blush, be clad in cheerful green;
in such a dress the sportive sea-nymph go;
so in their grassy bed fresh rose blow:
the lass who skin be like the hazel brown,
with bright yellow shall overcome she own:
while maid grow pale with sickness or despair,
the sable mournful dye shall choose to wear;
so the pale moon still shine with pure light,
clothe in the dusky mantle of the night.

but far from you be all those treacherous art,
that wind with paint charm unwary heart,
dancing' a touchstone that true beauty try,
nor suffer charm that nature hand deny:
though for awhile we may with wonder view
the rosy blush, and skin of lovely hue,
yet soon the dance will cause the cheek to glow,
and melt the waxen lip, and neck of snow:
so shine the field in icy fetter bind,
while freeze gem bespangle all the ground,
through the clear crystal of the glitter snow,
with scarlet dye the blush hawthorn glow;
over all the plain unnumbered glory rise,
and a new bright creation charm our eye:
till zephyr breathe, then all at once decay
the splendid scene, their glory fade away,
the field resign the beauty not their own,
and all their snowy charm run trickle down.

dare i in such momentous point advise,
i shall condemn the hoop enormous size,
of ill i speak by long experience find,
oft have i tread the immeasurable round,
and mourn my shin bruise black with many a wound.
nor shall the tighten stay, too strait palace,
in whale-bone bondage gall the slender waist;
nor wave lappet shall the dance fair,
nor ruffle edge with dangle fringe wear;
oft will the cobweb ornament catch hold
on the approach button rough with gold,
nor force, nor art can then the bond divide,
when once the entangle Gordian knot be tie:
so the unhappy pair, by Hymen power,
together join in some ill-fated hour,
the more they strive their freedom to regain,
the fast bind the indissoluble chain.

let each fair maid, who fear to be disgrace,
ever be sure to tie her garter fast,
lest the loose string, amid the public ball,
a wish for prize to some proud fop shall fall,
who the rich treasure shall triumphant show,
and with warm blush cause her cheek to glow.

but yet, (as fortune by the self-same way
she humble many, some delight to raise)
it happen once, a-fair illustrious dame
by such neglect acquire immortal fame.
and hence the radiant star and garter blue
britannia noble grace, if fame say true:
hence still, Plantagenet, thy beauty bloom,
though long since moulder in the dusky tomb,
still thy lose garter be thy sovereign care,
and what each royal breast be proud to wear.

but let i now my lovely charge remind,
lest they forgetful leave their fan behind;
lay not, you fear, the pretty toy aside,
a toy at once display, for use and pride,
a wondrous engine, that by magic charm,
cool your own breast, and every other warm.
what dare bard shall ever attempt to tell
the power, that in this little weapon dwell?
what verse can ever explain its various part,
its numerous use, motion, charm and art?
its paint fold, that oft extend wide,
the afflict fair one be blubber beauty hide,
when secret sorrow her sad bosom fill,
if Strephon be unkind, or shock be ill:
its stick, on which her eye deject poor,
and point finger number over and over,
when the kind virgin burn with secret shame,
die to consent, yet fear to own her flame;
its shake triumphant, its victorious clap,
its angry flutter, and its wanton tap?

forbear, my muse, the extensive theme to sing,
nor trust in such a flight thy tender wing;
rather do you in humble line proclaim,
from whence this engine take its form and name,
say from what cause it first derive its birth,
how form in heaven, how thence deduce to earth.

once in Arcadia, that fame seat of love,
there live a nymph, the pride of all the grove,
a lovely nymph, adorn with every grace,
a easy shape, and sweet bloom face,
Fanny the damsel name, as chaste as fair,
each virgin envy, and each swain despair;
to charm her ear the rival shepherd sing,
blow the soft flute, and wake the tremble string,
for she they leave their wander flock to rove,
while Fanny name resound through every grove,
and spread on every tree, enclose in knot of love;
as fielding now, her eye all heart inflame,
like she in beauty, as alike in name.

it be when the summer sun, now mount high,
with fierce beam have scorch the glow sky,
beneath the covert of a cool shade,
to shun the heat, this lovely nymph be lay;
the sultry weather over her cheek have spread
a blush, that add to their native red,
and her fair breast, as polish marble white,
be half conceal, and half expose to sight;
Aeolus the mighty god, who wind obey,
observe the beauteous maid, as thus she lie,
over all her charm he gaze with fond delight,
and suck in poison at the dangerous sight;
he sigh, he burn; at last declare his pain,
but still he sigh, and still he woo in vain;
the cruel nymph, regardless of his moan,
mind not his flame, uneasy with her own;
but still complain, that he who rule the air
will not command one zephyr to repair
around her face, nor gentle breeze to play
through the dark glade, to cool the sultry day;
by love incite, and the hope of joy,
the ingenious god contrive this pretty toy,
with gale incessant to relieve her flame;
and call it fan, from lovely Fanny name.

Canto ii.

now see prepare to lead the sprightly dance,
the lovely nymph, and well-dressed youth advance;
the spacious room receive each jovial guest,
and the floor shake with please weight oppress:
thick range on every side, with various dye
the fair in glossy silk our sight surprise:
so, in a garden bathe with genial shower,
a thousand sort of variegate flower,
jonquil, carnation, pink, and tulip rise,
and in a gay confusion charm our eye.
high over their head, with numerous candle bright,
large sconce shed their sparkle beam of light,
their sparkle beam that still more bright glow,
reflect back from gem, and eye below:
unnumbered fan to cool the crowd fair
with breathe zephyr move the circle air,
the sprightly fiddle, and the sound lyre
each youthful breast with generous warmth inspire;
fraught with all joy the blissful moment fly,
while music melt the ear, and beauty charm the eye.

now let the youth, to who superior place
it first belong the splendid ball to grace,
with humble bow, and ready hand prepare,
forth from the crowd to lead his choose fair;
the fair shall not his kind request deny,
but to the please toil with equal ardour fly.

but stay, rash pair, not yet untaught advance,
first hear the muse, ere you attempt to dance:
 by art direct over the foam tide
secure from rock the paint vessel glide;
by art the chariot scour the dusty plain,
spring at the whip, and hear the strait'n rein:
to art our body must obedient prove,
if ever we hope with graceful ease to move.

long be the dance art unfixed, and free,
hence lose in error and uncertainty,
no precept do in mind, or rule obey,
but every master teach a different way;
hence ere each new-born dance be full try,
the lovely product even in bloom die,
through various hand in wild confusion toss,
its step be alter, and its beauty lose;
till fuillet, the pride of Gallia, rose,
and do the dance in character compose,
each lovely grace by certain mark he teach,
and every step in last volume write:
hence over the world this please be shall spread,
and every dance in every clime be read.
by distant master shall each step be see,
though mountain rise, and ocean roar between;
hence, with her sister art, shall dance claim
a equal right to universal fame,
and Isaac rigadoon shall live as long,
as raphael painting, or as virgil song.

wise nature ever, with a prudent hand,
dispense various gift to every land,
to every nation frugal impart
a genius fit for some peculiar art;
to trade the dutch incline, the Swiss to arm,
music and verse be soft italia charm;
Britannia just glory to have find
land unexplored, and sail the globe around:
but none will sure presume to rival FRANCE,
whether she form, or execute the dance;
to her exalt genius it be we owe
the sprightly rigadoon and louvre slow,
the boree, and courant unpractised long,
the immortal minuet, and the smooth Bretagne,
with all those dance of illustrious fame,
 that from their native country take their name,
with these let every ball be first begin,
nor country dance intrude till these be do.

each cautious bard, ere he attempt to sing,
first gentle flutter try his tender wing,
and if he find that with uncommon fire
the muse all his rapture soul inspire,
at once to heaven he soar in lofty ode,
and sing alone of hero and of god;
but if he tremble fear a flight so high,
he then descend to soft elegy;
and if in elegy he can succeed,
in pastoral he may tune the oaten reed:
so shall the dancer, ere he try to move,
with care his strength, his weight, and genius prove;
then, if he find kind nature gift impart
endowment proper for the dance art,
if in himself he feel together join,
a active body and ambitious mind,
in nimble rigadoon he may advance,
or in the louvre slow majestic dance;
if these he fear to reach, with easy pace
let he the minuet's circle maze trace:
be this too hard? this too let he forbear,
and to the country-dance confine his care.

will you in dance every fault avoid,
to keep true time be your first thought employ;
all other error they in vain shall mend,
who in this one important point offend;
for this, when now unite hand in hand
eager to start the youthful couple stand;
let they awhile their nimble foot restrain,
and with soft tap beat time to every strain:
so for the race prepare two courser stand,
and with impatient paw spurn the sand.

in vain a master shall employ his care,
where nature once have fix a clumsy air;
rather let such, to country sport confine,
pursue the fly hare, or timorous hind:
nor yet, while i the rural esquire despise,
a mien effeminate will i advise;
with equal scorn i will the fop deride,
nor let he dance — but on the woman side.

and you, fair nymph, avoid with equal care,
a stupid dullness, and a coquet air;
neither with eye, that ever love the ground,
asleep, like spin-top, run round and round;
nor yet with giddy look, and wanton pride,
stare all around, and skip from side to side.

true dance, like true wit, be best express
by nature only to advantage dress;
it be not a nimble bound, or caper high,
that can pretend to please a curious eye,
good judge no such tumbler trick regard,
or think they beautiful, because they be hard.

it be not enough, that every stander-by
no glare error in your step can spy,
the dance and music must so nice meet,
each note shall seem a echo to your foot;
a nameless grace must in each movement dwell,
which word can never express, or precept tell,
not to be teach, but ever to be see
in flavia air, and Chloe easy mien:
it be such a air that make she thousand fall,
when Fielding dance at a birth-night ball;
smooth as Camilla she skim over the plain,
and fly like she through crowd of hero slay.

now when the minuet oft repeat over,
(like all terrestrial joy) can please no more,
and every nymph, refuse to expand
her charm, decline the circulate hand;
then let the jovial country-dance begin,
and the loud fiddle call each straggler in:
but ere they come, permit i to disclose,
how first, as legend tell, this pastime rise.

in ancient time (such time be now no more)
when albion crown illustrious ARTHUR wear,
in some fair open glade, each summer night,
where the pule moon diffuse her silver light,
on the soft carpet of a grassy field,
the sport fairy their assembly hold:
some light trip with their pigmy queen,
in circle ringlet mark the level green,
some with soft note bid mellow pipe resound,
and music warble through the grove around;
oft lonely shepherd by the forest side,
belated peasant oft their revel spy,
and home return, over the nutbrown ale,
their guest divert with the wondrous tale.
instruct hence, throughout the british isle,
and fond to imitate the please toil,
round where the tremble may pole fix on high,
and bear its flowery honour to the sky,
the ruddy maid, and sun-burnt swain resort,
and practise every night the lovely sport;
on every side aeolian artist stand,
who active elbow swell wind command,
the swell wind harmonious pipe inspire,
and blow in every breast a generous fire.

thus teach at first the country-dance begin,
and hence to city and to court it run,
succeed age do in time impart
various improvement to the lovely art:
from field and grove to palace remove;
great one the please exercise approve;
hence the loud fiddle, and shrill trumpet sound,
be make companion of the dancer bound;
hence gem, and silk, brocade, and ribbon join,
to make the ball with perfect lustre shine.

so rude at first the tragic muse appear,
her voice alone by rustic rabble hear,
where twist tree a cool arbour make
the please spectator sit beneath the shade,
the homely stage with rush green be strew,
and in a cart the stroll actor ride:
till time at length improve the great design,
and bid the scene with paint landscape shine;
then art do all the bright machine dispose,
and theatre of parian marble rise,
then mimic thunder shake the canvas sky,
and god descend from their tower on high.

with caution now let every youth prepare
to choose a partner from the mingle fair;
vain will he hear the instruct muse voice,
if she pretend to direct his choice:
beauty alone by fancy be express,
and charm in different form each different breast;
a snowy skin this amorous youth admire,
while nutbrown cheek another bosom fire.
small waist and slender limb some heart ensnare,
while other love the more substantial fair.

but let not outward charm your judgment sway,
your reason rather than your eye obey,
and in the dance, as in the marriage noose,
rather for merit, than for beauty, choose:
be her your choice, who know with perfect skill
when she shall move, and when she shall be still,
who uninstructed can perform her share,
and kind half the please burden bear.
unhappy be that hopeless wretch fate,
who fetter in the matrimonial state
with a poor, simple, unexperienced wife,
be force to lead the tedious dance of life;
and such be he, with such a partner join,
a move puppet, but without a mind:
still must his hand be point out the way,
yet never can teach so fast, as she can stray,
beneath her folly he must ever groan,
and ever blush for error not his own.

but now behold unite hand in hand,
range on each side, the well-paired couple stand!
each youthful bosom beat with delight,
wait the brisk signal for the please fight:
while lovely eye, that flash unusual ray,
and snowy bubby pull above the stay,
quick busy hand, and bridle head declare,
the fond impatience of the start fair.
and see the sprightly dance be now begin!
now here, now there the giddy maze they run,
now with slow step they pace the circle ring,
now all confuse, too swift for sight they spring:
so, in a wheel with rapid fury toss,
the undistinguished spoke be in the motion lose.

the dancer here no more require a guide,
to no strict step his nimble foot be tie,
the muse precept here will useless be,
where all be fancy, unconfined, and free;
let he but to the music voice attend,
by this instruct, he can never offend;
if to his share it fall the dance to lead,
in wellknown path he may be sure to tread;
if other lead, let he their motion view,
and in their step the wind maze pursue.

in every country-dance a serious mind,
turn for reflection, can a moral find;
in hunt-the-squirrel thus the nymph we view,
seek when we fly, but fly when we pursue:
thus in round-dance, where our partner change,
and unconfined from fair to fair we range,
as soon as one from his own consort fly,
another seize on the lovely prize:
awhile the favourite youth enjoy her charm,
till the next comer steal she from his arm,
new one succeed, the last be still her care;
how true a emblem of the inconstant fair!

where can philosopher, and sage wise,
who read the curious volume of the sky,
a model more exact than dance name,
of the creation universal frame?
where world unnumbered over the aetherial way,
in a bright regular confusion stray;
now here, now there they whirl along the sky,
now near approach, and now far distant fly,
now meet in the same order they begin,
and then the great celestial dance be do.

where can the moralist find a juster plan
of the vain labour, and the life of man?
awhile through justle crowd we toil, and sweat,
and eager pursue we know not what,
then when our trifle short-lived race be run,
quite tire sit down, just where we first begin.

though to your arm kind fate indulgent care
have give a partner exquisite fair,
let not her charm so much engage your heart,
that you neglect the skilful dancer part;
be not, when you the tuneful note shall hear,
still whisper idle prattle in her ear;
when you shall be employ, be not at play,
nor for your joy all other step delay:
but when the finish dance you once have do,
and with applause through every couple run,
there rest awhile: there snatch the fleet bliss,
the tender whisper, and the balmy kiss;
each secret wish, each soft hope confess,
and her moist palm with eager finger press;
with smile the fair shall hear your warm desire,
when music melt her soul, and dance sire.

thus mix with love, the please toil pursue,
till the unwelcome morn appear in view;
then, when approach day its beam display,
and the dull candle shine with faint ray,
then when the sun just rise over the deep,
and each bright eye be almost set in sleep,
with ready hand, obsequious youth, prepare
safe to her coach to lead each choose fair,
and guard she from the morn inclement air:
let a warm hood enwrap her lovely head,
and over her neck a handkerchief be spread,
around her shoulder let this arm be cast,
while that from cold defend she slender waist;
with kiss warm her balmy lip shall glow,
unchilled by nightly damp, or wintery snow;
while generous white-wine, mull with ginger warm,
safe protect her inward frame from harm.

but ever let my lovely pupil fear
to chill their mantling blood with cold small beer;
ah, thoughtless fair! the tempt draught refuse,
when thus forewarn by my experience muse;
let the sad consequence your thought employ,
nor hazard future pain, for present joy,
destruction lurk within the poisonous dose,
a fatal fever, or a pimple nose.

thus through each precept of the dance art
the muse have play the kind instructor part,
through every maze her pupil she have lead,
and point out the sure path to tread;
no more remains; no more the goddess sing,
but drop her pinion, and unfurl her wing;
on downy bed the weary dancer lie,
and sleep silk cord tie down each drowsy eye;
delightful dream their please sport restore,
and even in sleep they seem to dance once more.

and now the work complete finish lie,
which the devour tooth of time defy;
while bird in air, or fish in stream we find,
or damsel fret with age partner join;
as long as nymph shall with attentive ear
a fiddle rather than a sermon hear;
so long the bright eye shall oft peruse
the useful line of my instructive muse;
each belle shall wear they write upon her fan,
and each bright beau shall read they — if he can.
