to the same.

from Hampton-court, 1731. 

by the same.

while in the fortune of the gay and great,
the glare of court, and luxury of state;
all that the mean covet and deplore,
the pomp of wealth, and insolence of power:
while in these various scene of gild life,
of fraud, ambition, policy, and strife;
where every word be dictate by art,
and every face the mask of every heart;
while with such different object entertain,
in all that be real feel, and all that be feign,
i speculate on human joy and woe,
till from my pen the verse spontaneous flow;
to who these artless offering shall i bring,
to who these undigested number sing,
but to a friend? — and to what friend but you,
safe, just, sincere, indulgent, kind and true?
disdain not then these trifle to attend,
nor fear to blame, nor study to commend.
say, where false notion err i pursue,
and with the plausible confound the true:
correct with all the freedom that i write;
and guide my darken reason with thy light.

thou partial heaven have bless, profuse kind,
with wit, with judgement, and a taste refine,
thy fancy rich, and thy observance true,
the last still wakeful, and the first still new.
rare blessing! and to few divide know,
but give unite to thyself alone.
instruction be thy word, and lively truth,
the school of age, and the delight of youth.

when man their various discontent relate,
and tell how wretched this our mortal state;
that life be but diversify distress,
the lot of all, and hardly more or less;
that king and villager have each their share,
these pinch with mean, and those with splendid care;
that seem pleasure be intrinsic woe,
and all call happiness, delusive show;
food only for the snake in envy breast,
who often grudge what be never possess;
say, for thou know the folly of mankind,
can tell how obstinate, perverse, and blind;
say, be we thus oppress by nature law,
or of our misery, ourselves the cause?

sure oft, unjust, we impute to fate
a thousand evil which ourselves create;
complain that life afford but little joy,
and yet that little foolish destroy.
we check the pleasure that too soon subside,
and break the current of too weak a tide.
like Atalanta, golden trifle chace,
and balk that swiftness which may win the race;
for life have joy adapt to each stage,
love for our youth, ambition for our age.
but wilful man invert her decree,
when young will govern, and when old will please,
covet the fruit his autumn shall bestow,
nor taste the fragrance while the blossom blow.
then far-fled joy in vain he will restore,
his appetite unanswered by his power:
round beauty neck he twist his wither arm,
receive with loathe to her venal charm:
he rake the ash, when the fire be spend,
nor gain fruition, though he gain consent.
but can we say it be providence fault,
if thus untimely all her gift be seek,
if summer-crop which must decay we keep,
and in the winter will the harvest reap?

when brute, with what they be allow content,
listen to nature, and pursue her bent,
and still their power with their ambition weigh,
gain what they can, but never force a trade:
a thousand joy her happy follower prove,
health, plenty, rest, society, and love.
to we alone, in fatal ignorance proud,
to deviate from her dictate it be allow:
that boast gift our reason to believe,
or let caprice, in reason garb, deceive.
to we the noble privilege be give
of wise refine on the will of heaven.
our skill we trust, but labour still to gain
more than we can, lose what we may obtain.

will the wise elephant desert the wood,
to imitate the whale and range the flood?
or will the mole her native earth forsake,
in wanton madness to explore the lake?
yet man, who still ideal profit sway,
than those less prudent, and more blind than these,
will quit his home, and venturous brave the sea.
and when his rashness its desert have find,
the fool survive, weep the fool that be drown.

herd range the field, the feather kind the grove,
choose, woo, caress, and with promiscuous love,
as taste and nature prompt, adhere, or rove;
they meet with pleasure, and with ease they part,
for beast be only couple by the heart.
the body still accompany the mind,
and when this wander, that be unconfined:
the love that join the sate pair once flee,
they change their haunt, their pasture, and their bed.
no four-legged idiot drag, with mutual pain,
the natural cement pass, a artful chain:
the effect of passion cease with the cause,
clog with no after-weight of form or law:
to no dull rule of custom they submit,
like we they cool, but when they cool, they quit.

nor find we in the wood, the sea, or plain,
one ever elect over the rest to reign.
if any rule, it be force that give the law,
what brute be bind in voluntary awe?
do they, like we, a pageant idol raise,
swell with false pride, and flatter by false praise?
do they their equal, sometime less, revere?
at once detest and serve, despise and fear?
to strength inferior do they bend the knee?
with ear and eye of other here and see?
or ever vest a mortal god with power
to do those wrong they afterwards deplore?
these institution be of man alone,
marriage and monarchy be both our own.
public oppression, and domestic strife,
be ill which we ourselves annex to life,
god never make a husband, king, or wife.
boast then, oh man! thy profitable gain,
to folly polish, civilise to pain.

here will i launch into the various field
of all the care our prejudice yield;
what multiply example may be tell,
of pain they give, and joy that they withhold?
when to credulity tradition preach,
and ignorance practise what error teach!

will any feather maiden of the wood,
or scaly female of the people flood,
when lust and hunger call, its force resist?
in abstinence, or chastity persist?
and cry, 'if heaven intent be understand,
'these taste be only give to be withstand.'
or will they wise both these gift improve,
and eat when hungry, and when amorous love?

yet superstition, in religion name,
with future punishment and present shame,
can fright weak woman from her lover arm,
who weep with mutual pain her useless charm;
while she, poor wretch! consume in secret fire,
with power to seize, forego what she desire,
till beauty fade, and inclination die,
and the fair tree, the fruit ungathered, die.

but be these ill, the ill which heaven design?
be we unfortunate, or be we blind?
if in possession of our wish curse,
bathe in untasted spring we die with thirst;
if we make misery, what be blessing mean,
and benefit convert to punishment?

when in the spring the wise industrious bee
collect the various bloom from fragrant tree,
extract the liquid sweet of every flower,
and cull the garden to enrich their store:
shall any pedant bee of all the hive,
from this or that perfume the plunderer drive,
and say, that he by inspiration know,
the sacred, tempt, interdict rose,
by heaven command, though sweet, useless grow:
think you the fool will ever be obey,
and that the lie will grow into a trade?
even Turk will answer, no — and yet, we see
the vine, that rise, and Mahomet, that bee.
to these, how many proof i yet can add,
that man superior sense be being mad?
that none, refine, their true interest view,
but for the substance, still the shade pursue.
that oft perverse, and prodigal of life,
(our power and will at everlasting strife)
we waste the present for the future hour,
and, miser-like, by hoard, still be poor.
or foolish regretful of the past,
the good which yet remain neglect to taste.

nor need i any foreign proof to bring,
myself a instance of the truth i sing.
while in a court, repugnant to my taste,
from my love friend these precious hour i waste,
why do i vain here thy absence mourn,
and not anticipate thy wish return?
why stay my passage to those happy field,
where fate in thou my every pleasure yield?
fortune allow the blessing i refuse,
and even this moment, be my heart to choose;
for thou i shall forsake this joyless crowd,
and not on paper think, but think aloud:
with thy love converse fill the shorten day,
and glad my soul — yet here unpleased i stay,
and by mean, sanguine view of interest sway,
by airy hope, to real care betray;
lament a grievance which i may redress,
and wish that happiness i may possess.
