Iris to Philus.

by the same.

if slight Iris can your pity move;
 if slight Iris can recall your love;
 if ever with joy you hear her soft vow,
 renew the dear idea, hear she now. 
you once be faithful, oh the tender bliss! 
the sweet endearment, and the thrill kiss! 
these witness once, when i, for ever true,
 plight my heart, a prey to love and you;
 and you, untainted by the vice of art,
 yield to i, in solemn faith, your heart. 
oh say the cause, the cause i long to find,
 you dear deceitful man, why now unkind? 
have Iris for her Philus now no charm? 
for he no pleasure in her vacant arm? 
methinks i see, while torture wound my rest,
 methinks i see you clasp to your breast
 some rosy bloom maid, who beat vein
 throb with soft tumult, with ecstatic pain,
 while on her cheek the deepen blush rise,
 and melt rapture sparkle in her eye. 
such be the joy, when i, incautious maid,
 too fond trust, be by you betray. 
such be the joy, oh, call the scene to mind! 
when Iris yield, all her soul resign. 
ah! then you swear (the accent now i hear,
 your turtle, constant, coo they to my ear)
 that hoary time, and joy-consuming age,
 the ardour of your flame shall never assuage. 
but though unchanged by age, or hoary time,
 you slight my ripen charm, my blush prime. 
all fondness, once upon my breast you lay,
 and sweet sigh the hasty hour away;
 but, ah! how change my fate, forlorn i be leave,
 of every kindly-soothing hope bereave! 
whatever be wont to court the rove eye,
 now swell the tear, and heave the unbidden sigh;
 wherever i turn, all nature charm seem flee,
 the sun withdraw, the sun-flower droop her head;
 rob of the prop, where once she fond cling,
 the fade woodbine trail the earth along;
 unchanged alone the mournful yew remain,
 and midst each vary blast its hue retain;
 its leaf unchanged, my faithless swain reprove,
 but, ah! they can teach he how to love! 
if ever for she you feel the slight care,
 who form, too often, you have pronounce most fair,
 whenever i die, and die, ah soon i must! 
whenever this body moulder into dust,
 this only favour at your hand i crave,
 with mournful yew to shade my untimely grave:
 these mournful yew shall this memorial bear,
 Iris love Philus, and she die sincere. 
