absence and death.

a pastoral.

when every eye that know no cause to weep,
 and peaceful mind be hush in please sleep,
 two virgin nymph, who love have leave forlorn,
 never close their weep eye, from eve to morn:
 for strephon absence, daphne tear be shed,
 and Hebe mourn her faithful Collin dead;
 their sorrow be not to each other know,
 alike they mourn, and silent be their moan;
 awhile they weep, until one the silence break;
 thus Hebe answer, and thus Daphne speak. 

Daphne. 

say, gentle maid, whence spring thy anxious fear? 
what inward sorrow prompt thy gush tear? 
thy case thou safe may to i impart,
 true to my trust, and faithful from the heart;
 my grief, i will suspend awhile to hear
 thy tale, and shed a sympathetic tear. 

Hebe. 

and will not Daphne then her grief impart? 
to tell the sorrow, be to ease the heart. 
say first, why heave thy breast that labour sigh,
 and Hebe will alternate reply;
 the plaintive sound shall die along the vale,
 and neighbour hill resound the move tale. 

Daphne. 

a shepherd absence i be doom to mourn,
 while rigid fate forbid he to return;
 perhaps, like i, he mourn his force delay,
 perhaps some fair maid may tempt his stay;
 a while, with flatter gale of hope i steer,
 then, dash and shipwreck on the rock of fear. 

Hebe. 

young Collin do my yield heart subdue,
 a forester he be, and he be true;
 he vow his heart from i shall never rove;
 i hear with joy, and give he love for love:
 but my dear swain, my collin dead, and i
 now live, but only to despair, and die. 

Daphne. 

my shepherd be the choice of the swain,
 that climb the hill, or traverse over the plain;
 his radiant eye beam forth a mild ray,
 than the fair star, that lead the dawn day;
 nor be the flock, that graze the palin, so fair
 as the dear swain that make those flock his care. 

Hebe. 

my forester be comely to behold,
 his look be please as the tale he tell;
 the frock he wear, be of a fresh green
 than the gay forest, where he oft be see;
 and stately he, among his fellow swain,
 as the tall fir, that over the forest reign. 

Daphne. 

how swift the season fly throughout the year,
 how oft the spring return without my dear;
 yet shall some blishful hour, some distant spring,
 my long-mourned Strephon to his Daphne bring;
 one happy hour with he, will far overpay
 all i have suffer by his long delay. 

Hebe. 

no gloomy phantom have my joy overcast,
 my hope be wither by a deadly blast;
 see the surround wood, how every tree
 have drop its leaf, and seem to mourn with i;
 though spring will quick readorn the grove,
 yet i can never hope to see my love. 
