the choice of Hercules.

a poem.

i 

now have the son of Jove mature, attain
the joyful prime: when youth, elate and gay,
step into life; and follow unrestrained
where passion lead, or prudence point the way.
in the pure mind, at those ambiguous year,
or vice, rank weed, first strike her poisonous root:
or haply virtue open bud appear
by just degree; fair bloom of fair fruit:
for, if on youth untainted thought impress,
the generous purpose still shall warm the manly breast.

ii.

as on a day, reflect on his age
for high deed now ripe, alcides seek
retirement; nurse of contemplation sage;
step follow step, and think succeed thought:
muse, with steady pace the youth pursue
his walk; and lose in meditation stray
far in a lonely vale, with solitude
converse; while intent his mind survey
the dubious path of life: before he lie
here virtue rough ascent, there pleasure flowery way.

iii.

much do the view divide his waver mind:
now glow his breast with generous thirst of fame;
now love of ease to soft thought incline
his yield soul, and quench the rise flame.
when, lo! far off two female form he spy;
direct to he their step they seem to bear:
both, large and tall, exceed human size;
both far exceed human beauty, fair.
graceful, yet each with different grace, they move:
this, strike sacred awe; that, soft, win love.

iv.

the first, in native dignity surpass;
artless and unadorned she please the more:
health, over her look, a genuine lustre cast;
a vest, more white than new-fallen snow she wear.
august she tread, yet modest be her air;
serene her eye, yet dart heavenly fire.
still she draw near; and near still more fair,
more mild appear: yet such as may inspire
pleasure correct with a awful fear;
majestical sweet, and amiable severe.

v. 

the other dame seem even of fair hue;
but bold her mien; unguarded rove her eye:
and her flush cheek confess at near view
the borrow blush of a artful dye.
all soft and delicate, with airy swim
light she dance along; her robe betray
through the clear texture every tender limb,
heighten the charm it only seem to shade:
and as it flow down, so loose and thin,
her stature show more tall; more snowy-white, her skin.

vi.

oft with a smile she view herself askance;
even on her shade a conscious look she throw;
then all around her cast a careless glance,
to mark what gaze eye her beauty draw.
as they come near, before that other maid
approach decent, eager she press
with hasty step; nor of repulse afraid,
with freedom bland the wonder youth address;
with win fondness on his neck she hang;
sweet as the honey-dew flow her enchant tongue.

vii.

"dear Hercules, whence this unkind delay?
"dear youth, what doubt can thus distract thy mind?
"secure follow, where i lead the way;
"and range through wild of pleasure unconfined,
"with i retire, from noise, and pain, and care;
"embathed in bliss, and rapt in endless ease:
"rough be the road to fame, through blood and war;
"smooth be my way, and all my path be peace.
"with i retire, from toil and peril free;
"leave honour to the wretch! pleasure be make for thou.

viii.

"then will i grant thou all thy soul desire;
"all that may charm thy ear, and please thy sight:
"all that thy thought can frame, or wish require,
"to steep thy ravish sense in delight.
"the sumptuous feast, enhance with music sound;
"fit to tune the melt soul to love:
"rich odour, breathe choice sweet around;
"the fragrant bower, cool fountain, shady grove:
"fresh flower, to strew thy couch, and crown thy head;
"joy shall attend thy step, and ease shall smooth thy bed.

ix.

"these will i, free, constant supply;
"pleasure, not earn with toil, nor mix with woe:
"far from thy rest repine want shall fly;
"nor labour bathe in sweat thy careful brow.
"mature the copious harvest shall be thy;
"let the laborious hind subdue the soil:
"leave the rash soldier spoil of war to win;
"win by the soldier thou shall share the spoil:
"these soft care my bless ally employ,
"new pleasure to invent; to wish, and to enjoy. "

x. 

her win voice the youth attentive catch:
he gaze impatient on the smile maid;
still gaze, and listen: then her name beseech:
"my name, fair youth, be happiness, she say.
"well can my friend this envy truth maintain:
"they share my bliss; they best can speak my praise:
"though slander call i sloth — detraction vain!
"heed not what slander, vain detractor, say:
"slander, still prompt true merit to defame;
"to blot the bright worth, and blast the fair name."

xi.

by this, arrive the fair majestic maid:
(she all the while, with the same modest pace,
compose, advance.) "know, Hercules," she say
with manly tone, "thy birth of heavenly race;
"thy tender age that love instruction voice,
"promise thou generous, patient, brave and wise;
"when manhood shall confirm thy glorious choice:
"now expectation wait to see thou rise.
"rise, youth! exalt thyself, and i: approve
"thy high descent from heaven; and dare be worthy Jove.

xii.

"but what truth prompt, my tongue shall not disguise;
"the steep ascent must be with toil subdue:
"watch and care must win the lofty prize
"propose by heaven; true bliss, and real good.
"honour reward the brave and bold alone;
"she spurn the timorous, indolent, and base:
"danger and toil stand stern before her throne;
"and guard (so Jove command) the sacred place.
"who seek her must the mighty cost sustain,
"and pay the price of fame; labour, and care, and pain.

xiii.

"will thou engage the god peculiar care?
"o Hercules, the immortal power adore!
"with a pure heart, with sacrifice and prayer
"attend their altar; and their aid implore.
"or will thou gain thy country be loud applause,
"love as her father, as her god adore?
"be thou the bold assertor of her cause;
"her voice, in council; in the fight, her sword.
"in peace, in war, pursue thy country good:
"for she, bare thy bold breast; and pour thy generous blood.

xiv.

"will thou, to quell the proud and lift the oppress,
"in art of war and matchless strength excel?
"first conquer thou thyself. to ease, to rest,
"to each soft thought of pleasure, bid farewell.
"the night alternate, due to sweet repose,
"in watch waste; in painful march, the day:
"congeal, amid the rigorous winter snow;
"scorch, by the summer thirst-inflaming ray.
"thy harden limb shall boast superior might:
"vigour shall brace thy arm, resistless in the fight. "

XV. 

"hear thou, what monster then thou must engage;
"what danger, gentle youth, she bid thou prove?
(abrupt say sloth) "ill fit thy tender age
"tumult and war; fit age, for joy and love.
"turn, gentle youth, to i, to love and joy!
"to these i lead: no monster here shall stay
"thy easy course; no care thy peace annoy:
"i lead to bliss a near, smooth way.
"short be my way; fair, easy, smooth, and plain:
"turn, gentle youth! with i eternal pleasure reign. "

xvi.

"what pleasure, vain mistake wretch, be thy!
(virtue with scorn reply:)" who sleep in ease
"insensate; who soft limb the toil decline
"that season bliss, and make enjoyment please.
"drain the copious bowl, ere thirst require;
"feast, ere hunger to the feast invite:
"who tasteless joy anticipate desire;
"who luxury supply with appetite:
"yet nature loathe; and you employ in vain
"variety and art to conquer her disdain.

xvii.

"the sparkle nectar, cool with summer snow;
"the dainty board, with choice viand spread;
"to thou be tasteless all! sincere repose
"fly from thy flowery couch and downy bed.
"for thou be only tire with indolence:
"nor be thy sleep, with toil and labour buy:
"the imperfect sleep that lull thy languid sense
"in dull oblivious interval of thought:
"that kindly steal the inactive hour away
"from the long, linger space, that lengthen out the day.

xviii.

"from bounteous nature unexhausted store
"flow the pure fountain of sincere delight:
"averse to she, you waste the joyless hour;
"sleep drown thy day, and riot rule thy night.
"immortal though thou be, indignant Jove
"hurl thou from heaven, the immortal blissful place;
"for ever banish from the realm above,
"to dwell on earth, with man degenerate race:
"fit abode! on earth alike disgrace;
"reject by the wise, and by the fool embrace.

xix.

"fond wretch, that vain ween all delight
"to gratify the sense reserve for thou!
"yet the most please object to the sight,
"thy own fair action, never do thou see.
"though lull with soft sound thou lie along;
"soft music, warble voice, melt lay;
"never do thou hear, more sweet than sweet song
"charm the soul, thou never do hear thy praise!
"no — to thy revel let the fool repair:
"to such, go smooth thy speech; and spread thy tempt "snare.

xx.

"vast happiness enjoy thy gay ally!
"a youth of folly; and old age, of care:
"young, yet enervate; old, yet never wise;
"vice waste their vigour, and their mind impair.
"vain, idle, delicate, in thoughtless ease
"reserve woe for age their prime they spend;
"all wretched, hopeless, in the evil day
"with sorrow to the verge of life they tend.
"grieve, with the present; of the past, ashamed:
"they live, and be despise: they die, nor more be name.

xxi.

"but with the god, and godlike man, i dwell:
"i, his supreme delight, the almighty sire
"regard well-pleased: whatever work excel,
"all or divine or human, i inspire.
"counsel with strength, and industry with art,
"in union meet conjoin, with i reside:
"my dictate arm, instruct, and mend the heart;
"the sure policy, the wise guide.
"with i, true friendship dwell: she deign to bind
"those generous soul alone, who i before have join.

xxii.

"nor need my friend the various costly feast;
"hunger to they the effect of art supply;
"labour prepare their weary limb to rest;
"sweet be their sleep: light, cheerful, strong they rise.
"through health, through joy, through pleasure and renown,
"they tread my path; and by a soft descent,
"at length to age all gentle sink down,
"look back with transport on a life well-spent:
"in which, no hour fly unimproved away;
"in which, some generous deed distinguish every day.

xxiii.

"and when, the destine term at length complete,
"their ash rest in peace; eternal fame
"sound wide their praise: triumphant over fate,
"in sacred song, for ever live their name.
"this, Hercules, be happiness! obey
"my voice, and live. let thy celestial birth
"lift, and enlarge, thy thought. behold the way
"that lead to fame; and raise thou from earth
"immortal! lo, i guide thy step. arise,
"pursue the glorious path; and claim thy native sky. "

xxiv.

her word breathe fire celestial, and impart
new-vigour to his soul, that sudden catch
the generous flame: with great intent his heart
swell full; and labour with exalt thought:
the mist of error from his eye dispel,
through all her fraudful art in clear light
sloth in her native form he now behold;
unveiled, she stand confess before his sight;
false siren! — all her vaunt charm, that shine
so fresh erewhile, and fair: now wither, pale, and go.

xxv.

no more, the rosy bloom in sweet disguise
mask her dissemble look: each borrow grace
leave her wan cheek; pale sickness cloud her eye
livid and sink, and passion dim her face.
as when fair Iris have awhile display
her watery arch, with gaudy painture gay;
while yet we gaze, the glorious colour fade,
and from our wonder gentle steal away:
where shine the beauteous phantom erst so bright,
now lower the low-hung cloud; all gloomy to the sight.

xxvi.

but virtue more engage all the while
disclose new charm; more lovely, more serene
beam sweet influence. a mild smile
soften the terror of her lofty mien.
"lead, goddess, i be thy! (transport cry
alcides:)" o propitious power, thy way
"teach i! possess my soul; be thou my guide:
"from thou, o never, never let i stray! "
while ardent thus the youth his vow address;
with all the goddess fill, already glow his breast.

xxvii.

the heavenly maid; with strength divine endue
his dare soul; there all her power combine:
firm constancy, undaunted fortitude,
endure patience, arm his mighty mind.
unmoved in toil, in danger undismayed,
by many a hardy deed and bold emprise,
from fierce monster, through her powerful aid,
he free the earth: through she he gain the sky.
it be virtue place he in the bless abode;
crown with eternal youth; among the god, a god.
