to the moon.

by mr. ROBERT Lloyd.

all hail! majestic queen of night,
 bright Cynthia! sweet nymph, who presence bring
 the pensive pleasure, calm delight,
 while contemplation smooth her ruffle wing,
 which folly vain tumultuous joy,
 or business, care, and buzz of lusty day
 have all too ruffle. — hence away
 stale jest, and flippant mirth, and strife-engendering noise. 
when evening don her mantle grey,
 i will wind my solitary way,
 and hie i to some lonely grove
 (the haunt of fancy and of love)
 who social branch, far outspread,
 possess the mind with please dread. 
while Cynthia quiver through the tree
 that wanton with the summer breeze,
 and the clear brook, or dimple stream,
 reflect oblique her dance beam. 
how often, by thy silver light,
 have lover tongue beguile the night? 
when forth the happy pair have stray,
 the amorous swain and tender maid,
 and as they walk the grove along,
 cheere the still eve with various song. 
while every artful strain confess
 the mutual passion in their breast. 
to lover hour fly swift away,
 and night reluctant yield to day. 

thrice happy nymph, thrice happy youth,
 when beauty be the meed of truth! 

yet not the happy love alone,
 have thy celestial presence know. 
to thou complain the nymph forlorn
 of break faith, and vow forswear;
 and, the dull Swain, with fold arm,
 still muse on his false one charm,
 frame many a sonnet to her name,
 (as lover use to express their flame)
 or pine wan with thoughtful care,
 in downcast silence feed despair;
 or when the air dead stillness keep,
 and Cynthia on the water sleep;
 charm the dull ear of sober night,
 with love-born music sweet delight. 

oft as thy orb perform its round,
 thou listen to the various sound
 of shepherd hope and maiden fear
 (those conscious Cynthia silent hear
 while echo, which still love to mock,
 bear they about from rock to rock). 

but shift we now the pensive scene,
 where Cynthia silver over the green. 
Mark yonder spot, who equal rim
 form the green circle quaint and trim;
 hither the fairy blithe advance,
 and light trip in mazy dance;
 beat the pansie-paven ground
 in frolic measure round and round;
 these cynthia revel gay keep,
 while lazy mortal snore asleep;
 who oft they visit in the night,
 not visible to human sight;
 and as old prattle wife relate,
 though now the fashion out of date,
 drop sixpence in the housewife shoe,
 and pinch the slattern black and blue. 
they fill the mind with airy scheme,
 and bring the lady pleasant dream. 

who know not MAB, who chariot glide,
 and athwart man nose ride? 
while Oberon, blithe fairy, trip,
 and hover over the lady lip;
 and when he steal ambrosial bliss,
 and soft imprint the charm kiss,
 in dream the nymph her swain pursue,
 nor think it be Oberon that woo. 

you sportive youth, and lovely fair,
 from hence, my lesson read, beware,
 while innocence and mirth preside,
 we care not where the fairy glide;
 and Oberon will never miss
 to greet his favourite with a kiss;
 nor ever more ambrosia sip,
 than when he visit — be lip. 

when all thing else in silence sleep,
 the blithsome elf their vigil keep,
 and always hover round about,
 to find our worth or frailty out. 
receive with joy these elfin spark,
 their kiss leave no telltale mark,
 but breathe fresh beauty over the face,
 where all be virtue, all be grace. 

not only elfin say delight
 to hail the sober queen of night,
 but that sweet bird, who gurgle throat
 warble the thick melodious note,
 due as evening shade prevail,
 renew her soothe love-lorn tale. 
and as the lover pensive go,
 chant out her symphony of woe. 
which in boon nature wild tone,
 beggar all sound which art have know. 

but hist — the melancholy bird
 among the grove no more be hear;
 and Cynthia pale her silver ray
 before the approach of golden day,
 which on yond mountain misty height
 stand tiptoe with his gladsome light. 
now the shrill lark in aether float,
 and carol wide her liquid note;
 while Phoebus, in his lusty pride,
 his flame beam fling far and wide. 
Cynthia farewell — the pensive Muse
 no more her feeble flight pursue,
 but all unwilling take her way,
 and mix with the buzz of day:
