a elegy.

by sir B— G—.

in Burton favourite grove, alas, how change
 by Charlotte death! oft let i devious rove
 indulge grief; where gladsome once i range,
 in sweet society with peace and love. 

oft in the silent evening, all alone,
 when solemn twilight shade the face of day,
 the plaintive muse shall hither waft her moan;
 with tender passion here inspire my lay. 

these hour, allot to that muse hand,
 to late time thy memory shall endear;
 while soft idea rise at her command,
 and in luxurious sorrow prompt the tear. 

recall, soft fame of gentleness and love! 
that calm, which triumph over thy part breath;
 that bloom texture by the grace weave:
 — and be those eye for ever set in death? 

one more — and then — farewell! one linger view
 tear my fond soul from all it hold so dear:
 it be over! — farewell — my joy: sweet hope, adieu!
 — adieu, my love! — we part for ever here:

no! in the still of night, my restless thought
 pursue thy image through its change unknown;
 steal oft unnoticed to the dreary vault,
 and in that vale of sorrow pour my own:

nor, since the hour that close our bloom scene,
 once have it wander from its darling trust:
 it sound thy voice; still animate thy mien;
 and haunt thy slumber in the sacred dust. 

each conscious walk of tenderness and joy,
 thy faithful partner oft alone shall tread;
 recount, while anguish heave the frequent sigh,
 how bliss on bliss thy smile influence shed! 

though mine be many — many roll year! 
ecstatic thought shall linger still on thou! 
time roll in vain — remembrance, with her tear —
 — you that have lose a angel — pity i! 

thy smile be i — be oft; and only mine;
 nor yet forsake i in the face of death;
 even now they live — still over thy beauty shine:
 for fancy magic can restore thy breath. 

painful reflection! — can the active mind,
 which penetrate the vast expanse of day,
 long languish in this palsy mass confine,
 nor burst these fetter of obtrude clay? 

ah, no! — she beckon i — for yet she live! 
live in yond region of unfading joy! 
she point the fair reward that virtue give;
 — which chance, nor change, nor age can destroy. 

let folly animate this transient scene
 with every bloom that fancy can supply! 
reflection bend not on a point so mean;
 nor court this moment, since the next we die. 

the dear object hasten to decay:
 (a awful lesson to the pensive mind!) 
my Charlotte beauty so soon pass away:
 nor leave, but in my heart, a wreck behind! 
