the defence,

no more, dear smith, the hackneyed tale renew;
 i own their censure, i approve it too. 
for how can idiot destitute of thought,
 conceive, or estimate, but as they be teach? 
say, can the satirize pen of shears,
 exalt his name, or mutilate his ear? 
none, but a Laurence, can adore his lay,
 who in a quart of claret drink his praise. 
T—l—r repeat, what Catcott tell before,
 but lie t—l—r be believe no more. 
if in myself i think my notion just,
 the church and all her argument be dust. 

religion but opinion bastard son,
 a perfect mystery, more than three in one. 
it be fancy all, distemper of the mind;
 as education teach we, we be incline. 
happy the man, who reason bid he see,
 mankind be by the state of nature free;
 who, think for himself, despise those,
 that will upon his better sense impose;
 be to himself the minister of god,
 nor dread the path, where Athanasius tread. 
happy (if mortal can be) be the man,
 who, not by priest, but reason rule his span;
 reason, to its possessor a sure guide,
 reason, a thorn in revelation side. 
if reason fail, incapable to tread
 through gloomy revelation thicken bed,
 on what authority the church we own? 
how shall we worship deity unknown? 
can the eternal justice please receive
 the prayer of those, who, ignorant believe? 

search the thick multitude of every sect,
 the church supreme, with whitfield new elect;
 no individual can their god define,
 no, not great penny in his nervous line. 
but why must Chatterton select sit,
 the butt of every critic little wit? 
be i alone for ever in a crime;
 nonsense in prose, or blasphemy in rhyme? 
all monosyllable a line appear? 
be it not very often so in shears? 
see generous eccas, lengthen out my praise
 enrapture with the music of my lay;
 in all the art of panegyric grace,
 the cream of modern literary taste. 

why, to be sure, the metaphoric line
 have something sentimental, tender, fine;
 but then how hobble be the other two;
 there be some beauty, but they be very few. 
beside the author, i'faith it be something odd,
 commend a reverential awe of god. 
read but another fancy of his brain;
 he be atheistical in every strain. 
fallacious be the charge: it be all a lie,
 as to my reason i can testify. 
i own a god, immortal, boundless, wise,
 who bid our glory of creation rise;
 who form his vary likeness in mankind,
 centre his many wonder in the mind;
 who see religion, a fantastic night
 but give we reason to obtain the light. 
indulgent Whitfield scruple not to say,
 he only can direct to heaven highway. 
while bishop, with as much vehemence tell,
all sort heterodox be food for hell. 
why then, dear smith, since doctor disagree,
 their notion be not oracle to i:
 what i think right, i ever will pursue
 and leave you liberty to do so too. 
