a lash at atheist:

the poet speak, as the ghost of a quondam libertine, suppose to be the late E. of R.  reflect on that part of seneca Troas, begin atpost mortem nihil est, Ipsaq; mors nihilvelocis spatii meta novissima:spem ponant avidi seliciti metum.quaeris quo iaceas post obitum locoquo non nata iacent.

encumber with vile flesh, to earth incline,
profane tragedian, once i wear thy mind,
bear on the wing of soar wit so high,
i think my soul no farther pitch can fly
than the gay region of philosophy.
the hot-brained stag'rite in my breast do reign,
and sacred prophet preach the truth in vain,
nourish by logic art so well i know
to vent false reason and disguise the true:
around my beam the atheist of the time,
like atom, dance and wanton in my crime,
strong vice opinion of my wisdom breed,
which round the world, those false Apostles lead,
while scandal hourly i on vertue throw,
nor will be witty, unless wicked too;
all thy pernicious tenet then i own,
and wit profane with circle bay i crown,
proud of short-sighted reason, my design
be still to blast the mystery divine;
defame religion with unhallowed wit,
and ridicule the law of sacred write:
but oh, you foolish, fond, and apish crew,
you learned idiot that my tract pursue,
you crawl worm that bask in the sun ray,
and yet the sun great maker disobey.
pernicious snake that by celestial fire,
relieve from freeze ignorance, conspire
against your god, and think frail eye can see
through the arcana of the trinity,
reflect how false your notion be, by i.
and thou, poor heathen, that have wit to write,
yet not the truth, have eye, and yet no sight,
that be in the dawn of our redemption drive
through moral mist to grope the way to heaven,
thou that with one poor glimpse of reason bless,
give only as distinction from the beast;
profane dare affirm there nothing be
beyond the grave, of misery or bliss:
but that the soul and body, like a tree,
rest undisturbed in earth obscurity.
with i art now severe undeceived
in those dame tenet which we once believe,
yet not believe, for in each vile harangue
the atheist speak he feel a secret pang:
poor torture conscience peep through his disguise,
and tell the noisy hot brain fool he lie;
thus man more sordid than a brute must be,
that plague with the salt itch of sophistry,
forfeit his soul, profane all sacred law,
for the vain blast of popular applause.
have reverend Hobbs this revelation mark
before his dubious leap into the dark;
have he sound faith, before false sense approve,
Moses, instead of Aristotle love,
eternal vengeance have not find he then,
nor gorge he with his own leviathan;
like he, or worse, once mad do i rave
till i have get on. foot into the grave:
but there, as if eternal power have please
to show in i that wonder be not cease;
my guardian angel snatch my soul from night
to the clear path of everlasting light:
then banish wisdom reassume my brain,
religious reason take her seat again;
i sigh, and tremble at the horrid view
of my past crime, and scarce can renew
forget prayer, so little good i know,
till heavenly mercy down like manna fall,
and true repentance lift i from hell:
thus sickness which my mourn friend condole
when art can not restore my body whole,
prove the divine physician of my soul.
how deep then my long lose reason prise
the balmy scripture i so late despise!
how poor tinsel-robbed philosophy
appear when rich divinity be by!
and how the evangelist and prophet shine
among heathen poet, that my heart have win
go be my doubt, the resurrection plain,
and if there be a fool, so vile, so vain,
that in his head that scruple do retain:
let he but think what first create man,
then let he be a atheist if he can.
