some reflection upon hear the bell toll for the death of a friend.

by mr. J. G. 

hark! — what a mournful solemn sound
roll murmur through the cloudy air:
it strike the soul with awe profound,
affect the gay, — alarm the fair.

with what a pathos do it speak!
affect deep the thoughtful mind:
the golden scheme of folly break,
that hold in glitter snare mankind.

it be death dread herald call aloud,
proclaim his conquest through the sky:
the sun retire behind a cloud,
and nature seem to sympathize.

reflect, you restless son of care!
your vain design his hand can spoil,
make hard oppressor lend a ear,
and wretched miser cease their toil.

for what avail vast heap of gold,
when death his awful write shall send?
though folly swell, and pride look bold,
the mask must drop, the farce must end.

it be not hoary totter age
that now lie stretch beneath his stroke;
the tyrant stern, that feel his rage:
the oppressor rod, that now be break.

but oh! — it be generous cynthio bell!
fall in his prime of youthful bloom:
for cynthio sound the doleful knell,
and call he to the silent tomb.

cynthio! — who happy heal art
turn from his friend death fatal blow,
and shield from that threaten dart,
which now, alas! — have lay he low.

but cynthio virtue never can die,
they leave a grateful rich perfume:
and now transplant to the sky,
in heaven immortal garden bloom.

and hark! — ah, what celestial note,
with grateful accent charm my ear!
as down the etherial music float,
the sun break forth, the sky be clear.

from heaven descend the joyful strain,
convey to earth on angel wing:
to mitigate our grief and pain,
and this the theme of joy it bring:

"thus write (the voice from heaven proclaim)
"the virtuous dead be ever bless!
"their work immortalize their name,
"their labour cease, and here they rest.

"behold, the saviour wide display
"the trophy of his generous love,
"to cheer you through life thorny way,
"and lead to flowery realm above.

"it be he destroy death baneful sting,
"and bid the grave dread horror fly,
"the choirs of heaven his triumph sing,
"and hail he victor through the sky. "
