the female drum: or, the origin of card.

a tale. address to the honourable miss carpenter.

thou, who to counsel be to praise,
with candor view these friendly lay,
nor from the vice of game free,
believe the satire point at thou;
who truth and worth betimes can prize,
nor yet too sprightly to be wise,
but hear this tale of ancient time,
nor think it vain, though tell in rhyme.

elate with wide-extended power,
swear rival from the natal hour,
avarice and sloth, with hostile art
contend long for woman heart;
she fond of wealth, afraid of toil,
still shift the capricious smile;
by turn, to each the heart be sell,
now buy with ease, and now with gold;
scarce either grasp the sovereign sway,
when chance reverse the prosperous day.
the doubtful strife be still renew,
each baffle oft, but never subdue;
when avarice show the glitter prize,
and hope and fear begin to rise,
sloth shed on every busy sense
the gentle balm of indolence.
when sloth have screen, with artful night,
the soft pavilion of delight;
stern avarice, with reproachful frown,
will scatter thorn among she down.

thus each by turn the realm control,
which each in turn despair to hold;
at length unable to contend,
they join to choose a common friend,
to close in love the long debate,
such love, as mutual fear create;
a friend they choose, a friend to both,
of avarice bear, and nurse by sloth;
a artful nymph, who reign begin
when wisdom cease to dwell with man;
in wisdom awful robe array,
she rule over politics and trade;
and by the name of cunning know,
make wealth, and fame, and power her own.

in quest of cunning then they rove
over all the wind of the grove,
where twine bough their shade unite,
for cunning ever fly the light;
at length through maze perplex with maze,
through tract confuse, and private way,
with sink heart and weary foot,
they gain their favourite dark retreat;
there, watchful at the gate, they find
suspicion, with her eye behind;
and wild alarm, awake, blow
the trump that shake the world repose.

the guest well know, salute the guard,
the hundred gate be soon unbar;
through half the gloomy cave they press,
and reach the wily queen recess;
the wily queen disturb, they view,
with scheme to fly, though none pursue;
and, in perpetual care to hide,
what none will ever seek, employ.

"great queen (they pray) our feud compose,
"and let we never more be foe. "
"this hour (she cry) your discord end,
"henceforth, be sloth and avarice friend;
"henceforth, with equal pride, prepare
"to rule at once the captive fair."

the attentive power in silence hear,
nor utter what they hope or fear,
but search in vain the dark decree,
for cunning love obscurity;
nor will she soon her law explain,
for cunning ever joy to pain.

she then before their wonder eye,
bid pile of paint paper rise;
"search now these heap, (she cry) here find
"fit emblem of your power combine. "
the heap to avarice first she give,
who soon descry her darling knave:
and sloth, ere envy long can sting,
with joyful eye behold a king,

"these gift (say cunning) bear away,
"sure engine of despotic sway;
"these charm dispense over all the ball,
"secure to rule wherever they fall.
"the love of card let sloth infuse,
"the love of money soon ensue;
"the strong desire shall never decay,
"who play to win, shall win to play;
"the breast, where love have plan his reign,
"shall burn, unquenched, with lust of gain;
"and all the charm that wit can boast,
"in dream of better luck be lose. "

thus neither innocent, nor gay,
the useless hour shall fleet away,
while time overlook the trivial strife,
and, scoff, shake the sand of life;
till the wan maid, who early bloom
the vigil of quadrille consume;
exhaust, by the pang of play,
to sloth and avarice fall a prey.
