elegy, on the death of mr. Buckingham saint JOHN, tutor of Yale college, who be drown in his passage from new-haven to Norwalk, may the 5th, 1771. 

the world now yield to night return sway;
the deep gloom lead on the solemn hour,
and call my step, beneath the moon pale ray,
to roam in sadness on the sea-beat shore.
now glide the unconstant shadow over the plain,
the broad moon swim through the break cloud,
the gleam of water brighten on the main,
and anchor navy lift their wave shroud.
deep silence reign, save on the moory ground,
the long reed rustle to the pass gale,
the noise of dash wave, and hollow sound
of rush wind that murmur through the sail.
far hence, you pleasure of a mind at ease,
the sprightly joy that rural scene can yield,
when spring, lead jocund by the soften breeze
wake the glad morn and robe the dewy field.
far be the giddy rapture of the gay,
the midnight joy licentious youth can share,
while ruin, smile over her destine prey,
in sweet allurement hide her deadly snare.
i be the music of the roll wave,
the moonlight shadow and surround gloom,
i the dread haunt of contemplation grave,
that lift the soul to scene beyond the tomb.
here while deep midnight hold her silent reign,
and fancy bear the ravish thought along,
dark melancholy spread she airy train,
and friendship call and grief inspire the song.
as through these mournful gloom i stretch my sight,
mid sound of death that bid the soul attend,
amid empty form and fleet shape of night,
slow i view a whiterobed shade ascend.
that say, "i once be saint John! from the bound
of unknown realm beneath the dreary wave,
where ever-restless flood in nightly round,
roll their dark surge over my watery grave.
from seat which, near to mortal sight display,
the gate of vast eternity surround,
in night conceal and death impervious shade,
my voice ascend! attend the warn sound.
oh, thou attend! who flush with early bloom,
in life new spring and vernal sweetness gay,
mindless of fate, that must thy branch entomb,
spread thy green blossom to the morning ray.
with thou how late, how like alas, to thou,
to mortal joy by open youth beguile,
i stretch my airy wish, and follow free,
where pleasure triumph and where fancy smile.
then while fond hope her glitter pinion spread,
point to clime beyond the distant wave,
even then unnoticed over my destine head
hang death dire form and seal i for the grave.
how vain the thought for many a joyous morn,
to taste of rapture unallayed by woe!
at once from life and every pleasure tear,
from all i wish and all i love below.
the faithless morning, on our open sail,
smile out serene and smooth our glide way,
while the gay vessel, fan by breathe gale,
play on the placid bosom of the sea.
when lo, descend on the darken wind,
burst the dire storm — and feeble to sustain
the rush blast in war fury join,
the frail skiff sink beneath the surge main.
and see, afar the oarless boat convey
the tremble sailor to the distant shore;
alone, of aid bereave, with one last gaze,
i sink in deep and sink to rise no more.
in that sad hour, what fearful scene arise,
what pang distress, what unknown fear dismay,
when future world disclose on our eye,
the tremble soul forsake her kindred clay!
before the awful bar, the almighty throne,
in dread, i have stand the eternal judge to see,
and fix in bliss, or doom to endless moan,
have hear the long, the unreversed decree:
nor earth must know the rest" — where be thou now,
in youthful joy my partner and my friend,
of those bless hour thy fortune give below,
of all our hope be this the fatal end?
oh what avail that energy of mind,
for distant realm of science to explore,
that early lead where genius unconfined
spread her glad feast and open her clasic store?
ah what avail, amid earthly hope so frail,
the same gay-dawning on thy rise year?
ah what avail (for what can then avail?)
thy friend deep sorrow, or thy country tear?
in pleasure path, where vivid fancy lead,
amid every hope that bloom worth can raise,
the wing of death, with fatal horror spread,
blank the bright promise of thy future day.
so from the lower west the darken cloud
rush on the sun and dim his orient ray,
and hateful night in gloom untimely shroud
the ascend glory of the vernal day.
adieu, my friend, so dear in vain, adieu,
till some short day their fleet course roll,
soon shall our step thy early fate pursue,
move in the race and crowd to the goal.
the approach hour shall see the sun no more
wheel his long course, or spread his golden ray;
soon shall the dream of mortal life be over,
the brightness dawn of celestial day.
then join in bliss, as once in friendship join,
may pity heaven our pure spirit raise,
each crime atone, each virtue well refine,
to pass a bless eternity of praise.
