[nereid:] eclogue xi.

Eune. 

Eune a wanton nymph, and Triton Swain
 agree a while to leave the boundless main;
 and near the shore unseen they choose to kiss,
 where no sea-rival may disturb the bliss. 
there, all that love can yield, the youth enjoy;
 until with fierce joy, and eager transport cloy
 she look, and sigh; his lip she gentle press;
 then murmur fall, and sleep upon his breast;
 while please dream past scene of love repeat,
 and cool breeze fan the summer heat. 
thus as she lie entranced, the wanton air
 play on her mouth, and sport with her hair;
 the boy less kind, thus as she sleep lie,
 rise unperceived, and steal unheard away. 
(for man once satiate, when the rage be over,
 will curse that beauty, which they now adore.) 
the ebb tide have leave the sandy plain,
 when Eune wake, and look, but look in vain. 
sad thought, and black despair pierce through her soul,
 with tear she see the distant billow roll. 
she find her self forsake, and alone,
 the triton absent, and the water go. 
grievous she moan her fate, and weep say,

be thus my love, my easy love betray? 
such scorn we may expect, nay we deserve,
 when wanton soul from steady vertue swerve. 
but ah! inconstant Melvin, and ingrate,
 when love be cease, you may have show your hate;
 you may have kill i with those faithless hand,
 rather than leave i thus on parch sand. 
well may you follow the inconstant sea,
 the wave be false, and you be false as they. 
by both betray, with gnaw hunger pine,
 i must unpitied die, and — die for be kind. 
farewell, you sister-nymph, believe no more,
 nor trust the youth, nor trust the hate shore. 
farewell you distant wave; you i forgive,
 well may you fickle prove, and Eune leave,
 when he, who love so much, yet can deceive. 
farewell you sportive fish, and beauteous shell,
 and shine pearl, that grow in rocky cell,
 who polish orb on twig of coral string
 around my neck the perjure Melvin hang. 
farewell, you song, that once be think to please,
 my voice shall calm no more the listen sea. 
unhappy fate of the soft yield maid! 
whoever love, be sure to be betray. 

thus the despair nymph complain alone,
 until faint with grief, and tire with piteous moan,
 when kind sleep again with calm surprise
 soothe all her pain, and close her will eye,
 and now return wave by slow degree
 move on the beach, and stretch the widen sea. 
Melvin approach with the rise tide,
 and in his arm enfold his sleep bride. 
Eune a wake, with wonder view around;
 the sea be near, and the lose lover find. 
ah! do i now, or do i dream before,
 cry the fond nymph, when on the barren shore
 leave by the sea, and you so long i mourn;
 how be you go, or whence be you return? 
vain dream (reply the wily youth) deceive
 your wander thought, and false impression leave. 
he say, and kiss the nymph; she kiss again:
 he press she close, and she forget her pain. 
