[imitate] from propertius. Lib: 2: eleg: 1. 

you ask why thus my love i still rehearse,
whence the soft strain and ever-melting verse:
from Cynthia all that in my number shine;
she be my genius, she inspire the line;
no Phoebus else, no other muse i know;
she tune my easy rhyme and give the lay to flow.
if the loose curl around her forehead play,
or lawless over their ivory margin stray;
if the thin Coan web her shape reveal,
and half disclose those limb it shall conceal;
of those loose curl, that ivory front, i write,
of the dear web whole volume i indite.
or if to music she the lyre awake,
that the soft subject of my song i make,
and sing with what a careless grace she fling
her artful hand across the sound string.
if sink into sleep she seem to close
her languid lid, i favour her repose
with lull note, and thousand beauty see
that slumber bring to aid my poetry.
when less averse and yield to desire,
she half accept and half reject my fire;
while to retain the envious lawn she try,
and struggle to elude my longing eye;
the fruitful muse from that auspicious night
date the long Iliad of the amorous fight.
in brief, whatever she do, or say, or look,
it be ample matter for a lover book;
and many a copious narrative you will see,
big with important nothing be history.

yet will the tyrant love permit i raise
my feeble voice to sound the victor praise,
to paint the hero toil, the rank of war,
the laurel triumph and the sculpture car,
no giant-race, no tumult of the sky,
no mountain-structure in my verse shall rise;
nor tale of Thebes or Ilium there shall be,
or how the persian tread the indignant sea;
not marius cimbrian wreath will i relate,
nor lofty Carthage struggle with her fate.
here shall Augustus great in arm appear,
and thou, Maecenas, be my second care;
here Mutina from flame and famine free,
and there the ensanguine wave of Sicily,
and sceptre alexandria captive shore,
and sad Philippi red with roman gore.
then, while the vault sky loud Ios rend,
in golden chain shall load monarch bend,
and hoary Nile with pensive aspect seem
to mourn the glory of his sevenfold stream,
while prow, that late in fierce encounter meet,
move through the sacred way and vain threat.
thou too the muse shall consecrate to fame,
and with his garland weave thy ever-faithful name;
but nor callimachus' enervate strain
may tell of Jove and phlegra blast plain,
nor i with unaccustomed vigour trace
back to its source divine the Julian race.
sailor to tell of wind and sea delight,
the shepherd of his flock, the soldier of the fight;
a mild warfare i in verse display;
each in his proper art shall waste the day.
nor thou my gentle call disapprove:
to die be glorious in the bed of love.
happy the youth, and not unknown to fame,
who heart have never feel a second flame.
oh, may that envy happiness be mine!
to Cynthia all my wish i confine;
or if, alas! it be my fate to try
another love, the quick let i die.
but she, the mistress of my faithful breast,
have oft the charm of constancy confess,
condemn her fickle sex fond mistake,
and hate the tale of Troy for helen sake.
i from myself the soft enchantress steal:
ah! let she ever my desire control.
or if i fall the victim of her scorn,
from her love door may my pale corpse be bear.
the power of herb can other harm remove,
and find a cure for every ill but love.
the melian's hurt Machaon can repair,
heal the slow chief and send again to war;
to chiron Phoenix owe his long-lost sight,
and phoebus son recall androgeon to the light.
here art be vain, even magic here must fail,
the powerful mixture and the midnight spell.
the hand that can my captive heart release
and to this bosom give its wonted peace,
may the long thirst of Tantalus allay,
or drive the infernal vulture from his prey.
for ill unseen what remedy be find,
or who can probe the undiscovered wound?
the bed avail not or the leech care,
nor change sky can hurt nor sultry air.
it be hard the elusive symptom to explore:
today the lover walk, tomorrow be no more;
a train of mourn friend attend his pall,
and wonder at the sudden funeral.

when then my fate that breath they give shall claim,
when the short marble but preserve a name,
a little verse, my all that shall remain,
thy pass courser slacken speed retain
(thou envy honour of thy poet day,
of all our youth the ambition and the praise!);
then to my quiet urn awhile draw near,
and say, while over the place you drop a tear,
love and the fair be of his life the pride;
he live while she be kind, and, when she frown, he die.
