LONDON:

a poem, in imitation of the third satire of Juvenal. 

by mr. SAMUEL Johnson.

though grief and fondness in my breast rebel,
when injure Thales bid the town farewell,
yet still my calm thought his choice commend,
i praise the hermit, but regret the friend;
who now resolve, from vice and LONDON far,
to breathe in distant field a pure air,
and, fix on cambria solitary shore,
give to saint David one true briton more.

for who will leave, unbribed, hibernia land,
or change the rock of Scotland for the strand?
there none be sweep by sudden fate away,
but all who hunger spare, with age decay:
here malice, rapine, accident, conspire,
and now a rabble rage, now a fire;
their ambush here relentless ruffian lie,
and here the fell attorney prowl for prey;
here fall house thunder on your head,
and here a female atheist talk you dead.

while Thales wait the wherry that contain
of dissipate wealth the small remains,
on thames bank in silent thought we stand,
where Greenwich smile upon the silver flood.
strike with the seat that give Eliza birth,
we kneel, and kiss the consecrate earth;
in please dream the blissful age renew,
and call britannia glory back to view;
behold she cross triumphant on the main,
the guard of commerce, and the dread of Spain.
ere masquerade debauch, excise oppress,
or english honour grow a stand jest.

a transient calm the happy scene bestow,
and for a moment lull the sense of woe.
at length awake with contemptuous frown,
indignant Thales eye the neighbour town.

since worth, he cry, in these degenerate day
want even the cheap reward of empty praise;
in those curse wall, devote to vice and gain,
since unrewarded science toil in vain;
since hope but sooth to double my distress,
and every moment leave my little less;
while yet my steady step no staff sustain,
and life still vigorous revel in my vein;
grant i, kind heaven, to find some happy place,
where honesty and sense be no disgrace;
some please bank where verdant offer play,
some peaceful vale with nature painting gay;
where once the harrass briton find repose,
and safe in poverty defy his foe;
some secret cell, you power, indulgent give:
 let — live here, for — have learn to live.
here let those reign, who pension can incite
to vote a patriot black, a courtier white;
explain their country dear-bought right away,
and plead for pirate in the face of day;
with slavish tenet taint our poison youth,
and lend a lie the confidence of truth.

let such raise palace, and manor buy,
collect a tax, or farm a lottery,
with warble eunuch fill a licence stage,
and lull to servitude a thoughtless age.

hero, proceed! what bound your pride shall hold?
what check restrain your thirst of power and gold?
behold rebellious virtue quite overthrow,
behold our fame, our wealth, our life your own.
to such, a groan nation spoil be give,
when public crime inflame the wrath of heaven:
 but what, my friend, what hope remain for i,
who start at theft, and blush at perjury?
who scarce forbear, though britain court he sing,
to pluck a title poet borrow wing;
a statesman logic unconvinced can hear,
and dare to slumber over the gazetteer;
despise a fool in half his pension dress,
and strive in vain to laugh at H—Y'S jest.

other with soft smile, and subtle art,
can sap the principle, or taint the heart;
with more address a lover note convey,
or bribe a virgin innocence away.
well may they rise, while i, who rustic tongue
never know to puzzle right, or varnish wrong,
spurn as a beggar, dread as a spy,
live unregarded, unlamented die,

for what but social guilt the friend endear?
who share orgilio crime, his fortune share:
 but thou, shall tempt villainy present,
all marlb'rough hoard, or all Villiers spend,
turn from the glitter bribe thy scornful eye,
nor sell for gold, what gold can never buy,
the peaceful slumber, self-approving day,
unsullied fame, and conscience ever gay.

the cheat nation happy favourite see;
mark who the great caress, who frown on i.
LONDON! the needy villain general home,
the common sewer of Paris and of Rome,
with eager thirst, by folly or by fate,
suck in the dregs of each corrupt state.
forgive my transport on a theme like this,
 i can bear a french metropolis.

illustrious EDWARD! from the realm of day,
the land of hero and of saint survey;
nor hope the british lineament to trace,
the rustic grandeur, or the surly grace,
but lose in thoughtless ease, and empty show,
behold the warrior dwindle to a beau;
sense, freedom, piety, refine away,
of France the mimic, and of Spain the prey.

all that at home no more can beg or steal,
or like a gibbet better than a wheel;
hiss from the stage, or hoot from the court,
their air, their dress, their politics import;
 obsequious, artful, voluble and gay,
on britain fond credulity they prey.
no gainful trade their industry can escape,
 they sing, they dance, clean shoe, or cure a clap;
all science a fast monsieur know,
and bid he go to hell, to hell he go.

ah! what avail it, that, from slavery far,
i draw the breath of life in english air;
be early teach a briton right to prize,
and lisp the tale of Henry victory;
if the gull conqueror receive the chain,
and flattery subdue when arm be vain?

studious to please, and ready to submit,
the supple Gaul be bear a parasite:
still to his interest true, wherever he go,
wit, bravery, worth, his lavish tongue bestow;
in every face a thousand grace shine,
from every tongue flow harmony divine.
these art in vain our rugged native try,
strain out with falter diffidence a lie,
and gain a kick for awkward flattery.

beside, with justice this discern age
admire their wondrous talent for the stage:
 well may they venture on the mimic art,
who play from morn to night a borrow part;
practise their master notion to embrace,
repeat his maxim, and reflect his face;
with every wild absurdity comply,
and view each object with another eye;
to shake with laughter ere the jest they hear,
to pour at will the counterfeit tear,
and as their patron hint the cold or heat,
to shake in dog-day, in December sweat.
how, when competitor like these contend,
can surly virtue hope to fix a friend?
slave that with serious impudence beguile,
and lie without a blush, without a smile;
exalt each trifle, every vice adore,
your taste in snuff, your judgement in a whore;
can balbo eloquence applaud, and swear
he grope his breech with a monarch air.

for art like these prefer, admire, caress,
they first invade your table, then your breast;
 explore your secret with insidious art,
watch the weak hour, and ransack all the heart;
then soon your ill-placed confidence repay,
commence your lord, and govern or betray.

by number here from shame or censure free,
all crime be safe, but hate poverty.
this, only this, the rigid law pursue,
this, only this, provoke the snarl muse.
the sober trader at a tatter cloak,
wake from his dream, and labour for a joke;
with brisk air the silken courtier gaze,
and turn the vary taunt a thousand way.
of all the grief that harrass the distress;
sure the most bitter be a scornful jest;
fate never wound more deep the generous heart,
than when a blockhead insult point the dart.

have heaven reserve, in pity to the poor,
no pathless waste or undiscovered shore?
no secret island in the boundless main?
no peaceful desert yet unclaimed by Spain?
quick let we rise, the happy seat explore,
and bear oppression insolence no more.

this mournful truth be every where confess,
 slow rise worth, by poverty depress:
but here more slow, where all be slave to gold,
where look be merchandise, and smile be sell;
where win by bribe, by flattery implore,
the groom retail the favour of his lord.

but hark! the affright crowd tumultuous cry
roll through the street and thunder to the sky:
raise from some please dream of wealth and power,
some pompous palace or some blissful bower,
aghast you start, and scarce with ache sight
sustain the approach fire tremendous light;
swift from pursue horror take your way,
and leave your little all to flame a prey;
 then through the world a wretched vagrant roam,
for where can starve merit find a home?
in vain your mournful narrative disclose,
while all neglect, and most insult your woe.

shall heaven just bolt orgilio wealth confound,
and spread his flame palace on the ground,
swift over the land the dismal rumour fly,
and public mourning pacify the sky;
the laureate tribe in servile verse relate,
how virtue war with persecute fate;
 with well-feigned gratitude the pension band
refund the plunder of the beggare land.
see! while he build, the gaudy vassal come,
and crowd with sudden wealth the rise dome;
the price of borough and of soul restore;
and raise his treasure high than before.
now bless with all the bauble of the great,
the polish marble, and the shine plate,
 orgilio see the golden pile aspire,
and hope from angry heaven another fire.

can thou resign the park and play content,
for the fair bank of Severn or of Trent;
there may thou find some elegant retreat,
some hireling senator desert seat;
and stretch thy prospect over the smile land,
for less than rent the dungeon of the strand;
there prune thy walk, support thy droop flower,
direct thy rivulet, and twine thy bower;
and, while thy bed a cheap repast afford,
despise the dainty of a venal lord.
there every bush with nature music ring,
there every breeze bear health upon its wing;
on all thy hour security shall smile,
and bless thy evening walk and morning toil.

prepare for death, if here at night you roam,
and sign your will before you sup from home.

some fiery fop, with new commission vain,
who sleep on bramble till he kill his man;
some frolick drunkard, reel from a feast,
provoke a broil, and stab you for a jest

yet even these hero, mischievous gay,
lord of the street, and terror of the way;
flush as they be with folly, youth and wine,
their prudent insult to the poor confine;
afar they mark the flambeau bright approach,
and shun the shine train, and golden coach.

in vain these danger past, your door you close,
and hope the balmy blessing of repose:
cruel with guilt and dare with despair,
the midnight murderer burst the faithless bar;
invade the sacred hour of silent rest,
and plant, unseen, a dagger in your breast.

scarce can our field, such crowd at Tyburn die,
with hemp the gallows and the fleet supply.
propose your scheme, you senatorian band,
who way and mean support the sink land;
lest rope be want in the tempt spring,
to rig another convoy for the k—g.

a single jail, in alfred golden reign,
can half the nation criminal contain;
fair justice then, without constraint adore,
hold high the steady scale, but deep the sword;
no spy be pay, no special jury know,
bless age! but ah! how different from our own!

much can i add, but see the boat at hand,
the tide retire call i from the land:
 farewell! — when youth, and health, and fortune spend,
thou fly for refuge to the wild of Kent;
and tire like i with folly and with crime,
in angry number warn succeed time;
then shall thy friend, nor thou refuse his aid,
still foe to vice, forsake his cambrian shade;
in virtue cause once more exert his rage,
thy satire point, and animate thy page.
