a ode, etc. 

i 

how long, delude Albion, will thou lie
 in the lethargic sleep, the sad repose,
 by which thy close, thy constant enemy,
 have soft lull thou to thy woe? 
or wake, degenerate isle, or cease to own
 what thy old king in Gallic camp have do;
 the spoil they bring thou back, the crown they win. 
WILLIAM, (so fate require) again be arm;
 thy father to the field be go:
 again Maria weep her absent lord;
 for thy repose content to rule alone. 
be thy enervate son not yet alarm? 
when WILLIAM fight, dare they look tame on,
 so slow to get their ancient fame restore,
 as nor to melt at beauty tear, nor follow valour sword? 

ii.

see the repent isle awake,
 her vicious chain the generous goddess break:
 the fog around her temple be dispel;
 abroad she look, and see arm belgia stand
 prepare to meet their common lord command;
 her lion roar by her side, her arrow in her hand;
 and blush to have be so long withhold,
 weep off her crime, and hasten to the field:
 henceforth her youth shall be inure to bear
 hazardous toil and active war:
 to march beneath the dog-star rage heat,
 patient of summer drought, and martial sweat. 
and only grieve in winter camp to find,
 its day too short for labour they design:
 all night beneath hard heavy arm to watch;
 all day to mount the trench, to storm the breach;
 and all the rugged path to tread,
 where WILLIAM and his virtue lead. 

iii.

silence be the soul of war;
 deliberate counsel must prepare
 the mighty work, which valour must complete:
 thus WILLIAM rescue, thus preserve the state;
 thus teach we to think and dare;
 as while his cannon just prepare to breath
 avenge anger and swift death,
 in the try mettle the close danger glow,
 and now too late the die foe
 perceive the flame, yet can ward the blow;
 so while in william breast ripe counsel lie,
 secret and sure as brood fate,
 no more of his design appear
 than what awaken gallia fear;
 and (though guilt eye can sharp penetrate)
 distract Lewis can descry
 only a long unmeasured ruin nigh. 

iv.

on norman coast and bank of fright Seine,
 lo! the impend storm begin:
 Britannia safe through her master sea
 Plows up her victorious way. 
the french Salmoneus throw his bolt in vain,
 while the true thunderer assert the main:
 it be do! to shelf and rock his fleet retire,
 swift victory in vengeful flame
 burns down the pride of their presumptuous name:
 they run to shipwreck to avoid our fire,
 and the tear vessel that regain their coast
 be but sad mark to show the rest be lose:
 all this the mild, the beauteous, queen have do,
 and william soft half shake lewis' throne:
 Maria do the sea command
 while Gallia fly her husband arm by land,
 so, the sun absent, with full sway, the moon
 govern the isle, and rule the wave alone;
 so iuno thunder when her Iove be go. 
iö Britannia! loose thy ocean chain
 while Russell strike the blow thy queen ordain:
 thus rescue, thus revere, for ever stand,
 and bless the counsel, and reward the hand,
 iö Britannia! thy Maria reign. 

v. 

from mary conquest, and the rescue main,
 let France look forth to sambre arm shore,
 and boast her joy for william death no more. 
he live, let France confess, the victor live:
 her triumph for his death be vain,
 and speak her terror of his life too plain. 
the mighty year begin, the day draw nigh,
 in which that one of lewis many wife,
 who by the baleful force of guilty charm,
 have long enthraul he in her wither arm,
 shall over the plain from distant tower on high
 cast around her mournful eye,
 and with prophetic sorrow cry:
 why do my ruin lord retard his flight? 
why do despair provoke his age to fight? 
as well the wolf may venture to engage
 the angry Lyons generous rage;
 the ravenous Vultur, and the bird of night,
 as safe tempt the stoop eagle flight,
 as Lewis to unequal arm defy
 yonder hero, crown with bloom victory
 just triumph over rebel rage restrain,
 and yet unbreathed from Battels gain. 
see! all yonder dusty field quite cover over
 with hostile troop, and orange at their head,
 orange destine to complete
 the great design of labour fate,
 orange the name that tyrant dread:
 he come, our ruin empire be no more,
 down, like the persian, go the Gallic throne,
 Darius fly, young Ammon urge on. 

vi.

now from the dubious battle mingle heat
 let fear look back, and stretch her hasty wing,
 impatient to secure a base retreat:
 let the pale coward leave his wound king,
 for the vile privilege to breath,
 to live with shame in dread of glorious death. 
in vain: for fate have swift wing than fear,
 she follow hard, and strike he in the rear,
 die and mad the traitor bite the ground,
 his back transfix with a dishonest wound;
 while through the fierce troop, and thick press,
 virtue carry on success;
 while equal heaven guard the distinguish brave,
 and army can hurt who angel save. 

vii.

virtue to verse immortal lustre give,
 each by the other mutual friendship live;
 Aeneas suffer, and Achilles fight,
 the hero act enlarge the poet think,
 or virgil majesty, and Homer rage
 have never like last nature vanquish age;
 while Lewis then his rise terror drown
 with drum alarm and trumpet sound,
 while hide in arm retreat and guard town,
 from danger as from honour far,
 he bribe close murder against open war:
 in vain you Gallic muse strive
 with labour verse to keep his fame alive,
 your moulder monument in vain you raise
 on the weak basis of the tyrant praise:
 your song be sell, your number be profane,
 it be incense to a idol give,
 meat offer to prometheus man,
 that have no soul from heaven. 
against his will you chain your fright king
 on rapid rhine divide bed;
 and mock your hero, while you sing
 the wound for which he never bleed;
 falsehood do poison on your praise defuse,
 and lewis fear give death to boileau muse. 

viii.

on it be own worth true majesty be rear,
 and virtue be her own reward,
 with solid beam and native glory bright,
 she neither darkness dread, nor covet light;
 true to her self, and fix to inborn law,
 nor sink by spite, nor lift by applause,
 she from her settle orb look calm down,
 on life or death, a prison or a crown. 
when bind in double chain poor belgia lie
 to foreign arm, and inward strife a prey,
 while one good man buoy up her sink state,
 and virtue labour against fate;
 when fortune base with ambition join,
 and all be conquer but the patriot mind,
 when storm let loose, and rage sea
 just ready the tear vessel to overwhelm,
 force not the faithful pilot from his helm,
 nor all the siren song of future peace,
 and dazzle prospect of a promise crown,
 can lure his stubborn virtue down;
 but against charm, and threat, and hell, he stand,
 to that which be severe good;
 then, have no trophy justify his fame,
 no poet bless his song with nassaw name,
 virtue alone do all that honour bring,
 and heaven as plain point out the king,
 as when he at the altar stand
 in all his type and robe of power,
 while at his foot religious Britain bow,
 and own he next to what we there adore. 

ix.

say joyful maese, and boin victorious flood,
 (for each have mix his wave with royal blood)
 when william army past, do he retire,
 or view from far the battle distant fire? 
can he believe his person be too dear? 
or use his greatness to conceal his fear? 
can prayer or sigh the dauntless hero move? 
arm with heaven justice, and his people love,
 through the first wave he winge his venturous way,
 and on the adverse shore arise,
 (ten thousand fly death in vain oppose)
 like the great ruler of the day,
 with strength and swiftness mount from the sea:
 like he all day he toil, but long in night
 the god have ease his weary light,
 before vengeance leave the stubborn foe,
 or william labour find repose. 
when his troop falter, step not he between,
 restore the dubious fight again,
 mark out the coward that dare fly,
 and lead the faint brave to victory? 
still as she flee he, do he not overtake,
 her doubtful course, still bring her bleed back? 
by his keen sword do not the bold fall? 
be he not king, commander, soldier, all —? 
his danger such, as with become dread,
 his subject yet unborn shall weep to read;
 and be not those the only day that ere
 the pious prince refuse to hear
 his friend advice, or his subject prayer. 

x. 

where ever old Rhine his fruitful water turn,
 or fill his vassal tributary urn;
 to belgia save dominion, and the sea,
 who right wave rejoice in william sway. 
be there a town where child be not teach,
 here holland prosper, for here orange fight,
 through rapid water, and through fly fire:
 here rush the prince, here make whole France retire. —
 by different nation be this valour bless,
 in different language confess,
 and then let Shannon speak the rest:
 let Shannon speak, how on her wonder shore,
 when conquest hover on his arm do wait,
 and only ask some live to bribe she over. 
the god-like man, the more than conqueror,
 with high contempt send back the specious bait,
 and scorn glory at a price too great,
 with so much power such piety do join,
 as make a perfect virtue soar
 a pitch unknown to man before,
 and lift shannon wave over those of Boyne. 

xi.

nor do his subject only share
 the prosperous fruit of his indulgent reign;
 his enemy approve the pious war,
 which, with their weapon, take away their chain:
 more than his sword, his goodness strike his foe;
 they bless his arm, and sigh they must oppose. 
justice and freedom on his conquest wait,
 and it be for man delight that he be great:
 succeed time shall with long joy contend,
 if he be more a victor, or a friend:
 so much his courage and his mercy strive,
 he wound, to cure; and conquer, to forgive. 

xii.

you hero, that have fight your country cause,
 redress her injury, or form her law,
 to my adventurous song just witness bear,
 assist the pious muse, and hear her swear,
 that it be not poet thought, no flight of youth,
 but solid story, and severe truth,
 that WILLIAM treasure up a great name,
 than any country, any age, can boast:
 and all that ancient stock of fame
 he do from his forefather take,
 he have improve, and give with interest back;
 and in his constellation do unite
 their scatter ray of faint light:
 above or envy lash, or fortune wheel,
 that settle glory shall for ever dwell
 above the roll orb, and common sky,
 where nothing come that ever shall die. 

xiii.

where rove the muse? where thoughtless to return
 be her short live vessel bear,
 by potent wind too subject to be toss? 
and in the sea of william praise lose? 
nor let she tempt that deep, nor make the shore
 where our abandon youth she see
 shipwreck in luxury, and lose in ease;
 who nor britannia danger can alarm,
 nor william exemplary virtue warm:
 tell they however the king can yet forgive
 their guilty sloth, their homage yet receive,
 and let their wound honour live:
 but sure and sudden be their just remorse;
 swift be their virtue rise, and strong its course;
 for though for certain year and destine time,
 merit have lie confuse with crime;
 though Iove seem negligent of human care,
 nor scourge our folly, nor return our prayer. 
his justice now demand the equal scale,
 sedition be suppress, and truth prevail:
 fate it be great end by slow degree attain,
 and Europe be redeem, and WILLIAM reign. 
