Roxana to usbeck.

from les lettres PERSANNES.

by the same.

think not i write my innocence to prove,
to sue for pity, or awake thy love:
no mean defence expect, or abject prayer;
thou know no mercy, and i know no tear:
i laugh at all thy vengeance have decree,
avow the fact, and glory in the deed.

yes, tyrant! i deceive thy spy and thou:
please in oppression, and in bondage free:
the rigid agent of thy cruel law
by gold i win to aid my juster cause:
with dextrous skill elude all thy care,
and act more than jealousy can fear:
to wanton bower this prisonhouse i turn,
and bless that absence which you think i mourn.
but short those joy allow by niggard fate,
yet so refine, so exquisite great,
that their excess compensate their date.

i die: already in each burn vein
i feel the poisonous draught, and bless the pain:
for what be life unless its joy we prove?
and where be joy, deprive of what we love?

yet, ere i die, this justice i have pay
to my dear murder lover injure shade:
those sacrilegious instrument of power,
who wrought that ruin these sad eye deplore,
already with their blood their crime atone,
and for his life have sacrifice their own.

thou, though restraint and absence may defend
from my revenge, my curse still attend:
despair like i, barbarian! be thy part,
remorse afflict, and sorrow sting thy heart.

nor think this hate commence in my breast,
though prudence long its latent force suppress;
i know those wrong that i be force to bear,
and curse those chain injustice make i wear.

for can thou hope Roxana to deceive
with idle tale, which only fool believe?
poor abject soul in superstition breed,
in ignorance train, by prejudice mislead;
who hireling dervish by proxy teach
from those who false prerogative they preach.
do thou imagine i so weak of mind,
because i murmur not, i never repine,
but hug my chain, and think my jailor kind?
that will those law i ever obey,
which pride invent, and oppression make?
and while self-licensed through the world you rove,
to quicken appetite by change in love;
each passion sate, and each wish possess
that lust can urge, or fancy can suggest:
that i shall mourn thy loss with fond regret,
weep the misfortune, and the wrong forget?

can i believe that heaven this beauty give,
(thy transient pleasure, and thy last slave;)
endue with reason, only to fulfil
the harsh command of thy capricious will?
no, usbeck, no, my soul disdain those law;
and though i want power to assert my cause,
my right i know; and still those pleasure seek,
which justice warrant, and nature teach:
on custom senseless precept i refine,
i weigh what heaven, i know what man design,
and form by her own rule my free-born mind.

thus while this wretched body own thy power,
doom, unredressed, its hardship to deplore;
my soul subservient to herself alone,
and reason independent on her throne,
contemn thy dictate, and obey their own.
yet thus far to my conduct thanks be due,
at least i condescend to seem true;
endeavour still my sentiment to hide,
indulge thy vanity, and soothe thy pride.
though this submission to a tyrant pay,
who not my duty, but my fear obey,
if right weigh, will more deserve thy blame,
who call it virtue, but profane her name:
for to the world i shall have own that love,
which all impartial judge must approve:
you urge a right to tyrannize my heart,
which he solicit, assail by art,
while i, impatient of the name of slave,
to force refuse, what i to merit give.

oft, as thy slave this wretched body lead
to the detest pleasure of thy bed;
in those soft moment, consecrate to joy,
which ecstasy and transport shall employ;
clasp in your arm, you wonder still to find
so cold my kiss, so compose my mind:
but have thy cheat eye discern aright,
you will find aversion, where you seek delight.

not that my soul incapable of love,
no charm can warm, no tenderness can move;
for he, who love my every thought possess,
a fierce passion fill this constant breast,
than truth ever feel, or falsehood ever possess,

this stile unusual to thy pride appear,
for truth be a stranger to the tyrant ear;
but what have i to manage or to dread?
nor threat alarm, nor insult hurt the dead:
no wrong they feel, no misery they find;
care be the legacy we leave behind:
in the calm grave no usbeck we deplore,
no tyrant husband, no oppressive power.
alas! i faint — death intercept the rest:
the venom drug be busy in my breast:
each nerve unstring: a mist obscure the day:
my sense, strength, and even my hate decay:
though rage awhile the ebb spirit stay,
it be past — they sink beneath the transient aid.
take then, inhuman wretch! my last farewell;
pain be thy portion here, hereafter, hell:
and when our prophet shall my fate decree,
be any curse my punishment, but thou.
