petherton-bridge.

a elegy. inscribe to the reverend mr. Bean, of stoke-sub-hamdon, somerset.

by the same.

o Bean! who fond connubial day
 a beauteous infant-race attend;
 say, will thou once more aid my lay,
 and join the patron to the friend? 

but not over bright aonian plain,
 enrapture as we use to roam:
 the muse each joyous thought restrain,
 and call her winge idea home. 

the wed pair for child pray;
 they come — fair blessing from the sky:
 what rapture gild the haleyon day! 
what joy in distant azure rise! 

but ah! enamour as they view
 the smile, hopeful, infant-train,
 unseen, misfortune mark his due,
 unheard, he threat the heart with pain. 

have sad disaster never ensnare
 the soft, the innocent, and young,
 the tender muse have glad spare
 the little hero of her song. 

see thou the limpid current glide
 beneath yond bridge, my hapless theme,
 where bramble fringe its verdant side,
 and willow tremble over the stream? 

from petherton it take its name,
 from whence two smile infant stray:
 lead by the stream they hither come,
 and on the flowery margin play. 

sweet victim! must your short-lived day
 so soon extinguish in the wave;
 and point the set sun his way,
 that glimmer over your watery grave! 

as each by childish fancy lead,
 crop the broad daisy as they spring;
 lay stretch along the verdant bed,
 and sweet ply the lisp tongue;

lo! from the spray-deserted steep,
 where either way the twig divide,
 the one roll headlong to the deep,
 and plunge beneath the close tide. 

the other see, and from the land,
 (while nature image strange distress)
 stretch over the brink his little hand,
 the fruitless signal of redress. 

the offer pledge, without delay,
 the struggle victim rise and catch;
 but ah! in vain — their fatal way,
 they both descend swift as thought. 

short be the wave-oppressing space;
 convulse with pain too sharp to bear,
 their life dissolve in one embrace;
 their mingle soul fly up in air. 

lo! there yond time-worn sculpture show
 the sad, the melancholy truth;
 what pang the torture parent know,
 what snare await defenceless youth. 

here, not to sympathy unknown,
 full oft the sad muse wander near,
 bend silent over the mossy stone,
 and wet it with a will tear. 
