ode on true greatness.

by the same.

let who will climb the towery steep
 of sovereignty, with slippery stride,
 where, on the bosom of the deep
 below, the pitchy pinnace ride:
 a death head flag, unfurled to view,
 wave ghastly; and a sable crew
 gaze from the deck, and seem to wait,
 dash down the point rock, the rash unfortunate. 
i be the low and level way,
 amid the quiet vale to stray,
 safe in some sylvan lodge to dwell,
 and lull by the clear stream that speed
 by shallow ford to rustle reed,
 and small lake, fringe with homely aspodel. 

there sit the calm, the rural sage,
 with nature volume fair in view;
 and meditate the shine page
 replete with wonder ever new:
 while wisdom point, on either hand,
 where plant, and herb, and flowret stand
 in emerald grove, and shadowy glade,
 in furzy moor, or musky-smelling mead. 
truth, in her liquid glass serene,
 to he explain each moral scene:
 oft, in the downward sky, a train
 of tinsel insect he survey,
 or glowworm, with fallacious blaze,
 just emblem of court greatness, frail and vain. 

oft in his woodland walk he stop to mark
 the spirit and youthful lark,
 warn by the dawn in the dapple east,
 lift his melodious flight through upper air;
 late the low tenant of the rushy nest
 now sing unrivalled in his radiant sphere. 
the ponder hermit then see merit roam,
 above the nursling of the courtly dome,
 on glory sparkle wheel, raise from its humble dome. 

first of the family of fame,
 that Rome imperial city grace,
 from rural hut and hamlet come
 the Fabian and fabrician race;
 with that firm judge that can contemn
 and banish the proud diadem. 
to Sabine field she owe the vine,
 who tendril yet round virtue column twine;
 which brave oppression wintery breath,
 and stand the icy touch of death. 
the leafless flock, that fortune doom
 to wither, with return spring
 (while the glad flock of freedom sing)
 profuse of promise sweet, with double vigour bloom. 

hark! hark! it be brutus name i hear,
 join with his fair, heroic bride;
 to honour hallow fane they steer
 along the favourable tide;
 to she and safety there to place
 the tablet, vow to human race:
 blow, every kind and gentle gale
 of gratitude, and fan the swell sail. 
high on a fleecy couch recline,
 of white and amber cloud combine,
 Rome genius lift his august head;
 now slow descend near draw,
 hail with the popular applause,
 and bid the solemn pageantry proceed. 

go, the triumphal ornament display;
 you sacred salii lead the way:
 next lead the order of patrician blood,
 in awful march a numerous train compose,
 and follow by the jubilate crowd;
 as Cybelé through phrygian city go,
 majestic, and with golden turret crown:
 a hundred god her gorgeous car surround,
 a thousand tongue acclaim; the clang cymbal sound. 
