death:

by CHARLES Emily, ESQ.

i 

the festive roar of laughter, the warm glow
 of brisk-eyed joy, and friendship genial bowl. 
wit season converse, and the liberal flow
 of unsuspicious youth, profuse of soul,
 delight not ever; from the boisterous scene
 of riot far, and comus wild uproar,
 from folly crowd, who vacant brow serene
 be never knit to wisdom frown lore,
 permit i, you time-hallowed dome, you pile
 of rude magnificence, your solemn rest,
 amid your fret vault and lengthen isle,
 lonely to wander; no unholy guest,
 that mean to break, with sacrilegious tread,
 the marble slumber of your monumented dead. 

ii.

permit i with sad muse, that inspire
 unlaboured number apt, your silence drear
 blameless to wake, and with the orphean lyre
 fit attemper, sooth the merciless ear
 of Hades, and stern death, who iron sway
 great nature own through all her wide domain;
 all that with oary sin cleave their smooth way
 through the green bosom of the spawny main,
 and those that to the stream aether spread,
 in many a wheel glide, their feathery sail;
 and those that creep; and those that stately tread,
 that roam over forest, hill, or browse dale;
 the victim each of ruthless fate must fall;
 even God own image, man, high paramount of all. 

iii.

and you, the young, the giddy, and the gay,
 that startle from the sleepful lid of light
 the curtained rest, and with the dissonant bray
 of Bacchus, and loud jollity, affright
 yond radiant goddess, that now shoot among
 these many window isle her glimmer beam;
 know, that or ever its starred career along
 thrice shall have roll her silvery-wheeled team,
 some parent breast may heave the answer sigh,
 to the slow pause of the funeral knoll;
 even now black Atropos, with scowl eye,
 roar in the laugh, and revel over the bowl,
 even now in rosy-crowned pleasure wreath
 entwine in adder fold all-unsuspected death. 

iv

know, on the steal wing of time shall flee
 some few, some short-lived year; and all be past;
 a future bard these awful dome may see,
 Muse over the present age as i the last;
 who moulder in the grave, yet once like you;
 the various maze of life be see to tread,
 each bend their own peculiar to pursue,
 as custom urge or wilful nature lead;
 mix with the various croud inglorious clay,
 the noble virtue undistinguished lie;
 no more to melt with beauty heaven-born ray,
 no more to wet compassion tearful eye,
 catch from the poet rapture not their own,
 and feel the thrill melody of sweet renown. 

v. 

where be the master-hand, who semblant be
 chisel the marble into life, or teach
 from the well-pencilled portraiture to start
 the nerve that beat with soul, the brow that think! 
cold be the finger that in stone-sixt trance
 the mute attention rivet, to the lyre
 strike language: dim the poet quick-eyed glance. 
all in wild rapture flash heaven own fire. 
shrink be the sinew energy, that string
 the warrior arm: where sleep the patriot breast
 whilom that heave impassion! where the tongue
 that lance its lightning on the tower crest
 of sceptre insolence, and overthrow
 giant oppression, league with all her earth-born crew! 

vi.

these now be past; long, long, you fleet year,
 pursue, with glory winge, your fate way,
 ere from the womb of time unwelcome peer
 the dawn of that inevitable day,
 when wrap in shroud clay their warm friend
 the widow virtue shall again deplore,
 when over his urn in pious grief shall bend
 his Britain, and bewail one patriot more;
 for soon must thou, too soon! who spread abroad
 thy beam emanation unconfined,
 doom, like some better angel send of god
 to scatter blessing over humankind,
 thou too must fall, o Pitt! to shine no more,
 and tread these dreadful path, a Faulkland tread before. 

vii.

fast to the drive wind the marshale cloud
 sweep discontinuous over the etherial plain;
 another still upon another croud,
 all hasten downward to their native main. 
thus pass over through vary life career
 man fleet age; the season as they fly
 snatch from we in their course, year after year,
 some sweet connection, some endear tie. 
the parent, ever-honoured, ever-dear,
 claim from the filial breast the pious sigh;
 a brother urn demand the kindred tear;
 and gentle sorrow gush from friendship eye. 
today we frolick in the rosy bloom
 of jocund youth — the morrow knell we to the tomb. 

viii.

who know how soon in this sepulchral spot,
 shall heaven to i the drear abode assign! 
how soon the past irrevocable lot
 of these, that rest beneath i, shall be i. 
haply, when zephyr to thy native bourn
 shall waft thou over the storm hibernian wave,
 thy gentle breast, my Tavistock, shall mourn
 to find i sleep in the senseless grave. 
no more the social leisure to divide,
 in the sweet intercourse of soul and soul,
 blithe or of grave brow; no more to chide
 the linger year impatient as they roll,
 till all thy culture virtue shall display,
 full blossom, their bright honour to the gaze day. 

ix.

ah, dear youth! these vow perhaps unheard,
 the rude wind scatter over the billowy main;
 these prayer at friendship holy shrine prefer
 may rise to grasp their father knee in vain. 
soon, soon may nod the sad funereal plume
 with solemn horror over thy timeless hearse,
 and i survive to grave upon thy tomb
 the mournful tribute of memorial verse. —
 that leave to heaven decision — be it thy,
 high than yet a parent wish fly,
 to soar in bright preeminence, and shine
 with self-earned honour, eager to pursue,
 where glory, with her clear unsullied ray,
 the wellborn spirit light to deed of mighty praise. 

x. 

it be she thy god-like russell bosom steel
 with confidence untamed, in his last breath
 stern-smiling. she, with calm composure, hold
 the patriot axe of Sidney, edge with death. 
smite with the warmth of her impulsive flame,
 wolf gallant virtue fly to world afar,
 emulous to pluck fresh wreath of well-earned fame
 from the grim frown brow of laureled war. 
it be she, that on the morn of direful birth,
 bare thy young bosom to the fatal blow,
 lament Armytage! — the bleed youth! 
o bathe he in the pearly cave below,
 you nereid; and you nymph of Camus hoar,
 weep — for you oft have see he on your haunt shore. 

xi.

better to die with glory, than recline
 on the soft lap of ignominious peace,
 than yawn out the dull drone life supine
 in monkish apathy and gown ease. 
better employ in honour bright career
 the least division on the dial round,
 than thrice to compass Saturn live-long year,
 grow old in sloth, the burden of the ground;
 than tug with sweat toil the slavish oar
 of unredeemed affliction, and sustain
 the feverous rage of fierce disease sore
 unnumbered, that in sympathetic chain
 hang ever through the thick circumfluous air,
 all from the drizzly verge of yonder star-girt sphere. 

xii.

thick in the many-beaten road of life,
 a thousand malady be post round,
 with wretched man to wage eternal strife
 unseen, like ambush indian, till they wound. 
there the swell hydrop stand, the watery rheum,
 the northern scurvy, blotch with leprous scale;
 and mope ever in the cloister gloom
 of learned sloth, the bookish asthma pale:
 and the shun hag unsightly, that ordain
 on europe son to wreak the faithless sword
 of Cortez, with the blood of million stain,
 over dog-eyed lust the torture scourge abhor,
 shake threaten; since the while she winge her flight
 from amazon broad wave, and Andes snow-clad height. 

xiii.

where the wan daughter of the yellow year,
 the chatter ague chill, the writhe stone,
 and he of ghastly feature, on who ear
 unheeded croak the death-bird warn moan,
 marasmus; knotty gout; and the dead life
 of nerveless palsy; there on purpose fall
 dark brood, whet his interdict knife
 grim suicide, the damn fiend of hell. 
there too be the stun apoplexy pight,
 the bloat child of gorge intemperance foul;
 self-wasting melancholy, black as night
 lower, and foam fierce with hideous howl
 the dog hydrophoby, and near ally
 scar madness, with her moonstruck eye-ball stare wide. 

xiv.

there, stretch one huge, beneath the rocky mine,
 with boil sulphur fraught, and smoulder fire;
 he, the dread delegate of wrath divine,
 ever while that stand over taio hundred spire
 vindictive; thrice he wave the earth-shaking wand,
 powerful as that the son of amram bear,
 and thrice he raise, and thrice he check his hand. 
he strike the rock ground, with thunderous roar
 yawn; here from street to street hurry, and there
 now run, now stop, then shriek and scour amain,
 stare distraction: many a palace fair,
 with million sink ingulph, and pillared fane;
 old ocean farther wave confess the shock;
 even Albion tremble conscious on his steadfast rock. 

XV. 

the meager famine there, and drink with blood
 stern war; and the loathe monster, who of yore
 the slimy naiad of the memphian flood
 engender, to the bright-haired Phoebus bear,
 foul pestilence, that on the wide-stretched wing
 of commerce speed from cairo swarthy bay
 his wester flight, and through the sick air fling
 spot contagion; at his heel dismay
 and desolation urge their fire-wheeled yoke
 terrible; as long of old, when from the height
 of Paran come unwrathed the mighty, shake
 earth firm fix base totter; through the black night
 glance the flash lightning: heaven rent roof abroad
 thunder; and universal nature feel its god. 

xvi.

who on that scene of terror, on that hour
 of rouse indignation, shall withstand
 the almighty, when he meditate to shower
 the burst vengeance over a guilty land! 
can thou, secure in reason vaunt pride,
 tongue-doughty miscreant, who but now do gore. 
with more than hebrew rage the innocent side
 of agonize mercy, bleed sore,
 can thou confront, with steadfast eye unawed,
 the sworded judgement stalk far and near? 
well may thou tremble, when a injure god
 disclaim thou — guilt be ever quick of fear —
 loud whirlwind howl in zephyr soft breath;
 and every glance meteor glare imagine death. 

xvii.

the good alone be fearless — they alone
 firm and collect in their virtue, brave
 the wreck of world, and look unshrinking down
 on the dread yawn of the ravenous grave:
 thrice happy! who the blameless road along
 of honest praise have reach the vale of death;
 around he, like ministrant cherub, throng
 his better action; to the part breath
 sing their bless requiem: he the while
 gentle repose on some friendly breast,
 breathe out his benizon; then with a smile
 of soft complacence, lay he down to rest,
 calm as the slumber infant: from the goal
 free and unbounded fly the disembody soul. 

xviii.

whether some delegate charge below,
 some much-loved friend its hover care may claim,
 whether it heavenward soar, again to know
 that long-forgotten country whence it come;
 conjecture ever, the misfeatured child
 of letter arrogance, delight to run
 through speculation puzzle maze wild,
 and all to end at last where it begin. 
fain will we trace, with reason err clue,
 the darksome path of destiny aright;
 in vain; the task be easy to pursue
 the trackless wheel of the swallow flight. 
from mortal ken himself the almighty shroud
 pavilion in thick night and circumambient cloud. 
