the spirit of navigation. 

stern father of the storm! who do abide
amid the solitude of the vast deep,
for ever listen to the sullen tide,
and whirlwind that the billowy desert sweep!
thou at the distant death-shriek do rejoice;
the rule of the tempestuous main be thy,
outstretch and lone; thou utter thy voice,
like solemn thunder: these wild wave be i;
i their dread empire; nor shall man profane
the eternal secret of my ancient reign.

the voice be vain: secure, and as in scorn,
the gallant vessel scud before the wind;
her part sail swell stately to the morn;
she leave the green earth and its hill behind;
gallant before the wind she go, her prow
high bear, and dispart the blue tide
that foam and flash in its rage below;
meantime the helmsman feel a conscious pride,
and while far onward the long billow swell,
look to the lessen land, that seem to say, farewell!

father of storm! then let thy whirlwind roar
over sea of solitary amplitude;
man, the poor tenant of thy rocky shore,
man, thy terrific empire have subdue;
and though thy wave toss his high-foundered bark
where no dim watch-light gleam, still he defy
thy utmost rage, and in his buoyant ark
speed on, regardless of the darken sky;
and over the mountain-surge, as they roll,
subdue his destine way, and speed from pole to pole.

behold he now, far from his native plain,
where high wood shade some wild hesperian bay,
or green isle glitter in the southern main,
his stream ensign to the morn display!
behold he, where the north pale meteor dance,
and icy rock roll glimmer from afar,
fearless through night and solitude advance!
or where the pine son of Andamar,
when dark eclipse have wrap the labour moon,
howl to the demon of the dread monsoon!

time be, like they, poor nature shiver child,
pace the beach, and by the salt spray beat,
he watch the melancholy surge, or smile
to see it burn and bicker at his foot;
in some rude shaggy spot, by fortune place,
he dream not of strange land, and empire spread,
beyond the roll of the watery waste;
he see the sun shine on the mountain head,
but know not, while he hail the orient light,
what myriad bless his beam, or sicken at the sight.

from some dark promontory, that o'erbent
the flash wave, he hear their ceaseless roar;
or carol in his light canoe content,
as, bind from creek to creek, it graze the shore;
god of the storm the dreary space may sweep,
and shape of death, and glide spectre gaunt,
may flit, he think, over the remot deep;
and while strange voice cry, avaunt, avaunt!
uncertain light, see through the midnight gloom,
may lure he sad on to his cold watery tomb.

no city, then, amid the calm clear day,
over the blue water' undulate line,
with battlement, and fan that glitter gay,
and pier, and throng mast, be see to shine.
no cheerful sound be waft on the gale,
nor hum the shore with early industry;
but mournful bird in hollow cliff do wail,
and there all day the cormorant do cry,
while with sink eye, and mat, drip lock,
the houseless savage sleep beneath the foam-beat rock.

thus slumber long upon the dreamy verge
of instinct, see, he rouse from his trance!
faint, and as glimmer yet, the art emerge,
one after one, from darkness, and advance,
beauteous, as over the heaven the star' still way.
now see the track of his dominion wide,
fair smile as the day-spring; city gay
lift their proud head, and over the yellow tide,
while sound of fervent industry arise,
a thousand pennant float bright stream in the sky!

genius of injure Asia! once sublime
and glorious, now dim see amid the storm,
and melancholy cloud of sweep time,
who yet do half reveal thy awful form,
point, with sadden aspect and slow hand,
to vast emporium, desolate and waste;
to wreck of unknown city, sink in sand!
it be at thy voice, art, order, science, taste.
upspring, the east adorn, like the smile
of spring upon the bank of thy own swell Nile.

it be at thy voice huge enterprise awake,
that, long on rocky Aradus recline,
slumber to the hoarse surge that round she break,
and hollow pipe of the idle wind;
she hear thy voice, upon the rock she stand
gigantic, the rude scene she mark — she cry,
let there be intercourse, and the great flood
waft the rich plenty to these shore deny!
and soon thy eye delight see aspire,
crown the midland main, thy own imperial tyre.

queen of the water! who do open the gate
of commerce, and display in land unknown
thy venturous sail, even now in ancient state
methinks i see thou on thy rocky throne;
i see their massy pile thy cothon rear,
and on the deep a solemn shadow cast;
i traverse thy once echo shore, and hear
the sound of mighty generation past:
i see thy kingly merchant' throng resort,
and gold and purple gleam over all thy spacious port.

i mark thy glitter galley sweep along —
the steady rower to the stroke incline,
and chant in unison their choral song;
white through their oar the ivory bench shine;
the fine-wrought sail, which loom of Egypt weave,
swell beautiful beneath the bend mast;
hew from proud lebanon immortal grove,
the oak of Bashan brave the roar blast!
so over the western wave thy vessel float,
for verdant Egypt bind, or calpe cliff remote.

queen of the water! throne upon thy seat
amid the sea, thy beauty and thy fame
the deep, that roll low-murmuring at thy foot,
and all the multitude of isle, proclaim!
for thou Damascus pile her woolly store;
to thou their flock arabia prince bring;
and Sheba heap her spice and glitter over;
the ship of Tarshish of thy glory sing:
queen of the water! who be like to thou,
replenish in thy might, and throne on the sea!

the purple streamer fly, the trumpet sound,
the adventurous bark glide on in tranquil state;
the voyager, with leafy garland crown,
draw back their arm together, and elate
sweep over the surge; the spray far scatter fly
beneath the stroke of their unwearied oar;
to their loud shout the circle coast reply;
and now, over the deep ocean, where it roar
they fly; till slow lessen from the shore,
beneath the haze they sink — sink, and be see no more.

when night descend, and with her silver bow
the queen of heaven come forth in radiance bright,
survey the dim earth and sea below;
why from afar resound the mystic rite
hymn round her uncouth altar? virgin there
(amid the brazen cymbal hollow ring)
and age priest the solemn feast prepare;
to she their nightly orison they sing;
that she may look from her high throne, and guide
the wander bark secure along the trackless tide.

her on his nightly watch the pilot view
careful, and by her soft and tranquil light,
along the uncertain coast his track pursue;
and now he see great carmel woody height,
where nightly fire to grisly Baal burn;
round the rough cape he wind; meantime far on
thick eddy scud the hollow surf upturn;
he think of the sweet light of summer go!
he think, perhaps, dash on the rugged shore,
he never shall behold his babe' love mother more!

slow come the morn; but ah! what demon form,
while peal thunder the high concave rend,
rise more vast amid the rush storm!
with dreadful shade his horrid bulk ascend
dark to the drive cloud; beneath he roar
the deep; his trouble brow be wrap in gloom;
see, it move onward; now more huge it soar!
who shall avert the poor seafarer doom!
who now shall save he from the spectre might
that tread the rock wave in thunder and in night!

dread phantom! be thou he who fearful sway,
as egypt hoary chronicle have tell,
the cloud, the whirlwind, and the sea obey,
Typhon, of aspect hideous to behold!
oh, spare the wretched wanderer, who, lead
by flatter hope, have leave the peaceful shore!
behold, they shrink, they bend with speechless dread;
from their faint grasp drop the unheeded oar!
it answer not, but mingle sea and sky,
in cloud, and wind, and thunder, rush by.

hail to thy light, lord of the golden day,
that, burst through the sable cloud again,
do cheer the seaman solitary way,
and with new splendour deck the lucid main!
and lo! the voyage past, where many a palm,
its green top only see, the prospect bound,
fringe the sunny sea-line, clear and calm;
now hark the slowly-swelling human sound!
meantime the bark along the placid bay
of Tamiatis keep her easy-winding way.

here rest we safe from scene of peril past,
no danger lurk in this serene retreat;
no more be hear the roar of the blast,
but pastoral sound of scatter flock that bleat,
or evening herd that over the champaign low;
here citron tall and purple date around
delicious fragrance and cool shade bestow;
the shore with murmur industry resound;
while through the vernal pasture where he stray,
the Nile, as with delight, his mazy course delay.
