Caledonia, a poem, etc. 

in northern hight, where nature seldom smile,
 embrace with scas, and buttress round with isle,
 where lofty shore regard the adjacent pole,
 where wind incessant blow, and wave incessant roll;
 where tyrant cold in glacy ocean reign,
 and all the habitable world disdain,
defy the distant influence of the sun,
and shine in ice. 

first young sister to the freeze zone,
 batter by parent nature constant frown,
 adapt to hardship, and cut out for toil;
 the best worst climate, and the worst best soil. 
a rough, unhewn, uncultivated spot,
 of old so fame, and so of late forget.
neglect Scotland show her awful brow,
 not always quite so near to heaven as now.
circle with dreadful cliff and barbarous shore,
 where the strong surff with high impetuous roar,
 invade the rock, and these their rage disdain,
 and with redouble noise they be hurry home again;
 the hollow cavern mutual roar return,
 and baffle Neptune rage make the ocean burn.

the furious element in vain contend,
 unmoved the mighty natural breastwork stand.
their awful hight in threaten grandeur shine,
 emblem of mighty heart of stone within.
the instruct rock, invincible and strong,
 describe the race that to these rock belong,
 and bid the quick retreat wave declare,
 and warn the world against a northern war.
tell they the hope of conquest must be vain;
 when hand of steel shall rock of flint maintain.

these be the eternal bound of providence,
 the ocean bridle, and the land defence. 
the Warts and wrinkle place on nature brow
 that her maternal care and conduct show.
the mean part of nature have their use,
 and some to terror, some to strength conduce:
 nor be their ornament at all the less;
 for beauty best describe by usefulness. 
behind this rugged front secure lie
bless Caledonia, and with ease defy
her northern, or her southern enemy.
fix by decree, her nature not to fear
 huge navy there, or icy mountain here. 
here tower cliff, and there the beachy shoal
 defy the rage monster of the pole.
there equal they float world defy,
 bid they stand off and live, advance and die:
 the HARDY wretch that see the hint too late,
 fail not to find his folly in his fate. 

behind this rugged front secure lie
 old Caledonia, all the world surprise.
her native beauty and her wealth conceal
 wait the bless hour when both shall be reveal.
in age and fancy poverty secure,
 and yet she be ever young, and never poor. 

here labour with the injury of time,
 inclement air, inhospitable clime,
 foreign invasion and intestine war;
 yet all her native beauty still appear.

britain leave hand, which when she shall unite,
as nature dictate, and the fate invite,
and join her young sister on the right:
 how shall they Mutual wealth and strength convey,
 and with contempt the weak world survey!
till that bless hour, how do her injure name
 sleep in the rubbish of her ancient fame?
bury in slander, by reproach lay low:
 and all the distant world believe she so:
 then let we first survey she fancy Herse,
 she will find some resurrection in our verse;
 till rouse from a long decline fate,
 whole Brittain shall her glory reinstate.

how have we place she out of nature eye,
 where constant cold few seed of life supply?
where nature chill some despicables dwell,
 immure with darkness and ally to hell.
no moderate blessing, no endowment share,
 nothing that be pleasant see, nothing delightful here:
 but see the horrid bear march round the pole,
 and feel she pierce breath congeal the soul. 
their music whirlwind, and the shrill echo roar
 of freeze sea on the desert shore.

legend of fable fill our partial head,
 of land where grass never grow, or mortal tread;
 where keen wind and storm incessant blow
 on mountain cover with eternal snow;
 where nature never bloom, and sun never shine,
 but cold with cold, and frost with frost combine,
 inhospitable clime. —

what country have this? and whither be we go?
bright Caledonia, where will fable run?
suffer the impartial pen to range thy shore,
 and do thou justice, nature ask no more:

fit for commerce and cut out for trade;
 the sea the land, the land the sea invade.
the promontory cliff with hight embosst,
 and large deep bay adorn thy dangerous coast;
 alternate the pilot true relief,
 these warn at distance, those receive he safe;
 the deep indent harbour then invite,
 first court by day, and then secure at night:
 the weary sailor safe and true recess,
 a full amends for wild tempestuous sea.
nature that well foreknow a nation fate,
 thus fit Caledonia to be great.
her various aspect the design explain,
 and circumstance shall resist in vain.
subject not more to every cross event,
 she shall be great and rich, as nature mean.

view next her sea, from ancient terror name,
 for bugbear storm, by bugbear sailor fame.
phenician sailor, wise in ignorance,
 that dream of Thule, yet afraid to advance;
 thy lengthen sun with uncouth joy survey,
 and vain dream it lead to bright eternal day:
 unblessed with art, yet from thy ocean fly,
 afraid to live, because afraid to die. 
to they thy wealth and store be unrevealed,
 and all beyond thou happy conceal.
have they thy scally shoal of blessing know,
 they will long since choose thy shore, and quite forget their own. 
thy have be India, and thy golden sea
have fill their antique song.

but fear, that negative of glory, give
 this gift appropriat to a race more brave.
the fright south-taught navigator fly,
 and mock with fear, their own success destroy.
unpractised in thy watery war, they shun
 thy safe coast, and at a distance run.

thy sea, though vast, and in extent unknown,
 in wealth and strength to thou subservient groan.
calm tide, smooth surface, and a shine brow,
 and gentle gale for wealth and commerce blow.
these reconcile the once so dreadful waste,
 and art and industry supply the rest.

hail science, nature second eye,
beget on reason by philosophy,
man telescope to all that be deep and high;
 what infinite do thou pursue!
the tangle skeines of nature how undo!
pierce all her dark cloud, her knot untie,
 and leave her naked to the wander eye.

what gust of knowledge blow thou off to sea?
a desperate curiosity. 
in mountain-wave, and rage wind,
 tell we, what can thou hope to find?
it be answer, — these be nature school,
 to teach the power of art and rule:

from hence what vast instruct thing thou have bring;
 beside the huge remains not yet find out.
but of all knowledge, this be sure the best,
 as it be the polestar to the rest.
how winge with science, man may trace
 the foam ocean rough face;
 blow the vast furrow of the amaze deep,
 with ease and safety sail and sleep.

no more the uncertain northern tide shall fright,
 familiar danger lessen to the sight;
 the rock and sand, the threaten shore,
 pledge of certain death before.
now road and harbour find for help appear,
 and show the folly of our ancient fear;
 under their weather bank we calm ride
 danger and safety they divide.
now they appear the aid of providence,
 the sailor safety, and the land defence.

bold science whither will thou steer,
 see how the tempest arm with death, appear;
 read but the threaten language of the sky,
 how gather cloud, with-child of thunder rise;
 see mountain heap in strong rebellion move,
 see Ossa tope with pelion, threaten Jove;
 see angry nature rouse to civil war,
 it be prudence first teach mankind how to fear;
 bold science, whither will thou steer! 

vain caution! see the dare nymph set sail,
 what fear call storm, she call a welcome gale;
 on rage wave, and mountain billow tost,
 she see with joy her port, with joy she quit the coast;
 the wind be embrace with high expand wing
 the sailor sleep and fly, the pilot sing;
 sometime he mount so high, he turn his ear,
 and listen for the music of a sphere;
 charm with the symphony, he will consort keep,
 and beat true time, though he review the deep.

she be go, new world she seek, new world she find,
 she ride on tempest, and improve the wind,
 the elemental terror she will despise,
 and bully Neptune bold she defy.
see how mankind by her experience teach,
 have all to rule and method bring;
 the practicable sea to art submit,
 and wealth and commerce free circulate,
 with steady hand the experience pilot steer,
 and laugh in northern wave at southern fear,
 defy the two and thirty host of air,
 and sit compose in the midst of elemental war,
 all unconcerned at nature quarrel, he,
 to his own use, apply their enmity.

the furious wind, the water rage,
 he wise join to his just end, the voyage:
 in this he make their point rage agree,
 and form their discord into harmony. 

so jar party in a state,
 by the wise conduct of the crown,
 be manage to support the magistrate,
 and fix that power they struggle to pull down.

knowledge give courage, science make man brave;
 folly drive headlong to the grave:
 for ignorance and fear make coward run
 into those danger they be afraid to shun.

discretion only make man safe and bold,
 while fear the remedy withhold;
 fear hold the gate of reason fast,
 shut out its help, and so the coxcomb lose. 

the pilot now, consummate in his skill,
 make safe by nature, mount the watery hill;
 through path untrod, and maze of the deep,
 he cut his guide course, the rough, the steep,
 be all make smooth to he, he know his way,
 he neither fear the night, nor court the day:
 through all the tempest midnight rage he fly,
 visit the bottom now, anon the sky. 

when up to heaven he mount, the cheer sun
 make glad, and it be the same when dart down;
 to all the dark abyss he shoot and see,
 the hollow deep of nature nudity;
 till his bless port with steady hand he find:
 and thus to art he reconcile the wind. 

thus vanish the horrid and the wild,
 and nature now with pleasant eye behold;
 when Boreas mad with northern vapour rave,
 we smile, and with contempt survey the wave
 art reconcile the element, and trade
 can now with ease the globe extreme invade.
eternal circulate commerce flow,
 and every nation, every nation know. 
torrid and frigid scale, and join the pole,
 and far as wind can blow, or water roll,
 ship sail, and man in search of wealth will trace
 all the meanders of the universe.

the rough, the smooth, to man of art submit;
 the northern winter cold, or southern heat,
 with equal safety, and with equal ease,
 calm caspian lake, and caledonian sea. 
by nature aid, and art concur law,
 danger be only help to draw.
the thirst of honour generous mind bewitch,
 and danger tempt the brave, as gold the Rich.  

it be courage first that venture out to sea,
 young in experience, as philosophy.
Noah himself have certain be drown,
 have not his courage, as his faith, be sound.

hail Caledonia, by vast sea embrace;
 those sea for glory, wealth and terror place.
dreadful in fame, to thou familiar groan,
 suit to no man temper like thy own.
the bounteous ocean fraught with native gold,
 save it for thou; by its own curse, the cold.
have not the storm and tempest govern here,
 and fence this long hide treasure round with fear,
 past age have thy rifle store decreast,
 and foreign nation all thy wealth possess.
wealth that well suit a hardy race like thy,
 that dare through storm and death pursue the i.
wealth hide from coward, and the faint hand,
 scar with the sea content to starve by land.
but when thy dare son the wave explore,
 the ocean yield her unexhausted store:
 thy open harbour all her gift divide,
 and sea of wealth roll in with every tide:
 the golden shoal thy very net pursue,
 laugh at the less treasure of Peru;
 prompt thou to change the meanness of thy state,
 bid thou, when ever thou will, be rich and great.

tell we the son of mystery, from what hand,
 what secret high command
 give out the word that be hear to nature deep,
 where all the scaly tribe their council keep?
who tell they when the very month arrive?
and who the secret order give?
when from the womb of wonder far by-north,
 the mighty slymy host come forth;
 the numerous legion spread the sea,
 the wonder fright wave give way;
 forward the mighty move host push on,
 all guide by a hand unknown.
the involuntary well direct fry,
 the unknown something ready obey.

no pilot can with more exactness steer,
 not sun or moon divide the year.
not the revolve star their course obey,
 not darkness can succeed the day,
 with a more punctual steady pace,
 in manner, measure, time and place;
 true to the very distance of the shore,
 they be never, where they never be before
 where there be but few, there ever be but few,
 to every circumstance so true.
such course steer, such order keep,
 through all the wander maze of the deep;
 as if the ancient path they can descry,
 or read their father history:

then Caledonians lend a humble ear,
 and your own ill accept blessing hear,
 from the profound unmeasured deep
 where nature all her wonder keep.
her handmaid instinct, this bless message give
 to all the watery crew beneath the watery cave.
go numberless and spread the finny sail,
 and find Britannia nature darling isle;
 there spread your scaly squadron, and submit,
 your maker law command, to every net. 
be you their wealth and plenteous supply
 what cold soil and sterile clime deny.
be you their envy bless, and attend
 the will prey, to the undustrious hand,
 in proper squadron all your troop divide,
 and visit every creek, with every tide. 
present your self to every hungry door,
 employ the diligent, and feed the poor. 
if they reject the bounty of the sea
Bid'em complain no more of poverty. 
upbraid their sloth, and then return to i,
 visit no other port.

the punctual well instruct fish obey,
 and scaly squadron spread the northern sea,
 direct point their course, and find the shore,
 as if they will all be here before.
their equal distance keep, divide and join,
 as if they be teach by book, or steer by line:
 their strong detachment send to every creek,
 in just proportion their own mischief seek.
seek out the harbour, seek the indent shore,
 timploy the diligent, and feed the poor.
no other port they visit.

ah! Caledonia, mark the high command,
 and mark the caution of the heavenly hand;
 if thou reject the bounty of the sea,
 no more complain of poverty.
have thou in early time with wisdom grace
 heaven bounty, as in duty bind, embrace,
 above the nation thou have raise thy head,
 at home their envy, and abroad their dread,
 thy wealthy clime will all the world invite,
 they will court thou to unite.
no more of barren hill and sea complain,
 reproach the land with blast, with storm the main.

not all the spicy bank of Ganges stream,
 not fruitful Nile so oft the poet dream,
 not isle of pearl, not rich pacific sea,
 not the more fruitful caribbee,
 not afric wealth or chilean store,
 the silver mountain, or the golden shore,
 can such a unexhausted treasure boast,
 a treasure how supine lose! 
what pain have Scotland take to be poor,
 that have the Indies at her door;
 that let her course fate of choice remain,
 and see her maker bountiful in Vain.  

when Caledonians, when will you be wise,
 and search for certain wealth in native sea?
a wealth by heaven design for none but you,
 a wealth that do your very hand pursue,
 upbraid you with neglect of your own right,
 and court invade neighbour in your sight. 

when Caledonians, when will you be wise?
when from your cloud circumstance rise?
banish invader, heaven own gift enjoy,
 this will your native poverty destory.
this will restore your ancient dear buy name,
 this, and your valour, will revive your fame;
 how will your navy quick spread the sea,
 and guard that wealth they help you to possess?
how will your commerce all your son restore,
 and they will seek home that shun that home before? 
with wealth and people, happy, rich and free,
 you will first improve the land, and then the sea;
 be strong, be great, be rich, be europe fear,
 their war, their wealth, their trade, their honour share.

but let we retreat, who can the scene survey,
 and view this wealth the neighbour nation prey;
 what eye, that be caledonia friend, can see
 her son on shore, and stranger spread the sea? 
who can, with patience, view her people poor,
 and mine of wealth snatch up at every door?
the bounty heaven for their peculiar mean,
 reap by the hand to who it be never send.
the ocean plunder, the advantage sell,
 while these enjoy the tempest, those the gold.
hail bless conjunction, britain last best hour,
 shall Caledonia to her self restore;
 assert she long neglect property,
 her bless, her inheritance, the sea.

in hope of this, let we land and range the shore,
 and view the nation that the world call poor.
plenty a doubtful word mistake by most,
 a modern term for luxury and waste.
so Canaan flow. the land in plenty drown;
 yet Egypt do in vast increase abound.
the world be amuse with different form of word,
 when various sense the various thought afford.
nature by vast comparison explain,
 and all her contradiction so maintain. 
so scotland barren, fruitful, poor and rich:
 speak malice, speak insulter, tell we which.
describe the globe, run all the climate over,
 she be poor compare to rich, and rich compare to poor. 

in climate next, let we view her northern coast,
 a fruitful stile, with epithet embose,
 the horrid, boisterous, barren, and the cold,
 what fabled monstrous story have be tell!
yet range the globe, and her extreme survey,
 and sail from Magellan to hudson bay;
 ditto the jest, and when the truth be but tell,
 she be cold compare to hot, and hot compare to cold.
nor be there less of injury appear
 about her mountain, or her mountaineer. 
view but the savage Madagascar moor,
 campeche indian, or circassian boor,
 and when the character we shall compare,
 a northern highland-man a christian there.
polite his manner, and his modern dress,
 be beauty all, when match with ugliness. 

part ii.

the plan describe, the sea and shore survey;
 let we now the treasure of the land invade,
 traverse their hill, and all their vale descry,
 and spread their just description to the eye.
the rugged nation place by nature here,
 shall in their fancy poverty appear;
 the world shall blush, when they their picture see,
 and fame grow proud to print their history.
the soil no more unjust reproach shall bear,
for all they talk of barren slander here,
and it be, or may be fruitful every where.

a hardy race possess the stormy strand,
 and share the moderate bounty of the land,
 fit by nature for the boisterous clime,
 and large blessing will grow due by time.
the numerous offspring patient and sedate,
 with courage special to the climate wait.
when niggard nature shall their nation hear,
 shall smile, and pay they all the vast arrear.

a manly surliness, with temper mix,
 be on their mean countenance fix.
a awful frown sit on their threaten brow,
 and yet the soul all smooth, and calm below;
 think in temper, rather grave than gay,
 fit to govern, able to obey.
nor be their spirit very soon inflame,
 and if provoke, not very soon reclaim.
fierce when resolve, and fix as bar of brass,
 and conquest through their blood can only pass.

in spite of coward cold, the race be brave,
 in action dare, and in council grave;
 their haughty soul in danger always grow,
 no man dare lead they where they dare not go. 
sedate in thought, and steady in resolve,
 polite in manner, and as year revolve;
 always secure their large share of fame,
 and by their courage keep alive their name.

the labour poor deject and suppress,
 see not the approach prospect of their rest.
knowledge of liberty their only want,
 and loss of expectation their content.
too much subject to immoderate power,
 their petty tyrant all their pain devour.
the extort master their just hope restrain,
 and diligence be no where more in vain. 
the little chief, for what they call their due,
 eat up the farm and eat the farmer too;
 suck the lifeblood, of tennant and estate,
 and needless poverty to both create.
mistake their interest, national ill procure,
 and make the poor be very very poor. 

th unhappy drudge, yet bear the mighty load,
 with strange unnatural temperance endow,
 so servile, so unused to liberty;
 he seem the last, that wish to be free,
preposterous wonder!
where will nature run,
 that man shall struggle to be twice undo;
 affliction make man stupid, nature wink,
 and sense overlay, he act before he think;
 subject nature fetter with distress
 doze, and bondage do the soul possess,
 endeavour slackness, all the prospect dy,
 and with the hope, the love of liberty. 

yet under all the hardship of their state,
 they have something seem to claim a soft fate;
 nor do it claim alone, the grand portent
 foretell the bless, and decree the event.
it be plain print on the painful brow,
 they shall not always be suppress as now;
 the approach light at distance dawn, the ray
 dart a dim earnest of the welcome day.
when sleep bondage doom to last night,
 shall help to make the cheere beam more bright.
enlighten crowd shall their own freedom see,
 for wilful blindness only, shut out liberty;

bondage be ignorance, and he that see,
 need no directer cure for that disease.
knowledge and liberty go hand in hand,
 fool only will obey, when knave command;
 the sordid yoke no long can be bear,
 when once he see he must the grievance scorn;
 he that in blind dependence now submit,
 will rouse his strength, when he shall rouse his wit;
 nature prevail, and sense in exercise
 the chain on reason natural untie.

thus when new sight shall once but bless the poor,
 it be these will Scotland liberty restore;
 the strong conviction no man can resist,
 and blindness shall against her will be bless;

and now, in all their misery, let we view
 what blessing they industrious pursue;
 what just equivalent they can supply,
 for loss of wealth, and loss of liberty:

the instruct poor laborious and suppress;
 yet in their very misery be bless;
 crush with injurious homage they obey
 god and their landlord, but with different eye;
 and yet to both they pay without regret,
 to this the homage, and to that the debt. 
the negative of nature they endure,
 in virtue rich, though in possession poor,
 know in sacred, in religion nice,
 and ignorant in nothing more than vice:
 what crime they have, they borrow from mankind,
 hell manufacture here be contraband. 
import by the help of foreign trade,
 clandestine enjoy, clandestine convey. 
unusual judgement fill the mean head,
 devotion follow as instruction lead.
grave in behaviour, in discourse sedate,
 and apter to believe than to debate;
 and if they can exceed in do well,
 it be in a little little too much zeal.

in doctrine sound, in discipline severe,
 the church obtain her true dominion here.
and yet her soft coercive yield no power,
 either to persecure, or to devour.
fierce tenacious of determine truth,
 dreadful to error, vigilant of both.
the wild opinion of a neighbour state,
 find here no atom-fancy to create:
 the strong ferment venom hither bring,
 like irish poison, perish in the thought;
 here no enthusiastic notion grow,
 the only barrenness the nation know.

a mitred jest indeed, the land perplex,
 of pomp and pride, and policy so mix;
 the awkward medley leave we in debate,
 whether it do proceed from church or state,
 beget by power, and introduce by plot,
 with tyranny come in, with tyranny go out;
 but ill agree with precise air,
 it soon grow yellow, pale and sickly here.
the people wise, and in religion nice,
 can not be gull with such a faint device.
some blood the monster drink, but when it try
 to take a dose of liberty, it die.
but it their civil state some praise afford,
 much great be the trophy of their sword.
age of blood have bring they up to war
 and their strong legion breath in every air,
 they teach the very Swedes themselves to fight,
 and spite of dullness arm the Muscovite;
 the sordid Russ, to discipline they train
 and fain will teach the pole, but that be in vain. 
the untracted brute in ignorance too wise,
 learn only how experience to despise.
nothing keep nature closs in jail like pride,
squadron of page-like crime before her ride,
and ignorance be always next her side.
where shall we all their ancient glory trace,
 the forward nation court the very race:
not Europe venture to commence a war
but caledonian blood demand her share,
and if it be buy or sell, it be always very dear
 leipsick — a name in fame red letter roll
 matchless in war, where from the freeze pole
 Finland send monster, stranger to the sun,
breed up to fight, by great Gustave lead on;
and yet by hardy naked scots outdo.

voracious Tilly just make drink with blood,
 at magdeburgh he raise the crimson flood,
 though gorge with slaughter, yet a thirst for more,
 approach, all Europe tremble at his power.
in leipsick plain the dreadful scene begin,
 on bright deed the sun himself never shine.
tilly first fury break the saxon line,
and cry Victoria, all the troop fall in,
with blood and terror glitter eagle shine.
the scots reserve for danger hither fly,
danger their post by nation, teach to dy,
and winge with rage they ravish victory. 

not the unequal squadron, not the day
 half lest, not slaughter saxon in the way,
 not formidable death, that jest of war,
 in whatsoever shape she dare appear,
 can their intrepid steady motion stay,
 nothing but slaughter foe and victory;
 surround, they with double fury fight,
 and please with danger, shine in ( naked white,
 Gustavus see how fury like they fight,
 and better witness never soldier seek;
 the mighty hero smile, with wonder please,
 and still they fight the more, the more he praise.
they crown his head with laurel first, and he
 to their just valour own his victory.
from whence advance with a just applause,
 the ruin protestant abandon cause;
 religion and the country they restore,
 and grateful Germany commemorate the hour.

in thirty month continue fierce campaign,
 from leipsick plain, the Neckar, and the main,
 the Rhine, the Danube, and the lech they cross,
 no battle where they fight be ever lose. 
never be such a army, such a head,
 such man to follow, such a king to lead:
 such country traverse, or such battle win,
 such conquest make, or conquest make so soon. 

where shall we all their ancient glory trace?
let we hasten down to ramellies a pace;
 but stop at Phillipsburg, and ask Turenne,
 and read their ancient trophy on the Rhine,
 how they do there the gallic name advance,
 and by their blood give plume to grow France
 France, that on foreign valour raise their throne,
 by other nation sword, and not their own,
 strip of that help how easy they fall,
 and faint like Jericho without her wall.
recall from hence they Williams sword obey,
 and beat the french at mons for want of pay;
 soon as the caledonian band appear,
 not luxemberg himself disdain to fear;
 it be on their valour he have raise his fame,
 he know they will conquer where soever they come.
he will see they fight when great Turenne lie dead,
he will see they follow where he dare not lead;
he will see they fight when all the army flee.
when wise de lorge to shun his own defeat,
 under their valour shelter his retreat.

the experience hero, grave in war and state,
 in this as sober, as in that sedate.
advise his master, caution by his fear,
 to gain the scots, or else decline the War.  

then view they under fifteen year recess,
 range through Europe to avoid the peace.
battle and death they make their chief delight,
 and in all nation teach the world to fight.

Buda the dreadfull siege the world ere see,
 what hero do the fame of danger draw?
Lesly the old croatian ban appear,
 and dare scots lead up the volunteer.

what action pass, let only such relate,
 who know how man resolve to conquer meet;
 never be town with such strange fury fill,
 such deed Victoria seldom have behold;
 such storm, such fury, flesh and blood never bear,
 nor town be ever so maintain before;
 the desperate garrison disdain to fear,
 with their own slaughter bone the breach repair;
 contemn mercy, they like fury fight,
 and just as fast as life decline, submit.

what stream of blood must in such fight be lose?
what fatal price must such a conquest cost?
life so bestow, be always sell too dear,
 but valiant scots, what business have you here?
with noble blood adorn, and bloom year,
 you be not make to storm like musqueteer;
 Scotland run too much venture in your blood,
 to have your rate so little understand;
 you have no desperate fortune there to raise
 your name enough, you can not fight for praise:
 then why so lavish, why so rash brave?
to play away the live you ought to save;
 Scotland have son indeed, but none to spare,
 to furnish out the show and sport of war;
 you be her tender part which touch the whole,
 and what let out your blood, let out her soul. 

pardon the satyr interrupt here,
 she own, she hate this volunteer war,
 when neither king nor country to retrieve,
 the injure help, or the oppress relieve,
 neither to gain dominion, or to save;
 man die for nothing but the fame of brave.
so Foster hang himself with deep design,
 only to see himself be bury fine.

hard fate of man, that only for a name,'
will in their own destruction seek their fame.
that covet danger, and ride post to die,
 to live in air, and walk in memory;
 vain fame with high ferment vapour hot,
 to be remember, strive to be forget.
wrap in his jest, the bubble hero die,
 immortalise in mortal memory,
 fill up a ballad, make too great in rhime,
 be fable into tale, and die again by time.

and this for nothing, but to have it know,
 he die a ass of very great renown,
 a forward coxcomb, who in haste to dy,
 fight for he care not who, nor care not why.

one just excuse indeed some few may give,
 that die, because they can tell how to live:
 these shall in pity escape our censure here,
 so coward dare not live, and hang themselves for fear.

he be true brave that fight in just defence
of virtue press, of injure innocence,
himself, the law, his neighbour, or his prince;
 dare all the lawful call of fate obey,
 no danger will decline, no trust betray;
 while he that heal his torture in the war,
 own be he be a coward, and only fight for fear:
 as for the sport of fight, that be a jest,
 they talk of most, that understand it least.

Buda reduce, and gallantry lay by,
 Europe the sweet of short live peace enjoy:
 not the recess of arm can cool their fire,
 quench in the act, they burn in the desire;
 not capuan plenty, not luxuriant ease,
 the man of action first and worst disease,
 can taint their temper, quench their thirst of fame,
 or rust the polish splendour of their name.
their arm may tarnish, but the soul keep bright,
 for, spite of practice, they by nature fight;
 bear soldier, fit from the birth for fame,
 body all iron, and their soul all flame.

the war revive, Bellona sound to arm,
 the scots by nature ravish with her charm,
 from their remote mountain hear the sound,
 and troop of hero spread Hibernian ground;
 with native fire and sense of glory fill,
 and winge with joy, they rush into the field.

in every action that deserve a name,
 they share the hazard, other share the fame;
 William with pleasure often lead they on,
 they give, they guard, and they love his crown;
 smile he view the wonder of their hand.
happy the general troop like these command,
the glad monarch say,
when at namure,
Ramsay fall on and mock the gallic power,
and emulate nation wonder first give over.
at Derry, limrick, agrim, or the boyn,
 Athlone, namure, at steenkirk, or Landen;
 at all, their hero fight, at all they die,
 and latent virtue want of victory supply.

William, that man of courage love obey,
how mourn he Douglass, Angus, and Mackay? 
too great a loss for one unhappy day.
a loss that yield France the victory;
a loss that none but Scotland can supply;
none have such to survive, or such to die.

shall we to recent memory apply,
 and trace the scots in modern history:
 the present rise glory of their name,
 come up to all that be ancient in their fame.
at schellemberg how can they choose but fight,
 new vigour swell their nation at the sight;
 the very spot where Hepburn storm before,
 and conquer scots, imperial standard tear.
where Ramsey, Murray, Rhea, and Hamilton,
like Lyons fight, the Swedes amaze look on,
and see the impregnable intrenchment win.
and now the scots in valour still the same,
 worthy the race, and equal in their flame,
 with the same fury, gain the same applause,
 the same the courage, and the same the cause:
 the same the circumstance, the same success,
 that great Gustavus see, great marlbro' this. 

let future poet blenheim trophy sing,
 and ramellies to chime, with leipsick bring;
 there Orkney, Campbell, Hamilton, and hay,
 shall match the hero, and shall match the day.
to time last period hand their nation fame,
 and every age glory shall the next inflame.

part iii.

their foreign deed be trace, and now we come,
 to search the fund of fame that be leave at home;
 a thousand king the mighty land possess,
 in merit great, though in title less.
king in command and in superior race,
 and virtue ripen such for crown a pace.
nobility of blood, their action suit,
 and action here indent the attribute;
 here family in line of virtue run,
 the father merit double in the son.
the grow honour form a just encrease,
 first crown in war, and then reward in peace.

illustrious blood with more illustrious hand,
 in proper channel have be here retain:
 the antiquity which other nation boast,
 will here turn modern, and in age be lose.
Scotland in senior glory will contend,
 when lame chronology with age grow blind.
here mighty ancestor preserve their stile,
 from long prescription, ancient as the isle.

not raise on party favour, bribe and fear,
 blood, tyranny, oppression, theft and war;
 not raise by strength of face, or strength of purse,
 a stock of money, or a stock that be worse;
 but from the youth of time, their name remain,
 when vertue only can that fame obtain.
back, further back than story can relate,
 when infant nation fix their form of state.

when trick of state and court intrigue unknown,
 no mighty knave can brother villain crown.
from blood to blood their violence pursue,
 first steal their honour, then proclaim they due.
by fraud and strong oppression crown obtain,
 while those support the fraud, and these the reign;
 alternate violence fame supply,
 the modern fund of mean nobility.

if there be any thing in birth and blood,
 or be antiquity but understand;
 if the old trophy of our father fame,
 when thought of virtue burn, will fan the flame;
 make we their step of dignity pursue,
 and ancient honour will excite to new. 
if any true nobility remain,
 and virtue can by blood possess the vein.
then let we not farther search the world in vain,
 to ancient Rome, and lose record of Spain;
 nation in barbarous hydra-mixture raise,
 and only by their own too partial flattery praise.
fabii, cornellii, and the bruti yield
 to caledonian tribe the ancient field. 
cummin, duff, Donald, strathern, hay, and Keith,
 and name will run fame trumpet out of breath. 
their old armorial honour still retain,
 while Rome in modern line contend in vain. 

nor have the country lend her partial fame,
 and from her late town bestow the name,
 not town the name, but name the town command
 and family take title from the land:
 so Douglass, mar and Southerland survive,
 and not from town, but province derive.
kingdom of old, who though the claim lay down,
 yet in the antiquity they keep the crown.
the blood of prince in their race we see,
 and modern merit join to old nobility.

bless be the family that great in blood,
 have thus their true honour understand,
 that on the base of vertue build their fame,
 and join to that less praise their name,
 the only just and true great design;
 for vertue help nobility to shine.

then who shall search the long forget roll,
 examine all the part, or sum the whole,
 who shall the impotence of art supply,
 beyond the reach of book or heraldry?
there Gordon, Lindsay, Crawford, mar and Wems,
 with Seaton, Ramsey, cuninghame and gra'ams,
 Forbes, Ross, Murray, Bruce, Dunbar and Hume,
 and name for who no poet can make room;
 remote in birth, in name and honour know,
 the caledonian glory through the world have show.

where shall the galic trophy now appear?
the ancient Belgae will look modern here.
not mommerancy, not the great Nassau,
 can ancestor like these, direct draw.

Douglass with native dignity adorn,
ancient beyond record,
record they scorn.
the world be the general record of their house,
 when history be silent and abstruse.
the fund of family be in their blood,
 and the fame Scoti on their shoulder stand,
 a race of prince from their fruitful stem,
 have be a live history to they.
their fame that be past, foretell their fame to come,
 they be duke abroad before they be duke at home.
the nation will honour do afford,
 and these cut out their. glory by the sword;
 for it be the early fortune of their blood,
 to have their worth both crown and understand;
 prince by their strong sword possess their crown,
 and grateful France their ancient glory own.

when man be of true merit first possess,
 justice prevail, the world supply the rest.
for character will always suit men deed,
 honour will follow, when our vertue lead.

the mighty branch that now support the race,
 ripen the bloom stock for fame apace,
 with high instruct well direct hand,
 show he both how obey, and how command,
 by just example guide he to pursue,
 and double all their ancient deed with new. 

himself with steady hand the state direct,
 suppress faction, liberty protect,
 scatter the threaten cloud, prevent the storm;
 and gentle all! mistaken zeal reform;
 backward to punish bear the insult street,
 yet make his patience and his justice meet:
 and when their pride his government defy,
 Pitys: for it be below he to despise.
great Ann illustrious sceptre it be he sway,
 and while he rule, envy her self obey;
 malice may swell, and wild dislike appear,
 but all their spleen ferment into despair:
 grovle they severe in grief and discontent,
 crush by the chariot wheel of government.
so devil chain, their hate of heaven express,
 but as their rage grow great, their power grow less. 

Campbell the modern glory of this isle,
 their double fame increase in great argile;
 bear to be great, to noble blood ally,
 he keep the honour, and abate the pride,
 for action fit, to the war incline,
 true caledonian courage swell his mind;
 fit his country be character to raise,
 and by great action hand along her praise.
of ancient stock, and long forget race,
 nature have stamp their glory in his face.
the strong impress of every manly line
in character of native honour shine,
a index of the bright soul within.
a race to Caledonia always dear,
 and on who blood her liberty appear.
a race to honour, and their country true,
 they furnish fund of old, he heap up store of new. 
nor shall weak prejudice debauch our pen,
 to flatter prosperous fate, and guild the crime of man
 but undistinguished virtue we will rehearse,
 for partial praise be below our verse.

curse be that party-spleen that shut man eye,
 from the just merit of their enemy;
 that prepossess by feud, deny applause,
 and dare not praise the man without the cause. 
where honour claim it, honour will be just,
 and where men action praise they, all man must. 

Gordon, by family and Fortune great,
 though lose in solitude and long retreat,
shall rise in honour, as he be great in mind,
brave as the roman, as the christian kind,
a generous enemy, a faithful friend.

faction below he, if he do dislike,
 he always dare to show his face, and strike;
 treason a stab ith dark, that man that be brave,
 may show the enemy, can show the knave.

the hamilton of old ally to fame,
 illustrious in blood, and more in name;
 in ancient war ever other line begin,
 these have a length of tower fortune run.
title from France; from Sweden wound and scar,
 and batter bone they bring from belgic war;
 yet fraught with honour, and reward of fame,
 honour revive, and year increase the flame.
eight noble branch hand their glory down,
channel of blood from caledonia crown,
each have large share of merit of their own.
each in their proper line their house raise,
 by personal and hereditary praise;

what debt of praise be to the lesly due?
who shall their family or fame pursue?
the bloody step no single line can trace,
 nor envy fetch from hell, their history deface.
bear general, all by nature frame for war,
 in every battle front their name appear;
 the Swede, the Russ, and the hungarian yield,
 to they the will tribute of the field;
 from esseck bridge to mighty astracan,
 their terror with the barbarous crowd remain.
grast to this old stock, and to their fame,
 Leven add modern glory to the ancient name;
 Scotland depend on his experience hand,
 safe, not in army, but in his command.
he, young in year, yet very old in arm,
 guard she from foreign or domestic harm,
 his faithful aid new vigorous life afford,
 and bold draw hereditary sword.

Stuart ancient as the hill from which they spring
 the mountain still do to the name belong;
 from hence they branch to every high degree:
 and foreign court embrace the progeny.

the rise stem with thirst of glory fire,
 not he to th'crown, the crown to he aspire;
 his high attract fame the nation draw,
 they give old crown, and fate supply the new.

thy sceptre Caledonia in their hand,
 first raise the real glory of the land;
 and seven successive branch hold the crown,
 till Britain veil, and make the stuart her own.

what blood, what war, what strong convulsive throw,
 britania fill with inbred vapour know? 
how oft the intervene hand of blood,
 have their successive happiness withstand?
spread the dark Vail, let we hide the dismal scene,
let other paint the horrid-draught, our pen
shall show the bright, and wish the rest unseen.
Ann, the remain glory of the race,
 with unexampled lustre fill the place,
 without their fail all their virtue share,
 and britain bright imperial joy prepare.
bless be the hour, bless that auspicious reign
when Ann, the stuart last glory, shall obtain
that calm both nation long have wish in vain.
when year of rapine and revenge shall cease,
 and feud of blood be lose in flood of peace;
 reserve for she, reserve to crown the line,
 sever too long, the listen nation join.
nature direct, concur cause invite,
 the nation say amen, and all of course unite.
then party hate and border spleen lay down,
 our heart shall first unite, and then the crown;
 Britain be one, one end and interest view,
 and hand in hand one happiness pursue.

a gallaxy of worthy now appear,
 and spread the caledonian hemisphere;
 Roxburgh enjoy the curse of all man praise,
 and Tweeddale add truelustre to the ancient Hays,
 grave and sedate, he fill his sovereign throne,
 maintain its honour, and increase his own.

Montrose revive the ancient race of gra'me,
 from time and injury retrieve the name,
 lay all his family oppression by,
 and in his country have good, let just resentment dy;
 in scotland secret council he preside,
 with early prudence every action guide,
 sober, not dull, pious, and not precise,
 grave, without age, without experience wise;
 more think, more sedate than he appear,
 and old in understanding than in year. 

Glasgow adorn the ancient name of Boyl,
 the name be a constant honour to the isle,
a name britania always boast to hear,
for learning, wisdom, wealth and character
increase in England, and increase here.

the god of music join when colvil play,
 and all the muse dance to haddington essay;
 the charm be mutual, pierce and complete,
 this in his art excel, and that in wit.

Seafield, and Marr, and Loudoun guide the state,
 by birth and place, still more by merit great. 
no malice can their character conceal,
 but those direct the sceptre, this the seal.
the well instruct pilot of the realm
 who while just Queensberry steer, assist the helm:
 with wake care they all surround the throne,
 support the well know burden of the crown;
 the important drudgery with pleasure do,
 their country have safety, not their own, pursue.
through storm of tumult and distraction steer,
 not raise with hope, and not suppress with fear;
 with calm, but steady hand the faction guide
 at once, they yield to, and resist the tide:
 wise they calm the feud weak head create,
 and heal the wild distemper of the state;
 to every tender part their hand apply,
 and to the mischief suit the remedy;
 true patriot principle their mind possess,
 their country they, and they their country bless.
but their just zeal to ann immortal throne,
 make every noble character their own. 

nothing a prince wisdom more display,
than choice of counsellor,
the double praise.
be always first the monarch, then their own,
 first it illustrate, then support the throne.

but we will no more pursue the mighty train,
 who to describe our verse attempt in vain;
 the muse vail before the illustrious throng,
 too bright for verse, too numerous for our song;
 our ancestor have merit in vain,
 if our new step do not their old maintain:
but as our modern virtue stand as high,
the present worthy do the past supply;
a certain pledge, our name shall never dy.

and now with just regard let we view the fair,
 beauty can make no breach of union here;
 the equality agree on either hand,
 the lady no equivalent demand;
 nor will their virtue be exhaust here,
 but still the sex their just proportion bear:
 bless mixture, equal devout and gay,
 for virtue only can both smile and pray.

no scale of calculate right will severe
 betwixt the quantity and quality;
 England indeed the large roll may claim,
 and english beauty will preserve her name;
 but these the merit equal divide,
 have all their beauty, only want their pride.

and now to wonder turn your listen ear,
 visit the commonwealth of learning here;
 see how apollo nursery thrive, and how
 wit bloom in spite of climate, storm and snow;
 the muse all laborious and severe,
 be gardener breed, and work like horse here;
 there Seeds of science careful they sow,
 here cultivate the soil, to make they grow,
 plant, prune, inocculate, the season tend,
 and every fruitful scyon to its stock they bend.

see here how every plant in order thrive,
 and spite of clime the tender blossom live.
here epic thick, as groves of laurel grow,
 and strong heroic, place in walk below,
 lyric and pastoral in even lay,
 and panygericks circle round with bay,

there knowledge grow, for quantity and kind,
 the best, and best prepare to instruct the mind,
 tempere with modesty, it be set by zeal
 fit her rash infection to repel.

next this in constant bloom a range of wit,
 and every day it be weed of conceit,
 keep thin, entrench, and never run to seed,
 but ripen gentle in its flowery bed;
 for wit a plant so apt to grow in haste,
 it shake the root, and then decay as fast.
strong science in please order stand,
 with border of philosophy on either hand.
these well reward the labourer constant toil,
 be nourish by, and yet improve the soil.

but above all the wonder of the spot,
 a simple, man of learning oft forget,
 in a small border very cold and dry,
 here thrive that tender trifle, honesty;
 neglect weed! from what strange climate bring,
 how seldom find, indeed, how seldom seek?
how do the easy world appear content
with spurious kind,
how very often vent
 the false for true, and give their sense the lie,
 and make their interest pass for honesty?

another plant, but ah! how faint it grow?
not that it be hurt by climate, frost, and snow;
 but as if nature suffer strong decay,
 it withereth every where, and die away.
friendship!
the nice plant that ever grow,
 talk of by many, understand by few. 
it be only help be honesty, and where
 that thrive, it get some strength; but his very rare,
 by weed of self and jealousy ore'run,
 it be choke for want of air, and shade from the sun.
but who shall now the thrive plant describe,
the evergreen, that quicken June imbile,
and furnish new recruit to levi tribe?
son of the prophet at gamaliel foot,
 who extract learning, then refine to wit,
 by the laborious lymbeck of the brain,
 condense the spirit, and let the humid part remain,

no loiter sing-song muse trifle here,
 weave thin fancy into web of air;
 but here they wed the science for wife,
 and beat like hemp at Bridewell for their live:
 the enquirer here to ida top aspire,
 Parnassus cool Springs, can only quench their fire.
to learning high pinnacle attain,
 by strong assiduous travel of the brain,
 ravish the muse, in their deep delight,
 and learn with the same fury as they fight;
 to curious search, to thing, and book so press,
 the ancient or the modern find no rest,
 till universal knowledge fill the mind,
 and all the soul from dross, and ignorance refine.

hence they to every strong attainment reach,
 and what they learn so well, as well they teach;
 in every art, in every science grow,
 not proud of know, but be proud to know. 
push to a vice the lust of do well,
 and in whatever they practice they excel.

Humes and da'rymples here adorn the law,
with steady justice,
neither drive nor draw
 but with the head inform, and hand upright,
 give every cause its own impartial weight,

in every branch of learning here they rise,
 nothing too high they fear, too low despise,
 in every science, every just extreme,
 man of perfection may be find with they.

the law in mist and darkness they make clear,
 and Physick thrive in spite of wholesome air,
 pharmacopaea, void of simples, live,
 and surgery in barren practice thrive,
 philosophy mere simple knowledge vent,
 rather by nature than experiment. 
music in spite of discord, charm the ear,
 and jar party break no consort here.

thus bless with art, enrich with head and hand,
 produce sea, and more productive land;
 the climate sound, the people prompt and strong;
 why be her happiness delay so long? 
why with such patience, and so long endure,
 distemper prudence can so quick cure? 
why still on nature common bounty live?
and why so soon content with what she will give?
for where contentment make endeavour less,
 it be then a vice, and not a happiness. 
so the fame sluggard starve, and reason good,
 for want of feed, not for want of food;

bear the reproof, the fruitful climate be know,
 not heaven or nature blame, the fault be your own;
the earth adapt to bear, the air, the sea,
all fruitful, all to plenty show the way;
no barrenness, but in your indust'ry.

it be blasphemy to say the climates curse,
 nature will never be fruitful till she be force;
it be make her duty from her first decay,
the sweat brow alone, and labour hand to obey,
and these she never do, nor dare deny.

and yet this sloth be not their proper crime,
 it be due to poverty, and that to time.
hail sloth and poverty from Stygian air,
 usher to death, and handmaid to despair. 

strange birth, themeer perfection of a curse,
 that find man miserable, and make they worse,
 of ill connect self engender birth,
 first circulate themselves, and then the earth;
 infernal harmony of cause make,
 and in true circle of distress they walk,
 vile sloth and poverty of spurious breed,
 neither from heaven or earth, but of themselves proceed,
 beget in life, by long degenerate time,
 betwixt stagnate vertue, and impregnate crime. 

 'twin monster neither seed nor offspring know',
 but concreate, by mere succession flow.
no proper source, but from themselves they find,
 and by supine infusion reach the mind.
all nature rule by their own power reject,
 and be themselves the cause, themselves the effect;
 the alternate misery never leave the door,
 but poverty make sloth, and sloth make poor,
 unnatural mixture form the gender pair,
 alternate they both beget and bare. 
no proper seed of life, or live show,
 they be bear in death, and in consumption grow;
 superior witchcraft form the dismal race,
 and devil unknown below', connect the face.
the unhappy wretch, when hag-rid and possess,
 the crime be in his countenance confess.

a sanguine pale and droop brightness shine,
 this always saturnine, and that supine,
 join hand in hand, they live death display,
 and life in full perfection of decay. 
no misery so great, but they make worse,
 each other be, and each other curse.
they mingle death with every punct of time,
 and only in destruction be sublime;
 slow poison which no antidote can cure,
 linger in life and in destruction sure;
 potent in strength their strong dominion grow,
 not man but nation they can overthrow.

wake Scotland from thy long lethargic dream,
 seem what thou be, and be what thou shall seem,
 shake off the poverty, the sloth will dy,
 success alone can quicken industry.
no more the bondage of reproach endure,
 or bear those harm thou can so quick cure.
to land improvement and to trade apply,
 they will plentiful pay thy industry.
the barren muir shall weighty sheaf bestow,
the uncultivated vale rich pasture show,
the mountain flock and herd in stead of snow.

nature a virgin very chaste and coy,
 to court she nonsense, if you will enjoy,
she must be ravish,
when she be force she be free,
 a perfect prostitute to industry;
 free she open to the industrious hand,
 and pay they all the tribute of the land.
the strong laborious head she can deny,
 she be only backward where they will apply.
here fruitful hill, and there the flowery plain,
 deep undiscov'rd fund of wealth contain.
the silver vein and vast metallic store,
 forbid to call her wild mountain poor.
the mine of lead, of copper, and of coal,
 enrich the several part, those part the whole. 
nothing remain to make her wealth complete,
 but that her right hand and her left may meet.
