catharina's cave.

by mr. Newton.

beneath a mountain solitary shade
 live catharina, then a ancient maid,
 a useful dame that every simple know,
 and from choice herb exhale a cordial dew. 
rude be her dome, and hide from pry eye,
 by lofty hill that seem to reach the sky;
 deep in a rock the wind cavern run,
 a bend cypress screen it from the sun:
 from its rude side a fountain use to flow,
 that pour incessant on the stone below:
 this music lull the pensive dame to rest,
 and draw soft slumber on her ache breast:
 no sun be there, nor scarce a dawn gleam,
 no twinkle star, nor cynthia silver beam. 
there naked elm and sapless oak appear,
 with age grow rot, and by lightning fear;
 there perch the raven and the gray-eyed owl,
 with his wise visage and his serious scowl;
 no floweret there bedeck the mossy ground,
 but a thick forest spread its shade around,
 where the smooth box and brown hasel grow,
 the solemn pine-tree and the baleful yew:
 here no glad sound be hear nor human tongue,
 not colin flute nor blouzelinda song:
 these gloomy shade for grief be only make,
 and howl wolf that scamper through the glade. 

here catharina spend her irksome day,
 seclude both from envy and from praise. 
not so her laugh moment use to run,
 when her bright eye be like a morning sun:
 when to her flock repair the gaze swain,
 her flock be then the fair of the plain:
 and she no less — with vein of sprightly blue,
 and cheek like rose wrap in morning dew,
 the love and grace round her feature fly. 
her mind be cheerful as the rise day,
 mature as summer and as April gay;
 yet fate too soon eclipse her early joy,
 she fall the victim of the wing boy,
 the wing boy that bear the fatal dart:
 henceforth may virgin better guard their heart. 
it be celadon, it be he that cause her pain,
 the fair shepherd of the rural train;
 who careless beauty make her heart his prize,
 and steal the slumber from her wakeful eye. 

long time her pride and cool reason strive
 against the power of encroach love,
 in vain — her cheek and mournful eye declare
 the smother passion and the secret care,
 while the dull youth, who beauty never can please,
 who seek no more than indolence and ease,
 range over the valley with his darling tray,
 or near some fountain slumber out the day:
 all nymph he strive (but most she) to shun,
 and to thick shade and distant pasture run:
 there the soft flute his nimble finger ply,
 while his love dog sit listen by his side. 

then weep the fair with grief and rage oppress;
 strange passion labour in her pensive breast;
 she lose she Crook — her flock no more be tell,
 and her lamb wander from their nightly fold,
 till to these shade she take her desperate way,
 and vow no more to see the beam of day:
 here the gay rose on her cheek expire,
 and from her eye the laugh love retire:
 no flowery wreath she fade temple know,
 her lock uncombed upon her shoulder fly;
 no silken vestment on her limb be roll,
 a russet mantle save she from the cold;
 a simple cordage round her waste she tie,
 and a rude staff her better hand supply. 

here learn the dame the Physick of the field,
 and what the wood and what the mountain yield
 of sovereign balm, to heal a rankle wound,
 or ripen swell where no sore be find;
 to strengthen sinew, and catarrh expel,
 and none for colic can she art excel. 
with magic herb she draw out fester thorn;
 her charm can banish toothache, cramp, and corn. 
to she repair from all the neighbour plain,
 the sickly matron and the wound swain:
 nor to one species be her art confine;
 her skill be know among the fleecy kind,
 her cordial strengthen the decline ewe,
 and limp calf her heal plaster know. 
