a poem to the memory of THOMAS, late marquis of WHARTON, lord privy seal.

vain be these pomp, thy funeral rite to grace,
and blazon forth thy long patrician race;
these banner mark with boast feat of old,
and streamer wave with distinguish gold.
proud hieroglyphic! where be dark show
thy brave forefather merit, not thy own.
herald forbear! these paint honour give
to name that only in thy paint can live.
thy colour fade near this illustrious clay,
and all thy gaudy gild die away.

see, heaven displease thy fond attempt upbraid,
and claim the province thy bold hand invade;
untimely darkness gather round the sky,
blacken the morn to grace his obsequy.
the sicken sun shine dim, and in the sight
of gaze crowd, resign his wane light;
mark how he labour with relapse of night!
how his diminish face a crescent seem,
like Cynthia new silvered with his beam.
but as in full eclipse his light expire,
back to its source our gelid blood retire;
chill with surprise, our tremble joint unbrace,
and pale confusion sit on every face.
the bleat flock, no more the shepherd care,
stray from those fold to which they will repair.
home to his young the raven wing his way,
and leave untasted his yet bleed prey.
while tower lark their rival note prolong,
they drop benight in their morning song.
darkness and horror reign over earth and sky,
and nature for awhile with WHARTON die.

o! speak, refulgent parent of the day!
with beamy eye who do the globe survey;
thou radiant source of wit divine fire!
thou true judge of what thou do inspire!
say, have thou see in any age, or clime,
since thy bright race begin to measure time,
so great a genius rise? in every part
so form by nature, finish so by art?
such manly sense, with so much fire of mind?
judgement so strong, to wit so lively join?
no prepossession sway his equal soul,
steady to truth she point as her pole:
convince of vary in the least degree,
her pliant index she reclaim with ease.
early through custom and prescription yoke,
tyrant of weak soul, his reason break.
good sense revere from the mean hand,
he dare authority in robe withstand.

determine always on maturer thought,
still by new reason, to new measure bring;
firm, but not stubborn; thoughtful, not involve;
swift to perform what slow he resolve.

no tempest rage within his peaceful breast,
where kindle passion reason soon suppress.
'midst all event his firmness he maintain,
struggle with great, but slight ill disdain.
thus what philosopher can only preach,
his inborn virtue do in practice reach.

nature design he master of address;
none know it more, nor seem to know it less.
it work like magic on your yield heart,
sure be the charm, but secret be the art.
in human nature most exact learn,
the artful man he through his masque discern.
with choose bait that every temper take,
he know of knave or fool good use to make.

his easy breed free from form and rule,
that stiffen the civility of fool,
of various turn, for all occasion fit,
be square with judgement, and well touch with wit.
free of access, from affectation clean,
great without pride, nor when familiar, mean.
oblige always with good-natured sense,
nor apt to give nor apt to take offence.
nor fond when kind, nor harsh when most severe,
betwixt extreme he just know to steer.
in conversation wondrous be his art
to guard his own, and sift another heart.
to mirth and wit he lead the cheerful way,
reserve open and discreet gay;
nor can the soft hour his secret soul betray.
bright as the young, as the old wise,
in both extreme, alike he give surprise.

in body active, yet his sprightly mind
within that body feel herself confine. —
when thought important claim no long place,
then building, plant, and the speedy race,
painting, and book successive take their round,
no blank of time be in his journal sound.
skilled in the end of his existence, he
to be unuseful thought be not to be.

polite his taste of art, but vain be be
where nature have so great do she part.
through tiresome medium we at truth arrive;
his easy knowledge seem intuitive.
no copy beauty mean form his mind,
by heaven a great original design.
the seed of science in his blood be sow,
bear with philosophy, it be all his own.

nor bribe nor threaten can his zeal abate
to serve his country, and avert her fate.
firm to her law and liberty he stand,
submit private view to public good.
who can obsequious with the current swim,
Whig may be call, but tory be to he.
person or party he no long know,
when swerve once from honest, just, and true.
oft have he stem the rage of impious time,
when patriot virtue bear the brand of crime.
to check proud tyrant bear, and faction awe,
but most devote to good king and law.
twice his dear country be on ruin brink,
resolve to save she, or with she to sink,
his brave attempt successful twice he see,
once in wise Brunswick, once in great Nassau.

no bold champion in religion cause;
none fight more battle, nor with more applause.
to arm he fly as danger press she home,
and snatch the hopeless prey from France and Rome.
but as from conscience pure, religion spring,
he freedom press in unessential thing.
coercive law, he right understand,
may make man hypocrite, but never good.
all genuine virtue be by nature free;
and will, when force, no long virtue be.

who just will his eloquence declare,
himself must wharton fertile genius share.
will you conceive it? see how over the sand
fair Thames advance where Augusta stand.
gentle he flow, but with resistless force,
not like the rapid rhone impetuous course;
though deep, so clear be his transparent stream,
his bottom rise to his surface seem.
full be his spread current, but restrain.
and still within its flowery bank contain.
alternate wealth his two extreme unfold,
downwards he send we bread, and upward gold.
flow, sweet river! still thy course prolong!
thus deep and clear, thus gentle, full and strong,
that distant age may the image see
of wharton flow eloquence in thou.
so shall no torrent soil thy crystal stream,
thou patriot emblem, and thou poet theme!

you noble who surround the british throne,
reflect its lustre, and improve your own;
you who resemble, in rich robe of state,
that majesty august on which you wait,
witness how often his decisive sense,
his wit, his art, and copious eloquence,
have single win the question to his side,
make Oxford blush, and saint John drop his pride;
while every ear be with his accent charm,
as every breast be with his ardour warm:
faction be touch and feel the secret force,
dumb, and convict, but without remorse,
envy with rage contend in her face,
to see his triumph and her just disgrace.

nor less in council do his weight appear,
the able statesman, as the bright peer.
thou mighty prince, who from perfidious power
do speed to save we in a timely hour;
while beauty join with valour form thy train,
to grace our court, and raise our martial vein;
who rise beam make droop credit thrive,
religion spring, fair liberty revive:
say, if thy choose minister, who sit
with thou to guide the great machine of state,
a more consummate character can boast,
than that which Britain in her WHARTON lose.

oh! have kind heaven (if prayer be not too late)
another lustrum add to his date,
how will his head, his heart, his hand conspire,
to punish traitor as their crime require!
to crush rebellion, bridle factious rage,
and quell the monster of a impious age!
how will his bosom beat with joy to see,
great GEORGE! the british legend true in thou!
to see thou over the vanquish dragon ride,
and free thy kingdom from his rage and pride!
while peace and plenty spread their golden wing
around the best of man, the best of king,
and every tide shall waft into thy port
wealth from all land, and homage from all court.

but sovereign heaven, who way be ever wise,
 just draw the glorious dawn before his eye;
and for his happy son reserve the sight
of brunswick power in its meridian light.
GEORGE shall in he prove honour, courage, truth,
and find the father in the pregnant youth.

thus the great leader of the hebrew band,
through open billow and over burn sand,
from egypt yoke, and haughty Pharaoh chain,
to Canaan fruitful hill, and flowery plain,
from pisgah height the promise land descry;
more be forbid; he see, rejoice, and die.
