religious discourse.

to speak for god, to sound religion praise,
 of sacred passion the wise warmth to raise;
 the infuse the contrite wish to conquest nigh,
 and point the step mysterious as they lie;
 to seize the wretch in full career of lust,
 and sooth the silent sorrow of the just:
 who will not bless for this the gift of speech,
 and in the tongue beneficence be rich? 

but who must talk? not the mere modern sage
 who suit the soften gospel to the age;
 who never to raise degenerate practice strive,
 but bring the precept down to christian live. 
not he, who maxim from cold read take,
 and never see himself but through a book:
 not he, who hasty in the morn of grace,
 soon sink extinguish as a comet blaze. 
not he, who strain in scripture-phrase to abound
 deaf to the sense, who stun we with the sound:
 but he, who silence love; and never deal
 in the false commerce of a truth unfelt. 

guilty you speak, if subtle from within
 blow on your word the self-admiring sin:
 if unresolved to choose the better part,
 your forward tongue belief your languid heart,
 but then speak safe, when your peaceful mind
 above self-seeking bless, on god recline,
 feel he at once suggest unlaboured sense,
 and open a sluce of sweet benevolence. 
some high behast of heaven you then fulfil,
 spring from his light your word, and issue by his will. 

nor yet expect so mystical long,
 till certain inspiration loose your tongue:
 express the precept run, "do good to all;"
 nor add, "whenever you find a inward call." 
it be god command: no farther motive seek,
 speak or without, or with reluctance speak:
 to love habitual sense by act aspire,
 and kindle, till you catch the gospel-fire. 

discovery immature of truth decline,
 nor prostitute the gospel pearl to swine. 
beware, too rash how you speak the whole,
 the vileness, or the treasure of your soul. 
if spurn by some, where weak on earth you lie,
 if judge a cheat or dreamer, where you fly;
 here the sublime strain, the exert air
 forgo; you be at the bar, not in the chair. 

to the pert reasoner if you speak at all,
 speak what within his cognizance may fall:
 expose not truth divine to reason rack,
 give he his own belove idea back,
 your notion till they look like he, dilute;
 blind he must be — but save he from dispute! 
but when we be turn of reason noontide glare,
 and thing begin to show we what they be,
 more free to such your true conception tell;
 yet graft they on the art where they excel. 
if springhtly sentiment detain their taste;
 if path of various learning they have trace;
 if their cool judgement long, yet fear to fix:
 fire, erudition, hesitation mix. 

all rule be dead: it be from the heart you draw
 the live lustre, and unerring law. 
a state of think in your manner show,
 nor fierce soar, nor supine low:
 other their lightness and each inward fault
 quench in the stillness of your deep thought,
 let all your gesture fix attention draw,
 and wide around diffuse infectious awe;
 present with god by recollection seem,
 yet present, by your cheerfulness, with they. 

without elation christian glory paint,
 nor by fond amorous phrase assume the saint. 
greet not frail man with compliment untrue,
 with smile to peace confirm and conquest due,
 there be who watch to adore the dawn of grace,
 and pamper the young proselyte with praise:
 kind, humble soul! they with a right good will
 admire his progress — till he stand stock still. 

speak but to thirsty mind of thing divine,
 who strong for thought, be free in you to join. 
the busy from his channel part with pain,
 the lanquid loathe a elevate strain:
 with these you aim but at good-natured chat,
 where all, except the love, be low and flat. 

not one address will different temper fit. 
the grave and gay, the heavy and the wit. 
wit will sift you; and most conviction find
 where least it be urge, and seem the least design. 
slow mind be mere passive; and forget
 truth not inculcate: to these repeat,
 avow your counsel, nor abstain from heat. 

some gentle soul, to gay indifference true,
 nor hope, nor fear, nor think the more for you. 
let love turn babbler here, and caution sleep,
 blush not for shallow speech, nor muse for deep;
 these to your humour, not your sense attend,
 it be not the advice that sway they, but the friend. 
other have large recess in their breast,
 with pensive process all they hear digest:
 here well-weighed word with wary foresight sow,
 for all you say will sink, and every seed will grow. 

at first acquaintance press each truth severe,
 stir the whole Odium of your character:
 let harsh doctrine all your word engross,
 and nature bleed on the daily cross. 
then to yourself the ascetic rule enjoin,
 to other stoop surprise benign;
 pity, if from themselves with pain they part,
 if stubborn nature long hold out the heart. 
their outwork now be gain; forbear to press
 the more you urge they, you prevail the less;
 let speech lay by its roughness to oblige,
 your speak life will carry on the siege:
 by your example strike, to god they strive
 to live, no long to themselves alive. 

to positive adept insidious yield,
 the ensure the conquest, seem to quit the field:
 large in your grant; be their opinion show:
 approve, amend — and wind it to your own. 
couch in your hint, if more resign they hear,
 both what they will be soon, and what they be:
 please these word now to their conscious breast,
 the anticipate voice hereafter bless. 

in soul just wake the path of light to choose,
 conviction keen, and zeal of prayer infuse. 
let they love rule; till free from passion reign,
 till blameless moral rectitude they gain. 

but lest reform from each extremer ill,
 they shall but civilise old nature still,
 the lofty charm and energy display
 of virtue model by the godhead ray;
 the lineament divine, perfection plan,
 and all the grandeur of the inner man. 
commence thus the agonize strife
 previous to nature death, and second life:
 strike by their own inclement pierce eye,
 their feeble virtue blush, subside and die;
 they view the scheme that mimic nature make,
 a fancy goodness, and religion shade;
 with angry scorn they now reject the whole,
 unchanged their heart, undeify their soul;
 till indignation sleep away to faith,
 and god own power and peace take root in sacred wrath. 

aim less to teach than love. the work begin
 in word, be crown by artless warmth alone. 
love to your friend a second office owe,
 yourself and he before heaven footstool throw:
 you place his form as suppliant by your side,
 (a helpless worm, for who the saviour die)
 into his soul call down the eternal beam,
 and longing ask to spend, and to be spend for he. 
