the enthusiast: or the lover of nature.

a poem.

by the reverend mr. JOSEPH Warton. write in 1740. 

you green-robed dryad, oft at dusky eve
by wonder shepherd see, to forest brown,
to unfrequented mead, and pathless wild,
lead i from garden deck with art vain pomp.
can gilt alcove, can marble-mimic god,
parterres embroider, obelisk, and urn
of high relief; can the long, spread lake,
or vista lessen to the sight; can stow,
with all her attic fane, such rapture raise,
as the thrush-haunted copse, where light leap
the fearful fawn the rustle leaf along,
and the brisk squirrel sport from bough to bough,
while from a hollow oak, who naked root
overhang a pensive rill, the busy bee
hum drowsy lullaby? the bard of old,
fair nature friend, seek such retreat, to charm
sweet echo with their song; oft too they meet
in summer evening, near sequester bower,
or mountain-nymph, or muse, and eager learn
the moral strain she teach to mend mankind.
as to a secret grot Aegeria steal
with patriot Numa, and in silent night
whisper he sacred law, he listen sit
rapt with her virtuous voice, old tyber lean
attentive on his urn, and hush his wave.

rich in her weep country spoil Versailles
may boast a thousand fountain, that can cast
the torture water to the distant heaven;
yet let i choose some pine-top precipice
abrupt and shaggy, whence a foamy stream,
like Anio, tumble roar; or some black heath,
where straggle stand the mournful juniper,
or yew-tree scathe; while in clear prospect round,
from the grove bosom spire emerge, and smoke
in bluish wreath ascend, ripe harvest wave,
low, lonely cottage, and ruin top
of gothic battlement appear, and stream
beneath the sunbeam twinkle. — the shrill lark,
that wake the woodman to his early task,
or lovesick philomel, who luscious lay
sooth lone night-wanderer, the moan dove
pity by listen milkmaid, far excel
the deep-mouth viol, the soul-lulling lute,
and battle-breathing trumpet. artful sound!
that please not like the chorister of air,
when first they hail the approach of laugh may.

can Kent design like nature? Mark where Thames
plenty and pleasure pour through Lincoln mead;
can the great artist, though with taste supreme
endue, one beauty to this Eden add?
though he, by rule unfettered, bold scorn
formality and method, round and square
disdain, plan irregular great.

creative Titian, can thy vivid stroke,
or thy, o graceful Raphael, dare to vie
with the rich tint that paint the breathe mead?
the thousand-coloured tulip, violet bell
snow-clad and meek, the vermil-tinctured rose,
and golden crocus? — yet with these the maid,
Phillis or Phoebe at a feast or wake,
her jetty lock enamel; fair she,
in innocence and home-spun vestment dress,
than if coerulean saphire at her ear
shine pendent, or a precious diamond-cross
heave gentle on her pant bosom white.

yonder shepherd idle stretch on the rude rock,
listen to dash wave, and sea mews clang
high-hovering over his head, who view beneath
the dolphin dance over the level brine,
feel more true bliss than the proud ammiral,
amid his vessel bright with burnish gold
and silken streamer, though his lordly nod
ten thousand war-worn mariner revere.
and great Aeneas gaze with more delight
on the rough mountain shagged with horrid shade,
(where cloud-compelling Jove, as fancy dream,
descend shake his direful aegis black)
than if he enter the high Capitol
on golden column rear, a conquer world
exhaust, to enrich its stately head.
more please he sleep in poor evander cott
on shaggy skin, lull by sweet nightingale,
than if a Nero, in a age refine,
beneath a gorgeous canopy have place
his royal guest, and bid his minstrel sound
soft slumberous lydian air, to sooth his rest.

happy the first of man, ere yet confine
to smoky city; who in shelter grove,
warm cave, and deep-sunk valley live and love,
by care unwounded; what the sun and shower,
and genial earth untillaged can produce,
they gather grateful, or the acorn brown,
or blush berry; by the liquid lapse
of murmur water call to slake their thirst,
or with fair nymph their sun-brown limb to bathe;
with nymph who fond clasp their favourite youth,
unawed by shame, beneath the beechen shade,
nor wile, nor artificial coyness know.
then door and wall be not; the melt maid
nor frown of parent fear, nor husband threat;
nor have curse gold their tender heart allure:
then beauty be not venal. injure love,
o whither, god of rapture, be thou flee?
while avarice wave his golden wand around,
abhor magician, and his costly cup
prepare with baneful drug, to enchant the soul
of each low-thoughted fair to wed for gain.

in earth first infancy (as sing the bard,
who strong paint what he bold think)
though the fierce north oft smite with iron whip
their shiver limb, though oft the bristly boar
or hungry lion awake they with their howl,
and scar they from their moss-grown cave to rove
houseless and cold in dark tempestuous night;
yet be not myriad in embattle field
sweep off at once, nor have the rage sea
overwhelm the founder bark and shriek crew;
in vain the glassy ocean smile to tempt
the jolly sailor unsuspecting harm,
for commerce never have spread her swell sail,
nor have the wonder nereid ever hear
the dash oar: then famine, want, and pine,
sink to the grave their faint limb; but we,
diseaseful dainty, riot and excess,
and feverish luxury destroy. in brake,
or marsh wild unknowing they crop
herb of malignant juice; to realm remote
while we for powerful poison mad roam,
from every noxious herb collect death.
what though unknown to those primaeval sire
the well-arched dome, people with breathe form
by fair italia skilful hand, unknown
the shapely column, and the crumble bust
of awful ancestor in long descent?
yet why shall man mistake deem it noble
to dwell in palace, and high-roofed hall,
than in God forest, architect supreme!
say, be the persian carpet, than the field
or meadow mantle gay, more rich weave;
or soft to the votary of ease
than bladed grass, perfume with dew-drop flower?
o taste corrupt! that luxury and pomp,
in specious name of polish manner veil,
shall proud banish nature simple charm!
all-beauteous nature! by thy boundless charm
oppress, o where shall i begin thy praise,
where turn the ecstatic eye, how ease my breast
that pant with wild astonishment and love!
dark forest, and the open lawn, refresh
with ever-gushing brook, hill, meadow, dale,
the balmy beanfield, the gay-clovered close,
so sweet interchange, the low ox,
the playful lamb, the distant waterfall
now faint hear, now swell with the breeze,
the sound of pastoral reed from hazel-bower,
the choral bird, the neigh steed, that snuff
his dapple mate, sting with intense desire,
the ripen orchard when the ruddy orb
betwixt the green leaf blush, the azure sky,
the cheerful sun that through earth vital pour
delight and health and heat; all, all conspire,
to raise, to sooth, to harmonise the mind,
to lift on wing of praise, to the great sire
of being and of beauty, at who nod
creation start from the gloomy vault
of dreary chaos, while the grisly king
murmur to feel his boisterous power confine.

what be the lay of artful ADDISON,
cold correct, to shakespeare warble wild?
who on the wind avon willowed bank
fair fancy find, and bear the smile babe
to a close cavern: (still the shepherd show
the sacred place, whence with religious awe
they hear, return from the field at eve,
strange whisper of sweet music through the air)
here, as with honey gather from the rock,
she feed the little prattler, and with song
oft soothe his wander ear, with deep delight
on her soft lap he sit, and catch the sound.

oft near some crowd city will i walk,
listen the far-off noise, rattle car,
loud shout of joy, sad shriek of sorrow, knell
full slow toll, instrument of trade,
strike my ear with one deep-swelling hum.
or wander near the sea, attend the sound
of hollow wind, and ever-beating wave,
even when wild tempest swallow up the plain,
and Boreas' blast, big hail, and rain combine
to shake the grove and mountain, will i sit,
pensive muse on the outrageous crime
that wake heaven vengeance: at such solemn hour,
daemon and goblin through the dark air shriek,
while he-cat, with her black-browed sister nine,
ride over the earth, and scatter woe and death.
then too, they say, in dear egyptian wild
the lion and the tiger prowl for prey
with roar loud! the listen traveller
start fear-struck, while the hollow-echoing vault
of pyramid increase the deathful sound.

but let i never fail in cloudless night,
when silent Cynthia in her silver car
through the blue concave slide, when shine the hill,
twinkle the stream, and wood look tip with gold,
to seek some level mead, and there invoke
old midnight sister contemplation sage,
(queen of the rugged brow, and stern-fixed eye)
to lift my soul above this little earth,
this folly-fettered world: to purge my ear,
that i may hear the roll planet song,
and tuneful turn sphere: if this debar.
the little fayes that dance in neighbour dale,
sip the night-dew, while they laugh and love,
shall charm i with aërial note. — as thus
i wander muse, lo, what awful form
yonder appear! sharp-eyed philosophy
clad in dun robe, a eagle on his wrist,
first meet my eye; next, virgin solitude
serene, who blush at each gazer sight;
then wisdom hoary head, with crutch in hand,
tremble, and bend with age; last virtue self
smile, in white array, who with her lead
sweet innocence, that prattle by her side,
a naked boy! — harrass with fear i stop,
i gaze, when virtue thus — 'whoever thou be,
'mortal, by who i deign to be behold
'in these my midnight-walk; depart, and say
'that henceforth i and my immortal train
'forsake britannia isle; who fond stoop
'to vice, her favourite paramour.' — she speak,
and as she turn, her round and rosy neck,
her flow train, and long ambrosial hair,
breathe rich odour, i enamour view.

o who will bear i then to western clime,
(since virtue leave our wretched land) to field
yet unpolluted with iberian sword:
the isle of innocence, from mortal view
deep retire, beneath a plantane's shade,
where happiness and quiet sit enthrone,
with simple indian swain, that i may hunt
the boar and tiger through savannah wild,
through fragrant desert, and through citron-grove.
there feed on date and herb, will i despise
the far-fetched cate of luxury, and hoard
of narrow-hearted avarice; nor heed
the distant din of the tumultuous world.
so when rude whirlwind rouse the roar main,
beneath fair Thetis sit, in choral cave,
serene gay, nor sink sailor cry
disturb her sportive nymph, who round her form
the light fantastic dance, or for her hair
weave rosy crown, or with accord lute
grace the soft warble of her honeyed voice.
