the philanthropic society. 

inscribe to the duke of Leeds.

when want, with waste mien and haggard eye,
retire in silence to her cell to die;
when over her child she hang with speechless dread,
faint and despair of tomorrow bread;
who shall approach to bid the conflict cease,
and to her part spirit whisper peace!
who thou, poor infant, that with aspect bland
do stretch forth innocent thy helpless hand,
shall pity then protect, when thou be throw
on the world waste, unfriended and alone!

o hapless infancy! if aught can move
the hard heart to pity and to love
it be sure find in thou: dim passion mark
stern manhood brow, where age impress dark
the steal line of sorrow; but thy eye
wear not distrust, or grief, or perfidy. 
though fortune storm with dismal shadow lower,
thy heart nor fear, nor feel the bitter shower;
thy tear be soon forget; thou will weep,
and then the murmur wind will hush thy sleep,
as it be with some sad music; — and thy smile,
unlike to those that cover cruel wile,
plead best thy speechless innocence, and lend
a charm may win the world to be thy friend.

but thou be oft abandon in thy smile,
and early vice thy easy heart beguile.
oh for some voice, that of the secret maze
where the grim passion lurk, the wind way
that lead to sin, and ruth, and deep lament,
may haply warn thou, while yet innocent
and beauteous as the springtime over the hill
advance, when each vale glad music fill!
else lose and wander, the benight mind
no spot of rest again shall ever find;
then the sweet smile, that erst enchant lay
their magic beauty on thy look, shall fade;
then the bird be warble song no more shall cheer
with morning music thy delight ear;
fell thought and mutter passion shall awake,
and the fair rose the sully cheek forsake!

as when still autumn gradual gloom be lay
far over the fade forest sadden shade,
a mournful gleam illumine the cold hill,
yet pale wander over the distant rill;
but when the hollow gust, slow rise, rave,
and high the pine on yond lone summit wave,
each mild charm, like picture of a dream,
have perish, mute the bird, and dark the stream!
scuds the dree sleet upon the whirlwind bear,
and scowl the landscape cloud and forlorn! 

so fade, so perish frail virtue hue;
her last and linger smile seem but to rue,
like autumn, every summer beauty rest,
till all be dark and to the winter leave.
yet spring, with live touch, shall paint again
the green-leaved forest, and the purple plain;
with mingle melody the wood shall ring,
the whisper breeze its long-lost incense fling:
but, innocence! when once thy tender flower
the sickly taint have touch, where be the power
that shall bring back its fragrance, or restore
the tint of loveliness, that shine no more?

how then for thou, who pine in life gloom,
abandon child! can hope or virtue bloom!
for thou, expose amid the desert drear,
which no glad gale or vernal sunbeam cheer!

though some there be, who lift their head sublime,
nor heed the transient storm of fate or time;
too oft, alas! beneath unfriendly sky,
the tender blossom shrink its leaf, and die!

go, struggle with thy fate, pursue thy way; —
though thou be poor, the world around be gay!
thou have no bread; but on thy ache sight
proud luxury pavilion glitter bright;
in thy cold ear the song of gladness swell,
while vacant folly chime her tinkle bell:
the careless crowd prolong their hollow glee,
nor one relent bosom think of thou.

will not the indignant spirit then rebel,
and the dark tide of passion fearful swell!
will not despite, perhaps, or bitter need,
urge then thy temper to some direful deed!
pale guilt shall call thou to her ghastly band,
or murder welcome thou with reek hand! 
o wretched state, where our best feeling lie
deep sink in sullen, hopeless apathy!
or wakeful care, or gloomy terror start,
and night and tempest mingle in the heart!

all mournful to the pensive sage eye,
the monument of human glory lie;
fall palace, crush by the ruthless haste
of time, and many a empire silent waste,
where, 'midst the vale of long-departed year,
the form of desolation dim appear,
point to the wild plain with ruin spread,
the wreck of age, and record of the dead!
but where a sight shall shudder sorrow find,
sad as the ruin of the human mind; —
as man, by his great maker raise sublime
amid the universe, ordain to climb
the arduous height where virtue sit serene; —
as man, the high lord of this nether scene,
so fall, so lose! — his noble boast destroy,
his sweet affection leave a piteous void!

but oh, sweet charity! what sound be those
that meet the listen ear, soft as the close
of distant music, when the hum of day
be hush, and die gale the air convey!
come, hapless orphan, meek compassion cry,
wherever, unsheltered outcast! you abide
the bitter drive wind, the freeze sky,
the oppressor scourge, the proud man contumely;
come, hapless orphan! you who never see
a tear of kindness shed on your cold straw;
who never meet with joy the morning light,
or lisp your little prayer of peace at night;
come, hapless orphan! nor, when youth shall spring
soar aloft, as on a eagle wing,
shall you forsake on the ground be leave,
of hope, of virtue, and of peace bereave!
far from the springtide gale, and joyous day,
in the deep cavern of despair you lay:
she, iron-hearted mother, never press
your waste form with transport to her breast;
when none over all the world your 'plaint will hear,
she never kiss away the fall tear,
or fond smile, forgetful, to behold
some infant grace its early charm unfold.
she never with mingle hope and rise fear,
sigh for the fortune of your future year:
or see you hand in hand rejoice stray
beneath the morning sun, on youth delightful way.
but happy scene invite, and fair sky;
from your dark bed, child of woe, arise!

in cave where peace never smile, where joy never come,
where friendship eye never glisten at the name
of one she love, where famine and despair
sit silent 'amid the damp and lurid air,
the soothe voice be hear; a beam of light
be cast upon their feature, sink and white;
with tremble joy they catch the steal sound;
their famish little one come smile round.

sweet infancy! who all the world forsake,
thou have put on again thy cherub look:
guilt, shrink at the sight, in deep dismay
fly cower, and resign his wonted prey.

but who be she, in garb of misery clad,
yet of less vulgar mien? a look so sad
the mourn maniac wear, so wild, yet meek;
a beam of joy now wander over her cheek,
the pale eye visit; it leave it soon,
as fade the dewy glance of the moon
upon some wander cloud, while slow the ray
retire, and leave more dark the heaven wide way.

lose mother, early doom to guilt and shame,
who friend of youth now sigh not over thy name,
heavy have sorrow fall upon thy head,
yet think — one hope remain when thou be dead;
thy houseless child, thy only little one,
shall not look round, defenceless and alone,
for one to guide her youth; — nor with dismay
each stranger cold unfeeling look survey.
she shall not now be leave a prey to shame,
while slow disease prey on she fade frame;
nor, when the bloom of innocence be flee,
thus faint bow her unprotected head.
oh, she shall live, and piety and truth,
the lovely ornament, shall grace her youth.
and shall her eye with soft lustre shine,
and shall she wear such smile as once be thy,
the smile of peace and virtue they shall prove,
bless the calm abode of faithful love.

for you who thus, by pure compassion teach,
have weep over human sorrow; — who have seek
want dismal cell, and pale as from the dead
to life and light the speechless orphan lead; —
trust that the deed, in mercy book enrol,
approve spirit of the just behold!

meanwhile, new virtue here, as on the wing
of morn, from sorrow dreary shade shall spring;
young modesty, with fair untainted bloom;
and industry, that sing beside her loom;
and ruddy labour, issue from his hatch
ere the slant sunbeam strike the lowly thatch;
and sweet contentment, smile on a rock,
like a fair shepherdess beside her flock;
and tender love, that hastes with myrtle-braid
to bind the tress of the favour maid;
and piety, with unclasp holy book,
lift to heaven her mildly-beaming look:
these village virtue on the plain shall throng,
and albion hill resound a cheerful song;
while charity, with dewy eyelid bland,
lead a lisp infant in her hand,
shall bend at pure religion holy shrine,
and say, these child, god of love, be thy!
