MARY, queen of Scot:

a elegy.

the balmy zephyr over the woodland stray,
 and gentle stir the bosom of the lake:
 the fawn that pant in the covert lie,
 now through the bloomy park their revel take. 

pale rise the rugged hill that skirt the north,
 the wood glow yellow by the evening ray,
 silent and beauteous flow the silver forth,
 and Aman murmur through the willow stray. 

but ah! what mean this silence in the grove,
 where oft the wild-note soothe the lovesick boy? 
why cease in Mary bower the song of love,
 the song of love, of innocence, and joy? 

when bright the lake reflect the set ray,
 the sportive virgin tread the flowery green;
 and by the moon, full oft in cheerful may,
 the merry bridemaid at the dance be see. 

but who these nymph that through the copse appear
 in robe of white adorn with violet blue? 
fond with purple flower they deck yond bier,
 and wave in solemn pomp the bough of yew. 

supreme in grief, her eye confuse with woe,
 appear the lady of the aërial train,
 tall as the sylvan goddess of the bow,
 and fair as she who weep Adonis slay. 

such be the pomp when gilead virgin band,
 wander by judah flowery mountain, weep,
 and with fair Iphis by the hallow strand
 of siloe brook a mournful sabbath keep. 

by the resplendent cross with thistle twine,
 it be Mary guardian genius lose in woe:
 "ah say, what deep wrong have thus combine
" to heave with restless sigh thy breast of snow! 

 "oh stay, you dryad, nor unfinished fly
" your solemn rite; here come no foot profane:
 "the muses son, and hallow be his eye,
" implore your stay, implore to join the strain. 

 "see, from her cheek the glow life-blush fly;
" alas, what faulter sound of woe be these! 
 "you nymph, who fond watch her languid eye,
" oh say, what music will her soul appease! " 

 "resound the solemn dirge, the nymph reply,
" and let the turtle moan in Mary bower,
 "let grief indulge her grand sublimity,
" and melancholy wake her melt power:

 "for art have triumph; art, that never stand
" on honour side, or generous transport know,
 "have die its haggard hand in Mary blood,
" and over her fame have breathe its blight dew. 

 "but come, you nymph, you woodland spirit, come,
" and with funereal flower your tress braid,
 "while in this hallow grove we raise the tomb,
" and consecrate the song to Mary shade. 

 "o sing what smile her youthful morning wear,
" she every charm, and every lively grace;
 "when nature happy touch can add no more,
" heaven lend a angel beauty to her face. 

 "o! whether by the moss grow bushy dell,
" where from the oak depend the mistletoe,
 "where creep ivy shade the druid cell,
" where from the rock the gurgle water flow;

 "or whether sportive over the cowslip bed,
" you through the haunt dale of Mona glide,
 "or brush the upland lea, when Cynthia shed
" her silvery light on snowdon hoary side:

 "hither, you gentle guardian of the fair,
" by virtue tear, by weep beauty, come;
 "unbind the festive robe, unbind the hair,
" and wave the cypress bough at Mary tomb. 

 "and come, you fleet magicician of the air,
" the mournful lady of the chorus cry,
 "your airy tint of baleful hue prepare,
" and through this grove bid Mary fortune glide:

 "and let the song with solemn harp join,
" and wail note unfold the tale of woe. " 
she speak, and wake through the breathe wind
 from lyre unseen the solemn harp flow. 

the song begin: "how bright her early morn! 
" what last joy her smile fate portend! 
 "to wield the awful british sceptre bear,
" and gaul young heir her bridal-bed ascend. 

 "see, round her bed, light-floating on the air
" the little love their purple wing display
 "when sudden, shriek at the dismal glare
" of funeral torch, far they speed away. 

 "far with the love each blissful omen speed,
" her eighteenth April hear her widow moan;
 "the bridal bed the sable hearse succeed,
" and struggle faction shake her native throne. 

 "no more a goddess in the swim dance
" may thou, o queen, thy lovely form display;
 "no more thy beauty reign the charm of France,
" nor in versailles proud bower outshine the day. 

 "a nation stern and stubborn to command,
" and now convulse with faction fierce rage,
 "commit its sceptre to thy gentle hand,
" and ask a bridle from thy tender age. 

 "domestic bliss, that dear, that sovereign joy,
" far from her hearth be see to speed away;
 "strait dark-browed faction enter in destroy
" the seed of peace, and mark she for their prey. 

 "no more by moonshine to the nuptial bower
" her Francis come, by love soft fetter lead;
 "far other spouse now wake her midnight hour,
" enrage, and reek from the harlot bed. 

 "ah! draw the veil," shrill tremble through the air:
 the veil be draw, but dark scene arise,
 another nuptial couch the fate prepare,
 the baleful teem source of deep woe. 

the bridal torch her evil angel wave,
 far from the couch offend prudence flee;
 of deep crime deceitful faction rave,
 and rouse she tremble from the fatal bed. 

the hind be see in arm, and glitter spear
 instead of crook the Grampian shepherd wield;
 fanatic rage the ploughman visage wear,
 and red with slaughter lie the harvest-field. 

from Borthwick field, desert and forlorn,
 the beauteous queen all tear be see to fly;
 now through the street a weep captive bear,
 her woe the triumph of the vulgar eye. 

again the vision shift the fatal scene;
 again forlorn from rebel arm she fly,
 and unsuspecting on a sister queen
 the lovely injure fugitive relief. 

when wisdom baffle own the attempt in vain,
 heaven oft delight to set the virtuous free:
 some friend appear, and break affliction chain,
 but ah, no generous friend appear for thou! 

a prison ghastly wall and grate cell
 deform the airy scenery as it past;
 the haunt where listless melancholy dwell,
 where every genial feeling shrink aghast. 

no female eye her sickly bed to tend! 
 "ah cease to tell it in the female ear! 
a woman stern command! a proffer friend! 
" oh generous passion, peace, forbear, forbear! 

 "and can, oh Tudor, can thy breast retain
" no soften thought of what thy woe have be,
 "when thou, the heir of England crown, in vain
" do sue the mercy of a tyrant queen? 

 "and can no pang from tender memory wake,
" and feel those woe that once have be thy own;
 "no plead tear to drop for Mary sake,
" for Mary sake, the heir of England throne? 

 "alas! no plead pang thy memory know,
" dry be the tear which for thyself have flow;
 "dark politics alone engage thy view;
" with female jealousy thy bosom glow. 

 "and say, do wisdom own thy stern command? 
" do honour wave his banner over the deed? 
 "no; — Mary fate thy name shall ever brand,
" and ever over her woe shall pity bleed. 

 "the babe that prattle on his nurse knee,
" when first thy woeful captive hour begin,
 "ere heaven, oh hapless mary, set thou free,
" that babe to battle march in arm a man. " 

a awful pause ensue — with speak eye,
 and hand half raise, the guardian wood nymph wait,
 while slow and sad the airy scene arise,
 stain with the last deep woe of Mary fate. 

with dreary black hang round the hall appear,
 the thirsty saw-dust strew the marble floor,
 blue gleam the ax, the block its shoulder rear,
 and pike and halbert guard the iron door. 

the cloud moon her dreary glimpse shed,
 and Mary maid, a mournful train, pass by;
 languid they walk, and listless hang the head,
 and silent tear pace down from every eye. 

serene and noble mild appear the queen,
 she smile on heaven, and bow the injure head:
 the ax be lift — from the deathful scene
 the guardian turn, and all the picture flee:

it flee: the wood nymph over the distant lawn,
 as rapt in vision, dart their earnest eye;
 so when the huntsman hear the rustle fawn,
 he stand impatient of the start prize. 

the sovereign dame her awful eye-ball roll,
 as cuma maid when by the god inspire;
 "the depth of age to my sight unfold,"
 she cry, "and Mary meed my breast have fire. 

 "on tudor throne her son shall ever reign,
" age after age shall see their flag unfurled,
 "with sovereign pride, whereve roar the main,
" stream to the wind, and awe the tremble world. 

 "nor in their Britain shall they reign alone,
" age after age through lengthen time shall see
 "her branch race on europe every throne,
" and Goths and vandal bend to they the knee. 

 "but Tudor as a fruitless gourd shall die;
" i see her death-scene — on the lowly flore
 "dreary she sit, cold grief have glassed her eye,
" and anguish gnaw she till she breathe no more. 

but hark — loud howl through the midnight gloom,
 faction be rouse, and send her baleful yell! 
oh save, you generous few, your Mary tomb,
 oh save her ash from the blast spell:

 "and see where time with brighten face serene,
" point to yond far, but gloricus open sky;
 "see truth walk forth, majestic awful queen,
" and party blacken mist before her fly. 

 "falsehood unmask withdraw her ugly train,
" and Mary virtue all illustrious shine —
 "yes, thou have friend, the godlike and humane
" of late age, injure queen, be thy. " 

the milky splendor of the dawn ray
 now through the grove a tremble radiance shed,
 with sprightly note the wood-lark hail the day,
 and with the moonshine all the vision flee. 
