to colonel r—s. 

by s. B—. ESQ.

ere this can drown the tender husband eye,
 and rend the fond lover heart with sigh,
 no more shall those dear name my rapture move,
 low in the grave, and deaf to thou and love. 
firm in thy country cause, thy king defence,
 when honour call thy patriot virtue hence;
 the slow disease which taint then my blood,
 in vain by all the power of art withstand,
 aid by grief more deadly, creep at length
 through every vein, and undermine my strength. 
already death have summon i away,
 and love, fond love, scarce gain a hour delay,
 yet without dread death awful call i hear,
 no dark presage chill my soul with fear,
 no unrepented folly dread the grave,
 and one short moment more, with anguish crave,
 prepare i be call, from every terror free,
 save that for ever i must part from thou. 
but when on thou my thought reflect rove,
 and all the pleasure of our virtuous love;
 to think how bless we be, how soon must part,
 one deep-felt pang will pierce the dull heart;
 to cast one longing, linger look behind,
 can be no guilty weakness of the mind;
 methinks when heaven have kind bless we here,
 fond love, at part, shed a pious tear. 
still with each comfort will i cheer my heart,
 resign to god, though tremble to depart. 
short be man knowledge of a future state,
 perplex with doubt, and ignorant of fate;
 this one important truth we only know. 
bliss wait the good, the bad, eternal woe. 
but what those blessing, what those woe shall be,
 through life dull casement since no eye can see,
 let fancy paint the rapture of the sky,
 and scene of visionary transport rise. 
still, as be ever here my fond joy,
 let i for thou my every care employ;
 still let i serve, and though unseen, be near,
 not life itself impart a charm more dear. 
from every dangerous step those foot to guide,
 which here to follow be my virtuous pride;
 when wrath provoke, or fortune prove unkind,
 to lull the rage tumult of thy mind:
 the sweet around of balmy sleep to shed,
 when sickness bind thou to her painful bed;
 to guard thou safe through the dreadful day,
 when slaughter stalk from rank to rank for prey;
 still from thy breast to avert the death-fraught ball,
 and bid the uplift weapon guiltless fall:
 still at thy side, as be my wish below,
 your guardian-angel wheresoever you go. 
with thought like these my droop soul i warm,
 plume every hope, and every fear disarm. 
but, ah! to think what thy fond heart must feel,
 when first these line the fatal news reveal,
 what pang of grief will rend thy gentle breast,
 sink my sad soul, with pain and love oppress. 
but let i from the tender theme refrain,
 while every word but sharpen every pain;
 for when the hand that wound will heal the fore,
 the generous heart will only bleed the more. 
my late breath for thou a prayer shall sigh,
 if not desert by myself, i die. 
no more shall i thy much-loved face review;
 adieu, for ever, best of friend, adieu! 
