the hymn. 

to the almighty on his radiant throne,
 let endless Hallelujas rise! 
praise he, you wondrous height to we unknown,
 praise he, you heaven unreached by mortal eye,
 praise he, in your degree, you sublunary sky! 

praise he, you angel that before he bow,
 you creature of celestial frame,
 our guest of old, our wakeful guardian now,
 praise he, and with like zeal our heart inflame,
 transport then our praise to seat from whence you come! 

praise he, thou sun in thy meridian force;
 exalt he, all you star and light! 
praise he, thou moon in thy revolve course,
 praise he, thou gentle guide of silent night,
 which do to solemn praise, and serious thought invite. 

praise he, you humid vapour, which remain
 unfreeze by the sharp air;
 praise he, as you return in shower again,
 to bless the earth and make her pasture fair:
 praise he, you climb fire, the emblem of our prayer. 

praise he, you water petrify above,
 you shred cloud that fall in snow,
 praise he, for that you so divide move;
 you hailstone, that you do no large grow,
 nor, in one solid mass, oppress the world below. 

praise he, you soar fowl, still as you fly,
 and on gay plume your body raise;
 you insect, which in dark recess lie,
 although the extreme distance you try,
 be reconcile in this, to offer mutual praise. 

praise he, thou earth, with thy unbounded store;
 you depth which to the center tend:
 praise he you beast which in the forest roar;
 praise he you serpent, though you downwards bend,
 who make your bruise head our ladder to ascend. 

praise he, you man who youthful vigour warm;
 you child, hasten to your prime;
 praise he, you virgin of unsullied charm,
 with beauteous lip become sacred rhime:
 you age, give he praise for your increase of time. 

praise he, you monarch in supreme command,
 by anthem, like the hebrew king;
 then with enlarge zeal throughout the land
 reform the number, and reclaim the string,
 convert to his praise, the most harmonious thing. 

you senator preside by our choice,
 and you hereditary peer! 
praise he by union, both in heart and voice;
 praise he, who your agree council steer,
 produce sweet sound than the accord sphere. 

praise he, you native altar of the earth! 
you mountain of stupendious size! 
praise he, you tree and fruit which there have birth,
 praise he, you flame that from their bowel rise,
 all fit for the use of grateful sacrifice. 

he speak the word; and from the chaos rise
 the form and species of each kind:
 he speak the word, which do their law compose,
 and all, with never cease order join,
 till ruffle for our sin by his chastise wind. 

but now, you storm, that have your fury spend,
 as you his dictate do obey,
 let now your loud and threaten note relent. 
tune all your murmur to a soft key,
 and bless that gracious hand, that do your progress stay. 

from my contemn retreat, obscure and low,
 as grot from whence the wind disperse,
 may this his praise as far extend flow;
 and if that future time shall read my verse. 
though worthless in it self, let they his praise rehearse. 
