florimelia, the second pastoral.

by mr. Newton,

as florimelia watch her snowy fold,
 soft florimelia with her lock of gold,
 low in a vale beneath a spread shade,
 two ruddy youth that love the beauteous maid,
 to please the fair thus form the rival song,
 while the herd listen to each tuneful tongue. 

philaster.

this morn i wander through a poplar grove,
 where a lone turtle mourn her absent love;
 with pensive coo she well express her woe,
 lull by her voice the brook more gentle flow;
 when lo the partner of her nest draw nigh
 with hover wing: and bid her sorrow fly. 
all sprightly now with brisk note she sing,
 prune her soft breast, and spread her joyful wing. 
no more the grove be witness to her woe,
 such be the joy that faithful lover know. 

chromis.

as yester'-even, while my sheep do feed
 on a soft bank, i tune my oaten reed;
 it be there a single violet i spy,
 that breathe its odour, droop its head, and die;
 when from the root a gay companion grow,
 fair as the first and fresh as morning dew:
 who fragrant leaf perfume the border plain;
 then do the first its former beauty gain,
 please with each other side by side they grow,
 such be the joy that faithful lover know. 

philaster.

as sweet as be the violet be my love. 

chromis.

and i as constant as the turtledove. 

philaster.

soft be the murmur of a southern wind,
 and the complain of a lovesick mind;
 soft be the breathe of a infant sleep,
 but she be soft than her harmless sheep. 

chromis.

sweet be the gale that meet the rosy morn,
 sweet be the flower that yonder mead adorn;
 sweet be the bank on which my lambkin play,
 but my love nymph be sweet as early day. 

philaster.

where walk my love — there open rose bloom,
 and yellow cowslip shed a choice perfume;
 when she be go the open rose fade,
 the sun himself lament the absent maid. 

chromis.

when smile my love, then smile the groves below;
 and the clear sky with bright lustre glow:
 but when she frown, those groves be glad no more,
 and the sky lower that be bright before. 

philaster.

while we prefer the spring to winter storm,
 or goodly Cedars to unseemly thorn;
 while maple keep below the lofty pine,
 shall my love nymph before her sister shine? 

chromis.

as we prefer the peacock to the crow,
 as maiden fair than their mother show;
 and as my voice above philaster swell,
 so my love nymph each other nymph excel. 

philaster.

you sing last night with more melodious air,
 as you lay plait cloe yellow hair;
 while the shrill pipe her slender finger ply,
 the pipe you give she, and your heart beside. 

chromis.

it be you i see beneath a maple shade;
 with blubber cheek you curse the cruel maid,
 who break your cypress bowl on yonder plain,
 and send the willow to she slight Swain. 

philaster.

 'tell i at midnight where do mandrake groan,
 and blood fall drop from the darken moon:
 tell this, and i shall for thy learning yield,
 a coalblack lamb that sport in yonder field. 

chromis.

tell i, where oak have tender medlar bear,
 and shrub yield apple that be crab before;
 and for thy knowledge i shall not refuse
 to give the best of all my speckle ewe. 

thus sing the shepherd while the listen maid,
 praise both their song, and thus their song repay;
 behold this lovely pine-apple, she cry;
 and this twin-chesnut once my chief pride,
 these long be my, and these i give to you;
 to both a prize, a prize to both be due. 

now nightly vapour taint the cold air,
 they part the flock, and to the fold repair;
 and the black cloud forbid their long stay,
 their foot unwilling tread their destine way
 at once: farewell too lovely nymph, they cry,
 and on the virgin cast a part eye. 
