write in the year 1719. 

Britannia. a poem.

as on the sea-beat shore Britannia sit,
 of her degenerate son the fade fame,
 deep in her anxious heart, revolve sad:
 bare be her throb bosom to the gale,
 that hoarse, and hollow, from the bleak surge blow;
 loose flow her tress; rent her azure robe. 
hang over the deep from her majestic brow
 she tear the laurel, and she tear the bay. 
nor cease the copious grief to bathe her cheek;
 nor cease her sob to murmur to the main. 
peace discontent nigh, depart, stretch
 her dove-like wing. and war, though great rouse,
 yet mourn his fetter hand. while thus the queen
 of nation speak; and what she say the muse
 record, faithful, in unbidden verse. 

even not yond sail, that, from the sky-mixt wave,
 dawn on the sight, and waft the royal youth,
 a freight of future glory to my shore;
 even not the flatter view of golden day,
 and rise period yet of bright renown,
 beneath the parent, and their endless line
 through late revolve time, can sooth my rage;
 while, unchastised, the insult Spaniard dare
 infest the trade flood, full of vain war
 despise my navy, and my merchant seize;
 as, trust to false peace, they fearless roam
 the world of water wild, make, by the toil,
 and liberal blood of glorious age, i:
 nor burst my sleep thunder on their head. 
whence this unwonted patience? this weak doubt? 
this tame beseech of reject peace? 
this meek forbearance? this unnative fear,
 to generous briton never know before? 
and fail my fleet for this; on indian tide
 to float, unactive, with the veer wind? 
the mockery of war! while hot disease,
 and sloth distemper, sweep off burn crowd,
 for action ardent; and amid the deep,
 inglorious, sink they in a watery grave. 
there now they lie beneath the roll flood,
 far from their friend, and country unavenged;
 and back the weep war-ship come again,
 dispirited, and thin; her son ashamed
 thus idle to review their native shore;
 with not one glory sparkle in their eye,
 one triumph on their tongue. a passenger,
 the violate merchant come along;
 that far-sought wealth, for which the noxious gale
 he draw, and sweat beneath equator sun,
 by lawless force detain; a force that soon
 will melt away, and every spoil resign,
 be once the british lion hear to roar. 
whence be it that the proud iberian thus,
 in their own well-asserted element,
 dare rouse to wrath the master of the main? 
who tell he, that the big incumbent war
 will not, ere this, have roll his tremble port
 in smoky ruin? and his guilty store,
 win by the ravage of a butcher world,
 yet unatoned, sink in the swallow deep,
 or lead the glitter prize into the Thames? 

there be a time (oh let my languid son
 resume their spirit at the rouze thought!) 
when all the pride of Spain, in one dread fleet,
 swell over the labour surge; like a whole heaven
 of cloud, wide-rolled before the boundless breeze. 
gay the splendid armament along
 exultant plough, reflect a red gleam,
 as sink the sun, over all the flame vast;
 tall, gorgeous, and elate; drink with the dream
 of easy conquest; while their bloat war,
 stretch out from sky to sky, the gather force
 of age hold in its capacious womb. 
but soon, regardless of the cumbrous pomp,
 my dauntless briton come, a gloomy few,
 with tempest black, the goodly scene deform,
 and lay their glory waste. the bolt of fate
 resistless thunder through their yield side;
 fierce over their beauty blaze the lurid flame;
 and seize in horrid grasp, or shatter wide,
 amid the mighty water, deep they sink. 
then too from every promontory chill,
 rank fen, and cavern where the wild wave work,
 i sweep confederate wind, and swell a storm. 
round the glad isle, snatch by the vengeful blast,
 the scatter remnant drive; on the blind shelve,
 and point rock, that mark the indent shore,
 relentless dash, where loud the northern main
 howl through the fracture caledonian isle. 

such be the dawn of my liquid reign;
 but since how vast it grow, how absolute,
 even in those trouble time, when dreadful Blake
 I will angry nation with the british name,
 let every humble state, let Europe say,
 sustain, and balance, by my naval arm. 
ah what must these immortal spirit think
 of your poor shift? these, for their country good,
 who face the black danger, know no fear,
 no mean submission, but command peace. 
ah how with indignation must they burn? 
(if ought, but joy, can touch etherial breast)
 with shame? with grief? to see their feeble son
 shrink from that empire over the conquer sea,
 for which their wisdom plane, their council glow,
 and their vein bleed through many a toil age. 

oh first of human blessing! and supreme! 
fair peace! how lovely, how delightful thou! 
by who wide tie, the kindred son of man,
 like brother live, in amity combine,
 and unsuspicious faith; while honest toil
 give every joy, and to those joy a right,
 which idle, barbarous rapine but usurp. 
pure be thy reign; when, unaccursed by blood,
 nought, save the sweetness of indulgent shower,
 trickle distil into the vernant glebe;
 instead of mangle carcass, sad-seen,
 when the blythe sheaf lie scatter over the field,
 when only shine share, the crooked knife,
 and hook imprint the vegetable wound;
 when the land blush with the rose alone,
 the fall fruitage, and the bleed vine. 
oh, peace! thou source, and soul of social life;
 beneath who calm, inspire influence,
 science his view enlarge, art refine,
 and swell commerce open all her port;
 bless be the man divine, who give we thou! 
who bid the trumpet hush his horrid clang,
 nor blow the giddy nation into rage;
 who sheath the murderous blade; the deadly gun
 into the well-piled armoury return;
 and, every vigour from the work of death,
 to grateful industry convert, make
 the country flourish, and the city smile. 
unviolated, he the virgin sing;
 and he the smile mother to her train. 
of he the shepherd, in the peaceful dale,
 chant; and, the treasure of his labour sure,
 the husbandman of he, as at the plough,
 or team, he toil. with he the sailor sooth,
 beneath the tremble moon, the midnight wave;
 and the full city, warm, from street to street,
 and shop to shop, responsive, ring of he. 
nor joy one land alone; his praise extend
 far as the sun roll the diffusive day;
 far as the breeze can bare the gift of peace,
 till all the happy nation catch the song. 

what will not peace! the patriot bear for thou? 
what painful patience? what incessant care? 
what mix anxiety? what sleepless toil? 
even from the rash protect what reproach? 
for he thy value know; thy friendship he
 to human nature: but the better thou,
 the rich of delight, sometime the more
 inevitable war, when russian force
 awake the fury of a injure state. 
then the good easy man, who reason rule;
 who, while unhurt, know nor offence, nor harm,
 rouse by bold insult, and injurious rage,
 with sharp, and sudden check, the astonish son
 of violence confound; firm as his cause,
 his bold heart; in awful justice clad;
 his eye effulge a peculiar fire:
 and, as he charge through the prostrate war,
 his keen arm teach faithless man, no more
 to dare the sacred vengeance of the just. 

and what, my thoughtless son, shall fire you more,
 than when your weil-earned empire of the deep
 the least beginning injury receive? 
what better cause can call your lightning forth? 
your thunder wake? your dear life demand? 
what better cause, than when your country see
 the sly destruction at her vital aim? 
for oh it much import you, it be your all,
 to keep your trade entire, entire the force,
 and honour of your fleet; over that to watch,
 even with a hand severe, and jealous eye. 
in intercourse be gentle, generous, just,
 by wisdom polish, and of manner fair;
 but on the sea be terrible, untamed,
 unconquerable still: let none escape,
 who shall but aim to touch your glory there. 
be there the man, into the lion den
 who dare intrude, to snatch his young away? 
and be a briton seize? and seize beneath
 the slumber terror of a british fleet? 
then ardent rise! oh great in vengeance rise;
 overturn the proud, teach rapine to restore:
 and as you ride sublime round the world,
 make every vessel stoop, make every state
 at once their welfare and their duty know. 
this be your glory; this your wisdom; this
 the native power for which you be design
 by fate, when fate design the firm state,
 that ever be seat on the subject sea;
 a state, alone, where liberty shall live,
 in these late time, this evening of mankind,
 when Athens, Rome, and Carthage be no more,
 the world almost in slavish sloth dissolve. 
for this, these rock around your coast be throw;
 for this, your oak, peculiar harden, shoot
 strong into sturdy growth; for this, your heart
 swell with a sullen courage, grow still
 as danger grow; and strength, and toil for this
 be liberal pour over all the fervent land. 
then cherish this, this unexpensive power,
 undangerous to the public ever prompt,
 by lavish nature thrust into your hand:
 and, unencumbered with the bulk immense
 of conquest, whence huge empire rise and fall,
 self-crushed, extend your reign from shore to shore,
 whereve the wind your high behest can blow,
 and fix it deep on this eternal base. 
for shall the slide fabrrick once give way,
 soon slacken quite, and past recovery break,
 it gather ruin as it roll along,
 steep-rushing down to that devour gulph,
 where many a mighty empire bury lie. 
and shall the big redundant flood of trade,
 in which ten thousand thousand labour join
 their several current, till the boundless tide
 roll in a radiant deluge over the land,
 shall this bright stream, the least inflect, point
 its course another way, over other land
 the various treasure will resistless pour,
 never to be win again; its ancient tract
 leave a vile channel, desolate, and dead,
 with all around a miserable waste. 
not Egypt, be, her better heaven, the Nile
 turn in the pride of flow; when over his rock,
 and roar cataract, beyond the reach
 of dizzy vision pile, in one wide flash
 a ethiopian deluge foam amain;
 (whence wonder fable trace he from the sky)
 even not that prime of earth, where harvest crowd
 on untilled harvest, all the teem year,
 if of the fat overflow culture rob,
 be then a more uncomfortable wild,
 sterile, and void; than of her trade deprive,
 briton, your boast isle: her prince sink;
 her high-built honour moulder to the dust;
 unnerved her force; her spirit vanish quite;
 with rapid wing her riches flee away;
 her unfrequented port alone the sign
 of what she be; her merchant scatter wide;
 her hollow shop shut up; and in her street,
 her field, wood, market, village, and road,
 the cheerful voice of labour hear no more. 

oh let not then waste luxury impair
 that manly soul of toil, which string your nerve,
 and your own proper happiness create! 
oh let not the soft, penetrate plague
 creep on the free-born mind! and work there,
 with the sharp tooth of many a new-formed want,
 endless, and idle all, eat out the heart
 of liberty; the high conception blast;
 the noble sentiment, the impatient scorn
 of base subjection, and the swell wish
 for general good, erase from the mind:
 while nought save narrow selfishness succeed,
 and low design, the sneak passion all
 let loose, and reign in the rankle breast. 
induce at last, by scarce-perceived degree,
 sap the very frame of government,
 and life, a total dissolution come;
 sloth, ignorance, dejection, flattery, fear,
 oppression rage over the waste he make;
 the human being almost quite extinct;
 and the whole state in broad corruption sink. 
oh shun that gulph: that gape ruin shun! 
and countless age roll it far away
 from you, you heaven-beloved! may liberty,
 the light of life! the sun of human kind! 
whence hero, bard, and patriot borrow flame,
 even where the keen depressive north descend,
 still spread, exalt, and actuate your power! 
while slavish southern climates beam in vain. 
and may a public spirit from the throne,
 where every virtue sit, go copious forth
 live over the land! the fine art inspire;
 make thoughtful science raise his pensive head,
 blow the fresh bay, bid industry rejoice,
 and the rough son of low labour smile. 
as when, profuse of spring, the loosen west
 lift up the pine year, and balmy breathe
 youth, life, and love, and beauty over the world. 

but haste we from these melancholy shore,
 nor to deaf wind, and wave, our fruitless plaint
 pour weak; the country claim our active aid;
 that let we roam; and where we find a spark
 of public virtue, blow it into flame. 
and now my son, the son of freedom! meet
 in awful senate; thither let we fly;
 burn in the patriot thought, flow from his tongue
 in fearless truth; myself, transform, preside,
 and shed the spirit of Britannia round. 

this say; her fleet form, and airy train,
 sink in the gale; and nought but ragged rock
 rush on the break eye; and nought be hear
 but the rough cadence of the dash wave. 
