ode to Borrowdale in Cumberland.

ode to Borrowdale in Cumberland.

hail, derwent beauteous pride! 
who charm rough rock in threaten grandeur guard,
 who entrance seem to mortal bar,
 but to the genius of the storm throw wide. 

he on thy rock dread height,
 recline beneath his canopy of cloud,
 his form in darkness shroud,
 and frown as fix to keep thy beauty from the sight. 

but rock and storm be vain:
 mid mountain rough and rude
 man dare foot intrude,
 till, lo! upon the ravish eye
 burst thy clear stream, thy smile sky,
 thy wooded valley, and thy matchless plain. 

bright vale! the muse choice theme,
 my morning think, my midnight dream;
 still memory paint thou, smile scene,
 still view the robe of pure green,
 refresh by beauty-shedding rain,
 which wrap thy flower-enamelled plain;
 still mark thy mountains front sublime,
 force grace from the hand of time;
 still i thy rugged rock recall,
 which seem as nod to their fall,
 who wonder fix my ache sight,
 till terror yield to delight,
 and my surprise, pleasure, fear,
 be tell by slow delicious tear. 

but sudden the smile day
 that cheer the valley, fly away;
 the wooded rock, the rapid stream,
 no long boast the noontide beam. 
but storm athwart the mountain sail,
 and dark brood over Borrowdale. 
the frighten swain his cottage seek,
 ere the thick cloud in terror speak: —
 and see, pale lightning flash round! 
while as the thunder awful sound
 on echo pinion wide fly,
 yond cataract roar unheeded die; .... 
and thou, sublimity! i hail,
 throne on the gloom of Borrowdale. 

but soon the thunder die away,
 the flash withdraw its fearful ray;
 again upon the silver stream
 wave in bright wreath the noontide beam. 

o scene sequester, vary, wild,
 scene form to soothe affliction child,
 how bless be i to watch each charm
 that deck thy vale in storm or calm! 

to see aurora hand unbind
 the mist by night chill power confine;
 upon the mountain dusky brow
 then mark their colour as they flow,
 glide the cold west to seek,
 as from the east day splendour break. 

now the green plain enchant the sight,
 adorn with spot of yellow light;
 while, by its magic influence, shade
 with contrast seem each charm to aid,
 and clothes the wood in deep dye,
 to suit the azure-vested sky. 
while, lo! the lofty rock above,
 where proud tower the bird of Jove;
 see from the view yond radiant cloud
 his broad and sable pinion shroud,
 till, as he onward wing his flight,
 he vanish in flood of light;
 where feather cloud on æther sail,
 and glitter hang over Borrowdale ..... 

or, at still midnight solemn hour,
 when the dull bat revolve no more,
 in search of nature awful grace,
 i will go, with slow and cautious pace,
 where the loud torrent foam tide
 lash the rock uneven side, .... 
that rock which, over the stream below
 bend its moss-clad crumble brow,
 make pale with fear the wanderer cheek,
 nor midnight silence fail to break
 by fragment from its age head,
 which, rush to the river bed,
 cause, as they dash the water round,
 a dread variety of sound;
 while i the gloomy grandeur hail,
 and awe-struck rove through Borrowdale. 

yes, scene sequester, vary, wild,
 so form to soothe affliction child,
 sweet Borrowdale! to thou i will fly,
 to hush my bosom ceaseless sigh. 
if yet in nature store there be
 one kind heart-healing balm for i,
 now the long hour be tell by sigh,
 and sorrow steal health crimson dye, —
 if aught can smile and bloom restore,
 ah! sure thine's the precious power! 

then take i to thy world of charm,
 and hush my torture breast alarm;
 thy scene with unobtrusive art
 shall steal the mourner from her heart, .... 
the hand in sorrow clasp unclose,
 bid she sick soul on heaven repose,
 and, soothe by time and nature, hail
 health, peace, and hope in Borrowdale. 
