a epistle to the king of Sweden, from a lady of great-britain. 

to thou rude warrior, who we once admire,
 and think thy action speak thou half inspire,
 while justice hold the Ballance of thy cause,
 and every language sound thy applause:
 but since ambition and revenge prevail,
 thy glory languish, and our wonder fail;
 to thou a woman send with generous care,
 and warn thy rashness timely to beware. 

fame now a tale of fresh date have tell,
 beyond thy mad romantic feat of old:
 our malcontent thy numerous squadron boast,
 describe thy penant wave on our coast,
 and to the fearful cry, britannia lose! 
but we, who know the genius of our isle,
 at their report, and thy invasion smile. 

be not our dame in every climate fame? 
les bell angloise by every nation name? 
be not our youth in foreign field admire,
 alike by valour and by love inspire;
 and shall those fair one, who the morning pass,
 consult that dear friend to love, the glass;
 to set the favourite, and the patch to place;
 to bow, and glance it, with become grace
 to melt the hero heart and charm his eye,
 fall to thy gothic rage a sacrifice? 
no, to thy terror learn, our british youth
 be fame for honour, constancy and truth:
 each will as soon consent thy cause to aid,
 as yield the fair to who his vow be pay. 
unlike the passive female of thy land,
 the arbitrator of the war we stand. 
at flirt of fan, our arm legion fly,
 and they who dare offend, must dare to die. 
we know thy dare heart be nurse in blood,
 wild as the fierce savage of the wood;
 with fame like this, in northern slaughter shine,
 rough as the freeze bear, thy neighbour sign:
 but here thy brutal force no grown shall gain;
 by love, as well as arm our monarch reign;
 can we our GEORGE and his love race disown,
 to find thy barren chastity a throne? 

no! in thy shaggy Rugg rude slumber take,
 and dream of conquest thou shall never make;
 at distance be thy leathern doublet wear,
 nor risque thy life to purchase certain scorn;
 for now the wormwood damsel apprehend
 the dismal consequence of such a friend:
 begin to tremble at the truth they hear,
 and vow their champion shall for GEORGE declare:
 they fear thy taste shall lead young James astray,
 and quite unman their monarch every way:
 in his excuse they still will have to tell,
 though war his foe, he love exceed well;
 the proof from whence he spring, is'not to fight;
 his surgeon prove hereditary right. 

but if by thy example he shall grow
 cold as thy rock of ice, and hill of snow:
 shall he clean linen hold in dire disgrace,
 and sable crape his ivory neck enchase:
 shall he, like thou, on Shives of coarse bread,
 rude with dirty thumb his butter spread;
 banish the generous juice of grape away,
 and with small acid Tiff his thirst allay;
 swallow lean hasty meal of tasteless root,
 and eat, and drink, and live and reign in boot;
 shall he, like thou regardless of the fair,
 lye down to sleep, and only wake to war;
 can he in arm, like gallant Brunswick, shine,
 yet will his female friend his cause decline,
 nor justifié a right so slovenly divine. 

consult thy safety; send no army forth
 beyond the confine of thy freeze north:
 since of our british fair this truth be tell,
 we love the chaste, but we abhor the cold:
 but if thy dare folly will proceed,
 fate drive thou forward, and thy fall decree. 

each lovely toast her hero soul inspire,
 urge the war, and wake his martial fire:
 think but what terror will thy spirit seize
 when thou shall face such enemy as these;
 see a battalion palace with point d'espan,
 and warm in glow velvet lead the van:
 with warlike air, the embroider chief appear,
 and graceful the loom rich labour wear:
 in modish order, over their shoulder fly
 deville Wiggs, or lockman smarter tie;
 the gold-clocked stock draw the gazer sight,
 and verdin red-toped shoe, stitch round with white:
 fine meclin lace round their finger play
 from snowy shirt, at least change twice a day. 

these well-dressed youth to thy destruction move,
 and victory wait upon the wing of love,
 our sex softness be to thou unknown;
 what by a look, or one kind kiss be do! 
thou, who a strange art to love delight,
 can never imagine how these lover fight. 
these be the man, who on the flandrian plain
 overthrow the grand monarch in ten campaign:
 will these give way before thy vandal host
 and yield their former labour all for lose? 
no, these for liberty, and beauty draw,
 and all around the neighbour tyrant awe:
 these cock, take snuff, invoke the darling fair,
 and then dispatch the foe endebonair. 

aim then no more, fond prince, at George throne,
 wake from the flatter dream, and guard thy own,
 in every element alike we reign,
 and launch our ready squadron on the main:
 our champion, jocund over the flow bowl,
 reign in their wooden world, from pole to pole;
 fearless of danger, cut their conquer way,
 and from invade tyrant scour the sea. 
safe thou may in lake of sulphur sleep,
 than brave these dreadful master of the deep:
 beneath their cannon roar, thy flag must fall,
 Orford preside, and these be briton all. 
these, bold as Lyons, will the fight maintain,
 or drive thou back, or sink thou in the main:
 though boisterous as the wind at sea they roar,
 they be gentle all, as southern gale on shore. 
the engagement past, the tender thought return,
 and for the fair in love soft fire they burn;
 in beauty dear embrace lull they lie,
 but when their country call, her strong foe defy. 

these hoist their sail, and wait thy come over,
 and if thou dare to touch britannia shore,
 never hope to see thy native Sweden more. 
how will thou dare these heart of oak to meet
 shall young Augustus deign to lead the fleet? 
Augustus! he! who stride over the slay,
 hunt thy new ally over flandria plain:
 the boy, who cause forsake now by all,
 call for a madman to prevent his fall. 
no dastard blood our prince vein disgrace,
 unlike the prince of a former race,
 who wise sleep or blubber in distress,
 he will face the battle, and will force success. 

from great Plantagenet Augustus spring,
 by his example teach to conquer king. 
methinks i see the royal warrior stand
 deal among his chief thy forfeit land;
 while thou shall fall unpitied, and forlorn,
 all europe terror once, but now all europe scorn. 
