ode to the right reverend Benjamin lord bishop of Winchester.

by the same.

i 1. 

for toil which patriot have endure,
for treason quell and law secure,
in every nation time display
the palm of honourable praise.
envy may rail; and faction fierce
may strive: but what, alas, can those
(though bold, yet blind and sordid foe)
to gratitude and love oppose,
to faithful story and persuasive verse?

i 2. 

o nurse of freedom, Albion, say,
thou tamer of despotic sway,
what man, among thy son around,
thus heir to glory have thou find?
what page, in all thy annal bright,
have thou with pure joy survey
than that where truth, by hoadly aid,
shine through the deep unhallowed shade
of kingly fraud and sacerdotal night?

i 3. 

to he the teacher bless
who send religion, from the palmy field
by Jordan, like the morn to cheer the west,
and lift up the veil which heaven from earth conceal,
to Hoadly thus he utter his behest:
"go thou, and rescue my dishonour law
"from hand rapacious and from tongue impure:
"let not my peaceful name be make a lure
"the snare of savage tyranny to aid:
"let not my word be impious chain to draw
"the free-born soul, in more than brutal awe,
"to faith without assent, allegiance unrepayed."

ii. 1. 

no cold nor unperform hand
be arm by heaven with this command.
the world soon feel it: and, on high,
to William ear with welcome joy
do Locke among the bless unfold
the rise hope of hoadly name:
Godolphin then confirm the fame;
and Somers, when from earth he come,
and valiant stanhope the fair sequel tell. 

ii. 2. 

then draw the lawgiver around,
(sire of the grecian name renowned)
and listen ask, and wonder know,
what private force can thus subdue
the vulgar and the great combine;
can war with sacred folly wage;
can a whole nation disengage
from the dread bond of many a age,
and to new habit mould the public mind.

ii. 3. 

for not a conqueror sword,
nor the strong power to civil founder know,
be his: but truth by faithful search explore,
and social sense, like seed, in genial plenty sow.
wherever it take root, the soul (restore
to freedom) freedom too for other seek.
not monkish craft the tyrant claim divine,
not regal zeal the bigot cruel shrine
can long guard from reason warfare sage;
not the wild rabble to sedition wrought,
nor synod by the papal genius teach,
nor saint John spirit loose, nor atterbury rage.

iii. 1. 

but where shall recompense be find?
or how such arduous merit crown?
for look on life laborious scene:
what rugged space lie between
adventurous virtue early toil
and her triumphal throne! the shade
of death, mean time, do oft invade
her progress; nor, to we display,
wear the bright heroine her expect spoil.

iii. 2. 

yet bear to conquer be her power:
— o Hoadly, if that favourite hour
on earth arrive, with thankful awe
we own just heaven indulgent law,
and proud thy success behold;
we attend thy reverend length of day
with benediction and with praise,
and hail thou in our public way
like some great spirit fame in age old.

iii. 3. 

while thus our vow prolong
thy step on earth, and when by we resign
thou join thy senior, that heroic throng
who rescue or preserve the right of human kind,
o! not unworthy may thy albion tongue
thou still, her friend and benefactor, name:
o! never, Hoadly, in thy country eye,
may impious gold, or pleasure gaudy prize,
make public virtue, public freedom vile;
nor our own manner tempt we to disclaim
that heritage, our noble wealth and fame,
which thou have keep entire from force and factious guile.
