the golden age,

a poetical epistle.

boast of proud Shropshire, oxford last shame,
 who none but coxcomb scorn, but fool defame,
 eternal war with dullness bear to wage,
 thou Paracelsus of this wondrous age;
 Beddoes, the philosophic chemist guide,
 the bigot scourge, of Democrats the pride;
 accept this lay; and to thy brother, friend,
 or name more dear, a sans culotte attend,
 while in rhyme galligaskins i enclose
 the broad posterior of thy brawny prose,
 and sing, by thou inspire, in tuneful strain,
 the bless return of Saturn golden reign! 

oh have i, silly swain, the force and fire
 of some, who frenchman bloody deed inspire;
 can i, ascend on the wing of sound,
 please with the grand, the lofty and profound,
 rise above mortal ken in rapturous glow,
 leave poor pursy sense to pant below;
 can i, for ever studious to refine,
 prank with my pearly phrase each pretty line,
 or like a empty bottle, deep immerse,
 whence bubble after bubble bustle burst,
 amuse to view my noisy nothing swell,
 in the sweet vanity of thought excel;
 now burst over the bound of vulgar rhyme,
 graceful great and terrible sublime;
 troll in full-toned melody along
 with all the clatter clang of modern song;
 i will hail the progress of those blissful day,
 when fair philosophy meridian ray
 shall brighten nature face, shall drive the mole
 of blink error to their secret hole,
 disperse the darkness of primaeval night,
 and bid a new creation rise to light! 

proceed, great day! and bring, oh! bring to view
 thing strange to tell! incredible, but true! 
behold, behold, the golden age appear:
 skip, skip, you mountain! forest lend your ear! 
see red-capt liberty from heaven descend,
 and real prodigy her step attend! 
no more immerse in many a foreign dye
 shall british wool be teach to blush and lie;
 but all our pasture glow with purple ram,
 with scarlet lambkin, and their yellow dam! 
no more the lazy ox shall gormandize,
 and swell with fatten grass his monstrous size;
 no more trot round and round the groan field,
 but ton of beef our load thicket yield! 
the patient dairy-maid no more shall learn
 with tedious toil to whirl the frothy churn;
 but from the hedge shall her dairy fill,
 as pound of butter in big drop distil! 
the sottish Jew, who in a god believe,
 and sometime blessing, often plague receive,
 shout a miracle, when on the ground
 their boast bread the greedy grumbler find:
 by no dry crust shall infidel be feed,
 our soil produce butter to our bread! 
see reverend Thames, who god of river reign,
 and wind meander through our rich plain,
 to treat the cit, that many a sixpence give
 once in a week like gentleman to live,
 resign his majesty of mud, and stream
 over strawberry bed in deluge of cream! 
see tallow candle tip the modest thorn,
 candle of wax the proud elm adorn! 
see the dull clown survey with stupid stare
 where leave once grow, now periwig of hair! 
while fluid, which a wondrous change betray,
 ooze from the vernal bud, the summer spray,
 differ from animal alone in name,
 (as botanist already half exclaim). 
see plant, susceptible of joy and woe,
 feel all we feel, and know whatever we know! 
view they like we incline to watch or sleep,
 like we to smile, and, ah! like we to weep! 
like we behold they glow with warm desire,
 and catch from beauty glance celestial fire! 
then, oh! you fair, if through the shady grove
 muse on absent lover you shall rove,
 and there with tempt step all heedless brush
 too near some wanton metamorphose bush,
 or only hear perchance the western breeze
 steal murmur through the animate tree,
 beware, beware, lest to your cost you find
 the bush dangerous, dangerous too the wind,
 lest, ah! too late with shame and grief you feel
 what your fictitious pad will ill conceal! 

while plant turn animal, man, happy man,
 to age shall extend life lengthen span. 
Bane to our bliss, no more the wrinkle face
 beauty bewitch circle shall disgrace;
 but see the reign toast half kind, half coy,
 her rivals envy, and her lover joy,
 skill to allure, to charm we, and beguile,
 in all the bloom of eighty sit and smile! 
thus shall each Belle a lovely l'enclos prove,
 drive boy of future century mad with love;
 the marriage table its degree extend,
 and to our great, great grandmother ascend. 
poor pope, who grieve "that life can scarce supply
"more than to look about he, and to die, "
have he but flourish in these halcyon day,
 may long have bid life little candle blaze,
 have grow strait, handsome, brisk and debonnair,
 the muse' favourite, favourite of the fair! 
happy the poet lot, who can prolong,
 till time shall be no more, his deathless song;
 and live himself to see his swell name
 roll, like a Snowball, gather all its fame! 
happy, thrice happy he, who at his will
 can drink of life sweet cup his constant fill;
 who, if excess of oxygene create
 symptom, which lean consumption indicate,
 a sure specific can procure with ease,
 rich cream and butter from his herd of tree:
 or if he find excess of hydrogene
 his body load with fat, his mind with spleen,
 true health and vigour to restore, can take
 from some regenerate oak a savoury steak,
 slice off the slaughter monster quondam stump,
 convert now into a real Rump,
 and, bless with a accommodate maw,
 devour the luscious bit, red, recent, raw! 

now rise, my muse, and, warm with rapture, dart
 from man to manner, "fancy to the heart." 
transport sight! to view the son of pride
 their little head with shame and sorrow hide,
 rank and distinction cease, all reek lie
 in the mean muck of low equality! 
favourite of freedom, son of frisky France,
 who never learn like british bear to dance,
 and, while their premier's humdrum bagpipe sound,
 lead by the nose, jog growl round and round;
 but more like monkey, airy, light, and gay,
 please on your master head to skip and play;
 you pious atheist, moralist, who deem
 the christian heaven and hell a idle dream,
 delight to deride all vulgar fear
 of beelzebub black claw, crop tail, and ear,
 with manly scorn and dignity to tread
 on prostrate superstition hoary head;
 who, foe to power despotic, dare defy
 the king of king, that bugbear of the sky;
 dread for present crime no future rod,
 self-praise your worship, vanity your god:
 oh how my eye with tear ecstatic fill,
 what new feel transport through my bosom thrill,
 when i behold you with gigantic blow
 the pigmy pride of royalty lie low,
 with pike and gun this moral dogma teach —
 virtue consist in nudity of breech! 

soon shall we view no more the glitter thing
 bestarred, begartered, and befool by king;
 the pretty twinkler that so sweet shine,
 and deem their lovely lustre all their own! 
no more the despot view, who mighty nod
 shake nature, and proclaim he god of god;
 drink with applause who raise his roll eye,
 and seem, whenever he move, to tread the sky! 
despise, detest, all shall wing their flight,
 and sink, no more to rise, in endless night! 
arm with a bristle end and glitter awl,
 behold a minor monarch in his stall! 
no circle gold his royal brow surround,
 a yard of room his sphere of action bound;
 his sole ambition and his prime pursuit,
 with skill a shoe to patch, to stitch a boot! 
nor deem his fate severe! the time may come
 when many a pious king in Christendom,
 dash from his throne, and make dame Fortune fool,
 shall envy little capet cobble stool! 

Mark with the peer and prince the cant priest,
 forbid on his country be fat to feast,
 while peace look down sweet smile on the swain,
 and untaxed plenty crown the fruitful plain! 
no more that lazy lubbard shall we pay,
 with phiz so farcical to preach and pray;
 no more behold that harpy of the land
 lay on our large sheaf his greedy hand;
 with bigotry black banner wide unfurled,
 fright into gothic ignorance the world:
 but truth and light shall come, with hostile rage,
 "to drive the holy vandal off the stage." 
see tithe expire, and ancient slavery fail;
 proud superstition turn her vanquish tail;
 no zealous minister the church befriend,
 but all her sorcery with the beldame end:
 lo! Babylon be fall! that mystic —
 that sink of wickedness, be now no more! 
great Babylon be fall! shout, shout, you mead! 
and, oh! you cornfield, wave your happy head! 
you lovely lambkin, strain your feeble voice,
 and with your dam in loud baas rejoice! 
calf, join your note to swell the gladden sound! 
cow, let your low from the sky rebound! 
prolific duck, quack amid the mighty noise! 
hen, more prolific, cackle out your joy! 
and you, oh! Swine, lift up your little eye,
 with rapture riot round your rot sty! 
stretch your triumphant throat, and strive to make
 the frighten welkin with your grunt shake! 
