cyder.

book i 

what soil the apple love, what care be due
 to orchat, timely when to press the fruit,
 thy gift, Pomona, in miltonian verse
 adventurous i presume to sing; of verse
 nor skill, nor studious: but my native soil
 invite i, and the theme as yet unsung. 

you ariconian knight, and fair dame,
 to who propitious heaven these blessing grant,
 attend my lay; nor hence disdain to learn,
 how nature gift may be improve by art. 

and thou, o Mostyn, who benevolence,
 and candor, oft experience, i vouchsafe
 to knit in friendship, grow still with year,
 accept this pledge of gratitude and love. 
may it a last monument remain
 of dear respect; that, when this body frail
 be moulder into dust, and i become
 as i have never be, late time may know
 i once be bless in such a matchless friend. 

whoev expect his labour tree shall bend
 with fruitage, and a kindly harvest yield,
 be this his first concern; to find a tract
 impervious to the wind, begird with hill,
 that intercept the hyperborean blast
 tempestuous, and cold eurus nip force,
 noxious to feeble bud: but to the west
 let he free entrance grant, let zephyr bland
 administer their tepid genial air;
 nought fear he from the west, who gentle warmth
 disclose well the earth all-teeming womb,
 invigorate tender seed; who breath
 nurture the orange, and the citron groves,
 hesperian fruit, and waft their odour sweet
 wide through the air, and distant shore perfume. 
nor only do the hill exclude the wind:
 but, when the blacken cloud in sprinkle shower
 distil, from the high summit down the rain
 run trickle; with the fertile moisture cheere,
 the orchat smile; joyous the farmer see
 their thrive plant, and bless the heavenly dew. 

next, let the planter, with discretion meet,
 the force and genius of each soil explore;
 to what adapt, what it shun averse:
 without this necessary care, in vain
 he hope a apple-vintage, and invoke
 pomona aid in vain. the miry field,
 rejoice in rich mould, most ample fruit
 of beauteous form produce; please to sight,
 but to the tongue inelegant and flat. 
so nature have decree; so, oft we see
 man pass fair, in outward lineament
 elaborate; less, inward, exact. 
nor from the sable ground expect success,
 nor from cretaceous, stubborn and jejune:
 the must, of pallid hue, declare the soil
 devoid of spirit; wretched he, that quaff
 such wheyish liquour; oft with colic pang,
 with pungent colic pang distress, he will roar,
 and toss, and turn, and curse the unwholesome draught. 
but, farmer, look, where full-eared sheaf of rye
 grow wavy on the tilth, that soil select
 for apple; thence thy industry shall gain
 tenfold reward; thy garner, thence with store
 surcharge, shall burst; thy press with pure juice
 shall flow, which, in revolve year, may try
 thy feeble foot, and bind thy falter tongue. 
such be the Kentchurch, such dantzeyan ground,
 such thy, o learned Brome, and Capel such,
 willisian Burlton, much-loved geers his marsh,
 and sutton-acre, drench with regal blood
 of Ethelbert, when to the unhallowed feast
 of mercian offa he invite come,
 to treat of spousal: long connubial joy
 he promise to himself, allure by fair
 elfrida beauty; but delude die
 in height of hope — oh! hard fate, to fall
 by shew of friendship, and pretend love! 

i nor advise, nor reprehend the choice
 of marcley-hill; the apple no where find
 a kind mould: yet it be unsafe to trust
 deceitful ground: who know but that, once more,
 this mount may journey, and, his present site
 forsake, to thy neighbour bound transfer
 the goodly plant, afford matter strange
 for law-debate? if, therefore, thou incline
 to deck this rise with fruit of various taste,
 fail not by frequent vow to implore success;
 thus piteous heaven may fix the wander glebe. 

but if (for nature do not share alike
 her gift) a happy soil shall be withhold;
 if a penurious clay shall be thy lot,
 or rough unwieldy earth, nor to the plough,
 nor to the cattle kind, with sandy stone
 and gravel over-abounding, think it not
 beneath thy toil; the sturdy pear-tree here
 will rise luxuriant, and with tough root
 pierce the obstruct grit, and restive marl. 

thus nought be useless make; nor be there land,
 but what, or of it self, or else compel,
 afford advantage. on the barren heath
 the shepherd tend his flock, that daily crop
 their verdant dinner from the mossy turf,
 sufficient; after they the cackle goose,
 close-grazer, find wherewith to ease her want. 
what shall i more? even on the cliffy height
 of penmenmaur, and that cloud-piercing hill,
 Plinlimmon, from afar the traveller ken
 astonish, how the goat their shrubby brouze
 gnaw pendent; nor untremble can thou see,
 how from a scraggy rock, who prominence
 half overshade the ocean, hardy man,
 fearless of rend wind, and dash wave,
 cut sampire, to excite the squeamish gust
 of pamper luxury. then, let thy ground
 not lie unlaboured; if the rich stem
 refuse to thrive, yet who will doubt to plant
 somewhat, that may to human use redound,
 and penury, the worst of ill, remove? 

there be, who, fond studious of increase,
 rich foreign mould on their ill-natured land
 induce laborious, and with fatten muck
 besmear the root; in vain! the nursel grove
 seem fair awhile, cherish with foster earth:
 but, when the alien compost be exhaust,
 it be native poverty again prevail. 

though this art fail, despond not; little pain,
 in a due hour employ, great profit yield. 
the industrious, when the sun in Leo ride,
 and dart his sultry beam, portend drought,
 forget not at the foot of every plant
 to sink a circle trench, and daily pour
 a just supply of alimental stream,
 exhaust sap recruit; else, false hope
 he cherish, nor will his fruit expect
 the autumnal season, but, in summer pride,
 when other orchat smile, abortive fail. 

thus the great light of heaven, that in his course
 survey and quicken all thing, often prove
 noxious to plant field, and often man
 perceive his influence dire: swelter they run
 to grot, and cave, and the cool umbrage seek
 of weave arboret, and oft the rill
 still stream fresh revisit, to allay
 thirst inextinguishable: but if the spring
 precede shall be destitute of rain,
 or blast septentrional with brush wing
 sweep up the smoky mist, and vapour damp,
 then woe to mortal! Titan then exert
 his heat intense, and on our vital prey;
 then malady of various kind, and name
 unknown, malignant fever, and that foe
 to bloom beauty, which imprint the face
 of fair nymph, and check our grow love,
 reign far and near; grim death, in different shape,
 depopulate the nation, thousand fall
 his victim, youth, and virgin, in their flower,
 reluctant die, and sigh leave their love
 unfinished, by infectious heaven destroy. 

such heat prevail, when fair Eliza, last
 of winchcomb name (next thou in blood, and worth,
 o fair saint John!) leave this toilsome world
 in beauty prime, and sadden all the year:
 nor can her virtue, nor repeat vow
 of thousand lover, the relentless hand
 of death arrest; she with the vulgar fall,
 only distinguish by this humble verse. 

but if it please the sun intemperate force
 to know, attend; while i of ancient fame
 the annal trace, and image to thy mind,
 how our forefather, (luckless man!) ingulft
 by the wide yawn earth, to Stygian shade
 go quick, in one sad sepulchre enclose. 

in elder day, ever yet the roman band
 victorious, this our other world subdue,
 a spacious city stand, with firm wall
 sure mound, and with numerous turret crown,
 aerial spire, and citadel, the seat
 of king, and hero resolute in war,
 fame Ariconium; uncontrolled, and free,
 until all-subduing latian arm prevail. 
then also, though to foreign yoke submiss,
 she undemolished stand, and even until now
 perhaps have stand, of ancient british art
 a please monument, not less admire
 than what from attic, or etruscan hand
 arise; have not the heavenly power averse
 decree her final doom: for now the field
 labour with thirst, Aquarius have not shed
 his wonted shower, and Sirius parch with heat
 solstitial the green herb: hence begin relax
 the ground contexture, hence tartarean dregs,
 sulphur, and nitrous spume, enkindle fierce,
 bellow within their darksome cave, by far
 more dismal than the loud displode roar
 of brazen enginry, that ceaseless storm
 the bastion of a well-built city, deem
 impregnable: the infernal wind, until now
 close imprison, by titanian warmth,
 dilate, and with unctuous vapour feed,
 disdain their narrow cell; and, their full strength
 collect, from beneath the solid mass
 upheave, and all her castle root deep
 shake from their low seat; old vaga stream,
 force by the sudden shock, her wonted track
 forsake, and draw her humid train aslope,
 crankle her bank: and now the lower sky,
 and baleful lightning, and the thunder, voice
 of angry god, that rattle solemn, dismay
 the sink heart of man. where shall they turn
 distress? whence seek for aid? when from below
 hell threaten, and even fate supreme give sign
 of wrath and desolation? vain be vow,
 and plaint, and suppliant hand, to heaven erect! 
yet some to fane repair, and humble rite
 perform to Thor, and Woden, fable god,
 who with their votary in one ruin share,
 crush, and overwhelm. other, in frantic mood,
 run howl through the street, their hideous yell
 rend the dark welkin; horror stalk around,
 wild-staring, and, his sad concomitant,
 despair, of abject look: at every gate
 the throng populace with hasty stride
 press furious, and, too eager of escape,
 obstruct the easy way; the rock town
 supplant their footstep; to, and fro, they reel
 astonish, as overcharged with wine; when lo! 
the ground adust her rive mouth dispart,
 horrible chasm, profound! with swift descent
 old Ariconium sink, and all her tribe,
 hero, and senator, down to the realm
 of endless night. mean while, the loosen wind
 infuriate, melt rock and flame globe
 hurl high above the cloud; until, all their force
 consume, her ravenous jaw the earth satiate close. 
thus this fair city fall, of which the name
 survive alone; nor be there find a Mark,
 whereby the curious passenger may learn
 her ample site, save coin, and moulder urn,
 and huge unwieldy bone, last remains
 of that gigantic race; which, as he break
 the clot glebe, the ploughman haply find,
 appal. upon that treacherous tract of land,
 she whilom stand; now Ceres, in her prime,
 smile fertile, and, with ruddy freight bedeck,
 the apple-tree, by our forefather blood
 improve, that now recall the devious muse,
 urge her destine labour to pursue. 

the prudent will observe, what passion reign
 in various plant (for not to man alone,
 but all the wide creation, nature give
 love, and aversion): everlasting hate
 the vine to ivy bear, nor less abhor
 the colewort rankness; but, with amorous twine,
 clasp the tall elm: the pæstan rose unfold
 her bud, more lovely, near the fetid Leek,
 (crest of stout briton,) and inhance thence
 the price of her celestial scent: the gourd,
 and thirsty cucumber, when they perceive
 the approach olive, with resentment fly
 her fatty fibre, and with tendril creep
 diverse, detest contact; while the fig
 contemn not rue, nor sage humble leaf,
 close neighbour: the herefordian plant
 caress free the contiguous peach,
 hazel, and weight-resisting palm, and like
 the approach the Quince, and the elder pithy stem;
 uneasy, seat by funereal yeugh,
 or walnut, (who malignant touch impair
 all generous fruit), or near the bitter dew
 of cherry. therefore, weigh the habit well
 of plant, how they associate best, nor let
 ill neighbourhood corrupt thy hopeful graff. 

will thou, thy vat with generous juice shall froth? 
respect thy orchat; think not, that the tree
 spontaneous will produce a wholesome draught. 
let art correct thy breed; from parent bough
 a Cyon meet sever; after, force
 a way into the crabstock close-wrought grain
 by wedge, and within the live wound
 enclose the Foster twig; nor overnice
 refuse with thy own hand around to spread
 the bind clay: ee'r-long their differ vein
 unite, and kindly nourishment convey
 to the new pupil; now he shoot his arm
 with quick growth; now shake the teem trunc,
 down rain the empurple ball, ambrosial fruit. 
whether the wilding fibre be contrive
 to draw the earth pure spirit, and resist
 it be faeculence, which in more porous stock
 of cyder-plant find passage free, or else
 the native verjuice of the crab, derive
 through the infix Graff, a grateful mixture form
 of tart and sweet; whatever be the cause,
 this doubtful progeny by nice taste
 expect best acceptance find, and pay
 large revenue to the orchat-lord. 

some think, the Quince and apple will combine
 in happy union; other fit deem
 the sloe-stem bear sylvan plum austere. 
who know but both may thrive? however, what loss
 to try the power of both, and search how far
 two different nature may concur to mix
 in close embrace, and strange offspring bear? 
thou'lt find that plant will frequent change try,
 undamaged, and their marriageable arm
 conjoin with other. so silurian plant
 admit the peache odoriferous globe,
 and pear of sundry form; at different time
 adopt plum will alien branch grace;
 and man have gather from the hawthorn branch
 large medlar, imitate regal crown. 

nor be it hard to beautify each month
 with file of particoloured fruit, that please
 the tongue, and view, at once. so maro Muse,
 thrice sacred Muse! commodious precept give
 instructive to the swain, not whole bend
 on what be gainful: sometime she divert
 from solid counsel, show the force of love
 in savage beast; how virgin face divine
 attract the hapless youth through storm, and wave,
 alone, in deep of night: then she describe
 the scythian winter, nor disdain to sing,
 how under ground the rude Riphæan race
 mimic brisk cyder with the brake product wild;
 sloe pound, hip, and servis harsh juice. 

let sage experience teach thou all the art
 of graft, and in-eyeing; when to lop
 the flow branch; what tree answer best
 from root, or kernel: she will best the hour
 of harvest, and seed-time declare; by she
 the different quality of thing be find,
 and secret motion; how with heavy bulk
 volatile Hermes, fluid and unmoist,
 mount on the wing of air; to her we owe
 the indian weed, unknown to ancient time,
 nature choice gift, who acrimonious fume
 extract superfluous juice, and refine
 the blood distemper from its noxious salt;
 friend to the spirit, which with vapour bland
 it gentle mitigate, companion fit
 of pleasantry, and wine; nor to the bard
 unfriendly, when they to the vocal shell
 warble melodious their well-laboured song. 
she find the polish glass, who small convex
 enlarge to ten million of degree
 the mite, invisible else, of nature hand
 least animal; and show, what law of life
 the cheese-inhabitant observe, and how
 fabric their mansion in the harden milk,
 wonderful artist! but the hide way
 of nature will thou know? how first she frame
 all thing in miniature? thy specular orb
 apply to well-dissected kernel; lo! 
strange form arise, in each a little plant
 unfold its bough: observe the slender thread
 of first-beginning tree, their root, their leaf,
 in narrow seed describe; thou will wonder say,
 a inmate orchat every apple boast. 
thus all thing by experience be display,
 and most improve. then sedulous think
 to meliorate thy stock; no way, or rule
 be unassayed; prevent the morning star
 assiduous, nor with the western sun
 surcease to work; lo! thoughtful of thy gain,
 not of my own, i all the live-long day
 consume in meditation deep, recluse
 from human converse, nor, at shut of eve,
 enjoy repose; but oft at midnight lamp
 ply my brain-racking study, if by chance
 thou i may counsel right; and oft this care
 disturb i slumber. will thou then repine
 to labour for thy self? and rather choose
 to lie supine, hope, heaven will bless
 thy slight fruit, and give thou bread unearned? 

it will profit, when the stork, sworn-foe of snake,
 return, to show compassion to thy plant,
 fatigue with breed. let the arch knife
 well sharpen now assail the spread shade
 of vegetable, and their thirsty limb
 dissever: for the genial moisture, due
 to apple, otherwise mispend it self
 in barren twig, and, for the expect crop,
 nought but vain shoot, and empty leaf abound. 

when swell bud their odorous foliage shed,
 and gentle harden into fruit, the wise
 spare not the little offspring, if they grow
 redundant; but the throng cluster thin
 by kind avulsion: else, the starveling brood,
 void of sufficient sustenance, will yield
 a slender autumn; which the niggard soul
 too late shall weep, and curse his thrifty hand,
 that will not timely ease the ponderous bough. 

it much conduce, all the care to know
 of garden, how to scare nocturnal thief,
 and how the little race of bird, that hop
 from spray to spray, scoop the costly fruit
 insatiate, undisturbed. priapus form
 avail but little; rather guard each row
 with the false terror of a breathless kite. 
this do, the timorous flock with swift wing
 scud through the air; their fancy represent
 his mortal talon, and his ravenous beak
 destructive; glad to shun his hostile gripe,
 they quit their theft, and unfrequent the field. 

beside, the filthy swine will oft invade
 thy firm enclosure, and with delv snout
 the root forest undermine: forthwith
 alloo thy furious mastiff, bid he vex
 the noxious herd, and print upon their ear
 a sad memorial of their past offence. 

the flagrant Procyon will not fail to bring
 large shoal of slow house-bearing snail, that creep
 over the ripe fruitage, pare slimy tract
 in the sleek rind, and unpressed cyder drink. 
no art avert this pest; on thou it lie,
 with morning and with evening hand to rid
 the prey reptile; nor, if wise, will thou
 decline this labour, which it self reward
 with please gain, while the warm limbec draw
 salubrious water from the nocent brood. 

myriad of wasp now also cluster hang,
 and drain a spurious honey from thy groves,
 their winter food; though oft repulse, again
 they rally, undismayed: but fraud with ease
 ensnare the noisome swarm; let every bough
 bear frequent vial, pregnant with the dregs
 of Moyle, or mum, or treacle viscous juice;
 they, by the allure odour draw, in haste
 fly to the dulcet cate, and crowd sip
 their palatable bane; joyful thou will see
 the clammy surface all over-strown with tribe
 of greedy insect, that with fruitless toil
 flap filmy pennon oft, to extricate
 their foot, in liquid shackle bind, until death
 bereave they of their worthless soul: such doom
 wait luxury, and lawless love of gain! 

however thou may forbid external force,
 intestine evil will prevail; damp air,
 and rainy winter, to the centre pierce
 of firm fruit, and by unseen decay
 the proper relish vitiate: then the grub
 oft unobserved invade the vital core,
 pernicious tenant, and her secret cave
 enlarge hourly, prey on the pulp
 ceaseless; mean while the apple outward form
 delectable the witless Swain beguile,
 until, with a writhen mouth, and spatter noise,
 he taste the bitter morsel, and reject
 disrelish; not with less surprise, then when
 embattle troop with flow banner pass
 through flowery mead delight, nor distrust
 the smile surface; while the cavern ground,
 with grain incentive store, by sudden blaze
 burst fatal, and involve the hope of war
 in firy whirl; full of victorious thought,
 tear and dismember, they aloft expire. 

now turn thy eye to view alcinous groves,
 the pride of the phæacian isle, from whence,
 sail the space of the boundless deep,
 to Ariconium precious fruit arrive:
 the pippin burnish over with gold, the moil
 of sweet honey taste, the fair permain,
 tempere, like comely nymph, with red and white. 
salopian acre flourish with a growth
 peculiar, style the Ottley: be thou first
 this apple to transplant; if to the name
 it be merit answer, no where shall thou find
 a wine more prize, or laudable of taste. 
nor do the Eliot least deserve thy care,
 nor john-apple, who wither Rind, entrench
 with many a furrow, apt represent
 decrepit age; nor that from Harvey name,
 quick-relishing: why shall we sing the thrift,
 codling, or Pomroy, or of pimple coat
 the russet, or the cats-head's weighty orb,
 enormous in its growth; for various use
 though these be meet, though after full repast
 be oft require, and crown the rich desert? 

what, though the pear-tree rival not the worth,
 of ariconian product? yet her freight
 be not contemn, yet her wide-branching arm
 best screen thy mansion from the fervent dog
 adverse to life; the wintery hurricane
 in vain employ their roar, her trunc unmoved
 break the strong onset, and control their rage. 
chief the Bosbury, who large increase,
 annual, in sumptuous banquet claim applause. 
thrice acceptable beverage! can but art
 subdue the float lee, pomona self
 will dread thy praise, and shun the dubious strife. 
be it thy choice, when summer-heat annoy,
 to sit beneath her leafy canopy,
 quaff rich liquid: oh! how sweet to enjoy,
 at once her fruit, and hospitable shade! 

but how with equal number shall we match
 the musk surpass worth! that early give
 sure hope of racy wine, and in its youth,
 its tender nonage, load the spread bough
 with large and juicy offspring, that defy
 the vernal nip, and cold syderal blast! 
yet let she to the read-streak yield, that once
 be of the sylvan kind, uncivilised,
 of no regard, until scudamore skilful hand
 improve she, and by courtly discipline
 teach she the savage nature to forget:
 hence style the scudamorean plant; who wine
 whoev taste, let he with grateful heart
 respect that ancient loyal house, and wish
 the noble peer, that now transcend our hope
 in early worth, his country be just pride,
 uninterrupted joy, and health entire. 

let every tree in every garden own
 the redstreak as supreme; who pulpous fruit
 with gold irradiate, and vermilion shine
 tempt, not fatal, as the birth of that
 primæval interdict plant, that win
 fond eve in hapless hour to taste, and die. 
this, of more bounteous influence, inspire
 poetic rapture, and the lowly muse
 kindle to lofty strain; even i perceive
 her sacred virtue. see! the number flow
 easy, while, cheere with her nectareous juice,
 she, and my country be praise i exalt. 
hail herefordian plant, that do disdain
 all other field! heaven sweet bless, hail! 
be thou the copious matter of my song,
 and thy choice nectar; on which always wait
 laughter, and sport, and care-beguiling wit,
 and friendship, chief delight of human life. 
what shall we wish for more? or why, in quest
 of foreign vintage, insincere, and mix,
 traverse the extreme world? why tempt the rage
 of the rough ocean? when our native glebe
 impart, from bounteous womb, annual recruit
 of wine delectable, that far surmount
 Gallic, or latin grape, or those that see
 the set sun near calpe tower height. 
nor let the rhodian, nor the lesbian vine
 vaunt their rich must, nor let tokay contend
 for sovereignty; Phanæus self must bow
 to the ariconian vale: and shall we doubt
 the improve our vegetable wealth, or let
 the soil lie idle, which, with fit manure,
 will large usury repay, alone
 impower to supply what nature ask
 frugal, or what nice appetite require? 
the meadow here, with bat'n ooze enrich,
 give spirit to the grass; three cubit high
 the joint herbage shoot; the unfallowed glebe
 yearly overcome the granary with store
 of golden wheat, the strength of human life. 
lo, on auxiliary pole, the hop
 ascend spiral, range in meet array! 
lo, how the arable with barley-grain
 stand thick, overshadow, to the thirsty hind
 transport prospect! these, as modern use
 ordain, infuse, a auburn drink compose,
 wholesome, of deathless fame. here, to the sight,
 apple of price, and plenteous sheaf of corn,
 oft interlace occur, and both imbibe
 fit congenial juice; so rich the soil,
 so much do fructuous moisture overabound! 
nor be the hill unamiable, who top
 to heaven aspire, afford prospect sweet
 to human ken; nor at their foot the vale
 descend gentle, where the low herd
 chew verdurous pasture; nor the yellow field
 Gaily' interchange, with rich variety
 please, as when a emerald green, enchase
 in flamy gold, from the bright mass acquire
 a noble hue, more delicate to sight. 
next add the sylvan shade, and silent groves,
 (haunt of the Druids) whence the hearth be feed
 with copious fuel; whence the sturdy oak,
 a prince refuge once, the æternal guard
 of England throne, by sweat peasant fell,
 stem the vast main, and bear tremendous war
 to distant nation, or with sovereign sway
 I be the divide world to peace and love. 
why shall the Chalybes, or Bilboa boast
 their harden iron; when our mine produce
 as perfect martial over? can tmolus head
 vie with our saffron odour? or the fleece
 bætic, or fine tarentine, compare
 with lemster silken wool? where shall we find
 man more undaunted, for their country be weal
 more prodigal of life? in ancient day,
 the roman legion, and great Cæsar find
 our father no mean foe: and Cressy plain,
 and Agincourt, deep-tinged with blood, confess
 what the Silures vigour unwithstood
 can do in rigid fight; and chief what
 brydges wide-wasting hand, first garter knight,
 puissant author of great chandois stem,
 high chandois, that transmit paternal worth,
 prudence, and ancient prowess, and renown,
 the he noble offspring. o thrice happy peer! 
that, bless with hoary vigour, view thy self
 fresh bloom in thy generous son; who lip,
 flow with nervous eloquence exact,
 charm the wise senate, and attention win
 in deep council: Ariconium please,
 he, as her choose worthy, first salute. 
he on the iberian, on the Gallic shore,
 he hardy briton bless; his faithful hand
 convey new courage from afar, nor more
 the general conduct, than his care avail. 

thou also, glorious branch of cecil line,
 this country claim; with pride and joy to thou
 thy alterennis call: yet she endure
 patient thy absence, since thy prudent choice
 have fix thou in the muse fair seat,
 where Aldrich reign, and from his endless store
 of universal knowledge still supply
 his noble care; he generous thought instill
 of true nobility, their country be love,
 (chief end of life) and form their ductile mind
 to human virtue: by his genius lead,
 thou soon in every art pre-eminent
 shall grace this isle, and rise to burleigh fame. 

hail highborn peer! and thou, great nurse of art,
 and man, from whence conspicuous patriot spring,
 Hanmer, and Bromley; thou, to who with due
 respect wintonia bow, and joyful own
 thy mitred offspring; be for ever bless
 with like example, and to future time
 proficuous, such a race of man produce,
 as, in the cause of virtue firm, may fix
 her throne inviolate. hear, you god, this vow
 from one, the mean in her numerous train;
 though mean, not least studious of her praise. 

Muse, raise thy voice to beaufort spotless fame,
 to Beaufort, in a long descent derive
 from royal ancestry, of kingly right
 faithful asserter: in he centre meet
 their glorious virtue, high desert from pride
 disjoin, unshaken honour, and contempt
 of strong allurement. o illustrious prince! 
o thou of ancient faith! exult, thou,
 in her fair list this happy land enrol. 

who can refuse a tributary verse
 to Weymouth, firm friend of slight worth
 in evil day? who hospitable gate,
 unbar to all, invite a numerous train
 of daily guest; who board, with plenty crown,
 revive the feast-rite old: mean while his care
 forget not the afflict, but content
 in act of secret goodness, shun the praise,
 that sure attend. permit i, bounteous lord,
 to blazon what though hide will beauteous shine;
 and with thy name to dignify my song. 

but who be he, that on the wind stream
 of Vaga first draw vital breath, and now
 approve in anna secret council sit,
 weigh the sum of thing, with wise forecast
 solicitous of public good? how large
 his mind, that comprehend whatever be know
 to old, or present time; yet not elate,
 not conscious of its skill? what praise deserve
 his liberal hand, that gather but to give,
 prevent suit? o not unthankful Muse,
 he lowly reverence, that first deign to hear
 thy pipe, and screen thou from opprobrious tongue. 
acknowledge thy own Harley, and his name
 inscribe on every bark; the wound plant
 will fast increase, fast thy just respect. 

such be our hero, by their virtue know,
 or skill in peace, and war: of soft mould
 the female sex, with sweet attractive air
 subdue obdurate heart. the traveller oft,
 that view their matchless form with transient glance,
 catch sudden love, and sigh for nymph unknown,
 smite with the magic of their eye: nor have
 the dædal hand of nature only pour
 her gift of outward grace; their innocence
 unfeigned, and virtue most engage, free
 from pride, or artifice, long joy afford
 to the honest nuptial bed, and in the wane
 of life, rebate the misery of age. 
and be there find a wretch, so base of mind,
 that woman powerful beauty dare condemn,
 exact work of heaven? he ill deserve
 or love, or pity; friendless let he see
 uneasy, tedious day, despise, forlorn,
 as stain of human race: but may the man,
 that cheerful recount the female praise
 find equal love, and love untainted sweet
 enjoy with honour. o, you god! may i
 elect my fate, my happy choice shall be
 a fair, and modest virgin, that invite
 with aspect chaste, forbid loose desire,
 tender smile; in who heavenly eye
 sit pure love enthrone: but if the star
 malignant, these my better hope oppose,
 may i, at least, the sacred pleasure know
 of strict amity; nor ever want
 a friend, with who i mutual may share
 gladness, and anguish, by kind intercourse
 of speech, and office. may in my mind,
 indelible a grateful sense remain
 of favour undeserved! — o thou! from who
 glad both rich, and low seek aid; most wise
 interpreter of right, who gracious voice
 breathe equity, and curb too rigid law
 with mild, impartial reason; what return
 of thanks be due to thy beneficence
 free vouchsafe, when to the gate of death
 i tend prone? if thy indulgent care
 have not preven, among unbodied shade
 i now have wander; and these empty thought
 of apple perish: but, upraise by thou,
 i tune my pipe afresh, each night, and day
 thy unexampled goodness to extol
 desirous; but nor night, nor day suffice
 for that great task; the high honour name
 of Trevor must employ my will thought
 incessant, dwell for ever on my tongue. 

let i be grateful, but let far from i
 be fawn cringe, and false dissemble look,
 and servile flattery, that harbour oft
 in court, and gild roof. some loose the band
 of ancient friendship, cancel nature law
 for pageantry, and tawdy gugaw. some
 renounce their sire, oppose paternal right
 for rule, and power; and other be realm invade,
 with specious show of love. this traitorous wretch
 betray his sovereign. other, destitute
 of real zeal, to every altar bend,
 by lucre sway, and act the base thing
 to be style honourable: the honest man,
 simple of heart, prefer inglorious want
 to ill-got wealth; rather from door to door
 a jocund pilgrim, though distress, he will rove,
 than break his plight faith; nor fear, nor hope,
 will shock his steadfast soul; rather debar
 each common privilege, cut off from hope
 of mean gain, of present good despoil,
 he will bear the mark of infamy, contemn,
 unpitied; yet his mind, of evil pure,
 support he, and intention free from fraud. 
if no retinue with observant eye
 attend he, if he can with purple stain
 of cumbrous vestment, labour over with gold,
 dazzle the croud, and set they all agape;
 yet clad in homely weed, from envy dart
 remote he live, nor know the nightly pang
 of conscience, nor with spectre grisly form,
 dæmon, and injure soul, at close of day
 annoy, sad interrupt slumber find. 
but (as a child, who inexperienced age
 nor evil purpose fear, nor know,) enjoy
 night sweet refreshment, humid sleep, sincere. 
when chaunticleer, with Clarion shrill, recall
 the tardy day, he to his labour hie
 gladsome, intent on somewhat that may ease
 unhealthy mortal, and with curious search
 examine all the property of herb,
 fossil, and mineral, that the embowel earth
 display, if by his industry he can
 benefit human race: or else his thought
 be exercise with speculation deep
 of good, and just, and meet, and the wholesome rule
 of temperance, and aught that may improve
 the moral life; not sedulous to rail,
 nor with envenom tongue to blast the fame
 of harmless man, or secret whisper spread,
 among faithful friend, to breed distrust, and hate. 
studious of virtue, he no life observe
 except his own, his own employ his care,
 large subject! that he labour to refine
 daily, nor of his little stock deny
 fit alm to lazar, merciful, and meek. 

thus sacred Virgil live, from courtly vice,
 and bait of pompous Rome secure; at court
 still thoughtful of the rural honest life,
 and how to improve his ground, and how himself:
 best poet! fit exemplar for the tribe
 of Phœbus, nor less fit Mæonides,
 poor eyeless pilgrim! and if after these,
 if after these another i may name,
 thus tender spencer live, with mean repast
 content, depress by penury, and pine
 in foreign realm: yet not debase his verse
 by Fortune frown. and have that other bard,
 oh, have but he that first ennoble song
 with holy rapture, like his abdiel be,
 among many faithless, strict faithful find;
 unpitied, he shall not have wail his orb,
 that roll in vain to find the pierce ray,
 and find no dawn, by dim suffusion veil! 
but he — however, let the muse abstain,
 nor blast his fame, from who she learn to sing
 in much inferior strain, grovel beneath
 the olympian hill, on plain, and vale intent,
 mean follower. there let her rest awhile,
 please with the fragrant walk, and cool retreat. 

cyder.

book ii.

o Harcourt, who the ingenuous love of art
 have carry from thy native soil, beyond
 the eternal alpine snow, and now detain
 in italy waste realm, how long must we
 lament thy absence? while in sweet sojourn
 thou view the relic of old Rome; or what,
 unrivalled author by their presence, make
 for ever venerable, rural seat,
 tibur, and Tusculum, or virgil urn
 green with immortal bay, which haply thou,
 respect his great name, do now approach
 with bend knee, and strow with purple flower;
 unmindful of thy friend, that ill can brook
 this long delay. at length, dear youth, return,
 of wit, and judgement ripe in bloom year,
 and britain isle with latian knowledge grace. 
return, and let thy father worth excite
 thirst of preeminence; see! how the cause
 of widow, and of orphan he assert
 with win rhetoric, and well argue law! 
Mark well his footstep, and, like he, deserve
 thy prince favour, and thy country be love. 

mean while (although the massic grape delight
 pregnant of racy juice, and formian hill
 temper thy cup, yet) will not thou reject
 thy native liquour: lo! for thou my mill
 now grind choice apple, and the british vat
 overflow with generous cyder; far remote
 accept this labour, nor despise the muse,
 that, pass land, and sea, on thou attend. 

thus far of tree: the please task remain,
 to sing of wine, and autumn bless increase. 
the effect of art be show, yet what avail
 against heaven? oft, notwithstanding all thy care
 to help thy plant, when the small fruit'ry seem
 exempt from ill, a oriental blast
 disastrous fly, soon as the hind, fatigue,
 unyoke his team; the tender freight, unskilled
 to bear the hot disease, distemper pine
 in the year prime, the deadly plague annoy
 the wide enclosure; think not vain now
 to treat thy neighbour with mellifluous cup,
 thus disappoint: if the former year
 exhibit no supply, alas! thou must,
 with tasteless water wash thy droughty throat. 

a thousand accident the farmer hope
 subvert, or checque; uncertain all his toil,
 until lusty autumn lukewarm day, allay
 with gentle cold, insensible confirm
 his ripen labour: autumn to the fruit
 earth various lap produce, vigour give
 equal, intenerate milky grain,
 berry, and sky-dyed plum, and what in coat
 rough, or soft rind, or beard husk, or shell;
 fat olive, and pistacio fragrant nut,
 and the pine tasteful apple: autumn paint
 ausonian hill with grape, while english plain
 blush with pomaceous harvest, breathe sweet. 
o let i now, when the kind early dew
 unlock the embosom odour, walk among
 the well range file of tree, who full-aged store
 diffuse ambrosial steam, than myrrh, or nard
 more grateful, or perfume flowery Beane! 
soft whisper air, and the lark mattin song
 then woo to muse, and becalm the mind
 perplex with irksome thought. thrice happy time,
 best portion of the various year, in which
 nature rejoice, smile on her work
 lovely, to full perfection wrought! but ah,
 short be our joy, and neighbour grief disturb
 our pleasant hour. inclement winter dwell
 contiguous; forthwith frosty blast deface
 the blithsome year: tree of their shrivel fruit
 be widow, dreery storm over all prevail. 
now, now be the time; ever hasty sun forbid
 to work, disburthen thou thy sapless wood
 of its rich progeny; the turgid fruit
 abound with mellow liquour; now exhort
 thy hind to exercise the point steel
 on the hard rock, and give a wheely form
 to the expect grinder: now prepare
 material for thy mill, a sturdy post
 cylindric, to support the Grinder weight
 excessive, and a flexile sallow' entrench,
 round, capacious of the juicy Hord. 
nor must thou not be mindful of thy press
 long ever the vintage; but with timely care
 shave the goat shaggy beard, lest thou too late,
 in vain shall seek a strainer, to dispart
 the husky, terrene dregs, from pure must. 
be cautious next a proper steed to find,
 who prime be past; the vigorous horse disdain
 such servile labour, or, if force, forget
 his past achievement, and victorious palm. 
blind Bayard rather, wear with work, and year,
 shall roll the unwieldy stone; with sober pace
 he will tread the circle path until dewy eve,
 from early day-spring, please to find his age
 decline, not unuseful to his lord. 

some, when the press, by utmost vigour screw,
 have drain the pulpous mass, regale their swine
 with the dry refuse; thou, more wise shall steep
 thy husk in water, and again employ
 the ponderous engine. water will imbibe
 the small remains of spirit, and acquire
 a vinous flavour; this the peasant blithe
 will quaff, and whistle, as thy tinkle team
 they drive, and sing of fusca radiant eye,
 please with the medley draught. not shall thou now
 reject the apple-cheese, though quite exhaust;
 even now it will cherish, and improve the root
 of sickly plant; new vigor hence convey
 will yield a harvest of unusual growth. 
such profit spring from husk discreet use! 

the tender apple, from their parent rend
 by stormy shock, must not neglect lie,
 the prey of worm: a frugal man i know,
 rich in one barren acre, which, subdue
 by endless culture, with sufficient must
 his cask replenish yearly: he no more
 desire, nor want, diligent to learn
 the various season, and by skill repel
 invade pest, successful in his care,
 until the damp lybian wind, with tempest arm
 outrageous, bluster horrible amid
 his cyder-grove: overturn by furious blast,
 the sightly rank fall prostrate, and around
 their fruitage scatter, from the genial bough
 strip immature: yet do he not repine,
 nor curse his star; but prudent, his fall heap
 collect, cherish with the tepid wreath
 of ted grass, and the sun mellow beam
 rival with artful heat, and thence procure
 a costly liquour, by improve time
 equal with what the happy vintage bear. 

but this i warn thou, and shall always warn,
 no heterogeneous mixture use, as some
 with watery turnip have debase their wine,
 too frugal; nor let the crude humour dance
 in heat brass, steam with fire intense;
 although devonia much commend the use
 of strengthen Vulcan; with their native strength
 thy wine sufficient, other aid refuse;
 and, when the allot orb of time be complete,
 be more commend than the labour drink. 

nor let thy avarice tempt thou to withdraw
 the priest appoint share; with cheerful heart
 the tenth of thy increase bestow, and own
 heaven bounteous goodness, that will sure repay
 thy grateful duty: this neglect, fear
 signal avengeance, such as overtake
 a miser, that unjust once withhold
 the clergy due; rely on himself,
 his field he tend with successless care,
 early, and late, when, or unwished for rain
 descend, or unseasonable frost
 curb his increase hope, or when around
 the cloud drop fatness, in the middle sky
 the dew suspend stay, and leave unmoist
 his execrable glebe; record this,
 be just, and wise, and tremble to transgress. 

learn now, the promise of the come year
 to know, that by no flatter sign abuse,
 thou wise may provide: the various moon
 prophetic, and attendant star explain
 each rise dawn; ever icy crust surmount
 the current stream, the heavenly orb serene
 twinkle with tremble ray, and Cynthia glow
 with light unsullied: now the Fowler, warn
 by these good omen, with swift early step
 tread the crimp earth, range through field and glade
 offensive to the bird, sulphureous death
 cheque their mid flight, and heedless while they strain
 their tuneful throat, the tower, heavy lead
 overtakes their speed; they leave their little live
 above the cloud, præcipitant to earth. 

the woodcock early visit, and abode
 of long continuance on our temperate clime,
 foretell a liberal harvest: he of time
 intelligent, the harsh hyperborean ice
 shun for our equal winter; when our sun
 cleave the chill soil, he backward wing his way
 to scandinavian freeze summer, meet
 for his numed blood. but nothing profit more
 than frequent snow: o, may thou often see
 thy furrow whiten by the woolly rain,
 nutritious! Secret nitre lurk within
 the porous wet, quicken the languid glebe. 

sometime thou shall with fervent vow implore
 a moderate wind; the orchat love to wave
 with winter-wind, before the gem exert
 their feeble head; the loosen root then drink
 large increment, earnest of happy year. 

nor will it nothing profit to observe
 the monthly star, their powerful influence
 over plant field, what vegetable reign
 under each sign. on our account have Jove
 indulgent, to all moon some succulent plant
 allot, that poor, helpless man may slack
 his present thirst, and matter find for toil. 
now will the corinth, now the rasp supply
 delicious draught; the quince now, or plum,
 or cherry, or the fair thisbeian fruit
 be press to wine; the briton squeeze the work
 of sedulous bee, and mix odorous herb
 prepare balsamic cup, to wheeze lung
 medicinal, and short-breathed, ancient sire. 

but, if thou be indefatigable bend
 to toil, and omnifarious drink will brew;
 beside the orchat, every hedge, and bush
 afford assistance; even afflictive birch,
 curse by unlettered, idle youth, distil
 a limpid current from her wound bark,
 profuse of nurse sap. when solar beam
 parch thirsty human vein, the damask mead,
 unforced display ten thousand paint flower
 useful in potable. thy little son
 permit to range the pasture; glad they
 will mow the cowslip-posy, faint sweet,
 from whence thou artificial wine shall drain
 of icy taste, that, in mid fervour, best
 slack crave thirst, and mitigate the day. 

happy iërne, who most wholesome air
 poison envenom spider, and forbid
 the baleful toad, and viper from her shore! 
more happy in her balmy draught, (enrich
 with miscellaneous spice, and the root
 for thirst-abating sweetness praise,) which wide
 extend her fame, and to each droop heart
 present redress, and lively health convey. 

see, how the belgæ, sedulous, and stout,
 with bowl of fatten mum, or blissful cup
 of kernell-relished fluid, the fair star
 of early Phosphorus salute, at noon
 jocund with frequent-rising fume! by use
 instruct, thus to quell their native phlegm
 prevail, and engender wayward mirth. 

what need to treat of distant clime, remove
 far from the slope journey of the year,
 beyond petsora, and islandic coast? 
where ever-during snow, perpetual shade
 of darkness, will congeal their livid blood,
 do not the arctic tract, spontaneous yield
 a cheer purple berry, big with wine,
 intense fervent, which each hour they crave,
 spread round a flame pile of pine, and oft
 they interlard their native drink with choice
 of strong brandy, yet scarce with these aid
 enable to prevent the sudden rot
 of freeze nose, and quick-decaying foot. 

nor less the sable borderer of Nile,
 nor who Taprobane manure, nor they,
 who sunny Borneo bear, be store with stream
 egregious, rum, and rice spirit extract. 
for here, expose to perpendicular ray,
 in vain they covet shade, and Thrascias' gale,
 pine with æquinoctial heat, unless
 the cordial glass perpetual motion keep,
 quick circuit; nor dare they close their eye,
 void of a bulky charger near their lip,
 with which, in often-interrupted sleep,
 their fry blood compel to irrigate
 their dry-furred tongue, else minute to death
 obnoxious, dismal death, the effect of drought! 

more happy they, bear in columbus world,
 carybbes, and they, who the cotton plant
 with downy-sprouting vest array! their wood
 bow with prodigious nut, that give at once
 celestial food, and nectar; then, at hand
 the lemmon, uncorrupt with voyage long,
 to vinous spirit add (heavenly drink!) 
they with pneumatic engine, ceaseless draw,
 intent on laughter; a continual tide
 flow from the exhilarate fount. as, when
 against a secret cliff, with soddain shock
 a ship be dash, and leak drink the sea,
 the astonish mariner ay ply the pump,
 no stay, nor rest, until the wide breach be close. 
so they (but cheerful) unfatigued, still move
 the drain sucker, then alone concern,
 when the dry bowl forbid their please work. 

but if to hoard thou be bend, thy hope
 be frustrate, shall thou think thy pipe will flow
 with early-limpid wine. the hord store,
 and the harsh draught, must twice endure the sun
 kind strengthen heat, twice winter purge cold. 

there be, that a compound fluid drain
 from different mixture, woodcock, pippin, Moyle,
 rough Eliot, sweet permain, the blend stream
 (each mutual correct each) create
 a pleasurable medley, of what taste
 hardly distinguish; as the showery arch,
 with list colour gay, or, azure, gules,
 delight, and puzzle the beholder eye,
 that view the watery breed, with thousand show
 of painture vary, yet unskilled to tell
 or where one colour rise, or one saint. 

some cyder have by art, or age unlearned
 their genuine relish, and of sundry vine
 assume the flavour; one sort counterfeit
 the spanish product, this, to Gauls have seem
 the sparkle nectar of Champaigne; with that,
 a german oft have swill his throat, and swear,
 delude, that imperial Rhine bestow
 the generous rummer, while the owner please,
 laugh inly at his guest, thus entertain
 with foreign vintage from his cyder-cask. 

soon as thy liquour from the narrow cell
 of close-pressed husk be free, thou must refrain
 thy thirsty soul; let none persuade to broach
 thy thick, unwholesome, undigested cade:
 the hoary frost, and northern blast take care
 thy muddy beverage to serene, and drive
 præcipitant the base, ropy lees. 

and now thy wine transpicuous, purge from all
 it be earthy gross, yet let it feed awhile
 on the fat refuse, least too soon disjoin
 from spritely, it, to sharp, or vapid change. 
when to convenient vigour it attain,
 suffice it to provide a brazen tube
 Inflext; self-taught, and voluntary fly
 the defecate liquour, through the vent
 ascend, then by downward tract convey,
 spout into subject vessel, lovely clear. 
as when a noontide sun, with summer beam,
 dart through a cloud, her watery skirt be edge
 with lucid amber, or undrossy gold:
 so, and so rich, the purge liquid shine. 

now also, when the cold abate, nor yet
 full summer shine, a dubious season, close
 in glass thy pure stream, and let they gain,
 from due confinement, spirit, and flavour new. 

for this intent, the subtle chemist feed
 perpetual flame, who unresisted force
 over sand, and ash, and the stubborn flint
 prevail, turn into a fusil sea,
 that in his furnace bubble sunny-red:
 from hence a glow drop, with hollow steel
 he take, and by one efficacious breath
 dilate to a surprise cube, or sphære,
 or oval, and fit receptacle form
 for every liquid, with his plastic lung,
 to human life subservient; by his mean
 cyder in metal frail improve; the Moyle,
 and tasteful pippin, in a moon short year,
 acquire complete perfection: now they smoke
 transparent, sparkle in each drop, delight
 of curious palate, by fair virgin crave. 
but harsh fluid different length of time
 expect: thy flask will slow mitigate
 the eliot roughness. stirom, firm fruit,
 embottle (long as priameian Troy
 withstand the greek) endure, ever just mild. 
soften by age, it youthful vigor gain,
 fallacious drink! you honest man beware,
 nor trust its smoothness; the third circle glass
 suffice virtue: but may hypocrite,
 (that sly speak one thing, another think,
 hateful as hell) please with the relish weak,
 drink on unwarned, until by enchant cup
 infatuate, they their wily thought disclose,
 and through intemperance grow a while sincere. 

the farmer toil be do; his cade mature,
 now call for vent, his land exhaust permit
 the indulge awhile. now solemn rite he pay
 to Bacchus, author of heart-cheering mirth. 
his honest friend, at thirsty hour of dusk,
 come uninvited; he with bounteous hand
 impart his smoke vintage, sweet reward
 of his own industry; the well fraught bowl
 circle incessant, while the humble cell
 with quaver laugh, and rural jest resound. 
ease, and content, and undissembled love
 shine in each face; the thought of labour past
 encrease their joy. as, from retentive cage
 when sullen philomel escape, her note
 she vary, and of past imprisonment
 sweet complain; her liberty retrieve
 cheer her sad soul, improve her please song. 
gladsome they quaff, yet not exceed the bound
 of healthy temperance, nor encroach on night,
 season of rest, but well bedew repair
 each to his home, with unsupplanted foot. 
ever heaven emblazon by the rosy dawn
 domestic care awake they; brisk they rise,
 refresh, and lively with the joy that flow
 from amicable talk, and moderate cup
 Sweetly' interchange. the pine lover find
 present redress, and long oblivion drink
 of coy Lucinda. give the debtor wine;
 his joy be short, and few; yet when he drink
 his dread retire, the flow glass add
 courage, and mirth: magnificent in thought,
 imaginary riches he enjoy,
 and in the goal expatiate unconfined. 
nor can the poet bacchus praise indite,
 debar his grape: the muse still require
 humid regalement, nor will aught avail
 implore Phœbus, with unmoistened lip. 
thus to the generous bottle all incline,
 by parch thirst allure: with vehement sun
 when dusty summer bake the crumble clod,
 how pleasant be it, beneath the twist arch
 of a retreat bower, in midday reign
 to ply the sweet carouse, remote from noise,
 secure of feverish heat! when the age year
 incline, and Boreas' spirit bluster frore,
 beware the inclement heaven; now let thy hearth
 crackle with juiceless bough; thy linger blood
 now instigate with the apple powerful stream. 
perpetual shower, and stormy gust confine
 the will ploughman, and December warn
 to annual jollity; now sportive youth
 carol incondite rhythm, with suit note,
 and quaver unharmonious; sturdy swain
 in clean array, for rustic dance prepare,
 mix with the buxom damsel; hand in hand
 they frisk, and bind, and various maze weave,
 shake their brawny limb, with uncouth mein,
 transport, and sometime, a oblique leer
 dart on their love, sometime, a hasty kiss
 steal from unwary lass; they with scorn,
 and neck recline, resent the ravish bliss. 
mean while, blind british bard with volant touch
 traverse loquacious string, who solemn note
 provoke to harmless revel; these among,
 a subtle artist stand, in wondrous bag
 that bear imprison wind, (of gentle sort
 than those, which erst Laertes son enclose.) 
peaceful they sleep, but let the tuneful squeeze
 of labour elbow rouse they, out they fly
 melodious, and with spritely accent charm. 
'midst these disport, forget they not to drench
 themselves with belly goblet, nor when spring
 return, can they refuse to usher in
 the fresh-born year with loud acclaim, and store
 of jovial draught, now, when the sappy bough
 attire themselves with bloom, sweet rudiment
 of future harvest: when the gnossian crown
 lead on expect autumn, and the tree
 discharge their mellow burden, let they thank
 boon nature, that thus annual supply
 their vault, and with her former liquid gift
 exhilarate their languid mind, within
 the golden mean confine: beyond, there be nought
 of health, or pleasure. therefore, when thy heart
 dilate with fervent joy, and eager soul
 prompt to pursue the sparkle glass, be sure
 it be time to shun it; if thou will prolong
 dire compotation, forthwith reason quit
 her empire to confusion, and misrule,
 and vain debate; then twenty tongue at once
 conspire in senseless jargon, nought be hear
 but din, and various clamour, and mad rant:
 distrust, and jealousy to these succeed,
 and anger-kindling taunt, the certain bane
 of well-knit fellowship. now horrid fray
 commence, the brim glass now be hurl
 with dire intent; bottle with bottle clash
 in rude encounter, round their temple fly
 the sharp-edged fragment, down their batter cheek
 mix gore, and cyder flow: what shall we say
 of rash Elpenor, who in evil hour
 dry a immeasurable bowl, and think
 the exhale his surfeit by irriguous sleep,
 imprudent? he, death iron-sleep oppress,
 descend careless from his couch; the fall
 luxt his neck-joint, and spinal marrow bruise. 
nor need we tell what anxious care attend
 the turbulent mirth of wine; nor all the kind
 of malady, that lead to death grim cave,
 wrought by intemperance, joint-racking gout,
 intestine stone, and pine atrophy,
 chill, even when the sun with july-heat
 frys the scorch soil, and dropsy all afloat,
 yet crave liquid: nor the centaur tale
 be here repeat; how with lust, and wine
 inflame, they fight, and spill their drunken soul
 at feast hour. you heavenly power, that guard
 the british isle, such dire event remove
 far from fair Albion, nor let civil broil
 ferment from social cup: may we, remote
 from the hoarse, brazen sound of war, enjoy
 our humid product, and with seemly draught
 enkindle mirth, and hospitable love. 
too oft alas! have mutual hatred drench
 our sword in native blood, too oft have pride,
 and hellish discord, and insatiate thirst
 of other right, our quiet discompose. 
have we forget, how fell destruction rage
 wide-spreading, when by eris' torch incense
 our father war? what hero, signalise
 for loyalty, and prowess, meet their fate
 untimely, undeserved! how Bertie fall,
 Compton, and Granvill, dauntless son of Mars,
 fit theme of endless grief, but that we view
 their virtue yet survive in their race! 
can we forget, how the mad, headstrong rout
 defy their prince to arm, nor make account
 of faith, or duty, or allegiance swear? 
apostate, atheist rebel! bend to ill,
 with seem sanctity, and cover fraud,
 instil by he, who first presume to oppose
 omnipotence; alike their crime, the event
 be not alike; these triumph, and in height
 of barbarous malice, and insult pride,
 abstain not from imperial blood. o fact
 unparallelled! o Charles! o best of king! 
what star their black, disastrous influence shed
 on thy nativity, that thou shall fall
 thus, by inglorious hand, in this thy realm,
 supreme, and innocent, adjudge to death
 by those, thy mercy only will have save! 
yet be the cyder-land unstained with guilt;
 the cyder-land, obsequious still to throne,
 abhor such base, disloyal deed, and all
 her pruning-hook extend into sword,
 undaunted, to assert the trample right
 of monarchy; but, ah! successless she
 however faithful! then be no regard
 of right, or wrong. and this, once happy, land
 by homebred fury rent, long groan beneath
 tyrannic sway, until fair-revolving year
 our exile king, and liberty restore. 
now we exult, by mighty anna care
 secure at home, while she to foreign realm
 send forth her dreadful legion, and restrain
 the rage of king: here, noble she support
 justice oppress; here, her victorious arm
 quell the ambitious: from her hand alone
 all Europe fear revenge, or hope redress. 
rejoice, o Albion! sever from the world
 by nature wise indulgence, indigent
 of nothing from without; in one supreme
 entire bless; and from begin time
 design thus happy; but the fond desire
 of rule, and grandeur, multiply a race
 of king, and numerous sceptre introduce,
 destructive of the public weal: for now
 each potentate, as wary fear, or strength,
 or emulation urge, his neighbour bound
 invade, and ampler territory seek
 with ruinous assault; on every plain
 host cope with host, dire be the din of war,
 and ceaseless, or short truce haply procure
 by havoc, and dismay, until jealousy
 raise new combustion: thus be peace in vain
 seek for by martial deed, and conflict stern:
 until Edgar grateful (as to those who pine
 a dismal half-year night, the orient beam
 of Phœbus lamp) arise, and into one
 cement all the long-contending power,
 pacific monarch; then her lovely head
 concord rear high, and all around diffuse
 the spirit of love; at ease, the bard new string
 their silent harp, and teach the wood, and vale,
 in uncouth rhythm, to echo Edgar name. 
then gladness smile in every eye; the year
 run smooth on, productive of a line
 of wise, heroic king, that by just law
 establish happiness at home, or crush
 insult enemy in farther clime. 

see lyon-hearted Richard, with his force
 draw from the north, to jury hallow plain! 
pious valiant, (like a torrent swell
 with wintery tempest, that disdain all mound,
 break a way impetuous, and involve
 within its sweep, tree, house, man) he press
 amid the thick battle; and overthrow
 whateve withstand his zealous rage; no pause,
 no stay of slaughter, find his vigorous arm,
 but the unbelieving squadron turn to flight
 smite in the rear, and with dishonest wound
 mangle behind: the soldan, as he flee,
 oft call on Alla, gnash with despite,
 and shame, and murmur many a empty curse. 

behold third Edward streamer blaze high
 on gallia hostile ground! his right withhold,
 awaken vengeance; o imprudent Gauls,
 rely on false hope, thus to incense
 the warlike english! one important day
 shall teach you mean thought! eager of fight,
 fierce Brutus offspring to the adverse front
 advance resistless, and their deep array
 with furious inroad pierce; the mighty force
 of Edward, twice overturn their desperate king,
 twice he arise, and join the horrid shock:
 the third time, with his wide-extended wing,
 he fugitive decline superior strength,
 discomfit; pursue, in the sad chace
 ten thousand ignominious fall; with blood
 the valley float: great Edward thus avenge,
 with golden Iris his broad shield emboss. 

thrice glorious prince! who, fame with all her tongue
 for ever shall resound. yet from his loin
 new author of dissension spring; from he
 two branch, that in host long contend
 for sovereign sway; (and can such anger dwell
 in noble mind?) but little now avail
 the tie of friendship; every man, as lead
 by inclination, or vain hope, repair
 to either camp, and breathe immortal hate,
 and dire revenge: now horrid slaughter reign;
 son against father tilt the fatal lance,
 careless of duty, and their native ground
 distain with kindred blood, the twang bow
 send shower of shaft, that on their barb point
 alternate ruin bear. here may you see
 baron, and peasant on the embattle field
 slay, or half dead, in one huge, ghastly heap
 promiscuous amast: with dismal groan,
 and ejulation, in the pang of death
 some call for aid, neglect; some overturn
 in the fierce shock, lie gasp, and expire,
 trample by fiery courser; horror thus,
 and wild uproar, and desolation reign
 unrespited: ah! who at length will end
 this long, pernicious fray? what man have fate
 reserve for this great work? — hail, happy prince
 of tudor race, who in the womb of time
 cadwallador foresee! thou, thou be he,
 great Richmond Henry, that by nuptial rite
 must close the gate of Janus, and remove
 destructive discord: now no more the drum
 provoke to arm, or trumpet clangor shrill
 affright the wife, or chill the virgin blood;
 but joy, and pleasure open to the view
 uninterrupted! with presage skill
 thou to thy own unite fergus line
 by wise alliance; from thou James descend,
 heaven choose favourite, first Britannic king. 
to he alone, hereditary right
 give power supreme; yet still some seed remain
 of discontent; two nation under one,
 in law and interest diverse, still pursue
 peculiar end, on each side resolute
 to fly conjunction; neither fear, nor hope,
 nor the sweet prospect of a mutual gain,
 can ought avail, until prudent ANNA say
 let there be union; strait with reverence due
 to her command, they will unite,
 one in affection, law, and government,
 indissoluble firm; from Dubris south,
 to northern Orcades, her long domain. 

and now thus league by a eternal bond,
 what shall retard the britons bold design,
 or who sustain their force; in union knit,
 sufficient to withstand the power combine
 of all this globe? at this important act
 the mauritanian and cathaian king
 already tremble, and the unbaptised Turk
 dread war from utmost Thule; uncontrolled
 the british navy through the ocean vast
 shall wave her double cross, the extreme clime
 terrific, and return with odorous spoil
 of Araby well fraught, or indus wealth,
 pearl, and barbaric gold; mean while the swain
 shall unmolested reap, what plenty strow
 from well store horn, rich grain, and timely fruit. 
the elder year, Pomona, please, shall deck
 with ruby-tinctured birth, who liquid store
 abundant, flow in well blend stream,
 the native shall applaud; while glad they talk
 of baleful ill, cause by bellona wrath
 in other realm; wherever the british spread
 triumphant banner, or their fame have reach
 diffusive, to the utmost bound of this
 wide universe, silurian cyder bear
 shall please all taste, and triumph over the vine. 
