to the reverend to to, d. d. 

— french power, and weak ally, and war, and want —
no more of that, my friend; you touch a string
that hurt my ear. all politics apart,
except a generous wish, a glow prayer
for british welfare, commerce, glory, peace.
give party to the wind: it be a word,
a phantom sound, by which the cunning great
whistle to their dependent: a decoy
to gull the unwary, where the master stand
encourage his minion, his train bird,
feed and caress their species to betray.
see with what hollow blandishment and art
they lead the wing captive to the snare!
fool! that in open aether may have soar,
free as the air they cut; sipe pure rill,
dine with the Thames, or bathe in crystal lake.

we wear no badge, no dependence own:
who true love thou, dear liberty,
a silken fetter will uneasy sit.

heaven know it be not insolence that speak!
the tribute of respect to greatness due
not the bribe sycophant more will pay.
still, still as much of party be retain,
as principle require, and sense direct:
else our vain bark, without a rudder, float
the scorn and pastime of each veer gale.

this gentle evening let the sun descend
untroubled, while it paint your ambient hill
with fade lustre, and a sweet farewell.
here be our seat: that castle opposite,
proud of its woody brow, adorn the scene,
dictate, o verse in book, and just of taste,
dictate the please theme of our discourse.
shall we trace science from her eastern home
chaldaean; or the bank of Nile, where Thebes,
nurse her daughter art, majestic stand,
and pour forth knowledge from a hundred gate?
there first the marble learn to mimic life,
the pillared temple rise, and pyramid,
who undecaying grandeur laugh at time;
birth-place of letter, where the sun be show
his radiant way, and heaven be teach to roll.
there too the muse tune their early lyre,
warble soft number to serapis ear;
until chace by tyrant, or a mild clime
invite, they remove with pilgrim harp,
and all their band of harmony to Greece.
as when a flock of linnet, if perchance
deliver from the falcon talon, fly
with tremble wing to cover, and renew
their note; tell every bush of their escape,
and thrill their merry thanks to liberty.
the tuneful tribe, please with their new abode,
polish the rude inhabitant, whence tale
of listen wood, and rock that dance to sound.
hear the full chorus lift hymn to Jove!
Linus and Orpheus catch the strain, and all
the rapture audience utter loud applause.

a song, believe i, be no trifle then:
weighty the muse task, and wide her sway:
she be religion, the resound fane
echo her language; polity be she,
and the world bow to legislative verse.

as state increase, and government be form,
her aid less useful, she retire to grot
and shady bower, content to teach and please.
under her laurel frequent bard repose;
voluble Pindar troll his rapid song,
or Sappho breathe her spirit complaint:
here the stage buskin, there the lyric choir,
and Homer epic trumpet. happy Greece,
bless in her offspring! seat of eloquence,
of art and reason; patriot-virtue seat!
do the sun thither dart uncommon ray!
do some preside genius hover over
that animate soil with brood wing!
the sad reverse may start a gentle tear —
go, search in Athens for herself, inquire
where be her orator, her sage now:
her arsenal overturn, her wall in dust,
but far less ruin than her soul decay.
the stone inscribe to Socrates, debase
to prop a reel cot: minerva shrine
possess by those who never hear her name.
upon the mount where old Mùsaeus sing,
sit the grim turbane captain, and exact
harsh tribute; on the spot where Plato teach
his heavenly strain sublime, a stupid Turk
be preach ignorance and Mahomet.
turn next to Rome: be that the clime, the place,
where once, as fame report, Augustus live?
what magic have transform she, shrink her nerve?
a wither laurel, and a moulder arch! —
can the pure crimson tide, the noble blood
that ever flow, to such a puddle turn?
she end, like she long appian, in a marsh;
or Jordan river pour his clear urn
into the black asphaltus slimy lap.
patron of wit, and victor of mankind,
bard, warrior, worthy (revolution strange)
be pimp and fiddler, mountebank and monk.
in tully beehive, magazine of sweet,
the lazy drone be buzz or asleep.

but we forgive the live for the dead;
indebt more to Rome than we can pay.
of a long dearth prophetic, she lay in
a feast for age. — o thou banquet nice,
where the soul riot with secure excess!
what feel delight! what please useful hour
repeat owe we to her letter son!
we by their favour tiber walk enjoy,
their temple trace, and share their noble game;
enter the crowd theatre at will,
go to the forum, hear the consul plead,
be present in the thunder Capitol
when Tully speak; at soft hour attend
harmonious Virgil to his mantuan farm,
or baian; and with happy Horace talk
in myrtle grove by teverone cascade.

hail, precious page! that amuse and teach,
exalt the genius, and improve the breast.
you sage historian all your store unfold,
reach your clear steady mirror — in that glass
the form of good and ill be well portray.

but chief thou, divine philosophy,
shed thy bless influence; with thy train appear
of grace mild, far be the stoic boast,
the cynic snarl, and churlish pedantry.
bright visitant, if not too high my wish,
come in the lovely dress you wear, a guest
at Plato table, or at Tusculum,
the roman feast his select friend.

tamer of pride! at thy serene rebuke
see crouch insolence, spleen, and revenge
before thy shine taper disappear.
tutor of human life, auspicious guide,
who faithful clue unravel every muse,
who conduct smooth the rough path; who voice
control each storm, and bid the roar be still:
o condescend to gild my darksome roof:
let i know thou — the Delphic oracle
be then obey — and i shall know myself.
