Eyam

for one short week i leave, with anxious heart,
 source of my filial care, the full of day;
 lure by the promise of harmonic art
 to breathe her handel soul-exalting lay. 
pensive i trace the derwent amber wave,
 foam through sylvan bank, or view it lave
 the soft romantic valley, high over-peered
 by hill, and rock, in savage grandeur rear

not two short mile from thou, — can i refrain
 thy haunt, my native Eyam, long unseen? 
thou, and thy love inhabitant again
 shall meet my transient gaze. — thy rocky screen,
 thy airy cliff i mount; and seek thy shade,
 thy roof, that brow the steep, romantic glade;
 but, while on i the eye of friendship glow,
 swell my pain sigh, my tear spontaneous flow. 

in scene paternal, not behold through year,
 nor view, till now, but by a father side,
 well may the tender tributary tear,
 from keen regret of duteous fondness, glide. 
its pastor, to this human-flock no more
 shall the long flight of future day restore;
 distant he droop — and that once-gladdening eye
 now languid gleam, even when his friend be nigh. 

through this know walk, where weedy gravel lie,
 rough, and unsightly; — by the long coarse grass
 of the once smooth, and vivid green, with sigh,
 to the desert rectory i pass; —
 stray through the darken chamber naked bind,
 where childhood early, lively bliss i find. 
how change, since erst, the lightsome wall beneath,
 the social joy do their warm comfort breathe! 

ere yet i go, who may return no more,
 that sacred pile, amid yonder shadowy tree,
 let i revisit! — ancient, massy door,
 thou grate hoarse! — my vital spirit freeze
 pass the vacant pulpit to the space
 where humble rail the decent altar grace,
 and where my infant sister ash sleep,
 who loss i leave the childish sport to weep. 

now the low beam, with paper garland hang,
 in memory of some village youth, or maid,
 draw the soft tear, from thril remembrance spring,
 how oft my childhood mark that tribute pay. 
the glove suspend by the garland side,
 white as its snowy flower, with ribbon tie;
 dear village! long these wreath funereal spread,
 simple memorial of thy early dead! 

but, o! thou blank, and silent pulpit! — thou
 that with a father precept, just, and bland,
 do win my ear, as reason strengthen glow
 show their full value — now thou seem to stand
 before my sad, suffuse, and tremble gaze,
 the dreary relic of depart day;
 of eloquence paternal, nervous, clear,
 dim appartition thou, — and bitter be my tear. 
