elegy iii.

by the same.

let other boast their heap of shine gold,
 and view their field with wave plenty crown,
 who neighbour foe in constant terror hold,
 and trumpet break their slumber never sound:

while calm poor i trifle life away,
 enjoy sweet leisure by my cheerful fire,
 no wanton hope my quiet shall betray,
 but cheap bless i will scorn each vain desire. 

with timely care i will sow my little field,
 and plant my orchard with its master hand,
 nor blush to spread the hay, the hook to wield,
 or range my sheaf along the sunny land. 

if late at dusk, while careless i roam,
 i meet a stroll kid, or bleat lamb,
 under my arm i will bring the wanderer home,
 and not a little chide its thoughtless dam. 

what joy to hear the tempest howl in vain,
 and clasp a fearful mistress to my breast? 
or lull to slumber by the beat rain,
 secure and happy sink at last to rest? 

or if the sun in flame Leo ride,
 by shady river indolent stray,
 and with my Delia, walk side by side,
 hear how they murmur, as they glide away. 

what joy to wind along the cool retreat,
 to stop and gaze on Delia as i go? 
to mingle sweet discourse with kiss sweet,
 and teach my lovely scholar all i know? 

thus please at heart, and not with fancy dream,
 in silent happiness i rest unknown;
 content with what i be, not what i seem,
 i live for Delia, and myself alone. 

ah, foolish man! who thus of her possess,
 can float and wander with ambition wind,
 and if his outward trappings speak he bless,
 not heed the sickness of his conscious mind. 

with she i scorn the idle breath of praise,
 nor trust to happiness that be not our own,
 the smile of fortune may suspicion raise,
 but here i know that i be love alone. 

stanhope, in wisdom as in wit divine,
 may rise and plead britannia glorious cause,
 with steady rein his eager wit confine,
 while manly sense the deep attention draw:

let stanhope speak his listen country wrong,
 my humble voice shall please one-partial maid;
 for her alone i pen my tender song,
 secure sit in his friendly shade. 

stanhope shall come, and grace his rural friend,
 Delia shall wonder at her noble guest,
 with blush awe the riper fruit commend,
 and for her husband patron cull the best. 

she be the care of all my little train,
 while i with tender indolence be bless,
 the favourite subject of her gentle reign,
 by love alone distinguish from the rest. 

for her i will yoke my ox to the plough,
 in gloomy forest tend my lonely flock,
 for she a goat-herd climb the mountain brow,
 and sleep extend on the naked rock:

ah! what avail to press the stately bed,
 and far from she amid tasteless grandeur weep,
 by marble fountain lie the pensive head,
 and, while they murmur, strive in vain to sleep? 

Delia alone can please, and never tire,
 exceed the paint of thought in true delight,
 with she, enjoyment waken new desire,
 and equal rapture glow through every night:

beauty and worth alike in she contend
 to charm the fancy, and to fix the mind,
 in she, my wife, my mistress, and my friend;
 i taste the joy of sense and reason join. 

on she i will gaze, when other love be over,
 and die press she with my clay-cold hand —
 thou weep already, as i be no more,
 nor can that gentle breast the thought withstand. 

o when i die, my late moment spare,
 nor let thy grief with sharp torment kill,
 wound not thy cheek, nor hurt that flow hair,
 though i be dead, my soul shall love thou still:

o quit the room, o quit the deathful bed,
 or thou will die, so tender be thy heart,
 o leave i, Delia, ever thou see i dead,
 these weep friend will do thy mournful part:

let they, extend on the decent bier,
 convey the coarse in melancholy state,
 through all the village spread the tender tear,
 while pity maid our wondrous love relate. 
