elegy.

write at the approach of winter.

by the same.

the sun far southward bend his annual way,
 the bleak northeast wind lay the forest bare,
 the fruit ungathered quit the naked spray,
 and dreary winter reign over earth and air. 

no mark of vegetable life be see,
 no bird to bird repeat his tuneful call;
 save the dark leaf of some rude evergreen,
 save the lone red-breast on the moss-grown wall,

where be the sprightly scene by spring supply,
 the may-flowered hedge scent every breeze;
 the white flock scatter over the mountain side,
 the woodlark warble on the bloom tree? 

where be gay summer sportive insect train,
 that in green field on paint pinion play;
 the herd at morn wide-pasturing over the plain,
 or throage at noontide in the willow shade? 

where be brown autumn evening mild and still,
 what time the ripen corn fresh fragrance yield,
 what time the village people all the hill,
 and loud shout echo over the harvest field? 

to former scene our fancy thus return,
 to former scene that little please when here! 
our winter chill we, and our summer burn;
 yet we dislike the change of the year. 

to happy land then restless fancy fly,
 where indian stream through green savannah flow;
 where bright sun and ever tranquil sky
 bid new fruit ripen and new flowret blow. 

let truth these fair happy land survey,
 there half the year descend in watery storm;
 or nature sicken in the blaze of day,
 and one brown hue the sun-burnt plain deform. 

there oft as toil in the mazy field,
 or homeward pass on the shadeless way,
 his joyless life the weary labourer yield,
 and instant drop beneath the deathful ray. 

who dream of nature free from nature strife? 
who dream of constant happiness below? 
the hope-flushed enterer on the stage of life;
 the youth to knowledge unchastised by woe. 

for i, long toil on many a weary road,
 lead by false hope in search of many a joy;
 i find in earth bleak clime no bless abode,
 no place, no season sacred from annoy:

for i, while winter rage round the plain,
 with his dark day i will human life compare;
 not those who fraught with cloud and wind and rain,
 than this with pine pain and anxious care. 

o whence this wondrous turn of mind our fate! 
whatever the season or the place possess,
 we ever murmur at our present state,
 and yet the thought of part break our rest:

why else, when hear in evening solemn gloom,
 do the sad knell, that sound over the plain
 toll some poor lifeless body to the tomb,
 thus thrill my breast with melancholy pain? 

the voice of reason echo in my ear,
 thus thou ere long must join thy kindred clay;
 no more these "nostril breathe the vital air,"
 no more these eyelid open on the day. 

o winter, round i spread thy joyless reign,
 thy threaten sky in dusky horror dress;
 of thy dread rage no long i will complain,
 nor ask a Eden for a transient guest. 

enough have heaven indulge of joy below,
 to tempt our tarriance in this love retreat;
 enough have heaven ordain of useful woe,
 to make we languish for a happy seat. 

there be, who deem all clime, all season fair,
 there be, who know no restless passion strife;
 contentment smile at each idle care;
 contentment thankful for the gift of life;

she find in winter many a scene to please;
 the morning landscape fringe with frost-work gay,
 the sun at noon see through the leafless tree,
 the clear calm aether at the close of day:

she mark the advantage storm and cloud bestow,
 when bluster caurus purify the air,
 when moist Aquarius pour the fleecy snow,
 that make the impregnate glebe a rich harvest bear;

she bid for all our grateful praise arise,
 to he who mandate speak the world to form;
 give spring gay bloom, and summer cheerful sky,
 and autumn corn-clad field, and winter sound storm
