ode to sleep.

by mr. H—.

i 

friend to the gloomy shade of night! 
vast source of fanciful delight! 
power! who care-dissolving sway,
 the slave that pant over indian hill,
 the wretch who snow-girt Zembla chill,
 and wide creation fertile race obey;
 the joyous chorister that flit in air,
 the mute that dwell beneath the silver flood,
 the savage howl over the affright wood,
 and man, the imperious lord of all, thy power declare. 

ii.

thy magic wand can oft restrain
 the miser sordid hope of pain;
 can make each heart-felt trouble cease:
 or from the sicken thought suspend
 the image of a die friend;
 and lull suspicion wakeful eye in peace. 
if thou but soothe the faithful lover rest,
 no fond remembrance of each part sigh. 
of beauty smile, or pity stream eye,
 in grief soft moment steal around his ask breast. 

iii.

fair virtue friend! thou never shall shed
 thy blessing over the impious head,
 or amid the noise of crowd be find;
 thy balm-distilling sweet alone
 to ermine innocence be know,
 and gay content with rural garland crown. 
by thou the shadow-trembling murderer guilt
 with double terror wring the torture soul,
 the purple steel, the life-destructive bowl,
 recall the baleful horror of the blood he spill. 

iv.

when by some pale and livid light
 i cheat the tedious hour of night,
 indulge over the attic page:
 the die taper warn to rest,
 thy vision seize my ravish breast,
 and picture beauty real woe assuage. 
over Helicon my bleat lamb i guard,
 or mix with dull boeotia simple swain
 protect my flock in humble ascra plain,
 and view the sky-born sister hail their favourite bard. 

v. 

methinks i hear the theban lyre:
 i feel my ravish soul aspire:
 the nymph surround the infant boy. 
already conscious of his fame
 the sestive choirs their hope proclaim,
 while Pan exult with uncouth sign of joy;
 for thou, sole glory of thy abject race,
 the thyme-fed bee their luscious sweet diffuse,
 to soothe the number of thy copious muse,
 and in Boeotia fix each coy reluctant grace. 

vi.

oft fire with bacchanalian rage,
 the father of the grecian stage
 in terror clad annoy my rest;
 i feel unnumbered horror rise! 
the sight forsake my swim eye,
 while hiss fury rush upon my breast. 
in solemn pomp, i see old Gela mourn,
 dissolve in grief beside the poet grave
 to sorrow sound he lull each plaintive wave,
 his willow fade and his sea-green mantle tear. 

vii.

with long taste, with eager lip,
 in rapture vision oft i sip
 the honey of the tragic bee;
 who strain can every tempest quell,
 can every noxious blast dispel,
 and still the hollow roar of the sea. 
who powerful fancy, who exhaustless vein,
 who dare genius, who triumphant wing,
 deep source from whence ten thousand river spring,
 just bound can limit, and each rigid rule restrain. 

viii.

how oft inspire with magic dread,
 by fancy to the cave i be lead
 where sit the wise piérian sage;
 with pierce eye, with pensive mind,
 in attic solitude recline,
 stern virtue precept chill the poet rage. 
bless bard! who muse, amid mild moral strong,
 can each rebellious appetite controul,
 can wake each tender feeling of the soul,
 and deck instruction in the please charm of song. 

ix.

with patriot ardor i behold
 the mirthful muse for freedom bold;
 though chaste, severe; though poignant, sweet;
 for long uncertain where to rest,
 at length upon the poet breast
 the sportive grace fix their gay retreat. 
with simple strain the doric muse charm,
 and oft to noble theme of heavenly praise
 as lybia poet hymn his solemn lay,
 the wanton teïan love each chaster think disarm. 

x. 

thus may thy languid charm dispense
 their blessing over my ravish sense
 by thou to attic world convey. 
thus if at Juno fond request
 thou ever on ida top oppress
 the almighty thunderer with thy dewy shade,
 to soothe one mortal thy fond care empley! 
and, Morpheus, thus may thy mild lethéan power,
 for ever hover round my midnight hour,
 through fancy mirror wrap i in idéal joy. 
