elegy.

write at the approach of spring.

by JOHN SCOTT, ESQ.

stern winter hence with all his train remove;
 and cheerful sky and limpid stream be see;
 thick-sprouting foliage decorate the grove;
 revive herbage robe the field in green. 

yet lovely scene shall crown the advance year;
 when bloom spring full bounty be display;
 the smile of beauty every vale shall wear;
 the voice of song enliven every shade. 

o fancy, paint not come day too fair! 
oft for the prospect sprightly may shall yield,
 rain-pouring cloud have darken all the air,
 or snow untimely whiten over the field:

but shall kind spring her wonted bounty shower,
 the smile of beauty and the voice of song;
 if gloomy thought the human mind overpower,
 even vernal hour glide unenjoyed along. 

i shun the scene where madden passion rave;
 where pride and folly high dominion hold,
 and unrelenting avarice drive her slave
 over prostrate virtue in pursuit of gold:

the grassy lane, the wood-surrounded field,
 the rude stone-fence with fragrant wall-flower gay,
 the clay-built cot, to i more pleasure yield
 than all the pomp imperial dome display;

and yet even here amid these secret shade,
 these simple scene of unreproved delight,
 affliction iron hand my breast invade,
 and death dread dart be ever in my sight. 

while genial sun to genial shower succeed;
 (the air all mildness, and the earth all bloom)
 while herd and flock range sportive over the mead;
 crop the sweet herb, and snuff the rich perfume;

o why alone to hapless man deny
 to taste the bliss inferior being boast! 
o why this fate that fear and pain divide
 his few short hour on earth delightful coast! 

ah cease — no more of providence complain! 
it be sense of guilt that wake the mind to woe,
 give force to fear, add energy to pain,
 and pall each joy by heaven indulge below:

why else the smile infant train so bless,
 ere dear-bought knowledge end the peace within,
 or wild desire inflame the youthful breast,
 or ill propension ripen into sin? 

as to the bleat tenant of the field,
 as to the sportive warbler on the tree,
 to they their joy sincere the season yield,
 and all their day and all their prospect please;

such joy be mine when from the people street,
 where on thamesis bank i live immure,
 the new blow field that breathe a thousand sweet,
 to surry wood-crowned hill my step allure:

o happy hour, beyond recovery flee! 
what share i now "that can your loss repay,"
 while over my mind these gloom of thought be spread,
 and veil the light of life meridian ray? 

be there no power this darkness to remove? 
the long-lost joy of Eden to restore,
 or raise our view to happy seat above,
 where fear, and pain, and death shall be no more? 

yes, those there be who know a saviour love
 the long-lost joy of Eden can restore,
 and raise their view to happy seat above,
 where fear, and pain, and death shall be no more:

these grateful share the gift of nature hand;
 and in the vary scene that round they shine;
 (the fair, the rich, the awful, and the grand)
 admire the amaze workmanship divine. 

blow not a floweret in the enamel vale,
 shine not a pebble where the rivulet stray;
 sport not a insect on the spicy gale;
 but claim their wonder and excite their praise. 

for they even vernal nature look more gay,
 for they more lively hue the field adorn;
 to they more fair the fair smile of day,
 to they more sweet the sweet breath of morn. 

they feel the bliss that hope and faith supply;
 they pass serene the appoint hour that bring
 the day that waft they to the realm on high;
 the day that centre in eternal spring. 
