reflection after view a scene of distress.

teach i, all gracious power, to be content! 
to bless my lot because ordain by thou;
 never mourn for that, thy wisdom have not lend,
 but deem it good because thy great decree. 

then cease vain heart to mourn the want of power,
 just heaven will view, accept the will mind;
 will give reward in retribution hour,
 to all who feel the ill of human kind. 

what though i can bestow the wish supply,
 nor cheer cold poverty obscure abode;
 never read the language of a grateful eye,
 nor guide the helpless penitent to god. 

i often wish the uninformed to teach,
 to give to orphan infancy its bread,
 to soothe the sorrow of decline age,
 and give that pittance which i yet may need. 

be hush complaint — be never murmur more,
 arraign not that great plan to heaven know;
 perhaps endow with splendour, wealth and power,
 the kind feeling have not be my own. 

with pleasure circle, prove secure from fear,
 perhaps i never have breathe a pity sigh;
 may never offer other woe a tear,
 but live a stranger to each soft tie. 

then it be in mercy wealth have be deny,
 for now — a soul that feel for all be i,
 i yet can soothe the ill of suffering worth,
 and pray the bad their purpose to resign. 

and i can cheer the modest with applause,
 kind support the weak, the sorrow mind,
 can plead, unblushing, virtue injure cause,
 conceal the fail of my err kind. 

the voice attune to softness may repress
 the anguish sigh —— relieve the doubt heart,
 a pity look will often soften pain,
 a mite to penury will joy impart. 

a friendly smile can welcome modest fear,
 a cheerful word beguile the gloom of age;
 hence then despondency — hence discontent,
 i still have worth which partial friend engage. 

yes — these be i, and these the good approve,
 most gracious power! that all those gift bestow;
 in mercy, still withhold the mean of ill,
 and let i all unto thy mercy owe. 

then while on earth i will thy great name adore,
 and sink with sweet composure to the dust! 
bless thy past mercy — "humble hope for more,"
 from thou my god, protector, guide and trust. 
