[nereid:] eclogue ii.

Mel.  

be still fond youth, and cease the rueful noise,
 that wide-mouthed base ill-suit a squeak voice:
 the shepherd rude pipe, or sailor crowd
 as sweet echo, and almost as loud. 

Lar. 

rail on, poor Melvin, and with envy swell,
 while Pholoe commend the tuneful shell. 
she swear beside, i sing like amorous swain,
 when with alternate love they cheer the smile plain. 

Mel.  

begin, if thou be skill in tuneful lay,
 now whisper breeze gentle sound convey. 
the noisy wind in bolt cave be press,
 and now the halcyon build her waver nest. 

Lar. 

i have observe past through different clime,
 can fix the season, and adjust the time,
 and know what star, when they oppose or meet
 will cause or stormy wind, or fall sleet. 

Mel.  

i have see the deep overspread with stringy weed,
 and depthless water look like verdant mead. 
i know far distant isle in northern sea,
 where bird from insect grow, and hang on tree. 

Lar. 

the moon command the wave. her change face
 disturb the whole, and stir the watery mass;
 but there be sea, which no such influence know,
 and rebel-tide, that without order flow. 

Mel.  

though now it be calm, i know those magic spell
 can raise the sleep wind from rocky cell:
 the lower heaven look then with sad hue,
 and dismal storm, and frightful wreak ensue. 

Lar. 

when fatal rock have split the break ship,
 and shriek mortal sink into the deep,
 if Laron hear the cry, he often save,
 and buoy the float wretch amid the angry wave. 

Lar. 

on yonder rock i tune the passive air
 and Pholoe think her sister siren there. 
the wanton dolphin joyous dance around,
 spout the wave, and frisk at every sound. 

Mel.  

in that same cliff Cyano sleep lie,
 with labour haste i cut the yield way:
 i come, and she glad of the kind surprise
 still feigh a sleep, and close she wake eye. 

Lar. 

Ino repent, and will at length be kind;
 but she be as fickle as the morning wind:
 to i her tear and glance be no more
 than crackle bottle on the frothy shore. 

Mel.  

in steepy rock the sea-fowl make their nest:
 take heed, you bird; for a unwelcome guest
 will steal the speckle egg, and give the prey
 to a kind nymph, that sport in yonder bay. 

Lar. 

Peleus, earth-born, his Thetis have enjoy,
 but the wood-nymph, who late at ebb tide
 measure the sandy plain, will come no more:
 ah! will she love, i can even live — on shore. 

Mel.  

the Manato his change of pleasure boast,
 now sport in sea, now graze on the coast;
 nature indulge thus th'amphibious kind,
 while to our watery home we ever be confine. 

Lar. 

unhappy offspring of the briny main,
 who want a voice to sing, or — to complain,
 though mute your self, yet you in shoal will throng,
 and joy to hear laron delightful song. 

Mel.  

fish, Laron, be not mute; for even now
 i hear the distant low of the cow,
 while soft breeze breath in whisper round,
 and every wave break with a please sound. 

Lar. 

see yonder gawdy fish, that flutter spring,
 and cut the liquid air with moisten wing;
 strange be his life, but stranger laron fate,
 who burn amid the wave, and pine for heat. 

Mel.  

those gild flyer still in danger move,
 pursue by fish below, by bird above:
 so Melvin fly from dorinda eye
 to Galatea fall a easy prize. 

Lar. 

old hoary Proteus late i sleep find
 in a dark mossy cave, and clasp he round;
 in vain to fright with different form he strive,
 i hold he fast, and he foretell my love. 

Mel.  

i for Leucippe steal a fisher net;
 she kiss, and vow, she never will forget:
 but they shall nothing lose by what i steal,
 for to their boat i drive a numerous shoal. 

Lar. 

a trident now be i, which Ceyx own,
 make of a sword-fish, and emboss around:
 when i bestow it on the amorous maid,
 Laron with more than kiss will be pay. 

Mel.  

Laron be court by a lovely fair:
 you god! i envy not the happy pair. 
poor dusky-faced Melanthe! one will think,
 like cuttle-fish, she hide her self in ink. 

Lar. 

Melanthe still be kind, though coarse make:
 the nymph that be kind with kindness must be pay,
 i hate the skittish fair, that fly when woo,
 like fearful Tunnys, when by shark pursue. 

Mel.  

lobster by instinct the pour-contrel fly;
 (for if they see he, they by see die)
 but we those danger seek, we ought to shun,
 and court our fate, and strive to be undo. 

Lar. 

the polypus, though change, must not escape
 by a false dress, and counterfeit shape;
 so wanton nymph awhile with awkward pride
 deny that passion, which they can hide. 
love will revenge on those, who love inspire,
 and they must heat themselves, who other set on fire. 

Mel.  

when ebb tide have empty half the deep,
 and point rock affright the distant ship,
 the nereid sit, and comb their flow hair,
 or move in tuneful sound the circle air. 
but, triton, be no lover to be catch,
 the hair will be uncombed, the song forget. 

Lar. 

Melvin, a sail come brisk before the wind. 
cease then the song, and may the nymph be kind:
 for shall we thus appear in human form,
 the fright sailor will forebode a storm. 
