kambromyomaxia:

or the mouse-trap; be a translation of mr. Holdsworth muscipula, 1737. 

by ****.

the mountain-briton, first of man who frame
bond for the mouse, first who the tiny thief
in prison close vexatious — fatal wile,
and death inextricate — sing, heavenly Muse.
thou Phoebus, (for to mouse thyself waste erst
a foe, in antique lore thence Smintheus call,)
inspire the song; and among the cambrian hill
thy Pindus choose, smile upon the muse,
who lowly theme and humble verse delight.

the mouse, a hostile animal, enure
to live by rapine, now long time have rove
wherever his lust innate of spoil lead on;
and unavenged his wicked craft pursue;
long fearless, unavenged — all thing on earth
feel his fell tooth, while safe in nimble speed
evasive, he in every dainty dish
his revel hold secure. nought be untouched,
but every feast wail the domestic foe,
a constant guest unbidden. nor strong wall
his theft obstruct, nor massy bar avail,
nor door robust, to save the luscious cate:
through wall, and bar, and door he eat his way
contemptuous, and regales with unbought fare.

thus wail the helpless world the general foe,
but cambria most; for cambria odorous store
most stimulate the curious taste of mouse:
not with a taste content, or lambent kiss,
(the fate of common cheese,) he undermine
and hollow with reiterate tooth
eatable palace. 
the nation see,
and rage — revenge and grief distract their mind —
what shall they do? they foam, they gnash their tooth,
and over their pendant rock in fury rove,
restless with rage — for nature prone to rage
the cambrian form, and bid their fiery breast
burst into sudden flame — that man will deem
their soul be with their finger sulphur-tinged.

it be decree — rage prompt they to revenge
unsated but with blood — yet by what mean,
what be the cautious felon to ensnare,
they doubt: for, cambria, thy Grimalkin race
nor to the house defence, nor in distress
so imminent, can aught of succour bring.
oft have the cat place at the cavern mouth
the various ambuscade; as oft with paw
soft-silent creep, near the hollow cell
keep wary watch — in vain — the little mouse
in little bulk secure, (advantage great
over a giant foe!) if chance he spy
her watch at his door intent on prey,
inward he fly, his serpentine recess
pursue, and cave impervious to cat:
nor dare again thrust out his head in air,
nor form new sally, till the siege be raise,
and danger with the watchful foe withdraw.

the cambrian thus, (if cambrian with the mouse
we may compare,) when roman Julius seek
to join the briton to the world subdue,
elude his vain toil. — to their retreat
at once a nation vanish; in their rock,
rampire impregnable, lay safe obscure
'amid circle ruin; and of conquest though
despair, to be conquerable scorn.
their long, unbroken lineage hence they boast,
their country unsubdued, and ancient tongue.

thus do the mouse, by custom tutor, oft
evade the hostile paw; nor cambria son
have hope from their confederate of the war:
when strait, on the utmost frontier of their land,
where now menevia the shrink honour mourn
of her divide mitre, of who wall
half-buried but a empty name remain,
behold a council summonse. from each side
see noble, father, and the vulgar throng
of stench sulphureous, mix. 
a ancient sage,
who length of beard oft from his native hill
the goat with envy eye; his hand, his face
with scurf of ancient growth encrust over;
break with year, against a post recline,
(by cambrian back still shake) in the midst
stand visible to all, and with deep tone
these word precipitate, guttural speak.
"of open war we treat not, but sly theft —
"no foreign foe, but a too inmate guest
"(that heavy evil) summons we to meet.
"still shall the bold insulter lord it thus,
"the tyrant mouse? Rouse, awful father, rouse;
"you, to who breast your country good be dear,
"by counsel end these horror; and if aught
"of hope remain, now lend propitious aid:
"so shall your glory grow, your name be know
"immortal as caidwalader in fame. "

he speak, and strait the fragment, mouldy scrap,
relic of rapine, monument of theft,
high in their sight uprear, rouse their rage.
now thirst of dire revenge, now lust of fame
burns emulous, and fire each patriot breast;
each meditate to mouse unheard of fate,
and every brain be hammer on a trap.

but one above all by the honour-ad name
of taffy fame, far more for wit renowned:
cambria never breed his peer, whether at forge,
or council; Senator and blacksmith he.
thus begin the sage — "shall cheese, our nation boast,
"in cambria be extinct, i fear our hind
"will mourn their whole meal sink, and noble grieve
"the honour lose, that crown the second course.
"since then nor cambria courage, nor her cat
"against the monster can prevail, we will try
"if this mechanic hand, if craft, deceit,
"can aught advantage: in a foe none ask
"if force prevail, or fraud."
strait at this boast,
all fix on taffy their expect eye,
all in glad murmur speak their promise joy,
wait whence the bliss; question, and burn to know.

scratch his head, (as british head demand,)
he ghastly smile, and strait with free air
proceed thus — "when weary, at the close
"of yester sun i give my limb to rest,
"and slumber deep my eye have quench; a mouse
"bold and pursue, as i guess, the trail,
"which unconnected cheese recent exhale
"from out my viscous jaw, steal down my mouth
"then discontinuous; and reach now
"my very entrails, strait their crude content
"begin gnaw, and through my throat ill-fortified
"my yester meal, alas! triumphant drag.
"when sudden rouse from sleep, in his retreat
"i betwixt my tooth the felon snape, and bound
"vain rebellious in the bite chain.
"instruct thus that mouse may be enthrall,
"new visionary prison-house rise
"in my revolve mind, and such restraint,
"as the late captive of my jaw suggest.
"by what mysterious law the hand of Jove
"move sublunary thing! by what hide rule
"the chain of cause act! the mouse himself
"to we involuntary succour bring,
"and for the wound he give himself prescribe.
"blush not by such a master to improve;
"from foe to learn, honour nor right forbid. "

these say, homeward he his. the applaud throng
accompany his route, and to his toil
propitious omen beg. each to his house
bend his swift course; each to his Lares fly,
glad harbinger of this expect birth
from taffy brain: and while they tell the tale,
while to the god for glad event they bend
of the great enterprise, the mouse kind
(prophetic instinct!) show unwonted joy
gamesome; and (if we credit fame) beneath
the matron hand dance the embryo cheese.

taffy mean while with head, and hand, and heart,
ply his great work, with PALLAS' aid divine
the mouse-trap build. a wonderful machine
now stand confess; and form until then unknown
the tragi-comic edifice endue.

now smile, sweet Muse, and to our sight disclose
the infant fabric; each particular
dilate, and join they in the finish pile.

of oblong form twin plank of wood compose
the base and roof; a wiry palisade
fence each side, on who small column raise
the fabric stand: the insi'dious gate invite
with friendly-seeming welcome; but on high,
depend from a slender thread, the vast
portcullis threat, to thoughtless mouse sure death.
(such be the thread of life, spin by the fate
to mouse and man — all on a thread depend.)
amid the level roof shoot up a mast
erect, in who cleave head a slender beam
transverse insert play, and on each side
extend its poise arm; who one extreme
depress, one equal the pendent door
exalt. within, let through a slender boar,
a wire depend that fluctuate with a touch;
the low part be cramp into a hook,
tenacious of the bait; while the upper gripe
the extreme handle of the treacherous beam.
but soon as ever it feel the foe to have touch
the fatal food, the loosen portal strait
let fall, and speak the first attack revenge.

thing thus dispose, instant the pendent hook
taffy with treason clothes, and turn to death
the very food of mouse: but, that his cheese
more fragrant may from far the foe invite,
toast the fell bait, and strengthen the perfume.

and now appear the memorable night,
when on his bed taffy his limb fatigue
repose, near his pillow downy side
his Minion mouse-trap set, and all-secure
i the faithful centry, slumber sweet indulge.
the frolic mouse, (a tribe audacious they)
safe in the covert of the silent night,
now sport abroad: when one, a leader mouse,
of nose sagacious, bear the god his foe,
the hostile ambush seek, lead by the scent
of toast cheese delicious. the grate resist
his swift career, and entrance first deny —
but he, to suffer such severe repulse
indignant, round the wiry fortress scour,
and crisp his nose, and with sagacious beard
a pass explore; and enter now the line,
impassable again, of all his wish
at length possess, the deadly bait secure,
feast on his ruin, and enjoy his fate.

taffy, who strait the pendulous door, scarce drop,
with sudden clap have wake, you may behold
now on his elbow prop, now from his bed
skip triumphant, fire with thirst to know
what newcome guest. the mouse ridiculous
rage within, batter with front and foot,
prove with his head each wiry interval,
and wear with rage tooth his iron hold.
Driv'n to the toil so rave the marsian boar
horrid, and shake his wave bond, the sport
of circle dog; he fling about his foam,
and on his front erect the bristle stare.

the morrow come, and from her rocky highth,
precipitant, whole cambria pour; for strait
in every ear the novel tale be rife —
nor wonder, for the ass, his solemn wont
relax, nor mindful of his late slow pace,
the mountain climb more wanton than the kid:
thence with sonorous din from rusty throat,
(the cambrian herald simulate,) thrice
thou, taffy, bray; thrice tell the public joy.
nor less the owl; (from that great aera term
cambria ambassador:) for through her town,
and utmost limit wander wild that night,
she scratch the window with her ominous beak,
grate harsh dissonance, and sing in shriek
the instant fate of mouse. the labour rock
bring forth, and pembroke, and mervinia son
in swarm condense rush down; and who the wall
of bonium hold, and Maridunum fame
for their prophetic bard, Merlin; and who
fruitful glamorgan feed, and he that drink
of vaga stream, with the rough hardy clown
Montgomery manure. — then taffy, amid
the crowd ring, his rage prey insult.

"vain be thy effort — fix thy doom of death,
"on this my altar the first victim thou,
"to die with memorable blood the frame.
"no hope remain: thy flight these wiry post
"inexorable bar — dread, wicked wight,
"the fate thy merit ask; for these thy bond
"thou quit not but with life."
the fatal word
scarce have he speak, when from the sunny thatch,
(her wonted haunt, when with extend limb
she bask luxurious, wink in soft ease,)
down leap the playful cat. — her swift approach
the captive eye, and prick his ear, and stiff
bristle his gibbous back, nor dare attempt
the portal now up-draw; but his sole hope
of freedom only in his prison fix,
with hook talon grasp his bond, and hang
tenacious by his foot — at length he drop
out-shaken: instant to her prey the cat
fly rapid, and with rude, embrace enfold,
and savage kiss on she struggle foe
(vain effort!) cruel imprint. no pause
her rage admit; her sinuous-twirling tail
denote the victor joy; her body move
agil in wanton frolick, watch now
prone on the earth intent the destine mouse;
his neck now light pat with hurtless paw,
dissemble love; but ruminate the while
to tear he limb from limb. the mouser thus,
witty in tyranny, with various art
wanton barbarity enjoy: but now,
tire with the sportive mockery, no more
conceal her rage, but over her tremble prey
like the starve lion hang, and growl tear
his gory entrails, and convulsive limb.

the circle crowd, soon as his hate blood
sprinkle they spy, fill with glad shout the air;
and echo, tenant of the cambrian hill,
their clamorous joy repeat; plinlimmon highth,
and Brechin with the lofty Snowdon join:
to the neighbour star the loud acclaim ascend,
and offa ditch rebellow to the din.

taffy, for ever live — even to this day
thy gift the cambrian celebrate; and thou
commemorate each circle year. the land
grateful, its native honour to maintain,
each joyful head crown redolent with Leek.
