epilogue to Lucius.

the female author who recite to day,
 trust to her sex the merit of her play. 
like father Bayes secure she sit down:
 Pitt, box and gallery, god! all be our own. 
in ancient Greece, she say, when Sappho write,
 by their applause the critic show their wit. 
they tune their voice to her lyric string;
 though they can all do something more, than sing. 
but one exception to this fact we find;
 that booby Phaon only be unkind,
 a ill-bred boatman, rough as wave and wind. 
from Sappho down through all succeed age,
 and now on french, or on italian stage,
 rough satyr, sly remark, ill-natured speech,
 be always aim at poet, that wear breech. 
arm with Longinus, or with rapin, no man
 draw a sharp pen upon a naked woman. 
the bluster bully in our neighbour street,
 scorn to attack the female that he meet:
 fearless the petticoat contemn his frown:
 the hoop secure, whatever it surround. 
the many-colored gentry there above,
 by turn be rule by tumult, and by love:
 and while their sweetheart their attention fix,
 suspend the din of their damn clatter stick. 
now sir —
 to you our author make her soft request,
 who speak the kind, and who write the best. 
your sympathetic heart she hope to move,
 from tender friendship, and endear love. 
if petrarch muse do laura wit rehearse,
 and Cowley flatter dear orinda verse;
 she hope from you — pox take her hope and fear;
 i plead her sex claim: what matter she? 
by our full power of beauty we think fit,
 to damn this salic law impose on wit:
 we will try the empire you so long have boast;
 and if we be not praise, we will not be toast. 
approve what one of we present to night;
 or every mortal woman here shall write:
 rural, pathetic, narrative, sublime,
 we will write to you, and make you write in rhime:
 female remark shall take up all your time. 
your time, poor soul! we will take your very money;
 female third day shall come so thick upon you. 
as long as we have eye, or hand, or breath,
 we will look, or write, or talk you all to death. 
unless you yield for better and for worse:
 then the she- shall gain the course;
 and the grey mare will prove the better horse. 
