monody on the death of dr Warton.

oh! i shall ill thy generous care requite
thou who do first inspire my timid muse,
can i one tuneful tear to thou refuse,
now that thy age eye be close in night,
kind Warton! thou have stroke my stripling head,
and sometime, mingle soft reproof with praise,
my path have best direct through the maze
of thorny life: by thou my step be lead
to that romantic valley, high overhang
with sable wood, where many a minstrel ring
his bold harp to the sweep waterfall;
while fancy love around each form to call
that fill the poet dream: to this retreat
of fancy, (win by who entice lay
i have forget how sink the summer day),
thou first do guide my not unwilling foot;
meantime inspire the gay breast of youth
with love of taste, of science, and of truth. 
the first incite sound of human praise,
a parent love except, come from thou;
and but for thou, perhaps, my boyish day
have all pass idle, and whatever in i
now live of hope, be bury.
i be one,
long bind by cold dejection numb chain,
as in a torpid trance, that deem it vain
to struggle; nor my eyelid to the sun
uplift: but i hear thy cheer voice;
i shake my deadly slumber off; i gaze
delight 'round; awake, inspire, amaze,
i mark another world, and in my choice
lovely, and deck with light! on fairy ground
methinks i buoyant tread, and hear the sound
as of enchant melody, that steal,
steal gentle, and entrance my captive soul.
then all be life and hope! it be thy first ray,
sweet fancy, on the heart; as when the day
of spring, along the melancholy tract
of wintery Lapland, dawn; the cataract,
from ice dissolve on the silent side
of some white precipice, with paly gleam
descend, while the cold hill a slant beam
faint tinge: till, ascend in his pride,
the great sun from the red horizon look,
and wake the tuneless bird, the stagnant brook,
and sleep lake! so on my mind cold night
the ray of fancy shine, and give delight
and hope past utterance.
thy cheer voice,
o Warton! bid my silent heart rejoice,
and wake to love of nature; every breeze,
on itchin brink be melody; the tree
wave in fresh beauty; and the wind and rain,
that shake the battlement of wykeham fane,
not less delight, when, with random pace,
i tread the cloister aisle; and witness thou,
Catherine, upon who foss-encircled brow
we meet the morning, how i love to trace
the prospect spread around; the rill below,
that shine irriguous in the gleam plain;
the river bend, where the dark barge go slow,
and the pale light on yonder time-worn fane! 
so pass my day with new delight; mean time
to learning tender eye thou do unfold
the classic page, and what high bard of old,
with solemn note, and minstrelsy sublime,
have chant, we together hear; and thou,
Warton! will bid i listen, till a tear
spring to my eye: now the bold song we hear
of greece sightless master-bard: the breast
beat high; with stern Pelides to the plain
we rush; or over the corpse of Hector slay
hang pity; — and lo! where pale, oppress
with age and grief, sad Priam come; with beard
all white he bow, kiss the hand besmear
with his last hope best blood!
the oaten reed
now from the mountain sound; the sylvan muse,
recline by the clear stream of arethuse,
wake the sicilian pipe; the sunny mead
swarm with the bee, who drowsy lullaby
sooth the recline ox with half-closed eye;
while in soft cadence to the madrigal,
from rock to rock the whisper water fall! 
but who be he, that, by yond gloomy cave,
bid heaven and earth bear witness to his woe!
and hark! how hollow the ocean-wave
echo his plaint, and murmur deep below!
haste, let the tall ship stem the toss tide,
that he may leave his cave, and hear no more
the lemnian surge unrejoice roar;
and be great fate through the dark world thy guide,
sad Philoctetes! 
so instruction bland,
with young-eyed sympathy, go hand in hand
over classic field; and let my heart confess
its holy joy, when i essay to climb
the lonely height where Shakspeare sit sublime,
lord of the mighty spell: around he press
spirit and fairy-form. he, rule wide
his visionary world, bid terror fill
the shiver breast, or soft pity thrill
even to the inmost heart. within i die
all thought of this low earth, and high power
seem in my soul to stir; till, strain too long,
the sense sink.
then, Ossian, thy wild song
haply beguile the unheeded midnight hour,
and, like the blast that sweep berrathron tower,
come pleasant and yet mournful to my soul!
see over the autumnal heath the grey mist roll!
hark to the dim ghost' faint and feeble cry,
as on the cloudy tempest they pass by!
see you huge loda spectre-shape advance,
through which the star look pale!
nor cease the trance
which bind the err fancy, till dark night
fly silent by, and at my window-grate
the morning bird sing loud: nor less delight
the spirit feel, when still and charm i sit
great Milton solemn harmony to hear,
that swell from the full chord, and strong and clear,
beyond the tuneless couplet' weak control,
their long-commingling diapason roll,
in vary sweetness.
nor, amid the choir
of peal minstrelsy, be thy own lyre,
Warton, unheard; — as fancy pour the song,
the measure music flow along,
till all the heart and all the sense
feel she divine influence,
in throb sympathy: — prepare the car,
and whirl we, goddess, to the war,
where crimson banner fire the sky,
where the mingle shout arise,
where the steed, with fetlock red,
trample the die and the dead;
and amain, from side to side,
death his pale horse be see to ride!
or rather, sweet enthusiast, lead
our footstep to the cowslip mead,
where, as the magic spell be wind,
die music float around: —
or seek we some grey ruin shade,
and pity the cold beggar, lay
beneath the ivy-rustling tower,
at the dreary midnight hour,
scarce shelter from the drift snow;
while her dark lock the bleak wind blow
over her sleep infant cheek!
then let the shrill trumpet speak,
and pierce in loud tone the ear,
till, while it peal, we seem to hear
the sound march, as of the theban song;
and vary number, in their course,
with gather fullness, and collect force,
like the broad cataract, swell and sweep along!
strike by the sound, what wonder that i lay,
as thou, o Warton! do the theme inspire,
my inexperienced hand upon the lyre,
and soon with transient touch faint music make,
as soon forget!
so i love to lie
by the wild stream of elfin poesy,
rapt in strange muse; but when life begin,
i never roam a visionary man;
for, teach by thou, i learn with sober eye
to look on life severe reality.
i never make (a dream-distempered thing)
poor fiction realm my world; but to cold truth
subdue the vivid shaping of my youth.
save when the drisly wood be murmur,
or some hard cross have my spirit bow;
then i have leave, unseen, the careless crowd,
and seek the dark sea roar, or the steep
that brave the storm; or in the forest deep,
as all its grey leaf rustle, woo the tone
of the love lyre, that, in my springtide go,
wake i to transport.
eighteen summer now
have smile on itchin margin, since the time
when these delightful vision of our prime
rose on my view in loveliness. and thou
friend of my muse, in thy death-bed art cold,
who, with the tender touch, do unfold
the shrink leaf of fancy, else unseen
and shelterless: therefore to thou be due
whatever their summer sweetness; and i strew,
sad, such floweret as on hillock green,
or mountain-slope, or hedgerow, yet my hand
may cull, with many a recollection bland,
and mingle sorrow, Warton, on thy tomb,
to who, if bloom they boast, they owe their bloom!
