the child of sorrow.

as amid romantic vecta path i stray,
 where clear Medina roll its silver wave,
 beneath a solitary willow shade,
 who pendent bough the lucid water lave,

a child of sorrow catch my wander eye;
 loose her attire, dishevel be her hair,
 pallid her cheek, and oft a burst sigh
 proclaim her breast the dwelling of despair. 

yet peerless beauty with unconquered sway
 resistless shine in her neglect form,
 as the effulgence of the god of day
 gleam through the darkness of the wintery storm. 

oft over the wave she cast a wistful view,
 as oft the torrent of her tear do flow;
 then to the shore she stream eye withdraw,
 and in disorder word thus speak her woe:

 "dash, dash, you wave, against the sound shore,
" your rage no long can my bosom move;
 "loud, you wind, and yet still loud roar,
" you can no more destroy my only love. 

 "victim of sorrow from the dawn of life,
" i can no more admit new joy or grief;
 "perfidious fortune, free from all thy strife,
" even in despair my soul shall find relief. " 

touch with compassion at these plaintive sound,
 slow i approach, and to the stranger say:
 "what deep affliction cause such heart-felt wound? 
" what storm of fortune bow thy youthful head? 

 "can i alleviate?" — "never," she reply,
 "can human power my mind from anguish save:
" never, oh! never can my woe subside,
 "but amid the shadow of the darksome grave. 

 "yet since soft pity seem to touch thy heart,
" and the big tear stand tremble in thy eye,
 "the story of my grief i will impart,
" then leave i to my hapless destiny. 

 "where proud Augusta rear her lofty head,
" my childhood pass in affluence and ease:
 "far from my path the train of sorrow flee,
" while gay i bask in Fortune bright blaze. 

 "but short those joy; for scarce have fifteen year
" teach i my happiness to know and prize,
 "when swift the splendid vision disappear,
" and pale adversity dun cloud arise. 

 "misfortune unforeseen deprive my sire
" in little time of his abound wealth:
 "to high view accustom to aspire,
" he lose his wonted cheerfulness and health. 

 "i see despair overcast his manly brow,
" while silent grief sit rankle at his breast;
 "i see his head with disappointment bow,
" till a untimely death restore his rest. 

 "long time i mourn — nor do i mourn alone —
" a virtuous mother share in all my woe;
 "a husband and a father we bemoan,
" and for his loss our tear alternate flow. 

 "but time, who lenient hand can oft assuage
" the sharp wound of unrelenting fate,
 "have soften by degree affliction rage
" to fond remembrance and concern sedate. 

 "together we forsake the venal crowd,
" and in this island find a still retreat,
 "far from the gay, the thoughtless, and the proud,
" for poverty and resignation meet. 

 "content here we live, nor ever repine
" at memory of what we once possess;
 "but grateful own, that the unsullied mind
" in its own conscious rectitude be bless. 

 "hard by our cottage, on a rise ground,
" in simple state ardelio mansion stand —
 "ardelio love by all the country round,
" friend to the poor, the artless, and the good. 

 "large be his fortune, liberal his heart,
" faultless his manner, undefiled his mind:
 "free from ambition, avarice, or art,
" he only study be to serve mankind. 

 "by chance conduct to our lone abode,
" he find i friendless, pity i, and love:
 "he bounteous hand a quick relief bestow,
" and soon each trace of indigence remove. 

 "the day be fix, when at the sacred shrine
" attest heaven shall hear our mutual vow;
 "and sprightly pleasure seem once more to twine
" her fresh rose for my favour brow. 

 "but, ah! those rose bloom but to decay;
" for, like the bud before the eastern wind,
 "their beauty fade immature away,
" but fade leave a last thorn behind. 

 "oblige to leave i for a little space,
 presage tear his fatal absence mourn;
" but the kind youth, my rise grief to chase,
 "at part promise he will soon return. 

 "mean time a fever unremitting rage
" invade all my parent tremble frame;
 "no remedy its fury can assuage,
" her frantic cry in vain my succour claim. 

 "a thousand time i kiss she pallid cheek,
" and with my tear bedew her burn hand,
 "while with officious care i vain seek
" those cure which unavailing science plan. 

 "clasp in these arm she die: no friend be near,
" in who this sad, this break heart can trust,
 "when i behold she on the sable bier,
" and hear the solemn sentence, dust to dust! 

 "frantic with sorrow, to the rocky shore
" with a uncertain course my step i bend:
 "unheeded round i the deep thunder roar,
" and the blue lightning lurid flame descend. 

 "yet one dread object my attention draw:
" near the rude cliff a vessel i espy,
 "and hear the clamour of its fright crew,
" who vain try to stem the billowy tide. 

 "for, by the fury of the tempest tost,
" against the rock its sever plank rebound;
 "the float wreck be drive towards the coast,
" with seaman lifeless body scatter round. 

 "new anguish seize my grief-devoted mind:
" while i survey the horror of the storm,
 "i think, perhaps even now, to death consign,
" float amid those wave my love ardelio form. 

 "pierce with the thought, down the craggy steep
" i hasten to explore the fatal strand:
 "just then, emerge from the rage deep,
" a breathless corpse be throw upon the sand. 

 "shudder i look with half-averted eye —
" ah i, my dread forebode be too true! " 
she pause — then utter, with a burst sigh,
" ardelio tear for ever from my view! " 
