oatlands; or the transfer of the laurel.

a poem.

reason, (a dame not often in the wrong)
 bethink, (for much to think be reason give)
 on what be ill, and what be leave undo,
 and how dispose of all the gift of heaven. 

perceive fortune off can fling her hood,
 and stop to cast on knave a partial eye,
 and that when come where blush merit stand,
 up go her bandage, and she pass he by. 

within a sacred grove (to peace consign)
 a branch by fortune from the laurel tear,
 be straight into a graceful wreath entwine —
 she say — "by victory let this be wear!" 

to victory the sculpture arch be raise
 high over the smoke ruin of a town! 
and bell ring loud, and every window blaze,
 and tuneful minstrel sing her vast renown. 

and on her forehead glory be inscribe
 in glitter letter great of beam gold,
 fair honour fount she seem to have imbibe,
 in sooth, her form be gracious to behold. 

and blast be puff from trump of vaunt fame,
 that justice to she have the wreath decree! 
yet reason doubt the gay virago claim,
 if sans desert, why wear the liberal meed? 

let emulation for that wreath contend! 
let youthful ardour pant to reach the goal! 
a gild prize may be the purpose end,
 or fierce ambition only fire the soul. 

in proud cathedral why te deum raise? 
say, why to victory the choral joy? 
such song, indeed, be pure immortal praise,
 do god create for man but to destroy. 

 "her conquest, rapine be!" sage reason cry —
 "her flash of glory, all illusive! vain! 
" her fair-faced honour, fallacy and pride,
 "and crimson slaughter do her hand distain. 

 "shall light-heeled vanity for trinket pine,
" she make of victory a pliant tool,
 "to work a star or ribbon wondrous fine,
" reward of coward — knave, or valiant fool. 

 "before the rustic youth can form a choice,
" some trick convey he to a foreign land,
 "by custom braze, in carnage can rejoice,
" the brutal hero of a cutthroat band! 

 "the perfect general show his needle star,
" the mangle private may go hang or beg,
 "dispute his charter to the trade of war,
" he swear, and show it in his wooden leg. 

 "fire! pest! and famine do she give mankind,
" be victory then the laurel win by thou? 
 "the sovereign good, o wisdom! let i find,
" i hold this evergreen her honour fee. 

 "it be charity that wipe the briny tear,
" which victory bid down the cheek to flow,
 "that lift with smile the mourner from the bier,
" and put aside the bitter cup of woe. 

 "perish her hope of industry the bane! 
" that turn the ploughshare to a murderous sword,
 "and make the ruffian, once a simple swain! 
" achieve exploit by earth and heaven abhor. 

 "the husband and the parent she have slay! 
" widow and orphan victory have make! 
 "untilled, nor wave ear adorn the plain,
" for desolation mark her ruthless trade. " 

few know where bashful charity do hide,
 full see of heaven, she shrink from mortal ken,
 and many a devious round, and far and wide
 do reason seek she, 'amid the haunt of man. 

quoth wisdom, "reason, thou be as fortune blind! 
" for just decision idle thus to roam,
 "when charity, beneficent and kind,
" dwell near at hand, and oatlands be her home. 

 "it be not alone with paltry gold to part,
" or chase pale sorrow from the cottage door,
 "she there, store treasure moral in the heart,
" God own appoint agent for the poor. " 

blithe on a velvet turf of mossy green,
 where naïd from the silver Thames resort,
 surround by her playful charge be see,
 the lovely mistress of their harmless sport. 

far vice and folly fly at her command! 
and sure success attend her sweet employ,
 and as the mental bud to flower expand,
 she view her labour with a mother joy. 

to little act let great one lowly bend,
 where rank by pride be only understand;
 to work angelic her white thought ascend,
 aspire to the height of do good. 

reason convince, that charity benign,
 of oatland grove have make her love retreat,
 bid victory her laurel crown resign,
 to lie at beauteous frederica foot! 

nature her noble task have well perform,
 endow the babe with intellectual grace,
 the lambent spark that all his bosom warm,
 shine full confess in air, shape, limb, and face. 

in culture, fortune! take a ample share! 
or else the plant may wither in the bloom:
 why genius (that with phosper may compare)
 condemn to waste? a lamp within the tomb! 

not that each shrub can hang with golden fruit,
 or rose issue from the humble sod,
 but reason best can lift he from the brute,
 when man shall know that he be the work of god. 

or say, that nature leave her work most crude,
 still more it stand in need of polish aid,
 untaught, we view our kind, a savage rude,
 and wonder at the monster we have make. 

but wealth can cherish! draw the talent forth,
 a sun! which Fortune cold neglect supply,
 then more than mine the bounteous heart be worth,
 that give what sordid penury deny. 

hail, heavenly Frederica! god of all,
 pour every blessing on the gentle fair! 
shall ill assail, anticipate she call,
 who take the helpless infant to her care. 
