epistle to the right honble. the lord viscount BEAUCHAMP.

write in the year mdccxxxv-vi.

by the same.

 "what be nobility?" you wish to know,
 the real substance strip of all its show:
 and can you then the honest freedom bear
 of truth i ought to tell, and you to hear? 
or shall i say — "such beauty, birth, estate,
" must make their owner love, and make he great! 
 "above the mean restraint of vulgar rule,
" your will a law, plebeian but your tool,
 "while mingle with your blood each honour flow;
" and in each pulse a percy ardor glow? —

not so the muse: she teach you to know,
 how vain those honour you to other owe! 
who rise to glory, must by virtue rise,
 it be in the mind all genuine greatness lie:
 on that eternal base, on that alone,
 the world esteem you build, and more — your own. 

though Percy, Seymour, mighty name! combine
 to swell your blood, to dignify your line;
 for you though fortune all her store have spread,
 and beauty point to pleasure rosy bed;
 yet what avail birth, beauty, fortune store,
 the plume of title, and the pride of power,
 if deaf to virtue, deaf to honour call,
 to tyrant vice a wretched slave you fall? 
to vice, paternal laurel you must yield;
 reverse each triumph, lose each purple field;
 your sire no more their captive foe detain,
 you pay the ransom, and you break the chain;
 no more your high-descended fame we view,
 no Hartford fight, no Percy bleed for you. 

i know, my lord, ambition fill your mind,
 and in life voyage be impel wind;
 but at the helm let sober reason stand,
 and steer the bark, with heaven-directed hand;
 so shall you safe ambition gale receive,
 and ride secure, though the billow heave;
 so shall you shun the giddy hero fate,
 and by her influence be both good and great. 

she bid you first, in life soft vernal hour,
 with active industry, wake nature power;
 with rise year, still rise art display;
 with new-born grace, mark each new-born day. 
it be now the time young passion to command,
 while yet the pliant stem obey the hand;
 guide now the courser with a steady rein,
 ere yet he bound over pleasure flowery plain:
 in passion strife, no medium you can have;
 you rule a master, or submit a slave. 
 "for who these toil, you may perhaps inquire;"
 first for yourself: next nature will inspire
 the filial thought, fond wish, and kindred tear,
 which make the parent and the sister dear:
 to these, in close band of love, ally,
 their joy or grief you live, their shame or pride:
 hence timely learn to make their bliss your own,
 and scorn to think or act for self alone;
 hence brave strive upon your own to raise
 their honour, grandeur, dignity, and praise. 

but wide far, beyond the narrow bound
 of family, ambition search round;
 search to find the friend delightful face,
 the friend at least demand the second place. 
and yet beware: for most desire a friend
 from mean motive, not for virtue end. 
there be, who with fond favour fickle gale
 now sudden swell, and now contract their sail;
 this week devour, the next with sicken eye
 avoid, and cast the sully plaything by;
 there be, who, toss in the bed of vice,
 for flattery opiate give the high price;
 yet from the save hand of friendship turn,
 her medicine dread, her generous offer spurn. 
desert greatness! who but pity thou? 
by crowd encompass, thou no friend can see:
 or shall kind truth invade thy tender ear,
 we pity still; for thou no truth can hear. 
never grudge thy wealth to swell a useless state,
 yet, frugal, deem the expense of friend too great;
 for friend, never mix in ambitious strife,
 for friend, the rich furniture of life! 

be you, my lord, a noble, high aim,
 your pride to burn with friendship sacred flame;
 by virtue kindle, by like manner feed,
 by mutual wish, mutual favour spread,
 increase with year, by candid truth refine,
 pour all its boundless ardour through your mind. 
be you the care a choose band to gain;
 with they to glory radiant summit strain,
 aid and aid each, while all contend,
 who best, who brave, shall assist his friend. 

thus still shall private friendship spread around,
 till in their joint embrace the public find,
 the common friend! — then all her good explore,
 explore, pursue with each unbiased power. 
but chief the great shall her law revere,
 ennoble honour, which she bid they wear. 
a british noble be a dubious name,
 of low infamy; or high fame:
 bear to redress a injure orphan cause,
 to smooth the unequal frown of rigid law;
 to stand a isthmus of our well-mixed state,
 where rival power with restless billow beat,
 and from each side alike the fury fling
 of madden commons, or encroach king. 
how mean, who scorn his country be sacred voice! 
by birth a patriot, but a slave by choice. 
how great, who answer this illustrious end,
 who prince and people call their equal friend! 
 "yes, there i will rest; ambition toil no more,
" that goal attain, sure her long race be over. " 
alas! it be scarce begin; ambition smile
 at the poor limit of the british isle;
 she over the globe expatiate unconfined,
 expand with christian charity the mind,
 and pant to be the friend of all mankind. 
her country all beneath one ambient sky;
 whoever behold you radiant orb on high. 
to who one sun impartial give the day,
 to who the silver moon her mild ray,
 who the same water, earth, and air sustain,
 over who one parent-king extend his reign,
 be her compatriot all; by she belove,
 in nature near, though far by space remove;
 on common earth, no foreigner she know;
 no foe can find, or none but virtue foe:
 ready she stand her cheerful aid to lend,
 to want and woe a undemanded friend;
 nor thus advance other bliss alone;
 but in the way to they still find her own. 
they be her own. what, shall your taper light
 ten thousand, burn it to yourself less bright? 
" man be ungrateful.  "— be they so, that dare! 
be that the giver, or receiver care? 
oh! blind to joy, that from true bounty flow,
 to think, those ever repent who heart bestow! 

man to his maker thus best homage pay,
 thus peaceful walk through virtue please way:
 her gentle image on the soul impress
 bid each tempestnous passion leave the breast:
 thence with her livid self-devouring snake
 pale envy fly; her quiver slander break:
 thus falis (dire scourge of a distract age!) 
the knave-led, one-eyed monster, party-rage. 
ambition jostle with her friend no more;
 nor thirst revenge to drink a brother gore;
 fury-remorse no sting scorpion rear;
 over tremble guilt no fall sword appear. 
hence conscience, void of blame, her front erect,
 her god she fear, all other fear reject. 
hence just ambition boundless splendour crown,
 and hence she call eternity her own. 

thus your love Scipio past his glorious day,
 bless with his kindred, friend, and country praise. 
nor end there the human hero thought,
 nor in the roman be the man forget;
 in the deaf battle hear nature call,
 he doom with tear a rival empire fall,
 the world be great patriot he! — by fame inspire,
 his youth each art adorn, each virtue fire;
 he through Rome son the brave contagion spread,
 now lead to conquest, now to wisdom lead;
 please, or to still the forum civil roar,
 or muse, cajeta, on thy bend shore;
 free from affair, unfettered with parade,
 to taste a friend amid the rural shade:
 there deign to mingle in immortal lay,
 there deep through time his country fate survey;
 while from his tongue sublime precept flow —
 "how man but sojourn on this spot below,
" how mortal fame be to a point confine,
 "heaven only fit to fill the immortal mind;
" for heaven, how virtue can alone prepare,
 "and vice will find herself unhappy there." 
hence, loose from earth, his pure affection soar
 where sensual pleasure cheat the soul no more. 
beneath his foot do nation treasure lie? 
million he view with unretorted eye. 
his country manner do corruption drown? 
he, blameless censor! stem they by his own. 
do kingdom groan? he bid oppression cease,
 stern tyrant awe, and hush the world to peace. 
do justice call? he care not what become
 of life, or of life sweet breath, his fame:
 for she he dare the noble, people hate,
 for she he live, for her resign to fate. 
these be his honour, his high triumph these! 
oh! how unlike the slave of wealth and ease:
 with plenty curse, to make their life a void,
 too great, too noble, to be well employ,
 they seek some livery friend to drag away
 the heavy, cumbrous, miserable day. 

there be, my lord, that with unfeeling ear
 a scipio, sydney, falkland glory hear,
 unmoved a Lonsdale spotless honour see,
 wise, studious, generous, loyal, just, and free! 
be proof to every lure of honest fame;
 and yet of sycophant will buy a name;
 hence bird of throat obscene, and greedy maw,
 the chatter magpie, the tale-bearing daw,
 rook, vulture, harpy, their vile board surround,
 while fright merit fly the unhallowed ground,
 fly to the private shade, the pure retreat,
 and to their flatterer leave the proud and great. 
what, though their hand never hold britannia reins,
 nor sword ever seek her foe on crimson plain? 
yet, Blount shall own they drive six horse well,
 and mordington their bold courage tell,
 their name with mordaunt pope disdain to sing,
 yet with their triumph do Newmarket ring. 
what though (you fair!) they break through honour law;
 yet hence they gain a modish world applause:
 receive, repulse, their boast be still the same,
 and still they triumph over each injure name. 
their vote, we know, never raise the droop state,
 but rescue opera from impend fate. 
their bounty never bid affliction smile,
 but pamper fiddler with the tradesman spoil. 
no goth to learning ever be foe so fall,
 yet their buy praise dedication swell;
 yet White allow they, in a length of year,
 the first of sharper, though the last of peer. 

in vain for such may dome on dome arise,
 with head audacious, and invade the sky;
 in vain dishonour star dart mimic ray,
 to give their sordid breast a borrow blaze;
 in vain with lordly rule, their wide domain
 swell hundred hill, and spread a hundred plain:
 if mean, still mean by their lofty state,
 (so statue lessen by a base too great)
 with birth ignoble, poor amid their store,
 obscure by splendour, impotent with power,
 by title stain, with beauty unadorned,
 court by flattery, but by merit scorn,
 the slave of slave, corruption dirty tool,
 the prey of villain, and the gaze of fool. 

rise then, my lord, with noble ardor rise! 
and while your sire before your ravish eye
 pass in a grand review, oh! pant for fame,
 and by your action dignify their name,
 transmit thence, with heighten lustre down,
 honour, that may your future offspring crown! 

that sight the muse with please hope survey,
 while to the blissful hour her fancy stray,
 when in the Hertford of another age
 the same fair virtue shall your soul engage;
 the same soft meekness and majestic mien
 shall cheer the private, grace the public scene. 
from she, to glad at once your ear and eye,
 a fair Eliza shall with spirit rise,
 with lively humour, yet devoid of blame,
 and be, with sweet variety, the same;
 over some bless heart confirm her last sawy,
 with reason sprightly, and with goodness gay. 
when to another Beauchamp you shall owe
 those joy, that with your dawn virtue grow,
 in he again be bear, again shall live,
 and take that happiness, which now you give. 
heaven have on you pour down his kind shower,
 health, riches, honour, bless your natal hour;
 at once a elegance of form and mind,
 to please, to serve, and to adorn your kind;
 in manner gentle, but in genius strong;
 though gay, collect, and polite, though young. 

these bounteous heaven bestow! it be you to raise
 his gift, and from their use derive your praise:
 he the material, you the work must be;
 your choice, my lord, be fame or infamy. 

oh! shall your virtue in pure current flow,
 and wealth and pleasure all around bestow,
 till earth no more their lengthen stream can bound,
 nor sink their fame in time vast ocean drown,
 say, may the muse to future age declare,
 they be her early honour and her care? 
that by her hand the bubble fount be clear,
 that, follow where the mazy rill appear,
 she form their channel, and their course she steer? 
may then this fond ambitious verse pretend,
 she teach the pupil, yet preserve the friend;
 first twine the wreath, that shall your temple crown,
 still in your glory happy than her own? 
