a college life.

for the vase at Bath-easton.

a college life! i scorn the odious phrase;
 so dull a theme shall never employ my lay:
 a life indeed! it be fit style a death,
 unless it be life mere to draw your breath;
 by fusty wall coop up, as in a pen,
 among fusty book, and still more fusty man. 
can this be life, by gothic rule compel
 to part from liberty, or be expel? 
at early dawn rouse by the bell to matin,
 the live long day confine to greek and latin;
 at such a hour among old don to dine,
 yet not allow a social glass of wine;
 with cap in hand across the court to go,
 but not to touch the grass-plat with your toe,
 lest dire expulsion for that breach of law
 seize on the culprit with it be iron claw. 
if when fatigue at evening, he shall take
 a nap too long, and not to prayer awake,
 strait through the college shall his name resound,
 dead or alive, the caitiff must be find:
 or if perchance some friend or lady sore
 shall draw he forth to taste the noontide air,
 then as a squirrel, who his chain have break,
 or slave new ransom from his gall yoke,
 his liberty he hug, with joy elate,
 he for a while forget his servile state,
 nor ever reflect on bar, or key, or gate. 
but now the college clock with gloomy knell
 assail his ear, and like conjurer spell
 strike through his heart — with horror in his face
 sudden he start — his short-lived joy give place. 
with eager stride swift through the street he hie,
 and at the portal for admittance cry,
 but cry in vain — for ah! it be all too late;
 the porter hear, but will unbar the gate;
 abash the youth retire with thoughtful pace,
 dream of jobation, lecture and disgrace;
 next morn by master, tutor, fellow rate,
 in short, not much unlike a bear when bait. 

since this a college life, peace to that pair,
 who die leave i to a guardian care,
 and he, thank fortune, to unbend my mind,
 choose a young tutor, gay, polite and kind,
 who, anxious much my moral to advance,
 take i a tour through Italy and France;
 give i the grace, which i more admire
 than all the learning i can else acquire:
 this, this be life, but that within a college,
 which musty pedant term the seat of knowledge,
 let pedant take — i will not see their face,
 but live and die devote to the grace. 

thus florio talk — much noise and little matter,
 it be thus, that puppy yelp, and monkey chatter. 
