to his friend under affliction.

none live in this tumultuous state of thing,
 where every morning some new trouble bring;
 but bold inquietude will break his rest,
 and gloomy thought disturb his anxious breast. 
angelic form, and happy spirit be
 above the malice of perplex care:
 but that be a bless too sublime, too high
 for those who bend beneath mortality. 
if in the body there be but one part
 subject to pain, and sensible of smart,
 and but one passion can torment the mind,
 that part, that passion busy fate will find,
 but since infirmity in both abound,
 since sorrow both so many way can wound,
 it be not so great a wonder that we grieve
 sometime, as it be a miracle we live. 

the happy man that ever breathe on earth,
 with all the glory of estate and birth,
 have yet some anxious care to make he know
 no grandeur be above the reach of woe. 
to be from all thing that disquiet, free,
 be not consistent with humanity. 
youth, wit, and beauty, be such charm thing,
 over which, if affluence spread her gaudy wing,
 we think the person, who enjoy so much,
 no care can move, and no affliction touch. 
yet can we but some secret method find
 to view the dark recess of the mind,
 we there may see the hide seed of strife,
 and woe in embryo ripen into life;
 how some fierce lust, or boisterous passion, fill
 the labour spirit with prolific ill
 pride, envy, or revenge, distract his soul,
 and all right-reason godlike power control. 
but if she must not be allow to sway
 though all without, appear serene and gay,
 a cankerous venom on the vital prey,
 and poison all the comfort of his day. 

external pomp, and visible success,
 sometime contribute to our happiness;
 but that, which make it genuine, refine,
 be a good conscience, and a soul resign:
 then, to whatever end affliction send,
 to try our virtue, or for punishment,
 we bear it calm, though a ponderous woe,
 and still adore the hand that give the blow. 
for in misfortune this advantage lie,
 they make we humble, and they make we wise. 
and he that can acquire such virtue, gain
 a ample recompense for all his pain. 

too soft caress of a prosperous fate
 the pious fervour of the soul abate;
 tempt to luxurious ease our careless day,
 and gloomy vapour round the spirit raise. 
thus lull into a sleep, we dose lie,
 and find our ruin in security;
 unless some sorrow come to our relief,
 and break the enchantment by a timely grief. 
but as we be allow, to cheer our sight,
 in black day, some glimmer of light:
 so in the most deject hour we may,
 the secret pleasure have, to weep and pray. 
and those request, the speedy passage find
 to heaven, which flow from a afflict mind:
 and while to he we open our distress,
 our pain grow light, and our sorrow less. 
the fine music of the grove, we owe
 to mourn philomel harmonious woe;
 and while her grief in charm note express,
 a thorny bramble prick her tender breast:
 in warble melody she spend the night,
 and move at once compassion and delight. 

no choice have ever so happy a event,
 but he that make it, do that choice repent. 
so weak our judgement, and so short be our sight,
 we can level our own wish right:
 and if sometime we make a wise advance,
 t'our self we little owe, but much to chance,
 so that when providence, for secret end,
 corrode care, or sharp affliction send
 we must conclude it best it shall be so,
 and not despond, or impatient grow. 
for he that will his confidence remove,
 from boundless wisdom, and eternal love,
 to place it on himself, or human aid,
 will meet those woe he labour to evade. 
but in the keen agony of grief,
 content a cordial that still give relief. 
heaven be not always angry when he strike,
 but most chastise those, who most he like,
 and if with humble spirit they complain,
 relieve the anguish, or reward the pain. 
