picture from Theocritus.

from idyl i 

goat-herd, how sweet above the lucid spring
the high pine wave with breezy murmur!
so sweet thy song, who music may succeed
to the wild melody of pan own reed.

thyrsis.

more sweet thy pipe enchant melody
than stream that fall from break rock on high.
say, by the nymph, that guard the sacred scene,
where lowly tamarisk shade these hillock green,
at noontide shall we lie? 
no; for overweary with the forest chase,
Pan, the great hunter god, sleep in this place.
beneath the branch elm, while thy sad verse,
o thyrsis! Daphnis' sorrow shall rehearse,
front the woodnymph's solitary seat,
who fountain flash amid the dark retreat;
where the old statue lean, and brown oak wave
their ancient umbrage over the pastoral cave;
there will we rest, and thou, as erst, prolong
the sweet enchantment of the doric song!

from the same idyl.

Mark, where the beetling precipice appear,
the toil of the old fisher, grey with year;
mark, as to drag the load net he strain,
the labour muscle and the swell vein!
there, in the sun, the cluster vineyard bend,
and shine empurple, as the morn ascend!
a little boy, with idly-happy mien,
to guard the grape upon the ground be see;
two wily fox creep round appear, —
the scrip that hold his morning meal be near, —
one break the bend vine; with long lip,
and look askance, one eye the tempt scrip.
he plot and plot his rushy net all day,
and make the vagrant grasshopper his prey;
he plot his net, intent with idle care,
nor heed how vineyard, grape, or scrip may fare.

from the same.

where be you, nymph, when Daphnis droop with love?
in fair peneus' Tempe, or the grove
of Pindus! nor your pastime do you keep,
where huge Anapus' torrent water sweep;
on ætna height, ah! impotent to save,
nor yet where Akis wind his holy wave!

from the same.

Pan, Pan, oh mighty hunter! whether now,
thou roam over Lyceus' shaggy brow,
or Mœnalaus, outstretch in ample shade,
thy solitary footstep have delay;
leave helice romantic rock a while,
and haste, oh haste, to the sicilian isle;
leave the dread monument, approach with fear,
that lycaonian tomb the god revere.
here cease, sicilian muse, the doric lay; —
come, forest king, and bear this pipe away;
Daphnis, subdue by love, and bow with woe,
sink, sink for ever to the shade below.

from idyl vii.

he leave we; — we, the hour of part come,
to prasidamus' hospitable home,
myself and Eucritus, together wend,
with young amynticus, our bloom friend:
there, all delight, through the summer day,
on bed of rush, pillow deep, we lay;
around, the lentil, new cut, be spread;
dark elm and poplar whisper over our head;
a hallow stream, to all the wood-nymph dear,
fresh from the rocky cavern murmur near;
beneath the fruit-leave' many-mantling shade,
the grasshopper a coil incessant make;
from the wild thorny thicket, hear remote,
the wood-lark trill his far-resounding note;
loud sing the thrush, musician of the scene,
and soft and sweet be hear the dove sad note between;
then yellow bee, who murmur soothe the ear,
go idle flit round the fountain clear.
summer and autumn seem at once to meet,
fill with redolence the bless retreat,
while the ripe pear come roll to our foot.

from idyl xxii.

when the fame Argo now secure have pass
the crush rock, and that terrific strait
that guard the wintery pontic, the tall ship
reach wild bebrycia's shore; bear like god
her god-descended chief. they, from her side,
with scale step descend, and on the shore,
savage, and sad, and beat by ocean wind,
strew their rough bed, and on the casual fire
the vessel place. the brother, by themselves,
 castor and red-haired Pollux, wander far
into the forest solitude. a wood
immense and dark, shag the mountain side,
before they rise; a cold and sparkle fount
well with perpetual lapse, beneath its foot,
of pure water clear; scatter below,
stream as of silver and of crystal rise,
bright from the bottom: pine, of stately height,
poplar, and plane, and cypress, branch wide,
be near, thick border by the scent flower
that lure the honey bee, when spring decline,
thick swarm over the meadow. there all day
a huge man sit, of savage, wild aspect;
his breast stand round forward, his broad back
seem as of iron, such as may befit
a vast colossus sculpture. full to view
the muscle of his brawny shoulder stand,
like the round mountain-stone the torrent wave
have polish; from his neck and back hang down
a lion skin, hold by its claw. he first
the red-haired youth address: hail, stranger, hail,
and say, what tribe unknown inhabit here!
take to the sea thy hail: i ask it not,
who never see before, or thou, or thy.
courage! thou see not man that be unjust
or cruel.
courage shall i learn from thou!
thy heart be savage; thou be passion slave.
such as i be thou see; but land of thy
i tread not.
come, these hospitable gift
accept, and part in peace.
no: not from thou.
my gift be yet in store.
say, may we drink
of this clear fount?
ask, when wan thirst have parch
thy lip.
what present shall i give to thou?
none. stand before i as a man; lift high
thy brandish arm, and try, weak pugilist,
thy strength.
but say, with who shall i contend?
thou see he here; nor in his art unskilled.
then what shall be the prize of he who win?
or thou shall be my slave, or i be thy.
the crest bird so fight.
whether like bird
or lion, for no other prize fight we!
he say: and sound loud his hollow conch;
the gaunt bebrycian brother, at the sound,
with long lank hair, come flock to the shade
of that vast plain.
then Castor hie, and call
the hero chief from the magnesian ship.
