liberty and peace.

lo! freedom come. the prescient muse foretell,
all eye the accomplish prophecy behold:
her port describe, "she move divine fair,
"olive and laurel bind her golden hair. "
she, the bright progeny of heaven, descend,
and every grace her sovereign step attend;
for now kind heaven, indulgent to our prayer,
in smile peace resolve the din of War.  
fix in Columbia her illustrious line,
and bid in thou her future council shine.
to every realm her portal open wide,
receive from each the full commercial tide.
each art and science now with rise charm,
the expand heart with emulation warm.
even great Britannia see with dread surprise,
and from the dazzl' splendor turn her eye!
Britain, who navy sweep the atlantic over,
and thunder send to every distant shore:
even thou, in manner cruel as thou be,
the sword resign, resume the friendly part!
for galia power espouse columbia cause,
and new-born Rome shall give Britannia law,
nor unremembered in the grateful strain,
shall princely louis 'friendly deed remain;
the generous prince the impend vengeance eye,
see the fierce wrong, and to the rescue fly.
perish that thirst of boundless power, that draw
on albion head the curse to tyrant due.
but thou appease submit to heaven decree,
that bid this realm of freedom rival thou!
now sheathe the sword that bid the brave atone
with guiltless blood for madness not their own.
send from the enjoyment of their native shore
ill-fated — never to behold she more!
from every kingdom on europa coast
throng various troop, their glory, strength and boast.
with heart-felt pity fair Hibernia see
Columbia menace by the tyrant law:
on hostile field fraternal arm engage,
and mutual death, all deal with mutual rage;
the muse ear hear mother earth deplore
her ample surface smoke with kindred gore:
the hostile field destroy the social tie,
and everlasting slumber seal their eye.
Columbia mourn, the haughty foe deride,
her treasure plunder, and her town destroy:
witness how charlestown curl smoke arise,
in sable column to the cloud sky!
the ample dome, high-wrought with curious toil,
in one sad hour the savage troop despoil.
descend peace the power of war confound;
from every tongue celestial peace resound:
as from the east the illustrious king of day,
with rise radiance drive the shade away,
so freedom come array with charm divine,
and in her train commerce and plenty shine.
Britannia own her independent reign,
Hibernia, Scotia, and the realm of Spain;
and great germania ample coast admire
the generous spirit that Columbia fire.
auspicious heaven shall fill with favour gale,
where ever Columbia spread her swell sail:
to every realm shall peace her charm display,
and heavenly freedom spread her golden ray.
