[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night ii. on time, death, and friendship.

humble inscribe to the right honourable the earl of Wilmington. 

 "when the cock crew, he weep,"— smite by that eye,
 which look on i, on all: that power who bid
 this midnight sentinel, with clarion shrill,
 (emblem of that which shall awake the dead,)
 rouse soul from slumber, into thought of heaven. 
shall i too weep? where then be fortitude? 
and, fortitude abandon, where be man? 
i know the term on which he see the light:
 he that be bear be list; life be war,
 eternal war with woe. who bear it best,
 deserve it least. — on other theme i will dwell. 
Lorenzo! let i turn my thought on thou,
 and thy on theme may profit; profit there
 where most thy need: theme, too, the genuine growth
 of dear philander dust. he thus, though dead,
 may still befriend. — what theme? time be wondrous price,
 death, friendship, and philander final scene. 

so can i touch these theme as may obtain
 thy ear, nor leave thy heart quite disengage,
 the good deed will delight i; half-impress
 on my dark cloud a Iris; and from grief
 call glory. — do thou mourn philander fate? 
i know thou say it: say thy life the same?
 — he mourn the dead who live as they desire. 
where be that thrift, that avarice of time,
 (o glorious avarice!) thought of death inspire,
 as rumour robbery endear our gold? 
o time! than gold more sacred; more a load
 than lead to fool; and fool repute wise. 
what moment grant man without account? 
what year be squander, wisdom debt unpaid! 
our wealth in day all due to that discharge. 
haste, haste, he lie in wait, he be at the door,
 insidious death! shall his strong hand arrest,
 no composition set the prisoner free. 
eternity inexorable chain
 fast bind; and vengeance claim the full arrear. 

how late i shudder on the brink! how late
 life call for her last refuge in despair! 
that time be i, o Mead, to thou i owe;
 fain will i pay thou with eternity. 
but ill my genius answer my desire;
 my sickly song be mortal, past thy cure. 
accept the will; — it die not with my strain. 

for what call thy disease, Lorenzo? not
 for aesculapian, but for moral aid. 
thou think it folly to be wise too soon. 
youth be not rich in time, it may be poor;
 part with it as with money, spare; pay
 no moment but in purchase of its worth;
 and what its worth, ask death-bed; they can tell. 
part with it as with life, reluctant; big
 with holy hope of noble time to come;
 time higher-aimed, still near the great mark
 of man and angel, virtue more divine. 
be this our duty, wisdom, glory, gain? 
(these heaven benign in vital union bind:)
 and sport we like the native of the bough,
 when vernal sun inspire? amusement reign
 man great demand: to trifle be to live:
 and be it then a trifle, too, to die? 

thou say i preach, Lorenzo! it be confess. 
what, if, for once, i preach thou quite awake? 
who want amusement in the flame of battle? 
be it not treason to the soul immortal,
 her foe in arm, eternity the prize? 
will toy amuse when medicine can cure? 
when spirit ebb, when life enchant scene
 their lustre lose, and lessen in our sight,
 (as land and city with their glitter spire,
 to the poor shatter bark, by sudden storm
 — throw off to sea, and soon to perish there,)
 will toy amuse? no; throne will then be toy,
 and earth and sky seem dust upon the scale. 

redeem we time? — its loss we dear buy. 
what plead Lorenzo for his high-prized sport? 
he plead time numerous blank; he loud plead
 the straw-like trifle on life common stream. 
from who those blank and trifle but from thou? 
no blank, no trifle, nature make, or mean. 
virtue, or purpose virtue, still be thy;
 this cancel thy complaint at once; this leaf
 in act no trifle, and no blank in time. 
this greaten, fill, immortalise all;
 this the bless art of turn all to gold;
 this the good heart prerogative to raise
 a royal tribute from the poor hour;
 immense revenue! every moment pay. 
if nothing more than purpose in thy power,
 thy purpose firm be equal to the deed:
 who do the best his circumstance allow,
 do well, act noble; angel can no more. 
our outward act, indeed, admit restraint;
 it be not in thing over thought to domineer. 
guard well thy thought; our thought be hear in heaven. 

on all-important time, through every age,
 though much, and warm, the wise have urge, the man
 be yet unborn who due weigh a hour. 
 "I have lose a day"— the prince who noble cry,
 have be a emperor without his crown;
 "of Rome?"say, rather, lord of human race:
 he speak as if depute by mankind. 
so shall all speak: so reason speak in all. 
from the soft whisper of that god in man,
 why fly to folly, why to frenzy fly,
 for rescue from the blessing we possess? 
time, the supreme! — time be eternity;
 pregnant with all eternity can give;
 pregnant with all that make archangel smile. 
who murder time, he crush in the birth
 a power ethereal, only not adore. 

ah! how unjust to nature and himself
 be thoughtless, thankless, inconsistent man! 
like child babble nonsense in their sport,
 we censure nature for a span too short;
 that span too short we tax as tedious too;
 torture invention, all expedient tire,
 to lash the linger moment into speed,
 and whirl we (happy riddance!) from ourselves. 
art, brainless art! our furious charioteer,
 (for nature voice unstifled will recall,)
 drive headlong towards the precipice of death;
 death, most our dread; death thus more dreadful make. 
o what a riddle of absurdity! 
leisure be pain; take off our chariot-wheel;
 how heavy we drag the load of life! 
bless leisure be our curse; like that of Cain,
 it make we wander; wander earth around
 to fly that tyrant, thought. as Atlas groan
 the world beneath, we groan beneath a hour. 
we cry for mercy to the next amusement;
 the next amusement mortgage our field;
 slight inconvenience! prison hardly frown,
 from hateful time if prison set we free. 
yet when death kind tender we relief,
 we call he cruel: year to moment shrink,
 age to year. the telescope be turn. 
to man false optic (from his folly false)
 time, in advance, behind he hide his wing,
 and seem to creep, decrepit with his age. 
behold he, when pass by; what then be see
 but his broad pinion, swift than the wind? 
and all mankind, in contradiction strong,
 rueful, aghast, cry out on his career. 

leave to thy foe these error, and these ill;
 to nature just, their cause and cure explore. 
not short heaven bounty, boundless our expense;
 no niggard, nature; man be prodigal. 
we waste, not use, our time; we breathe, not live. 
time waste be existence, use be life. 
and bare existence man, to live ordain,
 wring and oppress with enormous weight. 
and why? since time be give for use, not waste,
 enjoin to fly, with tempest, tide, and star,
 to keep his speed, nor ever wait for man;
 time be use be doom a pleasure; waste, a pain;
 that man may feel his error, if unseen;
 and, feeling, fly to labour for his cure;
 not, blunder, split on idleness for ease. 
life care be comfort; such by heaven design;
 he that have none, must make they, or be wretched. 
Cares be employment; and without employ
 the soul be on a rack; the rack of rest,
 to soul most adverse; action all their joy. 

here, then, the riddle, mark above, unfold:
 then time turn torment, when man turn a fool. 
we rave, we wrestle with great nature plan;
 we thwart the deity; and it be decree,
 who thwart his will shall contradict their own. 
hence our unnatural quarrel with ourselves;
 our thought at enmity; our bosom-broil:
 we push time from we, and we wish he back;
 lavish of lustrum, and yet fond of life;
 life we think long and short; death seek and shun;
 body and soul, like peevish man and wife,
 unite jar, and yet be loath to part. 

o the dark day of vanity! while here
 how tasteless, and how terrible when go! 
go! they never go; when past, they haunt we still;
 the spirit walk of every day decease,
 and smile a angel, or a fury frown. 
nor death nor life delight we. if time past,
 and time possess, both pain we, what can please? 
that which the deity to please ordain, —
 time use. the man who consecrate his hour
 by vigorous effort, and a honest aim,
 at once he draw the sting of life and death;
 he walk with nature, and her path be peace. 

our error cause and cure be see: see next
 time be nature, origin, importance, speed;
 and thy great gain from urge his career. —
 all-sensual man, because untouched, unseen,
 he look on time as nothing. nothing else
 be true man: it be Fortune. — time be a god. 
have thou never hear of time be omnipotence? 
for, or against, what wonder can he do! 
and will: to stand blank neuter he disdain. 
not on those term be time (heaven stranger!) send
 on his important embassy to man. 
Lorenzo! no; on the long-destined hour,
 from everlasting age grow ripe,
 that memorable hour of wondrous birth,
 when the dread sire, on emanation bend,
 and big with nature, rise in his might,
 call forth creation, (for then time be bear,)
 by godhead stream through a thousand world:
 not on those term, from the great day of heaven,
 from old eternity mysterious orb,
 be time cut off, and cast beneath the sky;
 the sky, which watch he in his new abode,
 measure his motion by revolve sphere;
 that horologe machinery divine. 
hour, day, and month, and year, his child, play
 like numerous wing around he, as he fly:
 or, rather, as unequal plume, they shape
 his ample pinion, swift as dart flame,
 to gain his goal, to reach his ancient rest,
 and join anew eternity his sire;
 in his immutability to nest,
 when world, that count his circle now, unhinged,
 (fate the loud signal sound,) headlong rush
 to timeless night and chaos, whence they rise. 

why spur the speedy? why with levity
 new-wing thy short, short day be too rapid flight? 
know thou or what thou do, or what be do? 
man fly from time, and time from man; too soon
 in sad divorce this double flight must end;
 and then, where be we? where, Lorenzo, then
 thy sport? thy pomp? — i grant thou, in a state
 not unambitious; in the ruffle shroud,
 thy parian tomb triumphant arch beneath. 
have death his foppery? then well may life
 put on her plume, and in her rainbow shine. 

you well-arrayed! you lily of our land! 
you lily male, who neither toil, nor spin,
 (as sister lily may,) if not so wise
 as Solomon, more sumptuous to the sight! 
you delicate! who nothing can support,
 yourself most insupportable! for who
 the winter rose must blow, the sun put on
 a bright beam in Leo; silky-soft
 Favonius breathe still soft, or be chide;
 and other world send odour, sauce, and song,
 and robe, and notion, frame in foreign loom! 
o you lorenzos of our age! who deem
 one moment unamuse a misery
 not make for feeble man; who call aloud
 for every bauble drivel over by sense;
 for rattle, and conceit of every cast,
 for change of folly, and relay of joy,
 to drag your patient through the tedious length
 of a short winter day; — say, sage; say,
 wit oracle; say, dreamer of gay dream! 
how will you weather a eternal night,
 where such expedient fail? 

o treacherous conscience! while she seem to sleep
 on rose and myrtle, lull with siren song;
 while she seem, nod over her charge, to drop
 on headlong appetite the slacken rein,
 and give we up to licence, unrecal,
 unmarked, — see, from behind her secret stand,
 the sly informer minute every fault,
 and her dread diary with horror fill. 
not the gross act alone employ her pen;
 she reconnoitre fancy airy band,
 a watchful foe! the formidable spy,
 listen, o'erhear the whisper of our camp;
 our dawning purpose of heart explore,
 and steal our embryo of iniquity. 
as all-rapacious usurer conceal
 their doomsday-book from all-consuming heir;
 thus, with indulgence most severe, she treat
 we spendthrift of inestimable time;
 unnoted, note each moment misapply;
 in leaf more durable than leaf of brass,
 write our whole history; which death shall read
 in every pale delinquent private ear;
 and judgement publish; publish to more world
 than this; and endless age in groan resound. 
Lorenzo, such that sleeper in thy breast! 
such be her slumber; and her vengeance such
 for slight counsel; such thy future peace! 
and think thou still thou can be wise too soon? 

but why on time so lavish be my song? 
on this great theme kind nature keep a school,
 to teach her son herself. each night we die;
 each morn be bear anew: each day a life! 
and shall we kill each day? if trifle kill,
 sure vice must butcher. o what heap of slay
 cry out for vengeance on we! time destroy
 be suicide, where more than blood be spill. 
time fly, death urge, knell call, heaven invite,
 hell threaten: all exert; in effort, all;
 more than creation labour! — labour more! 
and be there in creation what, amid
 this tumult universal, winge dispatch,
 and ardent energy, supine yawn? —
 man sleep, and man alone; and man, who fate,
 fate irreversible, entire, extreme,
 endless, hair-hung, breeze-shaken, over the gulf
 a moment tremble; drop! and man, for who
 all else be in alarm; man, the sole cause
 of this surround storm! — and yet he sleep,
 as the storm rock to rest.  "throw year away?"
throw empire, and be blameless. moment seize;
 heaven on their wing: a moment we may wish
 when world want wealth to buy. bid day stand still,
 bid he drive back his car, and re-import
 the period past, regive the give hour. 
Lorenzo, more than miracle we want:
 Lorenzo — o for yesterday to come! 

such be the language of the man awake;
 his ardour such for what oppress thou. 
and be his ardour vain, Lorenzo? no;
 that more than miracle the god indulge:
 today be yesterday return; return
 full-powered to cancel, expiate, raise, adorn,
 and reinstate we on the rock of peace. 
let it not share its predecessor fate;
 nor, like its elder sister, die a fool. 
shall it evaporate in fume? fly off
 fuliginous, and stain we deep still? 
shall we be poor for the plenty pour? 
more wretched for the clemency of heaven? 

where shall i find he? angel! tell i where. 
you know he: he be near you: point he out:
 shall i see glory beam from his brow,
 or trace his footstep by the rise flower? 
your golden wing, now hover over he, shed
 protection; now be wave in applause
 to that bless son of foresight! lord of fate! 
that awful independent on tomorrow! 
who work be do; who triumph in the past;
 who yesterday look backward with a smile;
 nor, like the parthian, wind he as they fly;
 that common, but opprobrious lot! past hour,
 if not by guilt, yet wound we by their flight,
 if folly bound our prospect by the grave,
 all feeling of futurity benumb;
 all god-like passion for eternal quench;
 all relish of reality expire;
 renounce all correspondence with the sky;
 our freedom chain; quite wingless our desire;
 in sense dark-prisoned all that ought to soar;
 prone to the centre; crawl in the dust;
 dismount every great and glorious aim;
 embrute every faculty divine;
 heart-buried in the rubbish of the world:
 the world, that gulf of soul, immortal soul,
 soul elevate, angelic, winge with fire
 to reach the distant sky, and triumph there
 on throne, which shall not mourn their master change;
 though we from earth, ethereal they that fall. 
such veneration due, o man, to man. 

who venerate themselves, the world despise. 
for what, gay friend, be this escutcheoned world,
 which hang out death in one eternal night? 
a night that gloom we in the noontide ray,
 and wrap our thought, at banquet, in the shroud. 
life little stage be a small eminence,
 inch-high the grave above; that home of man,
 where dwell the multitude: we gaze around;
 we read their monument; we sigh; and while
 we sigh, we sink, and be what we deplore:
 lament, or lament, all our lot! 

be death at distance? no: he have be on thou;
 and give sure earnest of his final blow. 
those hour that late smile, where be they now? 
pallid to thought, and ghastly! drown, all drown
 in that great deep, which nothing disembogue! 
and, die, they bequeath thou small renown. 
the rest be on the wing: how fleet their flight! 
already have the fatal train take fire;
 a moment, and the world be blow up to thou,
 the sun be darkness, and the star be dust. 

it be great wise to talk with our past hour;
 and ask they, what report they bear to heaven;
 and how they may have bear more welcome news. 
their answer form what man experience call;
 if wisdom friend, her best; if not, worst foe. 
o reconcile they! kind experience cry,
 "there be nothing here, but what as nothing weigh;
 the more our joy, the more we know it vain,
 and by success be tutor to despair."
nor be it only thus, but must be so. 
who know not this, though grey, be still a child. 
loose then from earth the grasp of fond desire,
 weigh anchor, and some happy clime explore. 

be thou so moor thou can not disengage,
 nor give thy thought a ply to future scene? 
since, by life pass breath, blow up from earth
 light, as the summer dust, we take in air
 a moment giddy flight, and fall again;
 join the dull mass, increase the tread soil,
 and sleep till earth herself shall be no more;
 since, then, (as emmet, their small world overthrow,)
 we, sore amaze, from out earth ruin crawl,
 and rise to fate extreme of foul or fair,
 as man own choice, (controller of the sky!) 
as man despotic will, perhaps one hour,
 (o how omnipotent be time!) decree;
 shall not each warn give a strong alarm? 
warn, far less than that of bosom tear
 from bosom, bleed over the sacred dead! 
shall not each dial strike we as we pass,
 portentous, as the write wall, which strike,
 over midnight bowl, the proud assyrian pale,
 erewhile high-flushed with insolence and wine? 
like that the dial speak; and point to thou,
 Lorenzo! loath to break thy banquet up:
 "o man, thy kingdom be depart from thou;
 and, while it last, be empty than my shade."
its silent language such: nor need thou call
 thy Magi to decipher what it mean. 
know, like the median, fate be in thy wall:
 do ask, "how?" "whence?"belshazzar-like, amaze? 
man make enclose the sure seed of death;
 life feed the murderer. ingrate! he thrive
 on her own meal, and then his nurse devour. 

but here, Lorenzo, the delusion lie;
 that solar shadow, as it measure life,
 it life resemble too: life speed away
 from point to point, though seem to stand still. 
the cunning fugitive be swift by stealth:
 too subtle be the movement to be see;
 yet soon man hour be up, and we be go. 
warn point out our danger; gnomon, time:
 as these be useless when the sun be set;
 so those, but when more glorious reason shine. 
reason shall judge in all; in reason eye,
 that sedentary shadow travel hard. 
but such our gravitation to the wrong,
 so prone our heart to whisper what we wish,
 it be late with the wise than he be aware;
 a Wilmington go slow than the sun:
 and all mankind mistake their time of day;
 even age itself. fresh hope be hourly sow
 in furrow brow. so gentle life descent,
 we shut our eye, and think it be a plain. 
we take fair day in winter for the spring;
 and turn our blessing into bane. since oft
 man must compute that age he can feel,
 he scarce believe he be old for his year. 
thus, at life late eve, we keep in store
 one disappointment sure, to crown the rest, —
 the disappointment of a promise hour. 

on this, or similar, Philander! — thou
 who mind be moral as the preacher tongue,
 and strong to wield all science worth the name; —
 how often we talk down the summer sun,
 and cool our passion by the breezy stream! 
how often thaw and shorten winter eve,
 by conflict kind, that strike out latent truth,
 best find, so seek; to the recluse more coy! 
thought disentangle, pass over the lip;
 clean run the thread; if not, it be throw away
 or keep to tie up nonsense for a song;
 song, fashionable fruitless; such as stain
 the fancy, and unhallowed passion fire;
 chime her saint to cytherea fane. 

know thou, Lorenzo, what a friend contain? 
as bee mix nectar draw from fragrant flower,
 so man, from friendship, wisdom and delight;
 twin tie by nature, if they part, they die. 
have thou no friend to set thy mind abroach? 
good sense will stagnate. thought shut up want air,
 and spoil, like bale unopened to the sun. 
have think be all, sweet speech have be deny;
 speech, thought canal! speech, thought criterion too! 
thought in the mine may come forth gold or dross;
 when coin in word, we know its real worth. 
if sterling, store it for thy future use;
 it will buy thou benefit; perhaps, renown. 
thought, too, deliver, be the more possess:
 teach we learn; and give we retain
 the birth of intellect; when dumb, forget. 
speech ventilate our intellectual fire;
 speech burnish our mental magazine,
 brighten for ornament, and whet for use. 
what number, sheathe in erudition, lie,
 plunge to the hilt in venerable tome,
 and rust in; who may have bear a edge,
 and play a sprightly beam, if bear to speech;
 if bear bless heir of half their mother tongue! 
it be thought exchange which, like they alternate push
 of wave conflict, break the learned scum,
 and defecate the student stand pool. 

in contemplation be his proud resource? 
it be poor as proud, by converse unsustained. 
rude thought run wild in contemplation field;
 converse, the manage, break it to the bit
 of due restraint; and emulation spur
 give graceful energy, by rival awe. 
it be converse qualify for solitude,
 as exercise for salutary rest. 
by that untutored, contemplation rave;
 and nature fool by wisdom be outdo. 

wisdom, though rich than Peruvian mine,
 and sweet than the sweet ambrosial hive, —
 what be she but the mean of happiness? 
that unobtained, than folly more a fool;
 a melancholy fool, without her bell. 
friendship, the mean of wisdom, rich give
 the precious end which make our wisdom wise. 
nature, in zeal for human amity,
 deny or damp a undivided joy. 
joy be a import; joy be a exchange;
 joy fly monopolist; it call for two;
 rich fruit, heaven-planted, never pluck by one! 
needful auxiliar be our friend, to give
 to social man true relish of himself. 
full on ourselves descend in a line,
 pleasure bright beam be feeble in delight:
 delight intense be take by rebound;
 reverberate pleasure fire the breast. 

celestial happiness, whenever she stoop
 to visit earth, one shrine the goddess find,
 and one alone, to make her sweet amends
 for absent heaven, — the bosom of a friend;
 where heart meet heart, reciprocal soft,
 each other pillow to repose divine. 
beware the counterfeit: in passion flame
 heart melt; but melt like ice, soon hard freeze. 
true love strike root in reason, passion foe:
 virtue alone entendre we for life;
 i wrong she much — entendre we for ever:
 of friendship fair fruit, the fruit most fair
 be virtue kindle at a rival fire,
 and emulous rapid in her race. 
o the soft enmity! endear strife! 
this carry friendship to her noontide point,
 and give the rivet of eternity. 

from friendship, which outlive my former theme,
 glorious survivor of old time and death! 
from friendship, thus, that flower of heavenly seed,
 the wise extract earth most hyblaean bliss,
 superior wisdom, crown with smile joy. 

but for who blossom this elysian flower? 
abroad they find, who cherish it at home. 
Lorenzo, pardon what my love extort,
 a honest love, and not afraid to frown. 
though choice of folly fasten on the great,
 none cling more obstinate, than fancy fond
 that sacred friendship be their easy prey;
 catch by the wafture of a golden lure,
 or fascination of a highborn smile. 
their smile the great and the coquette throw out
 for other heart, tenacious of their own;
 and we no less of we, when such the bait. 
you Fortune cofferer, you power of wealth,
 can gold gain friendship? impudence of hope! 
as well mere man a angel may beget. 
love, and love only, be the loan for love. 
Lorenzo! pride repress; nor hope to find
 a friend, but what have find a friend in thou. 
all like the purchase; few the price will pay;
 and this make friend such miracle below. 

what, if (since dare on so nice a theme)
 i show thou friendship delicate as dear,
 of tender violation apt to die? 
reserve will wound it, and distrust destroy. 
deliberate on all thing with thy friend. 
but since friend grow not thick on every bough,
 nor every friend unrotten at the core;
 first, on thy friend, deliberate with thyself;
 pause, ponder, sift; not eager in the choice,
 nor jealous of the choose: fix, fix;
 judge before friendship; then confide till death. 
well for thy friend; but noble far for thou;
 how gallant danger for earth high prize! 
a friend be worth all hazard we can run. 
 "poor be the friendless master of a world:
 a world in purchase for a friend be gain."

so sing he: (angel hear that angel sing! 
angel from friendship gather half their joy:)
 so sing Philander, as his friend go round
 in the rich ichor, in the generous blood
 of Bacchus, purple god of joyous wit,
 a brow solute, and ever-laughing eye. 
he drink long health and virtue to his friend;
 his friend, who warm he more, who more inspire. 
friendship the wine of life; but friendship new
 (not such be his) be neither strong nor pure. 
o for the bright complexion, cordial warmth,
 and elevate spirit of a friend,
 for twenty summer ripen by my side;
 all faeculence of falsehood long throw down;
 all social virtue rise in his soul,
 as crystal clear, and smile as they rise! 
here nectar flow; it sparkle in our sight;
 rich to the taste, and genuine from the heart. 
high-flavoured bliss for god! on earth how rare! 
on earth how lose! — Philander be no more. 

think thou the theme intoxicate my song? 
be i too warm? — too warm i can be. 
i love he much; but now i love he more. 
like bird, who beauty languish, half conceal,
 till, mount on the wing, their glossy plume
 expand shine with azure, green, and gold;
 how blessing brighten as they take their flight! 
his flight Philander take; his upward flight,
 if ever soul ascend. have he drop,
 (that eagle genius!) o, have he let fall
 one feather as he fly, i then have write
 what friend may flatter, prudent foe forbear,
 rival scarce damn, and Zoilus reprieve. 
yet what i can, i must: it be profane
 to quench a glory light at the sky,
 and cast in shadow his illustrious close. 
strange, the theme most affect, most sublime,
 momentous most to man, shall sleep unsung! 
and yet it sleep, by genius unawake,
 paynim or christian, to the blush of wit. 
man high triumph, man profound fall,
 the death-bed of the just, be yet undrawn
 by mortal hand; it merit a divine! 
angel shall paint it, angel ever there;
 there, on a post of honour, and of joy. 

dare i presume, then? but Philander bid;
 and glory tempt, and inclination call. 
yet be i strike; as strike the soul beneath
 aerial groves impenetrable gloom;
 or in some mighty ruin solemn shade;
 or gaze by pale lamp on highborn dust,
 in vault; thin court of poor unflatter king! 
or at the midnight altar hallow flame. 
it be religion to proceed: i pause —
 and enter, awe, the temple of my theme. 
be it his death-bed? no: it be his shrine:
 behold he there just rise to a god. 
the chamber where the good man meet his fate
 be privilege beyond the common walk
 of virtuous life, quite in the verge of heaven. 
fly, you profane! if not, draw near with awe,
 receive the blessing, and adore the chance
 that throw in this Bethesda your disease:
 if unrestored by this, despair your cure. 
for here resistless demonstration dwell;
 a death-bed a detector of the heart. 
here tire dissimulation drop her mask
 through life grimace, that mistress of the scene! 
here real and apparent be the same. 
you see the man; you see his hold on heaven,
 if sound his virtue, as philander sound:
 heaven wait not the last moment; own her friend
 on this side death; and point they out to man,
 a lecture, silent, but of sovereign power! 
to vice, confusion; and to virtue, peace. 

whatever farce the boastful hero play,
 virtue alone have majesty in death;
 and great still, the more the tyrant frown. 
Philander! he severe frown on thou:
 "no warn give! unceremonious fate! 
a sudden rush from life meridian joy! 
a wrench from all we love, from all we be! 
a restless bed of pain! a plunge opaque
 beyond conjecture, feeble nature dread! 
strong reason shudder at the dark unknown! 
a sun extinguish, a just open grave! 
and, o! the last, last — what? (can word express,
 think reach it?) the last — silence of a friend!"
where be those horror, that amazement where,
 this hideous group of ill, which single shock,
 demand from man? — i think he man till now. 

through nature wreck, through vanquish agony,
 (like the star struggle through this midnight gloom,)
 what gleam of joy, what more than human peace! 
where the frail mortal, the poor abject worm? 
no, not in death the mortal to be find. 
his conduct be a legacy for all;
 rich than mammon for his single heir. 
his comforter he comfort; great in ruin,
 with unreluctant grandeur, give, not yield,
 his soul sublime; and close with his fate. 

how our heart burn within we at the scene! 
whence this brave bound over limit fix to man? 
his god sustain he in his final hour! 
his final hour bring glory to his god!
 man glory heaven vouchsafe to call she own. 
we gaze, we weep mix tear of grief and joy! 
amazement strike, devotion burst to flame! 
christian adore, and infidel believe! 

as some tall tower, or lofty mountain brow,
 detain the sun, illustrious from its height;
 while rise vapour and descend shade,
 with damp, and darkness, drown the spacious vale;
 undamp by doubt, undarkened by despair,
 Philander thus august rear his head,
 at that black hour which general horror shed
 on the low level of they inglorious throng:
 sweet peace, and heavenly hope, and humble joy,
 divine beam on his exalt soul,
 destruction gild, and crown he for the sky,
 with incommunicable lustre bright. 
