to — — with ARTHUR and Albina. 

1794. 

ah! if your eye shall ever these line survey,
 dismiss from thence its penetrate ray:
 let criticism then her distance keep,
 and dread justice then be lull to sleep:
 for, let whatever sentence be their due,
 i feel i can censure bear from you. 

ARTHUR and Albina. 

ah i! the yellow western sky turn pale,
 and leave the cheerless son of earth to mourn;
 and yet i hear not in the silent vale,
 a sound to tell i Arthur do return. 

ah, haste you hour! quick plume the loiter wing! 
bring back my hero, crown with glorious spoil! 
let bard on lofty harp his triumph sing,
 and loud applause repay successful toil! 

reward the flame, you great celestial power,
 the noble flame that in his bosom glow! 
inspire he, Druids, from your holy bower,
 with strength to conquer iron-breasted foe! 

with heighten vigour brace his nervous arm,
 and let his lance with tenfold fury fly,
 make he terrific by some potent charm,
 and add new lightning to his pierce eye! 

then may my lover gain unrivaled fame,
 the roman banner may less proud flow,
 then he may humble their detest name,
 and their high plume wave over a british brow! 

then may his chariot, wheel over the plain,
 hurl death and desolation all around,
 while his intrepid front appal their train,
 and make our proud invader bite the ground! 

but yet i hear no lively foot advance;
 no sound of triumph greet my listen ear! 
and i may carve this eagle-darting lance
 for one, who voice i never more shall hear! 

perhaps my vow have never reach the sky,
 nor hear'n, propitious, smile upon my prayer;
 and ah! to morrow crimson dawn may rise
 to plunge i in the horror of despair! 

yet well he know the dreadful spear to wield —
 alas! their fearful limb be fence with care:
 and, what can valour, when the extend shield
 may leave, so oft, his generous bosom bare? 

say, reverend Druids, can you bless in vain? 
can you in vain extend your spotless hand? 
will not heaven listen when its priest complain,
 and save its altar from unhallowed band? 

oh yes! i will fear no more! the sacred grove,
 that rear their untouched branch to the sky;
 beneath who shade its choose servant rove,
 hide from weak, unconsecrated eye:

beneath who shade the choral bard rehearse,
 pierce, with upraise eye, each mist that shroud,
 and, listen, catch the heaven-dictated verse,
 by air etherial waft from the cloud:

it never can be — but hark! i hear the sound
 of some one step; yet not the youth i love;
 he will have fly, and scarce touch the ground,
 not linger thus, with weary caution, move. 

the heavy wanderer approach nigh,
 but the drear darkness skreen he from my view:
 ah, gracious heaven! it be my Arthur sigh,
 which the unwilling breeze so faint blow. 

oh speak! inform i what i have to fear! 
speak, and relieve my doubt, tremble heart! 
to thy Albina, with a tongue sincere,
 a portion of thy wretchedness impart! ' 

 "sweet maid," reply the wound, die youth,
 in accent mournful, tremulous and slow,
 "yes, i will ever answer thou with truth,
" while yet the feeble tide of life shall flow. 

 "we make the haughty roman chief retire,
" the tower, sacrilegious eagle fly;
 "our bosom swell with more than mortal fire,
" when from the field indignant they withdraw. 

 "but ill bespeak my faint and languid tongue,
" the glow beauty of that joyful sight;
 "ill can my breast, with keen torture wring,
" dwell on the charm terror of the fight. 

 "to other then i leave the envy strain,
" which shall for age rend the british air;
 "nor will thy partial ear expect, in vain,
" to find the humble name of Arthur there,

 "i go, while now the victory be warm,
" the just reward of valour to obtain;
 "soon i return, clad in a noble form,
 "again to triumph, and again be slay. 

 "ah! then, my dear Albina, cease to grieve,
" nor at thy lover glorious fate repine;
 "for, though my present favour form i leave,
" this constant heart shall still be only thy. 

 "alas! even now i feel the icy hand
" of hasty death, press down my swell heart;
 "even now i hear a sweet aërial band,
" summon thy faithful Arthur to depart. 

 "let not thy tear a absent lover mourn,
" remember that he brave, noble die;
 "remember that he quick will return,
" and claim again his love, his destine bride. " 

as thus the warrior faint spirit flee,
 and part life stream forth at every vein,
 his quiver lip, in whisper, soft say,
 "remember, Arthur die to live again!" 

 "oh stay, dear youth!" the hapless maiden cry,
 "my best-loved Arthur, but one moment stay! 
" and close not yet those all-enlivening eye,
 "so late light at the torch of day. 

 "ah! yet once more, that look of tender love,
" of fond regret, my Arthur, let i view! 
 "let one more effort thy affection prove,
" and bid i once, once more, a long adieu. 

 "now, ere the moon withdraw her feeble light,
" open yet again on i thy fade eye! 
 "he hear not! memory have take her flight,
" and vanish with that last convulsive sigh. 

why do i variegate wreath prepare,
 "to pay the conqueror every honour due? 
" or, why, with fillet, bind my flow hair,
 "and tinge my arm of the bright azure hue? 

 "oh! must this constant bosom beat no more? 
" this skilful hand no more direct the spear? 
 "must lose Albina still her fate deplore,
" and ever drop the unavailing tear? 

 "must i no more that lovely face review,
" express each emotion of the mind? 
 "no more repeat a sweet sad adieu? 
" no more gay chaplet on his forehead bind? 

 "his forehead, high and fair, with martial grace,
" and bold, free curl of glossy chesnut crown;
 "the full, dark eye-brow which adorn his face,
" overwhelm foe with terror as he frown. 

 "his voice, though strong, harmonious clear,
" no more shall fill Albina with delight;
 "no more shall sooth her still-attentive ear,
" and make she fancy every sorrow light. 

 "farewell to love, to happiness, and joy! 
" yet will i cull the summer choice bloom;
 "funereal chaplet shall my time employ,
" and wither daily on my Arthur tomb. " 

as thus she mourn, with bitter woe oppress,
 a ray of light illumine all the grove,
 and a console voice the fair address,
 in the soft accent of parental love. 

though still she clasp her hero value corpse,
 she slow raise her languid, stream eye,
 and own astonishment resistless force,
 view the stranger with a wild surprise. 

the form be clad in robe of pure white,
 that sweep with solemn dignity the ground;
 contrast with the black gloom of night,
 which reign in awful majesty around. 

the silver beard do reverence demand,
 and tell she that a holy bard be there,
 who shrivel finger grasp a flame brand,
 which throw a lustre on the wave hair. 

his eye possess the brilliant fire of youth,
 unite with the wisdom of the sage;
 and speak, with the simple voice of truth,
 he blend the solemnity of age. 

 "arise! thou lovely of misfortune train,
" and cease these weak, despond tear to shed;
 "the soft effusion of thy grief restrain,
" which serve but to disturb the peaceful dead. 

 "the youth you mourn, far from these scene of woe,
" to world of never-ending joy be fly;
 "where his bless bosom with delight shall glow,
" and his fair temple wear a princely crown. 

 "ah then, presumptuous! question not the sky,
" nor more with vain lament his loss deplore;
 "attend to this, and cease your fruitless sigh,
" you soon shall meet where you can part no more. " 

awe-struck, his sacred wisdom she confess,
 which pour sweet consolation on her mind;
 she cross her blood-stained hand upon her breast,
 and bow her humble, grateful head, resign. 
