riddle.

by the same.

tear from the fruitful spot on which i grow,
i innocent unnumbered pain pursue;
pain more afflict, as from man they flow,
from parent man! for birth to man i owe.
sometime on spike of steel my nerve they rend,
sometime asunder split from end to end;
in boil cauldron now immerse i lie,
now doom the rage of dry fire to try:
there while in double torment scorch and drown,
fast tie i writhe the rigid stake around.
last their fierce hate its utmost effort try
with all barbarian pomp of sacrifice.
the purple fillet round my temple wreathe,
from every part the scent unguent breathe;
over my white lock the sacred flower be spread
while on the fatal block be place my head.
yet with fix constancy i bear my doom;
and constancy at last will overcome.
from all my trial i return at length,
my worth increase, my beauty, and my strength.
the suffer martyr thus in torment die,
in saint state more glorious to arise.
and now i reassume my native state,
my torturer now beneath their burden sweat,
slave in their turn to i, and think it pride
if on their subject neck i deign to ride.

yet still my filial duty i retain,
unchanged by honour, as unmoved by pain.
still to mankind a friend, i daily shed
my warm blessing on his parent head;
around he still with fond embrace twine,
as round the elm her tendril curl the vine.
nor quit he ever till he to rest repair,
and every morn renew my constant care.

ready alike on rich and poor to wait;
i suit myself to every different state.
with priest in whitish dress array i shine,
emblem of purity and truth divine.
his solemn face the doctor owe to i,
his solemn face, to which he owe his fee.
at bench, or bar, i add a dignity
to the upright sentence, or rhetoric plea;
hence without i no judge explain the law,
nor coif council plead the puzzle cause:
in full flood my bounty shower on they
profuse, descend to the garment hem.
gorgeous in silken garb i grace the beau;
and all around ambrosial fragrance throw;
nor less decorous, though with dust overspread,
when to the camp the valiant warrior lead,
gorgonian terror to each mien i add,
and still their weak part with care i shade.
