a disappointment.

on village green who smooth and well-worn sod,
 cross pathe, with many a gossip foot be tread;
 by cottage door where playful child run,
 and cat and cur sit bask in the sun;
 where over a earthen seat the thorn be bend,
 cross-armed and back to wall poor William lean. 
his bonnet all awry, his gather brow,
 his hang lip and lengthen visage show
 a mind but ill at ease. with motion strange
 his listless limb their wayward posture change;
 while many a crooked line and curious maze
 with clout shoe he on the sand portray. 
at length the half-chewed straw fall from his mouth,
 and to himself low speak the moody youth. 

 "how simple be the lad, and rest of skill,
 who think with love to fix a woman will! 
who every Sunday morn to please her sight,
 knot up his neck-cloth gay and hosen white;
 who for her pleasure keep his pocket bare,
 and half his wage spend on pedlar ware;
 when every niggard clown or dotard old,
 who hide in secret nook his oft-told gold,
 who field or orchard tempt, with all her pride,
 at little cost may win she for his bride! 
while all the meed her silly lover gain,
 be but the neighbour jeer for his pain. 
on Sunday last, when Susan banns be read,
 and i astonish sit with hang head,
 cold grow my shrink frame, and loose my knee,
 while every neighbour eye be fix on i. 
ah Sue! when last we work at hodge hay,
 and still at i you mock in wanton play —
 when last at fair, well please by chapman stand,
 you take the new-bought fare from my hand —
 when at old hobb you sing that song so gay,
'sweet William,' still the burden of the lay, —
 i little think, alas! the lot be cast,
 that thou shall be another bride at last:
 and have, when last we trip it on the green,
 and laugh at stiff-backed Rob, small thought i ween,
 ere yet another scanty month be fly
 to see thou wed to the hateful clown;
 ay, lucky churl! more gold thy pocket line;
 but do these shapely limb resemble thy,
 i will stay at home and tend the household gere,
 nor on the green with other lad appear. 
ay, lucky churl! no store thy cottage lack,
 and round thy barn thick stand the shelter stack,
 but do such feature coarse my visage grace,
 i will never budge the bonnet from my face. 
yet let it be; it shall not break my ease! 
he best deserve who do the maiden please. 
such silly cause no more shall give i pain,
 nor ever maiden cross my rest again. 
such grizzle suitor with their taste agree,
 and the black fiend may have they all for i! 

now through the village rise confuse sound,
 hoarse lad, and child shrill, and yelp hound. 
straight every housewife at her door be see,
 and pause hedger on their mattock lean. 
at every narrow lane and alley mouth,
 loud-laughing lass stand and joke youth. 
a bridal band trick out in colour gay,
 with minstrel blythe before to cheer the way,
 from cloud of curl dust that onward fly,
 in rural splendour break upon the eye. 
as in their way they hold so gay on,
 cap, bead, and button, glance to the sun,
 each village wag with eye of roguish cast,
 some maiden jog and vent the ready jest;
 while village toast the pass bell deride,
 and sober matron marvel at their pride. 
but William, head erect with settle brow,
 in sullen silence view the pass show;
 and oft he scratch his pate with careless grace,
 and scorn to pull the bonnet over his face;
 but do with steady look unaltered wait,
 till hindmost man have pass the churchyard gate,
 then turn he to his cot with visage flat,
 where honest lightfoot on the threshold sit. 
up leap the kindly beast his hand to lick,
 and for his pain receive a angry kick. 
loud shut the door with harsh and thunder din;
 the echo round their circle course begin. 
from cot to cot, church tower, and rocky dell,
 it grow amain with wide progressive swell,
 and lightfoot join the coil with loud and piteous yell. 
