a epistle from S. J. ESQ; in the country, to the right Hon. the lord Lovelace in town.

write in the year 1735. 

in day, my lord, when mother time,
though now grow old, be in her prime,
when Saturn first begin to rule,
and Jove be hardly come from school,
how happy be a country life!
how free from wickedness and strife!
then each man live upon his farm,
and think and do not mortal harm;
on mossy bank fair virgin sleep,
as harmless as the flock they keep;
then love be all they have to do,
and nymph be chaste, and swain be true.

but now, whatever poet write,
it be sure the case be alter quite,
virtue no more in rural plain,
or innocence, or peace remain;
but vice be in the cottage sound,
and country girl be oft unsound;
fierce party-rage each village fire,
with war of justice and squire;
attorney, for a barley straw,
whole age hamper folk in law;
and every neighbour in a flame
about their rate, or tithe, or game:
some quarrel for their hare and pigeon,
and some for difference in religion:
some hold their parson the best preacher,
the tinker some a better teacher;
these to the church they fight for, stranger,
have faith in nothing but her danger;
while those, a more believe people,
can swallow all thing — but a steeple.

but i, my lord, who, as you know,
care little how these matter go,
and equal detest the strife
and usual joy of country life,
have by good fortune little share
of its diversion, or its care;
for seldom i with squire unite,
who hunt all day, and drink all night;
nor reckon wonderful invite,
a quarter-session, or cockfighting;
but then no farm i occupy,
with sheep to rot and cow to die:
nor rage i much, or much despair,
though in my hedge i find a snare;
nor view i, with due admiration,
all the high honour here in fashion;
the great commission of the quorum,
terror to all who come before they;
militia scarlet, edge with gold,
or the white staff high-sheriff hold;
the representative caress,
the judge bow, the bishop blessing.
nor can i for my soul delight
in the dull feast of neighbour knight,
who, if you send three day before,
in white glove meet you at the door,
with superfluity of breed
first make you sick, and then with feed.
or if with ceremony cloy,
you will next time such plague avoid,
and visit without previous notice,
JOHN, JOHN, a coach! — i can think who it be,
my lady cry, who spy your coach,
ere you the avenue approach;
lord, how unlucky! — washing-day!
and all the man be in the hay!
entrance to gain be something hard,
the dog all bark, the gate be bar;
the yard with line of linen cross,
the hall-door's lock, the key be lose:
these difficulty all overcome,
we reach at length the drawing-room,
then there be such trample over-head,
madam you will swear be bring to bed;
miss in a hurry burst the lock,
to get clean sleeve to hide her smock;
the servant run, the pewter clatter,
my lady dress, call, and chatter;
the cook-maid rave for want of butter,
pig squeak, fowl scream, and green goose flutter.
now after three hour tedious wait,
on all our neighbour fault debate,
and have nine time view the garden,
in which there be nothing worth a farthing,
in come my lady, and the pudden:
you will excuse, sir, — on a sudden —
then, that we may have four and four,
the bacon, fowl, and colly-flower
their ancient unity divide,
the top one grace, one each side;
and by and by the second course
come lag like a distance horse:
a salver then to church and king,
the butler sweat, the glass ring;
the cloth remove, the toast go round,
bawdy and politics abound;
and as the knight more tipsy wax,
we damn all minister and tax.
at last the ruddy sun quite sink,
the coachman tolerable drink,
whirl over hillock, rut, and stone,
enough to dislocate one bone,
we home return, a wondrous token
of heaven kind care, with limb unbroken.
afflict we not, you god, though sinner,
with many day like this, or dinner!

but if civility thus teaze i,
nor business, nor diversion please i,
you will ask, my lord, how time i spend?
i answer, with a book, or friend:
the circulate hour divide
betwixt read, walk, eat, ride:
but book be still my high joy,
these early please, and late cloy.
sometime over distant clime i stray,
by guide experience teach the way;
the wonder of each region view,
from freeze Lapland to Peru;
bind over rough sea, and mountain bare,
yet never forsake my elbow chair.
sometime some fame historian pen
recall past age back again,
where all i see, through every page,
be but how man with senseless rage
each other rob, destroy, and burn,
to serve a priest, or statesman turn
though load with a different aim,
yet always ass much the fame.
sometime i view with much delight,
divine their holy gamecock fight;
here faith and work at variance set,
strive hard who shall the victory get;
presbytery and episcopacy
there fight so long, it will amaze you:
here free-will hold a fierce dispute
with reprobation absolute;
there sense kick transubstantiation,
and reason peck at revelation.
with learned Newton now i fly
over all the roll orb on high,
visit new world, and for a minute
this old one scorn, and all that be in it:
and now with labour Boyle i trace
nature through every wind maze,
the latent quality admire
of vapour, water, air, and fire:
with please admiration see
matter surprise subtlety;
as how the small lamp display,
for mile around, its scatter ray;
or how (the case still more to explain)
 a fart that weigh not half a grain,
the atmosphere will oft perfume
of a whole spacious drawing-room.

sometime i pass a whole long day
in happy indolence away,
in fond meditate over
past pleasure, and in hope more:
or wander through the field and wood,
and garden bathe in circle flood,
there bloom flower with rapture view,
and sparkle gem of morning dew,
whence in my mind idea rise
of caelia cheek, and Chloe eye.

it be thus, my lord, i, free from strife,
spend a inglorious country life;
these be the joy i still pursue,
when absent from the town and you:
thus pass long summer sun away,
busy idle, calm gay;
nor great, nor mean, nor rich, nor poor,
not have much, or wish more;
except that you, when weary grow
of all the folly of the town,
and see, in all public place,
the same vain fop and paint face,
will sometime kind condescend
to visit a dull country friend:
here you will be ever sure to meet
a hearty welcome, though no treat,
one who have nothing else to do,
but to divert himself and you:
a house, where quiet guard the door,
no rural wit smoke, drink and roar;
choice book, safe horse, wholesome liquour,
clean girl, backgammon, and the vicar.
