[nereid:] eclogue vii.

Stur.  

the wave be still, and the unclouded day
 smile on the murmur sea with joyous light. 
begin the song, while wanton dolphin play,
 and the bright sun, and please calm invite. 

hip. 

happy the youth, who beauteous Myra love,
 no nymph so nimble swim, so graceful move. 
when to soft word she tune her artful tongue,
 the wind themselves will listen to her song. 

Stur.  

Anthis i see, and to my envy eye
 the circle blood with conscious ardour fly. 
when Anthis smile joy fill the swell vein,
 nor winter-calms, nor summer gentle rain
 be half so grateful to the fish swain. 
her rise breast be white as polish shell,
 and in each part a different beauty dwell. 

hip. 

when Myra frown, though all the sky be fair,
 the cloud return, and thick the moisten air;
 the smile heaven, when ever she look serene,
 put on its azure, and the sea its green. 

Stur.  

when first a glance from galatea eye
 pierce through my heart, and do my soul surprise,
 amaze i fall —

beauty it self too powerful will affright;
 no lightning move so swift, or shine so bright. 

hip. 

the crampfish touch benumb with sudden pain,
 and shiver horror strike through every vein. 
but by one distant look from she i love
 my blood grow stagnate, and i stand unmoved. 

Stur.  

we curse the dog, and loath the shapeless bat
 (as sad forerunner of unlucky fate)
 these, we deform, and frightful monster call,
 but they (each in their kind) be beauteous all;
 fond we love, and without reason hate,
 and worship idol, which our self create. 

hip. 

beauty a shine spark of heavenly fire,
 that kindle in the soul immense desire;
 it draw with please force the will mind;
 beauty divine like this we seldom find:
 few thing be true fair, though perfect in their kind. 

Stur.  

who Myra love, when Clytie appear,
 course tasteless thornback to the sole prefer. 
i her pale cheek, and languid look despise;
 well may she kill; for death be in her eye. 

hip. 

i hate the full-cheeked blouse, and flush maid,
 who angry red make every youth afraid:
 such flame nymph want every real grace,
 they cool our passion, while they burn our face. 

Stur.  

envy be pale, and pale be sad despair. 
can Myra then be pale, and yet be fair? 
the water-lilly be a faintish sweet. 
i know a island grove, where nereid meet;
 there blush bed of beauteous rose grow,
 from who diffusive smell in fragrant circle flow. 

hip. 

will Myra yield to love, will she comply,
 her cheek will colour with a fresh die. 
but though even now she want no graceful charm,
 her voice kill farther than her eye can harm. 
Nereus himself above the wave appear,
 she sing — and he with secret pleasure hear,
 and listen smile, and stroke his hoary beard. 
while Doris stand afar, and jealous grow,
 with watchful eye she look, and fear what may ensue. 

Stur.  

so have i hear one praise the chatter pie,
 and swear the Coots with artful music cry:
 but hark — even now i hear some distant song. 

hip. 

it be myra voice; i know her warble tongue. 
move, sturio, soft on; then sudden rise,
 and in her wanton song the easy nymph surprise. 
