[queen MARY.]

the first part of queen MARY.

the follow dedication design for — ESQ; decease.

it be under sail — the barge — to row they over,
 where beauty queen be captive long before. 
there have the muse with pleasure lead the way;
 for there, in autumn, now she love to stray:
 there on the shore — where oft the queen at night,
 have lonely walk — revolve her sad fate;
 the tree — the wall — the ruin, all conspire —
 the dome sequester — wake poetic fire:
 there oft the queen, as the chaste dame, have weave
 her fatal story and their fatal love;
 young gordon doom — poor chatilard despair,
 by Murray guile one common fate they share;
 her injure honour — and her infant son,
 distract thought! 
from cruel subject turn her thought away,
 to mild scene her fancy steal astray,
 to peace — to justice — bethlehem shepherd king,
 his dog, his sheep, his crook, may there be see,
 in well choose colour, — work each scene with ease,
 as nature teach she all the art to please. 
kind nature gift — her unmatched charm to prove,
 the muse and grace here have interwove
 their various skill. 

tune to the harp, the muse oft have sing,
 in mournful strain, her story thus begin:
 her infant reign — elis'beth deadly hate,
 the many trouble prelude to her fate;
 a fate uncommon — a behead queen,
 and all the various scene that intervene. 
though drive from home, in Henry court she find
 each pleasure wait she, with politeness crown;
 belove, adore, her dawn charm expand,
 and taste and genius lead her hand in hand. 

o heavenly Muse! her early sorrow tell,
 let truth and pity clear her injure fame,
 which long conceal, the bright now to shine,
 to share the pleasure — and the praise be thy. 
no father care her infant year to guide,
 for death untimely — in the tomb have lay,
 by grief of heart — and factious time oppress,
 but more than all, by solway loss distress. 
what can the queen in these disastrous time? 
she seek a refuge in more temperate clime. 
to gallia king, the royal charge convey,
 till time and wisdom civil discord lay. 
no easy task — where blind mistake zeal,
 and different tenet but increase the flame,
 religion pure,
 while mortal weak but prostitute thy name. 

fortune for a time now promise fair,
 and Henry, faithful, use his utmost care
 to form her mind — each science to impart,
 while thus our beauty gain each youthful heart;
 well please both nation mutual to entwine,
 and wed to Francis this our bloom queen. 
what do ambition? and aspire pride? 
two regal sceptre to adorn the bride
 can not suffice — assume fair England name,
 and royal arm — which the proud dame
 can never forget — who firm and cautious reign
 make it unsafe for mary then to claim
 her natural right, nor the young queen be blame,
 by whomso'er that fatal counsel frame. 

must still your queen — resentful thus to i,
 to bar my passage through the british sea. 
unkind condolence! in a perplex time,
 when thus sedition rend my native isle. 
scarce have i mourn my much love mother death
 when Henry too — resign his die breath. 
more than a parent! i his great care,
 and part sigh, for i prefer his prayer,
 be it not hard? o Muse, forbear to tell,
 her grow sorrow — thou know they well. 

the second part of queen MARY.

ah! how unfeeling, he demand her crown,
 her country to resign. relentless Lindsay,
 do ever real beauty touch a heart like thy? 
impossible — to thus insult — while spirit,
 nobleness of mind, and young ambition,
 all flutter round the imprison queen
 yet weep for her son! for he she dread. 
you ruin wall! with ivy mantle over,
 and winter snow, the emblem of her fate,
 which all extreme have know — nor hope — nor spring
 nor summer sun return. — but i will plant
 a thousand shrub and tree to shade her injure name,
 invite the muse! to wander with i there,
 and open gay field of new idea. 
power of the mind! sovereign of the soul,
 o! why deny that wondrous art to i? 
Titian — Rubens — Raphael — finish hand,
 Hamilton! here be thy Lucretia,
 over all her die frame, as life just flee;
 the barbarous poniard drop her sacred blood;
 from Brutus arm! behold the fate of Rome,
 avenge his country on the Tarquin race. 
what differ fate! while all the world admire
 thy honour name — chaste — pure as light, as truth,
 to Mary load of grief — to blast her fame! 
Rome by one death — from tyranny be free,
 a tyrant hope to reign in Mary stead. 

of all my former ill, the queen may say,
 and soon to nature i that debt shall pay. 
my injure shade! shall mourn my blast fame:
 my son perhaps shall curse his mother name;
 o! cruel thought — if ever my darnley life
 avenge the deed — if ever that name be dear,
 by these bleak mountain, and this lonely isle,
 the trouble water, and the wind that blow,
 or by that power superior to the storm,
 attest my innocence. too soon the seed
 of jealousy be sow — that fatal bond;
 associate of their guilt — to be deceive
 to wed his murderer! ah! have i die,
 bury in the grave, ever thus dishonour. 
o! all you faithful dame for truth renowned,
 be i unworthy to be name with they? 

— have she, as thou! Lucretia — dare —
 but here the soul! superior by her faith,
 triumph — and for her country and her son,
 endure, in misery, all her cruel fate,
 accurse marriage! — deep lay malice. o mary! 
their vill'nous design — be here accomplish, —
 and stab thy fame! but time shall bring to light
 their dark deed — and heal thy wound name. 
— avaunt thou! — Murray, Morton, Bothwell,
 and thou Elisabeth, great as a queen,
 but deadly in thy hate — as desperate by thy love. 
mary and Essex, victim of thy ire,
 bright star that fall by thy malignant breath,
 yet, yet i weep for thou — thy woman weakness,
 and thy jealous mind. 
o they be punishment enough — forgive,
 forgive, o mighty god! forgive. 

o character! thou sacred name profane,
 or gain so dear — by those who court thou
 only for a name, — and in fair show
 appear what they art not. fair rectitude,
 be thou alone my wish — retire and silent. 
there, the motive of my heart to know,
 and leave to other — what? as they deserve
 a name! shall i ever gain thou by one restless thought,
 or popular deed — to strive — to vie,
 or to supplant another. 
to sacrifice my mind, my peace,
 — — — — she be go. 
no rather,
 suffer all — unknown — forsake — unminded,
 or mind only when again to take
 the little i have get. whence be that envy
 and that jealous eye? to be what? yes. 
let they. o happiness, can thou depend
 on aught — but truth, unsullied rectitude of thought,
 and virtue fair, — with kind benevolence,
 and humble mind reflect how poor and weak
 we be in ourselves. 

come, quiet thought, and leave the giddy restless
 vain pursuit of earthly care — o come,
 and by yond brook where dance sun beam
 wander through the tree — invite my muse,
 or catch yond awful arch — from rock to rock
 where dash water burst in break fall,
 or in the shady break where murmur rill,
 in wild meander stray from wood to wood,
 or listen to the evening song retire
 where scarce a breeze be whisper through the scene. 
who can behold yond glorious orb that gild the sky,
 and not adore the hand, author of nature,
 who in his work sublime paint out his power;
 in wisdom all express, at awful distance, view
 the mighty mind — the thought, contrivance,
 and the powerful word — and as the sun go down,
 come, evening mild — and with thy soften dew
 or gentle rain refresh the earth,
 mother of all the sustenance to man. 

chorus.

i 

light fame — no more i thou attend,
 no more thy airy flight pursue;
 light fame no more my soul can move,
 no more thy freak and whim i heed. 

ii.

light fame — no more thy voice i will hear,
 thy voice i think how sweet to i;
 light fame, i think thy voice be true,
 but soon it change, how false, how wild? 

iii.

light fame — no more my soul can move,
 thy freak and whim she may neglect. 
light fame — no more my soul can move,
 in conscious worth shall find relief. 

nightingale.

o! can my sweet plaint lull to rest,
 soften one sigh — as thou dream,
 i will sit the whole night on thy tree,
 and sing, — — sing, — —
 with the thorn at my breast. 
