the widow gordon petition to the right Hon. the lady Carteret.

weary with long attendance on the court,
 you, madam, be the wretch last resort. 
eternal king! if here in vain i cry,
 where shall the fatherless and widow fly? 

how bless be they, who sleep among the dead,
 nor hear their children pierce cry for bread! 

when your love offspring give your soul delight,
 reflect how i be irksome to my sight:
 o think, how must a wretched mother grieve,
 who hear the want she never can relieve! 

a evil prey upon my helpless son,
 (how many way the wretched be undo!) 
cruel distemper! to assault his sight,
 and rob he of his only joy, the light! 
his anguish make my weary eye overflow,
 and load i with unutterable woe. 

no friendly voice my lonely mansion cheer;
 all fly the infection of the widow tear:
 even those, who pity ease my want with bread,
 be now, o sad reverse! my great dread. 
my mournful story will no more prevail,
 and every hour i dread a dismal jail:
 i start at each imaginary sound,
 and horror have encompass i around. 

tremble, you daughter, who at ease recline,
 lest you shall know a misery like i. 
you now, unmoved, can hear the wretched moan;
 and feel no want, yourself oppress by none;
 fly from the sight of woe you will not share,
 and leave the helpless orphan to despair. 
but know, that dreadful hour be draw near,
 when you will be treat, as you have act here:
 to you no more the wretched shall complain;
 it will be your turn to weep, and sue in vain. 

not so the fair, with godlike mercy bless,
 who feel another anguish in her breast;
 who never hear the wretched sigh in vain,
 herself distress till she relieve their pain. 

this fame report, fair Carteret, of you;
 this bless report encourage i to sue. 
o angel-goodness, hear, and ease my moan,
 nor let your mercy fail in i alone! 
so at the last tribunal will i stand,
 with my poor orphan, place on either hand;
 there, with my cry, my saviour i will assail;
 (for at his bar the widow tear prevail)
 that she, who make the fatherless her care,
 the fullness of celestial joy may share;
 that she a crown of glory may receive,
 who snatch i from destruction, and the grave. 
