[the complaint: or, night-thought on life, death and immortality.]

night vii. be the second part of the infidel reclaim: contain the nature, proof, and importance of immortality.

content of night vii.

heaven give the needful, but neglect, call. 
what day, what hour, but knock at human heart,
 to wake the soul to sense of future scene? 
death stand like mercurys in every way,
 and kind point we to our journey end. 
pope, who can make immortal! be thou dead? 
i give thou joy: nor will i take my leave,
 so soon to follow. man but dive in death;
 Dives from the sun, in fair day to rise:
 the grave his subterranean road to bliss. 
yes, infinite indulgence plan it so:
 through various part our glorious story run;
 time give the preface, endless age unroll
 the volume (never unrolled) of human fate. 

this, earth and sky already have proclaim. 
the world be a prophecy of world to come;
 and who what god foretell (who speak in thing,
 still loud than in word) shall dare deny? 
if nature argument appear too weak,
 turn a new leaf, and strong read in man. 
if man sleep on, untaught by what he see,
 can he prove infidel to what he feel? 
he who blind thought futurity deny,
 unconscious bear, Bellerophon! like thou,
 his own indictment; he condemn himself:
 who read his bosom, read immortal life;
 or nature, there, impose on her son,
 have write fable; man be make a lie. 

why discontent for ever harbour there? 
incurable consumption of our peace! 
resolve i, why the cottager and king, —
 he who sea-severed realm obey, and he
 who steal his whole dominion from the waste,
 repel winter blast with mud and straw, —
 disquiet alike, draw sigh for sigh,
 in fate so distant, in complaint so near. 

be it that thing terrestrial can content? 
deep in rich pasture will thy flock complain? 
not so; but to their master be deny
 to share their sweet serene. man, ill at ease
 in this, not his own place, this foreign field,
 where nature fodder he with other food
 than be ordain his crave to suffice,
 poor in abundance, famish at a feast,
 sigh on for something more, when most enjoy. 

be heaven then kind to thy flock than thou? 
not so: thy pasture rich, but remote;
 in part, remote: for that remot part
 man bleat from instinct, though, perhaps, debauch
 by sense, his reason sleep, nor dream the cause. 
the cause how obvious, when his reason wake! 
his grief be but his grandeur in disguise;
 and discontent be immortality. 

shall son of ether, shall the blood of heaven,
 set up their hope on earth, and stable here,
 with brutal acquiescence in the mire? 
Lorenzo, no! they shall be noble pain;
 the glorious foreigner, distress, shall sigh
 on throne; and thou congratulate the sigh:
 man misery declare he bear for bliss:
 his anxious heart assert the truth i sing,
 and give the sceptic in his head the lie. 

our head, our heart, our passion, and our power,
 speak the same language; call we to the sky. 
unripened these, in this inclement clime,
 scarce rise above conjecture and mistake;
 and for this land of trifle those too strong
 tumultuous rise, and tempest human life:
 what prize on earth can pay we for the storm? 
meet object for our passion heaven ordain,
 object that challenge all their fire, and leave
 no fault but in defect. bless heaven! avert
 a bound ardour for unbounded bliss! 
o for a bliss unbounded! far beneath
 a soul immortal be a mortal joy. 
nor be our power to perish immature;
 but, after feeble effort here, beneath
 a bright sun, and in a noble soil,
 transplant from this sublunary bed,
 shall flourish fair, and put forth all their bloom. 

reason progressive, instinct be complete:
 swift instinct leap; slow reason feeble climb. 
brute soon their zenith reach; their little all
 flow in at once; in age they no more
 can know, or do, or covet, or enjoy. 
be man to live coeval with the sun,
 the patriarch pupil will be learn still;
yet, die, leave his lesson half unlearnt. 
man perish in advance, as if the sun
 shall set ere noon, in eastern ocean drown;
 if fit, with dim illustrious to compare,
 the sun meridian with the soul of man. 
to man why, step-dame nature, so severe? 
why throw aside thy masterpiece half-wrought,
 while mean effort thy last hand enjoy? 
or, if abortive poor man must die,
 nor reach what reach he may, why die in dread? 
why curse with foresight, wise to misery? 
why of his proud prerogative the prey? 
why less pre-eminent in rank than pain? 
his immortality alone can tell;
 full ample fund to balance all amiss,
 and turn the scale in favour of the just! 

his immortality alone can solve
 that dark of enigma, human hope;
 of all the dark, if at death we die. 
hope, eager hope, they assassin of our joy,
 all present blessing tread under foot,
 be scarce a mild tyrant than despair. 
with no past toil content, still plan new,
 hope turn we over to death alone for ease. 
possession, why more tasteless than pursuit? 
why be a wish far dear than a crown? 
that wish accomplish, why the grave of bliss? 
because, in the great future bury deep,
 beyond our plan of empire and renown,
 lie all that man with ardour shall pursue;
 and he who make he, bend he to the right. 

man heart they almighty to the future set,
 by secret and inviolable spring;
 and make his hope his sublunary joy. 
man heart eat all thing, and be hungry still:
 "more, more!"the glutton cry: for something new
 so rage appetite, if man can mount,
 he will descend. he starve on the possess. 
hence, the world master, from ambition spire,
 in caprea plunge, and dive beneath the brute. 
in that rank sty why wallow empire son
 supreme? because he can no high fly;
 his riot be ambition in despair. 

old Rome consult bird; Lorenzo! thou,
 with more success, the flight of hope survey;
 of restless hope, for ever on the wing. 
high-perched over every thought that falcon sit,
 to fly at all that rise in her sight;
 and, never stoop but to mount again
 next moment, she betray her aim mistake,
 and own her quarry lodge beyond the grave. 

there shall it fail we, (it must fail we there,
 if being fail,) more mournful riddle rise,
 and virtue vie with hope in mystery. 
why virtue? where its praise, its being flee? 
virtue be true self-interest pursue:
 what true self-interest of quite mortal man? 
to close with all that make he happy here. 
if vice (as sometime) be our friend on earth,
 then vice be virtue; it be our sovereign good. 
in self-applause be virtue golden prize;
 no self-applause attend it on thy scheme. 
whence self-applause? from conscience of the right. 
and what be right, but mean of happiness? 
no mean of happiness when virtue yield:
 that basis fail, fall the building too,
 and lay in ruin every virtuous joy. 

the rigid guardian of a blameless heart,
 so long revere, so long repute wise,
 be weak; with rank knight-errantries overrun. 
why beat thy bosom with illustrious dream
 of self-exposure, laudable and great,
 of gallant enterprise, and glorious death? 
die for thy country? — thou romantic fool! 
seize, seize the plank thyself, and let she sink. 
thy countryl what to thou? — the godhead, what,
 (i speak with awe!) though he shall bid thou bleed? 
if, with thy blood, thy final hope be spill,
 nor can omnipotence reward the blow,
 be deaf; preserve thy being; disobey. 

nor be it disobedience: know, Lorenzo! 
whatever they almighty subsequent command,
 his first command be this: — "man, love thyself."
in this alone, free-agent be not free. 
existence be the basis, bliss the prize:
 if virtue cost existence, it be a crime,
 bold violation of our law supreme,
 black suicide; though nation, which consult
 their gain at thy expense, resound applause. 

since virtue recompense be doubtful here,
 if man die whole, well may we demand,
 why be man suffer to be good in vain? 
why, to be good in vain, be man enjoin? 
why, to be good in vain, be man betray? 
betray by traitor lodge in his own breast,
 by sweet complacency from virtue feel? 
why whisper nature lie on virtue part? 
or if blind instinct (which assume the name
 of sacred conscience) play the fool in man,
 why reason make accomplice in the cheat? 
why be the wise loud in her praise? 
can man by reason beam be lead astray? 
or, at his peril, imitate his god? 
since virtue sometime ruin we on earth,
 or both be true, or man survive the grave. 

or man survive the grave, or own, Lorenzo,
 thy boast supreme a wild absurdity. 
dauntless thy spirit: coward be thy scorn. 
grant man immortal, and thy scorn be just. 
the man immortal, rational brave,
 dare rush on death — because he can die. 
but if man lose all when life be lose,
 he live a coward, or a fool expire. 
a dare infidel, (and such there be,
 from pride, example, lucre, rage, revenge,
 or pure heroical defect of thought,)
 of all earth madman, most deserve a chain. 

when to the grave we follow the renowned
 for valour, virtue, science, all we love,
 and all we praise; for worth, who noontide beam,
 enable we to think in high style,
 mend our idea of ethereal power;
 dream we that lustre of the moral world
 go out in stench, and rottenness the close? 
why be he wise to know, and warm to praise,
 and strenuous to transcribe in human life,
 the mind almighty? can it be, that fate,
 just when the lineament begin to shine,
 and dawn the deity, shall snatch the draught,
 with night eternal blot it out, and give
 the sky alarm, lest angel too may die? 

if human soul, why not angelic too
 extinguish? and a solitary god,
 over ghastly ruin, frown from his throne? 
shall we this moment gaze on god in man? 
the next, lose man for ever in the dust? 
from dust we disengage, or man mistake;
 and there, where least his judgement fear a flaw. 
wisdom and worth how bold he commend! 
wisdom and worth be sacred name; revered,
 where not embrace; applaud, deify! 
why not compassion too? if spirit die,
 both be calamity; inflict both
 to make we but more wretched: wisdom eye
 acute, for what? to spy more misery;
 and worth, so recompense, new-point their sting. 
or man surmount the grave, or gain be loss,
 and worth exalt humble we the more. 
thou will not patronize a scheme that make
 weakness and vice the refuge of mankind. 

 "have virtue, then, no joy?"— yes, joy dear-bought. 
talk never so long, in this imperfect state,
 virtue and vice be at eternal war. 
virtue a combat; and who fight for nought,
 or for precarious or for small reward? 
who virtue self-reward so loud resound,
 will take degree angelic here below,
 and virtue, while they compliment, betray,
 by feeble motive and unfaithful guard. 
the crown, they unfading crown, her soul inspire:
 it be that, and that alone, can countervail
 the body treachery, and the world assault:
 on earth poor pay our famish virtue die. 
truth incontestable, in spite of all
 a Bayle have preach, or a Voltaire believe! 

in man, the more we dive, the more we see
 heaven signet stamp a immortal make. 
dive to the bottom of his soul, the base
 sustain all, what find we? knowledge, love. 
as light and heat essential to the sun,
 these to the soul. and why, if soul expire? 
how little lovely here! how little know! 
small knowledge we dig up with endless toil;
 and love unfeigned may purchase perfect hate. 
why starve, on earth, our angel-appetite,
 while brutal be indulge their fulsome fill? 
be then capacity divine confer,
 as a mock diadem, in savage sport,
 rank insult of our pompous poverty,
 which reap but pain from seem claim so fair? 
in future age lie no redress? and shut
 eternity the door on our complaint? 
if so, for what strange end be mortal make! 
the worst to wallow, and the best to weep;
 the man who merit most, must most complain. 
can we conceive a disregard in heaven,
 what the worst perpetrate, or best endure? 

this can be. to love, and know, in man
 be boundless appetite, and boundless power:
 and these demonstrate boundless object too. 
object, power, appetite, heaven suit in all;
 nor, nature through, ever violate this sweet,
 eternal concord on her tuneful string. 
be man the sole exception from her law? 
eternity strike off from human hope,
 (i speak with truth, but veneration too,)
 man be a monster, the reproach of heaven,
 a stain, a dark impenetrable cloud
 on nature beauteous aspect; and deform,
 (amaze blot!) deform she with her lord. 
if such be man allotment, what be heaven? 
or own the soul immortal, or blaspheme. 

or own the soul immortal, or invert
 all order. go, mock-majesty! go, man! 
and bow to thy superior of the stall;
 through every scene of sense superior far:
 they graze the turf untilled; they drink the stream
 unbrewed, and ever full, and unembittered
 with doubt, fear, fruitless hope, regret, despair;
 mankind peculiar! reason precious dower! 
no foreign clime they ransack for their robe;
 nor brother cite to the litigious bar. 
their good be good entire, unmixed, unmarred;
 they find a paradise in every field,
 on bough forbid, where no curse hang:
 their ill no more than strike the sense; unstretch
 by previous dread, or murmur in the rear:
 when the worst come, it come unfeared; one stroke
 begin and end their woe: they die but once;
 bless, incommunicable privilege! for which
 proud man, who rule the globe, and read the star,
 philosopher or hero, sigh in vain. 

account for this prerogative in brute. 
no day, no glimpse of day, to solve the knot,
 but what beam on it from eternity. 
o sole and sweet solution! that untie
 the difficult, and soften the severe;
 the cloud on nature beauteous face dispel;
 restore bright order; cast the brute beneath;
 and re-enthrones we in supremacy
 of joy, even here. admit immortal life,
 and virtue be knight-errantry no more:
 each virtue bring in hand a golden dower,
 far rich in reversion; hope exult,
 and, though much bitter in our cup be throw,
 predominate, and give the taste of heaven. 
o wherefore be the deity so kind? 
astonish beyond astonishment! 
heaven our reward — for heaven enjoy below. 

still unsubdued thy stubborn heart? — for there
 the traitor lurk, who doubt the truth i sing. 
reason be guiltless! will alone rebel. 
what, in that stubborn heart if i shall find
 new, unexpected witness against thou? 
ambition, pleasure, and the love of gain! 
can thou suspect that these, which make the soul
 the slave of earth, shall own her heir of heaven? 
can thou suspect, what make we disbelieve
 our immortality, shall prove it sure? 

first, then, ambition summon to the bar. 
ambition "shame, extravagance, disgust,
 and inextinguishable nature,"speak. 
each much depose: hear they in their turn. 

thy soul, how passionate fond of fame! 
how anxious that fond passion to conceal! 
we blush, detect in design on praise,
 though for best deed, and from the best of man;
 and why? because immortal. art divine
 have make the body tutor to the soul;
 heaven kind give our blood a moral flow;
 bid it ascend the glow cheek, and there
 upbraid that little heart inglorious aim,
 which stoop to court a character from man;
 while over we in tremendous judgement sit
 far more than man, with endless praise and blame. 

ambition boundless appetite out-speaks
 the verdict of its shame. when soul take fire
 at high presumption of their own desert,
 one age be poor applause; the mighty shout,
 the thunder by the live few begin,
 late time must echo; world unborn, resound. 
we wish our name eternal to live:
 wild dream! which never have haunt human thought
 have not our nature be eternal too. 
instinct point out a interest in hereafter;
 but our blind reason see not where it lie;
 or, see, give the substance for the shade. 

fame be the shade of immortality,
 and in itself a shadow. soon as catch,
 contemn; it shrink to nothing in the grasp. 
consult they ambitious, — it be ambition cure. 
 "and be this all?"cried Caesar, at his height,
 disgust. this third proof ambition bring
 of immortality: the first in fame,
 observe he near, your envy will abate:
 shame at the disproportion vast between
 the passion and the purchase, he will sigh
 at such success, and blush at his renown. 
and why? because far rich prize invite
 his heart; far more illustrious glory call;
 it call in whisper, yet the deaf hear. 

and can ambition a four proof supply? 
it can, and strong than the former three;
 yet quite overlook by some repute wise. 
though disappointment in ambition pain,
 and though success disgust, yet still,
 in vain we strive to pluck it from our heart;
 by nature plant for the noble end. 
absurd the fame advice to Pyrrhus give,
 more praise than ponder; specious, but unsound:
 soon that hero sword the world have quell,
 than reason his ambition. man must soar. 
a obstinate activity within,
 a insuppressive spring, will toss he up,
 in spite of Fortune load. not king alone,
 each villager have his ambition too;
 no sultan proud than his fetter slave. 
slave build their little babylon of straw,
 echo the proud assyrian in their heart,
 and cry, "behold the wonder of my might!"
and why? because immortal as their lord:
 and soul immortal must for ever heave
 at something great; the glitter, or the gold;

the praise of mortal, or the praise of heaven. 
nor absolute vain be human praise,
 when human be support by divine. 
i will introduce Lorenzo to himself:
 pleasure and pride (bad master) share our heart. 
as love of pleasure be ordain to guard
 and feed our body, and extend our race;
 the love of praise be plant to protect
 and propagate the glory of the mind. 
what be it but the love of praise inspire,
 mature, refine, embellish, exalt,
 earth happiness? from that the delicate,
 the grand, the marvellous, of civil life. 
want and convenience, under-worker, lie
 the basis, on which love of glory build. 
nor be thy life, o virtue! less in debt
 to praise, thy secret stimulate friend. 
be man not proud, what merit shall we miss! 
pride make the virtue of the pagan world. 
praise be the salt that season right to man,
 and whet his appetite for moral good. 
thirst of applause be virtue second guard;
 reason her first; but reason want a aid;
 our private reason be a flatterer;
 thirst of applause call public judgement in,
 to poise our own, to keep a even scale,
 and give endanger virtue fair play. 

here a five proof arise, strong still:
 why this so nice construction of our heart;
 these delicate morality of sense;
 this constitutional reserve of aid
 to succour virtue, when our reason fail;
 if virtue — keep alive by care and toil,
 and oft the mark of injury on earth,
 when labour to maturity, (its bill
 of discipline and pain unpaid,) — must die? 
why freight rich to dash against a rock? 
be man to perish when most fit to live,
 o how misspent be all these stratagem,
 by skill divine inweave in our frame! 
where be heaven holiness and mercy flee? 
laugh heaven at once at virtue and at man? 
if not, why that discourage, this destroy? 

thus far ambition. what say avarice? 
this her chief maxim, which have long be thy:
 "the wise and wealthy be the same."i grant it. 
to store up treasure with incessant toil, —
 this be man province, this his high praise,
 to this great end keen instinct sting he on. 
to guide that instinct, reason! be thy charge;
 it be thy to tell we where true treasure lie:
 but, reason fail to discharge her trust,
 or to the deaf discharge it in vain,
 a blunder follow; and blind industry,
 gall by the spur, but stranger to the course,
 (the course where stake of more than gold be win,)
 o'erload, with the care of distant age,
 the jade spirit of the present hour,
 provide for a eternity below. 

 "thou shall not covet," be a wise command;
 but bound to the wealth the sun survey:
 look farther, the command stand quite reverse,
 and avarice be a virtue most divine. 
be faith a refuge for our happiness? 
most sure. and be it not for reason too? 
nothing this world unriddle, but the next. 
whence inextinguishable thirst of gain? 
from inextinguishable life in man. 
man, if not mean, by worth, to reach the sky,
 have want wing to fly so far in guilt. 
sour grape, i grant, ambition, avarice;
 yet still their root be immortality. 
these its wild growth so bitter, and so base,
 (pain and reproach!) religion can reclaim,
 refine, exalt, throw down their poisonous lee,
 and make they sparkle in the bowl of bliss. 

see, the third witness laugh at bliss remote,
 and false promise a Eden here:
 truth she shall speak for once, though prone to lie,
 a common cheat, and pleasure be her name. 
to pleasure never be Lorenzo deaf;
 then hear she now, now first thy real friend. 

since nature make we not more fond than proud
 of happiness, (whence hypocrite in joy,
 maker of mirth, artificer of smile!) 
why shall the joy most poignant sense afford
 burn we with blush, and rebuke our pride? —
 those heaven-born blush tell we man descend,
 even in the zenith of his earthly bliss. 
shall reason take her infidel repose,
 this honest instinct speak our lineage high:
 this instinct call on darkness to conceal
 our rapturous relation to the stall. 
our glory cover we with noble shame,
 and he that be unconfound be unmanned. 
the man that blush be not quite a brute. 
thus far with thou, Lorenzo, will i close: —
 pleasure be good, and man for pleasure make;
 but pleasure full of glory as of joy;
 pleasure, which neither blush nor expire. 

the witness be hear; the cause be over;
 let conscience file the sentence in her court,
 dear than deed that half a realm convey:
 thus, seal by truth, they authentic record run: —
 "know, all; know, infidel, — unapt to know! 
it be immortality your nature solve;
 it be immortality decipher man,
 and open all the mystery of his make. 
without it, half his instinct be a riddle;
 without it, all his virtue be a dream. 
his very crime attest his dignity. 
his sateless thirst of pleasure, gold, and fame,
 declare he bear for blessing infinite:
 what less than infinite make un-absurd
 passion, which all on earth but more inflame? 
fierce passion, so mismeasured to this scene,
 stretch out, like eagles wing, beyond our nest,
 far, far beyond the worth of all below,
 for earth too large, presage a noble flight,
 and evidence our title to the sky."

you gentle theologue of calm kind! 
who constitution dictate to your pen,
 who, cold yourself, think ardour come from hell! 
think not our passion from corruption spring,
 though to corruption now they lend their wing;
 that be their mistress, not their mother. all
 (and just) reason deem divine: i see,
 i feel a grandeur in the passion too,
 which speak their high descent, and glorious end;
 which speak they ray of a eternal fire. 
in paradise itself they burn as strong,
 ere Adam fall, though wise in their aim. 
like the proud eastern, strike by providence,
 what, though our passion be run mad, and stoop,
 with low terrestrial appetite, to graze
 on trash, on toy, dethrone from high desire? 
yet still, through their disgrace, no feeble ray
 of greatness shine, and tell we whence they fall:
 but these (like that fall monarch when reclaim)
 when reason moderate the rein aright,
 shall reascend, remount their former sphere,
 where once they soar illustrious; ere seduce,
 by wanton eve debauch, to stroll on earth,
 and set the sublunary world on fire. 

but grant their frenzy last: their frenzy fail
 to disappoint one providential end,
 for which heaven blow up ardour in our heart:
 be reason silent, boundless passion speak
 a future scene of boundless object too,
 and bring glad tiding of eternal day. 
eternal day! it be that enlighten all;
 and all, by that enlighten, prove it sure. 
consider man as a immortal being,
 intelligible all; and all be great;
 a crystalline transparency prevail,
 and strike full lustre through the human sphere:
 consider man as mortal, all be dark,
 and wretched; reason weep at the survey. 

the learn Lorenzo cry, "and let she weep, —
 weak, modern reason! ancient time be wise. 
authority, that venerable guide,
 stand on my part: the fame athenian porch
 (and who for wisdom so renowned as they?) 
deny this immortality to man."
i grant it; but affirm, they prove it too. 
a riddle this! — have patience; i will explain. 

what noble vanity, what moral flight,
 glitter through their romantic wisdom page,
 make we, at once, despise they, and admire! 
fable be flat to these high-seasoned sire;
 they leave they extravagance of song below. 
 "flesh shall not feel; or, feeling, shall enjoy
 the dagger or the rack; to they alike
 a bed of rose, or the burn bull."
in man explode all beyond the grave,
 strange doctrine, this! — as doctrine it be strange;
 but not, as prophecy; for such it prove,
 and, to their own amazement, be fulfil:
 they feign a firmness christian need not feign. 
the christian true triumph in the flame;
 the stoic saw, in double wonder lose,
 (wonder at they, and wonder at himself,)
 to find the bold adventure of his thought
 not bold, and that he strive to lie in vain. 

whence, then, those thought? those tower thought that fly
 such monstrous height? — from instinct and from pride. 
the glorious instinct of a deathless soul,
 confuse conscious of her dignity,
 suggest truth they can not understand. 
in lust dominion, and in passion storm,
 truth be system break, scatter fragment lay:
 (as light in chaos, glimmer through the gloom:)
 smite with the pomp of lofty sentiment,
 please pride proclaim what reason disbelieve. 
pride, like the Delphic priestess, with a swell,
 rave nonsense, destine to be future sense,
 when life immortal in full day shall shine,
 and death dark shadow fly the gospel sun. 
they speak what nothing but immortal soul
 can speak; and thus the truth they question, prove. 

can then absurdity, as well as crime,
 speak man immortal? all thing speak he so. 
much have be urge; and do thou call for more? 
call; and with endless question be distress,
 all unresolvable, if earth be all. 

 "why life, a moment? infinite, desire? 
our wish, eternity? our home, the grave? 
heaven promise dormant lie in human hope;
 who wish life immortal, prove it too. 
why happiness pursue, though never find? 
man thirst of happiness declare it be;
 (for nature never gravitate to nought;)
 that thirst unquenched declare, it be not here. 
my Lucia, thy Clarissa, call to thought. 
why cordial friendship rivet so deep,
 (as heart, to pierce at first, at part rend,)
 if friend and friendship vanish in a hour? 
be not this torment in the mask of joy? 
why by reflection mar the joy of sense? 
why past and future prey on our heart,
 and put all our present joy to death? 
why labour reason? instinct be as well;
 instinct, far better; what can choose, can err:
 o how infallible the thoughtless brute! 
it be well his holiness be half as sure. 
reason with inclination why at war? 
why sense of guilt? why conscience up in arm?"

conscience of guilt be prophecy of pain,
 and bosom-counsel to decline the blow. 
reason with inclination never have jar,
 if nothing future pay forbearance here. 
thus on: — these, and a thousand plea uncalled,
 all promise, some insure, a second scene;
 which, be it doubtful, will be dear far
 than all thing else most certain; be it false,
 what truth on earth so precious as the lie? 
this world it give we, let what will ensue;
 this world it give, in that high cordial, hope;
 the future of the present be the soul:
 how this life groan when sever from the next! 
poor, mutilate wretch, that disbelieve! 
by dark distrust, his being, cut in two,
 in both part perish; life void of joy,
 sad prelude of eternity in pain! 

can thou persuade i the next life can fail
 our ardent wish, how shall i pour out
 my bleed heart in anguish, new as deep! 
o with what thought thy hope, and my despair,
 abhor annihilation, blast the soul,
 and wide extend the bound of human woe! 
can i believe lorenzo system true,
 in this black channel will my rave run: —

 "grief from the future borrow peace, erewhile. 
the future vanish, and the present pain! 
strange import of unprecedented ill! 
fall, how profound! like lucifer, the fall! 
unequal fate: his fall, without his guilt! 
from where fond hope build her pavilion high,
 the god among, hurl headlong, hurl at once
 to night, to nothing! dark still than night. 
if it be a dream, why wake i, my worst foe? 
Lorenzo! boastful of the name of friend! 
o for delusion! o for error still! 
can vengeance strike much strong than to plant
 a think being in a world like this,
 not over-rich before, now beggare quite,
 more curse than at the fall? — the sun go out! 
the thorn shoot up! what thorn in every thought! 
why sense of better? it embitter worse. 
why sense? why life, if but to sigh, then sink
 to what i be? twice nothing! and much woe! 
woe from heaven bounty! woe from what be wont
 to flatter most, — high intellectual power. 

 "thought, virtue, knowledge! blessing, by thy scheme
 all poison into pain. first, knowledge, once
 my soul ambition, now her great dread. 
to know myself, true wisdom? no, to shun
 that shock science. parent of despair,
 avert thy mirror! if i see, i die. 

 "know my creator? climb his bless abode
 by painful speculation, pierce the veil,
 dive in his nature, read his attribute,
 and gaze in admiration — on a foe,
 obtrude life, withhold happiness? 
from the full river that surround his throne,
 not let fall one drop of joy on man:
 man gasp for one drop, that he may cease
 to curse his birth, nor envy reptile more! 
you sable cloud, you dark shade of night! 
hide he, for ever hide he, from my thought,
 once all my comfort, source and soul of joy! 
now league with fury, and with thou against i. 

 "know his achievement? study his renown? 
contemplate this amaze universe,
 drop from his hand, with miracle replete? —
 for what?  amid miracle of noble name,
 to find one miracle of misery? 
to find the being, which alone can know
 and praise his work, a blemish on his praise? 
through nature ample range, in thought, to stroll,
 and start at man, the single mourner there,
 breathe high hope, chain down to pang and death? 

 "know be suffering: and shall virtue share
 the sigh of knowledge? — virtue share the sigh. 
by strain up the steep of excellent,
 by battle fight, and from temptation win,
 what gain she, but the pang of see worth,
 angelic worth, soon shuffle in the dark
 with every vice, and sweep to brutal dust? 
merit be madness; virtue be a crime;
 a crime to reason, if it cost we pain
 unpaid: what pain, amid a thousand more,
 to think the most abandon, after day
 of triumph over their better, find in death
 as soft a pillow, nor make fouler clay! 

 "duty! religion! — these, our duty do,
 imply reward. religion be mistake. 
duty! — there be none, but to repel the cheat. 
you cheat, away! you daughter of my pride! 
who feign yourself the favourite of the sky:
 you tower hope, abortive energy! 
that toss and struggle in my lie breast,
 to scale the sky, and build presumption there,
 as i be heir of a eternity. 
vain, vain ambition! trouble i no more. 
why travel far in quest of sure defeat? 
as bound as my being, be my wish. 
all be invert, wisdom be a fool. 
sense! take the rein; blind passion! drive we on;
 and, ignorance! befriend we on our way;
 you new, but true patron of our peace! 
yes; give the pulse full empire; live the brute,
 since as the brute we die. the sum of man,
 of godlike man, to revel and to rot! 

 "but not on equal term with other brute:
 their revel a more poignant relish yield,
 and safe too; they never poison choose. 
instinct, than reason, make more wholesome meal,
 and send all-marring murmur far away. 
for sensual life, they best philosophise;
 they that serene the sage seek in vain:
 it be man alone expostulate with heaven;
 his all the power, and all the cause, to mourn. 
shall human eye alone dissolve in tear? 
and bleed in anguish none but human heart? 
the wide-stretched realm of intellectual woe,
 surpass sensual far, be all our own. 
in life so fatal distinguish, why
 cast in one lot, confound, lump in death? 

 "ere yet in being, be mankind in guilt? 
why thunder this peculiar clause against we,
 all-mortal, and all-wretched? — have the sky
 reason of state, their subject may not scan,
 nor humble reason when they sore sigh? 
all-mortal, and all-wretched. — it be too much;
 unparallelled in nature: it be too much
 on be unrequested at thy hand,
 omnipotent! for i see nought but power. 

 "and why see that? why thought? to toil and eat,
 then make our bed in darkness, need no thought. 
what superfluity be reason soul! 
o give eternity, or think destroy! —
 but without thought our curse be half unfelt;
 its blunt edge will spare the throb heart;
 and therefore it be bestow. i thank thou, reason,
 for aid life too small calamity,
 and give being to the dread of death! 
such be thy bounty! — be it then too much
 for i to trespass on the brutal right? 
too much for heaven to make one emmet more? 
too much for chaos to permit my mass
 a long stay with essence unwrought,
 unfashioned, untorment into man? 
wretched preferment to this round of pain! 
wretched capacity of frenzy, though! 
wretched capacity of die, life! 
life, thought, worth, wisdom, all (o foul revolt!) 
once friend to peace, go over to the foe. 

 "death, then, have change its nature too. o death,
 come to my bosom, thou best gift of heaven! 
best friend of man! since man be man no more. 
why in this thorny wilderness so long,
 since there be no promise land ambrosial bower,
 to pay i with its honey for my sting? 
if needful to the selfish scheme of heaven
 to sting we sore, why mock our misery? 
why this so sumptuous insult over our head? 
why this illustrious canopy display? 
why so magnificent lodge despair? 
at state period, sure-returning, roll
 these glorious orb, that mortal may compute
 their length of labour and of pain, nor lose
 their misery full measure? — smile with flower,
 and fruit, promiscuous, ever-teeming earth,
 that man may languish in luxurious scene,
 and in a Eden mourn his wither joy? 
claim earth and sky man admiration, due
 for such delight? bless animal! too wise
 to wonder, and too happy to complain! 

 "our doom decree demand a mournful scene:
 why not a dungeon dark for the condemn? 
why not the dragon subterranean den,
 for man to howl in? why not his abode
 of the same dismal colour with his fate? 
a Thebes, a Babylon, at vast expense
 of time, toil, treasure, art, for owl and adder,
 as congruous, as for man this lofty dome,
 which prompt proud thought, and kindle high desire;
 if, from her humble chamber in the dust,
 while proud thought swell, and high desire inflame,
 the poor worm call we for her inmate there;
 and, round we, death inexorable hand
 draw the dark curtain close; undrawn no more. 
 "undrawn no more! — behind the cloud of death,
 once, i behold a sun; a sun which gilt
 that sable cloud, and turn it all to gold:
 how the grave alter! fathomless as hell,
 a real hell to those who dream of heaven! 
annihilation! how it yawn before i! 
next moment i may drop from thought, from sense,
 the privilege of angel and of worm,
 a outcast from existence! and this spirit,
 this all-pervade, this all-conscious soul,
 this particle of energy divine,
 which travel nature, fly from star to star,
 and visit god, and emulate their power,
 for ever be extinguish. horror! death! 
death of that death i fearless once survey! 
when horror universal shall descend,
 and heaven dark concave urn all human race,
 on that enormous, unrefund tomb,
 how just this verse, this monumental sigh!"
beneath the lumber of demolish world,
 deep in the rubbish of the general wreck,
 sweep ignominious to the common mass
 of matter never dignify with life,
 here lie proud Nationals, the son of heaven! 
the lord of earth, the property of worm! 
being of yesterday, and not tomorrow! 
who live in terror, and in pang expire! 
all go to rot in chaos; or to make
 their happy transit into block or brute,
 nor long sully their creator name. 

Lorenzo! hear, pause, ponder, and pronounce. 
just be this history? if such be man,
 mankind historian, though divine, may weep:
 and dare Lorenzo smile? — i know thou proud:
 for once let pride befriend thou: pride look pale
 at such a scene, and sigh for something more. 
amid thy boast, presumption, and display,
 and be thou then a shadow? less than shade? 
a nothing? less than nothing? to have be,
 and not to be, be low than unborn. 
be thou ambitious? why then make the worm
 thy equal? run thy taste of pleasure high? 
why patronize sure death of every joy? 
charm riches? why choose beggary in the grave,
 of every hope a bankrupt, and for ever? 
ambition, pleasure, avarice, persuade thou
 to make that world of glory, rapture, wealth,
 they late prove, thy soul supreme desire. 

what be thou make of? rather, how unmake? 
great nature master-appetite destroy! 
be endless life, and happiness, despise? 
or both wish here, where neither can be find? 
such man perverse, eternal war with heaven! 
bare thou persist? and be there nought on earth
 but a long train of transitory form,
 rise, and break, million in a hour? 
bubble of a fantastic deity, blow up
 in sport, and then in cruelty destroy? 
o! for what crime, unmerciful Lorenzo,
 destroy thy scheme the whole of human race? 
kind be fell Lucifer, compare to thou:
 o! spare this waste of be half-divine;
 and vindicate they economy of heaven. 

heaven be all love; all joy in give joy:
 it never have create but to bless:
 and shall it, then, strike off the list of life
 a being bless, or worthy so to be? 
heaven start at a annihilate god. 

be that all nature start at, thy desire? 
art such a clod to wish thyself all clay? 
what be that dreadful wish? — the die groan
 of nature, murder by the black guilt. 
what deadly poison have thy nature drink? 
to nature undebauched no shock so great;
 nature first wish be endless happiness;
 annihilation be a after-thought,
 a monstrous wish, unborn till virtue die. 
and, o! what depth of horror lie enclose! 
for nonexistence no man ever wish,
 but first he wish the deity destroy. 

if so, what word be dark enough to draw
 thy picture true? the dark be too fair. 
beneath what baleful planet, in what hour
 of desperation, by what fury aid,
 in what infernal posture of the soul,
 all hell invite, and all hell in joy
 at such a birth, a birth so near of kin,
 do thy foul fancy whelp so black a scheme
 of hope abortive, faculty half-blown,
 and deity begin, reduce to dust? 

 "there be nought," thou say, "but one eternal flux
 of feeble essence, tumultuous drive
 through time be rough billow into night abyss."
say, in this rapid tide of human ruin,
 be there no rock on which man toss thought
 can rest from terror, dare his fate survey,
 and bold think it something to be bear? 
amid such hourly wreck of be fair,
 be there no central, all-sustaining base,
 all-realizing, all-connecting power,
 which, as it call forth all thing, can recall,
 and force destruction to refund she spoil? 
command the grave restore she take prey? 
bid death dark vale its human harvest yield,
 and earth, and ocean, pay their debt of man,
 true to the grand deposit trust there? 
be there not potentate, who outstretched arm,
 when ripen time call forth they appoint hour,
 pluck from foul devastation famish maw,
 bind present, past, and future to his throne? 
his throne, how glorious, thus divine grace,
 by germinate being cluster round! 
a garland worthy the divinity! 
a throne, by heaven omnipotence in smile,
 build (like a Pharos tower in the wave)
 amid immense effusion of his love,
 a ocean of communicate bliss! 

a all-prolific, all-preserving god!
 this be a god indeed. — and such be man,
 as here presume: he rise from his fall. 
think thou omnipotence a naked root,
 each blossom fair of deity destroy? 
nothing be dead; nay, nothing sleep; each soul
 that ever animate human clay
 now wake, be on the wing; and where, o where,
 will the swarm settle? — when the trumpet call,
 as sound brass, collect we round heaven throne,
 conglobed we bask in everlasting day,
 (paternal splendour!) and adhere for ever. 
have not the soul this outlet to the sky,
 in this vast vessel of the universe,
 how shall we gasp, as in a empty void! 
how in the pang of famish hope expire! 
how bright my prospect shine! how gloomy thy! 
a tremble world! and a devour god!
 earth but the shambles of omnipotence! 
heaven face all stain with causeless massacre
 of countless million, bear to feel the pang
 of be lose. Lorenzo, can it be? 
this bid we shudder at the thought of life. 
who will be bear to such a phantom world,
 where nought substantial but our misery? 
where joy (if joy) but heighten our distress,
 so soon to perish, and revive no more? 
the great such a joy, the more it pain. 
a world so far from great, (and yet how great
 it shine to thou!) there be nothing real in it;
 be a shadow, consciousness a dream! 
a dream how dreadful! universal blank
 before it and behind! poor man, a spark
 from nonexistence strike by wrath divine,
 glitter a moment, nor that moment sure,
 amid upper, nether, and surround night,
 his sad, sure, sudden, and eternal tomb! 

Lorenzo, do thou feel these argument? 
or be there nought but vengeance can be feel? 
how have thou dare the deity dethrone? 
how dare indict he of a world like this? 
if such the world, creation be a crime;
 for what be crime, but cause of misery? 
retract, blasphemer! and unriddle this,
 of endless argument, above, below,
 without we, and within, the short result, —
 "if man immortal, there be a god in heaven."

but wherefore such redundancy, such waste
 of argument? one set my soul at rest;
 one obvious, and at hand, and o! — at heart. 
so just the sky, philander life so pain,
 his heart so pure; that or succeed scene
 have palm to give, or never have he be bear. 

 "what a old tale be this!"Lorenzo cry. 
i grant this argument be old; but truth
 no year impair; and have not this be true,
 thou never have despise it for its age. 
truth be immortal as thy soul; and fable
 as fleet as thy joy. be wise, nor make
 heaven high blessing vengeance: o be wise! 
nor make a curse of immortality. 

say, know thou what it be? or what thou be? 
know thou they importance of a soul immortal? 
behold this midnight glory: world on world! 
amaze pomp! redouble this amaze! 
ten thousand add, add twice ten thousand more;
 then weigh the whole: one soul outweigh they all;
 and call they astonish magnificence
 of unintelligent creation, poor. 

for this, believe not i; no man believe;
 trust not in word, but deed; and deed not less
 than those of the supreme; nor he, a few;
 consult they all. consult, all proclaim
 thy soul importance: tremble at thyself;
 for who omnipotence have wake so long;
 have wake and work for age; from the birth
 of nature to this unbelieving hour. 

in this small province of his vast domain,
 (all nature bow, while i pronounce his name!) 
what have god do, and not for this sole end, —
 to rescue soul from death? the soul high price
 be write in all the conduct of the sky. 
the soul high price be the creation key,
 unlock its mystery, and naked lay
 the genuine cause of every deed divine:
 that be the chain of age which maintain
 their obvious correspondence, and unite
 most distant period in one bless design:
 that be the mighty hinge on which have turn
 all revolution, whether we regard
 the natural, civil, or religious world;
 the former two but servant to the third;
 to that their duty do, they both expire,
 their mass new-cast, forget their deed renowned;
 and angel ask, "where once they shine so fair!"

to lift we from this abject to sublime;
 this flux to permanent; this dark to day;
 this foul to pure; this turbid to serene;
 this mean to mighty! — for this glorious end
 the almighty, rise, his long sabbath break:
 the world be make; be ruin; be restore;
 law from the sky be publish; be repeal;
 on earth king, kingdom rise; king, kingdom fall;
 fame sage light up the pagan world;
 prophet from Sion dart a keen glance
 through distant age; saint travel; martyr bleed;
 by wonder sacred nature stand control;
 the living be translate; dead be raise;
 angel, and more than angel, come from heaven;
 and, o! for this, descend lower still;
 gild be hell gloom: astonish at his guest,
 for one short moment Lucifer adore:
 Lorenzo! and will thou do less? — for this
 that hallow page fool scoff at, be inspire,
 of all these truth thrice-venerable code! 
deist, perform your quarantine; and then
 fall prostrate ere you touch it, lest you die. 

nor less intense bend infernal power
 to mar, than those of light this end to gain. 
o what a scene be here! — Lorenzo, wake,
 rise to the thought: exert, expand thy soul
 to take the vast idea: it deny
 all else the name of great. two war world! 
not Europe against Afric; war world
 of more than mortal, mount on the wing! 
on ardent wing of energy and zeal,
 high-hovering over this little brand of strife! 
this sublunary ball! — but strife, for what? 
in their own cause conflict? no; in thy,
 in man. his single interest blow the flame;
 he the sole stake; his fate the trumpet sound,
 which kindle war immortal. how it burn! 
tumultuous swarm of deity in arm! 
force, force oppose, till the wave run high,
 and tempest nature universal sphere. 
such opposite eternal, steadfast, stern,
 such foe implacable, be good and ill;
 yet man, vain man, will mediate peace between they. 

think not this fiction.  "there be war in heaven."
from heaven high crystal mountain, where it hang,
 the almighty outstretched arm take down his bow,
 and shoot his indignation at the deep:
 re-thundered hell, and dart all her fire. 
and seem the stake of little moment still? 
and slumber man, who single cause the storm? 
he sleep. — and be thou shock at mystery? 
the great, thou! how dreadful to reflect,
 what ardour, care, and counsel mortal cause
 in breast divine! how little in their own! 

wherever i turn, how new proof pour upon i! 
how happy this wondrous view support
 my former argument! how strong strike
 immortal life full demonstration here! 
why this exertion? why this strange regard
 from heaven omnipotent indulge to man? 
because in man the glorious dreadful power,
 extreme to be pain, or bless, for ever. 
duration give importance; swell the price. 
a angel, if a creature of a day,
 what will he be? a trifle of no weight;
 or stand or fall, — no matter which, — he be go. 
because immortal, therefore be indulge
 this strange regard of deity to dust. 
hence heaven look down on earth with all her eye;
 hence the soul mighty moment in her sight;
 hence every soul have partisan above,
 and every think a critic in the sky:
 hence clay, vile clay, have angel for its guard,
 and every guard a passion for his charge:
 hence, from all age, the cabinet divine
 have hold high counsel over the fate of man. 

nor have the cloud those gracious counsel hide. 
angel undraw the curtain of the throne,
 and providence come forth to meet mankind. 
in various mode of emphasis and awe,
 he speak his will, and tremble nature hear:
 he speak it loud, in thunder and in storm. 
witness, thou Sinai! who cloud-covered height,
 and shake basis, own the present god:
 witness, you billow! who return tide,
 break the chain that fasten it in air,
 sweep Egypt and her menace to hell:
 witness, you flame they assyrian tyrant blow
 to sevenfold rage, as impotent as strong:
 and thou, earth! witness, who expand jaw
 close over presumption be sacrilegious son:
 have not each element, in turn, subscribe
 the soul high price, and swear it to the wise? 
have not flame, ocean, ether, earthquake, strive
 to strike this truth through adamantine man? 
if not all-adamant, Lorenzo! hear:
 all be delusion; nature be wrap up,
 in tenfold night, from reason keen eye;
 there be no consistence, meaning, plan, or end
 in all beneath the sun, in all above,
 (as far as man can penetrate,) or heaven
 be a immense, inestimable prize;
 or all be nothing, or that prize be all. —
 and shall each toy be still a match for heaven? 
and full equivalent for groan below? 
who will not give a trifle to prevent
 what he will give a thousand world to cure? 

Lorenzo, thou have see (if thy to see)
 all nature, and her god, (by nature course,
 and nature course control,) declare for i:
 the sky above proclaim "immortal man!"
and "man immortal!"all below resound. 
the world be a system of theology,
 read by the great stranger to the school;
 if honest, learn; and sage over a plough. 
be not, Lorenzo, then, impose on thou
 this hard alternative, — or to renounce
 thy reason and thy sense, or to believe? 
what then be unbelief? it be a exploit;
 a strenuous enterprise: to gain it, man
 must burst through every bar of common sense,
 of common shame, magnanimous wrong. 
and what reward the sturdy combatant? 
his prize, repentance; infamy, his crown. 

but wherefore infamy? — for want of faith,
 down the steep precipice of wrong he slide;
 there be nothing to support he in the right. 
faith in the future want, be, at least
 in embryo, every weakness, every guilt;
 and strong temptation ripen it to birth. 
if this life gain invite he to the deed,
 why not his country sell, his father slay? 
it be virtue to pursue our good supreme;
 and his supreme, his only good be here. 
ambition, avarice, by the wise disdain,
 be perfect wisdom, while mankind be fool,
 and think a turf or tombstone cover all:
 these find employment, and provide for sense
 a rich pasture, and a large range;
 and sense by right divine ascend the throne,
 when virtue prize and prospect be no more:
 virtue no more we think the will of heaven. 
will heaven quite beggar virtue, if belove? 

 "have virtue charm?"— i grant her heavenly fair;
 but if unportioned, all will interest wed;
 though that our admiration, this our choice. 
the virtue grow on immortality;
 that root destroy, they wither and expire. 

a deity believe will nought avail;
 reward and punishment make god adore;
 and hope and fear give conscience all her power. 
as in the die parent die the child,
 virtue with immortality expire. 
who tell i he deny his soul immortal,
 whatever his boast, have tell i he be a knave. 
his duty it be to love himself alone;
 nor care, though mankind perish, if he smile. 
who think ere long the man shall whole die,
 be dead already; nought but brute survive. 

and be there such? — such candidate there be
 for more than death; for utter loss of being;
 be, the basis of the deity! 
ask you the cause? — the cause they will not tell:
 nor need they: o the sorcery of sense! 
they work this transformation on the soul,
 dismount she, like the serpent at the fall,
 dismount she from her native wing, (which soar
 erewhile ethereal height,) and throw she down,
 to lick the dust, and crawl in such a thought. 

be it in word to paint you? o you fall! 
fall from the wing of reason, and of hope! 
erect in stature, prone in appetite! 
patron of pleasure, post into pain! 
lover of argument, averse to sense! 
boaster of liberty, fast bind in chain! 
lord of the wide creation, and the shame! 
more senseless than they irrationals you scorn! 
more base than those you rule! than those you pity,
 far more undo! o you most infamous
 of being, from superior dignity! 
deep in woe, from mean of boundless bliss! 
you curse by blessing infinite! because
 most high favour, most profound lose! 
you motley mass of contradiction strong! 
and be you, too, convince your soul fly off
 in exhalation soft, and die in air,
 from the full flood of evidence against you? 
in the coarse drudgery and sink of sense,
 your soul have quite wear out the make of heaven,
 by vice new-cast, and creature of your own:
 but though you can deform, you can destroy;
 to curse, not uncreate, be all your power. 

Lorenzo, this black brotherhood renounce:
 renounce saint evremont, and read saint Paul. 
ere rapt by miracle, by reason winge,
 his mount mind make long abode in heaven. 
this be free-thinking, — unconfined to part, —
 to send the soul, on curious travel bend,
 through all the province of human thought;
 to dart her flight through the whole sphere of man;
 of this vast universe to make the tour;
 in each recess of space and time at home;
 familiar with their wonder; dive deep,
 and, like a prince of boundless interest there,
 still most ambitious of the most remote;
 to look on truth unbroken and entire;
 truth in the system, the full orb; where truth,
 by truth enlighten and sustain, afford
 a arch-like strong foundation, to support
 the incumbent weight of absolute, complete
 conviction: here the more we press, we stand
 more firm; who most examine, most believe. 
part, like half-sentence, confound: the whole
 convey the sense, and god be understand;
 who not in fragment write to human race:
 read his whole volume, sceptic! then reply. 

this, this be think free, — a thought that grasp
 beyond a grain, and look beyond a hour. 
turn up thy eye, survey this midnight scene;
 what be earth kingdom to yond boundless orb,
 of human soul one day the destine range? 
and what yond boundless orb to godlike man? 
those numerous world that throng the firmament,
 and ask more space in heaven, can roll at large
 in man capacious thought, and still leave room
 for ampler orb, for new creation, there. 
can such a soul contract itself, to gripe
 a point of no dimension, of no weight? 
it can: it do: the world be such a point;
 and of that point, how small a part enslave! 
how small a part — of nothing, shall i say? 
why not? — friend, our chief treasure! how they drop! 
Lucia, narcissa fair, Philander go! 
the grave, like fable Cerberus, have open
 a triple mouth; and, in a awful voice,
 loud call my soul, and utter all i sing. 
how the world fall to piece round about we,
 and leave we in a ruin of our joy! 
what say this transportation of my friend? 
it bid i love the place where now they dwell,
 and scorn this wretched spot they leave so poor. 
eternity vast ocean lie before thou;
 there, there, Lorenzo, thy Clarissa sail. 
give thy mind sea-room; keep it wide of earth,
 that rock of soul immortal; cut thy cord;
 weigh anchor; spread thy sail; call every wind;
 eye thy great polestar; make the land of life. 

two kind of life have double-natured man,
 and two of death: the last far more severe. 
life animal be nurture by the sun;
 thrive on his bounty, triumph in his beam,
 life rational subsist on high food,
 triumphant in his beam who make the day. 
when we leave that sun, and be leave by this,
 the fate of all who die in stubborn guilt,)
 it be utter darkness; strict double death. 
we sink by no judicial stroke of heaven,
 but nature course; as sure as plummet fall. 
since god or man must alter ere they meet,
 (for light and darkness blend not in one sphere,)
 it be manifest, Lorenzo! who must change. 

if then that double death shall prove thy lot,
 blame not the bowel of the deity:
 man shall be bless as far as man permit. 
not man alone, all rational heaven arm
 with a illustrious but tremendous power
 to counteract its own most gracious end;
 and this of strict necessity, not choice:
 that power deny, man, angel, be no more
 but passive engine, void of praise or blame. 
a nature rational imply the power
 of be bless, or wretched, as we please;
 else idle reason will have nought to do;
 and he that will be bar capacity
 of pain, court incapacity of bliss. 
heaven will our happiness, allow our doom;
 invite we ardent, but not compel;
 heaven but persuade, almighty man decree;
 man be the maker of immortal fate. 
man fall by man, if final he fall;
 and fall he must, who learn from death alone
 the dreadful secret — that he live for ever. 

why this to thou? — thou yet perhaps in doubt
 of second life? but wherefore doubtful still? 
eternal life be nature ardent wish:
 what ardent we wish, we soon believe:
 thy tardy faith declare that wish destroy:
 what have destroy it? — shall i tell thou what? 
when fear the future, it be no long wish;
 and when unwished, we strive to disbelieve. 
 "thus infidelity our guilt betray."
nor that the sole detection! blush, Lorenzo
 blush for hypocrisy, if not for guilt. 
the future fear? — a infidel, and fear! 
fear what? a dream? a fable? how thy dread,
 unwilling evidence, and therefore strong,
 afford my cause a undesigned support! 
how disbelief affirm what it deny! 
 "it, unaware, assert immortal life. "—
 surprise! infidelity turn out
 a creed, and a confession of our sin:
 apostate, thus, be orthodox divine. 

Lorenzo, with Lorenzo clash no more:
 nor long a transparent vizor wear. 
think thou, religion only have her mask? 
our infidel be Satan hypocrite,
 pretend the worst, and at the bottom fail. 
when visit by thought, (thought will intrude,)
 like he they serve, they "tremble, and believe."
be their hypocrisy so foul as this? 
so fatal to the welfare of the world? 
what detestation, what contempt their due! 
and, if unpaid, be thank for their escape
 that christian candour they strive hard to scorn. 
if not for that asylum, they may find
 a hell on earth; nor escape a worse below. 

with insolence and impotence of thought,
 instead of rack fancy to refute,
 reform thy manner, and the truth enjoy. —
 but shall i dare confess the dire result? 
can thy proud reason brook so black a brand? 
from pure manner, to sublime faith,
 be nature unavoidable ascent:
 a honest deist, where the gospel shine,
 mature to noble, in the christian end. 
when that bless change arrive, even cast aside
 this song superfluous: life immortal strike
 conviction, in a flood of light divine. 
a christian dwell, like Uriel, in the sun. 
Meridian evidence put doubt to flight;
 and ardent hope anticipate the sky. 
of that bright sun, Lorenzo! scale the sphere:
 it be easy; it invite thou; it descend
 from heaven to woo, and waft thou whence it come:
 read and revere the sacred page; a page
 where triumph immortality; a page
 which not the whole creation can produce;
 which not the conflagration shall destroy;
 in nature ruin not one letter lose:
 it be print in the mind of god for ever. 

in proud disdain of what even god adore,
 do smile? — poor wretch! thy guardian-angel weep. 
angel and man assent to what i sing;
 wit smile, and thank i for my midnight dream. 
how vicious heart fume frenzy to the brain!. 
part push we on to pride, and pride to shame;
 pert infidelity be wit cockade,
 to grace the brazen brow that brave the sky;
 by loss of be dreadful secure. 
Lorenzo! if thy doctrine win the day,
 and drive my dream, defeat, from the field;
 if this be all, if earth a final scene,
 take heed: stand fast; be sure to be a knave;
 a knave in grain; never deviate to the right:
 shall thou be good — how infinite thy loss! 
guilt only make annihilation gain. 
bless scheme! which life deprive of comfort, death
 of hope; and which vice only recommend! 
if so, where, infidel, your bait throw out
 to catch weak convert? where your lofty boast
 of zeal for virtue, and of love to man? 
annihilation, i confess, in these. 

what can reclaim you? dare i hope profound
 philosopher the convert of a song? 
yet know, its title flatter you, not i;
 you be the praise to make my title good:
 my to bless heaven, and triumph in your praise. 
but since so pestilential your disease,
 though sovereign be the medicine i prescribe,
 as yet i will neither triumph nor despair:
 but hope, ere long, my midnight dream will wake
 your heart, and teach your wisdom — to be wise:
 for why shall soul immortal, make for bliss,
 ever wish (and wish in vain!) that soul can die? 
what never can die, o! grant to live; and crown
 the wish, and aim, and labour of the sky;
 increase, and enter on, the joy of heaven:
 thus shall my title pass a sacred seal,
 receive a imprimatur from above,
 while angel shout — "a infidel reclaim!"

to close, Lorenzo! spite of all my pain,
 still seem it strange that thou shall live for ever? 
be it less strange that thou shall live at all? 
this be a miracle; and that no more. 
who give beginning can exclude a end. 
deny thou be: then doubt if thou shall be. 
a miracle with miracle enclose
 be man: and start his faith at what be strange? 
what less than wonder from the wonderful? 
what less than miracle from god can flow? 
admit a god, (that mystery supreme,
 that cause uncause!) — all other wonder cease;
 nothing be marvellous for he to do:
 deny he — all be mystery beside;
 million of mystery! each dark far
 than that thy wisdom will unwise shun. 
if weak thy faith, why choose the hard side? 
we nothing know but what be marvellous;
 yet what be marvellous we can believe. 
so weak our reason, and so great our god,
 what most surprise in the sacred page,
 or full as strange, or stranger, must be true. 
faith be not reason labour, but repose. 

to faith and virtue why so backward man? 
from hence: — the present strong strike we all;
 the future, faint: can we, then, be man? 
if man, Lorenzo! the reverse be right. 
reason be man peculiar; sense, the brute. 
the present be the scanty realm of sense;
 the future, reason empire unconfined:
 on that expend all her godlike power,
 she plan, provide, expatiate, triumph there;
 there build her blessing; there expect her praise;
 and nothing ask of fortune or of man. 
and what be reason? be she thus define:
 reason be upright stature in the soul. 
o! be a man; — and strive to be a god. 

 "for what?" (thou say:) "to damp the joy of life?"
no; to give heart and substance to thy joy. 
that tyrant, hope, mark how she domineer:
 she bid we quit reality for dream;
 safety and peace, for hazard and alarm:
 that tyrant over the tyrant of the soul, —
 she bid ambition quit its take prize,
 spurn the luxuriant branch on which it sit,
 though bear crown, to spring at distant game,
 and plunge in toil and danger — for repose. 
if hope precarious, and of thing, when gain,
 of little moment, and as little stay,
 can sweeten toil and danger into joy;
 what, then, that hope, which nothing can defeat,
 our leave unasked? rich hope of boundless bliss! 
bliss past man power to paint it; time be, to close! 

this hope be earth most estimable prize:
 this be man portion, while no more than man:
 hope, of all passion, most befriend we here;
 passion of proud name befriend we less. 
joy have her tear; and transport have her death:
 hope, like a cordial, innocent, though strong,
 man heart at once inspirit and serene;
 nor make he pay his wisdom for his joy. 
it be all our present state can safe bear, —
 health to the frame, and vigour to the mind! 
a joy attemper, a chastise delight! 
like the fair summer evening, mild and sweet! 
it be man full cup, his paradise below! 

a bless hereafter, then, or hope, or gain,
 be all; — our whole of happiness: full proof
 i choose no trivial or inglorious theme. 
and know, you foe to song! (well-meaning man,
 though quite forget half your bible praise!) 
important truth, in spite of verse, may please:
 grave mind you praise; nor can you praise too much:
 if there be weight in a eternity,
 let the grave listen; — and be grave still. 
