to mr. Dryden, on his excellent translation of Virgil.

1. 

thou matchless poet, who capacious mind
contain the whole that knowledge can impart,
where we each charm science find,
and every please art:
permit my muse in plain unpolished verse,
in humble strain her wonder to rehearse:
from her low shade she lift her dazzle sight,
and view the splendour and amaze height:
see boundless wit, in artful number play,
and like the glorious source of day,
to distant world both light and heat convey.

2. 

before the happy birth of light,
ever nature do her form power display,
while blend in their native night,
the principle of all thing lie;
triumphant darkness do her self dilate,
and through the chaos with resistless sway
her dusky horror spread;
such in this isle be once our wretched state:
dark melancholy night her sable wing display,
and all around her baleful influence shed;
from gloom, to gloom, with weary step we stray,
till Chaucer come with his delusive light,
and give some transient glimmering to the night:
next kind spencer with his lunar beam
enrich our sky, and wake we from our dream:
then please vision do our mind delight,
and airy spectre dance before our sight:
amid our shade in antic round we move,
and the bright entertain phantom love.

3. 

with Waller our first dawn of light arise,
he do the beauty of the morn disclose:
then Milton come, and Cowley bless our eye;
with joy we see the distant glory rise:
but there remain some footstep of the night,
dark shadow still be intermix with light:
those shade the mighty dryden chase away,
and show the triumph of refulgent day:
now all be clear, and all be bright,
our sun from his meridian height
dart kind down revive ray,
and one continue splendour crown our day.

4. 

this work, great poet, be reserve for thou,
none else can we from our confinement free:
by thou lead on, we climb the sacred hill,
and our please eye with distant prospect fill:
view all the acquest thy conquer pen have make,
the immortal trophy of thy fame:
and see, as if we stand on magic ground,
majestic ghost with verdant laurel crown:
illustrious hero, every glorious name,
that can a place in ancient record claim:
among the rest, thy virgil awful shade,
who thou have raise to bless our happy land,
do circle round with radiant honour stand:
he be now the welcome native of our isle,
and crown our hope with a auspicious smile;
with he we wander through the depth below,
and into nature close recess go;
view all the secret of the infernal state,
and search into the dark intrigue of fate:
survey the pleasure of the elysian field,
and see what joy the high region yield.

5. 

what thanks, thou generous man, can we repay,
what equal retribution make,
for all thy pain, and all thy care,
and all those toil, who kind effect we share?
our language like the augean stable lie,
rude and uncleansed, till thou by glory move,
the herculean task do undertake,
and have with flood of wit the offensive heap remove:
that ancient rubbish of the gothic time,
when manly sense be lose in trifle rhime:
now the unformed mass be to perfection wrought;
thou have enlarge our knowledge, and resin our thought.
long may thou shine within our british sphere,
and may not age, nor care,
the sprightly vigor of thy mind impair:
let envy cease, and all thy merit own,
and let our due regard in praise be ever show:
and when from hence thou shall remove
to bless the harmonious world above,
may thy strong genius on our isle descend,
and what it have inspire, eternal defend.
