a address to the deity.

god of my life! and author of my day! 
permit my feeble voice to lisp thy praise;
 and tremble, take upon a mortal tongue
 that hallow name to harp of seraph sing. 
yet here the bright seraph can no more
 than hide their face, tremble, and adore. 
worm, angel, man, in every different sphere
 be equal all, for all be nothing here. 
all nature faint beneath the mighty name,
 which nature work, through all their part proclaim. 
i feel that name my inmost thought control,
 and breathe a awful stillness through my soul;
 as by a charm, the wave of grief subside;
 impetuous passion stop her headlong tide;
 at thy feel presence all emotion cease,
 and my hush spirit find a sudden peace,
 till every worldly thought within i die,
 and earth gay pageant vanish from my eye;
 till all my sense be lose in infinite,
 and one vast object fill my ache sight. 

but soon, alas! this holy calm be break;
 my soul submit to wear her wonted yoke;
 with shackle pinion strive to soar in vain,
 and mingle with the dross of earth again. 
but he, our gracious master, kind, as just,
 know our frame, remember man be dust:
 he spirit, ever brood over our mind,
 see the first wish to better hope incline;
 mark the young dawn of every virtuous aim,
 and fan the smoke flax into a flame:
 he ear be open to the soft cry,
 his grace descend to meet the lift eye;
 he read the language of a silent tear,
 and sigh be incense from a heart sincere. 
such be the vow, the sacrifice i give;
 accept the vow, and bid the suppliant live:
 from each terrestrial bondage set i free;
 hush every wish that centre not in thou;
 bid my fond hope, my vain disquiet cease,
 and point my path to everlasting peace. 

if the soft hand of win pleasure lead
 by live water, and through flowery mead,
 when all be smile, tranquil, and serene,
 and vernal beauty paint the flatter scene,
 oh! teach i to elude each latent snare,
 and whisper to my slide heart — beware:
 with caution let i hear the syren voice,
 and doubtful, with a tremble heart, rejoice. 

if friendless, in a vale of tear i stray,
 where brier wound, and thorn perplex my way,
 still let my steady soul thy goodness see,
 and with strong confidence lie hold on thou;
 with equal eye my various lot receive,
 resign to die, or resolute to live;
 prepare to kiss the sceptre, or the rod,
 while god be see in all, and all in god. 

i read his awful name, emblazon high
 with golden letter on the illumine sky;
 nor less the mystic character i see
 wrought in each flower, inscribe on every tree;
 in every leaf that tremble to the breeze
 i hear the voice of god among the tree;
 with thou in shady solitude i walk,
 with thou in busy crowd city talk,
 in every creature own thy form power,
 in each event thy providence adore. 
thy hope shall animate my droop soul,
 thy precept guide i, and thy fear controul. 
thus shall i rest, unmoved by all alarm,
 secure within the temple of thy arm,
 from anxious care, from gloomy terror free,
 and feel myself omnipotent in thou. 

then when the last, the close hour draw nigh,
 and earth recede before my swim eye;
 when tremble on the doubtful edge of fate
 i stand and stretch my view to either state;
 teach i to quit this transitory scene
 with decent triumph and a look serene;
 teach i to fix my ardent hope on high,
 and have live to thou, in thou to die. 
