the love of gain.

the author.

though oft the heart, when rage passion storm,
 to vice we kneel, and fain will veil her form,
 her native darkness ever mock disguise,
 and crime look foul, even in their author eye. 
here the first mark of heavenly vengeance view;
 vice, false to other, to herself be true! 
when the pack jury, and the quibble flaw
 delude the eye, and lame the arm of law;
 when erskine wit the culprit-client save,
 and fraud unscourged offend justice brave;
 still be the wretch in private doom to hear
 from his own heart a verdict more severe. 
there dwell a judge, who voice no bribe can pay,
 no party silence, and no flattery sway;
 the sinner shrink, before himself arraign,
 and almost sorrow, that his cause be gain. 

nor do his guilt himself alone disgust;
 the world condemn, for here the world be just:
 unpunished crime still shock the public ear,
 and crime unpunished double foul appear. 

then why, Emilius, thus in furious strain
 of break faith, and law corrupt complain? 
less warmth, my testy friend; more just sound
 your injury depth, nor call your scratch a wound. 
with plenteous store by Fortune bounty bless,
 of bond, and stock, and fertile land possess,
 your loss be trifle, and so trite your case,
 scarce in the public print it will find a place. 
while, then, we mark your breast with passion rise,
 your tremble lip, clench hand, and flash eye,
 when ask the cause, how poor the answer sound,
 "a friend be false! i have lose a thousand pound. " —
 a friend be false? do that amaze the eye
 which late see its sixtieth year go by? 
have age then bleach your raven lock in vain,
 impair your limb, and not mature your brain? 
oh! mourn your dross no more: with tear lament
 your mind unfurnished, and your time mispend. 
bless be the man, who philosophic lore
 beyond proud Fortune reach have teach to soar;
 who, when she frown, her falsehood not revile,
 nor boast her favour when the harlot smile. 
nor he less happy count, who year have buy
 precious experience, and deep-searching thought,
 wisdom to know all bliss be insecure,
 courage to hope, and patience to endure. 

say, loud complainant, do the roll year
 present one day from fraud or knavery clear,
 who spotless white no theft, no murder stain,
 write in blood man damn lust for gain? 
in vain you search: — yet still the search pursue,
 examine man, and find of good how few! 
so few, alas! that if that guilt to fly
 which daily, hourly, here disgust the eye,
 the just resolve to leave the british strand,
 and seek some distant less pollute land,
 the whole fair troop away with ease may bear
 my lord-mayor barge, and still have room to spare. 
now let the iron age no more be blame;
 bless shall its memory be, when we be name,
 for which no bard can find in nature page
 so base a metal as will mark the age! 

yet though ourselves still sin, not less we blame
 our neighbour sin, and, when he err, exclaim
 loud than fishwife scold, or ass bray,
 or vapid puff his own dry dull damn play! 
all-hail, mouth-virtue! at your altar bend
 each cant hypocrite, and perjure friend;
 spare lovegold see his household god in you,
 who cost no sixpence, and who seem Peru! 

boy-witted elder! must thou still be tell,
 no sorcerer spell can witch a heart like gold? 
that in each guinea conquer cupid swarm,
 and Venus less than good king George can charm? 
hear you not, how the rude but wise crowd
 mock your simplicity with laughter loud,
 when rave about faith, and virtuous dread,
 and lightning destine for each perjure head,
 you hope the traitor (by your threat dismay)
 will keep the promise, which he can evade? 
if such thing be, it be sure ere Adam fall,
 or eve lose Eden for a nonpareil! 
but now a debt if some strange man shall own,
 when neither bond or witness prove the loan,
 to mark a act so just, and truth so rare,
 his marble form shall grace some public square,
 and his name blazon in the historic page,
 attest that one good man adorn our age. 

for i, whenever such act of faith i hear,
 lose in amaze, and trust scarce my ear,
 "let all," i cry, "to view this wonder run,
" and pidcock own his rarity outdo. 
 "mourn, hapless pidcock, mourn! your reign be over;
" in vain your eagle scream, and tiger roar;
 "the crowd, who erst to view your monster run,
" now seek a rare sight, a honest man! 
 "what drink, what eat he? for i never can think,
" like common mortal he can eat or drink. 
 "how speak, how walk he? ere i sleep tonight,
" on this rare creature i must feast my sight. " 
and when, at length, this wonder i behold,
 amaze to find he cast in human mould,
 i be vex that like ourselves on earth he tread,
 and scarce believe he have get two head. 

but say, Emilius, if a wrong thus slight
 so wound thy feeling and disgust thy sight,
 how will thou rave, if fraud glib tongue have find
 the mean to 'reave thou of thy last poor pound;
 or how support a friend more guilty stealth,
 when loss of freedom follow loss of wealth? 
turn to yond prison! list yond captive tale,
 who rash stand his smooth-tongued brother bail:
 pen in those wall, the wretch all hope resign,
 now wild rave, and now deject pine;
 while his free life abroad the debtor spend,
 enjoy new pleasure, and defraud new friend. 

Emilius.

oh! but my wretch so wondrous well deceive,
 suspicion self have sure he faith believe! 
he swear such oath! ..... 

the author.

he swear! do that prevail,
 and be thou blind by a trick so stale? 
oath now be trifle few refuse to take,
 easy to form, and easy still to break;
 their perjure vow but few with horror scan;
 but few fear heavenly wrath, if safe from man,
 or shudder think, their guilt that angel know,
 the secret sin a secret still below. 
mark you, when late your cause in court be try,
 and your false friend his lawful debt deny,
 one slight convulsion, or one transient blush
 bid his lip quiver, or his forehead flush? 
falter his tongue, when, lose all sacred fear,
 on god he call to prove his word sincere;
 and wish, if just your charge, to curse his sin
 flame may consume himself and all his kin? 
no! such his earnest air, and changeless face,
 each word, each look such candour seem to grace,
 so firm his voice, so bold and clear his eye,
 yourself can scarce believe his tale a lie! 

Emilius.

it be true! it be true! with horror strike i hear
 the unblushing villain speak the damn word. 
god! how can man thus brave celestial ire,
 while heaven have justice, and while hell have fire! 

the author.

alas! my friend, a awful truth to tell,
 there be, who scorn that heaven, and mock that hell. 
in vain for these alternate season reign,
 spring robe the field, and autumn swell the grain;
 in vain the moon now gild the brow of night,
 and now the sun pour flood of glorious light:
 "it be chance," they cry, "to those fair orb give birth,
" and chance alone with produce bless the earth! " 
then bold on the sacred book they lie
 their lip to swear some good man wealth away,
 and while his spoil their ravish eye bewitch,
 laugh at poor rogue, less impious and less rich. 

other, who timid guilt forbid to climb
 those dreadful height where atheist soar sublime,
 own that a power supreme exist on high,
 but while they own a power, that power defy. 
to these the priest inspire describe in vain
 each promise pleasure, and each threaten pain:
 heaven future joy their notice scarce seem worth,
 wealth in this world, their present heaven on earth,
 nor fear they to deserve the eternal curse,
 hell bad, it be true, but want of money worse! 

 "let wrath divine," thus gripe in transport cry,
 "curse every limb, and quench my blast eye,
" if still harmonious sound my ear may drink,
 "while in yond chest my count guinea chink,
" and still my palsy hand have power to hold,
 "close to my heart, this bag of darling gold! 
" what! shall i fear, indignant heaven to see
 "its magazine of plague exhaust on i? 
" what! shall i mourn the bargain make, if wealth
 "i buy with loss of fame, and loss of health? 
" no, still with glad content my heart shall beat,
 "though torture rack my hand, my eye, my foot,
" if hoard of gold my burst coffer fill,
 "gold, which can soothe each pang, each fear can still,
" comfort for every care, and balm for every ill! 

 "yet why these fear? celestial wrath, we know,
" though just, be merciful; though fierce, be slow:
 "perhaps too, when arrive the avenge hour,
" repentant prayer may calm heaven angry power;
 "nor always in the world vast book we find
" to equal sin a equal doom assign. 
 "here see with honour crown, there'whelm with grief,
" the indian spoiler, and the english thief;
 "and mark, what vary fate their plunder stop
" who rob a nation, and who rob a shop. 
 "rascal alike, by Fortune wayward sport
" one go to Tyburn, tother go to court;
 "and while this rogue be doom in air to swing,
" that for a peerage kneel to thank the king. " 

the sophist fear thus calm, the legal war
 no more he dread, but dauntless seek the bar,
 arrive before you, wonder why you stay,
 and cry — "sure conscience make the wretch delay!" 
catch by his tranquil air and front of brass,
 (oft do for innocence assurance pass)
 the judge declare your charge must groundless be,
 its malice blame, and set the prisoner free;
 while you with fierce rage assert your cause,
 and term the judge corrupt, unjust the law,
 than Sappho feel when Drury damn her work,
 or gallia struggle raise in zealous Burke! 

yet now, Emilius, let my prayer assuage
 awhile this flood of grief, this storm of rage,
 nor scorn my counsel, though from one it flow,
 who life few year, who brain small judgement know:
 your lack of temper suit my lack of wit,
 and boyish grief with boyish counsel fit. 
when amputation risque a patient life,
 some skilful hand shall guide the surgeon knife;
 but who to bleed he Farquhar need retain,
 when the next barber boy can breathe the vein? 

Mark then! — if what you mourn, be some dire ill
 no partner suffer, and no time can still;
 if some strange curse, some plague to nature new,
 on you have fall, and fall on none but you,
 no word of i shall mock your publish pain,
 or strive to bind your wrath in reason chain. 
who know the human heart, must also know
 how keen the pang which make your sorrow flow:
 not with those sigh, which heave the nephew heart,
 who see his hoard uncle life depart;
 not with those tear, which custom bid be shed
 by youthful widow for old husband dead;
 grieve they, who dear depart wealth behold,
 and mourn, not loss of friend, but loss of gold. 
no force affliction bid their sorrow rise;
 they need no onion to provoke their eye;
 no! — lose that idol most adore and dear,
 heart-felt despair, wild rage, and grief sincere
 burst in each bitter sigh, gush in each scald tear. 

yet sure, my friend, it be wrong, unusual rage
 to feel at crime so usual in this age,
 unless your lot by fate you hope design
 free from all cross common to mankind. 
alas! ere beat your breast, ere rend your hair,
 weigh, what you bear yourself, what other bear. 
no pang be you past man, past heaven relief,
 no mighty mischief move this mighty grief;
 search but the world, then own your wrong how small
 place near those wrong on other head which fall. 
must i attest the fact? to prove how vice
 reign sovereign here, one house can well suffice. 
to Bow-Street turn! —

you giddy, gay, and proud,
 who swell great London ever-bustling crowd,
 London, where all extreme together meet,
 folly chief throne, and wisdom grave seat;
 where disagreement in agreement lie,
 our close-knit mass of contrariety;
 where throng the rich and poor, the fool and knave,
 where statesman juggle, and where patriot rave;
 where ball for advocate prepare their work,
 and embryo law-suit in a whisper lurk;
 where Cupid pay in specie for his wile,
 and judge frown whenever a lady smile;
 where equal farce continual sport afford
 at Covent-Garden, or the house of lord;
 where beggar with feign tear and ready smile,
 cringe to saint James, or blubber to saint Giles;
 you who confuse sail in motley trim
 down this full flood of pleasure, business, whim,
 whether you frame smooth, glib, and specious lie
 to cheat a tradesman, or to raise supply,
 with private or with public misery sport,
 cheat upon 'change, or parasite at court,
 now pause awhile! — for one reflect hour
 forgo your hope of gain, your dream of power,
 and hark, while tell the muse what monstrous crime,
 what newfound sin reserve for our strange time,
 their hideous form to Addington betray,
 from morn first languish to the death of day. 
here mark the thankless child, the unnatural sire,
 the pandar slave who let his spouse for hire,
 the adulterous friend, the trust wanton wife,
 the brother aim at the brother life,
 the rake who cool in beauty arm his heat,
 then let she starve, or ply for bread the street,
 and that dark train of foe to moral rule,
 thief, bawd, assassin, gambler, knave, and fool,
 fool, who will fain be knave ...... no more i will write,
 hence, odious form, nor long shock my sight! 
else by disgust and scorn to madness drive,
 burst those chain which bind my soul to heaven,
 i shall disdain to breathe such taint air,
 shall blush a human form like these to wear,
 for present ease shall barter future bliss,
 and sure no world can be more black than this,
 deep in my swell heart shall plunge the knife,
 and cry, while fly my soul from mortal strife,
 "heaven bless my father, though he give i life!" 

cease, wild enthusiast! end thy angry tale,
 over human frailty drop compassion veil;
 view they with grief, not rage, nor dare to scan
 with censure too severe thy fellow-man! 
think, have no parent watch thy pliant youth,
 curb thy wild passion, turn thy step to truth,
 and teach thou by her radiant light to know
 that bliss be virtue, and that guilt be woe,
 spurn restraint, and scorn each sacred vow,
 haply thyself have be what these be now;
 these, who by headstrong passion force away,
 or press want, or strong example sway,
 stranger to love of man, or fear of god,
 but tread perhaps those path their parent tread,
 while ignorance lead they to that whirlpool brink,
 where long they struggle, and where now they sink! 

oh! view their lot, my soul, nor more repine
 to bear those evil fate have fix on i;
 content, though many a grief my bosom wring,
 if still that bosom own no conscious sting,
 if still i know for other wound to feel,
 with pity view they, and with pleasure heal,
 and still those pang which cause so keen a smart,
 nor sour my temper, nor deprave my heart. 
yes! though by fate with heavy sorrow curse,
 from my pale lip not murmur breath shall burst,
 if still my hand have power to raise the oppress,
 and, though unblest myself, make other bless! 

that power, Emilius, still be you! — then why
 thus pant your bosom, and thus flame your eye? 
your gold, though lose ..... 

Emilius.

...... nay, it be not gold which make
 this fury tear i; but my bile it shake,
 that still my lawful suit in vain i urge,
 and still yond caitiff mock the avenge scourge! 
can i but once his well-earned suffering see! .... 

the author.

and will his suffering then bring wealth to thou? 
will with his blood gold to thy coffer run,
 or all his groan repay thou one pound one? 

Emilius.

not so; but vengeance ..... 

the author.

...... hush! — to mention fear
 what thou must shame to speak, i shame to hear! 
base mind alone delight in vengeance find,
 that low vile passion of a low vile mind! 
oh! think, when summon to the throne of heaven,
 as thou forgave, so thou shall be forgive! 
and think, what pang will rack each throb nerve,
 if god shall judge we, as our fault deserve! 
say, at this moment shall the perjure wretch,
 sting with remorse, his hand implore stretch
 towards thou for pardon, while with tear and groan
 thy foot he kiss, and his guilt he own,
 shall that foot spurn he? will thou frown, and cry
 "back, sinner, to the flame thou fain will fly!" 
it be noble far, thy thirst of vengeance over,
 to bid the sinner rise, and sin no more;
 it be noble far to play the christian part,
 aid struggle conscience to secure his heart,
 confirm his faith, with hope inspire his breast,
 and make he virtuous now, hereafter bless. 
then, when thou diedst, the transport thy will be
 proud to boast — "god owe a soul to i!" 

but if revenge alone can please you, know,
 even now, though law be blind, though justice slow,
 more pang he feel, his heart by conscience rent,
 than you can name, or mortal brain invent. 
true, from his lip no complaint inform the crowd
 what pain be his — deep be his groan, not loud;
 true, from his eye no stream of anguish roll,
 his burn tear fall inward on his soul:
 there brood thy viper, conscious guilt, and dart
 with ceaseless spite their fang into his heart;
 there print with bloodless stroke thy silent steel
 wound, that no balm can ease, no time can heal! 
not all the pang which dante vision swell,
 no freeze limbo, and no fiery hell,
 surpass his torment, who still bear unblest
 a self-accuser in his own sad breast. 
disgust, and ceaseless care, and anxious fear
 still share his bed, and at his board appear. 
in vain his cook their various art combine
 each dish to season, and each sauce refine;
 champagne rich grape in vain, to cheer his soul,
 with brilliant bubble fill his crystal bowl:
 the harpy conscience pounce on her prey,
 tear from his hand the untasted food away,
 and, ere the wine his pallid lip can pass,
 her gall-fraught tongue drop poison in his glass. 

next mark, my friend, his slumber! — if repose
 list to his suit, and bid his eye-lid close,
 mark what convulsion heave his martyr breast,
 and frequent start, and heart-drawn sigh attest,
 though nature grant he sleep, that guilt deny he rest. 
now groan of torture ghost his ear affright;
 now ghastly phantom dance before his sight;
 and now he see (and scream in frantic fear)
 to size gigantic swell thy angry shade appear! 
swift at thy summons rush with hideous yell
 their prey to seize the denizen of hell! 
headlong they hurl he on some ice-rock point,
 mangle each limb, and dislocate each joint;
 or plunge he deep in blue sulphureous lake;
 or lash his quiver flesh with twist snake;
 or in his brain their burn talon dart;
 or from his bosom rend his pant heart
 to bathe their fiery lip in guilty gore! —
 then start he from his couch, while dew of horror pour
 down his dank forehead — wring his hand, and pray to sleep no more. 

hark! the storm-daemon shriek! — it thunder! — lo! 
how pale his cheek, how wild his eye-ball grow,
 hear the first murmur; while he wait the crash,
 and dread to see the etherial meteor flash. 
no shock of cloud, he think, no casual hand
 roll the red bolt, or dart the avenge brand;
 it be heaven own voice in thunder bid he die,
 and it be to blast he yond blue lightning fly! 
his fear be vain; the storm disperse; — true,
 but who can answer what the next may do? 
though now sweet nature sleep, and sky be fair,
 soon gather cloud again may gloom the air;
 soon shaft divine, wing by celestial breath,
 again may glare, and the next shaft bring death! 

with ceaseless fear and conscious pang oppress
 by day, by night unknown one hour of rest,
 waste his limb, his strength and spirit flee,
 disease now chain he on her thorny bed. 
the couch in crowd though galen son surround,
 his dire complaint deride their skill profound;
 no medicine bring relief, no pang be ease,
 for who can medicine to a mind disease? 
heaven lord alone! — "and shall i dare invoke
" with prayer that power, who holy law i break? 
 "in heaven still fresh my violate vow,
" will angel heed my force repentance now? 
 "hence, idle thought! no prayer can now obtain
" aid from insult heaven, and man be vain! " 
thus cry the wretch, distraction in his eye,
 hopeless to live, yet unprepared to die;
 by fear his soul, by pain his body vex,
 by conscience torture, and by doubt perplex,
 loathe this world, and shudder at the next. 

yet though his old offence thus brand with shame
 his conscious forehead, and unman his frame,
 when some new sin excite his impious zeal,
 his heart be adamant, his nerve be steel:
 nor think, your perjure friend, reform by time,
 will bound his forfeit to this single crime. 
the rose of innocence, once rend away,
 no more shall grace his brow. and who can say,
 "one step, and then no further?" — this first sin
 crown with success, ere long his foot shall win
 to lofty height of vice, and urge his fate
 from bad to worse, from little crime to great,
 till his broad guilt for public vengeance call,
 and to the law his life a victim fall. 
then shall thou own (and blush at thy mistrust),
 crime still be punish, and god still be just! 

here break we off! — speed thou to Lombard-street,
 or plod the gamble 'change with busy foot,
'midst bull and bear some false report to spread,
 of Prussia arm, or Buonaparte dead,
 from specious lie a honest gain to draw,
 and spoil some wretch in form allow by law;
 more dupe to find, more knavish trick to learn,
 and fool thyself, fool other in thy turn:
 while i, sequester in some favourite nook,
 or guide the pencil, or explore the book,
 bless, if still free from mad ambition dream,
 youth vain rash hope, and inter sordid scheme,
 i sometime hear, to cheer my lonely hour,
 the muse awake her lute harmonious power,
 and still can boast (when down life vale i bend
 my step, nor grieve, nor glad my day to end),
 a feeling heart, a open hand, content, and one true friend. 
