ode x.  on lyric poetry.

once more i join the thespian choir,
 and taste the inspire fount again:
 o parent of the graecian lyre,
 admit i to thy secret strain —
 and lo! with ease my step invade
 the pathless vale and open shade,
 till now i spy her verdant seat,
 and now at large i drink the sound,
 while these her offspring, listen round,
 by turn her melody repeat. 

i see Anacreon smile and sing:
 he silver tress breathe perfume;
 his cheek display a second spring
 of rose teach by wine to bloom. 
away, deceitful care away! 
and let i listen to his lay,
 while flow'fy dream my soul employ;
 while turtle-winged the laugh hour
 lead hand in hand the festal power,
 lead youth and love, and harmless joy. 

break from the fetter of his native land,
 devote shame and vengeance to her lord
 with loud impulse and a threaten hand,
 the lesbian patriot smite the sound chord:
 you wretch, you perfidions train,
 you curse of god and free-born man,
 you murderer of the law,
 though now you glory in your lust,
 though now you tread the feeble neck in dust,
 yet time and righteous Jove will judge your dreadful cause. 

but lo, to sappho mournful air
 descend the radiant queen of love;
 she smile, and ask what fond care
 her suppliant plaintive measure move. 
why be my faithful maid distress? 
who, Sappho, wound thy tender breast? 
say, fly he? — soon he shall pursue:
 shun he thy gift? — he too shall give:
 slight he thy sorrow? — he shall grieve,
 and bend he to thy haughty vow. 

but, o Melpomene, for who
 awake thy golden shell again? 
what mortal breath shall ever presume
 to echo that unbounded strain? 
majestic in the frown of year,
 behold, the man of Thebes appear:
 for some there be, who mighty frame
 the hand of Jove at birth endow
 with hope that mock the gaze crowd;
 as eagle drink the noontide flame,

while the dim raven beat his weary wing,
 and clamour far below. — propitious Muse,
 while i so late unlock thy hallow spring,
 and breathe whatever thy ancient air infuse,
 to polish albion warlike ear
 this long-lost melody to hear,
 thy sweet art employ;
 as when the wind from shore to shore,
 through Greece thy lyre persuasive language bear,
 till town and isle, and sea return the vocal joy. 

but oft amid the graecian throng,
 the loose-robed form of wild desire
 with lawless note intune thy song,
 to shameful step dissolve thy choir. 
o fair, o chaste be still with i
 from such profane discord free:
 while i frequent thy tuneful shade,
 no frantic shout of thracian dame,
 no satyr fierce with savage flame
 thy please accent shall invade. 

queen of the lyre, in thy retreat
 the fair flower of Pindus glow;
 the vine aspire to crown thy seat,
 and myrtle round thy laurel grow. 
thy string attune their vary strain,
 to every pleasure, every pain,
 which mortal tribe be bear to prove,
 and strait our passion rise or fall,
 as at the wind imperious call
 the ocean swell the billow move. 

when midnight listen over the slumber earth,
 let i, o Muse, thy solemn whisper hear:
 when morning send her fragrant breeze forth,
 with airy murmur touch my open ear. 
and ever watchful at thy side,
 let wisdom awful suffrage guide
 the tenor of thy lay:
 to she of old by Jove be give
 to judge the various deed of earth and heaven;
 it be thy by gentle art to win we to her sway. 

oft as from stricter hour resign
 i quit the maze where science toil,
 do thou refresh my yield mind
 with all thy gay, delusive spoil. 
but, o indulgent, come not nigh
 the busy step, the jealous eye
 of gainful care and wealthy age,
 who barren soul thy joy disdain,
 and hold as foe to reason reign
 whomever thy lovely haunt engage. 

with i, when mirth consent band
 around fair friendship genial board
 invite thy heart-awakening hand,
 with i salute the teian chord,
 or if invoke at soft hour,
 o seek with i the happy bower. 
that hear Dione be gentle tongue;
 to beauty link with virtue train,
 to love devoid of jealous pain,
 there let the sapphic lute be string. 

but when from envy and from death to claim
 a hero bleed for his native land;
 or when to nourish freedom vestal flame,
 i hear my genius utter his command. 
nor theban voice, nor lesbian lyre
 from thou, o Muse, do i require,
 while my prophetic mind,
 conscious of power she never know,
 astonish grasp at thing beyond her view,
 nor by another fate have feel she own confine. 
