a elegy on the death of that true perfection of beauty and goodness, the lady Essex spicket, who dye of the small-pox, immediate after her marriage.

mors.

great second cause, of man original,
why do thy head upon thy bosom fall?
why be thy active spirit all disperse?
why thy robe tear, and genial torch reverse,
as if the end of nature now be come,
and general dissolution fill one tomb.
since mortal all by our disposés move,
i point their date of time, and thou their love
since death be natural to all be bear,
why do thou languish thus, why do thou mourn?

HYMEN.

thou bloodless tyrant of mortality;
pale king of charnel, can thou ask i why?
ah, that i can reverse heaven great decree,
and in thy place fix any fate but thou!
thou that thus rude dare my right invade,
and cloud love bright lustre with thy shade,
with barbarous power act a lawless guest,
and rape a virgin from her nuptial feast;
the sharp bolt in heaven with fatal speed,
my eager rage shall dart upon thy head,

Mo. 

rage in vain, — thou idle spend thy breath,
do thou not know reward for sin be death?
since primitive offence, HYMEN, for sin i own,
but ah, why shall she perish that have none?
the sweet aspatia be all purity.

mors.

be not the sweet aspatia bear to die?

Hym. 

though nature tribute once she be to pay
can it be due upon her wedding-day;
a time when rapture the please sense control,
and spritely joy keep revel in their soul.
when Vesta fond of her dear charge to i,
have just give up her beauteous votary,
a sacred mould for a bless progeny:
at such a time when love do bright shine,
when life be dear, to force she to resign
be cruelty fit for no breast but thy.

Mo. 

these argument how vain you employ!
you be a friend, but i swear foe to joy;
at the wide door of luxury i wait,
and summon there the least prepare to fate;
a envious pleasure do my breast overflow
to dash their sweet draught of life with woe;
so when the haughty syrian monarch crown
his swell bowl in gulf of pleasure drown;
when consecrate vessel be not free
from the wild law of his impiety;
when thoughtless epicure swell with excess,
and wanton woman charm his soul with bliss,
the fatal hand upon the wall be place,
subscribe that short moment for his last.

Hym. 

why name thou that, or syria monarch here
death, as reward of sin be proper there;
his ill spend day obtain to long a date,
spot with crime and mellow for his fate;
but sweet aspatia guiltless from her birth,
divine live a angel upon earth.

mors.

Merrit extreme, but with a mortal date,

Hym. 

all worth be mortal with remorseless fate;
a charm grace do all her action guide,
a sacred virtue never soil with pride;
a saint-like piety, a pity heart,
a uncorrupted beauty without art,
humble as cottage girl, yet awful too,
kidn to distress, and to all Merrit true;
devout as angel, sing hymn on high,
yet spite of all their grace:

Mo. 

bear to die:

Hym. 

if these can not thy avarice overcome,
thou may take more to swell the mighty sum,
her graceful modesty, her mighty wit,
the one delightful, as the other great;
and then for patience, and bless charity,
none ever her equal know:

Mo. 

yet bear to die,

Hym. 

not only die, but in her bloom age,
to feel the curse of thy extreme rage,
a double death do she dear life pursue,
of beauty first, and then of nature too,
vile Schelliton that will not pity show,
but where no flesh be, how shall pity grow?
be thy soul form of any thing but spite,
or all the contrary of soft delight:
those eye late blind with disease so foul
with point beam have shoot thou to the soul,

Mo. 

that be one reason why i quench their fire,
her wit and beauty do so far aspire,
even death have else be fool into desire,
pity have warm my breast to let she live,
and female charm have purchase a reprieve,
have not resent ghost over who i reign,
all murmur at a thought so strange, so vain,
declare in the grand council of my state,
pity be fit for any thing but fate.

Hym. 

and fate more fit for any thing than love,
henceforth aloud in every-shady grove,
where harmless lover pretty garland weave.
the swain and nymph aspatia obsequy,
shall sing with heavy heart and weep eye;
aspatia hapless fate each breast shall sway,
aspatia story shall wear out the day,
satyr shall range from their obscure abode,
vice shall grow famous, marriage out of mode,
and till by warrant from the deity
HYMEN have power to alter fate decree,
of this great wrong he will never cease to complain,
nor ever tie the genial knot again.
