[the season:] autumn.

crown with the sickle, and the wheaten shear,
 while autumn, nod over the yellow plain,
 come jovial on; the doric reed once more,
 well-pleased, i tune. whatever the wintery frost
 nitrous prepare; the various-blossomed spring
 put in white promise forth; and summer-sun
 concoct strong, rush boundless now to view,
 full, perfect all, and swell my glorious theme. 

Onslow! the muse, ambitious of thy name,
 to grace, inspire, and dignify her song,
 will from the public voice thy gentle ear
 a while engage. thy noble care she know,
 the patriot-virtue that distend thy thought,
 spread on thy front, and in thy conduct glow;
 while listen senate hang upon thy tongue,
 devolve through the maze of eloquence
 a roll of period, sweet than her song. 
but she too pant for public virtue, she,
 though weak of power, yet strong in ardent will,
 whenever her country rush on her heart,
 assume a bold note, and fond try
 to mix the patriot with the poet flame. 

when the bright virgin give the beauteous day,
 and Libra weigh in equal scale the year;
 from heaven high cope the fierce effulgence shake
 of part summer, a serener blue,
 with golden light irradiate, wide invest
 the happy world. attempered sun arise,
 sweet-beamed, and shed oft through lucid cloud
 a please calm; while broad, and brown, below,
 unbounded harvest hang the heavy head. 
rich, silent, deep, they stand; for not a gale
 roll its light billow over the bend plain;
 a calm of plenty! till the ruffle air
 fall from its poise, and give the breeze to blow. 
rent be the fleecy mantle of the sky;
 the cloud fly different; and the sudden sun
 by fit effulgent gild the illumine field,
 and black by fit the shadow sweep along. 
a gayly chequer, wide-extended view,
 far as the circle eye can shoot around,
 convolve, and toss in a flood of corn. 

these be thy blessing industry! rough power! 
who labour still attend, and sweat, and pain;
 yet the kind source of every gentle art,
 and all the soft civility of life:
 raiser of human kind! by nature cast,
 naked, and helpless, out amid the wood,
 and wild, to rude inclement element;
 with various power of deep efficiency
 implant, and profuse pour around
 material infinite; but idle all. 

still unexerted, in the unconscious breast,
 sleep the lethargic power; corruption still,
 voracious, swallow what the liberal hand
 of bounty scatter over the savage year. 
and still the sad barbarian, rove, mix
 with beast of prey; or for his acron-meal
 fight the fierce tusky boar: a shiver wretch! 
aghast, and comfortless, when the red north,
 with winter charge, let the mix tempest fly,
 hail, rain, and snow, and bitter-breathing frost. 
then to the shelter of the hut he flee;
 and the wild season, sordid, pine away. 
for home he have not; home be the resort
 of love, of joy, of peace, and plenty, where,
 support and support, polish friend,
 and dear relation mingle into bliss. 
but this the rugged savage never feel,
 even desolate in croud; and thus his day
 roll heavy, dark, and unenjoyed along;
 a waste of time! till industry approach,
 and rouse he from his miserable sloth;
 his faculty unfold; point out,
 where lavish nature the direct hand
 of art demand; show he how to raise
 his feeble force by the mechanic power,
 to dig the mineral from the vault earth,
 on what to turn the pierce rage of fire,
 on what the torrent, and the gather blast;
 give the tall ancient forest to his ax;
 teach he to chip the wood, and hew the stone,
 till by degree the finish fabric rise;
 tear from his limb the blood-polluted fur,
 and wrap they in the woolly vestment warm,
 or bright in glossy silk, and flow lawn;
 with wholesome viand fill his table, pour
 the generous glass around, inspire, to wake
 the life-refining soul of decent wit:
 nor stop at barren, bare necessity;
 but still advance bold, lead he on,
 by hardy patience, and experience slow,
 to pomp, to pleasure, elegance, and grace;
 and breathe high ambition through his soul,
 set science, wisdom, glory in his view,
 and bid he be the lord of all below. 

then gather man their natural power combine,
 and form a public; to the general good
 submit, aim, and conduct all. 
for this the patriot-council meet, the full,
 the free, and fair represent whole,
 for this devise the holy guardian law,
 distinguish order, animate art,
 and with joint force oppression chain, set
 imperial justice at the helm; yet still
 to they accountable: nor slavish dream
 that toil million must resign their weal,
 and all the honey of their search, to such
 as for themselves alone themselves have raise. 

hence every form of cultivate life
 in order set, protect, and inspire,
 into perfection wrought. unite all,
 society grow numerous, high, polite,
 and happy. nurse of art! the city rise;
 and stretch street on street by thousand lead,
 from twine woody haunt, and the tough yew
 to bow strong-straining, her aspire son. 
it be nought but labour, the whole dusky group
 of cluster house, and of mingle man,
 restless design, and execution strong. 
in every street the sound hammer ply
 his massy task; while the corrosive file,
 in fly touch, form the fine machine. 

then commerce bring into the public walk
 the busy merchant; the big warehouse build;
 raise the strong crane; choke up the load street
 with foreign plenty; and on thou, thou Thames,
 large, gentle, deep, majestic, king of flood! 
than who no river heave a full tide,
 seize for his grand resort. on either hand,
 like a long wintery forest, grove of mast
 shoot up their spire; the belly sheet between
 possess the breezy void; the sooty hulk
 steer sluggish on; the splendid barge along
 row, regular, to harmony; around,
 the boat, light-skimming, stretch its oary wing;
 while deep the various voice of fervent toil
 from bank to bank increase; whence rib with oak,
 to bear the british thunder, black, and bold,
 the roar vessel rush into the main. 

then too the pillared dome, magnific, heave
 his ample roof; and luxury within
 pour out her glitter store. the canvas smooth,
 with glow life protuberant, to the view
 embody rose. the statue seem to breathe,
 and soften into flesh, beneath the touch
 of form art, imagination-flushed. 

all be the gift of industry; whatever
 exalt, embellish, and render life
 delightful. pensive winter cheere by he
 sit at the social fire, and happy hear
 the exclude tempest idle rave along. 
his harden finger deck the gaudy spring. 
without he summer be a arid waste;
 nor to the autumnal month can thus transmit
 these full, mature, immeasurable store,
 that, wave round, recall my wander song. 

soon as the morning tremble over the sky,
 and, unperceived, unfold the spread day;
 before the ripen field the reaper stand,
 in fair array; each by the lass he love,
 to bear the rough part, and mitigate
 by nameless gentle office her toil. 
at once they stoop, and swell the lusty sheaf;
 while, bandy round and round, the rural talk,
 the rural scandal, and the rural jest
 fly hearty, to deceive the tedious time,
 and chear steal the sultry hour away. 
behind the master walk, build up the shock;
 and, conscious, glance oft this way and that
 his sate eye, feel his heart heave with joy. 
the gleaner spread around, and here and there,
 spike after spike, their spare harvest pick. 
be not too narrow, husbandman! but fling
 from the full sheaf, with charitable stealth,
 the liberal handful. think, oh grateful think! 
how good the god of harvest be to you;
 who pour abundance over your flow field;
 while these unhappy partner of your kind
 wide-hove round you, like the fowl of heaven,
 and ask their humble dole. the various turn
 of fortune ponder; that your son may want
 what now, with hard reluctance, faint, you give. 

the lovely young Lavinia once have friend;
 and fortune smile, deceitful, on her birth. 
for in her helpless year deprive of all,
 of every stay, save innocence and heaven,
 she with her widow mother, feeble, old,
 and poor, live in a cottage, lose far up
 amid the wind of a woody vale;
 safe from the cruel, blast art of man;
 almost on nature common bounty feed,
 like the gay bird that sing they to repose,
 content, and careless of tomorrow fare. 
her form be fresh than the morning-rose,
 when the dew wet its leaf; unstained, and pure,
 as be the lily, or the mountain snow. 
the modest virtue mingle in her eye,
 still on the ground deject, and dart all
 their humid beam into the bloom flower:
 or when the story that her mother tell,
 of what her faithless fortune flatter once,
 thril in she think, they, like the dewy star
 of evening, shine in tear. a native grace
 sit fair-proportioned on her polish limb,
 veil in a simple robe; for loveliness
 need not the foreign aid of ornament,
 but be when unadorned adorn the most. 
thoughtless of beauty, she be beauty self,
 recluse among the wood; if city-dame
 will deign their faith. and thus she go compel
 by strong necessity, with as serene,
 and please a look as patience can put on,
 to glean palaemon field. the pride of swain
 Palaemon be, the generous, and the rich,
 who lead the rural life in all its joy,
 and elegance, such as arcadian song
 transmit from ancient, incorrupted time;
 when tyrant custom have not shackle man,
 and free to follow nature be the mode. 
he then, his fancy with autumnal scene
 amuse, chance beside his reaper-train
 to walk, when poor Lavinia draw his eye;
 unconscious of her power, and turn quick
 with unaffected blush from his gaze. 
he see her charm, but he see not half
 the charm her down-cast modesty conceal. 
that very moment love and chaste desire
 spring in his bosom, to himself unknown;
 for still the world prevail, and its dread laugh
 which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn,
 shall his heart own a glean in the field:
 and thus in secret to his soul he sigh. 

what pity! that so delicate a form,
 by beauty kindle, and harmonious shape,
 where sense sincere, and goodness seem to dwell,
 shall be devote to the rude embrace
 of some indecent clown? she look, methinks,
 of old acasto line; and to my mind
 recall that patron of my happy life,
 from who my liberal fortune take its rise;
 now to the dust go down; his house, land,
 and once fair-spreading family dissolve. 
i have hear that, in some waste obscure retreat,
 urge by remembrance sad, and decent pride,
 far from those scene which know their better day,
 his age widow and his daughter live;
 who yet my fruitless search can never find. 
romantic wish, will this the daughter be! 

when, strict inquire, from herself he find
 she be the same, the daughter of his friend,
 the bountiful acasto; who can speak
 the mingle passion that surprise his heart,
 and through his nerve in shiver transport run? 
then blaze his smother flame, avow, and bold;
 and as he run she, ardent, over and over,
 love, gratitude, and pity weep at once. 
confuse, and frighten at his sudden tear,
 her rise beauty flush a high bloom,
 as thus Palaemon, passionate, and just,
 pour out the pious rapture of his soul. 

and be thou then acasto dear remain? 
she, who my restless gratitude have seek
 so long in vain? oh yes! the very same,
 the soften image of my noble friend,
 alive, his every feature, every look,
 more elegant touch. fair than spring! 
thou sole survive blossom from the root,
 that nourish up my fortune, say, ah where,
 in what unsmiling desert, have thou draw
 the kind aspect of delight heaven? 
into such beauty spread? and blow so white? 
though poverty cold wind, and crash rain,
 beat keen, and heavy, on thy tender year. 
o let i now, into a rich soil,
 transplant thou safe! where vernal sun, and shower,
 diffuse their warm, large influence;
 and of my garden be the pride, and joy! 
it ill befit thou, oh it ill befit
 acasto daughter, he, who open store,
 though vast, be little to his ampler heart,
 the father of a country, thus to pick
 the very refuse of those harvest-field,
 his bounty teach to gain, and right enjoy. 
then throw that shameful pittance from thy hand,
 but ill apply to such a rugged task;
 with harvest shine all these field be thy;
 and, if my wish may presume so far,
 their master too, who then indeed be bless,
 to make the daughter of acasto so. 

here cease the youth: yet still his speak eye
 express the sacred triumph of his soul,
 with conscious virtue, gratitude, and love,
 above the vulgar joy divine raise. 
nor wait he reply. win by the charm
 of goodness irresistible, and all
 in sweet disorder lose, she blush consent. 
the news immediate to her mother bring,
 while, pierce with anxious thought, she pine away
 the lonely moment for lavinia fate;
 amaze, and scarce believe what she hear,
 joy seize her wither vein, and one bright gleam
 of set life shine on her evening-hour:
 not less enrapture than the happy pair;
 who flourish long in mutual bliss, and rear
 a numerous offspring, lovely like themselves,
 and good, the grace of all the country round. 

defeat oft the labour of the year,
 the sultry south collect a potent blast. 
at first, the grove be scarce see to stir
 their tremble top; and a still murmur run
 along the soft-inclining field of corn. 
but as the aereal tempest full swell;
 and in one mighty stream, invisible,
 immense, the whole excite atmosphere,
 impetuous rush over the sound world;
 strain to the root, the stoop forest pour
 a rustle shower of yet untimely leaf. 
high-beat, the circle mountain eddy in,
 from the bare wild, the dissipate storm,
 and send it in a torrent down the vale. 
expose, and naked, to its utmost rage,
 through all the sea of harvest roll round,
 the billowy plain boil wide; nor can evade,
 though pliant to the blast, its seize force;
 or whirl in air, or into vacant chaff
 shake waste. and sometime too a burst of rain,
 sweep from the black horizon, broad, descend
 in one continuous flood. still over head
 the glomerate tempest grow, and still
 the deluge deepen; till the field around
 lie sink, and flat, in the sordid wave. 
sudden, the ditch swell; the meadow swim. 
red, from the hill, innumerable stream
 tumultuous roar; and high above its bank
 the river lift; before who weighty rush,
 herd, flock, and harvest, cottage, and swain,
 roll mingle down; all that the wind have spare,
 in one wild moment ruin, the big hope,
 and well-earned treasure of the painful year. 
flee to some eminence, the husbandman,
 helpless behold the miserable wreck
 drive along, his drown ox at once
 descend, with his labour scatter round,
 he see; and instant over his shiver thought
 come winter unprovided, and a train
 of clamant child dear. you master, then
 be mindful of the rough laborious hand,
 that sink you soft in elegance, and ease;
 be mindful of those limb, in russet clad,
 who toil to you be warmth, and graceful pride;
 and oh be mindful of that spare board,
 which cover you with luxury profuse,
 make your glass sparkle, and your sense rejoice! 
nor cruel demand what the deep rain,
 and all-involving wind have sweep away. 

here the rude clamour of the sportsman joy,
 the gun thick-thundering, and the wind horn,
 will tempt the muse to ling the rural game. 
how, in his mid-career, the spaniel strike,
 stiff, by the taint gale, with open nose,
 outstretched, and fine sensible, draw full,
 fearful, and cautious, on the latent prey;
 as in the sun the circle covey bask
 their vary plume, watchful, and every way
 through the rough stubble turn the secret eye. 
catch in the meshy snare, in vain they beat
 their useless wing, entangle more and more:
 nor on the surge of the boundless air,
 though bear triumphant, be they safe; the gun,
 glance just, and sudden, from the fowler eye,
 overtake their sound pinion; and again,
 immediate, bring they from the tower wing,
 dead to the ground; or drive they else disperse,
 wound, and wheel various, down the wind. 

these be not subject for the peaceful muse,
 nor will she stain her spotless theme with such;
 then most delight, when she smile see
 the whole mix animal creation round
 alive, and happy. it be not joy to she,
 this false cheerful, barbarous game of death;
 this rage of pleasure, which the restless youth
 awake, impatient, with the gleam morn;
 when beast of prey retire, that all night long,
 urge by necessity, have roam the dark;
 as if their conscious ravage shun the light,
 ashamed. not so the steady tyrant man,
 who with the thoughtless insolence of power
 inflame, beyond the most infuriate rage
 of the worst monster that ever howl the waste,
 for sport alone take up the cruel tract,
 amid the beam of the gentle day. 
upbraid we not, you wolf! you tiger fell! 
for hunger kindle you, and lawless want;
 but lavish feed, in nature bounty roll,
 to laugh at anguish, and rejoice in blood,
 be what your horrid bosom never know. 

poor be the triumph over the timid hare! 
shake from the corn, and now to some lone seat
 retire: the rushy fen; the ragged furz,
 stretch over the stony heath; the stubble chapt;
 the thistly lawn; the thick, entangle broom;
 of the same friendly hue, the wither fern;
 the fallow ground lay open to the sun,
 concoctive; and the nod sandy bank,
 hang over the maze of the mountain-brook. 
vain be her best precaution; though she sit
 by nature raise to take the horizon in;
 and head couch close betwixt her hairy foot,
 in act to spring away. the scent dew
 betray her early labyrinth; and deep,
 in scatter, sullen opening, far behind,
 with every breeze she hear the come storm. 
but near, and more frequent, as it load
 the sigh gale, she spring amaze, and all
 the savage soul of game be up at once:
 the pack full-opening, varion; the shrill horn,
 resound from the hill; the neigh steed,
 wild for the chace; and the loud hunter shout;
 over a weak, harmless, fly creature, all
 mix in mad tumult, and discordant joy. 

the stag too, single from the herd, where long
 he range the branch monarch of the shade,
 before the tempest drive. at first in speed,
 he, sprightly, put his faith; and, fear-aroused,
 give all his swift, aereal soul to flight. 
against the breeze he dart, that way the more
 to leave the lessen, murderous cry behind. 
deception short! though fleet than the wind
 blow over the keen-aired mountain by the north,
 he burst the thicket, glance through the glade,
 and plunge deep into the wild wood. 
if slow, yet sure, adhesive to the tract
 hot-steaming, up behind he come again
 the inhuman rout, and from the shady depth
 expel he, circle through his every shift. 
he sweep the forest oft; and sob see
 the glade, mild-opening to the golden day;
 where, in kind contest, with his butt friend
 he go to struggle, or his love enjoy. 
oft in the full-descending flood he try
 to lose the scent, and lave his burn side;
 oft seek the herd; the watchful herd alarm,
 with quick consent, avoid the infectious maze. 
what shall he do? his once so vivid nerve,
 so full of buoyant soul, inspire no more
 the faint course; but wrench, breathless toil,
 sick, seize on his heart: he stand at bay;
 and put his last weak refuge in despair. 
the big round tear run down his dapple face;
 he groan in anguish; while the growl pack,
 blood-happy, hang at his fair, jut chest,
 and mark his beauteous chequer side with gore. 

of this enough. but if the silvan youth
 who fervent blood boil into violence,
 must have the chace; behold, despise flight,
 the rous'd-up lion, resolute, and slow,
 advance full on the portend spear,
 and coward-band, that circle wheel aloof. 
slink from the cavern, and the trouble wood,
 see the grim wolf; on he his shaggy foe
 viudictive fix, for murder be his trade:
 and, growl horrid, as the brindle boar
 grin near destruction, to the monster heart
 let the dart lighten from the nervous arm. 

these Britain know not; give, you briton, then
 your sportive fury, pitiless, to pour
 loose on the sly destroyer of the flock. 
he, from his craggy wind haunt unearth,
 let all the thunder of the chace pursue. 
throw the broad ditch behind you; over the hedge
 high-bound, resistless; nor the deep morass
 refuse, but through the shake wilderness
 pick your, nice way; into the perilous flood
 bear fearless, of the rage instinct full;
 and as you ride the torrent, to the bank
 your triumph sound sonorous, run round,
 from rock to rock, in circle echo toss;
 then snatch the mountain by their woody top;
 rush down the dangerous steep; and over the lawn,
 in fancy swallow up the space between,
 pour all your speed into the rapid game. 
for happy he! who top the wheel chace;
 have every maze evolve, and every guile
 disclose; who know the merit of the pack;
 who see the villain seize, and die hard,
 without complaint, though by a hundred mouth
 at once tear, mercyless. thrice happy he! 
at hour of dusk, while the retreat horn
 call they to ghostly hall of grey renown,
 with woodland honour grace; the fox fur,
 depend decent from the roof; and spread
 round the drear wall, with antic figure fierce,
 the stag large front: he then be loud hear,
 when the night stagger with severe toil;
 and their repeat wonder shake the dome. 

but first the fuel chimney blaze wide;
 the tankard foam; and the strong table groan
 beneath the smoke sirloin, stretch immense
 from side to side; on which, with fell intent,
 they deep incision make, and talk the while
 of England glory, never to be deface,
 while hence they borrow vigour: or amain
 into the pasty plunge, at interval,
 if stomach keen can interval allow,
 relate how it run, and how it fall. 
then sate hunger bid his brother thirst
 produce the mighty bowl; the mighty bowl,
 swell high with fiery juice, steam liberal round
 a potent gale, revive as the breath
 of Maia, to the lovesick shepherdess,
 on violet diffuse, while soft she hear
 her pant shepherd steal to her arm,
 nor want be the brown octobe, draw,
 mature, and perfect, from his dark retreat
 of thirty year; and now his honest front
 flame in the light refulgent, nor ashamed
 to vie it with the vineyard best produce. 
perhaps a while, amusive, thoughtful whisk
 walk gentle round, beneath a cloud of smoke,
 wreathe, fragrant, from the pipe; or the quick dice,
 in thunder leap from the box, awake
 the sound gammon: while romp-loving miss
 be haul about, in gallantry robust. 

at last these pule idleness lay
 aside, frequent, and full, the dry divan
 close in firm circle; and set, ardent, in
 for serious drink. nor evasion sly,
 nor sober shift be to the puke wretch
 indulge askew; but earnest, brim bowl
 lave every soul, the table float round,
 and pavement, faithless to the fuddle foot. 
thus as they swim in mutual swill, the talk,
 vociferate at once by twenty tongue,
 reel fast from theme to theme; from horse, hound,
 to church, or mistress, politics, or ghost,
 in endless maze, intricate, perplex. 

meantime, with sudden interruption, loud,
 the impatient catch burst from the joyous heart. 
that moment touch be every kindred soul;
 and, open in a full-mouthed cry of joy,
 the laugh, the slap, the jocund curse go round;
 while, from their slumber shake, the kennel hound
 mix in the music of the day again. 

as when the tempest, that have vex the deep
 the dark night long, fall murmur towards morn;
 so their mirth gradual sink. their feeble tongue,
 unable to take up the cumbrous word,
 lie quite disslove. before their maudlin eye,
 see dim, and blue, the double taper dance,
 like the sun wade through the misty sky. 
then, slide sweet, they drop. overturn above
 lie the wet, break scene; and stretch below,
 each way, the drunken slaughter; where astride
 the lubber power himself triumphant sit,
 slumberous, incline still from side to side,
 and steep they, silent all, in sleep till morn. 

but if the rough sex by this red sport
 be hurry wild, let not such horrid joy
 ever stain the bosom of the british fair. 
far be the spirit of the chace from they! 
uncomely courage, unbeseeming skill,
 to spring the fence, to rein the prance steed,
 the cap, the whip, the masculine attire,
 in which they roughen to the sense, and all
 the win softness of their sex be lose. 

make up of blush, tenderness, and fear,
 in they it be graceful to dissolve at woe;
 with every motion, every word, to wave
 quick over the kindle cheek the ready blush;
 and from the small violence to shrink,
 unequal, then the lovely in their fear;
 and by this silent adulation, soft,
 to their protection more engage man. 
o may their eye no miserable sight,
 save weep lover, see! a noble game,
 through love enchant wile pursue, yet flee,
 in chace ambiguous. may their tender limb
 float in the loose simplicity of dress! 
and fashion all to harmony, alone,
 know they to seize the captivate soul,
 in rapture warble from the radiant lip;
 to teach the lute to languish; with smooth step,
 disclose motion in its every charm,
 to swim along, and swell the mazy dance;
 to train the foliage over the snowy lawn;
 to play the pencil, turn the instructive page;
 to give new flavour to the fruitful year,
 and heighten nature dainty; in their race
 to rear their grace into second life;
 to give society its high taste;
 well-ordered home man best delight to make;
 and by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
 with every kind, care-elusive art,
 to raise the glory, animate the joy,
 and sweeten all the toil of human life;
 this be the female dignity, and praise. 

you swain, now hasten to the hazel-bank;
 where, down yond dale, the wildly-winding brook
 fall hoarse from steep to steep. in close array
 fit for the thicket, and the tangle shrub,
 you virgin, come. for you their late song
 the woodland raise; the cluster nut for you
 the lover find amid the secret shade;
 or, where they burnish on the topmost bough,
 with active vigour crush down the tree;
 or shake they ripe from the resign husk,
 a glossy shower, and of a ardent brown,
 as be the ringlet of melinda hair:
 Melinda form with every grace complete,
 yet these neglect, above beauty wise,
 and far transcend such a vulgar praise. 

hence from the busy, joy-resounding field,
 in cheerful error, let we tread the maze
 of autumn, unconfined; and vital taste
 the breath of orchard big with bend fruit. 
obedient to the breeze, and beat ray,
 from the deep-loaded bough a mellow shower,
 incessant melt away. the juicy pear
 lie, in a soft profusion, scatter round. 

a various sweetness swell the gentle race;
 in species different, but in kind the same,
 by nature all-refining hand prepare,
 of tempere sun, and water, earth, and air,
 in everchanging composition mix. 
so fare it with those wide-projected heap
 of apple, which the lusty-handed year,
 innumerous, over the blush orchard shake. 
a various spirit, fresh, delicious, keen,
 dwell in their gelid pore; and, active, point
 the pierce cyder for the thirsty tongue:
 thy native theme, and boon inspirer too,
 Phillips, facetious bard, the second thou
 who noble dare, in rhyme-unfettered verse,
 with british freedom sing the british song;
 how, from silurian vat, high-sparkling wine
 foam in transparent flood; some strong, to cheer
 the wintery revel of the labour hind;
 and tasteful some, to cool the summer-hour. 

in this glad season, while his last, best beam
 the sun shed equal over the meeken day;
 oh lose i in the green, majestic walk
 of, Dodington! thy seat, serene, and plain;
 where simple nature reign; and every view,
 diffusive, spread the pure dorsetian down,
 in boundless prospect, yonder shagged with wood;
 here rich with harvest; and there white with flock. 
mean time the grandeur of thy lofty dome,
 far-splendid, seize on the ravish eye. 

new beauty rise with each revolve day;
 new column swell; and still the fresh spring find
 new plant to quicken, and new grove to green. 
full of thy genius all! the muse seat;
 where in the secret bower, and wind walk
 they twine the bay for thou. here oft alone,
 fire by the thirst of thy applause, i court
 the inspire breeze; and meditate the book
 of nature, ever-open; aim thence,
 heart-taught like thy, to learn the moral song. 

and, as i steal along, the sunny wall,
 where autumn bask, with fruit empurple deep,
 my theme still urge in my vagrant thought;
 present the downy peach; the purple plumb,
 with a fine blueish mist of animal
 cloud; the ruddy nectarine; and dark,
 beneath his ample leaf, the luscious fig.
 the vine too here her curl tendril shoot;
 hang out her cluster, swell to the south;
 and scarce wish for a warm sky. 

turn we a moment fancy rapid flight
 to vigorous soil, and clime of fair extent;
 where, by the potent sun elate high,
 the vineyard heave refulgent on the day;
 spread over the vale; or up the mountain climb,
 profuse; and drink amid the sunny rock,
 from cliff to cliff increase, the heighten blaze. 
low bend the gravid bough. the cluster clear,
 half through the foliage see, or ardent flame,
 or shine transparent; while perfection breathe
 white over the turgent film the live dew. 
as thus they brighten with exalt juice,
 touch into flavour by the mingle ray;
 the rural youth and virgin over the field,
 each fond for each to cull the autumnal prime,
 exult rove, and speak the vintage nigh. 
then come the crush swain; the country float,
 and foam unbounded with the mashy flood;
 that by degree ferment, and refine,
 round the raise nation pour the cup of joy:
 the claret smooth, deep as the lip we press,
 in sparkle fancy, while we drain the bowl;
 the mellow-tasted burgundy; and quick,
 as be the wit it give, the bright champaign. 

now by the cool, decline year condense,
 descend the copious exhalation, check
 as up the middle sky unseen they steal,
 and roll the double fog around the hill. 
no more the mountain, horrid, vast, sublime,
 who pour a sweep of river from his side;
 and deep betwixt contend kingdom lay
 the rocky, long division; while aloft,
 his piny top be, lessen, lose in air:
 no more his thousand prospect fill the view
 with great variety; but in a night
 of gather vapour, from the baffle sense,
 sink dark, and total. nor alone immerse;
 the huge dusk, gradual, swallow up the plain. 
vanish the wood. the dim-seen river seem
 sullen, and slow, to roll the misty wave. 
even in the height of noon oppress, the sun
 shed weak, and blunt, his wide-refracted ray;
 whence glare oft with many a broaden orb
 he fright the nation. indistinct on earth,
 see through the turbid air, beyond the life,
 object appear; and, wilder, over the waste,
 the shepherd stalk gigantic. till at last
 wreathe close around, in deep circle still
 successive float, sit the general fog
 unbounded over the world; and mingle thick,
 a formless, grey confusion cover all. 
as when of old (so sing the hebrew bard)
 light, uncollected, through the chaos urge
 its infant way; nor order yet have draw
 his endless train forth from the dubious gloom. 

these rove mist, that constant now begin
 to smoke along the hilly country, these,
 with mighty rain, the skill in nature say,
 the mountain-cistern fill, those grand reserve
 of water, scoop among the hollow rock;
 whence gush the stream, the ceaseless fountain play,
 and their unfailing store the river draw. 
but be this equal to the vast effect? 
be thus the volga fill? the rapid Rhine? 
the broad Euphrates? all the unnumbered flood,
 that large refresh the fair-divided earth;
 and, in the rage of summer, never cease
 to send a thunder torrent to the main? 

what though the sun draw from the steam deep
 more than the river pour? how much again,
 over the vex surge, in bitter-driving shower,
 frequent return, let the wet sailor say:
 and on the thirsty down, far from the burst
 of spring, how much, to their revive field,
 and feed flock, let lonely shepherd sing. 

but sure it be no weak, variable cause,
 that keep at once ten thousand thousand flood,
 wide-wandering over the world, so fresh, and clear,
 for ever flow, and for ever full. 
and thus some sage, deep-exploring, teach:
 that, where the hoarse, innumerable wave,
 eternal, lash the resound shore;
 suck through the sandy stratum, every way,
 the water with the sandy stratum rise;
 amid whole angle infinite strain,
 they leave each saline particle behind,
 and clear, and sweeten, as they soak along. 
nor stop the restless fluid, mount still,
 though here and there in lowly plain it spring,
 but to the mountain court by the sand,
 that lead it darkling on in faithful maze,
 far from the parent-main, it boil again
 fresh into day; and all the glitter hill
 be bright with spout rill. the vital stream
 hence, in its subterranean passage, gain,
 from the wash mineral, that restore power,
 and salutary virtue, which anew
 string every nerve, call up the kindle soul
 into the healthful cheek, and joyous eye:
 and whence, the royal maid, Amelia bloom
 with new-flushed grace; yet reserve to bless,
 beyond a crown, some happy prince; and shine,
 in all her mother matchless virtue dress,
 the Carolina of another land. 

while autumn scatter his depart gleam,
 warn of approach winter, gather, play
 the swallow-people; and toss wide around,
 over the calm sky, in convolution swift,
 the feather eddy float. rejoice once,
 before to their wintery slumber they retire;
 in cluster cling, beneath the moulder bank,
 and where the cavern sweat, as sage dream. 
or rather into warm clime convey,
 with other kindred bird of season, there
 they twitter cheerful, till the vernal month
 invite they welcome back: for, throng, now
 innumerous wing be in commotion all. 

where the Rhine lose his majestic force
 in belgian plain, win from the rage deep
 by diligence amaze, and the strong,
 unconquerable hand of liberty,
 the stork-assembly meet; for many a day,
 consult deep, and various, ever they take
 their plumy voyage through the liquid sky. 
and now their rout design, their leader choose,
 their tribe adjust, clean their vigorous wing;
 and many a circle, many a short essay
 wheel round and round, in congregation full,
 the figure flight ascend; and, ride high
 the aerial billow, mix with the cloud. 

or where the northern ocean, in vast whirl,
 boil round the naked, melancholy isle
 of farther Thule, and the atlantic surge
 pour in among the stormy Hebrides;
 who can recount what transmigration there
 be annual make? what nation come and go? 
and how the live cloud on cloud arise? 
infinite wing! till all the plume-dark air,
 and white resound store be one wild cry

here the plain, harmless native his small flock,
 and herd diminutive of many hue,
 tend on the little island verdant swell,
 the shepherd sea-girt reign; or, to the rock
 dire-clinging, gather his ovarious food;
 or sweep the fishy shore; or treasure up
 the plumage, ril full, to form the bed
 of luxury. and here a while the muse,
 high-hovering over the broad cerulean scene,
 see Caledonia, in romantic view:
 her airy mountain, from the gelid main,
 invest with a keen, diffusive sky,
 breathe the soul acute; her forest huge,
 incult, robust, and tall, by nature hand
 plant of old; her azure lake between,
 pour out extensive, and of watery wealth
 full; wind deep, and green, her fertile vale;
 with many a cool, translucent, brim flood
 wash lovely, from the Tweed, pure parent-stream,
 to where the north-inflated tempest foam
 over orca, or betubium high peak. 
nurse of a people, in misfortune school
 train up to hardy deed; soon visit
 by learning, when before the gothic rage
 she take her western flight. a generous race
 of unsubmitting spirit, wise, and brave,
 who still through bleed age struggle hard,
 to hold a hapless, undiminished state;
 too much in vain! hence of ignoble bound
 impatient, and by tempt glory bear
 over every land, for every land their life
 have flow profuse, their pierce genius plane,
 and swell the pomp of peace their faithful toil. 
as from their own clear north, in radiant stream,
 bright over Europe burst the boreal morn. 

oh be there not some patriot, in who power
 that best, that godlike luxury be place,
 of blessing thousand, thousand yet unborn,
 through late posterity? some, large of soul! 
to cheer deject industry? to give
 a double harvest to the pine swain? 
and teach the labour hand the sweet of toil? 
how, by the fine art, the native robe
 to weave; how, white as hyperborean snow,
 to form the lucid lawn; with venturous oar,
 how to dash wide the billow; nor look on,
 shameful passive, while batavian fleet
 defraud we of the glitter, finny swarm,
 that heave our frith, and crowd upon our shore;
 how all-enlivening trade to rouse, and wing
 the prosperous sail, from every grow port,
 unchallenged, round the sea-incircled globe;
 and thus unite Britain Britain make
 entire, the imperial mistress of the deep. 

yes, there be such. and full on thou, Argyle,
 her hope, her stay, her darling, and her boast,
 from her first patriot, and her hero spring,
 thy fond, implore country turn her eye:
 in thou, with all a mother triumph, see
 her every virtue, every grace combine,
 her genius, wisdom, her polite turn,
 her pride of honour, and her courage try,
 calm, and intrepid, in the very throat
 of sulphurous war, on tenier dreadful field,
 while thick around the deadly tempest fly. 
and when the trumpet, kindle war no more,
 pour not the flame squadron over the field;
 but, fruitful of fair deed, and mutual faith,
 kind peace unite the jar world again;
 let the deep olive through thy laurel twine. 
for, powerful as thy sword, from thy rich tongue
 persuasion flow, and win the high debate:
 while mix in thou combine the charm of youth,
 the force of manhood, and the depth of age. 
thou, Forbes, too, who every worth attend,
 as truth sincere, as weep friendship kind,
 thou, true generous, and in silence great,
 thy country feel through her revive art,
 plane by thy wisdom, by thy soul inform;
 and seldom have she feel the friend like thou. 

but see the fade, many-coloured wood,
 shade deepen over shade, the country round
 embrown; a crowd umbrage, dusk, and dun,
 of every hue, from wan, decline green
 to sooty dark. these now the lonesome muse,
 low-whispering, lead into their leaf-strown walk,
 and give the season in its late view. 

meantime, light-shadowing all, a sober calm
 fleece unbounded ether; who lest wave
 stand tremulous, uncertain where to turn
 the gentle current: while illumine wide,
 the dewy-skirted cloud imbibe the sun,
 and through their uvid pore his tempere force
 shed over the peaceful world. then be the time,
 for those who wisdom, and who nature charm,
 to steal themselves from the degenerate crowd,
 and soar above this little scene of thing;
 to tread low-thoughted vice beneath their foot;
 to sooth the throb passion into peace;
 and woo lone quiet in her silent walk. 

thus solitary, and in pensive guise,
 oft let i wander over the russet mead,
 and through the sadden grove, where scarce be hear
 one die strain, to cheer the woodman toil. 
haply some widow songster pour his plaint
 far, in saint warble, through the tawny copse. 
while congregate thrush, linnet, lark,
 and each wild throat, who artless strain so late
 swell all the music of the swarm shade,
 rob of their tuneful soul, now shiver sit
 on the dead tree, a dull, despondent flock! 
with not a brightness wave over their plume,
 and nought save chatter discord in their note,
 o let not, aim from some inhuman eye,
 the gun the music of the come year
 destroy; and harmless, unsuspecting harm,
 lay the weak tribe, a miserable prey! 
in mingle murder, flutter on the ground. 

the pale, descend year, yet please still,
 a gentle mood inspire; for now the leaf
 incessant rustle from the mournful grove,
 oft start such as, studious, walk below,
 and slow circle through the wave air. 
but shall a quick breeze and the bough
 sob, over the sky the leafy rain stream;
 till choke, and mat with the dreary shower,
 the forest-walk, at every rise gale,
 roll wide the wither waste, and whistle bleak. 
flee be the blast verdure of the field;
 and, shrink into their bed, the flowery race
 their sunny robe resign. even what remain
 of bold fruit fall from the naked tree;
 and wood, field, garden, orchard, all around
 the desolate prospect thrill the soul. 

he come! he come! in every breeze the power
 of philosophic melancholy come! 
his near approach the sudden-starting tear,
 the glow cheek, the mild deject air,
 the soften feature, and the beat heart,
 pierce deep with many a secret pang, declare. 
over all his soul his sacred influence breathe;
 in all the bosom triumph, all the nerve;
 inflame imagination; through the sense
 infuse every tenderness; and far
 beyond dim earth exalt the swell thought. 
ten thousand thousand fleet idea, such
 as never mingle with the vulgar dream,
 croud fast into the mind creative eye. 
as fast the correspondent passion rise,
 as vary, and as high: devotion raise
 to rapture, and divine astonishment. 

the love of nature unconfined, and chief
 of human kind; the large, ambitious wish,
 to make they bless; the sigh for suffer worth,
 lose in obscurity; the indignant scorn
 of mighty pride; the fearless, great resolve;
 the wonder that the die patriot draw,
 inspire glory through remote time;
 the arouse pant for virtue, and for fame;
 the sympathy of love, and friendship dear;
 with all the social offspring of the heart. 

oh bear i then to vast, embower shade! 
to twilight grove, and visionary vale! 
to weep grotto, and prophetic gloom! 
where angel-form athwart the solemn dusk,
 tremendous sweep, or seem to sweep along;
 and voice more than human, through the void
 deep-sounding, seize the enthusiastic ear. 

and now the western sun withdraw the day;
 and humid evening, gild over the sky,
 in her chill progress, to the ground condense
 the ascend vapour throw. where water ooze,
 where marsh stagnate, and where river wind,
 cluster the roll fog, and swim along
 the dusky-mantled lawn. meanwhile the moon
 full-orbed, and break through the scatter cloud,
 show her broad visage in the crimson east. 
turn to the sun direct, her spot disk,
 (where mountain rise, umbrageous dale descend,
 and ocean roll, as optic tube descry)
 a less earth give all his blaze again,
 void of its flame, and shed a soft day. 
now through the pass cloud she seem to stoop,
 now up the pure cerulean ride sublime. 
wide the pale deluge float; and stream mild
 over the sky mountain to the shadowy vale,
 while rock, and flood reflect the quiver gleam,
 the whole air whiten with a boundless tide
 of silver radiance, tremble round the world. 

but when, half-blotted from the sky, her light,
 faint, permit the starry fire to burn,
 with keen lustre through the depth of heaven;
 or quite extinct, her deaden orb appear,
 and scarce appear, of sickly, beamless white:
 oft in this season, silent from the north
 a blaze of meteor shoot, ensweeping first
 the low sky, then all at once converge
 high to the crown of heaven, and all at once
 relapse quick, as quick reascend,
 and mix, and thwart, extinguish, and renew,
 all ether course in a maze of light. 

from look to look, contagious through the crowd,
 the pannic run, and into wondrous shape
 the appearance throw: army in meet array,
 throng with aerial spear, and steed of fire;
 till the long line of full-extended war
 in bleed fight commix, the sanguine flood
 Rowls a broad slaughter over the plain of heaven. 
as thus they scan the visionary scene,
 on all side swell the superstitious din,
 incontinent; and busy frenzy talk
 of blood and battle; city overturn,
 and, late at night, in swallow earthquake sink,
 or paint hideous with ascend flame;
 of sallow famine, inundation, storm;
 of pestilence, and every great distress;
 empire subverse, when rule fate have strike
 the unalterable hour: even nature self
 be deem to totter on the brink of time. 
not so the man of philosophic eye,
 and inspect sage; the wave brightness he
 curious survey, inquisitive to know
 the cause, and material, yet unfixed,
 of this appearance beautiful, and new. 

now black, and deep, the night begin to fall,
 a solid shade, immense. sink in the gloom
 magnificent, and vast, be heaven and earth. 
order confound lie; all beauty void;
 distinction lose; and gay variety
 one universal blot: such the fair power
 of light, to kindle, and create the whole. 
drear be the state of the benight wretch,
 who then, bewilder, wander through the dark,
 full of pale fancy, and chimeras huge;
 nor visit by one directive ray,
 from cottage stream, or from airy hall. 
perhaps impatient as he stumble on,
 strike from the root of slimy ruse, blue,
 the wildfire scatter round, or gathertd trail
 a length of flame deceitful over the moss;
 whither decoy by the fantastic blaze,
 now sink and now renew, he be quite absorb,
 rider and horse into the miry gulph:
 while still, from day to day, his pine wife,
 and plaintive child his return await,
 in wild conjecture lose. at other time,
 send by the better genius of the night,
 innoxious, gleam on the horse mane,
 the meteor sit; and show the narrow path,
 that wind lead through pit of death, or else
 instruct he how to take the dangerous ford. 

the lengthen night elapse, the morning shine
 serene, in all her dewy beauty bright,
 unfold fair the last autumnal day. 
and now the mount sun dispel the fog;
 the rigid hoar-frost melt before his beam,
 and hang on every spray, on every blade
 of grass, the myriad dew-drop twinkle round. 

ah see where rob, and murder, in that pit,
 lie the still heave hive; at evening snatch,
 beneath the cloud of guilt-concealing night,
 and whelm over sulphur: while, undream ill,
 the happy people, in their waxen cell,
 sit tend public care, and plan scheme
 of temperance, for winter poor; rejoice
 to mark, full-flowing round, their copious store,
 sudden the dark, oppressive steam ascend:
 and, use to mild scent, the tender race,
 by thousand, tumble from their honeyed dome,
 convolve, and agonize in the dust. 
and be it then for this you roam the spring,
 intent from flower to flower? for this you toil
 ceaseless the burn summer-heat away? 
for this in autumn search the bloom waste,
 nor lose one sunny gleam? for this sad sit? 
o man! tyrannic lord! how long, how long,
 shall prostrate nature groan beneath your rage,
 await renovation? when oblige,
 must you destroy? of their ambrosial food
 can you not borrow? and in just return,
 afford they shelter from the wintery wind;
 or, as the sharp year pinch, with their own
 again regale they on some smile day? 
hard by, the stony bottom of their town
 look desolate, and wild; with here and there
 a helpless number, who the ruin state
 survive, lament weak, cast out to death. 
thus a proud city, populous, and rich,
 full of the work of peace, and high in joy,
 at theatre, or feast, or sink in sleep,
 (as late, Palermo, be thy fate) be seize
 by some dread earthquake, and convulsive hurl,
 sheer from the black foundation, stench-involved,
 into a gulph of blue, sulphureous flame. 

hence every harsh sight! for now the day,
 over heaven and earth diffuse, grow warm, and high,
 infinite splendour! wide invest all. 
how still the breeze! save what the filmy thread
 of dew evaporate brush from the plain. 
how clear the cloudless sky! how deep tinge
 with a peculiar blue! the ethereal arch
 how swell immense! amid who azure throne
 the radiant sun how gay! how calm below
 the gild earth! the harvest-treasure all
 now gather in, beyond the rage of storm,
 sure to the swain; the circle fence shut up;
 and instant winter bid to do his worst. 
while loose to festive joy, the country round
 laugh with the loud sincerity of mirth,
 care shake away. the toil-invigorate youth,
 not need the melodious impulse much,
 leap wild graceful, in the lively dance. 
her every charm abroad, the village-toast,
 young, buxom, warm, in native beauty rich,
 dart not-unmeaning look; and, where her eye
 point a approve smile, with double force,
 the cudgel rattle, and the struggle twist. 
age too shine out; and, garrulous, recount
 the feat of youth. thus they rejoice; nor think
 that, with tomorrow fun, their annual toil
 begin again the never-ceasing round. 

oh know he but his happiness, of man
 the happy he! who far from public rage,
 deep in the vale, with a choice few retire,
 drink the pure pleasure of the rural life. 
what though the dome be want, who proud gate
 each morning vomit out the sneak crowd
 of flatterer false, and in their turn abuse,
 vile intercourse! what though the glitter robe,
 of every hue reflect light can give,
 or float loose, or stiff with mazy gold,
 the pride, and gaze of fool! oppress he not. 
what though from utmost land, and sea, purvey,
 for he each rare, tributary life
 bleed not, and his insatiate table heap
 with luxury, and death. what though his wine
 flow not from bright gem; nor sink in bed,
 oft of gay care, he toss out the night;
 or, thoughtless, sleep at best in idle state. 
what though deprive of these fantastic joy,
 that stiil amuse the wanton, still deceive;
 a face of pleasure, but a heart of pain;
 their hollow moment undelighted all. 
sure peace be he; a solid life, estrange
 to disappointment, and fallacious hope;
 rich in content, in nature bounty rich,
 in herb, and fruit; whatever green the spring,
 when heaven descend in shower; or bend the bough,
 when summer redden, and when autumn beam;
 or in the wintery glebe whatever lie
 conceal, and fatten with the rich sap;
 these be not want; nor the milky drive,
 luxuriant, spread over all the low vale;
 nor bleat mountain; nor the chide of stream,
 and hum of bee, invite sleep sincere
 into the guiltless breast, beneath the shade,
 or throw at large amid the fragrant hay:
 nor aught beside of prospect, grove, or song,
 dim grotto, gleam lake, and fountain clear. 
here too live simple truth; plain innocence;
 unsullied beauty; sound, unbroken youth,
 patient of labour, with a little please;
 health ever-blooming; unambitious toil;
 calm contemplation, and poetic ease. 

let other brave the flood, in quest of gain,
 and beat, for joyless month, the gloomy wave. 
let such as deem it glory to destroy,
 rush into blood; the sack of city seek;
 unpierced, exult in the widow wail,
 the virgin shriek, and infant tremble cry. 
let some far-distant from their native soil,
 urge, or by want, or harden avarice,
 find other land beneath another sun. 
let this through city work his ardent way,
 by legal outrage, and establish guile,
 the social sense extinct; and that ferment
 mad into tumult the seditious herd,
 or melt they down to slavery. let these
 ensnare the wretched in the toil of law,
 foment discord, and perplex right,
 a iron race! and those of fair front,
 but equal inhumanity, in court,
 and slippery pomp delight, in dark cabal;
 wreathe the deep bow, diffuse the lie smile,
 and tread the weary labyrinth of state. 
while he, from all the stormy passion free,
 that restless man involve, hear, and but hear,
 at distance safe, the human tempest roar,
 wrap close in conscious peace. the fall of king,
 the rage of nation, and the crush of state
 move not the man, who, from the world escape,
 in still retreat, and flowery solitude,
 to nature voice attend, from day to day,
 and month to month, through the revolve year;
 admire, see she in her every shape:
 feel all her fine emotion at his heart;
 take what she liberal give, nor think of more. 
he, when young spring protrude the burst gem,
 mark the first bud, and suck the healthful gale
 into his freshen soul; her genial hour
 he quite enjoy; and not a beauty blow,
 and not a open blossom breathe in vain. 
in summer he, beneath the live shade,
 such as from frigid Tempe wont to fall,
 or Haemus cool, read what the muse, of these
 perhaps, have in immortal number sing;
 or what she dictate write; and, oft a eye
 shoot round, rejoice in the vigorous year. 
when autumn yellow lustre gild the world,
 and tempt the sickle swain into the field,
 seize by the general joy, his heart distend
 with gentle throw; and through the tepid gleam
 deep-musing, then the best exert his song. 
even winter wild to he be full of bliss. 
the mighty tempest, and the hoary waste,
 abrupt, and deep, stretch over the bury earth,
 awake to solemn thought. at night the sky,
 disclose, and kindle, by refine frost,
 pour every lustre on the astonish eye. 
a friend, a book, the steal hour secure,
 and mark they down for wisdom. with swift wing,
 over land, and sea, imagination roam;
 or truth, divine break on his mind,
 elate his being, and unfold his power;
 or in his breast heroic virtue burn. 
the touch of love, and kindred too he feel,
 the modest eye, who beam on his alone
 ecstatic shine; the little, strong embrace
 of prattle child, twine around his neck,
 and emulous to please he, call forth
 the fond parental soul. nor purpose gay,
 amusement, dance, or song, he stern scorn;
 for happiness, and true philosophy
 still be, and have be of the smile kind. 
this be the life which those who fret in guilt,
 and guilty city, never know; the life,
 lead by primaeval age, incorrupt,
 when god himself, and angel dwell with man! 

oh nature! all-sufficient! over all! 
enrich i with the knowledge of thy work! 
snatch i to heaven; thy roll wonder there,
 world beyond world, in infinite extent,
 profuse scatter over the void immense,
 show i; their motion, period, and their law,
 give i to scan; through the disclose deep
 light my blind way: the mineral strata there;
 thrust, bloom, thence the vegetable world;
 over that rise system, more complex,
 of animal; and high still, the mind,
 the vary scene of quick-compounded thought,
 and where the mix passion endless shift;
 these ever open to my ravish eye;
 a search, the flight of time can never exhaust! 
but if to that unequal; if the blood,
 in sluggish stream about my heart, forbid
 that best ambition; under close shade,
 inglorious, lay i by the lowly brook,
 and whisper to my dream. from thou begin,
 dwell all on thou, with thou conclude my song;
 and let i never, never stray from thou! 
