the school-mistress. 

a poem, in imitation of Spenser. 

by William Shenstone, ESQ;

i 

ah i! full sore be my heart forlorn,
to think how modest worth neglect lie;
while partial fame do with her blast adorn
such deed alone, as pride and pomp disguise;
deed of ill sort, and mischievous emprise!
lend i thy clarion, goddess! let i try
to sound the praise of merit, ere it die;
such as i oft have chance to espy,
lose in the dreary shade of dull obscurity.

ii.

in every village mark with little spire,
embower in tree, and hardly know to fame,
there dwell, in lowly shed, and mean attire,
a matron old who we school-mistress name;
who boast unruly brat with birch to tame.
they grieve sore, in piteous durance pen,
I will by the power of this relentless dame;
and ofttimes on vagary idle bend,
for unkempt hair, or task unconed, be sore shent.

iii.

and all in sight do rise a birchen tree,
which learning near her little dome do stowe;
whilom a twig of small regard to see,
though now so wide its wave branch flow;
and work the simple vassal much woe;
for not a wind may curl the leaf that blow,
but their limb shudder, and their pulse beat low;
and, as they look, they find their horror grow,
and shape it into rod, and tingle at the view.

iv.

so have i see (who have not, may conceive,)
a lifeless phantom near a garden place:
so do it wanton bird of peace bereave,
of sport, of song, of pleasure, of repast;
they start, they stare, they wheel, they look aghast:
sad servitude! such comfortless annoy
may no bold briton riper age ever taste!
ne superstition clog his dance of joy,
ne vision empty, vain, his native bliss destroy.

v. 

near to this dome be find a patch so green,
on which the tribe their gambol do display;
and at the door imprison board be see,
lest weak wight of small size shall stray;
eager, perdie, to bask in sunny day!
the noise intermix, which thence resound,
do learning little tenement betray:
where sit the dame, disguise in look profound,
and eye her fairy throng, and turn her wheel around.

vi.

her cap, far white than the drive snow,
emblem right meet of decency do yield:
her apron die in grain, as blue, i trow,
as be the harebell that adorn the field:
and in her hand, for sceptre, she do wield
tway birchen spray; with anxious fear entwine,
with dark distrust, and sad repentance fill;
and steadfast hate, and sharp affliction join,
and fury uncontrolled, and chastisement unkind.

vii.

few but have ken, in semblance meet portray,
the childish face of old eol train;
libs, notus, Auster: these in frown array,
how then will fare or earth, or sky, or main,
be the stern god to give his slave the rein?
and be not she rebellious breast to quell,
and be not she her statute to maintain,
the cott no more, i ween, be deem the cell,
where comely peace of mind, and decent order dwell.

viii.

a russet steal be over her shoulder throw;
a russet kirtle fence the nip air;
it be simple russet, but it be her own;
it be her own country breed the flock so fair;
it be her own labour do the fleece prepare;
and sooth to say, her pupil, range around,
through pious awe, do term it pass rare;
for they in gape wonderment abound,
and think, no doubt, she be the great wight on ground.

ix.

albeit ne flattery do corrupt her truth,
ne pompous title do debauch her ear;
Goody, good-woman, gossip, n'aunt, forsooth,
or dame, the sole addition she do hear;
yet these he challenge, these she hold right dear:
ne will esteem he act as may behove,
who shall not honour eld with these revere:
for never title yet so mean can prove,
but there be eke a mind which do that title love.

x. 

one ancient hen she take delight to feed,
the plod pattern of the busy dame;
which, ever and anon, impel by need,
into her school, begird with chicken, come;
such favour do she past deportment claim:
and, if neglect have lavish on the ground
fragment of bread, she will collect the same;
for well she know, and quaint can expound,
what sin it be to waste the small crumb she find.

xi.

herb too she know, and well of each can speak
that in her garden sip the silvery dew;
where no vain flower disclose a gaudy streak;
but herb for use, and physic, not a few,
of grey renown, within those border grow:
the tuft Basil, pun-provoking thyme,
fresh Baum, and marigold of cheerful hue;
the lowly Gill that never dare to climb;
and more i fain will sing, disdain here to rhime.

xii.

yet euphrasy may not be leave unsung,
that give dim eye to wander league around;
and pungent radish, bite infant tongue;
and plantain rib that heal the reaper wound;
and marjoram sweet, in shepherd posy find;
and lavender, who spike of azure bloom
shall be, erewhile, in arid bundle bind,
to lurk amid the labour of her loom,
and crown her kerchief clean, with much rare perfume.

xiii.

and here trim rosmarine, that whilom crown
the danty garden of the proud peer;
ere, drive, from its envy site, it find
a sacred shelter for its branch here;
where edge with gold its glitter skirt appear.
oh wassel day; o custom meet and well!
ere this be banish from its lofty sphere:
simplicity then seek this humble cell,
nor ever will she more with thane and lordling dwell.

xiv.

here oft the dame, on sabbath decent eve,
hymn such psalm as Sternhold forth do meet,
if winter it be, she to her hearth do cleave;
but in her garden find a summer seat:
sweet melody! to hear she then repeat
how israel son, beneath a foreign king,
while taunt foeman do a song entreat,
all, for the nonce, untune every string,
up hang their useless lyre — small heart have they to sing.

XV. 

for she be just, and friend too virtuous lore,
and pass much time in true virtuous deed;
and, in those elsin ear, will oft deplore
the time, when truth by popish rage do bleed;
and tortious death be true devotion meed;
and simple faith in iron chain do mourn,
that will on wooden image place her creed;
and lawny saint in moulder flame do burn:
ah! dear lord, forefend, thilk day shall ever return.

xvi.

in elbow chair, like that of scottish stem
by the sharp tooth of canker eld deface,
in which, when he receive his diadem,
our sovereign prince and lief liege be place,
the matron sit; and some with rank she grace,
(the source of children and of courtier pride!)
redress affront, for vile affront there pass;
and warn they not the fretful to deride,
but love each other dear, whatever they betide.

xvii.

right well she know each temper to descry;
to thwart the proud, and the submiss to raise;
some with vile copper prize exalt on high,
and some entice with pittance small of praise;
and other some with baleful sprig she 'fray;
even absent, she the reins of power do hold,
while with quaint art the giddy crowd she sway;
forewarn, if little bird their prank behold,
it will whisper in her ear, and all the scene unfold.

xviii.

lo now with state she utter the command!
eftsoon the urchin to their task repair;
their book of stature small they take in hand,
which with pellucid horn secure be;
to save from finger wet the letter fair:
the work so gay, that on their back be see,
saint George high achievement do declare;
on which thilk wight that have gaze be,
ken the forthcoming rod, unpleasing sight, i ween!

xix.

ah luckless he, and bear beneath the beam
of evil star! it irk i while i write!
as erst the bard by mulla silver stream,
oft, as he tell of deadly dolorous plight,
sigh as he sing, and do in tear indite.
for brandish the rod, she do begin
to loose the brogue, the stripling late delight!
and down they drop; appear his dainty skin,
fair as the furry coat of white ermilin.

xx.

o ruthful scene! when from a nook obscure,
his little sister do his peril see:
all playful as she sit, she grow demure;
she find full soon her wonted spirit flee;
she meditate a prayer to set he free:
nor gentle pardon can this dame deny,
(if gentle pardon can with dame agree)
to her sad grief that swell in either eye,
and wring she so that all for pity she can die.

xxi.

nor long can she now her shriek command;
and hardly she forbear, through awful fear,
to rushen forth, and, with presumptuous hand,
to stay harsh justice in its mid career.
on thou she call, on thou her parent dear!
(ah! too remote to ward the shameful blow!)
she see no kind domestic visage near,
and soon a flood of tear begin to flow;
and give a loose at last to unavailing woe.

xxii.

but ah! what pen his piteous plight may trace?
or what device his loud lament explain?
the form uncouth of his disguise face?
the pallid hue that dye his look amain?
the plenteous shower that do his cheek distain?
when he, in abject wise, implore the dame,
ne hope ought of sweet reprieve to gain;
or when from high she level well her aim,
and, through the thatch, his cry each fall stroke proclaim.

xxiii.

the other tribe, aghast, with sore dismay,
attend, and conn their task with much care:
by turn, astony, every twig survey,
and, from their fellow hateful wound, beware;
know, i wist, how each the same may share;
till fear have teach they a performance meet,
and to the wellknown chest the dame repair;
whence oft with sugar cate she do they greet,
and gingerbread rare; now, certes, double sweet!

xxiv.

see to their seat they high with merry glee,
and in beseemly order sit there;
all but the wight of bum gall, he
abhor bench and stool, and fourm, and chair;
(this hand in mouth fix, that rend his hair;)
and eke with snub profound, and heave breast,
convulsion intermit! do declare
his grievous wrong; his dam unjust behest;
and scorn her offer love, and shun to be caress.

xxv.

his face besprent with liquid crystal shine,
his bloom face that seem a purple flower,
which low to earth its droop head decline,
all smear and sully by a vernal shower.
o the hard bosom of despotic power!
all, all, but she, the author of his shame,
all, all, but she, regret this mournful hour:
yet hence the youth, and hence the flower, shall claim,
if so i deem aright, transcend worth and fame.

xxvi.

behind some door, in melancholy thought,
mindless of food, he, dreary caitiff! pine;
ne for his fellow joyaunce care ought,
but to the wind all merriment resign;
and deem it shame, if he to peace incline;
and many a sullen look askance be send,
which for his dam annoyance he design;
and still the more to pleasure he she be bend,
the more do he, perverse, her behaviour past resent.

xxvii.

ah i! how much i fear lest pride it be!
but if that pride it be, which thus inspire,
beware, you dame, with nice discernment see,
you quench not too the spark of noble fire:
ah! better far than all the muse lyre,
all coward art, be valour generous heat;
the firm fix breast which fit and right require,
like vernon patriot soul; more just great
than craft that pimp for ill, or flowery false deceit.

xxviii.

yet nurse with skill, what dazzle fruit appear!
even now sagacious foresight point to show
a little bench of heedless bishop here,
and there a chancellor in embryo,
or bard sublime, if bard may ever be so,
as Milton, Shakespeare, name that never shall die!
though now he crawl along the ground so low,
nor weeting how the muse shall soar on high,
wish, poor starve elf! his paper-kite may fly.

xxix.

and this perhaps, who, censure the design,
low lay the house which that of card do build,
shall Dennis be! if rigid fate incline,
and many a epic to his rage shall yield;
and many a poet quit the aonian field;
and, sour by age, profound he shall appear,
as he who now with dissdainful fury thril
survey my work; and level many a sneer,
and furl his wrinkly front, and cry "what stuff be here?"

xxx.

but now than Phoebus gain the middle sky,
and liberty unbar their prison-door;
and like a rush torrent out they fly,
and now the grassy cirque have cover over
with boisterous revel-rout and wild uproar;
a thousand way in wanton ring they run,
heaven shield their short-lived pastime, i implore!
for well may freedom, erst so dear win,
appear to british elf more gladsome than the sun.

xxxi.

enjoy, poor imp! enjoy your sportive trade;
and chase gay fly, and cull the fair flower;
for when my bone in grass-green sod be lay;
for never may you taste more careless hour
in knightly castle, or in lady bower.
o vain to seek delight in earthly thing!
but most in court where proud ambition tower;
delude wight! who ween fair peace can spring
beneath the pompous dome of kesar or of king.

xxxii.

see in each sprite some various bent appear!
these rude carol most incondite lay;
those saunter on the green, with jocund leer
salute the stranger pass on his way;
some building fragile tenement of clay;
some to the stand lake their course bend,
with pebble smooth at duck and drake to play;
thilk to the huxter savoury cottage tend,
in pastry king and queen the allot mite to spend.

xxxiii.

here, as each season yield a different store,
each season store in order range be;
apple with cabbage-net cover over,
gall full sore the unmoneyed wight be see;
and gooseberry clad in livery red or green;
and here of lovely dye, the catherine pear,
fine pear! as lovely for thy juice, i ween:
o may no wight ever pennyless come there,
lest smite with ardent love he pine with hopeless care!

xxxiv.

see! cherry here, ere cherry yet abound,
with thread so white in tempt posy tie,
scatter like bloom maid their glance round,
with pamper look draw little eye aside;
and must be buy though penury betide.
the plumb all azure and the nut all brown,
and here each season, do those cake abide,
who honour name the inventive city own,
render through britain isle salopia praise know. 

XXXV. 

admire salopia! that with venial pride
eye her bright form in severn ambient wave,
fame for her loyal care in peril try,
her daughter lovely, and her stripling brave;
ah! amid the rest, may flower adorn his grave,
who art do first these dulcet cate display!
a motive fair to learning imp he give,
who cheerless over her darkling region stray;
until reason morn arise, and light they on their way.
