to WILLIAM Shenstone, ESQ

the production of half a hour leisure.

health to the bard, in leasowes happy grove,
 health and sweet converse with the muse he love! 
the lowly votary of the tuneful nine,
 with tremble hand, attempt her artless line,
 in number such as untaught nature bring,
 as flow spontaneous, like the native spring. 
but ah! what airy form around i rise,
 the russet mountain glow with rich dye! 
in circle dance a pigmy crowd appear,
 and hark! a infant voice salute my ear. 

 "mortal, thy aim we know, thy task approve,
 his merit honour, and his genius love;
 for we what verdant carpet have he spread,
 where nightly we our mystic maze tread! 
for we each shady grove and rural seat,
 his fall stream, and flow number sweet. 
do thou not mark amid the wind dell,
 what tuneful verse adorn the root-wove cell? 
that every fairy of our sprightly train
 resort, to bless the woodland, and the plain;
 there, as we move, unbidden splendor glow,
 the green turf brighten, and the flowret flow. 
there oft with thought sublime we bless the swain,
 nor we inspire, nor he attend in vain. 

go, simple rhymer, bear this message true,
 the truth that fairy dictate none shall rue. 

say to the bard, in leasowes happy grove,
 who dryad honour, and who fairy love —
 content thyself no long that thy lay
 by other foster, lend to other praise;
 no long to the favour world refuse
 the welcome treasure of thy polish muse;
 collect the flower that own thy value name,
 unite the spoil, and give the wreath to fame. 
never can thy moral, taste, or verse engage
 more solid fame, than in this happy age;
 when sense, when virtue cherish by the throne,
 and each illustrious privilege their own. 
though modest be thy gentle muse, i ween,
 o, lead she, blush, from the daisy green,
 a fit attendant on britannia queen! "

you sportive elf, as faithful i relate,
 the entrust mandate of your fairy state,
 visit these wild again with nightly care,
 so shall my kine, of all the herd, repair,
 in healthy plight, to fill the copious pail;
 my sheep be pen with safety in the dale;
 my poultry fear no robber in the roost;
 my linen more than common whiteness boast;
 let order, peace, and housewifry be i:
 Shenstone! be taste, and fame, and fortune thy! 
