[nereid:] eclogue iii.

ph.  

i see a distant fleet who tower mast
 seem a thick grove disrobe by winter-blast:
 bold be the man who fell the leavy tree
 on float wood to dare th'uncertain sea. 

dr.  

it be avarice that push those wretch on
 to seek for distant isle, and land unknown;
 while sea-born swain desire no foreign oar,
 content with sea, and careless of the shore. 
Glaucus, a mer-man now, (but not by birth)
 have tell the custom of those son of earth:
 though they have all that be good, and true rare,
 yet (envious) think their own too mean a share:
 for foreign toy they roam to every shore,
 and bring disease home unknown before. 
by commerce thus humour and fashion blend,
 and what they scorn before they now commend. 
nothing have any worth that be fix or true,
 but thing their value raise by be new. 
hence endless war engage the earth-born slave:
 this whet their rage, and ever make they brave. 
i late unseen see from a distant rock
 two vast machine engage in cloud of smoke;
 the wind be high, and ruffle all the main:
 but when the fight with loud noise begin,
 and bellow iron-tube their sulphur fire,
 the god afraid with droop wing retire;
 Boreas himself be hush in tremble air;
 the sea grow calm, and all the sky be fair. 
oft have i punish that ambitious wight
 who thus entrench on the mer-man right:
 who bear on earth, yet leave his native glade,
 and to his own prefer the watery mead;
 oft have i strive to burst the yield plank,
 and force the leaky ship on sandy bank:
 but see, Melanthus come, who, blithe and gay,
 like a feed porpoise frisk in wanton play. 
what happy chance have please the smile boy? 
the nymph he love be sure no long coy. 

Mel.  

you god! will proud Parthenoe now appear,
 with fierce rage i will seize the tremble fair;
 neither her anger nor her tear shall move,
 my blood be on fire, and i be full of love. 
my head be so wondrous light, i scarce find
 whether i move on wave or dance on wind. 

dr.  

so alter, Triton! whence proceed this change,
 so unexpected, sudden, and so strange? 
a settle melancholy gloom, but now
 seem, like a storm, to hang upon your brow;
 disconsolate you look, and nought can please,
 no herb be find to cure the fond disease. 

Mel.  

if i can use my tongue, i will tell thou, love,
 what do my soul to sudden transport move:
 meet the scatter ruin of a wreck,
 as shiver mast, plank, and a break deck,
 amid the rest a float cask i find
 stop up with artful care, and strong bind,
 curious to know what be within contain,
 with cautious fear i search; my finger stain
 come forth all moisten with a juicy red;
 but oh! the god never on such nectar feed. 
please with the heavenly taste, and spicy smell,
 i quaff full bowl in a capacious shell. 
you god! if earthy man thus live, and drink,
 give i the land, the sea a worthless sink. 
the precious draught my faint spirit cheer;
 i thus inspire no mortal mer-man fear. 
i rule the boundless sea, and now i reign
 sole lord, and mighty monarch of the main. 
this oil have so inflame my secret fire,
 i burn impatient with the fierce desire. 
no nymph, or old, or ugly, now i scorn;
 even blear-eyed Opis now will serve the turn. 
Parthenoe hate, nor do i great care;
 for now, the nymph that be kind, be only fair. 

ph.  

Melanthus rave; what magic spell be this,
 which feed the happy youth with fancy bliss? 
i long to taste the juice that thus inspire
 fond hope, self-pleasing love, and gay desire. 
