to sir Godfrey Kneller, at his country seat.

by the same.

to whitton shade, and hounslow airy plain,
thou, Kneller, take thy summer flight in vain,
in vain thy wish give all thy rural hour
to the fair villa, and well-ordered bower;
to court thy pencil early at thy gate,
ambition knock, and fleet beauty wait;
the boastful muse, of other fame so sure,
implore thy aid to make she own secure;
the great, the fair, and (if ought noble be,
ought more belove) the art solicit thou.

how can thou hope to fly the world, in vain
from Europe sever by the circle main:
seek by the king of every distant land,
and every hero worthy of thy hand.
have thou forget that mighty Bourbon fear
he still be mortal, till thy draught appear;
that Cosmo choose thy glow form to place
amid her master of the Lombard race?
see on she titian and her Guido urn,
her fail art, forlorn Hesperia mourn;
while Britain win each garland from her brow,
her wit and freedom first, her painting now.

let the faint copier, on old tiber shore,
(nor mean the task) each breathe bust explore,
line after line with painful patience trace,
this roman grandeur, that athenian grace;
vain care of part; if, impotent of soul,
the industrious workman fail to warm the whole!
each theft betray the marble whence it come,
and a cold statue stiffen in the frame.
thou nature teach, nor art her aid deny,
(the kind mistress and the sure guide)
to catch a likeness at one pierce fight,
and place the fair in the fair light.
ere yet the pencil try she nice toil,
or on the palette lie the blend oil,
thy careless chalk have half achieve thy art,
and her just image make Cleora start.

a mind that grasp the whole be rare find,
half learn, half painter, and half wit abound:
few, like thy genius, at proportion aim,
all great, all graceful, and throughout the same.

such be thy life. o since the glorious rage
that fire thy youth, flame unsubdued by age;
though wealth nor fame now touch thy sate mind,
still tinge the canvas, bounteous to mankind.
since after thou may rise a impious line,
coarse mangler of the human face divine,
paint on, till fate dissolve thy mortal part,
and live and die the monarch of thy art.
