[Psyche] Canto iv.

Canto iv.

full gladsome be my heart ere while to tell
 how proud ambition own superior love;
 for ah! too oft his stern power can quell
 the mild affection which more gentle move,
 and rather silent flee than with he strive:
 for love content and tranquil see with dread
 the busy scene ambition scheme approve,
 and, by the hand of peace obscure lead,
 from pride of public life disgust ever flee. 

there be who know not the delicious charm
 of sympathise heart; let such employ
 their active mind; the trumpet loud alarm
 shall yield they hope of honourable joy,
 and court may lure they with each splendid toy:
 but never may vanity or thirst of fame
 the dear bliss of love life destroy! 
oh! blind to man chief good who love disclaim,
 and barter pure delight for glory empty name! 

bless Psyche! thou have escape the tyrant power! 
thy gentle heart shall never know the pain
 which torture pride in his most prosperous hour:
 yet danger still unsung for thou remain;
 nor must thou unmolested hope to gain
 immortal beauty never fail spring;
 oh! no — nor yet tranquillity attain:
 but though thy heart the pang of doubt may sting,
 thy faithful knight shall yet thy step in safety bring. 

warn by late peril now she scarce dare
 quit for one moment his protect eye:
 sure in his sight, her soul of nought despair,
 and nought look dreadful when that arm be nigh
 on which her hope with confidence rely;
 by his advice their constant course they bend,
 he point where hide danger they shall fly,
 on he secure, as her heaven-sent friend,
 she bid her grateful heart content depend. 

oh! who the exquisite delight can tell,
 the joy which mutual confidence impart! 
or who can paint the charm unspeakable
 which link in tender band two faithful heart? 
in vain assail by fortune envious dart,
 their mitigate woe be sweet share,
 and double joy reluctant depart:
 let but the sympathise heart be spare,
 what sorrow seem not light, what peril be not dare? 

oh! never may suspicion gloomy sky
 chill the sweet glow of fond trust love! 
nor ever may he feel the scowl eye
 of dark distrust his confidence reprove! 
in please error may i rather rove,
 with blind reliance on the hand so dear,
 than let cold prudence from my eye remove
 those sweet delusion, where nor doubt nor fear
 nor foul disloyalty nor cruel change appear. 

the noble mind be ever prone to trust;
 yet love with fond anxiety be join;
 and timid tenderness be oft unjust;
 the coldness which it dread too prompt to find,
 and torture the too susceptible mind. 
hence rise the gloom which oft over Psyche steal
 lest he she love, unmindful or unkind,
 shall careless slight affection soft control,
 or she long absent lose her influence over his soul. 

it be evening, and the shade which sudden fell
 seem to forebode a dark unlovely night;
 the sigh wood-nymph from their cave foretell
 the storm which soon their quiet shall affright:
 nor cheer star nor moon appear in sight,
 nor taper twinkle through the rustle leaf
 and shed afar its hospitable light:
 but hark! a dismal sound the ear receive,
 and through the obscure gloom the eye strange form perceive. 

it be a helpless female who exclaim,
 who blind and age form a ass sustain:
 misshaped and timorous, of light ashamed,
 in darksome wood her hard-earned food she gain,
 and her voracious appetite maintain,
 though all devour, yet unsatisfied;
 nor aught of hard digestion she disdain,
 whatever be offer greedy she try,
 and mean serve, as slave, whoever food supply. 

a cruel monster now her step pursue,
 well know of yore and name the blatant beast;
 and soon he'seize his prey with grasp so rude,
 so fierce on her feeble body press,
 that have the courteous knight not soon release
 her unresisting limb from violence,
 she must have sink by his rough jaw oppress:
 the spiteful beast, enrage at the defence,
 now turn upon the knight with foam vehemence. 

but, when his fury feel the couch spear,
 on psyche unarmed form he bellow fly;
 it be there alone the knight his rage can fear;
 swift than thought his flame sword he draw,
 and from his hand the doubtful javelin throw
 lest err it may wound the tremble fair:
 eager the cruel monster to subdue
 he scorn to use his shield protect care,
 and rash leave his side in part expose and bare. 

sharp be the wound of his avenge steel,
 which force the roar beast to quit the field:
 yet ere he flee, the knight unused to feel
 the power of any foe, or ever to yield
 to any arm which sword or spear can wield,
 perceive the venom of his tooth impure;
 but, with indignant silence, unrevealed
 the pain he bear, while through the gloom obscure
 the beast, in vain pursue, urge on his flight secure. 

and now the hag, deliver from her fear,
 her grateful thanks upon the knight bestow,
 and, as they onward go, in psyche ear
 her tongue with many a horrid tale overflow,
 which warn she to forsake that venturous road,
 and seek protection in the neighbour grove;
 where dwell a prudent dame, who oft bestow
 her sage advice, when pilgrim doom to rove,
 benight there, have else with lurk danger strive. 

the knight now soft bid his charge beware,
 nor trust credulity who well he know:
 yet he himself, harass with pain and care,
 and heedful of the storm which fierce grow,
 yield, a path more shelter to pursue:
 now soon entangle in a gloomy maze
 Psyche no long have her knight in view,
 nor see his page star-crowned helmet blaze;
 close at her side alone the hag loquacious stay. 

fearful she stop, and call aloud in vain,
 the storm-roused wood roar only in reply;
 anxious her love protector to regain
 she tremble listen to credulity,
 who point where they a glimmer light may spy;
 which, through the shade of intervene tree
 and all the misty blackness of the sky,
 cast a weak and dubious ray she see,
 and fain by this will seek her terror to appease. 

yet hope that, allure by that same light
 which single seem through all the gloom to shine,
 she there at last may meet her wander knight,
 thither her footstep doubt incline
 as best the uncertain path they can divine,
 all tangle as it wind through brake and briar:
 while to affright her soul at once combine
 a thousand shapeless form of terror dire,
 here shriek the ill-omened bird, there glare the meteor fire. 

in the deep centre of the mazy wood,
 with mat ivy and wild vine overgrow,
 a gothic castle solitary stand,
 with massive wall build firm of murky stone;
 long have credulity its mistress know,
 meager her form and tawny be her hue,
 unsociable she live, unloved, alone,
 no cheerful prospect gladden ever her view,
 and her pale hollow eye oblique their glance throw. 

now have they reach the sad and dreary bower
 where dark Disfida hold her gloomy state:
 the grate casement strong with iron power,
 the huge portcullis creak over the gate,
 the surly guard that round the drawbridge wait,
 chill psyche heart with sad foreboding fear;
 nor ever have she feel so desolate
 as when at length her guide the porter hear,
 and at the well know call reluctant appear. 

in hall half light with uncertain ray,
 such as expire taper transient shed,
 the gloomy princess sit, no social blaze
 the unkindled hearth supply, no table spread
 cheer the lone guest who weetless wander,
 but melancholy silence reign around,
 while on her arm she lean her pensive head,
 and anxious watch, as sullen she frown,
 of distant whisper low to catch the doubtful sound. 

startle to hear a unaccustomed noise
 sudden she rise, and on the intruder bend
 her pry eye askance; but soon the voice
 of her old slave appease her discontent,
 and a half welcome to her guest she lend:
 her frequent question satisfy at last,
 through all the neighbour wood her scout she send
 to seek the knight, while psyche tear flow fast,
 and all the live-long night in anxious woe she pass. 

the sullen bell have tell the midnight hour,
 and sleep have lay the busy world to rest,
 all but the watchful lady of that bower
 and wretched Psyche: her distract breast
 the agony of sad suspense oppress,
 now to the casement eager she fly,
 and now the wished-for voice her fancy bless:
 alas! the scream night-bird only cry;
 only the drear obscure there meet her strain eye. 

have thy heart sicken with defer hope? 
or feel the impatient anguish of suspense? 
or have thou taste of the bitter cup
 which disappointment wither hand dispense? 
thou know the poison which overflow from hence
 over psyche tedious, miserable hour. 
the unheeded note of plaintive innocence
 no long sooth her soul with wonted power,
 while false disfida tale her listen ear devour. 

of rapid torrent and deep marshy fen,
 of ambush foe and unseen pit they tell,
 of ruffian rush from their secret den,
 of foul magicician and of visard spell,
 the poison lance and net invisible;
 while Psyche shudder see her knight betray
 into the snare of some enchanter fall,
 behold he bleed in the treacherous shade,
 or hear his die voice implore in vain for aid. 

at length the cruel messenger return,
 their trample steed sound welcome in her ear;
 her rapid foot the ground impatient spurn,
 as eager she fly their news to hear. 
alas! they bring no tiding which may cheer
 her sorrow soul oppress, disconsolate! 
 "dismiss," they cry, "each idle timid fear! 
no danger now thy faithless knight await,
 lure by a wanton fair to bower of peaceful state. 

 "we see he blithe follow where she lead,
 and urge he to return to thou in vain:
 some other knight, insult he say,
 thy charm may soon for thy protection gain,
 if still resolve to tread with weary pain
 the tedious road to that uncertain land;
 but he shall there content remain;
 no other bliss can now his heart demand
 than that new lady love and kind proffer hand." 

a while she stand in silent wonder lose,
 and scarce believe the strange abandonment;
 no fear like this her heart have ever cross,
 nor can she think his mind so light bend
 can swerve so quick from its first intent;
 till sudden burst forth in angry mood
 Disfida give her indignation vent,
 "ah, well i know," she cry, "that wicked brood
 who curse ensnare art in vain my care withstood,

vile varia fickle and inconstant train,
 perpetual torment of my harass day:
 their nightly theft my fruit, my flower sustain,
 their wanton goat over all my vineyard graze,
 my corn lie scatter, and my fence blaze,
 my friend, my follower they base lure;
 i know their mischievous detest way! 
my castle vain have i build so sure
 while from their treacherous wile my life be insecure. 

 "but i will lead thou to the glitter sand,
 where shine their hollow many-coloured fane:
 there, as the circle group fantastic stand,
 thy truant knight perhaps thou may regain
 from the light art of that seductive train." 
she pause — but Psyche speak not in reply;
 her noble heart, which swell with deep disdain,
 forbid the utterance of a single sigh,
 and shame the indignant tear which start to her eye. 

at length with firm, but gentle dignity
 and cold avert eye she thus reply:
 "no! let he go: nor power nor wish have i
 his conduct to control. let this suffice;
 before my path a sure guardian fly,
 by who direction onward i proceed
 soon as the morn first light shall clear the sky." 
she cease, then languish her grief to feed,
 her cold dark chamber seek from observation free. 

it be there regret indulge the bitter tear;
 she feel herself forsake and alone:
 "behold," she cry, fulfil be every fear,
 oh! wretched Psyche, now indeed undo! 
thy love be protect care no more be show,
 he bid his servant leave thou to thy fate,
 nor long will the hopeless wanderer own:
 some fair, noble spouse, some worthy mate,
 at length by Venus give shall share his heavenly state. 

 "oh! most adore! oh! most regret love! 
oh! joy that never must again be i,
 and thou lose hope, farewell! — vain i roye,
 for never shall i reach that land divine,
 nor ever shall thy beam celestial shine
 again upon my sad unheeded way! 
oh! let i here with life my woe resign,
 or in this gloomy den for ever stay,
 and shun the scornful world, nor see detest day." 

 "but no! those scene be hateful to my eye,
 and all who speak or witness my disgrace;
 my soul with horror from this dwelling fly
 and seek some tranquil, solitary place
 where grief may finish life unhappy race!" 
so past she the long night, and soon as morn
 have first begin to show his cheerful face,
 her couch, which care have strew with every thorn,
 with heavy heart she leave, disquiet, forlorn. 

not thus Disfida suffer she to part,
 but urge she there in safety to remain,
 repeat oft to her foreboding heart
 that fairy land she never can attain:
 but when she see dissuasion be in vain,
 and Psyche bend her journey to pursue,
 with angry brow she call a trusty train
 and bid they keep the imprudent fair in view,
 and guard her dangerous path with strict observance true. 

in vain their proffer service she decline,
 and dread the convoy of the scowl band;
 their hateful presence with her loss combine,
 she feel betray to the destroyer hand,
 and tremble wander over the dreary land;
 while as she seek to escape disfida power,
 her effort still the officious guard withstand,
 lead in vain circle many a tedious hour,
 undistance still she see the gloomy turret lower. 

till weary with her fruitless way, at length
 upon the ground her faint limb she throw;
 no wish remain to aid exhaust strength,
 the mazy path she care not to pursue,
 since unavailing be the task she know:
 her murmur guard to seek for food prepare,
 yet mindful of their charge, still keep in view
 the droop victim of their cruel care,
 who see the day decline in terror and despair. 

hark! a low hollow groan she seem to hear
 repeat oft; wonder she look around:
 it seem to issue from some cavern near,
 or low hut hide by the rise ground;
 for, though it seem the melancholy sound
 of human voice, no human form be nigh;
 her eye no human habitation find,
 but as she listen gaze attentive,
 her shudder ear receive the deep and long draw sigh. 

the guard who near stand now whisper say,
 "if aught of doubt remain within thy mind,
 or wish to know why thus thou be betray,
 or what strange cause thy faithless knight incline
 to leave the charge he with such scorn resign,
 each curious thought thou now may satisfy,
 since here the entrance of a cave we find,
 where dwell, deep hide from day too garish eye,
 a sage who magic skill can solve each mystery." 

he stay not her reply, but urge she on
 reluctant to the dark and dreary cave;
 no beam of cheerful heaven have ever shine
 in the recess of that gloomy grave,
 where scream owl their daily dwelling crave. 
one sickly lamp the wretched master show;
 devour fiend! who now the prey shall save
 from his fell gripe, who hand in blood imbrue,
 in his own bosom seek his lacerate food? 

on the damp ground he sit in sullen woe,
 but wild roll around his frenzied eye,
 and gnaw his wither lip, which still overflow
 with bitter gall; in foul disorder lie
 his black and mat lock; anxiety
 sit on his wrinkle brow and sallow cheek;
 the waste form, the deep-drawn, frequent sigh,
 some slow consume malady bespeak,
 but medicinal skill the cause in vain shall seek. 

 "behold," the treacherous guard exclaim, "behold,
 at length Disfida send thy promise bride! 
let she, desert by her knight, be tell
 what peerless lady lure he from her side;
 thy care her future safety must provide." 
smile malicious as thus he speak,
 he seem her helpless anguish to deride;
 then swift rush from the den he break,
 ere from the sudden shock astonish she awake. 

she too have flee; but when the wretch escape
 he close the cavern mouth with cruel care;
 and now the monster place his form misshaped
 to bar the passage of the affright fair:
 her spirit die, she breathe pollute air,
 and vaporous vision swim before her sight:
 he magic skill the sorcerer bid her share,
 and lo! as in a glass, she see her knight
 in bower remember well, the bower of loose delight. 

but oh! what word her feeling can impart! 
feeling to hateful envy near ally! 
while on her knight her anxious glance dart:
 his plume helmet, lo! he lay aside;
 his face with torture agony she spy,
 yet can from the sight her eye remove;
 no mortal knight she see have aid supply,
 no mortal knight in her defence have strive;
 it be love! it be love himself, her own adore love. 

pour in soft dalliance at a lady foot,
 in fond rapture he appear to lie,
 while her fair neck with inclination sweet
 bent over his graceful form her melt eye,
 which his look up to meet in ecstasy. 
their word she hear not; word have never express,
 what well her sicken fancy can supply,
 all that their silent eloquence confess,
 as breathe the sigh of fire from each impassion breast. 

while thus she gaze, her quiver lip turn pale;
 contend passion rage within her breast,
 nor ever have she know such bitter bale,
 or feel by such fierce agony oppress. 
oft have her gentle heart be sore distress,
 but meekness ever have a lenient power
 from anguish half his keen dart to wrest;
 meekness for she have soften sorrow hour,
 those furious fiend subdue which boisterous soul devour. 

for there be heart that, like some shelter lake,
 never swell with rage, nor foam with violence;
 though its sweet placid calm the tempest shake,
 yet will it never with furious impotence
 dash its rude wave against the rocky fence,
 which nature place the limit of its reign:
 thrice bless! who feel the peace which flow from hence,
 who meek-eyed gentleness can thus restrain;
 whatever the storm of fate, with her let none complain! 

that mild associate Psyche now desert,
 unlovely passion agitate her soul,
 the vile magician all his art exert,
 and triumph to behold his proud control:
 change to a serpent hideous form, he steal
 over her fair breast to suck her vital blood;
 his poisonous involution round her roll:
 already be his fork tongue imbrue
 warm in the stream of life, her heart be pure purple flood. 

thus wretched she fall geloso prey! 
but she, once more, unhoped for aid shall save! 
admit shine the clear blue light of day
 upon the horror of that gloomy grave;
 her knight soft voice resound through all the cave,
 the affright serpent quit his deadly hold,
 nor dare the vengeance of his arm to brave,
 shrink to a spider form, while many a fold
 of self-spun web obscene the sorcerer vile enrol. 

scarce have the star of his attendant youth
 blaze through the cavern and proclaim the knight,
 when all those spell and vision of untruth,
 breed in dark Erebus and nurse in night,
 dissolve vanish into vapour light;
 while Psyche, quite exhaust by her pain,
 and hardly trust she astonish sight,
 now faint and speechless in his arm remain,
 nor memory of the past, nor present sense retain. 

Borne from the cavern, and to life restore,
 her open eye behold her knight once more,
 she see who lose with anguish she deplore;
 yet a half-feigned resentment still she bear,
 nor sign of joy her face avert wear,
 though joy unuttered pant at her heart;
 in sullen silence much she ponder over
 what from her side induce he to depart,
 and all she since have see by aid of magic art. 

be it then all a false delude dream
 that wear there, semblance of celestial love? 
on this her waver thought bewilder seem
 at length to rest; yet onward as they move,
 though much his tender care her doubt reprove,
 and though she long to hear, and pardon all,
 silence she still preserve: awhile he strive
 her free and cheerful spirit to recall,
 but find the task be vain; his word unnoticed fall. 

now in his turn offend and surprise,
 the knight in silence from her side withdraw;
 with pain she mark it, but her pain disguise,
 and heedless seem her journey to pursue,
 now backward deign to turn one anxious view
 as oft she wish; till mindful of his lord,
 Constance alarm affectionate fly,
 eager to see their mutual peace restore,
 and blame her cold reserve in many a soft breathe word. 

 "o Psyche! wound not thus thy faithful knight,
 who fond seek thou many a anxious hour,
 though bleed yet from that inglorious fight,
 where thou be rescue from the savage power
 of that fall beast who will thy charm devour:
 still faint with wound, he cease not to pursue
 thy heedless course: let not displeasure lower
 thus on thy brow: think not his heart untrue! 
think not that ever from thou he will withdraw!" 

with self-reproach and sweet return trust,
 while yet he speak, her generous heart reply,
 soft melt pity bid she now be just
 and own the error which deceive her eye;
 her little pride she long to sacrifice,
 and ask forgiveness of her suffer knight;
 her suffer knight, alas! no more she spy,
 he have withdraw offend from her sight,
 nor can that gentle voice now hope to stay his flight,

struggle no more her sorrow to restrain,
 her stream eye look round with anxious fear;
 nor be those tender shower now shed in vain,
 her soft lament voice have reach his ear,
 where latent he have mark each precious tear;
 sudden as thought behold he at her foot! 
oh! reconcile moment! charm most dear! 
what feeling heart thy pleasure will repeat,
 or wish thy dear purchase bliss, however sweet? 

the smile of joy which swell her glow cheek,
 and over her part lip divine play,
 return pleasure eloquent speak,
 forgetful of the tear which linger stay,
 (like sparkle dew drop in a sunny day)
 unheeded tenant of rejoice eye;
 his wound her tender care can well repay:
 there grateful kindness breathe her balmy sigh,
 beneath her lenient hand how swift suffer fly! 

free from the maze of disfida grove,
 the open landscape brighten to their view;
 Psyche, with strength revive, now onward move
 in cheerful hope, with courage to renew
 repeat toil, and peril to pursue:
 thus when some tender plant neglect pine,
 shed over its pendent head the kindly dew,
 how soon refresh its vivid lustre shine! 
once more the leaf expand, the droop tendril twine. 

thus cheer, the knight intreat she to impart
 the danger which her way have since befel,
 her timid lip refuse to speak the art
 which clothe he in a form she love so well:
 that she have think he love, she blush to tell! 
confuse she stop; a gentle pause ensue;
 what chance have bring he to the demon cell
 she then enquire; what course he have pursue,
 and who his step have lead throughout the mazy wood. 

sooth he have much to say, though modest shame
 his gallant deed forbid he to declare;
 for while through those bewilder wood he come,
 assist by his page active care,
 he have detect varia wily snare,
 and force her wanton retinue to flee. 
with like disgrace, malignant in despair,
 disfida slave their plot defeat see,
 their feeble malice scorn, their destine victim free. 

but he have mark the trace of their foot,
 and find the path which to the cavern lead:
 whence now, rejoice in reunion sweet,
 their way together cheerful they tread,
 exempt awhile from danger and from dread;
 while psyche heart, with confidence more bold,
 full oft the hour of rapture picture,
 when those celestial charm she shall behold,
 and feel the arm of love once more his bride enfold. 
