the song of the three child paraphrase.

the song of the three child paraphrase. 

1. 

ascend my soul, and in a speedy flight
haste to the region of eternal light;
look all around, each dazzle wonder view,
and thy acquaintance with past joy renew.
through all the æthereal plain extend thy sight,
on every please object gaze;
on roll world below,
on orb which light and heat bestow:
and thence to their first cause thy admiration raise
in sprightly air, and sweet harmonious lay.
Assist i, all you work of art divine,
you wondrous product of almighty power,
you who in lofty station shine,
and to your glorious source by glad approach tower:
in your bright order all appear;
with i your grateful tribute pay,
before his throne your joint devotion lay.
you charm offspring of the earth draw near,
and for your beauty pay your homage here,
let all above, and all below,
all that from unexhausted bounty flow,
to heaven their joyful voice raise,
in loud melodious hymn of praise.
when time shall cease, and each revolve year,
lose in eternity shall disappear,
the bless employment ever shall remain,
and god be sing in each immortal strain.

2. 

o you bright minister of power divine,
in who the deity in miniature do shine;
you first essay of his create skill,
who guard his throne, and execute his will,
adore his goodness, who unwearied love
call into act that great design,
that kind idea to perfection bring,
which long have lie in his eternal thought;
who, when of all felicity possess,
and in himself supreme bless,
to make his wondrous bounty know,
be please to raise
from nothing mighty Monuments of praise:
such as convince evidence prove
of the benignity divine,
and in their blissful state above
with a resplendent lustre shine:
form much more beautiful than light,
and full of charm to we unknown,
of charm peculiar to themselves alone:
adorn with glory not to be express;
with glory much too bright,
to be the object of a mortal sight.
active as air, as æther pure,
exempt from passion, and from pain secure,
from cumbrous earth, and all its frailty free,
happy, and crown with immortality,
and know as create mind can be.
blessing like you, ecstatic Euges claim;
through the celestial court your thanks proclaim;
in high rapture, loud song of joy,
and hallelujah, your eternity employ.

3. 

you glorious plain of pure unshaded light,
which far above the gloomy verge of night
extend lie, beyond the sharp ken of sight;
who bound exceed the utmost stretch of thought,
where vast unnumbered world in fluid æther roll,
and round their radiant centre move,
make by step unequal, one continue dance of love:
extol his wisdom, who such wonder wrought,
who make, and like one individual soul
fill every part, and still preserve the mighty whole.

4. 

you product of condense cold,
you cloud, who liquid treasure hold,
who from your watery store above,
(where waft by concur wind you move)
on the glad earth your bounty pour,
and make it rich with each prolific shower:
not so you fall, as when you be design
to punish the rebellious race of human kind:
then, with impetuous haste stupendous cataract fall;
descend spout, ascend torrent meet;
and mingle horror do the victory get:
nature can not their mighty force repel;
beauty and order from her surface flee,
while over the ball the liquid ruin spread:
now in mild shower you make your kind descent,
refresh the earth, and all our want prevent;
from lofty mountain in meander slide,
and roll by grassy bank your silver wealth along;
let those celestial spring from whence you be supply
their silent homage pay;
and till that fatal hour the grateful task prolong,
when fierce devour flame shall force their dreadful way,
and make this beauteous globe their prey;
from which sulphureous steam shall rise
and chase the congregate vapor from the sky.

5. 

you bless inhabitant of light,
who from your shine seat above,
be often send on embassy of love:
to distant world you take your will flight,
and in the noble charity delight:
from the bless source of good, like ray you flow,
and kind spread your influence below:
in vain the great their mighty deed proclaim,
and think the high praise their due,
and to themselves ascribe that fame
which whole owe be to you:
in vain the grave consider wise
unto themselves applause give,
and think they by their own endeavour rise,
and rich and honour live:
the whole unto your care they owe,
from it each prosperous turn, each bless event do flow:
that tender care, which over all preside,
and for the common good of man provide.
your high Prerogatives with joy confess;
in lofty strain your kind creator bless:
in unforced, grateful, and exalt lay:
you know he best, and ought he most to praise.

6. 

thou glorious sun, bright author of our day,
who dazzle beam around themselves display,
and to the freeze pole thy needful heat convey.
from their long night the shiver native rise,
and see vast train of light adorn their sky.
before thy fire the vanquish cold retire,
and nature at the sudden change admire:
then their lose verdure wood and field regain,
and sea and river break their icy chain.
how bless be they who in warm clime be bear!
those happy clime thy ray do most adorn!
where balmy sweet their fragrant offering pay,
and warble bird salute the rise day:
where vital warmth do sprightly thought inspire,
thought brisk, and active as thy ray:
the immortal Homer feel thy fire,
that wondrous bard! who all succeed age praise.
to the first cause, the uncreated light,
the radiant source of everlasting day,
the center whence thy glory flow,
those dazzle splendor we admire below,
with we thy adoration pay.
and thou, fair orb, who beauty still invite;
who with thy pale beam of borrow light,
bring back the solar ray to bless our night:
from thou reflect, on the earth they shine,
and make the awful prospect seem divine:
thy welcome light the northern climates see,
their tedious night be pleasant make by thou:
from that exalt walk above,
where round our globe thou solemn do move,
admire and laud thy mighty maker love.

7. 

you glitter star, who float in liquid air,
both you that round the sun in different circle move,
and you that shine like sun above;
who light and heat attend planet share:
in your high station your creator praise,
while we admire both he and you;
though vast distant, yet our eye we raise,
and will your lofty region view;
those immense space which no limit know,
where pure æther unconfined do flow;
but our weak sight can such journey go:
it be think alone the distance must explore;
nothing but that to such a height can soar,
nothing but that can thither wing its way,
and there with boundless freedom stray,
and at one view ten thousand sparkle orb survey,
innumerable world and dazzle spring of light.
o the vast prospect! o the charm sight!
how full of wonder, and delight!
how mean, how little, do our globe appear!
this object of our envy, toil and care,
be hardly see amid the croud above;
there, like some shine point, do his scarce distinguish move.

8. 

yet man by his own thought betray,
curse with selflove, not with reflection bless,
if of a great estate possess,
be to his vanity a victim make;
no long he himself do know,
and look with scorn on all below:
but if by chance a kingdom be his share,
and he a diadem do wear,
full of himself, and heighten by his pride,
he to divinity do tower,
and from his visionary sphere of power
command his subject with imperious sway,
and force they his passion to obey:
humour, not reason, be most times his guide:
too great to be advise, by vice and folly lead,
he will the dangerous path of slippery grandeur tread,
and rash mount that steep ascent he ought to dread.
mistaken wretch! what be this worthless all
which do thy heat fancy move?
if thou the whole thy own can call,
it be but a trifle if compare with those above;
which may, perhaps, the happy mansion be
of creature much more noble, much more wise than we.

9. 

you exhalation that from earth arise,
who minute part can be see,
till they be assemble in the low sky;
where be condense, they fall again
in gentle dew, or shower of rain.
to you we owe those fruit our garden yield,
and all the rich production of the field:
but oh! how much be you by those desire,
who be with scorch sunbeam fire?
the swarthy native of the torrid zone,
who live expose to the fierce burn ray,
and will in dazzle brightness waste their day,
do you not sometime cast a shade between,
and from their sight the excessive glory skreen:
your well time bounty they must ever own;
on they you annual kindness bestow,
their air you cool, and all their ground overflow.
as you descend, that god adore,
unto who power you owe your unexhausted store.

10. 

you bluster wind, who spacious region sway,
as through your airy realm you force your way,
high as the starry arch your voice raise,
and with loud sound your great creator praise,
who wondrous power your motion do declare:
strange! that such little particle of air,
such nothing as escape our sight,
with so much strength, such wondrous force shall move,
so powerful in their operation prove!
sometime imprison in the vault below,
you all the dreadful mark of fury show;
the earth you shake, make mighty city reel,
and every part the dire concussion feel.
chasm you cause, and helpless mortal fright,
who tremble sink into everlasting night:
with die accent on their friend they call,
they hear, and in one common ruin fall:
the pale survivor pant fly,
and with loud screech rend the sky;
to neighbour hill they take their hasty flight,
but hill, alas! can no protection yield,
they can themselves from the devour mischief shield:
pursue by terror, lose in wild amaze,
they on surround horror gaze:
with sigh and groan, and with repeat cry,
they prostrate fall, and with implore eye,
all bathe in tear, from heaven they beg relief,
from heaven which see, and only can assuage their grief.

11. 

sometime disturb, they ruffle all the air,
and neither earth, nor ocean spare:
the mount wave with loud confusion roar,
and furious surge dash against the shore:
the stately cedar bend her awful head;
the mean tree can no resistance make;
their break branch all around be spread,
and all their leafy honour shed:
the fright bird their shatter nest forsake:
their verdant food the tremble cattle shun,
and urge by fear to gloomy covert run.

12. 

bless be that god who do our good design,
who kindness do his in each occurrence shine:
who make the boisterous wind declare his love,
and from our air the noxious steam remove,
those poisonous vapor which will fatal prove.
by he restrain, they gentle blow,
and friendly gale bestow:
to sultry clime relief convey,
where sun-burnt indian faint away,
and curse the excessive heat of their torment day.
to they the greedy, and the curious owe
a part of what they have, and what they know.
by they assist, they new sea explore,
and visit every foreign shore:
their sail they fill; the ship make speedy way,
and to wish port their precious freight convey.

13. 

thou kind enliven fire,
which do a needful warmth inspire;
and heat which do to all extend,
from star above, to mine below:
which do on nature work attend,
at once to cherish, and defend,
and make her tender embryo's grow:
the whole creation spring from thou,
both what we be, and what we see,
be owe to thy wondrous energy.
oppress with cold, and void of day,
the sluggish matter stupid lay,
till that propitious hour,
when thy invigorate power
do first its self display:
then life and motion soon begin,
and fiery atom form the sun.
how various be the blessing you bestow!
to that great god from who they flow,
with we your praise send;
let they in pure flame ascend;
to your bright centre swift move,
the eternal fountain both of heat and love.

14. 

you kind vicissitude of heat and cold,
which through the year a due proportion hold;
as on the wing of time your round you move,
extol that wise almighty mind,
who have your different task assign;
and from his lofty throne above
instruct you when to warm, and when to cool,
and do your order with a undisputed empire rule.
your grateful change health and pleasure give;
bless with the dear variety we live:
variety which tempt we on
the painful ill of life to bear,
and when the cheat vision go,
for we do new delude scene prepare:
from place to place,
fresh pleasure we pursue,
and the delightful toil renew,
till death overtake we in our thoughtless chase,
and put a end to our fantastic race.

15. 

you frost and ice, and you descend snow,
adore that god to who your power you owe,
while we, well-pleased, your chill cold endure,
and to the friendly smart our self inure;
and with the pure, the fresh, the salutif'rous air,
the mischief of the summer heat repair;
then with new pleasure wait the approach spring,
and grasp those blessing which the increase year do bring.
but oh! the rigour of the northern air!
what pain must those unhappy mortal bear,
who near the pole, remote from Phœbus ray
waste in uncomfortable darkness half their day!
there, pierce wind commence their stormy reign,
and icy cold the ascendant gain:
there, sea congeal, and river cease to flow,
where harden earth do firm as marble grow,
and where both hill and vale be ever hide with snow.
nature to they penurious do give;
they on a scant allowance live:
yet with content mind their lot sustain,
not know better, and inure to pain.

16. 

you silent night, who sacred be to rest,
wherein the afflict, by their grief oppress,
be with a short cessation bless;
while in the downy band of sleep they lie,
sorrow can no impression make,
slumber the absent joy supply;
and they be happy till they wake.
where you command, a awful quiet reign;
even nature seem the bless to partake.
on the smooth verdant plain
the weary beast recline their head,
and fall asleep upon their grassy bed:
the drowsy bird sit nod on the bough;
to all her work she soft repose allow.
ever darkness have her veil withdraw,
or light unbar her radiant gate,
before the cheerful morn begin to dawn;
while you march slow on in solemn state,
with gentle whisper, accent soft as air,
the praise of your bounteous god declare.

17. 

and you bright day, who from the east arise,
and with diffusive glory gild the sky,
with they your early tribute pay;
while we by kindly sleep refresh,
rise gay and sprightly from our rest,
and see, well-pleased, the out-guard of the night,
the gloomy shade give way
to your victorious light;
at who approach joy spread it self around,
pleasure in every place abound:
the busy peasant their love toil renew,
and active youth their noisy sport pursue:
with loud-mouthed hound the fright hare they chase,
and with his spoil their triumph grace:
the harmless flock lie bask in your beam,
and bird awaken from their dream,
from their soft wing shake off the pearly dew,
and their melodious strain, in tuneful note renew.

18. 

let darkness, who the infernal power obey,
and who ever time begin, with universal sway
through the wide void its empire do extend,
and still do with its young sister light
in its nocturnal course contend,
and ancient right defend:
as round the almighty throne, with sable wing display,
it form a venerable shade,
a shade, which do from each celestial sight
such dazzle glory hide,
as do it not a needful veil provide,
will with their prodigious blaze
attend seraphim amaze;
for the high honour thankful prove.
and thou, fair offspring of eternal love,
thou bright gift of power divine,
which through the happy plain above
do with a undiminished splendour shine:
from whence thou kindly do descend,
and through the mournful gloom thy cheerful beam extend;
(then beauteous nature from the chaos rise,
and do a thousand charm disclose:
with wondrous pleasure she receive the grace,
and bloom joy sit smile in her face.)
to thy bright fountain on retort ray
send constant tribute of unwearied praise.

19. 

you transient fire, who with tremendous light
rush through the dusky horror of the night,
as with a dreadful sound you force your way
through those resist cloud where you imprison lay,
to heaven your adoration pay;
while we your dangerous glory view
glory, who pernicious blaze
do the tremble world amaze:
both bird and beast with haste retire,
and man the dictate of their fear pursue;
from open field, and from the enkindle air,
they to the neighbour cliff repair;
but who can shun your penetrate fire?
the subtle mischief spread it self around,
and tumble lofty temple to the ground;
rock feel its power, marble be force to yield,
nor can the tree their shady cover shield:
through close pore it make its speedy way,
and on the vital stock do prey.
unhappy mortal, thus expose by fate
to the fierce rage of each impend ill,
find in their transitory state,
that death have many way to kill:
the treasure, life, be keep with pain and cost,
and sometime hardly see, before it be lose.

20. 

o let the earth her great creator bless,
and all the wonder of his power confess:
from pole to pole, let she resound his praise;
around her globe let the glad accent fly,
till they be echo by the neighbour sky:
to all the listen world above
let she proclaim aloud
the bless effect of his transcendent love,
who out of nothing do her beauteous fabric raise.
o prodigy of art divine!
the deity do in the wondrous structure shine!
who can in fit expression the sublime idea dress,
or the stupendous marvel of that work express!
angel themselves, who intellect be free
from those dark mist which our weak reason cloud,
who thing in their remote cause see,
who knowledge like their station great and high,
above the lofty flight of weak mortality,
astonish see the rise world appear;
the new, the glorious, the transport sight,
so full of wonder, and delight,
with rapturous joy fill each celestial breast,
with joy too vast to be express;
such ecstasy as here
we can not feel, and live;
they to our being will a period give:
the kill pleasure will be too intense,
and quite overwhelm our feeble sense;
but they who be all intellect and will,
and what they please fulfil,
who mind be pure, free from the least allay,
serene, and clear, as everlasting day,
imbibe the most ecstatic joy with eager haste,
nor can the immense excess immortal spirit waste.

21. 

zeal tune their harp, by it inspire they sing;
the charm sound through all the empyrean ring:
their god they with unwearied ardor bless,
and in their sacred hymn his praise express:
he wisdom, power, and goodness they admire,
these be the constant theme of all the angelic choir:
all these they see on his new work impress:
they see his powerful fiat soon obey;
he speak, and straight that mighty mass be make,
where earth and water, air and fire,
without distinction, order, or design,
do in one common chaos join:
stupid, unactive, without form, or light,
they lay confuse huddle in their native night;
till on the gloomy deep his spirit move;
the emanation of the power divine,
do all its part with vital influence bless,
and scatter through the whole their motive energy.
the active warmth do every part impel,
the heavy downward make their way,
and to a new make centre fall,
where, by their weight together press,
they do in one firm body rest,
on which a mass of liquid lay:
the lucid particle together come,
and join in one propitious flame,
which round the new-formed globe do light and heat convey,
and bless it with the welcome birth of day:
but to one sphere the fire be not confine,
still a sufficient stock be leave behind,
which through the whole in due proportion go,
and needful warmth to every part be send.

22. 

by heat excite, exhalation rise,
and do the region of the air compose:
the thick part our atmosphere do frame,
while the more subtle take a noble flight,
and fill with pure æther the celestial height,
then land appear; the obsequious flood give way,
and each within appoint bound do stay;
but rude and unadorned the new concretion lie,
till by a sudden act of power divine,
the unshaped mass a beauteous earth become;
charm it look in its gay infant dress;
goodness and art at once do shine,
and both the god confess.
thrice bless that pair, who in the dawn of time
be make possessor of that happy clime:
but wretched they soon lose their blissful state,
undo by their own folly, not their fate.

23. 

serene and calm those early region be,
a constant spring be always there,
and gentle breeze cool the air,
rough wind and rain they never know,
but unseen shower of pearly dew,
(aereal stream) their balmy drop distil,
and with prolific moisture the smooth surface fill.
the beauteous plain perpetual verdure wear,
with lovely flower embroider over.
flower so wondrous sweet, so wondrous fair,
never grace our earth, never perfume our air,
peculiar to those happy field they be;
through which the wind river make their way,
the clear unsullied stream with wanton play
in thousand various figure stray;
sometime concur water make
a little sea, a crystal lake,
where for a while in their soft bed they rest,
till by succeed current press,
to distant part they gentle flow,
and murmur as they go,
as if they wish a long stay,
and run unwilling away:
on their enamel bank be see
plant ever beauteous, ever green;
plant, who odoriferous smell,
do the since fame Sabæan sweet excel.
nature profuse spread her riches there,
the fertile soil prove grateful to her care,
the new unlaboured ground large stately tree do bear,
tree who majestic top aspire so high,
they almost seem to touch the sky;
load with blossom, and with fruit at once they stand;
at once the beauty of the spring and autumn crown the wood:
at once they do the bounty of both season wear.

24. 

such be the earth so beauteous and so gay,
fresh as the morn, delightful as the day:
not the hesperian garden so much fame of old,
where glorious tree bear vegetable gold;
nor that whereof Mæonides have write,
Alcinous garden, which its beauty owe
to that great genius, that transcendent wit,
who can the low subject raise,
and make the mean thing deserve eternal praise:
such be Phæacia, until with wondrous art
he 'mbelish every part:
he fancy the rich dress bestow:
to future time it have be little know,
have no native lustre of its own,
have not his muse enrol its name,
and lay it up secure within the archive of fame.
nor these, nor yet those happy plain,
Virgil describe in his immortal strain,
can equal the perfection of that charm place,
which nature have adorn with her exact care,
and furnish it with every grace;
her skill do every where appear:
all that be lovely, all that love delight,
may there be see in its exalt height:
in it conspicuous do shine
the inimitable stroke of art divine,
the god be see in every dazzle line.

25. 

such it continue, till deform by sin:
guilt call down vengeance from above,
and quick spoil the workmanship of love:
guilt on the earth a dreadful deluge bring;
in vain the offend race protection seek,
in vain they from the liquid mischief flee,
the fatal cause be still within:
from mountain top they see the float dead:
the increase water do their step pursue,
and none escape but the bless favourite few:
who ride in triumph on the watery waste,
secure above the swell surge place:
amaze they see the dare billow rise,
they pass the cloud, and mingle with the sky:
high on the exalt wave they look around,
but no remains of their dear country find;
the insult flood have cover all the ground:
with pity they their brothers fate deplore,
and then the mercy of their god adore;
his mercy, who such wondrous difference make,
and give such pregnant proof how much he love:
who, when no human power can aid,
himself their kind protector prove.
while thus employ, they see the sea subside,
the impetuous water gradual withdraw;
nature for their reception do provide;
and they can once again their native region view.

26. 

on some bleak mountain top they sigh stay,
and thence the horror of the plain survey:
those pleasant plain, once fill with all delight,
afford only now a melancholy sight:
there tree lay scatter, all defile with mud,
and finny monster flounce where spacious city stand:
the ground with heap of bone be cover over,
they every where find something to deplore:
long on the sad catastrophe they gaze,
at once afflict, and amaze;
and the vindictive justice of their god revere,
that justice, which so dreadful appear.
at length embolden, and the earth grow dry,
they from the inhospitable height descend;
the aerial kind disperse themselves around,
their step the flock and herd attend,
and seek their food upon the slimy ground,
the slimy ground can not their want supply;
indulgent nature pity their distress,
and do the field with useful herbage bless:
but man, unhappy man, be force to toil,
to plough, to sow, and cultivate the soil:
the stubborn earth without their care,
nor fruit, nor corn, nor the rich vine will bear:
they to their labour their subsistence owe,
and all their plenty on themselves bestow.

27. 

we, the curse offspring of that wander race,
be still condemn to this unhappy place;
this earth, where we with tear be usher in,
and where our grief, do with our year begin;
where, without labour, we can nothing gain,
and where the purchase equal not the pain;
who will with so much toil the encumbrance life maintain?
but we must live probationer for joy,
in noble deed our come hour employ;
that, when from this bad world release by fate,
we may be re-admitted to that glorious state,
where our pure soul possess supreme delight,
and live within the verge of everlasting light.
what, you bless spirit, what can you excite
to leave your radiant seat above?
can mortal body such attractive prove?
be happiness grow your disease?
or be you surfeit with ease?
o dreadful lapse! o fatal change!
must you, who through the high orb can range,
survey the beauteous world above,
and there adore the source of love,
be here confine to lump of clay,
to darksome cell, remote from your ætherial day?
on this vain theatre of noise and strife,
must you be force to act the farce of life:
our soul, good god, to their first bliss restore,
and let they actuate dull flesh no more.

28. 

it be grant; hark! i hear the trumpet sound,
the mighty voice dilate it self around,
and in its clangor every less noise be drown.
he come! he come! with a refine fire,
the cloud before he awful retire:
the part sky with haste give way
and show to tremble man the bright eternal day:
lightning and thunder on his triumph wait,
with all the fiery minister of fate:
ten thousand meteor roll along the air;
hot exhalation waste their fury there:
and burn mountain send their flame on high;
swift as our thought the scorch mischief fly:
mix with thick smoke the threaten terror rise,
and fill with sooty atom the dark gloomy sky:
the earth do shake, by fierce convulsion rend,
and search fire to every part be send.
hark! how the trouble sea do roar!
its scald water beat against the shore:
the fish leave their oozy bed;
with haste they swim to land,
but find no rest upon the burn sand:
both land and water equal they dread,
and on the glow beach in mighty Sholes lie dead.
the feather kind forsake their lofty height,
and from the sultry region of the air,
by speedy flight
for refuge to the earth repair,
where, with singe wing they gasp lie;
the low herd fall pant by,
and beast of prey with struggle fury die.
the brute creation one great holocaust be make,
and altogether on the burn altar lay.

29. 

by flame horror every where pursue,
from place to place, poor fright mortal run;
where ever they go, their danger be renew,
they can the swift destruction shun:
torture with heat they faint fall,
and cast despair glance round;
the child on their parent call;
the wretched parent sigh lie,
and see their tender offspring die:
with loud complaint they fill the air;
the heavenly vault return the sound,
and spread the mournful accent round:
in vain they groan, in vain they cry,
in vain their screech pierce the sky,
alas! no help, no aid be nigh:
the common vengeance all must share,
and with the earth, the fiery trial bear;
both rich, and poor, must leave their mingle ash there.

30. 

see! see! she be now a sea of fire,
a vast enormous blaze!
the neighbour world the prodigy admire,
and on the new-formed glory gaze:
the fire have all her dross calcine,
every part be now refine:
justice appease, to love give way,
love will once more its power display,
and the foundation of a second fabric lay.
it be do! it be do! an earth do rise,
encompass round with pure sky;
a earth, much better than the first,
than that, which for our sake be curse:
much more beauteous, much more fine,
much more of skill divine
do in the charm texture shine:
no inequality of air,
no noxious vapor govern there;
the brighten sky unclouded lustre wear.

31. 

there plenty spread her wing around,
and brood upon the fertile ground:
without expense, or toil, or care,
the fruitful ground do all thing bear:
it have a unexhausted store;
the greedy can wish for more:
sparkle gem, and golden oar,
useful corn, and generous wine,
wood of cedar, oak, and pine,
and lofty groves for ever green,
with bed of fragrant flower between;
pure crystal spring, sweet cool stream,
such as be once the poet theme.
see! see! melodious bird be there;
they please the eye, and charm the ear;
and inoffensive beast their pleasure mind,
neither for labour, nor for food design:
they do not on each other prey,
but new, and better law obey;
both lamb and lion there together play.

32. 

o you celestial race!
by providence design,
the bless possessor of this happy place,
you who like we do earthy body wear,
like we do human frailty share,
and all the painful ill of linger life do bear:
but now to noble post consign,
have leave your cumbrous flesh behind;
and now be clothe with radiant light,
with body active, pure, and bright;
admire and praise that wondrous love
which have for you such joy in store:
when land on that glorious shore,
you will think of your past grief no more:
divine munificence will prove
the bless employment of your happy hour,
and still exert your most exalt power.

33. 

no more with trifle you will be then in love,
no more your former vain pursuit approve:
no more endeavour to be rich and great;
and to your care a prey,
in anxious thought employ the night,
and in fatigue the day:
no more such needless toil repeat;
no more in luxury delight:
no more be wretched by your passion make,
nor by your appetite betray:
from all your folly you will abstain,
no more penurious be, nor vain,
nor will you ever more complain:
your former pleasure will insipid prove,
no more than dream your waken reason move;
new object whole will ingross your love:
object of which we can idea frame,
and joy, for which we can find a name.

34. 

such joy as here from contemplation spring;
that best, that noble pleasure of the mind,
which keep the soul upon the wing,
and will not be to any place confine;
but range at large, as unrestrained as thought, or wind.
to you delight it will ever yield:
it will lead you into nature boundless field;
to you her various beauty show,
and let you she Arcanum view:
the scene of providence display,
before you all the machine lie;
the whole economy divine,
where art do in perfection shine,
and where amaze you will find
wisdom and goodness, with almighty power combine:
show you the past occurrence of time,
from nature birth, to her decay,
from the rude chaos, to that last conclude day,
which sweep both man and all their vast design away:
sight such as these, so wondrous, and sublime,
will high transport raise,
and prove fit matter for eternal praise.

35. 

there, with each other you will with joy converse,
and all the warmth of sacred love express:
each breast will with a holy ardor flame,
your soul unite, and ever be the same:
without reserve, without disguise you will live,
no artifice, no separate interest know;
you heart for heart will free give,
and pay the kindness which you owe.
that friendship which from virtue spring,
immortal as its cause do prove;
with it, ten thousand joy it bring,
such joy as death can remove:
they will beyond the grave remain,
and solace we above;
where, for the good we love below,
we our affection shall retain;
which still to great height shall rise,
shall still more fervent grow,
and like the glory of the sky,
shall no decay, no diminution know.

36. 

you lofty mountain who aspire height
stop rise vapor in their airy flight;
where when condense, from thence they flow,
and water all the plain below.
to you, the mighty river owe their birth,
and the most precious treasure of the earth:
silver, and gold, those darling of mankind,
we in your wealthy bowel find:
on we, you copper, iron, lead and tin bestow,
and there, both shine gem, and useful mineral grow.
when from your airy top we look around,
on every side be please object find,
yonder, large plain their verdant beauty show,
and there, with noisy haste resistless torrent flow:
here, various animal, and herb invite,
there, town we see, here forest yield delight,
and there, the mighty ocean bound our sight.
as high above the cloud your head you raise,
the wondrous power of your creator praise;
let thunder blast spread the loud accent round,
and let each hill return the joyful sound.

37. 

you lovely green, who cloth the earth,
and to the sun, and moisture owe your birth:
all you that be for use design,
the pride of meadow, where the bleat cattle find
enough their hunger to suffice,
and still be bless with fresh supply:
you tender herb, who beauteous flower produce,
and you, enrich with balmy juice,
who be with heal virtue bless,
and you who for delight be make,
for ornament, or shade,
with all the odoriferous kind:
to heaven from whence your beauty come,
your thanks in pure effluvium send;
thither let all your praise be address;
in plenteous steam let they ascend,
and with a eager swiftness fly
through the soft yield sky.
you tower tree, do you the same;
you, that with verdant honour crown
cast your wide spread branch round,
and from the sun too fervent heat
afford a welcome cool retreat.
o you love groves! my early dear delight!
you to a thousand joy invite:
joy know but to a thoughtful mind,
which can within true satisfaction find;
and need no foreign help to make it bless,
but all-sufficient in its self can rest.

38. 

come all you fountain your due tribute pay,
and let each river as it roll along;
the universal call obey,
and with the whole creation join in one harmonious song:
through all the bright expanse above,
the boundless theatre of love,
let the melodious noise resound,
and spread the grateful transport round:
let nature too her homage pay
in every charm lay.
hear, o you sea! the invite sound,
let all your boisterous roar cease,
and let your watery subject taste the sweet of peace.
see! they attend! a sacred silence reign,
and quiet sit triumphant on the liquid plain.
you listen wave, with a low murmur voice,
express your thanks, and with the rest rejoice:
with you we will join, and the great subject raise:
almighty goodness claim the high praise.

39. 

you monarch of the finny race,
who in the northern sea delight;
where your huge body fill a mighty space,
and show like live island to the wonder sight;
as you your head above the water raise,
speak by your gesture your creator praise:
with you let every less fish combine;
such as in scaly armour shine,
with those that near the surface play,
and to the please spectator sight,
their beauteous form, and glitter Finns display;
all such as in the depth delight,
and through the weedy labyrinth stray;
those who themselves in muddy covert hide,
and such as in strong pearly shell reside;
with those that in the river live,
far distant from the encroach tide;
let all by sign their plaudit give;
before his throne their mute devotion lie,
and, as they can, their silent adoration pay.

40. 

you pretty ranger of the air,
who, unconfined, can at your pleasure fly
through the wide region of the low sky:
and in pursuit of fresh delight,
or weary with your tower flight,
can to the earth with ease repair,
and feed on tempt viand there;
and thence to silent groves retire,
where, undisturbed, you sit and sing,
and welcome back the flowery spring;
or at the summer warmth rejoice;
that warmth, to which you owe the fire
which do harmonious strain inspire.
well-pleased with your delightful choice,
from bough to bough you warble fly;
while neighbour hill return the voice,
and to each charm note reply.
as thus your happy minute glide along,
to heaven melodious offering pay:
with you a equal share
let the whole species bear;
the wild and tame, the beauteous, swift and strong;
let all contribute to the song:
and each in his peculiar way
to heaven eternal king,
with cheerful haste his vocal tribute bring.

41. 

come all you beast, your homage pay,
you of the fierce devour kind,
who chief live on prey;
and all the night intent on spoil,
range up and down with restless toil,
where if by chance you wretched traveler find,
who be by fate your prey design,
on they without remorse you seize,
and with their blood your crave stomach please;
but when return day
have chase the dusky shade away,
back to your den with fear you run,
at once pursue man, and hate light to shun:
and you, who innocence, and use,
keep you secure from all abuse;
you harmless flock, who grace the field,
and you, that milky treasure yield:
all you that on the mountain breed,
and you, that in the valley feed:
you, who on craggy rock reside,
and you, that in the earth abide:
let every individual beast,
as well the large, as the least,
before their bounteous god rejoice,
and pay their thanks with a unite voice.

42. 

you son of man, you choose race
who god do with transcendent favour grace:
you, who depend on his almighty power,
and taste his bounty every hour;
return those thanks which be his due,
and let the brutal kind be all outdo by you:
exert your reason, every thought improve,
and let your faculty be all employ on love:
that love, to which our all we owe,
and which take pleasure free to bestow.
when first this beauteous world be wrought,
while we exist but in thought,
love, even then our good design,
even then in every part it shine:
each place have something to invite,
the whole be crowd with delight.
the air be calm, the balmy spring
do all its fragrant treasure bring:
the beast rejoice, and void of strife,
enjoy a pleasant, easy life:
sing the glad bird, and all conspire
to make the earth a place desire,
a paradise, that can not be enough admire!

43. 

when thus prepare, love smile come,
and do our happy parent frame:
beauteous they be as dawn light,
their understanding clear and bright.
to you, say he, this earth i give;
amid unnumbered pleasure live.
prove but obedient, and your bliss shall be
as last as my own eternity.
he speak; they listen to the joyful sound,
then cast their ravish eye around,
where ever they gaze, they some new wonder find.
ah! thoughtless pair! how soon be you undo!
o can you not the fatal tempter shun!
accurse pride! thou ruin of our race,
thou black inhabitant of hell,
how dare thou enter that forbid place,
and prompt they to rebel?
o it be the vain desire of know more,
of add to your intellectual store,
which make both you, and all your wretched offspring poor.

44. 

too late, alas! they their sad change lament,
and to the wood their fruitless sorrow vent.
its dire effect their guilt display,
for innocence once lose, content no long stay:
pursue by vengeance, of themselves afraid,
they be a prey to every terror make:
the fear of death, that unknown worst of ill,
their sad despond soul with black idea fill:
where ever they look, a dismal horror reign,
and every creature in its turn complain:
full of despair, they shun the hate day,
and in dark shade sigh their sad hour away:
but they, alas! in vain retire;
shade can hide from wrath divine;
that all-consuming fire
will through the thick covert shine:
nor subterranean vault, nor a egyptian night
be proof against the search ray of pure æthereal light.

45. 

offend justice come to try their cause,
and from their close recess the tremble wretch draw.
strike pale with horror, self-condemned they stand,
and for themselves some vain excuse make:
deceive they be by a pretend good,
and all the blame on the false tempter lay:
the judge incense, their folly will not hear,
the weak result of shame and fear.
their will be free, and they have power to choose;
the good they know, and may the ill refuse:
felicity be they; and if they will please
the glorious treasure have be still their own;
they can not be by fraud, or force disseise:
their loss be owe to themselves alone:
their disobedience to the law divine
make death, eternal death, their due:
in vain they at their punishment repine,
the impartial judge will no compassion show.
their future race with they must bear a part,
involve both in the guilt, and in the smart.

46. 

love look with pity on their lose estate,
and strive to mitigate their rigurous fate:
but its attempt all unsuccessful prove.
relentless justice nought can move:
it be deaf to all the soft remonstrance of love.
when it in vain all other way have try,
it put on flesh, and for the guilty die:
offer it self in sacrifice for all,
and do a will victim fall.
o wondrous goodness! kindness all divine!
the god do in the bounteous action shine!

47. 

see, he appear! he leave his glorious throne!
put off his robe of dazzle light
and all alone
he downward take his way
to realm remote from his eternal day!
where all those splendor which our eye invite,
be if compare to those above,
like lunar beam, or wander fire,
and all as mean, as transient pleasure prove.
he come! he come! our nature wear!
and all our sinless frailty share,
and all our sorrow, all our suffering bear!
each angel at the sight admire,
and stoop low, with wonder eye,
into the awful mystery pry.
gaze on, gaze on, o holy choir!
and as you gaze, his praise sing;
such wondrous love you can enough admire,
a love which only can from boundless pity spring:

48. 

but stay a while, your heavenly music cease,
behold a scene your wonder will increase:
a scene, that will, can you be touch with grief,
the deep sorrow in your breast excite,
a melancholy, a amaze sight,
a prodigy beyond belief!
a god surround by insult foe,
and meek yield to their barbarous rage,
condemn, despise, and scourge by those
for who love sake he this hard treatment choose!
with cruel man, infernal power engage,
and the variety of torment try:
no common suffering can their wrath assuage,
he must with complicate torture die.
view he! o view he on the accurse wood,
his tender hand and foot all stain with blood,
bend beneath a ignominious fate,
the dire result both of their guilt and hate.

49. 

see, by his cross, the virgin mother stand
with stream eye, and lift hand:
fix on the mournful object she appear,
and only speak by sigh and tear.
thou wondrous pattern of maternal love!
can grief like thy no pity move?
such sorrow may even hungry tiger charm,
and fierce barbarian of their wrath disarm:
but the more savage Jew be stranger grow
to those soft dictate nature do inspire;
they do all tender sentiment disown,
and be by hellish malice set on fire:
but oh! our sin strike deep than their rage,
and in their cause, celestial wrath engage:
they pierce his soul with sorrow more intense,
than ever since be feel by human sense.
while thus he suffer, the condole sun
withdraw his light,
that he the dismal sight may shun;
darkness, great as their crime, the world overspread,
and every ray back to its center flee.
while they be wonder at the sudden night,
his dreadful agony increase,
our sin disturb his inward peace:
with loud complaint, and strong pathetic cry,
he towards his father throne cast his expire eye,
to he resign his soul, and full of anguish die.

50. 

see! o thou holy mourner! see!
commiserate nature join with thou!
the tremble earth resound thy moan,
and answer every sigh with loud redouble groan:
the beast refuse their meat, the bird complain,
and with sad note fill each adjoin plain;
the neighbour hill return the mournful sound,
and spread the melancholy music round:
the river with condole murmur flow,
and crystal fountain sign of sadness show:
the rock be rend,
and the rough soldier wear
the unusual badge of sorrow and of fear:
full of compassion each retire;
the move sight so vast concern inspire.
all, but the cruel Jew relent;
their harden heart can of ill repent.

51. 

the kind redeemer in his grave be lay;
for we he have a mighty ransom pay,
and for our sin full satisfaction make.
with lively colour in our thought we will paint
the bury son, and the lament saint;
by he she sit, with numerous woe oppress,
and wring her hand, and beat her snowy breast:
with sorrow, such as she never feel before,
and flood of tear, she do her loss deplore;
fain will she speak, but word can find no way,
she must the motion of her grief obey,
and only by her sigh her thought convey.
those throng dolour which her soul molest,
be much too great to be express;
they can in sad complaint a passage find;
by their excess, unhappy confine,
they still remain within, the burden of her mind.

52. 

oh! who can see the holy of her kind,
with humble duty to her god resign,
bear such affliction with a patient mind,
and not with conscious shame
their own ungoverned temper blame?
ah! bless virgin, let we learn from thou
to live from all our sinful passion free:
let we no more at providence repine,
but yield a calm submission to the will divine:
like thou all injury, all loss bear,
and be content when they be most severe.
thy pious grief succeed time shall praise,
and to thy honour last trophy raise:
where ever thy son extend his heavenly law,
and with his save precept vicious mortal awe;
thy dear remembrance ever shall remain,
and thou a mighty veneration gain:
thy bless example shall our pattern be,
we will strive to live, to love, to grieve, like thou.

53. 

now cease to weep, thy task of grief be do;
attend the triumph of thy conquer son:
he shall no long in the grave remain,
with ease he break death adamantine chain;
over it, and hell, see he victorious rise,
and once again
restore himself to thy desire eye;
make hake, make haste, with eager rapture meet
the ascend god, and breath thy transport at his foot:
make know thy trouble, there thy grief repeat,
and let thy joy, be like thy sorrow, great.

54. 

the holy dead revisit earth again;
those who whole age in their grave have lie,
awake from their long silent night,
and crowd to see the joyful sight:
with they, the faithful few on their dear saviour gaze,
and lose their reason in the bless amaze:
with doubt mind on his love face they look;
the welcome vision strike they with surprise;
at once with joy and wonder strook,
they tremble stand, and disbelieve their eye;
till his know voice dispel their fear,
that voice, with transport they be wont to hear
go, my love follower, gracious he say,
go, and the sinful world persuade;
i will my self your kind endeavour aid:
first to the Jew my righteous doctrine preach,
and then the heathen nation teach;
to they my sacred law make know,
i will by miracle your mission own:
go, fearless on, and my command obey,
and slight those danger which obstruct your way.
pursue those path which i have tread,
and bold share the suffering of your god:
eternal glory your reward shall prove,
the dear-bought purchase of your master love.

55. 

these charm accent their glad soul elate,
and reconcile they to their come fate;
to honour he who for their sake have die,
they death, and its precede ill, defy:
resolve they will the cruel Jew oppose,
and preach repentance to his barbarous foe:
they to remote country dauntless go,
through burn sand, and chill snow:
no pain, no labour spare,
but every where
his sacred truth declare:
those sacred truth which soul refine,
and if they his assistance have,
the most obdurate sinner save.
while fill with pleasure all divine,
they gaze on the transport sight,
he his bless to they give;
and then before their wonder eye
return to his desert sky,
and reassumed his regal state.
they see he mount clothe with refulgent light:
the encircle air, make by reflection bright,
they see with dazzle splendour shine.
and now above the reach of fate,
beyond the narrow verge of time,
by his please father side he sit sublime;
with he adore, encompass round
with numerous croud, who his due praise resound:
there, he for ever will his merit plead,
and with unwearied kindness intercede,
for such as here his just command obey,
and at his foot their darling interest lay.

56. 

while the disciple with attentive eye
fix their regard on the resplendent sky,
and view those distant tract of light
which their dear lord have leave behind,
two glorious form appear before their sight,
and with fresh wonder fill each mind:
beauteous they be as new create day,
and do resistless charm display:
ætherial splendor compass they around,
and they with glitter beam be crown:
with wondrous grace, and a majestic air,
they to the astonish listener say,
why, o you galilean, stand you gaze here,
by too much love betray
to groundless fear?
he be not lose, for who you mourn;
you shall once more see he return:
from heaven he shall descend again
attend by a pompous train:
myriad of angel, than the sun more bright,
clad all in robe of shine white,
shall on his radiant chariot wait,
resound trumpet shall proclaim his come state,
while bend cloud their glorious weight disclose,
and show the avenge god to his despair foe.

57. 

that god who they do once despise,
shall then become the terror of their eye:
with swift haste they will his dread presence shun,
and to dark cave, and close cavern run:
with deafen clamour to the hill they will call,
and wish the mountain on their head will fall;
beneath the mighty ruin they will hide,
or in unfathomable depth abide:
as they with horror, so the good with joy,
shall on the bright appearance gaze,
and meet their god with cheerful song of praise:
he come! he come! exult they will sing,
he come the wicked to destroy!
those long since dead, and those that yet remain,
he doom! he doom! to everlasting pain:
but from each land his suffering saint will bring:
from their long sleep his injure servant wake;
they shall a part of the resplendent triumph make:
in pure, immortal body they shall rise,
and mount, all-glorious mount the sky:
where free from sin, from pain, from fear,
they shall the welcome euge hear;
well do, well do, shall their please saviour say;
come, and receive a recompense from i;
you have be my follower in the rugged way,
and now shall taste of my felicity.
go, these important truth make know;
his resurrection joyful declare;
not to the Jew alone;
let the whole world in the glad tiding share.
they say; and as a transient flash of light,
with swiftness glance on spectator sight,
and in a moment mingle with the air,
and lose all its splendour there;
such be the quick appearance, such the quick remove,
of those bright form, those minister of love.

58. 

replete with joy, by flame ardor sway,
the please disciple their love lord obey:
with prosperous haste his holy faith they spread,
and in his name restore the sick, and raise the dead;
that awful name from which the tremble devil flee!
the oppose world they for his sake defy,
for he they live, and in his service die.
thrice bless be you who still obey his voice,
and make this dangerous proof of zeal your choice:
who, by a love for your dear lord inspire,
and by diffusive goodness fire,
cross sea unknown, through pathless desert go,
and no concern for your own safety show;
intrepid, and untired, no toil decline
that may advance your great design:
contemn danger, still pursue your way,
and far as the remote bound of day,
the glorious ensign of your suffer god display.

59. 

let Israel, that distinguish race,
those darling of almighty love,
who heaven have bless with his peculiar grace,
to their great benefactor thankful prove:
to he, who in their infant state,
when they, expose and helpless, lay,
to every threaten ill a prey:
obnoxious to the storm of fate,
and their insult neighbour hate,
keep they from all approach harm
secure, in his all-powerful arm:
and who in their mature estate,
when they egyptian fetter wear,
and cruel pressure bear,
then, even then, their good design,
midst all their Streights his kindness shine,
and when resolve to set they free
by method all-divine,
he bring about his great design;
and let the haughty tyrant see,
that while he multiply their pain,
and fast strive to tie their chain,
he but his own destruction wrought,
and on his land a speedy ruin bring.

60. 

the favourite people safe remain,
while plague among his subject reign;
such plague as with amaze haste
lay all his fruitful country waste:
he fertile Nile with blood make flow,
the sanguine mischief through its channel spread;
while from the infectious stench the poison fish flee,
and on the putrid mud in noisome heap lay dead:
the crocodile their watery haunt forsake,
and to the land for shelter go;
where, all defile with gore, they wallow lie,
and stretch at length, the bulky monster die:
the wretched native of these ill partake;
quite parch with thirst, they all the land survey,
through every field, and every desert stray;
with wish eye they search around,
but wholesome stream they no where find:
in this distress, upon their god they call;
before their shrine the faint suppliant fall:
they to their Isis, and Osiris cry,
but all in vain; their want be not supply.

61. 

frog in vast number from the river come,
and with loud croaking their ascent proclaim:
with hideous clamour they the land invade,
the temple fill, and in the royal chamber stay:
while on their loathsome guest the people gaze,
succeed wonder heighten their amaze:
dry earthy particle prolific prove,
each animate dust do move:
on man and beast the eager insect seize,
and with a bloody feast their hungry stomach please:
these soon be follow by vast swarm of fly,
which fill the earth, and darken all the sky;
in triumph ride the circuit of the air,
and play, and wanton there,
and neither Pharaoh, nor his god revere.

62. 

a deadly ill do on their cattle seize;
they faint, they sink, they yield to the disease:
from the unerring shaft it be vain to fly,
they in the field, and at the altar die:
the small remain with grievous boil be seize:
nor be the harmless beast alone disease;
with they the infectious ill their master share,
with they, the noisome sickness bear:
as they be murmur at their fate,
and curse their abhor estate,
they see new plague prepare in the air,
black dreadful cloud be gather there;
loud thunder roar, and forky lightning fly
with glare terror cross the darken sky,
vapor congeal, in mighty hail descend,
and certain ruin do its fall attend:
nor man, nor beast its fury can avoid;
the field it spoil, and every herb destroy;
the tree it rob of all their native green,
and nothing round their root but scatter bough be see:
the fright peasant with amazement strook,
with tremble haste their rural care forsake,
to close cave, and sacred vault they flee,
and there, remain secure, among the happy dead.

63. 

at all their ill Pharaoh remain unmoved,
his flinty heart more hard than marble prove:
he still resolve the hebrew to detain;
and for their sake be plague again:
with fatal haste vast flight of locust come.
their prince, the suffering people blame;
and see with grief, the quick devourer share,
that little which the hail have spare.
thick darken vapor from the earth arise,
and with their clammy atom fill all the ambient sky;
so vast their number, not one ray of light
can penetrate the shade of that black horrid night:
three day they sit hide from each other view,
and all their sigh, their tear, their sad complaint renew.
high provoke by their obdurate king,
god do on they a great judgement bring:
while with soft sleep they strive to calm their grief,
and hope to find in slumber some relief,
to every house he the destroyer send,
and bid he all the firstborn kill;
with haste he on the dreadful errand go,
and do the dire command fulfil:
amaze, and grieve the sad egyptian rise,
and with shrill screech, and loud dismal cry,
proclaim their loss, and to their king repair,
and beg he will his mourn subject spare:
they see impend danger threaten from on high,
and fear they shall like their dear offspring die:
with horror strike, they their sad suit renew:
move by their prayer he do at length relent;
and by their sigh and tear subdue,
from Egypt he the joyful hebrew send.

64. 

their great preserver now their guide become;
by night he lead they with a bright auspicious flame;
by day a cloud do their conductor prove,
thus be they still the care of his unwearied love.
the egyptian tyrant soon his rage renew,
and with a numerous host the fright Jew pursue:
on the Erythræan shore they tremble stay,
and thence the sea, and their approach foe survey:
enclose with danger, to their god they cry,
to he, who never yet his aid deny:
when thus distress, he bid the sea retire;
the obsequious sea with haste obey,
and at a awful distance stay,
while they be through its depth from all their fear convey:
with joyful speed amid the shade of night,
they follow their direct fire,
and by its glorious light,
view all the wonder of the new-formed way,
and see their god his mighty power display.
the rash egyptian still their step pursue,
and think they may be now with ease subdue;
onward they go, push forward by their fate,
and see no danger till it be too late.

65. 

when the safe shore the Israelite have gain,
the sea no long be restrain,
but with tumultuous haste its ancient ground regain.
from place to place the lose pursuer flee,
and vain strive the impetuous wave to shun,
each path to some new danger lead,
they can not from surround water run:
struggle and weary to their god they cry,
and full of horror, and confusion die:
the joyful people, when return day
have chase the melancholy shade away,
see on the shore the dead egyptian lie,
with arm and horse scatter by;
thick as autumnal leaf they lie,
to every ravenous bird, and every beast a prey.

66. 

those mighty man, who they so late fear,
now object of contempt appear:
with joy they gaze, and as they gaze, they sing;
the heavenly arch with cheerful accent ring:
with thankful heart they their protector bless,
and in sweet move strain their gratitude express.
then forward march, by the same kindness lead,
secure from danger, and divine feed
with angel food, with pure celestial bread:
thus favour, they through trackless desert go,
where from hard rock revive stream be send:
continue mercy fill each circle hour,
the rich production of unbounded power!
in vain against they warlike nation rise,
in vain against they combine,
in vain their conquer arm oppose;
in vain be every deep design:
without success, their stratagem they try,
without success, to lawless art they fly:
in vain do Moab altar raise,
in vain desire the prophet aid,
in vain that he will curse they pray:
in vain the seer to curse the bless essay:
a inward force, a power divine,
turn his intend curse into praise:
compel, their triumph he foretell,
long on the hate subject dwell.
thus bless, and prosper by almighty love,
in sacred pomp their force onward move;
and full of glory, reach the happy soil,
the kind reward of their obedient toil,
the promise Canaan; where, the fruitful ground
do with rich nature choice gift abound,
and where, their wish be with full fruition crown.

67. 

you sacred priest, who at the altar wait,
and there, well-skilled in rite divine,
his wondrous passion celebrate,
in who unprecedented love do shine:
extol his name, enlarge upon his praise,
and as it merit, the great subject raise:
with zeal, and clearness, holy truth relate;
and strive by reason to convince the mind:
let useless subtlety, those trick of pride,
those mask that ignorance do choose
her sloth, and her deformity to hide,
no place in your discourse find:
for solid notion, banish empty show,
and in the noble cause your rhetoric use:
no more in vain dispute engage;
no more a war with different party wage,
but make it your whole business to reform the age:
with vice alone the combat try,
to vanquish that your skill apply;
and with a courage dauntless and sublime,
a courage, worthy of your faith, and you,
exert your utmost strength the Hydra to subdue.
preach justice to the great, to such as climb
with guilty haste the dangerous height of fame,
and wade through blood to grandeur and a name.
tell they a nemesis divine,
do all the action of mankind survey,
see each ambitious, each unjust design;
and though oppressor prosper for a while,
and fortune seem on their attempt to smile,
yet in the last impartial day,
god with eternal vengeance will their crime repay.

68. 

tell those who bliss be to their wealth confine,
virtue the great treasure they can gain,
a treasure which for ever will remain.
persuade they with a bounteous mind
to be to the deserve needy kind,
and like that god to who they all thing owe,
their riches free to bestow.
the unthinking proud unto themselves make know;
tell they they have nothing they can call their own:
those thing they boast, may soon be snatch away,
they can insure their bliss for one short moment stay.
wealth may be lose, and beauty will decay:
title be vain, and what they honour call,
do often to the share of the unworthy fall:
inconstant fortune blind do bestow
promiscuous favour with a careless hand;
sometime she lift the mean on high,
and son of earth again insult the sky;
on the bright airy height of power they stand,
praise and adore by all below;
while such as merit empire, live obscure,
and all the indignity of fate endure.

69. 

persuade all such as of their knowledge proud,
cast scornful glance on the illiterate croud,
to look within, and let each haughty thought
be to the test of sober reason bring:
tell they their pride from ignorance flow,
he be ever humble who most know:
those who rich soul be always bright,
who live encompass round with intellectual light,
do in their mind a thousand error see,
and seldom be from their own censure free:
their wisdom add but to their pain,
and they by their research gain
only uncertain notice of truth:
when they to outward object turn their sight,
they find they all involve in night;
like fleet shadow they escape their view:
if at the expense of health, of ease, and youth,
they the thin airy form pursue,
themselves they tire with the long toilsome race,
and lose at last the phantom which they chase:
the world of learning none can yet explore;
the most laborious only coast it round the shore;
view creek, and bay, and distant mountain see,
the rest be hide from human industry.

70. 

teach the luxurious with a noble scorn
to look on all the glitter trifle here below:
tell they they be for high business bear,
and on their mind shall all their thought bestow;
there all their care, and all their skill shall show.
tell they the pomp of life be but a snare,
riches, temptation which they ought to fear,
empire, a burden few have strength enough to bear.
the true, substantial wealth be lodge within;
it be there the bright gem be find:
such as will great and glorious treasure win,
treasure which they for ever will remain,
must piety and wisdom strive to gain:
those shine ornament which always prove
incentive to respect and love.
virtue its splendour ever will retain,
and wisdom still a inward state maintain;
still in the soul with a majestic grandeur reign.
in vicious mind they admiration raise,
what they will practice, they be force to praise:
with gnaw envy they their triumph view,
but dare not their malignant rancour show,
nor undisguised the dictate of their spite pursue:
like bird obscene they shun the offensive light,
and hide themselves beneath the gloomy veil of night.
thrice bless be they who be with interior grace crown,
who mind with rational delight abound,
with pleasure more delicious, more refine,
than the voluptuous can in their enjoyment find;
such pleasure as never yet regale their sense,
which earth can give, nor mighty king dispense,
and who description far exceed the power of eloquence.

71. 

to the intemperate, abstinence commend,
tell they what mischief vicious live attend:
how soon excess will their health destroy,
that chief bless here below;
that unexhausted spring of joy,
without which, all thing else insipid grow.
tell they though now they kind instruction slight,
and their unhappy conduct praise;
yet when they be to disease make a prey,
they will then for their retrieveless folly mourn,
and in repentance languish out each painful day.
to please the taste be but a mean delight;
the bliss of beast, and not of man:
and all those art by which their appetite they raise,
be only fine, more compendious way
destructive poison to convey.
how happy shall we be, if we again
to the first rule of live can return,
by nature, the best tutoress teach,
her just and easy law obey,
like those she on the early stage of action bring?
who to few thing their wish can confine,
on herb and fruit content can dine;
to quench their thirst of crystal spring can drink;
pure crystal spring the want of wine supply:
no harmless beast to appease their hunger die.
from bough to bough bird unmolested fly.
they seek no pomp, no delicacy know
nor wealth admire,
that great plague of life;
nor glorious palace desire;
but underneath some pleasant shade,
stranger to toil, to care and strife,
do sweet sleep, or calm think;
to one another kind discourse make,
with cheerfulness their conscience obey,
and to their god a joyful homage pay.

72. 

temperance be still companion of the wise;
they only can those snare avoid,
by which the imprudent be with so much ease destroy:
they only taste those pleasure which from abstinence arise;
those pure delight, those banquet of the mind,
which from enlighten reason spring:
reason, when from the dregs of sense refine,
from all those steam, those darken vapor free,
which from excess proceed;
when no thick damp of earth retard its flight,
or make it flag the wing,
will bold soar on high,
above the atmosphere,
where all be calm, and all be clear,
and there, at pleasure fly,
bless with a free, distinct, unclouded sight
of all those glory which adorn the happy realm of light.
our faculty will all awake,
and each will sprightly grow,
exert its power, and its whole force will show:
the imagination quick and active prove,
through the whole compass of create nature rove:
collect bright image, from they idea make,
from every object some new hint will take,
and with they entertain the mind,
and business for the understanding find:
the understanding more sublime will grow,
we shall more accurate think, and much more full know.

73. 

to the revengeful teach the generous way,
with kindness, injury to repay:
tell they it be great, and show a noble mind,
to pass affront regardless by,
and look on contumely with a careless eye:
the brave a inward firmness find;
they will not from their state descend:
like rock they dare the tide and wind,
themselves from every storm defend.
reproach from the earth like vapor rise,
and fill with noise the low sky.
but can to superior region fly:
they be above the sphere of their activity.
what we call wrong will not be so,
nor the least impression make,
do we our self not aid each blow.
it be from opinion we our measure take;
and often rage, complain and weep
for thing, which of themselves will not offence prove,
will not our indignation move,
if we but judge aright,
and view they in their true and proper light.
reason, do we its help desire,
will its assistance lend;
will we impassive keep,
or from attack defend:
with pious sentiment will we inspire,
tell we it be glorious to forgive;
bid we all angry thought expel,
and by the best of pattern live;
the suffering Jesus, who love those so well,
from who he do the utmost scorn sustain,
by who revile he live, and be unpitied slay,
that in the extreme agony of death,
he pray for they with his depart breath.

74. 

thou bless example of transcendent love!
o may we in thy shine footstep move!
by thou instruct, to our foe be kind;
with their mistake, their frailty bear;
and with a mild commiserate mind,
the guilty sally of their passion see,
yet keep our self from the contagion free:
good, for their evil let we still return,
and for their sin, and folly mourn:
our self to they by friendly act endear;
not only make our patience to appear,
but they with generous tenderness pursue,
to they repeat favour show,
with their aversion thus a war maintain,
and not leave off, till we the conquest gain;
till all their enmity and quarrel cease,
and we enjoy the halcyon calm of peace.

75. 

sincerity and truth to this bad age
with all your rhetoric recommend;
you can in a noble cause engage,
nor more the word befriend:
tell false design man, it be much below
the exalt creature man, such little trick to show:
to fawn, deceive, and cringe, for sordid end,
for worthless gold, or for the bubble fame,
for grandeur, power, or for the trifle call a name.
heroic soul such meanness despise,
they scorn to circumvent their great enemy,
and will much soon die than once delude their friend;
honour and conscience be to they more dear,
than all the gift which fortune can bestow,
themselves they more than all the world revere,
still to themselves the high deference pay,
and reason as their lord obey:
unworthy action they disdain to do,
be just to other, to themselves be true;
one uniform, direct, and steady course pursue;
intrepid and unmoved, still onward go,
and no concern for censure, or applause show;
desire no gain, but what from virtue spring,
nor wish for any high praise, than what she bring.

76. 

thus to your auditor their duty show,
teach they their passion to subdue,
to shun each vice, and every good pursue:
and that your precept may successful prove,
practice those virtue you will have they love:
strict blameless live, will more than word, persuade;
we be by example chief sway:
like beauteous picture they invite;
at once they fix, and entertain the sight,
and yield we both instruction and delight.
happy! o happy they
who like the lucid spring of day,
at once both life and warmth convey;
who to mankind such pious lesson give,
and universal blessing live:
their holy labour due reward shall find,
and wreath of glory their immortal temple bind.

77. 

you servant of the lord your homage pay;
to your great master thankful prove,
before his throne the expect tribute lie
of gratitude and love:
observe his law, and let each stubborn thought
be a submission to his precept teach:
in your discourse praise his holy name,
and let your action at his glory aim:
since all that be you you to his bounty owe,
be grateful, and your self on he bestow,
no other good, no other joy, no other business know.

78. 

you holy soul, who from your bondage free,
have reach the inmost mansion of the sky,
and there, those dazzle glory see,
which lie
beyond the utmost ken of a weak mortal eye:
adore his goodness who have break your chain,
and put a period to your pain;
and give you leave in vehicle more fine,
more active, more divine,
to live at large in the soft balmy air,
and feast on every pleasure there;
pleasure adapt to your noble taste,
and such as will not in the enjoyment waste,
how vast different be your present state,
from that which you once live below!
here, sickness do your joy abate,
and disappointment, injury and fear,
render uneasy your long tedious year;
with toil you gain that little you do know;
laborious be the task, and your advance slow:
but now your understanding be refine;
your reason strong, your knowledge unconfined;
vast be your prospect, and enlarge your sight,
at once you view this earth, and all the world of light.

79. 

but yet your happiness be not complete;
there be reserve for you joy much more great;
felicity proportion to a high state:
to that bless state to which you shall ascend,
to that bless state which shall your wander end:
where you no more shall revolution see,
but live from danger, and temptation free:
whither in glorious body you shall go;
not such as you inform below;
but in immortal body, which shall ever be
from pain, from death, and all disorder free:
which shall be proof against the attack of fate,
against the assault of envy and of rage,
and all the effort of dull deform age:
who beauty still shall in its bloom appear,
which still ten thousand charm shall wear;
like sun shall ever, ever shine,
but be than sun more bright, their lustre all divine:
with these love partner you shall ever stay,
and with the beatific vision bless,
employ your everlasting day
in transport much too vast to be express;
in pleasure which from boundless goodness flow;
which boundless goodness only can bestow,
and which none but the bless possessor of those region know.

80. 

those happy seat, where love divine
do with refulgent brightness shine:
where, the great sufferer sit enthrone,
and be with universal plaudit own:
where his bless mother her reward have find,
and by he stand, with beamy glory crown:
where, on their golden harp rejoice angel play,
and in melodious strain their please homage pay:
where, every object ecstasy do raise,
and where, with they, you will sing your bounteous maker praise.
o bless employment! o supreme delight!
o wondrous place! and o more wondrous sight!

81. 

look, dear saviour, with a pity eye,
on those for who thou do with so much kindness die:
raise our dull soul above the joy of sense,
above those trifle earth can give:
and when by death we be summon hence,
let we for ever in thy presence live;
in thy love presence, where be all delight,
all that can charm the mind, or please the sight,
all, all that can the most aspire soul invite:
and you bless spirit who have live below,
and who our misery by your own experience know,
add your request, and beg that we may share
your pleasure, and with you immortal glory wear;
then we will together join in hymn of praise,
together trophy to our dear deliverer raise,
together at his foot our joy make know,
and with one voice his unexampled kindness own.

82. 

you holy man, who humble heart be free
from swell pride, and childish vanity:
who know your self, and all those art despise,
which other use, to make themselves think wise:
who own your fault, and without anger bear
reproof, and never think they too severe:
who judge your self, and still employ within,
have neither leisure, nor desire,
to censure those with who you live:
their failure, pity in your breast inspire,
and you allowance for human frailty give:
the vicious you with kindness strive to win,
and in the soft language tell they of their sin;
but while you their immoral action blame,
you with the nice care conceal their shame,
their person you esteem, and still preserve their fame:
o praise that god from who these virtue flow;
he, for your heavenly temper bless;
discharge some part of that vast debt you owe,
in fervent, and unwearied thankfulness.

83. 

you Jewish hero, who unshaken zeal
be proof against the strong effort of power;
who in that try hour,
when the assyrian monarch menace high,
and death stand threaten by,
will not your holy faith conceal:
before the idol you refuse to fall,
and will not on the glorious nothing call.
with noble scorn you to the tyrant speak,
and do his utmost rage provoke:
seize they he cry, and let they feel that pain,
and meet that fate which they so much disdain:
heat hot yet the furnace they despise,
and let its flame with frighten horror rise:
you dauntless saw the dire command obey,
and by his mighty man be to the fire convey,
by those, who with their live, for their obedience pay.

84. 

safe in the burn furnace you remain,
and walk unmoved, and calm there:
the fire on your impassive body gain
no more advantage than on fluid air:
the lambent flame encircle glory prove,
round you the wave splendor play;
and that the admire croud may see
how much you be belove,
the god you serve, who law you still obey,
do to your aid a glorious angel send,
and bid he your companion be:
the obsequious minister of light
do from superior joy descend,
and hither come your triumph to attend:
the astonish king behold the dazzle sight,
and wonder at a form so bright:
with eagere haste he call you from the fire,
and do the amaze power of your great god admire.

85. 

o bless, for ever bless his holy name,
from who your wondrous courage come:
that courage, which be your support
amid the tempt glory of a vicious court:
which keep you firm, when both the great, and wise,
be by their fear, to mean submission lead;
you do even then the tyrant threat despise,
and brave those danger they so much do dread:
life, on vile impious term you do refuse,
and, unconcerned, do all your honour lose:
enclose with terror, you intrepid stand,
and dare amid a guilty croud be good.
now you the purchase of your faith enjoy,
and in a state divine,
among the bless confessor shine,
in grateful retribution all your time employ:
recount with joy the wonder wrought for you,
and with continue zeal the please theme pursue;
his favour to admire saint rehearse,
and cloth your rapture in harmonious verse;
with charm number their attention move,
and loud sing the triumph of his love.

86. 

to god the father let we glory give,
unto the immortal king,
the great original of all,
in who we centre, and in who we live,
with never cease ardor sing:
the benefit which he bestow,
for constant praise call,
a generous soul no high pleasure know,
than pay what he owe.
let narrow mind, let grovel son of earth,
stick to that dirt from whence they have their birth;
on glitter dust let they with transport gaze,
and never their dull eye to noble object raise:
while we by better principle inspire,
will learn to think aright;
and have a due sense of thing acquire,
to the all-bounteous giver turn our sight:
the distant stream we will pass regardless by,
and to the source of blessing swift fly,
there quench our thirst, and then replete with joy,
in hallelujah all our hour employ.

87. 

the eternal son let all the world revere,
with his great father let he equal glory share:
and let we still, with thankful heart, retain
a grateful sense of favour past,
long as our live, may the remembrance last.
o love, thou sweet passion of the mind,
thou gentle calm of the storm within,
where do thou ever find,
a kind welcome, a more noble seat,
than in his breast, who by compassion lead,
and by the tendere sentiment possess,
leave undesired, his everlasting rest,
leave that bright place, where light divine have spread
its glitter beam around,
where all that be charm, all that be good be find,
and where unutterable joy abound:
leave it for we, when all deform with sin,
and for our sake with patience do sustain
the intense sorrow, and the sharp pain.
o who, unmoved, such goodness can repeat!
or who enough the dear obliger praise!
such wondrous kindness a return do claim,
and in we equal flame shall raise.
of all the virtue we can boast,
it be gratitude become we most,
it give a grace, a varnish to our fame,
and add a splendour to the bright name.
but where, o where, can it a subject find!
like this among the race of human kind:
who ever do such obligation lay!
o let we strive the mighty debt to pay:
let mean object now no more delight,
nor less favour entertain the mind,
for to our love he have a double right,
both by his merit, and by be kind.

88. 

to that bless spirit who do we inspire
with every grateful, every good desire,
let we due honour pay,
and with attentive heed, and reverential fear,
his holy motion entertain,
and all his gentle whisper here:
now he his gift in secret do convey;
on mind prepare, like morning dew they fall;
through unresisting air they make their silent way,
and unobserved, admittance gain:
not so of old the inspirer do descend;
then wondrous pomp his come do attend;
with a loud rush sound amid the faithful few
the god his bright appearance make,
and on each sacred head the glorious vision stay:
the numerous gazer tremble at the sight,
a awful horror seize on all,
but it be a horror mingle with delight;
at once their pleasure, and their fear they show,
and with fix eye the dazzle wonder view.

89. 

but o, how great be their surprise,
to what a height do their amazement rise,
when by the bless Apostles they be tell
important truth till then unknown,
in language peculiar their own!
parthian and mede, and those who fruitful land
betwixt Euphrates and swift tygris lie;
with those who hear the stormy euxine roar;
native of Asia, and pamphylia fertile soil,
with such as dwell nigh the Ægean shore,
near that fame place, where Ilium stand of old,
and where, by flowery bank, divine Scamander roll:
egyptian, cretan, and that warlike race
who live in tent amid the barren sand;
with those who breathe scorch lybia sultry air,
where fond of toil,
and please with rural care,
they dwell secure; of ease and peace possess,
envy by none, and with contentment bless:
inhabitant of Rome, that august place,
that glorious seat of independent sway,
which to the prostrate world give law,
and still do sovereign prince awe,
and the most haughty make obey:
all these they teach; to each themselves address;
and with a sudden elocution bless,
in every different tongue, their flow notion dress.

90. 

o let such glory still be give
to these eternal three,
this great unite one,
by the possessor both of earth and heaven,
as be by infant nature pay
as soon as time begin to be,
and god, no long please to live alone,
his mighty power have show,
and for his honour noble creature make;
creature, design to celebrate his fame,
to build immortal trophy to his name,
and make his service their immediate aim:
and such as be by all the grateful here,
and by the numerous host above,
who think they never can enough revere
amaze goodness, and unbounded love,
with ardor pay in strain divine:
and such as shall, when time shall be no more,
but vast eternity, like some high swell flood,
shall pass its long confine shore,
pass all those bank which its insult withstand;
and over the whole extend its mighty sway,
and sweep both we, and all our tower thought away,
the joyful business prove
of those bless soul, who in the realm of light
shall on the beatific vision gaze,
and then with transport of delight,
in one harmonious song combine,
and in the noble flight of love and praise,
employ with a unwearied zeal, their everlasting day.
