[nereid:] eclogue viii.

Proteus. 

Proteus have send his scaly herd to feed,
 and slumber on a bed of slimy weed;
 Ino and cete thither chance to stray,
 they see, and seize he as he sleep lie:
 anxious for flight, now flash flame he seem,
 now soft glide away in melt stream. 
but they fast hold he, till he smile say;
 with song, nay more than song you shall be pay. 
he then begin —

to sing of truth unknown, unheard before,
 while all the sea be still, and wind be hear no more. 
he sing the world first birth, and wondrous frame,
 how body all from one great fluid come. 
of different part compose, a liquid mass
 incessant move in the unbounded space:
 (the essence of a fluid be confess
 to move, and to be solid be to rest)
 and as they flow, all fluid ever bend
 to fly around, and to a circle tend;
 thus a true chaos do at first arise
 from move globule of a different size;
 but fine atom be more free to move,
 and with the sluggish part too active strive
 till they have press they down from those above:
 it be then unsullied light do first appear,
 and the bright æther shine unmixed with gross air. 
at length by tedious time, and slow degree
 be form the center of unfathomed sea,
 make of large globule, which the aerial sphere
 by motion thrust from it, and settle here;
 then first the ocean know his constant place,
 and azure deep unvail his smile face. 
it be motion make (when different body meet)
 what gravity we call, and press weight,
 while restless fluid ever drive below
 body more solid, or — that move too slow. 
long roll the sea, before the earth appear,
 no pasture yet be see, no bleat flock be hear,
 until th'ocean constant motion close press
 an earthy scum, which gather still increase;
 but here intrinsic fluid still remain,
 and hard mettle will its flux regain. 
whenever dissolve the part their freedom know,
 and with new joy again they love to flow. 

he sing, how heaven displease with earthy man,
 disturb the sea; how all the mass begin
 to move enrage; the motion thus increase,
 the sink earth down to the center press;
 such be the ancient deluge, when the flood
 pour over the plain, and on the mountain stand;
 while earth-born mortal too absurd teach
 that solid body to the center reach. 
ever land be see, the ocean have its birth,
 and now th'abyss support the shallow crust of earth. 

thus Proteus sing, and sing — yet more divine,
 how soul unbodied act, and how incline;
 that knowledge now be at the best no more,
 but a research of what we know before. 
the soul as yet to no dull body join,
 see all idea in the eternal mind;
 the native beam be sully and obscure,
 and quench at once, in gross clay immure,
 until rouse at length by thought, and studious care,
 like latent spark with sudden light they glare. 
glad the conscious mind the hint pursue,
 and rise image with wonder view;
 now find she long before existence have,
 and that those truth be rather find than make. 
thus science graft do on ignorance grow;
 man lose to find, and turn unwise to know. 
folly their fancy knowledge do his create;
 the great hardship this of human fate,
 with pain they learn, what they with ease forget. 

the god thus end his mysterious lay,
 when ruddy to the wave, sink the decline day. 
