a evening address to a nightingale.

by the same.

sweet bird! that kind perch near,
 pour thy plaint melodious in my ear,
 not, like base worldling, tutor to forgo
 the melancholy haunt of woe,
 thanks for thy sorrow-sothing strain: —
 for sure, thou have know to prove,
 like i, the pang of hapless love,
 else why so feel complain,
 and with thy piteous note thus sadden all the grove? 
say, do thou mourn thy ravish mate,
 that oft enamour on thy strain have hang? 
or have the cruel hand of fate
 bereave thou of thy darling young? 
alas, for both, i weep —
 in all the pride of youthful charm,
 a beauteous bride tear from my circle arm! 
a lovely babe that shall have live to bless,
 and fill my dote eye with frequent tear,
 at once the source of rapture and distress,
 the flatter prop of my decline year! 
in vain from death to rescue i essay,
 by every art that science can devise,
 alas! it languish for a mother aid,
 and winge its flight to seek she in the sky —
 then o our comfort be the same,
 at evening peaceful hour,
 to shun the noisy path of wealth and fame,
 and breathe our sorrow in this lonely bower. 

but why alas! to thou complain! 
to thou — unconscious of my pain! 
soon shall thou cease to mourn thy lot severe,
 and hail the dawn of a happy year:
 the genial warmth of joy-renewing spring
 again shall plume thy shatter wing;
 again thy little heart shall transport prove,
 again shall flow thy note responsive to thy love:
 but o for i in vain may season roll,
 nought can dry up the fountain of my tear,
 deplore still the comfort of my soul,
 i count my sorrow by increase year. 

tell i, thou siren hope, deceiver, say,
 where be the promise period of my woe? 
full three long, linger year have roll away,
 and yet i weep, a stranger to repose:
 o what delusion do thy tongue employ! 
 "that emma's fatal pledge of love,
" her last bequest — with all a mother care,
 "the bitterness of sorrow shall remove,
" soften the horror of despair,
 "and cheer a heart long lose to joy!" 
how oft, when fondle in my arm,
 gaze enrapture on its angel-face,
 my soul the maze of fate will vain trace,
 and burn with all a father fond alarm! 
and o what flatter scene have fancy feign,
 how do i rave of blessing yet in store! 
till every ache sense be sweet pain,
 and my full heart can bear, nor tongue can utter more. —

 "just heaven, i cry" — with recent hope elate,
 "yet i will live — will live, though emma's dead —
" so long bow down beneath the storm of fate,
 "yet will i raise my woe-dejected head! 
" my little Emma, now my all,
 "will want a father care,
" her look, her want my rash resolve recall,
 "and for her sake the ill of life i will bear:
" and oft together we will complain,
 "complaint, the only bliss my soul can know,
" from i, my child shall learn the mournful strain,
 "and prattle tale of woe;
" and o in that auspicious hour,
 "when fate resign her persecute power,
" with duteous zeal her hand shall close,
 "no more to weep — my sorrow-streaming eye,
" when death give misery repose,
 "and open a glorious passage to the sky. 

vain thought! it must not be — she too be dead —
 the flatter scene be over —
 my hope for ever — ever flee —
 and vengeance can no more —
 crush by misfortune — blast by disease —
 and none — none leave to bear a friendly part! 
to meditate my welfare, health, or ease,
 or sooth the anguish of a ache heart! 
now all one gloomy scene, till welcome death,
 with lenient hand (o false deem severe)
 shall kind stop my grief-exhausted breath,
 and dry up every tear:
 perhaps, obsequious to my will,
 but ah! from my affection far remove! 
the last sad office stranger may fulfil,
 as if i never have be belove;
 as if, unconscious of poetic fire,
 i never have touch the tremble lyre,
 as if my niggard hand never deal relief,
 nor my heart melt at another grief. 

yet — while this weary life shall last,
 while yet my tongue can form the impassion strain,
 in piteous accent shall the muse complain,
 and dwell with fond delay on blessing past:
 for o how grateful to a wound heart,
 the tale of misery to impart! 
from other eye bid artless sorrow flow,
 and raise esteem upon the base of woe! 
even he, the noble of the tuneful throng,
 shall deign my love lorn tale to hear,
 shall catch the soft contagion of my song,
 and pay my pensive muse the tribute of a tear. 
