colinetta.

it be when the field have shed their golden grain. 
and burn sun have fear the russet plain;
 no more the rose nor hyacinth be see,
 nor yellow cowslip on the tuft green:
 but the rude thistle rear its hoary crown,
 and the ripe nettle show a irksome brown. 
in mournful plight the tarnish groves appear,
 and nature weep for the decline year. 
the sun too quick reach the western sky,
 and rise vapour hide his evening eye:
 autumnal thread around the branch fly,
 while the dry stubble drink the fall dew. 

in this sick season, at the close of day,
 on Lydia lap pale colinetta lay;
 who sallow cheek have lose their rosy dye,
 the sparkle languish in she close eye. 
parch be those lip whence music use to flow,
 nor more the flute her weary finger know,
 yet thrice to raise her feeble voice she try,
 thrice on her tongue the faint number die;
 at last revive, on Lydia neck she hang,
 and like the swan expire thus she sing. 

farewell, you forest and delightful hill,
 you flowery meadow and you crystal rill,
 you friendly groves to who we use to run,
 and beg a shelter from the burn sun. 
those blast shade all mournful now i see,
 who droop their head as though they weep for i. 
the pensive linnet have forget to sing,
 the lark be silent till return spring. 
the spring shall all those wonted charm restore,
 which colinetta must behold no more. 

farewell, you field; my native field, adieu;
 who fertile lay my early labour know;
 where, when a infant, i be wont to stray,
 and gather king-cup at the close day. 
how oft have Lydia tell a mournful tale,
 by the clear lake that shine in yonder vale;
 when she have do i sing a cheerful lay,
 while the glad goldfinch listen on the spray:
 lure by my song each jolly Swain draw near,
 and rosy virgin throng around to hear:
 farewell, you swain; you rosy nymph, adieu:
 though i (unwilling) leave the stream and you,
 still may soft music bless your happy shore,
 but, colinetta, you must hear no more. 

o Lydia, thou, (if wayward tongue shall blame
 my life, and blot a harmless maiden name)
 tell they if ever i find a straggle ewe,
 although the owner name i hardly know;
 i feed it kind with my father hay,
 and give it shelter at the close day:
 i never steal young pigeon from their dam,
 nor from their pasture drive my neighbour lamb:
 nor set my dog to hunt their flock away,
 that mine may graze upon the vacant lay. 
when phillida by dance win the prize,
 or Colin praise young mariana eye:
 when Damon wed ursula of the grange,
 my cheek with envy never be see to change:
 wheneve i see aminda cross the plain,
 or walk the forest with her darling Swain,
 i never whisper to a stander-by,
 but hate scandal and abhor a lye. 
on Sunday i (as sister Sue can tell)
 be always ready for the sermon-bell:
 i honour both the teacher and the day;
 nor use to giggle when he bid i pray:
 then sure for i there be something good in store,
 when colinetta shall be see no more. 

when i be go, i leave to sister Sue
 my gown of Jersey, and my apron blue. 
my stud sheephook phillida may take,
 likewise my hay-fork and my hazel rake:
 my hoard apple and my winter pear
 be thy, o Lydia, to reward thy care. 
these nut that late be pluck from yonder tree,
 and this straw-basket, i bequeathe to thou:
 that basket do these die finger weave:
 my boxen flute to Corydon i leave,
 so shall it charm the listen nymph around,
 for none like he can make it sweet sound. 

in our churchyard there grow a spread yew,
 who dark green leaf distil a baneful dew:
 be those sad branch over my grave recline,
 and let these word be grave on the rind:
 "mark, gentle reader, — underneath this tree,
"there sleep a maid, old simon daughter she;
 "thou too, perhaps, ere many week be over,
"like colinetta, shall be see no more. 

here end the maid — for now the seal of death
 close her pale lip, and stop her rosy breath. 
her sink eye-ball take their long adieu,
 and with a sigh her harmless spirit fly. 
