the female advocate, or, an answer to a late satyr against the pride, lust and inconstancy, etc. of woman.

blasphemous wretch, thou who can think or say
 some curse or banish fiend usurp the way
 when eve be form; for then be deny by you
 god omniscience and omnipresence too:
 without which attribute he can not be,
 the great and supreme deity:
 nor can heaven sleep, though it may mourn to see
 degenerate man utter blasphemy. 
when from dark chaos heaven the world do make,
 make all thing glorious it do undertake;
 then it in eden garden free place
 all thing pleasant to the sight or taste,
 fill it with beast and bird, tree hang with fruit,
 that may with man celestial nature suit:
 the world be make thus spacious and complete,
 then man be form, who seem noble great. 
when heaven survey the work that it have do,
 see male and female, but find man alone,
 a barren sex, and insignificant;
 so heaven make woman to supply the want,
 and to make perfect what before be scant:
 then sure she a noble creature be,
 who heaven thus make to consummate all bliss. 
though man have be first, yet methinks she
 in nature shall have the supremacy;
 for man be form out of dull fenceless earth;
 but woman she have a far noble birth:
 for when the dust be purify by heaven,
 make into man, and life unto it give,
 then the almighty and alwise god say,
 that woman of that species shall be make:
 which be no soon say, but it be do,
 because it be not fit for man to be alone. 
thus have i prove woman creation good,
 and not inferior, when right understand:
 to that of man; for both one maker have,
 which make all good; then how can eve be bad? 
but then you will say, though she at first be pure,
 yet in that state she do not long endure. 
it be true; but if her fall examine right,
 we find most man have banish truth for spite:
 nor be she quite so guilty as some make;
 for Adam do most of the guilt partake:
 for he from God own mouth have the command;
 but woman she have it at second hand:
 the devil strength weak woman may deceive,
 but Adam tempt only be by eve. 
eve have the strong tempter, and least charge;
 man know most, do his sin make most large. 
but though woman man to sin do lead? 
yet since her seed have bruise the serpent head:
 why shall she be make a public scorn,
 of who the great almighty god be bear? 
sure to speak one slight word, must be
 a kind of murmur impiety:
 but still their great hater do prove such
 who former have love they too much:
 and from the proverb they be not exempt;
 too much familiarity have breed contempt;
 for they associate themselves with none,
 but such who virtue like their own, be go;
 and with all those, and only those who be
 most bold verse in their debauchery:
 and as in Adam all mankind do die,
 they make all base for one immodesty;
 nay, make the name a kind of magic spell,
 as if it will censure marry man to hell. 

woman, you power! the very name be a charm,
 and will my verse against all critic arm. 
the muse or Apollo do inspire
 heroic poet; but you be a fire,
 Pluto from hell do send by incubus,
 because we make their hell less populous;
 or else you never have damn the female thus:
 but if so universal they be
 dispose to mischief, what need you declare
 peculiar fault, when all the world may see
 with each approach morn a prodigy:
 man curse dead woman; i can hear as well
 the black infernal devil curse their hell:
 when there have be no such place we know,
 if they themselves have not first make it so. 
in lust perhaps you other have excel,
 and make all whore that possible will yield;
 and court all the female in your way,
 then do design at last to make a prey
 of some pure virgin; or what be almost worse,
 make some chaste wife to merit a divorce. 
but because they hate your insatiate mind,
 therefore you call what be virtuous, unkind:
 and disappointment do your soul perplex;
 so in mere spite you curse the female sex. 
i will not judge you thus, only i find
 you will adulterate all womankind,
 not only with your pen; you high soar;
 you will exclude marriage, make the world a whore. 

but if all man shall of your humour be
 and shall rob HYMEN of his deity,
 they soon will find the inconveniency. 
then hostile spirit will be force to peace,
 because the world so slow will increase. 
they will be glad to keep their man at home,
 and each want more to attend his throne:
 nay, shall a english prince resolve that he
 will keep the number of of his nobility:
 and this dull custom some few year maintain,
 there will be none less than a peer oth land. 
and i do fancy it will be pretty sport
 to see a kingdom cram into a court. 
sure a strange world, when one shall nothing see,
 unless a baudy house or Nunnery. 
or shall this act ere pass, woman will fly
 with unthought swiftness, to each monastery
 and in dark cave secure her chastity. 
she only in a marriage-bed delight;
 the very name of whore her soul affright. 
and when that sacred ceremony go,
 woman i be sure will choose to live alone. 

there be none can number all those virtuous dame
 which choose cold death before their lover flame. 
the chaste Lucretia who proud Tarquin love,
 her he slay, her chastity she prove. 
but i have go further than i need have do,
 since we have get example near home. 
witness those saxon lady who do fear
 the loss of honour when the Dane be here:
 and cut their lip and nose that they may
 not please seem, or give the Dane delight. 
thus have do what they can just do,
 at last they fall their sacrifice too. 
thus when curse Osbright court beon wife,
 she he refuse with hazard of her life. 
and some which i do know but will not name,
 have thus refuse and hazard the same. 
i can say more, but history will tell
 many more thing that do these excel. 

in constancy they man excel as far
 a heaven bright lamp do a dull twinkle star. 
though man be always alter of his mind,
 inconstancy be only in womankind. 
it be something strange, no hold, it be because
 the man have have the power of make law;
 for where be there that man that ever die,
 or ere expire with his love bride. 
but numerous train of chaste wife expire
 with their dear husband, though in flame of fire:
 we will do the same if custom do require. 
but this be do by indian woman, who
 do make their constancy immortal too,
 as be their fame: we find India yield
 more glorious phoenix than the arabian field. 
the german woman constancy do show
 when wensberg be besiege, beg they may go
 out of the city, with no big pack
 than each of they can carry on their back. 
the wonder world expect they will have go
 jade with treasure from their native home,
 but cross expectation each do take
 her husband as her burden on she back. 
so save he from intend death, and she
 at once give he both life and liberty. 
how many love wife have often die:
 drown in tear by their cold husband side. 
and when a sword be executioner,
 the very same have execute she,
 with her own hand; eager meet death,
 and scorn to live when he be void of breath. 
if this be constancy, why then the sun
 with constant motion do his progress run. 
there be thousand of example that will prove,
 woman be always constant in chaste love. 
but when she be court only to some lust,
 she well may change, i think the reason just. 
change do i say, that word i must forbear,
 no, she bright star will wander from her sphere
 of virtue (in which female soul do move)
 nor will she join with a insatiate love. 
for she who first espouse to vertue must
 be most inconstant, when she yield to lust. 
but now the scene be alter, and those who
 be esteem modest by a blush or two,
 be represent quite another way,
 worse than mock-verse do the most solid play. 
she that take pious precept for her rule,
 be think by some a kind of ill-bred fool;
 they will have all breed up in Venus school. 
and when that by her speech or carriage, she
 do seem to have fence of a deity,
 she straight be tax with ungentility. 
unless it be the little blind boy,
 that childish god, Cupid, that trifle toy,
 that certain nothing, who they feign to be
 the son of Venus daughter to the sea. 
but be he true, none serve he as they shall,
 for common those who adore this god,
 do it only in a melancholy mood;
 or else a sort of hypocrite they be,
 who do invocate he only as a snare. 
and by he they do sacred love pretend,
 when as heaven know, they have a base end. 
nor be he god of love; but if i must
 give he a title, then he be god of lust. 
and sure woman impious must be
 when ever she do become his votary,
 unless she will believe without controul,
 those that do hold a woman have no soul:
 and then do think no obligation lie
 on she to act what may be just or wise. 
and only strive to please her appetite,
 and to embrace that which do most delight. 
and when she do this paradox believe,
 whatever faith do please she may receive. 
she may be Turk, Jew, atheist, infidel,
 or any thing, cause she need never fear hell,
 for if she have no soul what need she fear
 something she know not what or when or where. 

but hold i think i shall be silent now,
 because a woman soul you do allow. 
but have we none you will say we have, else you
 can never damn we at the rate you do. 
what do thou think thou have privilege give,
 that those who thou do bless shall mount to heaven,
 and those thou curse unto hell must go. 
and so do think to fill the abyss below
 quite full of female, hope there may be
 no room for soul big with vice as thou. 
but if that thou with such vain hope shall die
 in the fluid air, thou must not think to fly,
 or enter into heaven, thy weight of sin
 will crush the damn, and so thoud enter in. 
but hold, i be uncharitable here,
 thou may repent, though that be a thing i fear. 
but if thou shall repent, why then again
 it will at best but mitigate thy pain,
 because thou have be vile to that degree,
 that thy repentance must eternal be. 
for be thou guilty of no other crime
 than what thou late put into rhime,
 why that without other offence give,
 be enough to shut the gate of heaven. 
but when together put all thou do,
 it will not only shut but bar it too. 

for when heaven make woman it design
 she for the charm object of mankind. 
nor be alter only with those who
 set bewly, Stratford, nay and Chreswell too,
 or other bawd, chase their acquaintance out,
 and then what they must be we make no doubt. 
it be to make heaven mistake when you say
 it mean one and it prove another way. 
for when heaven with its last and great care,
 have form a female charm bright and fair,
 why then immediate it do decree,
 that unto man she shall a blessing be,
 and so shall prove to all posterity. 
and sure there be nothing can be worse
 than for to turn a blessing to a curse. 
and when the great blessing heaven ere give,
 and certain the best that man can have. 
when that be scorn and contemn sure it must be
 a great affront unto heaven majesty. 
but i hope heaven will punish the offence,
 and with it justifié our innocence. 

i must confess there be some bad, and they
 lead by a ignis fatus, go astray:
 all be not force to wander in false way. 
only some few who dark benight fence,
 for want of light have power to make defence
 against those many tempt pleasure, which
 not only they but masculine soul bewitch. 
but you will persuade we, that it be we alone
 be guilty of all crime and you have none,
 unless some few, which you call fool, (who be
 espouse to wife, and live in chastity.) 
but the most rational, without which we
 doubtless shall question your humanity. 
and i will praise they more only i fear
 if i shall do it it will make i appear
 unto the world much fond than i be
 of that same state, for i love liberty,
 nor do i think there be a necessity
 for all to enter bed, like Noah beast
 into his ark; i will have some release
 from the dear care of that lawful state:
 hold i will not dictate, i will leave all fate. 
nor will i have the world to think that i
 through a despair do nuptial joy defy. 
for in the world so little i have be
 that I have but half a revolution see
 of Saturn, only i do think it best
 for those who love to contemplate at rest,
 for to live single too, and then they may
 uninterrupted, nature work survey. 
and have my antagonist spend his time
 make true verse instead of spiteful rhime,
 as a female poet, he have gain some praise,
 but now his malice blast his twig of bay. 
i do not wish you have, for i believe
 it be impossible for to deceive
 any with what you write, because that you
 may insert thing suppose true. 
and if by supposition i may go,
 then i will suppose all man be wicked too,
 because i be sure there be many that be so. 
and because you have make whore of all you can,
 so if you dare, you will say all woman will. 
which word do only argue guilt and spite:
 all make you cheap in every mortal sight. 
and it do show that you have always be
 only with woman guilty of that sin. 
you never desire nor be you fit for those
 who modest carriage do their mind disclose. 
and sir, methinks you do describe so well
 the way and manner Bewley enter hell,
 as if your love for she have make you go
 down to the black infernal shade below. 
but i suppose you never be so near,
 for if you have, you scarce will have be here,
 for have they see, they will keep you there. 
unless they think when ere it be you come,
 your hot entrance may increase the flame. 
if burn hell add to their extreme pain,
 and so be glad to turn you off again. 
and likewise, also i believe beside,
 that one thing more may be their haughty pride. 
they know you rival they in all their crime,
 wherewith they can debauch the will time. 
and as fond mortal hate a rival, they
 love through pride, be loath to let you stay,
 for fear that you may their black deed excel,
 usurp their seat and be the prince of hell. 
but i believe that you will let your hate
 over rule your bride, and you will not wish the state
 of covern, because your deceive mind,
 persuade your subject will be woman kind. 
but i believe when it come the trial,
 ask but for ten and you will have the denial. 
you will think your self far happy than you be,
 be you but half so sure of heaven as we. 
but when you be in hell if you shall find
 more then i speak of, think heaven design
 they for a part of your eternal fate,
 because they be thing which you so much do hate. 
but why you shall do so i can tell,
 unless it be what make you in love with hell:
 and have fallen-out with goodness, you
 must have antipathy against woman too. 
for virtue and they be so near ally
 that none can their mutual tie divide. 
like light and heat, incorporate they be,
 and interwove with providential care,
 but i be too dull to give my sex due praise,
 the task befit a laureate crown with bay:
 and yet all he can say, will be but small,
 a copy differ from the original. 
for shall he sleep under Parnassus hill,
 implore the muse for to guide his quill. 
and shall they help he, yet his praise will seem
 at best but undervalue disesteem. 
for he will come so short of what they be
 his line will with one single act compare. 
but to say true, be to say that she
 be good and virtuous unto that degree
 as you pretend she be bad, and that be beyond
 imagination, because you set no bound,
 and then one certain definition be
 to say that she do comprehend all bliss. 
and that she be all that be pious, chafe and true,
 heroic, constant, nay, and modest too:
 the late virtue be a thing you doubt,
 but it be because you never seek to find it out. 
you question where there be such a thing or no,
 it be only because you hope you have lose a foe,
 a hate object, yet a stranger too. 
i will speak like you, if such a thing there be,
 i be certain that she do not dwell with thou. 
thou be antipode to that and unto all
 that be good, or that we simple civil call. 
from yoke of goodness, thou have thy self release,
 turn bully Hector, and a humane beast. 
that beast do speak it rare come to pass,
 yet you may parallel with balaam ass.
 you do describe a woman so that one
 will almost think she have the fiend outdo:
 as if at her strange birth do shine no star,
 or planet, but fury in conjunction be;
 and do conspire what mischief they shall do,
 each act his part and she with plague pursue,
 it be false in she, yet it be fume up in you. 
you almost will persuade one that you think
 that providence to a low ebb be bring;
 and that to eve and Iezabell be give
 soul of so great extent that heaven be drive
 into a straight, and liberality
 have make her void of want, to supply
 these late body, she be force to take
 their soul asunder, and so number make,
 and transmigrate they into other, and
 still shift they as she find the matter stand. 
it be because they be the worst make i believe
 you must imagine Iezabel and eve. 
but i be not pythagorean to conclude
 one soul can serve for Abraham and Iude. 
or think that heaven so bankrupt or so poor,
 but that each body have one soul or more. 
i do not find our sex so near ally,
 either in disobedience or in pride,
 unto the 'bovenamed female (for i be sure
 they be refine, or else be always pure)
 that i must needs conceit their soul the same,
 though i confess there be some that merit blame:
 but yet their fault only thus much infer,
 that we be not make so perfect but may err;
 which add much lustre to a virtuous mind,
 and it be her prudence make her soul confine
 within the bound of goodness, for if she
 be all perfection, unto that degree
 that it be impossible to do amiss,
 why heaven not she must have the praise of this. 
but she be in such a state as she may fall,
 and without care her freedom may enthrall. 
but to keep pure and free in such a case,
 argue each virtue with its proper grace. 
and as a woman composition be
 most soft and gentle, she have happiness
 in that her soul be of that nature too,
 and yield to any thing that heaven will do,
 take a impression when it be seal in heaven,
 turn to a cold refusal, when it be give
 by any other hand: she be all divine,
 and by a splendid lustre do outshine
 all masculine soul, who only seem to be
 make up of pride and their love luxury. 
so great man ambition that he will
 have all the wealth and power if he can,
 that be bestow on the several throne
 of the world monarch, covet all their crown. 
and by experience it have be find
 the word ambition not a empty sound. 
there be not a history which do not show
 man pride, ambition and his falsehood too. 
for if at any time ambitious have
 least show of honour, then their soul grow brave,
 grow big and restless, they be not at ease,
 until they have a more fatal way to please,
 look fair and true, when false they intend;
 so from low subject, grow a monarch friend. 
and by grave counsel they their good pretend,
 when it be guilt poison and oft work their end. 
the son who must succeed, be too much love,
 must be pull down (his council be approve)
 for fear he will shall grow too great,
 desire to rule, shall mount his father seat. 
so he be dispatch, and then all those that be
 next in the way be his adherency. 
and then the better to secure the state,
 it be but just they shall receive his fate. 
so by degree he for himself make room,
 his prince be straightway shut up in his tomb,
 and then the false usurper mount the throne. 
or will do so at least but common
 he never sit firm, but with revenge do dy,
 but thank heaven there be but few that reach so high,
 for the know crime make a wise prince take care. 
thus what i have say do plain show there be
 man more impious than a woman far. 
so those who by their abject fortune be
 remote from court no less their pride declare,
 in be uneasy and envy all who be
 above they, in state, or priority. 
but it be impossible for to relate
 their boundless pride, or their prodigious hate,
 to all that fortune have but smile upon,
 in a degree that be above their own. 
and thou proud fool, that virtue will subdue,
 envy all good, do tower over woman too,
 which do betray a base ignoble mind,
 speak thou nothing but a bluster wind. 
but in so great a labyrinth as man pride,
 i shall not enter, nor will be imply,
 for to search out their strange and unknown crime,
 there be so many apparent in these time,
 that my dull arithmetic can tell
 half the sin that common do dwell
 in one sordid rustic, then how can i
 define the court or town debauchery. 
their pride in some small measure i have show. 
but they be run over and press down;
 and it be impossible i shall repeat
 the crime of man extravagant great,
 i will not name they, but to let they see
 i know they be bid and odious unto i:
 it be true, pride make man great in their own eye,
 but they proportionable i despise;
 and though ambition still aim to be high,
 yet lust at best be but bestiality;
 a sin with which there be none can compare,
 not pride nor envy, etc. for this do ensnare,
 not only those who it at first inflame,
 this sin must have a partner to be shame,
 and punish like himself. hold, one will do,
 he must have more, for he do still pursue
 the agent of his passion; it be not wife,
 that mutual name can regulate his life:
 and though he for his lust may have a shroud,
 and there may be polygamy allow,
 yet all his wife will sure be abhor,
 and some common Lais be adore. 
most mortal the name of wife they hate,
 yet they will take one as their proper fate,
 that they may have a child legitimate,
 to be their heir, if they have a estate,
 or else to bear their name: so, for by end,
 they take a wife, and satisfy their friend,
 who be desirous that it shall be so,
 and for that end, perhaps, estate bestow;
 which, when possess, be spend another way;
 the spurious issue do the right betray,
 and with their mother-strumpet be maintain;
 the wife and child by neglect disdain,
 wretched and poor unto their friend return,
 have get nothing, unless cause to mourn. 
the dire effect of lust i can tell,
 for i suppose its catalogue in hell;
 and he perhaps at last may read it there,
 write in flame, fierce as his own while here. 
i can say more, but yet not half that be do
 by these strange creature, nor be there scarce one
 of these inhumane beast that do not die
 as bad as bewley pox turn leprosy,
 and man do catch it by mere fantasy. 
though they be chaste and honest, yet it do
 pursue they, and some company on oath
 they have be in, and their infect breath
 give they that plague, which hasten their death,
 or else it be Scurvy, or some new disease,
 as the base wretch or vain physician please,
 and then a sum of money must be give
 for to keep corruption from the grave;
 and then it be double, for to hide the cheat:
 (o the sad horror of debauch deceit!) 
the body and estate together go. 
and then the only object here below,
 on which he do his charity bestow,
 be whore and quack, and perhaps page too
 must have a share, or else they will reveal
 that which money do make they conceal. 
sure trusty steward of extensive heaven,
 when what be for common good be only give
 unto peculiar friend of they, who be
 slave to their lust, friend debauchery;
 these be partaker of as great a fate
 as those who boldness turn they reprobate,
 and though a hypocrite do seem to be
 a great sharer of morality,
 yet methinks they almost seem all one,
 one hide, and other tell what he have do;
 but if one devil better than another,
 than one of these be better than the other:
 hypocrisy pre-eminence shall have,
 (though it have get the privilege to save)
 because the reprobate example may,
 by open custom, make the rugged way
 seem more smooth, and a common sin
 look more pardonable, and so by he
 more take example, it be he strive to win. 
mad soul, to fill up hell! but shall there be
 nothing ever act but hypocrisy,
 yet man will be as wicked as he be,
 and be no near to eternal bliss;
 for he who be so unsteady, as to take
 example by such man, shall never make
 i to believe, that he be real chaste,
 and, without pattern, never have embrace:
 such kind of sin at best such virtue weak,
 that with such a slender stress will break,
 and that be no virtue which can withstand
 a slight temptation at the second hand:
 but i believe one might as narrow pry
 for it, as the grecian do for honesty,
 and yet find none; and then if woman be
 averse to it too, sure all be iniquity
 on this side heaven, and it with justice go
 up thither, because here be find no content,
 but do regardless and neglect severe,
 and with a awful distance be pass by. 
instead of hide their prodigious act,
 they do reveal, brag of their horrid fact;
 unless it be some few who hide they, because
 they will not seem to violate those law
 which with their tongue they be force for to maintain,
 be grave counseller or alderman,
 or else the wife relation be alive,
 and then, if know, some other way they will drive
 their golden wheel, that way do seem uneven,
 then the estate most certain be give
 some other way, or else it be settle so
 as he may never have it to bestow,
 upon his lust, therefore he do seem
 for to have a very great esteem
 for his pretend joy; but when her friend
 be dead, then he his curse life defend,
 with what they leave; then the unhappy wife,
 with her dear child, lead a horrid life,
 and the estate put to another use,
 and their great kindness turn a abuse;
 and shall i strive their falsehood to relate,
 then i shall have but sisiphus his fate,
 for man be so inconstant and untrue,
 he be like a shadow which one do pursue,
 still fly from his word, nay and perfidious too. 
a instance too of infidelity
 we have in egypt false king ptolomy,
 who, though he under obligation be,
 for to protect Pompey from the snare,
 who flee to he for succour, yet base he
 do command his death most treacherous;
 he be inconstant too, or else design
 the same at first, so alter word not mind,
 which be much worse, for when that one do speak
 with a full resolution, for to break
 one word and oath, sure it must be
 a great crime than a inconstancy,
 which be as great fail in the soul
 as any sin that reason do control,
 but i design for to be short, so must
 be sure for to keep firm unto the first
 that i resolve, or else shall reprove
 these fault which first i ought for to remove;
 therefore, with Brutus, i this point will end,
 who, though he ought to have be caesar friend,
 by be declare his heir, yet it be he
 be the first actor in his tragedy:
 perfidious and ungrateful and untrue
 he be at once, nay and disloyal too:
 a thousand instance there may be bring,
 (not far fetch, though they be dear buy)
 to prove that man more false than woman be,
 more unconstant, nay and more perfidious:
 but these be crime which hell, (i be sure not heaven)
 as they pretend, have peculiar give
 unto our sex, but it be as false as they,
 and that be more false than any one can say. 
all pride and lust too to our charge they lie,
 as if in sin we all be so sublime
 as to monopolise each heinous crime;
 nay, woman now be make the scape-goat, and
 it be she must bear sin of all the land:
 but i believe there be not a priest that can
 make a atonement for one single man,
 nay, it be well if he himself can bring
 a humble, pious heart for the offer;
 a thing which ought to be inseparable
 to man o'th gown and of the sacred table;
 yet it be sometime want, and they be
 too often sharer of impiety:
 but howsoever the strange world now thrive,
 i must not look in my teacher life,
 but methinks the world do seem to be
 nought but confusion and degeneracy,
 each man so eager of each fatal sin,
 as if he fear he shall not do it again;
 yet still his soul be black, he be the same
 at all time, though he do not act all flame,
 because he opportunity do want,
 and to he always there be not a grant
 of object for to exercise his will,
 and for to show his great and mighty skill
 in all science diabolical,
 but when he meet with those which we do call
 base and unjust, why then his part he act
 most will, and then with hell contract
 to do the next thing that they shall require;
 and be thus inflame with hellish fire,
 he do to any thing it do desire,
 unless it be possible for hell to say,
 they shall be good, for then they will disobey. 
i be not sorry you do female hate,
 but rather reckon we be more fortunate,
 because i find, when you be right understand,
 you be at enmity with all that be good,
 and shall you love they, i shall think they be
 a grow bad, but still keep as you be:
 i need not bid you, for you must I be sure,
 and in your present wretched state endure;
 it be a impossible you shall be true,
 as for a woman to act like to you,
 which i be sure will not accomplish be,
 till heaven turn hell, and that be repugnancy;
 and when vice be virtue you shall have
 a share of that which make most female brave,
 which transmutation i be sure can be;
 so thou must lie in vast eternity,
 with prospect of thy endless misery,
 when woman, your imagine fiend, shall live
 bless with the joy that heaven can always give. 
