evening.

in cloud draw on the evening close,
 which cross the west in range stand,
 as pensive Gertrude seek the wood,
 and there the dark thicket choose;
 while from her eye amid the wild briar flow
 a sad and briny flood. 
dark over her head
 roll heavy cloud, while shower,
 pefume by summer wild and spicy flower,
 their ample torrent shed. 

why do she mourn? 
why droop, like floweret nip in early spring? 
alas! her tenderness meet no return! 
love hover round she with his airy wing,
 and warm her youthful heart with vain delight:
 while urban graceful form enchant her sight,
 and from his eye shoot forth the poisonous sting,
 another charm the impassion youth imspire,
 the sportive ROSAMONDE his genius fire. 

the drop which glide down gertrude cheek,
 amid bitter agony do flow;
 and though awhile her pallid lip may glow,
 it be as a blossom blight soon with woe:
 her disregard tress, wet with tear,
 hang over her pant bosom straight and sleek;
 her faithful heart be all despondency and fear. 

the sky disgorge, their last large drop refrain,
 the cloudy hemisphere's no more perturb;
 the leafy bough, that have receive the rain,
 with gust of wind disturb,
 shake wild their scatter drop over glade and plain;
 they fall on gertrude breast, and her white garment stain. 
sigh, she throw her mantle over her head,
 and through the brake towards her mansion speed;
 unheed she vestment draw along,
 sweep the tear that to the branch hang:
 and as she pass
 over the soak road, from off the shine grass,
 in clod around her foot the moist earth cling. 

the cloud disperse, again to sight
 the evening sun glow lambent bright;
 and force back the lower shade,
 spread its enliven beam, and kindle amid the glade:
 with high-wrought verdure every object glow,
 and purple hill their glitter mansion show. 
the universal gleam invite to sport,
 for toil and care cease with the ebb day;
 the industrious youth to plain or grove resort,
 dance on the lawn, or over the hillock stray. 

Gertrude, wander up a lane,
 from among the wind tree,
 fan by a refresh breeze,
 ascend upon the glisten plain. 
across gay Iris fling her bow,
 reflect each celestial ray;
 as if the flower that deck the may
 be there exhale, and through its watery pore do glow. 

from a fair covert, urban gay resort,
 a whistle pipe in warble note respire;
 the wellknown sound invite each youth to sport,
 and every heart its harmony inspire;
 while from each mead,
 so thick with daisy spread,
 the bound nymph with fairy lightness spring,
 and gayly wild their sportive sonnet sing;
 the air be scent by the odorous flower,
 bright sprinkle with the dew of fresh-fallen shower. 

of lively grace, and dimple smile,
 slim Cynthia, the refine,
 come, with neat Phillis, full of tricksome wile;
 while Silvius strol behind,
 chase by the marble-hearted Rosalind:
 the loud and witty large-mouthed Madge,
 with her obsequious servant Hodge. 

Blythe from the mill, which brisk turn round
 make the young zephyr breathe a rural sound,
 leap CHARLES, gay glow with industrious heat,
 active to lead in every rustic feat:
 back from his brow he shake his wavy lock,
 and turn quick his lively eye,
 his lovely, modest Peggy spy,
 return with her age father flock. 
straight with his hand he give his heart sincere,
 devoid of order dance, and whistle loud and clear. 

Hebe, a bloom, sprightly fair,
 with shallow head, a ill-matched pair;
 simple Daphne, rosy JOHN,
 and ever-blundering HELESON:
 from a large mansion, gloom by shade tree,
 forth spring the star-eyed luisse;
 graceful her tress flow around,
 like scatter cloud, that catch the moon pale beam;
 scarce she seem to touch the verdant ground,
 but, as inspire, along the plain she stream. 
more join the flock; - they spring in air,
 light as winge dove, and like to dove they pair;
 the sun last ray now linger over their head,
 and sweet delectable around be spread. 

poor Gertrude, hide among the tree, survey
 each ardent youth, each bloom maid;
 and as she gaze,
 pleasure by slow degree within her sense steal:
 her eye, with tear impearl, she raise,
 her heart each sweet sensation feel;
 light her foot the grassy meadow tread,
 while music power delude she from her care;
 among the nymph, by its soft influence lead,
 her sympathetic breast their rapture share. 

thus while she feel, and join the lively throng,
 lo! quick ascend the plain
 the glory of each swain,
 Urban, with sportive song,
 who cheerful note in frolic measure flee;
 while ROSAMONDE,
 fleet-footed, glow ROSAMONDE, he lead:
 the rapture of the lark her voice send forth,
 too well, ah! Gertrude know its worth;

dire tremble soon her spirit seize:
 can she, vain untaught nymph, aspire to please? 
her body own no grace,
 no smile, no dimple, deck her eye or face:
 she feel that she have nought to prize;
 yet, total devoid of art,
 expression charm be she, with beam eye,
 a voice far-reaching, and a feeling heart. 

she turn around -
 the fly breeze loosen to the air
 her ill-beseeming vest, her scatter hair:
 so sad she look, so artless be her woe,
 as from a think mind have draw a tear;
 but joy through every vein have steal,
 and mirth shut out the sympathetic glow. 
the heart be gay dance admit of no controul,
 sweet joy but seldom through our sense steal;
 it be pity then we shall forget to feel. 

gay wicked wit amid the circle spread,
 and wanton round the lively sally speed;
 each neat-trimmed maiden laugh with playful glee,
 who whisper swain divert with mimicry. 
fair ROSAMONDE, who rival bosom burn,
 with taunt mirth direct young urban eye;
 he, with mischievous archness, smile return,
 amid who circle wound satire rise;
 their sportive foot still beat the flowery ground,
 while wicked look, and jest, and jeer go round. 

pierce by their insult, sting with bitter smart,
 sad fall poor gertrude tear, high heave her heart. 
distant she fly, and site on a stone,
 conceal, give sorrow vent, and weep alone:
 till amid her grief, a virtuous just disdain
 come to her aid, and make her bosom glow;
 with shame she burn, she blush at her woe,
 and wonder at her weakness and her pain. 

 "unhappy maid!" she cry, "thou be to blame,
" thus to expose thy virtuous breast to shame:
 "poor heart! thy love be laugh at for its truth;
" yet it be a holy treasure, though disdain,
 "and wanton by thoughtlessness profane;
" Ah! why then waste the blessing of thy youth? 
 "no more fair reason sacred light despise;
" thy heart may blessing find
 "that dwell not in the eye,
" but in the virtue of the feeling mind. " 
