the invitation.

to two sister.

though low be my cot, and the scene all around
 unconscious that art with rude nature can play,
 yet here, even here, it be think, may be find
 some fugitive pleasure that happen to stray. 
when Aurora walk forth, and collect her perfume,
 and scatter her sweet on each innocent flower,
 her eye can look down just as fond to illume
 the low glide stream as the high gild tower:
 all nature behold, she smile as she see
 the gay tinkle rill, as it play through the mead; —
 as she look at the lustre that dart through the tree,
 and rear into notice the low tread weed. 
if such thing to observe, while beneath the dark oak,
 can delight nature child, bid her daughter come here;
 bid they haste while the dryad the songster invoke,
 and wave their green arm round her child so dear. 
for as yet the rude catch from the briar may be bear,
 since the rose that it bear can still blush for the offence,
 since we yet can remember the harsh wound thorn
 yield sweet that stray soft around every sense. 
but soon yellow autumn the green leaf shall stain,
 and gold gilding-tincture the meadow pervade;
 though now whet scythe the gay season proclaim,
 and weary scorch haymaker long for the shade. 
yet nature, still change, that season shall bring,
 when the mead become wither and chill turn the grove,
 when the gad gay woodbine no long shall cling
 to hang up her garland on bough that she love. 
with you, i must own, shall the glow of the plain
 be chill by a breath, and the sun haste away;
 though fond of the scene, i no more will complain,
 for friend yield a prospect more charm than may. 
and without they, how oft have i sigh as i view
 the wood-hanging bank, and the cottage so still;
 thy regret, silly heart, be too fond renew
 as i listen and hear the soft clack of the mill. 
what joy, will i say, can these beauty bestow,
 unless some dear friend have the pleasure to share;
 though nature shed incense wherever i go,
 her gift and her offering for they i will spare. 
for, ah! i have find in the bosom alone
 be the mansion of peace; and, wherever we stray,
 if we make not this cell-living goddess our own,
 it matter not what be the scene or the day. 
for fancy, that fairy, will darken the glade,
 and change every object that dance around, —
 will heighten or lessen the fall cascade,
 till horror or grandeur exist in the sound. 
yet still there be a nymph with as magical power,
 who only exhibit thing just as they be;
 and she, even she, can hand round the dull hour,
 nor in search of amusement needs wander afar. 
what though she be rural, and best love the grove,
 though scene of retirement delight she the most,
 yet not to one spot do she fasten her love,
 for easy please, not one pleasure be lose. 
she ramble about, and i meet she at eve;
 with Aurora i find she ascend the hill;
 at noon in the shade help her chaplet to weave,
 all day mark her step, and be near to she still. 
to such favour i have get, that my friend she will guide,
 with promise firm, that they shall not repent; —
 that they shall not be weary when set by my side,
 she promise this — and her name be content. 
