fashion: a satire.

yes, yes, my friend, disguise it as you will,
to right or wrong it be fashion guide we still;
a few perhaps rise singular good,
defy, and stem the fool-overwhelming flood;
the rest to wander from their brother fear,
as social herring in large shoal appear.

it be not a taste, but powerful mode, that bid
yonder purblind, poke peer run picture mad;
with the same wonder-gaping face he stare
on flat dutch daub, as on Guido air;
what may his oak-crowned manor mortgage gain?
alas! five fade landscape of Loraine.

not so Gargilius — sleek voluptuous lord,
a hundred dainty smoke upon his board;
earth, air, and ocean ransack for the feast,
in masquerade of foreign olio dress;
who praise, in this sauce-enamoured age,
calm, healthful temperance, like a indian sage:
but can he walk in public, be it say,
"gargilius dine on beef, and eat brown bread?"
happy the grottoe hermit with his pulse,
who want no truffle, rich ragout — nor Hulse.

how strict on Sunday gay laetitia face!
how curl her hair, how clean her Brussels lace!
she lift her eye, her sparkle eye to heaven,
most nunlike mourn, and hope to be forgive.
think not she pray, or be grow penitent —
she go to church — because the parish go.

close chreme, deaf to the pale widow grief,
part with a untuned guinea for relief;
no melt over his ruthless bosom steal,
more than fierce Arabs, or proud tyrant feel;
yet, since his neighbour give, the churl unlock,
damn the poor, his triple-bolted box.

why love not Hippia rank obscenity?
why will she not with twenty porter lie?
why not in crowd mall quite naked walk?
not awe by virtue — but "the world will talk." —
yet how demure look the wish maid,
for ever, but in bed, of man afraid!
thus hammon spring by day feel icy-cool,
at night be hot as hell sulphureous pool.

each pant warble of vesconti throat,
to DICK, be heavenly than a seraph note;
the thrill, he swear, soft-stealing to his breast,
be lullaby, to sooth his care to rest;
be sweet far, than laura luscious kiss,
charm the whole man, and lap his soul in bliss:
who can such counterfeit rapture bear,
of a deaf fool who scarce can thunder hear?
Crowder o might with he for festin pass,
and touch hande yield to trifle Hasse.

but curd-faced Curio come! all prate, and smile,
supreme of beaux, great bulwark of our isle!
Mark well his feather hat, his gild cockade,
rich ring, white hand, and coat of stiff brocade;
such weak-winged may-flies britain troop disgrace,
that flandria, wonder, mourn our alter race:
with he the fair, enrapture with a rattle,
of VAUXHALL, Garrick, or Pamela prattle:
this self-pleased king of emptiness permit
at the dear toilette harmless to sit;
as mirthless infant, idle out the day,
with wooden sword, or toothless puppy play:
it be mean (cry the manling) to command
a conquer host, or save a sink land,
than furl fair flavia fan, or lead a dance,
or broach new-minted fashion fresh from FRANCE.

o FRANCE, who edict govern dress and meat,
thy victor Britain bend beneath thy foot!
strange! that pert grasshopper shall lion lead,
and teach to hop, and chirp across the mead;
of fleet and laureled chief let other boast,
thy honour be to bow, dance, boil and roast.
let Italy give mimic canvas fire,
carve rock to life, or tune the lull lyre;
for gold let rich potosi be renowned,
be balmy-breathing gum in India find;
it be thy for slave to teach the shanty cut,
give empty coxcomb more important strut,
prescribe new rule for knot, hoop, manteau, wig,
shoe, soup, complexion, coach, farce, jig.

muscalia dream of last night ball till ten,
drink chocolate, stroke fop, and sleep again,
perhaps at twelve dare open her drowsy eye,
ask LUCY if it be late enough to rise;
by three each curl and feature just set,
she dine, talk scandal, visit, play piquet:
meanwhile her babe with some foul nurse remain,
for modern dame a mother care disdain;
each fortnight once she bear to see the brat,
"for oh they stun one ear, like squall cat!"
tiger and pard protect, and nurse their young,
the parent-snake will roll her fork tongue,
the vulture hover vengeful over her nest,
if the rude hand her helpless brood infest;
shall lovely woman, soft frame of heaven,
to who be tear, and feel pity give,
most fashionable cruel, less regard
her offspring, than the vulture, snake, and pard?

what art, o fashion, power supreme below!
you make we virtue, nature, sense, forgo;
you sanctify knave, atheist, whore, and fool,
and shield from justice, shame, and ridicule.
our grandame mode, long absent from our eye,
at your all-powerful bid duteous rise;
as Arethusa sink beneath the plain
for many a league, emerge flow again;
now Mary mob, and flounce you approve,
now shape-disguising sack, and slipper love:
scarce have you choose (like fortune fond to joke)
some reign dress, but you the choice revoke:
so when the deep-tongued organ note swell high,
and loud hosannah reach the distant sky,
hark, how at once the die strain decay,
and soften unexpected away.
the peer, prince, peasant, soldier, squire, divine,
goddess of change, bend low before your shrine,
swear to follow, wheresoever you lead,
though you eat toad, or walk upon your head.

it be hence bell game, intrigue, sip citron-dram,
and hide their lovely lock with head of ram;
hence girl, once modest, without blush appear,
with leg display, and swan-soft bosom bare;
hence stale, autumnal dame, still deck with lace,
look like vile canker coin in velvet case.
ask you, why whore live more belove than wife,
why weep virtue exile, flattery thrive,
why mad for pension, briton young and old
adore base minister, those calf of gold,
why witling templar on religion joke,
fat, rosy justice, drink, doze, and smoke,
dull critic on best bard pour harmless spite,
as babe that mumble coral, can bite,
why knave malicious, brother-knave embrace,
with heart of gall, but courtly-smiling face,
why scornful folly from her gawdy coach,
at starve houseless virtue point reproach,
why avarice be the great all-worshipped god?
methinks some daemon answer — "it be the mode!"

at this corruption smile with ghastly grin,
presage triumph to her mother, sin;
who, as with baneful wing aloft she fly,
"this fall land be mine!" — exult cry;
grim tyranny attend she on her way,
and frown, and whet his sword that thirst to slay.

look, from the frigid to the torrid zone,
by custom all be lead, by nature none.
the hungry Tartar ride upon his meat,
to cook the dainty flesh with buttock heat:
the Chinese complaisant take his bed
with his big wife, and be with cawdle feed.
how will our tender british beauty shriek,
to see slim beaux on bull their lance break!
yet not Lucinda, in heroic Spain,
admit a youth, but who his beast have slay.
see, wondrous land, where the fell victor bring,
to his glad wife, the head of slaughter king,
the mangle head! — over which they sing and laugh,
and in dire banquet the warm lifeblood quaff;
where youth their grandsire, age-bent, tremble, grey,
pity their weary weakness, kind slay:
where faint brahmin, sick of life, retire,
to die spontaneous on the spicy pyre;
where (stranger still!) with their wild date content,
the simple swain no sigh for gold torment.

how fond partial be our judgment grow,
we deem all manner odious, but our own!

o teach i, friend, to know wise nature rule,
and laugh, like you, at fashion hoodwink fool;
you, who to wood remove from modish sin,
despise the distant world hoarse, busy din;
as shepherd from high rock hear far below,
hear unconcerned loud torrent fierce flow;
you, though mad million the mean taste upbraid,
who still love virtue, fair, forsake maid;
as Bacchus charm Ariadne bear,
by all abandon, from the lonesome shore.
