alcanzar. 

when first alcanzar to the town do come,
 the people all believe that he be dumb:
 in troop, with hasty step to he they go;
 to get their fate presage be their intent. 
the man well verse be in the mystic art,
 and quick as thought can wondrous thing impart. 
whoever be with anxious care oppress,
 or on account of absent friend distress,
 unto alcanzar swift do repair,
 each of his purse do ample make he share. 
it matter not how great the distance be,
 a ship be rear, he waft he over the sea:
 though in distress, they free from every pain;
 dead or alive they now must cross the main:
 bedaub with lace, of gold they have get great store,
 and swift he land they on britannia shore. 

the nymph and swain do next his aid demand;
 he tie they all in Hymen silken band:
 he do young Strephon with love Delia bless,
 though wont ere while to shun his fond address. 
sly Sanders too, who love and woo for gold,
 see Susan charm down on the table tell:
 cow, calf and horse, place before his sight,
 a widow rich will well his love requite. 
poor Celia next, who, for some fickle swain,
 spend day in sorrow, and whole night in pain:
 it be his absence cause the maid to mourn,
 but fame alcanzar make he soon return. 
his antic gesture do the fair one cheer,
 and home she go, release from every fear. 
old Elspa now come tremble for her fate;
 she will be wed, but fear it be too late:
 her lock, alas! be silvered over with grey;
 yet to alcanzar swift she take her way. 
she give a sixpence; lady mark the rest,
 she be with a husband and five child bless. 
here maid of fifty, widow of fourscore,
 may all get marry for a penny more. 

but be the man like as his merit prize? 
ah no! he be by empty fool despise. 
a crafty youth, will Watson be his name,
 do strive to ruin great alcanzar fame. 
he dress himself all in a maid array,
 gown, stay and petticoat, extreme gay;
 a muslin head-dress, with a large toopee;
 few of our lady look so fine as he. 
up street he walk with a majestic air,
 and to alcanzar lodging do repair. 

first give a penny, then he show his hand,
 and do with down cast eye deject stand:
 but who can tell the sequel without tear? 
alcanzar chalk too soon a cradle rear. 
who will bewail this maid sad destiny? 
she pregnant prove, her love go to sea. 
now all around upon the youth do gaze,
 such dismal sign have fill they with amaze. 
will give a penny more; the sage do bring
 the lover home, and wed they with a ring. 
eight child too, he place before their sight
 will seem well please, and bid they all good night. 

this may have pass, have he the fact conceal;
 but o it be cruel! Willy all reveal. 
he think indeed, but all his thought be vain,
 the fame alcanzar character to stain. 
for one spoil dish who will a meal despise! 
or for one small mistake condemn the wise? 
