the two dog,

a tale.

it be in that place of Scotland isle,
 that bear the name of old king coil,
 upon a bony day in June,
 when wear through the afternoon,
 two dog, that be not throng at home;
 forgather once upon a time. 

the first i will name, they call he Cæsar
 be keepet for his honour pleasure;
 his hair, his size, his mouth, his lug,
 show he be none of Scotland dog,
 but whalpet some place far abroad,
 where sailor go to fish for Cod. 

his lock, letter, braw brass-collar
 show he the gentleman and scholar;
 but though he be of high degree,
 the fient a pride not pride have he,
 but will have have spend a hour caressan,
 even with a tinkler-gipsey's messan:
 at Kirk or market, mill or smiddie,
 no tawt tyke, though ever fae duddy,
 but he will have stane, as glad to see he,
 and stroan on stane and hillock with he. 

the tither be a ploughman collie,
 a rhyme, rant, rave billy,
 who for his friend and comrade have he,
 and in his freak have Luath call he,
 after some dog in Highland sing,
 be make long since, lord know how long. 

he be a gash and faithful tyke,
 as ever lap a sheugh or dyke. 
his honest, sonsie, baws'nt face,
 ay get he friend in ilk place;
 his breast be white, his towzie back,
 well clad with coat of glossy black;
 his gawsie tail, with upward curl,
 hang our his hurdy with a swirl. 

no doubt but they be fain of ither,
 and unco pack and thick thegither;
 with social nose whiles snuff and snowket;
 whiles mouse and modewurk they howket;
 whiles scour away in long excursion,
 and worry ither in diversion;
 till tire at last with money a farce,
 they set they down upon their ass,
 and there begin a long digression
 about the lord of the creation. 

Cæsar.

i have often wonder, honest Luath,
 what sort of life poor dog like you have;
 and when the gentry life i see,
 what way poor body live ava. 

our laird get in his rack rent,
 his coal, his kanae, and all his stent:
 he rise when he like himself;
 his flunkey answer at the bell;
 he ca's he coach; he ca's he horse;
 he draw a bony, silken purse
 as long' my tail, whare through the steeks,
 the yellow letter Geordie keek. 

from morn to een it be nought but toil,
 at bake, roast, fry, boil;
 and though the gentry first be steghan,
 yet even the hall folk fill their peghan
 with sauce, ragout, and such like trashtrie,
 that be little short of downright wastry. 
our whipper-in, wee, blastet wonner,
 poor, worthless elf, it eat a dinner,
 better than any tenant-man
 his honour have in all the lan' :
 and what poor cot-folk pit their painch in. 
i own it be past my comprehension. 

LUATH.

trowth, Cæsar, whiles their fash enough;
 a Cotter howkan in a sheugh,
 with dirty stane biggan a dyke,
 Bairan a quarry, and such like,
 himself, a wife, he thus sustain,
 a smytrie of wee, duddy wean,
 and nought but his han'-daurk, to keep
 they right and tight in thack and raep. 

and when they meet with fair disaster,
 like loss of health or want of master,
 you may will have think, a wee touch long,
 and they must starve of cauld and hunger
 but how it come, i never ken yet,
 they be most wonderful content;
 and buird chiel, and clever hizzy,
 be breed in such a way as this be. 

Cæsar 

but then, to see how you be negleket,
 how huff, and cuff, and disrespeket! 
l — d man, our gentry care as little
 for delver, ditcher, and such cattle;
 they go as saucy by poor folk,
 as i will have by a stinkan brock. 

i have notice, on our laird court-day,
 and money a time my heart be be uvae,
 poor tenant body, scant of cash,
 how they must thole a factor snash;
 he will stamp and threaten, curse and swear,
 he will apprehend they, poind their gear;
 while they must stand , with aspect humble,
 and hear it all, and fear and tremble! 

i see how folk live that have riches;
 but sure poor-folk must be wretch! 

LUATH.

they be no so wretched be one will have think;
 though constant on poortith brink,
 they be sae accustom with the fight,
 the view of it give they little fright. 

then chance and fortune be so guide,
 they be ay in less or more provide;
 and though fatigue with close employment,
 a blink of rest be a sweet enjoyment. 

the dear comfort of their life,
 their grushie wean and faithful wife;
 the prattle thing be just their pride,
 that sweetens of their fire side. 

and whiles twalpennie-worth of nappy
 can make the body uncommon happy;
 they lie aside their private care,
 to mind the Kirk and state affair;
 they will talk of patronage and priest,
 with kindle fury in their breast,
 or tell what new taxation come,
 and ferlie at the folk in Lon'on. 

as bleak-faced hallowmass return,
 they get the jovial, rantan Kirns,
 when rural life, of every station,
 unite in common recreation;
 love blink, wit slap, and social mirth
 forget there be care upon the earth. 

that merry day the year begin,
 they bar the door on frosty win;
 the nappy reek with mantl ream,
 and shed a heart-inspiring steam;
 the luntan pipe, and sneeshin mill,
 be hand round with right guide will;
 the canty, old folk, crackan crouse,
 the young one rantan through the house —
 my heart have be fae fain to see they,
 that i for joy have barket with they. 

still it be our true that you have say,
 such game be now our often play;
 there be money a creditable stock
 of decent, honest, fawsont folk,
 be rive out both root and branch,
 some rascal prideful gree to quench,
 who think to knit himself the fast
 in favour with some gentle master,
 who aiblin throng a parliamentin,
 for britain guide his saul indentin —

Cæsar.

have lad the little ken about it;
 for britain guide! guide faith! i doubt it
 say rather, gaun as premiers lead he
 and say aye or no's they bid he:
 at opera and play parade,
 mortgage, gamble, masquerade:
 or maybe, in a frolic daft,
 to Hague or Calais take a waft,
 to make a tour and take a whirl,
 to learn bon tun and see the worl' . 

there, at Vienna or Versailles,
 he rive his father old entail;
 or by Madrid he take the rout,
 to thrum guittar and fetch with nought;
 or down italian vista startle,
 Wh — re-hunting among grove of myrtle
 then bowse drumly german-water,
 to make himself look fair and fat,
 and purge the bitter ga's and canker,
 of curse venetian b — res and ch — ncres. 

for britain guide! for her destruction! 
with dissipation, feud and faction! 

LUATH 

Hech man! dear sir! be that the gate,
 they waste fae money a braw estate! 
be we so fight and harass
 for gear to go that gate at last! 

o will they stay aback from court,
 and please themselves with countra sport,
 it will have for every one be better,
 the laird, the tenant, and the Cotter! 
for those frank, rantan, ramblan billy,
 fient haet of they be ill heart fellow;
 except for breakin of their timmer,
 or speakin light of their Limmer,
 or shootin of a hare or moorcock,
 the ne'er-a-bit they be ill to poor folk. 

but will you tell i, master Cæsar,
 sure great folk life a life of pleasure? 
no cauld nor hunger ever can steer they,
 the vera thought of it need not fear they. 

Cæsar.

l — d man, be you but whiles where i be,
 the gentle you will have near envy they! 

it be true, they need not starve or sweat,
 through winter cauld, or summer heat;
 they have no sair-wark to craze their bane,
 and fill auld-age with grip and grane;
 but human-body be such fool,
 for all their college and school,
 that when no real ill perplex they,
 they make enough themselves to vex they;
 and ay the less they have to sturt they,
 in like proportion, less will hurt they:

a country fellow at the pleugh,
 his acre till, he be right enough;
 a country girl at her wheel,
 her dizzen do, she be unco well;
 but gentleman, and lady warst,
 with even down want of wark be curse. 
they loiter, lounge, lank and lazy;
 though deil-haet ail they, yet uneasy;
 their day, insipid, dull and tasteless,
 their night, unquiet, long and restless. 

and even their sport, their ball and race,
 their gallop through public place,
 there be such parade, such pomp and art,
 the joy can scarce reach the heart. 

the man cast out in party-matche,
 then sowther all in deep debauch. 
Aenight, they be mad with drink and wh — ring,
 ny day their life be past endure. 

the lady arm-in-arm in cluster,
 as great and gracious all as sister;
 but hear their absent thought of ither,
 they be a run devil and jad thegither. 
whiles, our there wee bit cup and platie,
 they sip the scandal-potion pretty;
 or lee-long night, with crabbet leuk,
 poor our the devil be picture beuk;
 stake on a chance a farmer stackyard,
 and cheat like any unhanged blackguard. 

there be some exception, man and woman;
 but this be gentry life in common. 

by this, the fun be out of sight,
 and dark gloamin bring the night:
 the bum-clock hum with lazy drone,
 the kye stand rowtan in the loan;
 when up they get and shake their lug,
 rejoice they be not man but dog;
 and each take off his several way,
 resolve to meet some ither day. 
