verse

address to my two nephew, on saint helen day, 1809. 

dear boy! — dismiss awhile from school,
 from sober learning thorny rule, —
 the annual race of glory run,
 the prize bestow, the laurel win, —
 you leave the scientific dome,
 while noisy rapture hail your home:
 home — cherish spot! who magic power
 can charm with hope the studious hour;
 and where the heart — however far —
 point, like the needle to its star! 
and now, with many a fond oration,
 you ask, to crown this dear vacation,
 saturnian time of sport and play,
 a fête! — to grace saint helen day! 
but will the saint propitious see
 a fête dear boy! prepare for i? 
i! — who her altar never seek,
 a heretic! who idle think
 she live alone in pagan fame,
 and half forget her saint name! 
but — since that name, entwine with palm,
 the legend deathless page embalm,
 and since historic truth must own
 her crest votary fill a throne —
 we will lay our offering at her shrine,
 and call she, as she be, divine! 

then haste, dear boy! and deck the bower,
 this choose day, with festive flower! 
the votive bouquet joyful bring;
 and bid your muse, on lofty wing,
 the steep parnassian summit climb,
 and weave the tributary rhyme. 
the soothe song which you rehearse —
 though form of perishable verse,
 and, like the bouquet, bear to die —
 shall fill with tear affection eye;
 shall touch, with eloquence confess,
 the chord which vibrate in her breast! 
then hither bring the early friend,
 with who your bound heart unbend;
 till then, in vain the fête prepare —
 what fête, unless by friendship share? 
together, happy band! advance;
 together frame the sportive dance;
 together tread the mimic stage,
 the TALMAS of another age;
 and then, to crown this favour night,
 unquestioned symbol of delight,
 the soar rocket swift shall rise,
 and, sweep, gild the midnight sky;
 bright wheel of fire shall rapid turn;
 and sun, that soon must set, shall burn;
 saint Helen, with a smile, shall view
 her rite all pay in order due. 
the saint, become my patron now,
 to she and you i breathe my vow:
 listen, dear boy! nor take amiss
 a lesson, with a part kiss —

 your life have close its baby span,
 and childhood ripen into man:
 on youth gay threshold now you tread;
 the path unfold, with rose spread,
 that lead the unsuspecting guest
 where pleasure hold her circean feast;
 with bosom yet from evil free,
 now promise to the saint and i,
 oft as the year, on circle wing,
 this fond return day shall bring,
 while over the world you light roam,
 far from the long-lost scene of home,
 this day in pleasure course to pause,
 this day let reason plead her cause! 

when come the year — for come they must —
 when her you love be lay in dust;
 her who for you have learn to prove
 a mother care — a mother love! 
from you all ill have seek to chase,
 and fill a mother vacant place:
 still on this day, to duty true,
 remember that she live for you! 
ah! give she one recording sigh,
 nor pass this day with tearless eye! 
still may its choose hour impart
 the throb of virtue to the heart,
 and be the talisman who spell
 shall passion wild delirium quell;
 controul, with some good angel power,
 seduction in her smile hour. 
this day, from all her wile secure,
 with noble hope, with purpose pure,
 resolve to feel that best delight
 reserve for those who live aright:
 and thus, dear boy! your tribute pay;
 thus consecrate saint helen day! 
