on the death of the honourable mr. James Thynne, young son to the right honourable the lord viscount Weymouth. 

farewel, love youth! since it be the will of heaven
 so soon to take, what have so late be give;
 and thus our expectation to destroy,
 raise a grief, where we have form a joy;
 who once believe, it be the fate design
 in he to double a illustrious line,
 and in a second channel spread that race
 where every virtue shine, with every grace. 
but we mistake, and it be not here below
 that this engraft scion be to grow;
 the seat above require he, that each sphere
 may soon the offspring of such parent share
 resign he then to the supreme intent,
 you, who but flesh to that bless spirit lend. 
again disrobe, let he to bliss retire,
 and only bear from you, amid that choir,
 what, precept or example do inspire,
 a title to reward, from that rich store
 of pious work, which you have send before. 
then lie the fade relic, which remain,
 in the still vault (exclude farther pain);
 where king and counsellor their progress close,
 and his renown ancestor repose;
 where Coventry withdraw all but in name,
 leave the world his benefit and fame;
 where his paternal predecessor lie,
 once large of thought, and rank among the wise;
 who genius in long-leat we may behold
 (a pile, as noble as if he will be tell
 by Weymouth, it shall be in time possess,
 and strive to suit the mansion to the guest.) 
nor favour, nor disgrace, there Essex sleep,
 nor somerset his master sorrow weep,
 who to the shelter of the unenvied grave
 convey the monarch, who he can not save;
 though, roman-like, his own less-valved head
 he proffer in that injure martyr stead. 
nor let that matchless female escape my pen,
 who their whole duty teach to weak man,
 and of each sex the two best gift enjoy,
 the skill to write, the modesty to hide;
 while none shall that performance disbelieve,
 who lead the life, may the direction give. 
with such as these, whence he derive his blood,
 great on record, or eminent good,
 let he be lay, till death long night shall cease,
 and break glory interrupt the peace. 
meanwhile, you live parent, ease your grief
 by tear, allow as nature due relief. 
for when we offer to the power above,
 like you, the dear object of our love;
 when, with that patient saint in holy write,
 we have learn at once to grieve, and to submit;
 when contrite sigh, like hallow incense, rise
 bear our anguish to the appease sky;
 then may those shower, which take from sorrow birth,
 and still be tend tower this baleful earth,
 over all our deep and parch care diffuse,
 like eden spring, or hermon soften dew. 
but lend your succour, you almighty power,
 for as the wound, the balsam too be you. 
in vain be number, or persuasive speech,
 what poet write, or what the pastor teach,
 till you, who make, again repair the breach. 
for when to shade of death our joy be flee,
 when for a loss, like this, our tear be shed
 none can revive the heart, but who can raise the dead. 
but yet, my muse, if thou have soft verse
 than ever bewail the melancholy Herse;
 if thou have power to dissipate the gloom
 inherent to the solitary tomb;
 to rescue thence the memory and air
 of what we late see so fresh, so fair;
 then shall this noble youth thy art engage
 to show the beauty of his bloom age,
 the please light, that from his eye be cast,
 like hasty beam, too vigorous to last;
 where the warm soul, as one the confine, lie
 ready for flight, and for eternal day. 
gentle dispose his nature shall be show,
 and all the mother sweetness make his own. 
the father likeness be but faint see,
 as ripen fruit be figure by the green. 
nor can we hope, have he fulfil his day,
 he shall have reach weymouth unequalled praise. 
still one distinguish plant each lineage show,
 and all the rest beneath it be stature grow. 
of tully race but he possess the tongue,
 and none like Julius from the caesar spring. 
next, in his harmless sport he shall be draw
 urge his courser, over the flowery lawn;
 sprightly himself, as the enliven game,
 bold in the chace, and full of generous flame;
 yet in the palace, tractable and mild,
 perfect in all the duty of a child;
 which fond reflection please, while it pain,
 like penetrate note of sad harmonious strain. 
select friendship timely he begin,
 and seize in youth that best delight of man. 
leave a grow race to mourn his end,
 their early and their age promise friend. 
but far away alas! that prospect move,
 lose in the cloud, like distant hill and groves,
 while with increase step we all pursue
 what time alone can bring to near view,
 that future state, which darkness yet involve,
 know but by death, which every doubt resolve. 
