verse write in February, 1827. 

like gleam of sunshine on the mountain side,
 fair, bright and beautiful, while all beside,
 slope, cliff and pinnacle in shadow lie
 beneath the awning of a wintery sky,
 through loop-hole in its cloudy texture beam
 a cataract of light, so soft stream, —
 shine one bless deed of ruth when war be grim form
 over a scourge nation guide his pass storm. 

like verdant islet-spot, that soft peer
 through the dull mist, as morning breeze clear
 the brood vapour from the wide-stretched vale,
 so in a land where mammon care prevail,
 do frequent deed of gentle charity
 refresh the moral gazer mental eye. 

Britain, thou be in arm and commerce grace
 with many generous act, that, fair trace
 on thy long annal, give a lustre far
 exceed those of wealth or trophy war;
 and may we not say truthful of thou,
 thou be a land of mercy? — may it be! 

what form be those with lean gall side? in vain
 their lax and ropy sinew sore strain
 heap load to draw with lash and goad urge on. 
they be in other day, but late go,
 the useful servant, dear prize, of those
 who to their fail age give no repose, —
 of thankless, heartless owner. then full oft
 their arch graceful neck so sleek and soft
 beneath a master stroke hand will rear
 right proud, as they neigh his wellknown voice to hear. 
but now how change! — and what mar thing be these,
 starve, hoot, scar, deny or food or ease;
 who humble look their bitter thraldom show,
 familiar with the kick, the pinch, the blow? 
alas! in this sad fellowship be find
 the playful kitten and the faithful hound,
 the gallant cock that hail the morning light,
 all now hard-fated mate in woeful plight. 

ah no! a land of mercy be a name
 which thou in all thy glory may not claim! 

but yet there dwell in thou the good, the bold,
 who in thy street, court, senate brave hold
 contention with thy wayward cruelty,
 and shall subdue it ere this age glide by. 
meantime as they their manly power exert,
 "god speed you well!" burst from each kindly heart. 
and they will speed; for this foul blot of shame
 must be wash out from britain honour name,
 and she among enlighten nation stand,
 a brave, a merciful and generous land. 
