to mrs. ward. 

by the same. 

o thou, my beauteous, ever tender friend,
 thou, on who all my worldly joy depend,
 accept these number; and with pleasure hear
 unstudied truth, which few, alas! can bear;
 while conscious virtue take the muse part,
 glow on thy cheek, and warm thy generous heart. 

let birthday suit be thoughtless celia Cire;
 and row of diamond recommend the fair;
 while gaze croud around the pageant press,
 charm with her pride, and luxury of dress:
 far other joy thy just ambition move,
 to cherish and reward a husband love;
 to slight vain title, in retreat to shine,
 shun public praise, and call a poet thy. 
and know, you fair, a poet can supply,
 what wealth, and power, and equipage deny. 
when the vain business of your live be over,
 and the glass frighten, who it charm before;
 when not a trace remain of what you be,
 and not a compliment salute your ear;
 without one virtue, to redeem respect,
 without one beauty, to forbid neglect;
 with tear unpitied, you may then lament
 the gloomy set of a life mis-spent;
 nor delia choice with witty malice blame,
 who give up show for happiness and fame. 

o! if the muse, not uninspired, divine,
 thy bright example shall for ever shine;
 teach the wise virgin, where to fix her choice,
 and weigh no marriage by the common voice;
 to yield with dignity, reject with grace;
 nor tire the lover with a tedious chace:
 with ease to conquer, and with ease retain,
 brighten prosperity, or soften pain:
 know woman glory, and her proper end;
 live to her husband, family, and friend:
 through vary life her various virtue prove,
 honour her portion here, and bliss above. 

say, what persuasion, or what art of i,
 can gain a passage to a soul like thy? 
where female softness, strength of reason meet,
 a pierce judgement, and a wit discreet;
 where every passion, every duty, know
 its proper bound, and not unlicensed flow. 
say, for thou know, my ever able guide,
 (one doubtful act remain unjustified)
 on i, on i, thy choice favour fall;
 can you so err, or i deserve so well? 
instruct i thou the happy art to steer,
 and still with modesty thy conduct clear;
 so in thy praise may the world agree;
 nor load with vanity the muse and i. 

with song still usher shall the morn arise,
 that show thou first, all-charming, to my eye:
 i gaze with rapture, yet chastize with awe:
 so the first man descend angel see. 
speak, or silent, o! secure to charm,
 to win with wisdom, or with beauty warm:
 the grace unobserved, with easy care,
 form thy soft accent, and compose thy air. 
i see, and hear; nor hear, nor see, unmoved,
 unknowing, or i dare not know, i love. 
what thence i suffer, let high heaven declare,
 pity my grief, propitious to my prayer. 
heaven try my passion, and pronounce it true:
 hence i embolden, and hence soft you. 
yet oft withhold, and falter oft with pain,
 my tongue half utter, what my eye explain,
 nor prone to flatter, nor to virtue blind;
 not void of knowledge, and to learn incline;
 nor spring from noble, nor ungenerous blood;
 boast a father honest, wise, and good;
 such long observe, and by long converse show,
 my temper, manner, and my fail know:
 you trust my vow, and pity love sincere;
 haste to relieve, and smile away my fear;
 give all you can, and all the rest forsake,
 the noble sacrifice, that love can make! 
of what avail the use of wealth to thou? 
or what the bless, if unshared with i? 
o double honour by the grateful mind,
 for what you bring, and what you leave behind! 

be there a man in science not unread,
 in simple neatness elegant breed,
 of what or health or nature ask, possess,
 receive by all, and by his friend caress,
 false and insidious can the fair pursue,
 and look on beauty with a miser view? 
teach by the muse such abject soul to hate,
 and hope sweet converse from the marriage-state,
 i place my triumph in a matchless wife,
 nor seek superfluous vanity of life:
 thus, unobnoxious to detraction aim,
 nor base suspicion can attaint my fame. 

degenerate thought! let slanderous tongue assail;
 spread all their poison, all their rage prevail;
 so gracious heaven restore thou, to enjoy
 what love can leave, but wisdom can employ. 

meanwhile my Delia manifest her worth;
 the loss of riches call her prudence forth:
 behold she now with dignity descend;
 and low, but necessary, care attend;
 cheerful, what fortune not allow, resign;
 and, hard still, her charity confine:
 but heaven in secret see the kind intent,
 each act of pity, or of bounty, mean;
 heaven see in secret; but in open day
 will crown thy merit, and thy praise display. 
though small thy store, not million can suffice,
 to furnish all thy liberal thought supply. 
how oft thy love sapphira melt thy breast,
 obscure her worth, her genius half depress! 
how oft thy fancy help old-age along! 
or hear the widow, and the orphan song! 
now visionary temple rise around;
 and half thy empire, GEORGE, be sacred ground. 

from thou, my Delia, from thy watchful care,
 my little last; my little, friend can share:
 nor debt distract, nor usury devour;
 poor if i be, within my fortune poor. 
smile on, my fair, though cautious, void of fear,
 wise to shun sorrow, or prepare to bear. 
who copy thou, shall never fail to find,
'midst cloud and storm, the sunshine of the mind:
 for piety (whatever ill impend)
 omniscience guide, omnipotence defend. 

bless in retirement, competence, and love,
 below all envy, and all vice above,
 crown with content, i only burn to show,
 (hopeless to recompense) how much i owe. 
o bear with genius, and with learning fill,
 in every rule of happy write skill;
 who beauty strike, false ornament offend;
 who weigh with care each author scope and end;
 know why pope slacken, or augment his fire;
 and oft, where other damn, the most admire;
 (so shallow wit, with bold folly, blame,
 from part, the faultless universal frame:
 but Newton genius can the whole explore,
 see all be good, and wisdom hand adore.) 
this verse (you know i free from faulty pride)
 or kind authorise, or kind hide:
 approve; and fame shall sanctify my lay:
 suppress; yet love my grateful labour pay. 
