the impertinent, or a visit to the court.

a satyr.

well, if it be my time to quit the stage,
 adieu to all the folly of the age! 
i die in charity with fool and knave,
 secure of happiness beyond the grave. 
I have have my purgatory here betimes,
 and pay for all my satire, all my rhyme:
 the poet hell, its torture, fiend and flame,
 to this be trifle, toy, and empty name. 

with foolish pride my heart be never fire,
 nor the vain itch to admire, or be admire;
 i hope for no commission from his grace;
 i buy no benefice, i beg no place;
 have not new-verse, or new suit to show;
 yet go to court! — the devil will have it so. 
but, as the fool, that in reform day
 will go to mass in jest, (as story say)
 can not but think, to pay his fine be odd,
 since it be no form design of serve god:
 such be my fate; who heaven adjudge as proud,
 as prone to ill, as negligent of good,
 as deep in debt, without a thought to pay,
 as vain, as idle, and as false, as they
 who live at court, for go once that way! 

scarce be i enter, when behold! there come
 a thing which Adam have be pose to name;
 Noah have refuse it lodging in his ark,
 where all the race of reptile might embark:
 a very monster than on africk shore
 the sun ever get, or slimy Nilus bear,
 or Sloane, or woodward wondrous. shelf contain;
 nay, all that lie traveller can feign. 

this thing have travel, speak each language too,
 and know what be fit for every state to do;
 of who best phrase and courtly accent join,
 he form one tongue exotic and refine. 
talker, i have learn to bear; m—tt—x i know,
 Henley himself I have hear, nay b—dg—l too:
 the doctor wormwood style, the hash of tongue,
 a pedant make; the storm of G—s—n's lung,
 the whole artillery of the term of war,
 and (all those plague in one) the bawl bar;
 these i can bear; but not a rogue so civil,
 who tongue can complement you to the devil. 
a tongue that can cheat widow, cancel score,
 make Scot speak treason, cozen subtle whore,
 with royal favourite in flattery vie,
 and Oldmixon and Burnet both out-lie. 

he spy i out. i whisper, gracious god!
 what sin of i can merit such a rod? 
that all the shot of dullness now must be
 from this thy blunderbuss discharge on i! 
well meet (he cry) and happy sure for each,
 for i be please to learn, and you to teach;
 what speech esteem you most? — "the king, say i,
 but the best word? —"o sir, the dictionary. 
you miss my aim; i mean the most acute
 and perfect speaker? — "Onslow, past dispute. 
but sir, of writer? —"swift, for close style,
 "and ho — y for a period of a mile. 
why yes, it be grant, these indeed may pass;
 good common linguist, and so panurge be:
 nay troth, the Apostles, (though perhaps too rough)
 have once a pretty gift of tongue enough. 
yet these be all poor gentleman! i dare
 affirm, it be travel make they what they be. 

thus other talent have nice show,
 he come by soft transition to his own:
 till i cry out, you prove yourself so able,
 pity! you be not druggerman at Babel:
 for have they find a linguist half so good,
 i make no question but the tower have stand. 

 "oblige sir! i love you, i profess,
"but wish you like retreat a little less;
 "spirit like you, believe i, shall be see,
"and (like Ulysses) visit court, and man. 
 "so much alone, (to speak plain truth between we)
"you will die of spleen — excuse i, nunquam minus —
 but as for court, forgive i if i say,
 no lesson now be teach the spartan way:
 though in his picture lust by full display,
 few be the convert aretine have make;
 and though the court show vice exceed clear,
 none shall, by my advice, learn virtue there. 

at this, entranced, he lift his hand and eye,
 squeak like a high-stretched lutestring, and reply:
 "oh it be the sweet of all earthly thing
"to gaze on prince, and to talk of king! "
then happy man who show the tomb! say i,
 he dwell amid the royal family;
 he, every day, from king to king can walk,
 of all our harries, all our Edwards talk,
 and get by speak truth of monarch dead,
 what few can of the living, ease and bread. 
"lord! sir, a mere mechanic! strange low,
 "and coarse of phrase — your english all be so. 
"how elegant your frenchman? — my, do you mean? 
i have but one, i hope the fellow clean. 
 "oh! sir, polite well! nay, let i die,
"your only wear be your paduasoy. "
not sir, my only — i have better still,
 and this, you see, be but my dishabille —
 wild to get loose, his patience i provoke,
 mistake, confound, object, at all he speak. 
but as coarse iron, sharpen, mangle more,
 and itch most hurt, when anger to a sore;
 so when you plague a fool, it be still the curse,
 you only make the matter worse and worse. 

he pass it over; put on a easy smile
 at all my peevishness, and change his style. 
he ask, what news? i tell he of new play. 
new eunuch, harlequin, and opera. 
he hear; and as a still, with simples in it,
 between each drop it give, stay half a minute;
 loath to enrich i with too quick reply
 by little, and by little, drop his lie. 
mere household trash! of birth-night, ball and show,
 more than ten holingshed, or hall, or stow. 
when the queen frown, or smile, he know; and what
 a subtle minister may make of that? 
who sin with who? who get his pension rug,
 or quicken a reversion by a drug? 
who place be quarter out, three part in four,
 and whether to a bishop, or a whore? 
who, have lose his credit, pawn his rent,
 be therefore fit to have a government? 
who in the secret, deal in stock secure,
 and cheat unknowing widow, and the poor? 
who make a trust, or charity, a job,
 and get a ac of parliament to rob? 
why turnpike rise, and why no cit, nor clown
 can gratis see the country, or the town? 
short no lad shall chuck, or lady vole,
 but some excise courtier will have toll. 
he tell what strumpet place sell for life,
 what esquire his land, what citizen his wife? 
and last (which prove he wise still than all)
 what lady face be not a white wall? 
as one of woodward patient, sick and sore,
 i puke, i nauseate, — yet he thrust in more;
 show poland interest, take the primate part,
 and talk gazette and post-boy over by heart. 
like a big wife at sight of loathsome meat,
 ready to cast, i yawn, i sigh, i sweat:
 then as a licence spy, who nothing can
 silence, or hurt, he libel the great man;
 swear every place entail for year to come,
 in sure succession to the day of doom:
 he name the price for every office pay,
 and say our war thrive ill, because delay;
 nay hint, it be by connivance of the court,
 that Spain rob on, and dunkirk still a port. 
not more amazement seize on Circe guest,
 to see themselves fall endlong into beast,
 than i, to find a subject stay and wise,
 already half turn traitor by surprise. 
i feel th'infection slide from he to i,
 as in the pox, some give it, to get free;
 and quick to swallow i, methinks i see
 one of our giant statute open its jaw! 
in that nice moment, as another lye
 stand just atilt, the minister come by. 
away he fly. he bow, and bow again;
 and close as umbra join the dirty train. 
not naos self more impudent near,
 when half his nose be in his patron ear. 
i bless my star! but still afraid to see
 all the court fill with strange thing than he,
 run out as fast, as one that pay his bail
 and dread more action, hurry from a jail. 

bear i, some god! oh quick bear i hence
 to wholesome solitude, the nurse of sense:
 here contemplation prune her ruffle wing,
 and the free soul look down to pity king. 
here still reflection lead on sober thought,
 which fancy colour, and a vision wrought. 
a vision hermit can to hell transport,
 and bring even i to see the damn at court. 
not Danté dream all the infernal state,
 see such a scene of envy, sin, and hate. 
base fear become the guilty, not the free;
 suit tyrant, plunderer, but suit not i. 
shall i, the terror of this sinful town,
 care, if a livery lord or smile or frown? 
who can flatter, and detest who can,
 tremble before a noble serving-man? 
o my fair mistress, truth! shall i quit thou,
 for huff, braggart, puff nobility? 
thou, who since yesterday, have roll over all
 the busy, idle blockhead of the ball,
 have thou, o sun! behold a empty sort,
 than such as swell this bladder of a court? 
now pox on those who show a court in wax! 
it ought to bring all courtier on their back. 
such paint puppet, such a varnish race
 of hollow gewgaw, only dress and face,
 such waxen nose, stately, stare thing,
 no wonder some folk bow, and think they king. 

and now the british youth, engage no more
 at fig or White, with felons, or a whore,
 pay their last duty to the court, and come
 all fresh and fragrant, to the drawing-room:
 colour as gay, and odour as divine,
 as the fair field they sell to look so fine. 
 "that be velvet for a king!"the flatterer swear;
 it be true, for ten day hence it will be king lear. 
our court may just to our stage give rule,
 that help it both to fool's-coat and to fool. 
and why not player strut in courtier clothes? 
for these be actor too, as well as those:
 want reach all state; they beg but better dress,
 and all be splendid poverty at best. 

paint for sight, and essence for the smell,
 like frigate fraught with spice and cochine'l,
 sail in the lady: how each pyrate eye
 so weak a vessel, and so rich a prize! 
topgallant he, and she in all her trim,
 he board she, she strike sail to he. 
 "cheer comtesse! you have charm all heart to hit!"
and "sweet sir fopling! you have so much wit!"
such wit and beauty be not praise for nought,
 for both the beauty and the wit be buy. 
 it will burst even heraclitus with the spleen. 
to see those antic, fopling and Courtin:
 the presence seem, with thing so rich odd,
 the mosque of Mahound, or some queer pagod. 
see they survey their limb by durer rule,
 of all beau-kind the best proportion fool! 
adjust their clothes, and to confession draw
 each idle atom, or erroneous straw;
 what terror will distract each conscious soul,
 convict of that mortal sin, a hole! 
or shall one pound of powder less bespread
 the monkey-tail that wag behind his head! 
thus finish and correct to a hair,
 they march, to prate their hour before the fair,
 so first to preach a white-gloved chaplain go,
 with band of lily, and with cheek of rose,
 sweet than Sharon, in immaculate trim,
 neatness itself impertinent in he. 
let but the lady smile, and they be bless;
 prodigious! how the thing protest, protest:
 peace, fool! or gonson will for papist seize you,
 if once he catch you at your Jesus! Jesus! 

nature make every fop to plague his brother,
 just as one beauty mortify another. 
but here be the captain, that will plague you both,
 who air cry arm! who very look man oath:
 what though his soul be bullet, body buff? 
damn he, he be honest, sir, — and that be enough. 
he spit foreright; his haughty chest before,
 like batter ram, beat open every door;
 and with a face as red, and as awry,
 as Herod hangdog in old tapestry,
 scarecrow to boy, the breed woman curse;
 have yet a strange ambition to look worse:
 confound the civil, keep the rude in awe,
 jest like alicensed fool, command like law. 
fright, i quit the room, but leave it so,
 as man from jail to execution go;
 for hang with deadly sin i see the wall,
 and line with giant, deadly than they all:
 each man a ascapart, of strength to toss
 for quoit, both temple-bar and Charing-Cross. 
Scar'd at the grizzly form, i sweat, i fly,
 and shake all over, like a discover spy. 
court be no match for wit so weak as i;
 charge they with heaven artillery, bold divine! 
from such alone the great rebuke endure,
 who satyr sacred, and who rage secure. 
it be mine to wash a few slight stain; but they
 to deluge sin, and drown a court in tear. 
however, what be now apocrypha, my wit,
 in time to come, may pass for holy write. 
