the academic.

write April m.dcc.lv.

by the same.

i 

while silent stream the moss-grown turret lave,
 cam, on thy bank with pensive step i tread;
 the dip osier kiss thy pass wave,
 and evening shadow over the plain be spread. 

from restless eye of painful care,
 to thy seclude grot i fly,
 where fancy sweet form repair,
 to soothe her darling poesy;

recline the lovely visionary lie
 in yonder vale and laurel-vested bower;
 where the gay turf be deck with various die,
 and breathe the mingle scent of every flower:

while holy dream prolong her calm repose,
 her pipe be cast the whisper reed among;
 high on the bough her wave harp be hang,
 murmur to every wind that over it blow. 

ii.

oft have i see she bathe at dewy morn
 her wanton bosom in thy silver spring,
 and, while her hand her flow lock adorn
 with busy elegance, have hear she sing. 

but say what long record theme,
 through all the lofty tale of time,
 more worthy can the goddess deem
 of sound chord, and song sublime,

than, who parental hand to vigour breed
 each infant art, the noble and the wise;
 who bounty give yonder arch shade to spread. 
yonder point spire in holy pomp to rise? 

shall war alone loud-echoing number claim,
 and shall the deed of smile peace be drown,
 amid the hero shout and trumpet sound? 
these too shall flourish in immortal fame. 

iii.

when science sle from latium polish coast
 and grecian grove, her long and love abode,
 far from the din of fierce conflict host,
 through barbarous realm the weary wanderer tread;

but to what more indulgent sky,
 to what more hospitable shade,
 can tremble, bleed, faint fly
 the helpless and devote maid? 

time-honoured founder! you the virgin woo! 
it be you, with soul to native grandeur bear,
 to bid her radiant beauty shine renew,
 with wealth to heap, with honour to adorn. 

in granta happy path she weep no more;
 heal be the wound that scar her gentle breast;
 here, still she smile with freedom son to rest;
 nor mourn her attic tower, nor Tuscan shore. 

iv.

father of genius! who the muse adore,
 for sure to you her noble strain belong,
 beneath who venerable roof she pour
 the grateful note of sweet flow song. 

the increase of swift revolve year
 with conscious pride exult view;
 how all you plan complete appear;
 how all your virtue bloom anew:

the generous zeal which erst you feel remains,
 its bounteous beam still ardent to dispense;
 while unexhausted to your learned plain
 roll the rich stream of wide munificence. 

joy to your shade! the great career be run,
 reserve by fate for some superior hand,
 confess, the last, the auspicious work shall stand,
 and statesman, monarch end what you begin. 

v. 

you too, once inmate of these wall renowned,
 who spirit, mingle with the ethereal ray,
 of universal nature trace the bound,
 or raise in majesty of thought the lay,

see your love art this clime to grace,
 their rival radiance bright shed,
 while Holles smile the wreath to place
 upon the youthful victor head. 

where spencer sit among your throne sublime,
 to the soft music of his mournful lay
 listen you weep for his ungrateful time,
 and point the better hope of happy day. 

if with the dead dishonour memory die,
 forget, much injure name, the unworthy woe;
 in strain like thy so may our accent flow,
 in noble number yonder fair dome arise. 

vi.

when faction storm, or some fall tyrant hate
 art join with freedom to one grave shall doom,
 then though these structure to the hand of fate
 bend their proud height, like thy, imperial Rome,

know, vain, time, thy rapid rage
 shall point its wide destroy aim,
 since what defy the force of age
 thus consecrate the pile to fame;

some future eye the ruin heap shall trace,
 the name of Holles on the stone behold,
 shall point a brunswic to a distant race,
 benign, and awful on the swell gold. 

the historic page, the poet tuneful toil,
 with these compare, their mutual aid shall raise
 to build the record of eternal praise,
 and deck with endless wreath their honour soil. 

vii.

sweet than warble sound that win the sense
 flow the glad music of a grateful heart,
 beyond the pomp of wordy eloquence,
 or strain too cold, high-wrought with labour art. 

though weak sound the jar string;
 though vain will the muse explore
 the height to which with eagle wing
 alone can heaven-taught genius soar;

yet shall her hand ingenious strive to twine
 the bloom chaplet for her leader brow;
 while with new verdure grace, in glory shrine,
 the ampler palm of civic honour grow;

when he, these favour shade appear to bless,
 who guardian counsel guide a nation fate,
 and with superior toil for europe state
 mix the thought of granta happiness. 

viii.

hail seat revere! where thoughtful pleasure dwell,
 and hover peace extend her downy wing,
 where muse knowledge hold her humble cell,
 and truth divine unlock her secret spring;

this verse with mild acceptance deign
 to hear; this verse yourself inspire,
 ere yet within your sacred fane
 the muse suspend her votive lyre. 

thou, granta, thus with filial thanks i greet,
 with smile maternal thou those thanks receive,
 for learning humble wealth, for friendship sweet,
 for every calm joy thy scene can give. 

while thus i sport upon thy peaceful strand,
 the storm of life at awful distance roar;
 and still i dread, still linger on the shore,
 to launch my little bark, and quit the land. 
