to a brother, on enter the army.

accept, my Charles, from thy still anxious friend,
 some useful counsel by affection pen;
 to my advice you oft have deference pay,
 which bid i hope this last will be obey;
 nought but your good can force i to expose
 the humble talent which i now disclose;
 then, my dear brother, kind plead excuse
 for every error of your sister muse:
 first, my young soldier, let i recommend,
 in life fair spring to make your god your friend;
 that power you in the bloom of youth engage,
 will never desert you in decline age;
 in danger hour he will prove the true friend,
 on he for all you want and wish depend;
 unto your parent every reverence pay,
 "it be God command their precept to obey;
 be duteous, open, tender, and sincere,
 support their age, to their advice adhere! 
let strict justice every action guide,
 and truth with honour over your mind preside;
 be firm in friendship, scorn all mean disguise,
 nor suffer mean resentment to arise;
 on your superior favour never presume,
 nor, to inferior, haughtiness assume;
 reprove with firmness, rule with gentle sway;
 through love; not fear, teach soldier to obey;
 watch over yourself, to they be not severe,
 they then will love you, and your worth revere;
 beware of passion, it unman the soul,
 if once indulge, it never brook controul;
 through all the vary scene of this frail state,
 it be temper shade the colour of our fate. 
temperance, dear youth, i warm recommend,
 in fume of wine too oft be lose a friend;
 oh! fly the frenzy like contempt or scorn,
 though mad at night, reflection come with morn:
 duel avoid, if you with honour can,
 it break through law prescribe by god and man;
 alas! too late the deed you may repent,
 be warn! the pang of dire remorse prevent;
 tremble, i charge thou, fatal game shun,
 a dangerous vice that thousand have undo;
 it lure the heart with smile, oh! sad deceit,
 and never forsake till ruin be complete. 
never be rule by fashion, but by sense,
 neither be apt to give or take offence;
 be not ambitious riches to attain,
 for trust i wealth be not exempt from pain;
 aim at a competence with credit bless,
 in every point we find the medium best. 
to wedlock state i dare but little say,
 the youthful heart in general take its way;
 i only raise to Hymen throne my voice,
 that he may lead you to a happy choice;
 dear as you be, detest be your name,
 shall ever you bring the innocent to shame;
 ever stain the honour of a virtuous race,
 or bring a helpless female to disgrace;
 scorn to their ruin any aid to lend,
 for man be bear their honour to defend. 
when we be apart, you on some distant shore,
 remember Anna, and these line read over;
 they be her counsel, breathe with love sincere,
 my only brother! then to they adhere;
 so will your conduct still unclouded shine,
 your fame still brighten as your day decline. 
