line to a parrot.

in these our day of sentiment
 when youthful poet all lament
 some dear lose joy, some cruel maid;
 old friendship change and faith betray;
 the world cold frown and every ill
 that tender heart with anguish fill;
 loathe this world and all its folly,
 in lay most musical and melancholy, —
 touch a low and homely string,
 may poet of a parrot sing
 with dignity uninjured? say! —
 no; but a simple rhymester may. 
well then, i see thou calm and sage,
 perch on the summit of thy cage,
 with broad, hook beak and plumage green,
 change to azure in the light,
 gay pinion tip with scarlet bright,
 and, strong for mischief, use or play,
 thick talon, crisp with silver grey, —
 a gallant bird, i ween! 

what courtly dame, for ball-room dress —
 what garter lord in silken vest —
 on wedding morn what country bride
 with groom bedizen by her side —
 what youngster in their fair-day gere,
 do ever half so fine appear? 
alas! at ball, or, church, or fair,
 be never assemble vision rare
 of move creature all so gay
 as in thy native wood, where day
 in blaze torrid brightness play
 through chequer bough and gentle make
 a ceaseless morris-dance of sheen and shade! 

in those bless wood, remove from man,
 thy early being first begin,
 amid gay compeer, who, bless as thou,
 hop busy from bough to bough,
 rob each load branch at pleasure
 of berry, bud and kernel treasure;
 then rise aloft with outspread wing,
 then stoop on flexile twig to swing,
 then course and circle through the air,
 mate chase mate, full many a pair. 
it will have set one heart a dance
 to have see their vary feather glance,
 and think how many happy thing
 creative goodness into being bring. 

but now how change! it be thy doom
 within a wall and window room
 to hold thy home, and (all forget
 the trace of thy former lot),
 clutch the wire with progress slow,
 still round and round thy cage to go. 

or cross the carpet: — alter case! 
this now be all thy daily travel' space. 

yet here thou be a cherish droll,
 know by the name of pretty poll;
 oft feed by lady gentle hand
 with fop and sugar at command,
 and sometime too a nut or cherry,
 which in thy claw to beak and eye
 thou seem to raise right dainty,
 turn it oft, as if thou still
 be scan it with cautious skill,
 provoke urchin near to laughter loud and merry. 
see, gather round, a rosy band,
 with eager upcast eye they stand,
 mark thy motion and withal
 delight on thy name to call;
 and hear, like human speech, reply
 come from thy beak most curious. 
they shout, they mow, they grin, they giggle,
 clap hand, hoist arm, and shoulder wriggle;
 o here, well may we say or sing,
 that learning be a charm thing! 
for thou, beneath thy wire-wove dome,
 a learned creature have become;
 and have, by dint of oft repeat,
 get word by rote, the vulgar cheat
 which, once in ten time well apply,
 be to the sky with praise cry. 
so letter dunce oft impose
 on simple fool their study prose. 
aye; over thy round though unwig head,
 full many a circle year have speed,
 since thou keep term within thy college,
 from many tutor, short and tall,
 in braid or bonnet, cap or caul,
 imbibe wondrous store of seem knowledge. 
and rare bachelor of art
 or master (dare we say it?) impart
 to other such undoubted pleasure
 from all his store of classic treasure:
 and lady sage, who learned saw
 to cognoscenti friend give law,
 rare, i trow, can so excite
 a listen circle with delight. 
and rare their acquirement shine
 through such a lengthen course as thy. 

the grannum of this group so gay,
 who round thou now their homage pay,
 belike have in such youthful glee,
 with admiration gaze on thou;
 and yet not wrinkle line betray
 the long course of thy lengthen day,
 thy bark of life have keep afloat
 as on a shoreless sea, where not
 or change or progress may be trace;
 time have with thou be leaden-paced. 

but ah! proud beauty, on who head
 some threescore year no blight have shed,
 untoward day will come at length,
 when thou, of spirit rest and strength,
 will mope and pine, year after year,
 which all one moulting-time appear,
 and this bright plumage, dull and rusty,
 will seem neglect shrink and dusty,
 and scarce a feather rugged stump
 be leave to grace thy fret rump. 
mew in a corner of thy home,
 have but little heart to roam,
 thou will wink and peer — a wayward elf,
 and croon and clutter to thyself,
 scream at visitor with spite,
 and open wide thy beak to bite. 

yet in old age still will thou find
 some constant friend thy want to mind,
 who voice thou will know, who hand thou will seek,
 turn to it thy feather cheek;
 grateful to she though cross and froward
 to all beside, and it will go hard
 but she will love thou, even when life last goal
 thou have reach, and call thou still she pretty poll. 

now from these line, young friend, i know
 a lesson may be draw to show
 how, like our bird, on life vain stage,
 pass human childhood, prime and age:
 but con comparison, i doubt,
 may put your patience to the rout,
 and all my pain small thanks receive,
 so this to wise folk leave. 
