the LINK. 

a ballad.

you lady that live in the city or town,
fair Winton or Alresford so fine and so gay;
and you neat country lass in clean linen gown,
as neat and as blithe and as pretty as they:
come away strait to Ovington, for you can think
what a charm new walk there be make on the link.

look how lovely the prospect, the meadow how green,
the field and the wood, in the vale or the hill:
the tree, and the cottage that peep out between,
the clear stream that run bubble in many a rill,
that will show your fair face as you stand on the brink,
and murmur most sweet all under the link.

how pleasant the morning, how clear the blue sky,
how pure the fresh air, and how healthy the place!
your heart go a pit-a-pat light as a fly,
and the blood circle brisk, and glow in your face:
will you paint your fair cheek with the rose and the pink?
throw your wash away, take a walk on the link.

after dinner the esquire ere the lady retreat,
march off with some friend that will ply the brisk glass;
give we liquour enough, and a good pleasant seat,
and damn your fine taste, and your finical lass:
all fresco, my lad, we will carouse and we will drink,
take your bottle each man, and away to the link.

not so gentle Collin, who love hold in thrall,
to Molly he steal all in silence away;
and when nought can be hear but the rude waterfall,
and the woodbine breathe sweet at close of the day,
he take her soft hand, and he tip she the wink,
come, my dear, let we take a cool walk on the link.

but, o you fair maiden, be sure have a care,
nor lay yourself open to love cruel dart;
of the hour and the place and the season beware,
and guard well each passage that lead to your heart;
sly Cupid will steal in at some little chink,
if you walk in the evening too late on the link.

you poet so lofty, who love to retire
from the noise of the town to the stream and the wood;
who in epic and tragic, with marvellous fire,
utter sound by mere mortal not well understand:
here mouth your loud strain, and here ply pen and ink,
quit Parnassus and Pindus, and come to the link.

and come you, who for thought be at little expense,
who indite gentle pastoral, ballad, or song;
you see with smooth number, and not too much sense,
how the verse run easy and glible along;
and the rhime at the close how it fall with a clink,
so kind be the muse that sport on the link.
