the poor man lamb: or, Nathan parable to David after the murder of Uriah, and his marriage with Bathsheba. 

turn into verse and paraphrase.

now spend the alter king, in amorous care,
 the hour of sacred hymn and solemn prayer:
 in vain the altar wait his slow return,
 where unattended incense faint burn:
 in vain the whisper priest their fear express,
 and of the change a thousand cause guess. 
heedless of all their censure he retire,
 and in his palace feed his secret fire;
 impatient, till from rabbah tiding tell,
 that near those wall the poor Uriah fall,
 lead to the onset by a choose few,
 who at the treacherous signal, soon withdraw,
 nor to his rescue ever return again,
 till by fierce ammon sword they see the victim slay. 
it be pass, it be do! the holy marriage-knot,
 too strong to be untie, at last be cut. 
and now to Bathsheba the king declare,
 that with his heart, the kingdom too be she;
 that israel throne, and long monarch arm
 be to be fill but with her widow charm. 
nor must the day of formal tear exceed,
 to cross the live, and abuse the dead. 
this she deny; and sign of grief be wear;
 but mourn no more than may her face adorn,
 give to those eye, which love and empire fire,
 a melt softness more to be desire;
 till the fix time, though hard to be endure,
 be pass, and a sad consort name procure:
 when, with the pomp that suit a prince thought,
 by passion sway, and glorious woman teach,
 a queen she be make, than michal seat high,
 while light unusual air profane the hallow lyre. 

where be thou Nathan? where be that spirit now,
 give to brave vice, though on a prince brow? 
in what low cave, or on what desert coast,
 now virtue want it, be thy presence lose? 

but lo! he come, the reverend bard appear,
 defile with dust his awful silver hair,
 and his rough garment, wet with fall tear. 
the king this mark, and conscious will have flee,
 the heal balm which for his wound be shed:
 till the more wary priest the serpent art,
 join to the dove-like temper of his heart,
 and thus retard the prince just ready now to part. 
hear i, the cause betwixt two neighbour hear,
 thou, who for justice do the sceptre bear:
 help the oppress, nor let i weep alone
 for he, that call for succour from the throne. 
good prince for protection be adore,
 and great by the shield, than by the sword. 
this clear the doubt, and now no more he fear
 the cause his own, and therefore stay and hear:
 when thus the prophet: —
 — in a flowery plain
 a kinglike man do in full plenty reign;
 cast round his eye, in vain, to reach the bind,
 which Jordan flood set to his fertile ground:
 countless his flock, while Lebanon contain
 a herd as large, keep by his numerous swain,
 that fill with morning bellow the cool air,
 and to the cedar shade at scorch noon repair. 
near to this wood a lowly cottage stand,
 build by the humble owner painful hand;
 fence by a stubble-roof, from rain and heat,
 secure without, within all plain and neat. 
a field of small extent surround the place,
 in which one single ewe do sport and graze:
 this his whole stock, till in full time there come,
 to bless his utmost hope, a snowy lamb;
 which, lest the season yet too cold might prove,
 and northern blast annoy it from the grove,
 or tower fowl on the weak prey may seize,
 (for with his store his fear must too increase)
 he bring it home, and lay it by his side,
 at once his wealth, his pleasure and his pride;
 still bar the door, by labour call away,
 and, when return at the close of day,
 with one small mess himself, and that sustain,
 and half his dish it share, and half his slender gain. 
when to the great man table now there come
 a lord as great, follow by hungry groom:
 for these must be provide sundry meat,
 the best for some, for other coarse cate. 
one servant, diligent above the rest
 to help his master to contrive the feast,
 extol the lamb be nourish with such care,
 so feed, so lodge, it must be princely fare;
 and have this, my lord his own may spare. 
in haste he send, lead by no law, but will,
 not to entreat, or purchase, but to kill. 
the messenger arrive; the harmless spoil,
 unused to fly, run bleat to the toil:
 while for the innocent the owner fear,
 and, sure will move, can poverty be hear. 
oh spare (he cry) the product of my care,
 my stock encrease, the bless on my prayer;
 my grow hope, and treasure of my life! 
more be he speak, when the murder knife
 show he, his suit, though just, must be deny,
 and the white fleece in its own scarlet die;
 while the poor helpless wretch stand weep by,
 and lift his hand for justice to the sky. 

which he shall find, the incense king reply,
 when for the proud offence the oppressor die. 
o Nathan! by the holy name i swear,
 our land such wrong unpunished shall not bear
 if, with the fault, the offender thou declare. 

to who the prophet, close with the time,
 thou be the man reply, and thy the ill-natured crime. 
nor think, against thy place, or state, i err;
 a power above thou do this charge prefer;
 urge by who spirit, hither be i bring
 the expostulate his goodness, and thy fault;
 to lead thou back to those forget year,
 in labour spend, and lowly rustic care,
 when in the wilderness thy flock but few,
 thou do the shepherd simple art pursue
 through crust frost, and penetrate dew:
 till wonder Jesse see six brother past,
 and thou elect, thou the least and last;
 a sceptre to thy rural hand convey,
 and in thy bosom royal beauty lay;
 a lovely princess make thy prize that day,
 when on the shake ground the giant lie
 stupid in death, beyond the reach of cry
 that bear thy shout fame to listen sky,
 and drive the fly foe as fast away,
 as wind, of old, locust to egypt sea. 
thy heart with love, thy temple with renown,
 the all-giving hand of heaven do large crown,
 while yet thy cheek be spread with youthful down. 
what more can crave man of god implore? 
or what for favour man can god do more? 
yet can not these, nor israel throne, suffice
 intemperate wish, draw through wander eye. 
one beauty (not thy own) and see by chance,
 melt down the work of grace with a allure glance;
 chase the spirit, feed by sacred art,
 and blot the title after god own heart;
 black murder breed to level at his head,
 who boast so fair a partner of his bed,
 nor long must possess those envy charm,
 the single treasure of his house, and arm:
 give, by this thy fall, cause to blaspheme
 to all the heathen the almighty name. 
for which the sword shall still thy race pursue,
 and, in revolt israel scornful view,
 thy captive wife shall be in triumph lead
 unto a bold usurper shameful bed;
 who from thy bowel spring shall seize thy throne,
 and scourge thou by a sin beyond thy own. 
thou have thy fault in secret darkness do;
 but this the world shall see before the noonday sun. 

enough! the king, enough! the saint reply,
 and pour his swift repentance from his eye;
 fall on the ground, and tear the nuptial vest,
 by which his crime completion be express:
 then with a sigh blast to carnal love,
 draw deep as hell, and pierce heaven, above
 let i (he cry) let i attend his rod,
 for i have sin, for i have lose my god. 

hold! (say the prophet) of that speech beware,
 god never be lose, unless by man despair. 
the wound that be thus will reveal,
 the almighty be as will shall be heal. 
thus wash in tear, thy soul as fair do show
 as the first fleece, which on the lamb do grow,
 or on the mountain top the late fall snow. 
yet to the world that justice may appear
 act her part impartial, and severe,
 the offspring of thy sin shall soon resign
 that life, for which thou must not once repine;
 but with submissive grief his fate deplore,
 and bless the hand, that do inflict no more. 

shall i then pay but part, and owe the whole? 
my body fruit, for my offend soul? 
shall i no more endure (the king demand)
 and escape thus light his offend hand? 
oh! let he all resume, my crown, my fame;
 reduce i to the nothing, whence i come;
 call back his favour, fast than he give;
 and, if but pardon, strip i to my grave:

since (though he seem to lose) he sure win,
 who give but earthly comfort for his sin. 
