Damon and Strephon.

a pastoral complaint.

Damon.

say, why these sigh that in thy bosom rise? 
why from thy cheek the wonted crimson fly? 
why on the ground be fix thy stream eye? 

Strephon.

still let this bosom swell with ache woe,
 and from my eye the stream sorrow flow. 
but oh! the cause — (see cloud be gather round,
 and zephyr wait to catch the mournful sound;
 the sicken tree all shed their bloom store)
 why will thou hear it? — Sylvius be no more. 

Damon.

be Sylvius dead? — then Phillis rend thy hair,
 and blot those feature that be late so fair. 
thou sun, forbear to gild this fatal day;
 nor you my lambkin dare to think of play. 

Strephon.

no more alas! — no more the tuneful Swain
 shall with soft number charm the listen plain. 
no more his flute shall greet the dawn spring;
 nor to his hand rebound the tremble string. 

Damon.

ah cruel death! will none but Sylvius do? 
no mean Swain among the worthy few? 
why do thou take (and leave the base tribe)
 the flower of shepherd and the muse pride? 

Strephon.

none know like he the heavenly note to swell,
 and moral tale in please number tell. 
while Sylvius sing, none think the day too long;
 but all repine at the too hasty song. 

Damon.

you solemn wind that whistle through the glade,
 or rude bluster in the dark shade,
 go bear our sorrow to the distant shore,
 and tell they Sylvius cheer our plain no more. 

Strephon.

vain be our sigh, our tear as vain flow,
 and each sad bosom swell with fruitless woe! 
as northern blast destroy the autumn store,
 so Sylvius fall and shall return no more. 

Damon.

enough of sorrow — now your garland bring;
 crop all the beauty of the early spring;
 around his tomb these will hand shall twine
 the choice brier of sweet eglantine. 

Strephon.

on his cold grave a laurel i bestow,
 which late do in my father garden grow:
 this wreathe Amyntas ask to shade her brow,
 but to my Sylvius i resign it now. 

Damon.

the pensive swain shall strike their bosom there,
 and soft-eyed virgin drop a gentle tear:
 may some good angel guard the sacred ground,
 and flower unfading shed their sweet around. 
