die novissima: or, the last Epiphany.

a pindaric ode, on Christ second appearance to judge the world.

i 

adieu, you toyish reed, that once can please
 my soft lip, and lull my care to ease;
 be go; i will waste no more vain hour with you,
 and smile Sylvia too, adieu,
 a bright power invoke my muse,
 and lofty thought, and rapture, do infuse,
 see! beckon from yond cloud, he stand,
 and promise assistance with his hand,
 i feel the heavy roll god,
 incumbent, revel in his frail abode,
 how my breast heave, and pulse beat! 
i sink, i sink, beneath the furious heat,
 the weighty bliss overwhelm my breast,
 and overflow joy profuse waste;
 some noble bard, o sacred power, inspire,
 or soul more large, the elapse to receive,
 and, bright yet, to catch the fire,
 and each gay follow charm, from death, to save,
 — in vain the suit — the god inflame my breast,
 i rave, with ecstasy oppress,
 i rise, the mountain lessen, and retire,
 and now i mix, unsinged, with elemental fire,
 the lead deity, i have in view,
 nor mortal know as yet, what wonder will ensue;

ii.

we pass through region of unsullied light,
 i gaze, and sicken at the blissful sight,
 a shudder paleness seize my look,
 at last the pest fly off, and thus i speak;
 "say, sacred guide, shall this bright clime
"survive the fatal test of time,
 "or perish, with our mortal globe below,
"when yond sun no long shine? 
straight i finish, — veil low;
 the visionary power rejoin,
 "it be not for you, to ask, nor mine, to say,
"the nicety of that tremendous day,
 "know, when o'erjaded time his round have run,
"and finish be the radiant journey of the sun,
 "the great decisive morn shall rise,
"and heaven bright judge appear in open sky,
 "eternal grace, and justice, he will bestow
"on all the tremble world below;

iii.

he say; i muse, and thus return,
 what ensign, courteous stranger, tell,
 shall the brood day reveal? 
he answer mild —
 "already, stupid with their crime,
"blind mortal, prostrate to their idol, lie,
 "such be the bode time,
"ever ruin blast from the sluicy sky,
 "dissolve they lie, in fulsome ease,
"and reveal in luxuriant peace,
 "in bacchanal, they do their hour consume,
"and bacchanal lead on, their swift, advance doom;

iv.

adulterate christ already rise,
 and dare to 'suage the angry sky,
 erratic throng, their saviour blood deny,
 and from the cross, alas! he do neglect sigh,
 the antichristian power have raise his hydra-head,
 and ruin, only less than Jesus, health, do spread,
 so long the gore through poison vein have flow,
 that scarce rank be a fury blood,
 yet specious artifice, and fair disguise,
 the monster shape, and curse design, belief,
 a fiend black venom, in a angel mien,
 he quaff, and scatter the contagious spleen,
 straight, when he finish his lawless reign,
 nature shall paint the shine scene,
 quick, as the lightning, which inspire the train;

v. 

forward confusion shall provoke the fray. 
and nature, from her ancient order, stray,
 black tempest, gather from the sea around,
 in horrid range shall advance,
 and as they march, in thick Sables drown,
 the rival thunder from the cloud shall sound,
 and lightning join the fearful dance,
 the bluster army over the sky shall spread,
 and universal terror shed,
 loud issue peal, and rise sheet of smoke. 
the encumber region of the air shall choke,
 the noisy main shall lave the suffering shore,
 and from the rock the break billow roar,
 black thunder burst, blue lightning burn,
 and melt world to heap of ash turn,
 the forest shall beneath the tempest bend,
 and rugged wind the nod Cedars rend;

vi.

reverse, all nature Webb shall run,
 and spotless misrule all around,
 order, its fly foe, confound,
 while backward all the thread shall haste to be unspun,
 triumphant chaos, with his oblique wand,
 (the wand, with which, ever time begin,
 his wander slave he do command,
 and make they scamper right, and in rude range run.) 
the hostile harmony, shall chace,
 and as the nymph resign her place,
 and pant to the neighbour refuge, fly,
 the formless russian slaughter with his eye,
 and follow, storm the perch dam retreat,
 add the terror of his threat;
 the globe shall faint tremble round,
 and backward jolt, distort with the wound;

vii.

swathe in substantial shrowd of night,
 the sicken sun, shall from the world retire,
 strip of his dazzle robe of fire,
 which dangle once shed round a lavish flood of light
 no frail eclipse, but all essential shade,
 not yield to primæval gloom,
 while day be yet a embryo in the womb,
 nor glimmer in it be source, with silver streamer play. 
a jetty mixture of the darkness, spread
 over murmur ægypt head,
 and that, which angel draw
 over nature face, when Jesus die,
 which sleep ghost for this mistake,
 and rise, off their hang funeral, shake,
 and fleet pass, expose their bloodless breast to view,
 yet find it not so dark, and to their dormitory glide. 

viii.

now bold fire appear,
 and over the palpable obscurement sport,
 glare and gay as fall Lucifer,
 yet mark with fate as when he flee the etherial court;
 and plunge into the open gulph of night;
 a sabre of immortal flame i bear,
 and, with this arm, his flourish plume i tear,
 and straight the fiend retreat from the fight. 

ix.

mean time the lambent prodigy on high,
 take gamesome measure in the sky,
 joy with his future feast, the thunder roar
 in chorus to the enormous harmony;
 and hollow to his offspring from sulphurous store,
 applaud how they tilt, and how they fly,
 and their each nimble turn, and radiant embassy. 

x. 

the moon turn pale at the sight,
 and all the blaze orb deny their light;
 the lightning, with its livid tail,
 a train of glitter terror, draw behind,
 which over the tremble world prevail,
 winge, and blow on, by storm of wind,
 they show the hideous leap on either hand
 of night, that spread her ebon curtain round,
 and there erect her royal stand,
 in seven-fold wind jett, her conscious temple bind. 

xi.

the star, next, start from their sphere,
 in giddy revolution leap and bound,
 while this with double fury glare,
 and meditate new war,
 and wheel in sportive gyre around,
 it be neighbour shall advance to fight,
 and while each offer to enlarge its right,
 the general ruin shall increase,
 and banish all the votary of peace;
 no more the star, with pale beam,
 shall tremble over the midnight stream,
 but travel downward to behold,
 what mimic they, so twink'le there,
 and, like Narcissus, as they gain more near,
 for the love image, straight expire,
 and agonise in warm desire,
 or slake their lust, as in the stream they roll;

xii.

while the world burn, and all the orb below,
 in their viperous ruin glow,
 they sink, and unsupported leave the sky,
 which fall abrupt, and tell their torment in the noise,
 then see the almighty judge, sedate, and bright,
 clothe in imperial robe of light,
 his wing the wind, rough storm the chariot bear,
 and nimble harbinger before he fly,
 and with officious rudeness brush the air,
 halt as he halt, then double in their flight,
 in horrid sport, with one another vie,
 and leave behind quick-winding tract of light;
 then urge, to their rank they close,
 and shiver lest they start, a sail caravan compose. 

xiii.

the mighty judge ride in tempestuous state,
 while menial guard of flame his order wait,
 his wave vestment shine,
 bright as the sun, which late do its beam resign,
 and burnish wreath of light shall make his form divine,
 strong beam of majesty around his temple play,
 and the transcendent gaity of his face allay,
 his father reverend character he will wear,
 and both overwhelm with light, and over awe with fear;
 myriad of angel shall be there,
 and i, perhaps, close the tremendous rear;
 angel, the first and fair son of day,
 clad with eternal youth, and, as their vestment, gay;

xiv.

nor, for magnificence alone,
 to brighten and enlarge the pageant scene,
 shall we encircle his more dazzle throne,
 and swell the lustre of his pompous train,
 the nimble minister of bliss or woe,
 we shall attend, and save, or deal the blow,
 as he admit to joy, or bid to pain. 

XV. 

the welcome news,
 through every angel breast, fresh rapture shall diffuse,
 the day be come,
 when Satan, with his power, shall sink to endless doom,
 no more shall we his hostile troop pursue,
 from cloud to cloud, nor the long fight renew;

xvi.

then Raphael, big with life, the trump shall sound;
 from fall sphere, the joyful music shall rebound,
 and sea and shore shall catch, and propagate it round,
 loud he will blow, and it shall speak more shrill,
 than when, from sinai hill,
 in thunder, through the horrid redden smoke,
 the almighty speak;
 we will shout around with martial joy
 and thrice the vault sky shall rend, and thrice our shout reply,
 then first the arch-angel voice, aloud,
 shall cheerful salute the day, and throng,
 and hallelujah fill the crowd,
 and i, perhaps, shall close the song. 

xvii.

from it be long sleep, all human race shall rise,
 and see the morn, and judge advance in the sky,
 to their old tenement, the soul return,
 while down the steep of heaven, as swift, the judge descend,
 these look illustrious bright, no more to mourn,
 while, see! distract look yond stalk shade attend,
 the saint no more shall conflict on the deep,
 nor rugged wave insult the labour ship,
 but from the wreck in triumph they arise,
 and bear to bliss, shall tread empyreal sky. 
