to the duke of Marlborough.

pardon, great duke, if britain stile delight;
or if the imperial title more invite;
pardon, great prince, the fail of a muse,
that dare not hope for more than your excuse,
force at a distance to attempt your praise,
and sing your victory in mournful lay,
to cast in shadow, and allay the light,
that wound, with near ray, the dazzle sight,
nor dare in a direct and open strain
such act, with her unhallowed note, profane:
in tower verse let mean hero grow,
and to elaborate line their greatness owe,
your action, own by every nation, want
praise, no great than a foe may grant.

oh! when shall Europe, by she marlbro sword,
to last peace and liberty restore,
allow she weary champion a retreat,
to his love country and his rise seat?
where your soft partner, far from martial noise,
your care shall sweeten with domestic joy:
your conquest she with doubtful pleasure hear,
and in the midst of every triumph fear;
betwixt her queen and you divide her life,
a friend obsequious, and a faithful wife.

hail Woodstock! hail you celebrate glade!
grow fast you wood, and flourish thick you shade!
you rise tower for your new lord prepare,
like your old Henry come from gallia war.
the general arm as far the king overpower,
as this new structure do surpass the bower.

the please prospect and romantic scite,
the spacious compass, and the stately height;
the paint garden, in their flower prime,
demand whole volume of immortal rhime,
and if the muse will second the design,
mean as they be, shall in my number shine,
there live, the joy and wonder of our isle,
happy in albion love, and anna smile.

while from the godlike race of Churchill bear,
four beauteous rosamond this bower adorn,
who with the ancient siren of the place
in charm may vie, and every bloom grace;
but bless with equal virtue have she be,
like they she have be favour by the queen,
who your high merit, and their own, prefer
to all the worthy bed of England peer.

thus the great eagle, when heaven war be over,
and the loud thunder have forget to roar,
Jove fire lay by, with those of Venus burn,
to his forsake mate and shade return;
on some proud tree, more sacred than the rest,
with curious art he build his spacious nest;
in the warm sun lie bask all the day,
while round their sire the generous eaglet play;
their sire, well-pleased to see the noble brood
fill all the lofty cedar of the wood.
