the danger of write verse.

a epistle.

first print in the year 1741. 

by WILLIAM Whitehead, ESQ;

you ask i, sir, why thus by phantom awe,
no kind occasion tempt the muse abroad?
why, when retirement sooth this idle art,
to fame regardless sleep the youthful heart?

''twould wrong your judgement, shall i fair say
distrust or weakness cause the cold delay:
hint the small difference, till we touch the lyre,
betwixt real genius and too strong desire;
the human slip, or seem slip pretend,
that rouse the critic, but escape the friend;
nay which, though dreadful when the foe pursue,
you pass, and smile, and still provoke the muse.

yet, spite of all you think, or kind feign,
my hand will tremble while it grasp the pen.
for not in this, like other art, we try
our light excursion in a summer sky,
no casual flight the dangerous train admit,
but wit once author, be for ever wit.
the fool in prose, like earth unwieldy son,
may oft rise vigorous, though he be oft overthrow;
one dangerous crisis mark our rise or fall,
by all we be court, or we be shun by all.

will it avail, that unmature by year,
my easy number please your partial ear,
if now condemn, my riper lay must bear
the wise man censure, and the vain man sneer?
or, still more hard, even where he be value most,
the man must suffer if the poet lose;
for want wit, be total undo,
and bar all art for have fail in one.
when fear like these his serious thought engage,
no bugbear phantom curb the poet rage.
it be powerful reason hold the straighten rein,
while flutter fancy to the distant plain
send a long look, and spread her wing in vain.

but grant for once, the officious muse have shed
her gentle influence on his infant head,
let fear lie vanquish, and resound fame
give to the bellow blast the poet name.
and see! distinguish from the crowd he move,
each finger mark he, and each eye approve!
secure, as halcyon brood over the deep,
the wave roll gentle, and the thunder sleep,
obsequious nature bind the tempest wing,
and please attention listen while he sing!

o blissful state, o more than human joy!
what shaft can reach he, or what care annoy?
what care, my friend? why all that man can know,
oppress with real or with fancy woe.
rude to the world, like earth first lord expel,
to clime unknown, from eden safe field;
no more eternal spring around he breathe,
black air scowl over he, deadly damp beneath;
now must he learn, misguided youth, to bear
each vary season of the poet year:
flattery full beam, detraction wintery store,
the frown of fortune, or the pride of power.
his act, his word, his thought no more his own,
each folly blazon, and each frailty know.
be he reserve? — his sense be so refine
it never descend to trifle with mankind.
open and free? — they find the secret cause
be vanity; he court the world applause.
nay, though he speak not, something still be see,
each change of face betray a fault within.
if grave, it be spleen; he smile but to deride;
and downright awkwardness in he be pride.
thus must he steer through fame uncertain sea,
now sink by censure, and now puff by praise;
contempt with envy strange mix endure,
fear where caress, and jealous though secure.

one fatal rock on which good author split
be think all mankind must have their wit;
and the grand business of the world stand still
to listen to the dictate of their quill.
hurt if they fail, and yet how few succeed,
what be bear in leisure man of leisure read;
and half of those have some peculiar whim
their test of sense, and read but to condemn.

beside, on party now our fame depend,
and frown or smile, as these be foe or friend.
wit, judgement, nature join; you strive in vain;
it be keen invective stamp the current strain.
fix to one side like Homer god, we fight,
these always wrong, and those for ever right.
and will you choose to see your friend, resign
each conscious tie which guide the virtuous mind,
embroil in faction, hurl with dreadful skill
the random vengeance of his desperate quill?
against pride in man with equal pride declaim,
and hide ill-nature under virtue name?
or deep verse in flattery wily way,
flow in full ream of undistinguished praise?
to vice grave, or folly bust bequeathe
the blush trophy, and indignant wreath?
like egypt priest, do endless temple rise,
and people with earth pest the offend sky?

the muse of old her native freedom know,
and wild in air the sportive wanderer fly;
on worth alone her bay eternal strow,
and find the hero, ere she hymn the god.
nor less the chief his kind support return,
no droop muse her slight labour mourn;
but stretch at ease she prune her grow wing,
by sage honour and revere by king.
even know Greece confess her early claim,
and warlike Latium catch the generous flame.
not so our age regard the tuneful tongue,
it be senseless rapture all, and empty song:
no Pollio shed his genial influence round,
no Varus listen while the grove resound.
even those, the know and the virtuous few,
who noble end by noble mean pursue,
forget the poet use; the powerful spell
of magic verse, which Sidney paint so well,
forget that Homer wake the grecian flame,
that Pindar rouse inglorious Thebes to fame,
that every age have great example give
of virtue teach in verse, and verse inspire by heaven.

but i forbear — these dream no long last,
the time of fable and of flight be past.
to glory now no laureled suppliant bend,
no coin be strike, no sacred dome ascend.
yet you, who still the muse charm admire,
and best deserve the verse your deed inspire,
even in these gainful unambitious day,
feel for yourself at least, you fond of praise,
and learn one lesson teach in mystic rhyme,
"it be verse alone arrest the wing of time."
fast to the thread of life, annex by fame,
a sculpture medal bear each human name,
over lethe stream the fatal thread depend,
the glitter medal tremble as they bend;
close but the shears, when chance or nature call,
the bird of rumour catch it as it fall;
awhile from bill to bill the trifle' toss,
the wave receive it, and it be ever lose!

but shall the mean swan that cut the stream
consign to Phoebus, catch the favour name,
safe in her mouth she bear the sacred prize
to where bright fame eternal altar rise.
it be there the muse friend true laurel wear,
there egypt monarch reign, and great Augustus there.

patron of art must live until art decay,
sacred to verse in every poet lay.
thus grateful France do richlieu worth proclaim,
thus grateful Britain dote on Somers name.
and, spite of party rage, and human flaw,
and british liberty and british law,
time yet to come shall sing of anna reign,
and bard, who blame the measure, love the man.

but why round patron climb the ambitious bay?
be interest then the sordid spur to praise?
shall the same cause, which prompt the chatter jay
to aim at word, inspire the poet lay?
and be there nothing in the boast claim
of live labour and a deathless name?
the picture front, with sacred fillet bound?
the sculpture bust with laurel wreathe around?
the annual rose scatter over his urn,
and tear to flow from poet yet unborn?

illustrious all! but sure to merit these,
demand at least the poet learned ease.
say, can the bard attempt what be true great,
who pant in secret for his future fate?
he serious toil, and humble art engage,
to make youth easy, and provide for age;
while lose in silence hang his useless lyre,
and though from heaven it come, fast die the sacred fire.
or grant true genius with superior force
burst every bond, resistless in its course,
yet live the man, how wild soever his aim,
will mad barter fortune smile for fame!
or distant hope of future ease forgo,
for all the wreath that all the nine bestow?
well please to shine, through each recording page,
the hapless dryden of a shameless age?

ill-fated bard! wherever thy name appear,
the weep verse a sad memento bear.
ah! what avail the enormous blaze between
thy dawn of glory, and thy close scene!
when sink nature ask our kind repair,
unstring the nerve, and silvered over the hair;
when stay reflection come uncalled at last,
and grey experience count each folly past,
untune and harsh the sweet strain appear,
and loud paean but fatigue the ear.

it be true the man of verse, though bear to ill,
too oft deserve the very fate he feel.
when, vain frequent at the great man board,
he share in every vice with every lord:
make to their taste his sober sense submit,
and against his reason mad arm his wit;
heaven but in justice turn their serious heart
to scorn the wretch, who life belief his art.

he, only he, shall haunt the muse grove,
who youth may reverence and grey hair approve;
who heaven-taught number, now, in thunder roll,
may rouse the virtuous and appal the bold.
now, to truth dictate lend the grace of ease,
and teach instruction happy art to please.
for he will Plato change their general fate,
and own one poet may improve his state.

curse be their verse, and blast all their bay,
who sensual lure the unconscious ear betray;
wound the young breast, ere virtue spread her shield,
and take, not win, the scarce dispute field,
though specious rhetoric each loose thought refine,
though music charm in every labour line,
the dangerous verse, to full perfection grow,
Bavius may blush, and Quarles disdain to own.

shall some Machaon, who sagacious soul
trace blush nature to her inmost goal,
skill in each drug the vary world provide,
all earth embosom, and all ocean hide,
nor cool herb, nor heal balm supply,
ease the swell breast, or close the languid eye;
but, exquisite ill, awake disease,
and arm with poison every baleful breeze:
what rack, what torture must his crime demand,
the more than Borgia of a bleed land!
and be less guilty he, who shameless page
not to the present bound its subtle rage,
but spread contagion wide, and stain a future age?

forgive i, sir, that thus the moral strain,
with indignation warm, reject the rein;
nor think i rove regardless of my theme,
it be hence new danger clog the path to fame.
not to themselves alone such bard confine
fame just reproach for virtue injure shrine;
profane by they, the muse laurel fade,
her voice neglect, and her flame decay.
and the son son must feel the father crime,
a curse entail on all the race that rhyme,

new care appear, new terror swell the train,
and must we paint they ere we close the scene?
say, must the muse the unwilling task pursue,
and to complete her danger mention you?
yes you, my friend, and those who kind regard
with partial fondness view this humble bard:
even you he dread. — ah! kind cease to raise
unwilling censure, by exact praise.
just to itself the jealous world will claim
a right to judge; or give, or cancel fame.
and, if the officious zeal unbounded flow,
the friend too partial be the worst of foe.

behold the athenian sage, who pierce mind
have trace the wily labyrinth of mankind,
when now condemn, he leave his infant care
to all those evil man be bear to bear.
not to his friend alone the charge he yield,
but noble hope on juster motive build;
bid even his foe their future step attend,
and dare to censure, if they dare offend.
will thus the poet trust his offspring forth,
or bloom our Britain with athenian worth:
will the brave foe the imperfect work engage
with honest freedom, not with partial rage,
what just production may the world surprise!
what other pope, what other maros rise!

but since by foe, or friend alike deceive,
too little those, and these too much believe;
since the same fate pursue by different way,
undo by censure, or undo by praise;
since bard themselves submit to vice rule,
and party-feud grow high, and patron cool:
since, still unnamed, unnumbered ill behind
rise black in air, and only wait the wind:
let i, o let i, ere the tempest roar,
catch the first gale, and make the near shore;
in sacred silence join the inglorious train,
where humble peace, and sweet contentment reign;
if not thy precept, thy example own,
and steal through life not useless, though unknown.
