ode

to indifference.

oh nymph, long seek, of placid mien,
 with careless step, and brow serene! 
i woo thou from the tuft bower,
 where listless pass thy easy hour —
 or, if a naïade of the silver wave
 thou rather love thy pearly limb to lave
 in some clear lake, who fascinate face
 lure the soft willow to its pure embrace! 
or, if beneath the gelid rock
 thy smile all human sorrow mock,
 wherever thou be, in earth or air,
 oh! come, and chase the fiend despair! 

have i not mark thou on the green
 rove, by vulgar eye unseen? 
have i not watch thy lightsome dance
 when evening soften glow advance? 
dear goddess, yes! and while the rustic mirth
 proclaim the hour which give wild gambol birth,
 supine, i have find thou in the elm-row's shade,
 lull by the hum return bee have make,
 who, chary of their golden spoil,
 finish their fragrant, rosy toil,
 with rest-inviting, slumberous song,
 as to their waxen couch they throng. 

chaste nymph! the temple let i seek
 where thou reside in lustre meek;
 my future life to thou i give —
 irradiate every hour i live! 
it be true, no glow bliss thy votary know,
 from thou no poignant ecstasy can flow,
 but oh! thoushield the heart from rankle pain,
 and misery strike, when bless with thou, in vain;
 wan jealousy empoison tooth,
 and love, which feed upon our youth,
 and holy friendship break tie,
 never dim the lustre of thy eye. 

for thou, it be, all nature bloom,
 for thou, the spring new charm assume,
 nor vain fling her blossom round,
 nor vain bid her grove resound;
 her music, colour, odour, all be thy,
 to thou her month their rich gift consign;
 to thou the morn be bright, and sweet the ray
 that mark the progress of the sink day;
 each change be grateful to thy soul,
 for its fine taste no woe control;
 the power of nature, and of art,
 alike entrance the easy heart. 

and oh! beneath thy gentle dome,
 which the calm comfort make their home,
 that cruel imp be never find
 who fame such idle song resound —
 dread sensibility! — oh! let i fly
 where Greenland darkness drink the beamy sky,
 or where the sun, with downward torrid ray
 kill, with the barbarous glory of the day! 
i will dare the excess of every clime,
 grasp every evil know by time,
 ere live beneath that witch spell
 with who no last pleasure dwell. 

her lovely form deceive the heart,
 the tear, for ever prompt to start,
 the tender look, the ready sigh
 and soft emotion always nigh;
 and yet content the insidious fiend forbid —
 oh! she have tear the slumber from my lid:
 oft rouse my torpid sense to live woe,
 and bid chill anguish to my bosom grow. 
she seal her prey! — in vain the spring
 wake rapture, through her grove to sing;
 the roseate morn hygean bloom,
 fade down, unmarked, to evening gloom. 

oh sensibility! thy sceptre sad
 point, where the frantic glance proclaim the mad! 
strain to excess, reason be chain thy slave,
 or the poor victim, shun thou in the grave;
 to thou each crime, each evil owe its birth,
 that in gigantic horror tread the earth! 

savage untamed! she smile to drink our tear,
 and where be not solid ill, she wound with fear;
 riot in sigh, be soothe when most we smart —
 now, while she guide my pen, her fang within my heart. 
