Albin and the daughter of mey.

a old tale, translate from the irish.

by the late mr. Jerom stone.

whence come these dismal sound that fill our ear! 
why do the grove such lamentation send! 
why sit the virgin on the hill of tear,
 while heavy sigh their tender bosom rend! 
they weep for Albin with the flow hair,
 who perish by the cruelty of mey;
 a blameless hero, bloom, young, and fair;
 because he scorn her passion to obey. 
see on you western hill the heap of stone,
 which mourning friend have raise over his bone! 

o woman! bloody, bloody be thy deed;
 the blackness of thy crime exceed belief;
 the story make each heart but thy to bleed,
 and fill both man and maid with keen grief! 
behold thy daughter, beauteous as the sky,
 when early morn transcend yond eastern hill,
 she love the youth who by thy guile do die,
 and now our ear with lamentation fill:
 it be she, who sad, and grovel on the ground,
 weep over his grave, and make the wood resound. 

a thousand grace do the maid adorn:
 her look be charm and her heart be kind;
 her eye be like the window of the morn,
 and wisdom habitation be her mind. 
a hundred hero try her love to gain:
 she pity they, yet do their suit deny:
 young Albin only court not in vain,
 Albin alone be lovely in her eye:
 love fill their bosom with a mutual flame;
 their birth be equal, and their age the same. 

her mother mey, a woman void of truth,
 in practice of deceit and guile grow old,
 conceive a guilty passion for the youth,
 and in his ear the shameful story tell:
 but over his mind she never can prevail;
 for in his life no wickedness be find;
 with shame and rage he hear the horrid tale,
 and shake with indignation at the sound:
 he flee to shun she; while with burn wrath
 the monster, in revenge, decree his death. 

amid lochmey, at distance from the shore,
 on a green island, grow a stately tree,
 with precious fruit each season cover over,
 delightful to the taste, and fair to see:
 this fruit, more sweet than virgin honey find,
 serve both alike for physic and for food;
 it cure disease, heal the bleed wound,
 and hunger rage for three long day withstand. 
but precious thing be purchase still with pain,
 and thousand try to pluck it, but in vain. 

for at the root of this delightful tree,
 a venomous and awful dragon lie,
 with watchful eye, all horrible to see,
 who drive the affright passenger away. 
worse than the viper sting its tooth do wound,
 the wretch who feel it soon behove to die;
 nor can physician ever yet be find
 who may a certain antidote apply:
 even they who skill have save a mighty host,
 against its bite no remedy can boast. 

revengeful mey, her fury to appease,
 and he destroy who dare her passion slight,
 feign to be strike with a dire disease,
 and call the hapless Albin to her sight:
 "arise, young hero! skill in feat of war,
 on yonder lake your dauntless courage prove;
 to pull i of the fruit, now brave dare,
 and save the mother of the maid you love. 
i die without its influence divine;
 nor will i taste it from a hand but thy."

with downcast-look the lovely youth reply,
 "though yet my feat of valour have be few,
 my might in this adventure shall be try;
 i go to pull the heal fruit for you."
with stately step approach to the deep,
 the hardy hero swim the liquid tide;
 with joy he find the dragon fast asleep,
 then pull the fruit, and come in safety back;
 then with a cheerful countenance, and gay,
 he give the present to the hand of mey. 

 "well have you do, to bring i of this fruit;
 but great sign of prowess must you give:
 go pull the tree entire by the root,
 and bring it hither, or i cease to live."
though hard the task, like lightning fast he fly,
 and nimble glide over the yield tide;
 then to the tree with manly step he draw,
 and pull, and tug it hard, from side to side:
 its burst root his strength can not withstand;
 he tear it up, and bear it in his hand. 

but long, alas! ere he can reach the shore,
 or fix his footstep on the solid sand,
 the monster follow with a hideous roar,
 and like a fury grasp he by the hand. 
then, gracious god! what dreadful struggle rose! 
he grasp the dragon by the envenom jaw,
 in vain: for round the bloody current flow,
 while its fierce tooth his tender body gnaw. 
he groan through anguish of the grievous wound,
 and cry for help; but, ah! no help be find? 

at length the maid, now wonder at his stay,
 and rack with dread of some impend ill,
 swift to the lake, to meet he, bend her way;
 and there behold what may a virgin kill! 
she see her lover struggle on the flood,
 the dreadful monster gnaw at his side;
 she see young Albin faint, while his blood
 with purple tincture die the liquid tide! 
though pale with fear, she plunge in the wave,
 and to the hero hand a dagger give! 

alas! too late; yet gather all his force,
 he drag, at last, his hiss foe to land. 
yet there the battle still grow worse and worse,
 and long the conflict last on the strand. 
at length he happy descry a part,
 just where the scaly neck and breast do meet;
 through this he drive a well-directed dart,
 and lay the monster breathless at his foot. 
the lover shout when they see he dead,
 while from his trunk they cut the bleed head. 

but soon the venom of his mortal bite
 within the hero bosom spread like flame;
 his face grow pale, his strength forsake he quite,
 and over his tremble limb a numbness come. 
then faint on the slimy shore he fall,
 and utter, with a heavy, die groan,
 these tender word, "my lovely maid, farewell! 
remember Albin; for his life be go!"
these sound, like thunder, all her sense oppress,
 and swoon down she fall upon his breast. 

at last, the maid awaken as from sleep,
 feel all her soul overwhelm in deep despair,
 her eye stare wild, she rave, she can not weep,
 she beat her bosom, and she tear her hair! 
she look now on the ground, now on the sky,
 now gaze around, like one implore aid:
 but none be near in pity to her cry,
 no comfort come to sooth the hapless maid! 
then grasp in her palm, that shine like snow,
 the youth dead hand, she thus express her woe. 

burst, burst, my heart! the lovely youth be dead,
 who, like the dawn, be wont to bring i joy;
 now bird of prey will hover round his head,
 and wild beast seek his carcase to destroy;
 while i who love he, and be love again,
 with sigh and lamentable strain must tell,
 how by no hero valour he be slay,
 but struggle with a beast inglorious fall! 
this make my tear with double anguish flow,
 this add affliction to my bitter woe! 

yet fame and dauntless valour he can boast;
 with matchless strength his manly limb be bind;
 that force will have dismay a mighty host,
 he show, before the dragon can he wound. 
his curl lock, that wanton in the breeze,
 be black than the raven ebon wing;
 his tooth be white than the fragrant tree,
 when blossom clothe they in the day of spring;
 a bright red his glow cheek do stain,
 than blood of tender heifer new slay. 

a pure azure sparkle in his eye,
 than that of icy shoal in mountain find;
 whenever he speak, his voice be melody,
 and sweet far than instrumental sound. 
o he be lovely! fair as pure snow,
 who wreath the top of high mountain crown;
 his lip be radiant as the heavenly bow;
 his skin be soft than the soft down;
 more sweet his breath than fragrant bloom, or rise,
 or gale that cross a flowery garden blow. 

but when in battle with our foe he join,
 and seek the hot danger of the fight,
 the stout chief stand wonder far behind,
 and none dare try to rival he in might! 
his ample shield then seem a gate of brass,
 his awful sword do like the lightning shine! 
no force of steel can through his armour pass,
 his spear be like a mast, or mountain-pine! 
even king and hero tremble at his name,
 and conquest smile whereve the warrior come! 

great be the strength of his unconquered hand,
 great be his swiftness in the rapid race;
 none can the valour of his arm withstand,
 none can outstrip he in the day of chace. 
yet he be tender, merciful, and kind;
 his vanquish foe his clemency confess;
 no cruel purpose labour in his mind,
 no thought of envy harbour in his breast. 
he be all gracious, bounteous, and benign,
 and in his soul superior to a king! 

but now he be go! and nought remain but woe
 for wretched i; with he my joy be flee,
 around his tomb my tear shall ever flow,
 the rock my dwelling, and the clay my bed! 
you maid, and matron, from your hill descend,
 to join my moan, and answer tear for tear;
 with i the hero to his grave attend,
 and sing the song of mourning round his bier. 
through his own grove his praise we will proclaim,
 and bid the place for ever bear his name. 
