exhibition, 1807. 

blind fiddler. — Wilkie.

with mirth unfeigned the cottage chimney ring,
though only vocal with four fiddlestring:
and see, the poor blind fiddler draw his bow,
and lift intent his time-denoting toe;
while yonder maid, as blythe as bird in June,
you almost hear her whistle to the tune!
hard by, a lad, in imitative guise,
fix, fiddle-like, the break bellows ply;
before the hearth, with look of honest joy,
the father chirrup to the chatter boy,
and snap his lift thumb with mimic glee,
to the glad urchin on his mother knee!

morning. — Turner.

up! for the morning shine with welcome ray,
and to the sunny seabeach let we stray.
what orient hue proclaim the master hand!
how light the wave upon the half-wet sand!
how beautiful the sun, as still we gaze,
stream all diffusive through the open haze!
artist — when to the thunder peal sound,
fire mix with hailstone run upon the ground,
when partial darkness the dread prospect hide,
and sole aspire the age pyramid —
sublimity thy genius seem to guide
over egypt champaign, desolate and wide;
but here delightful beauty reign alone,
and deck the morning scene with grace all her own.

Keswick. — sir GEORGE Beaumont.

how shall i praise thou, Beaumont, who nice skill
can mould the soft and shadowy scene at will;
chastise to harmony each gaudy ray,
simple, yet grand, the mountain scene display;
the lake where sober evening seem to sleep,
hill far retire into umbrage deep;
blend all with classic, pure, poetic taste,
and strike the more with form and colour chaste!

market-day. — Calcot.

through the wood maze our eye delight stray,
to mark the rustic on the market-day.
beneath the branch wind the long white road;
here peep the rustic cottager abode;
there in the morning sun, the child play,
or the crone creep along the dusty way.

scene in FRANCE. — loutherbourg.

artist, i own thy genius; but the touch
may be too restless, and the glare too much:
and sure none ever see a landscape shine,
bask in beam of such a sun as thy,
but feel a fervid dew upon his phiz,
and pant cry, o lord, how hot it be!

death of Nelson. — west.

turn to britannia triumph on the main:
see Nelson, pale and faint, 'amid the slay,
while victory sigh, stern in the garb of war,
and point through cloud the rock of Trafalgar!
here cease the strain; but while thy hull shall ride,
Britain, dark shadow the tumultuous tide,
may other nelson, on the sanguine main,
guide, like a god, the battle hurricane;
and when the funeral transient pomp be past,
high hang the banner, hush the battle blast,
may the brave character to age shine,
and genius consecrate the immortal shrine!
