to the right honourable the. earl of Radnor on his marriage.

if my faint genius do not reach that height
it ought, your fortune to congratulate,
be please, my lord, to take this for excuse,
that it be the interregnum of a muse.
Apollo frown upon each droop son,
and sadness crown the bowl of Hellicon,
the mount Pegasus, that late can fly,
trap with gay thought, and fancy through the sky,
in her swift course now the bold soldier dare
to stop, and back, and manage for the war.
strange turn of state disturb the peaceful nine,
and with the rest of the sad muse, i;
such solid grief do all Parnassus sway,
there scarce be joy the coronation day,
pardon a homely genius then ill dress,
that dare approach without a nuptial vest
to wish you joy, which though not polish here,
nor mirthful, adorn be yet sincere;
poet, like plant, flourish when shine upon,
but wither and decay without the sun.
son renown Ovid, when in court prefer,
for lofty verse be by all Rome revere;
but when disgrace he do to Pontus go,
his fate be humble, and his stile be low:
like he undo, forget and distress,
i wander when your theme my muse possess;
but then, like atom, thought do solid grow,
and spark of the old fire begin to glow.
your new-gained happiness inspire my pen
in spite of all resolve to write again;
your virtue next inform my memory,
your noble nature, love to poetry,
that dare encourage verse you find sublime,
unsway by the opinion of the time,
and own, like Athens once, in wit be charm,
and art shall grace a state as well as arm.
there honour with a part of public sway,
poet be by the senate hold in pay;
but here in our reform wise warlike isle,
their choice labour be not worth a smile:
another herd have rush into our fold,
and our new brood of wit devour the old,
a decent praise to mighty worth be due,
and only such, my lord, i pay to you.
to the few patron of true sense i fly,
and beg a genius at their foot may lie,
more use to satyr than to flattery:
that slavish vice i yet never understand,
nor can we flatter merit if we will,
since no just praise can ever be too good.
when once great Virgil by Augustus sit
to read the work he be to dedicate,
though praise even extravagant do seem
yet Cesar do not think he flatter he.
my muse, though to his height it ought to soar,
do only greet your joy, and wish you more:
with grateful thanks for honour do before,
be please to take what tribute i can pay,
and think, my lord, this be my only way.
