to mr. Poyntz, ambassador at the congress of Soissons, in the year 1728.  

write at Paris.

by the same.

o thou who friendship be my joy and pride,
who virtue warm i, and who precept guide;
thou, to who greatness right understand,
be but a large power of be good;
say, Poyntz, amid the toil of anxious state,
do not thy secret soul desire retreat?
do thou not wish (the task of glory do)
thy busy life at length may be thy own;
that to thy love philosophy resign,
no care may ruffle thy unbend mind?
just be the wish. for sure the happy meed,
to favour man by smile heaven decree,
be to reflect at ease on glorious pain,
and calm to enjoy what virtue gain.

not he i praise, who from the world retire,
by no enliven generous passion fire,
on flowery couch slumber life away,
and gentle bid his active power decay;
who fear bright glory awful face to see;
and shun renown as much as infamy:
but bless be he, who exercise in care,
to private leisure public virtue bear;
who tranquil end the race he noble run,
and deck repose with trophy labour win.
he honour follow to the secret shade,
and crown propitious his decline head:
in his retreat their harp the muse string,
for he in lay unbought spontaneous sing;
friendship and truth on all his moment wait,
please with retirement better than with state;
and round the bower where humble great he lie,
fair olive bloom, or verdant laurel rise.

so when thy country shall no more demand
the needful aid of thy sustain hand;
when peace restore shall on her downy wing
secure repose and careless leisure bring;
then to the shade of learned ease retire,
the world forget, by the world admire,
among thy book and friend, thou shall possess
contemplative and quiet happiness;
please to review a life in honour spend,
and painful merit pay with sweet content.
yet though thy hour unclog with sorrow roll,
though wisdom calm, and science feed thy soul;
one dear bliss remain to be possess,
that only can improve and crown the rest —

permit thy friend this secret to reveal,
which thy own heart perhaps will better tell;
the point to which our sweet passion move;
be to be true love, and fond love.
this be the charm that sooth the trouble breast,
friend to our health, and author of our rest,
bid every gloomy vex passion fly,
and tune each jar string to harmony.
even while i write; the name of love inspire
more please thought, and more enliven fire;
beneath his power my rapture fancy glow,
and every tender verse more sweet flow.
dull be the privilege of live free;
our heart be never form for liberty:
some beauteous image well imprint there,
can best defend they from consume care.
in vain to grove and garden we retire,
and nature in her rural work admire;
though grateful these, yet these but faint charm,
they may delight we, but can never warm.
may some fair eye, my friend, thy bosom fire
with please pang of ever gay desire;
and teach thou that soft science, which alone
still to thy search mind rest slight know.
thy soul, though great, be tender and refine,
to friendship sensible, to love incline;
and therefore long thou can not arm thy breast
against the entrance of so sweet a guest.
hear what the inspire muse bid i tell,
for heaven shall ratify what they reveal.

a choose bride shall in thy arm be place,
with all attractive charm of beauty grace;
who wit and virtue shall thy own express,
distinguish only by their soft dress:
thy greatness she, or thy retreat shall share,
sweeten tranquillity, or soften care:
her smile the taste of every joy shall raise,
and add new pleasure to renown and praise;
till charm you own the truth my verse will prove,
that happiness be near ally to love.
