[the emigrant.]

the emigrant.

book the first.

book i 

slow in the wintery morn, the struggle light
 throw a faint gleam upon the trouble wave;
 their foam top, as they approach the shore
 and the broad surf that never cease break
 on the innumerous pebble, catch the beam
 of the pale sun, that with reluctance give
 to this cold northern isle, its shorten day. 
alas! how few the morning wake to joy! 
how many murmur at oblivious night
 for leave they so soon; for bear thus
 their fancy bliss (the only bliss they taste!),
 on her black wing away! — change the dream
 that soothe their sorrow, for calamity
 (and every day bring its own sad proportion)
 for doubt, disease, abject dread of death,
 and faithless friend, and fame and fortune lose;
 fancy or real want; and wound pride,
 that view the day star, but to curse his beam. 
yet he, who spirit into be call
 this wondrous world of Waters; he who bid
 the wild wind lift they till they dash the cloud,
 and speak to they in thunder; or who breath,
 low murmur over the gentle heave tide,
 when the fair moon, in summer night serene,
 irradiate with long tremble line of light
 their undulate surface; that great power,
 who, govern the planet, also know
 if but a sea-mew fall, who nest be hide
 in these incumbent cliff; he sure mean
 to we, his reason creature, who he bid
 acknowledge and revere his awful hand,
 nothing but good: yet man, misguided man,
 Mars the fair work that he be bid enjoy,
 and make himself the evil he deplore. 
how often, when my weary soul recoil
 from proud oppression, and from legal crime
 (for such be in this land, where the vain boast
 of equal law be mockery, while the cost
 of seek for redress be sure to plunge
 the already injure to more certain ruin
 and the wretch starve, before his counsel plead)
 how often do i half abjure society,
 and sigh for some lone cottage, deep embower
 in the green wood, that these steep chalky hill
 guard from the strong south west; where round their base
 the beach wide flourish, and the light ash
 with slender leaf half hide the thymy turf! —
 there do i wish to hide i; well content
 if on the short grass, strew with fairy flower,
 i may repose thus shelter; or when eve
 in orient crimson linger in the west,
 gain the high mound, and mark these wave remote
 (lucid though distant), blush with the ray
 of the far-flaming orb, that sink beneath they;
 for i have think, that i shall then behold
 the beauteous work of god, unspoiled by man
 and less affect then, by human woe
 i witness not; may better learn to bear
 those that injustice, and duplicity
 and faithlessness and folly, fix on i:
 for never yet can i derive relief,
 when my swell heart be burst with its sorrow,
 from the sad thought, that other like myself
 live but to swell affliction countless tribe!
 — tranquil seclusion i have vain seek;
 peace, who delight in solitary shade,
 no more will spread for i her downy wing,
 but, like the fable danaid — or the wretch,
 who ceaseless, up the steep acclivity,
 be doom to heave the still rebound rock,
 onward i labour; as the baffle wave,
 which you rough beach repulse, that return
 with the next breath of wind, to fail again. —
 ah! mourner — cease these wail: cease and learn,
 that not the cot sequester, where the briar
 and woodbine wild, embrace the mossy thatch,
 (scarce see amid the forest gloom obscure!) 
or more substantial farm, well fence and warm,
 where the full barn, and cattle foddered round
 speak rustic plenty; nor the stately dome
 by dark fir shade, or the aspire pine,
 close by the village church (with care conceal
 by verdant foliage, lest the poor man grave
 shall mar the smile prospect of his lord),
 where office well range, or dovecote stock,
 declare manorial residence; not these
 or any of the building, new and trim
 with window circle towards the restless sea,
 which range in row, now terminate my walk,
 can shut out for a hour the spectre care,
 that from the dawn of reason, follow still
 unhappy mortal, until the friendly grave
 (our sole secure asylum) "end the chace. " 
behold, in witness of this mournful truth,
 a group approach i, who deject look,
 sad herald of distress! proclaim they man
 banish for ever and for conscience sake
 from their distract country, whence the name
 of freedom misapply, and much abuse
 by lawless anarchy, have drive they far
 to wander; with the prejudice they learn
 from bigotry (the tutoress of the blind),
 through the wide world unsheltered; their sole hope,
 that german spoiler, through that pleasant land
 may carry wide the desolate scourge
 of war and vengeance; yet unhappy man,
 whatever your error, i lament your fate:
 and, as disconsolate and sad you hang
 upon the barrier of the rock, and seem
 to murmur your despondence, wait long
 some fortunate reverse that never come;
 methinks in each expressive face, i see
 discriminate anguish; there droop one,
 who in a mope cloister long consume
 this life inactive, to obtain a better,
 and think that meager abstinence, to wake
 from his hard pallet with the midnight bell,
 to live on eleemosynary bread,
 and to renounce God work, will please that god. 
and now the poor pale wretch receive, amaze,
 the pity, stranger give to his distress,
 because these stranger be, by his dark creed,
 condemn as heretic — and with sick heart
 regret his pious prison, and his bead. —
 another, of more haughty port, decline
 the aid he need not; while in mute despair
 his high indignant thought go back to France,
 dwell on all he lose — the gothic dome,
 that vie with splendid palace; the bed
 of silk and down, the silver chalice,
 vestment with gold enwrought for blaze altar;
 where, amid cloud of incense, he hold forth
 to kneel crowd the imaginary bone
 of saint suppose, in pearl and gold enchase,
 and still with more than live monarchs pomp
 surround; be believe by mumble bigot
 to hold the key of heaven, and to admit
 who he think good to share it — now alas! 
he, to who dare soul and high ambition
 the world seem circumscribe; who, will to dream
 of fleuri, Richelieu, alberoni, man
 who tread on empire, and who politics
 be not beyond the grasp of his vast mind,
 be, in a land once hostile, still profane
 by disbelief, and rite unorthodox,
 the object of compassion — at his side,
 light of heart than these, but heavy far
 than he be wont, another victim come,
 a abbé — who with less contract brow
 still smile and flatter, and still talk of hope;
 which, sanguine as he be, he do not feel,
 and so he cheat the sad and weighty pressure
 of evil present; — still, as man mislead
 by early prejudice (so hard to break),
 i mourn your sorrow; for i too have know
 involuntary exile; and while yet
 England have charm for i, have feel how sad
 it be to look across the dim cold sea,
 that melancholy roll its refluent tide
 between we and the dear regret land
 we call our own — as now you pensive wait
 on this bleak morning, gaze on the wave
 that seem to leave your shore; from whence the wind
 be load to your ear, with the deep groan
 of martyr saint and suffer royalty,
 while to your eye the avenge power of heaven
 appear in awful anger to prepare
 the storm of vengeance, fraught with plague and death. 
even he of mild heart, who be indeed
 the simple shepherd in a rustic scene,
 and, amid the vine-clad hill of Languedoc,
 teach to the barefoot peasant, who hard hand
 produce the nectar he can seldom taste,
 submission to the lord for who he toil;
 he, or his brother, who to neustria son
 enforce religious patience, when, at time,
 on their indignant heart power iron hand
 too strong strike; elicit some spark
 of the bold spirit of their native north;
 even these parochial priest, these humble man,
 who lowly undistinguished cottage
 witness a life of pure piety,
 while the meek tenant be, perhaps, unknown
 each to the haughty lord of his domain,
 who mark they not; the noble scorn still
 the poor and pious priest, as with slow pace
 he glide through the dim arch avenue
 which to the castle lead; hope to cheer
 the last sad hour of some laborious life
 that hasten to its close — even such a man
 become a exile; stay not to try
 by temperate zeal to check his madden flock,
 who, at the novel sound of liberty
 (ah! most intoxicate sound to slave!),
 start into licence — lo! deject now,
 the wander pastor mourn, with bleed heart,
 his err people, weep and pray for they,
 and tremble for the account that he must give
 to heaven for soul entrust to his care. —
 where the cliff, hollow by the wintery storm,
 afford a seat with mat sea-weed strew,
 a soft form recline; around her run,
 on the rough shingle, or the chalky bourn,
 her gay unconscious child, soon amuse;
 who pick the fret stone, or glossy shell,
 or crimson plant marine: or they contrive
 the fairy vessel, with its ribbon sail
 and gild paper pennant: in the pool,
 leave by the salt wave on the yield sand,
 they launch the mimic navy — happy age! 
unmindful of the misery of man! —
 alas! too long a victim to distress,
 their mother, lose in melancholy thought,
 lull for a moment by the murmur low
 of sullen billow, weary by the task
 of have here, with swell and ache eye
 fix on the grey horizon, since the dawn
 solicitous watch the weekly sail
 from her dear native land, now yield awhile
 to kind forgetfulness, while fancy bring,
 in wake dream, that native land again! 
Versailles appear — its paint gallery,
 and room of regal splendour; rich with gold,
 where, by long mirror multiply, the crowd
 pay will homage — and, unite there,
 beauty give charm to empire — ah! too soon
 from the gay visionary pageant rouse,
 see the sad mourner start! — and, droop, look
 with tearful eye and heave bosom round
 on drear reality — where darken wave,
 urge by the rise wind, unheeded foam
 near her cold rugged seat: — to call she thence
 a fellow-sufferer come: dejection deep
 check, but conceal not quite, the martial air,
 and that high consciousness of noble blood,
 which he have learn from infancy to think
 exalt he over the race of common man:
 nurse in the velvet lap of luxury,
 and feed by adulation — can he learn,
 that worth alone be true nobility? 
and that the peasant who, "amid the son
 "of reason, valour, liberty, and virtue,
" display distinguish merit, be a noble
 "of nature own creation!" — if even here,
 if in this land of high vaunt freedom,
 even briton controvert the unwelcome truth,
 can it be relish by the son of France? 
man, who derive their boast ancestry
 from the fierce leader of religious war,
 the first in chivalry emblazon page;
 who reckon gueslin, Bayard, or de Foix,
 among their brave progenitor? their eye,
 accustom to regard the splendid trophy
 of heraldry (that with fantastic hand
 mingle, like image in feverish dream,
 "gorgons and hydras, and chimeras dire,"
 with paint pun, and visionary shape;),
 see not the simple dignity of virtue,
 but hold all base, who honour such as these
 exalt not from the crowd — as one, who long
 have dwell amid the artificial scene
 of populous city, deem that splendid show,
 the theatre, and pageant pomp of court,
 be only worth regard; forget all taste
 for nature genuine beauty; in the lapse
 of gush water hear no soothe sound,
 nor listen with delight to sigh wind,
 that, on their fragrant pinion, waft the note
 of bird rejoice in the trangled copse;
 nor gaze please on ocean silver breast,
 while light over it sail the summer cloud
 reflect in the wave, that, hardly hear,
 flow on the yellow sand: so to his mind,
 that long have live where despotism hide
 his feature harsh, beneath the diadem
 of worldly grandeur, abject slavery seem,
 if by that power impose, slavery no more:
 for luxury wreathe with silk the iron bond,
 and hide the ugly rivet with her flower,
 till the degenerate trifler, while they love
 the glitter of the chain, forget their weight. 
but more the man, who ill acquire wealth
 be wring from plunder myriad, by the mean
 too often legalise by power abuse,
 feel all the horror of the fatal change,
 when their ephemeral greatness, mar at once
 (as a vain toy that Fortune childish hand
 equal joy to fashion or to crush),
 leave they expose to universal scorn
 for have nothing else; not even the claim
 to honour, which respect for hero past
 allow to ancient title; man, like these,
 sink even beneath the level, whence base art
 alone have raise they; — unlamented sink,
 and know that they deserve the woe they feel. 
poor wander wretch! whosoever you be,
 that hopeless, houseless, friendless, travel wide
 over these bleak russet down; where, dim see,
 the solitary shepherd shiver tend
 his dun discolour flock (shepherd, unlike
 he, who in song the poet fancy crown
 with garland, and his crook with violet bind);
 poor vagrant wretch! outcast of the world! 
who not abode receive, no parish own;
 rove, like nature commoner, the land
 that boast such general plenty: if the sight
 of wide-extended misery soften you
 a while, suspend your murmur! — here behold
 the strange vicissitude of fate — while thus
 the exile noble, from their country drive,
 who rich luxury be they, must feel
 more poignant anguish, than the low poor,
 who, bear to indigence, have learn to brave
 rigid adversity depress breath! —
 ah! rather Fortune worthless favourite! 
who feed on England vital — pensioner
 of base corruption, who, in quick ascent
 to opulence unmerited, become
 giddy with pride, and as you rise, forget
 the dust you late leave, with scorn look down
 on those beneath you (though your equal once
 in fortune, and in worth superior still,
 they view the eminence, on which you stand,
 with wonder, not with envy; for they know
 the mean, by which you reach it, have be such
 as, in all honest eye, degrade you far
 beneath the poor dependent, who sad heart
 reluctant plead for what your pride deny);
 you venal, worthless hireling of a court! 
you pamper parasite! who briton pay
 for forge fetter for they; rather here
 study a lesson that concern you much;
 and, tremble, learn, that if oppress too long,
 the rage multitude, to madness sting,
 will turn on their oppressor; and, no more
 by sound title and parade form
 bind like tame victim, will redress themselves! 
then sweep away by the resistlef torrent,
 not only all your pomp may disappear,
 but, in the tempest lose, fair order sink
 her decent head, and lawless anarchy
 overturn celestial freedom radiant throne; —
 as now in Gallia; where confusion, bear
 of party rage and selfish love of rule,
 Sully the noble cause that ever warm
 the heart of patriot virtue — there arise
 the infernal passion; vengeance, seek blood,
 and avarice; and envy harpy fang
 pollute the immortal shrine of liberty,
 dismay her votary, and disgrace her name. 
respect be due to principle; and they,
 who suffer for their conscience, have a claim,
 whatever that principle may be, to praise. 
these ill-starred exile then, who, bind by tie,
 to they the bond of honour; who resign
 their country to preserve they, and now seek
 in England a asylum — well deserve
 to find that (every prejudice forget,
 which pride and ignorance teach), we for they
 feel as our brother; and that english heart,
 of just compassion ever own the sway,
 as true as our element, the deep,
 obey the mild dominion of the moon —
 this they have find; and may they find it still! 
thus may thou, Britain, triumph! — may thy foe,
 by reason generous potency subdue,
 learn, that the god thou worship, delight
 in act of pure humanity! — may thy
 be still such bloodless laurel! noble far
 than those acquire at Cressy or Poictiers,
 or of more recent growth, those well bestow
 on he who stand on calpe blaze height
 amid the thunder of a war world,
 illustrious rather from the crowd he save
 from flood and fire, than from the rank who fall
 beneath his valour! — action such as these,
 like incense rise to the throne of heaven,
 far better justify the pride, that swell
 in british bosom, than the deafen roar
 of victory from a thousand brazen throat,
 that tell with what success wide-wasting war
 have by our brave compatriot thin the world. 

note to the first book

the emigrant.

book the second.

book ii.

long wintery month be past; the moon that now
 light her pale crescent even at noon, have make
 four time her revolution; since with step,
 mournful and slow, along the wave-worn cliff,
 pensive i take my solitary way,
 lose in despondence, while contemplate
 not my own wayward destiny alone,
 (hard as it be, and difficult to bear!) 
but in behold the unhappy lot
 of the lorn exile; who, amid the storm
 of wild disastrous anarchy, be throw,
 like shipwreck sufferer, on England coast,
 to see, perhaps, no more their native land,
 where desolation riot: they, like i,
 from fair hope and happy prospect drive,
 shrink from the future, and regret the past. 
but on this upland scene, while April come,
 with fragrant air, to fan my throb breast,
 fain will i snatch a interval from care,
 that weigh my weary spirit down to earth;
 court, once more, the influence of hope
 (for "hope" still wait upon the flowery prime)
 as here i mark spring humid hand unfold
 the early leaf that fear capricious wind,
 while, even on shelter bank, the timid flower
 give, half reluctant, their warm hue
 to mingle with the primroses pale star. 
no shade the leafless copse yet afford,
 nor hide the mossy labour of the thrush,
 that, startle, dart across the narrow path;
 but quick reassure, resume his task,
 or add his loud note to those that rise
 from yonder tuft brake; where the white bud
 of the first thorn be mingle with the leaf
 of that which blossom on the brow of may. 
ah! it will not be: — so many year have pass,
 since, on my native hill, i learn to gaze
 on these delightful landscape; and those year
 have teach i so much sorrow, that my soul
 feel not the joy revive nature bring;
 but, in dark retrospect, deject dwell
 on human folly, and on human woe. —
 what be the promise of the infant year,
 the lively verdure, or the burst bloom,
 to those, who shrink from horror such as war
 spread over the affright world? with swim eye,
 back on the past they throw their mournful look,
 and see the temple, which they fond hope
 reason will raise to liberty, destroy
 by ruffian hand; while, on the ruin mass,
 flush with hot blood, the fiend of discord sit
 in savage triumph; mock every plea
 of policy and justice, as she show
 the headless corpse of one, who only crime
 be being bear a monarch — mercy turn,
 from spectacle so dire, her swell eye;
 and liberty, with calm, unruffled brow
 magnanimous, as conscious of her strength
 in reason panoply, scorn to distain
 her righteous cause with carnage, and resign
 to fraud and anarchy the infuriate crowd. —
 what be the promise of the infant year
 to those, who (while the poor but peaceful hind
 pen, unmolested, the increase flock
 of his rich master in this sea-fenced isle)
 survey, in neighbour country, scene that make
 the sick heart shudder; and the man, who think,
 blush for his species? there the trumpet voice
 drown the soft warble of the woodland choir;
 and violet, lurk in their turfy bed
 beneath the flower thorn, be stain with blood. 
there fall, at once, the spoiler and the spoil;
 while war, wide-ravaging, annihilate
 the hope of cultivation; give to fiend,
 the meager, ghastly fiend of want and woe,
 the blast land — there, taunt in the van
 of vengeance-breathing army, insult stalk;
 and, in the rank, " famine, and sword, and fire,
 "crouch for employment. " — lo! the suffer world,
 tear by the fearful conflict, shrink, amaze,
 from freedom name, usurp and misapply,
 and, cower to the purple tyrant rod,
 deem that the less ill. — delude man! 
ere you profane her ever-glorious name,
 or catalogue the thousand that have bleed
 resist she; or those, who great die
 martyr to liberty — revert awhile
 to the black scroll, that tell of regal crime
 commit to destroy she; rather count
 the hecatomb of victim, who have fall
 beneath a single despot; or who give
 their waste life for some dispute claim
 between anoint robber: monster both! 
 " oh! polish perturbation — golden care! " 
so strange covete by feeble man
 to lift he over his fellow; — toy, for which
 such shower of blood have drench the affright earth —
 unfortunate his lot, who luckless head
 thy jeweled circlet, line with thorn, have bind;
 and who, by custom law, obtain from thou
 hereditary right to rule, unchecked,
 submissive myriad: for untempered power,
 like steel ill form, injure the hand
 it promise to protect — unhappy France! 
if ever thy lily, trample now in dust,
 and blood-bespotted, shall again revive
 in silver splendour, may the wreath be weave
 by voluntary hand; and Freemen, such
 as England self may boast, unite to place
 the guard diadem on his fair brow,
 where loyalty may join with liberty
 to fix it firm. — in the rugged school
 of stern adversity so early train,
 his future life, perchance, may emulate
 that of the brave bernois, so just call
 the darling of his people; who revere
 the warrior less, than they adore the man! 
but never may party rage, perverse and blind,
 and base venality, prevail to raise
 to public trust, a wretch, who private vice
 make even the wild profligate recoil;
 and who, with hireling ruffian league, have burst
 the law of nature and humanity! 
wade, beneath the patriot specious mask,
 and in equality illusive name,
 to empire through a stream of kindred blood —
 innocent prisoner! — most unhappy heir
 of fatal greatness, who be suffer now
 for all the crime and folly of thy race;
 better for thou, if over thy baby brow
 the regal mischief never have be hold:
 then, in a humble sphere, perhaps content,
 thou have be free and joyous on the height
 of pyrennean mountain, shagged with wood
 of chesnut, pine, and oak: as on these hill
 be yonder little thoughtless shepherd lad,
 who, on the slope abrupt of downy turf
 recline in playful indolence, send off
 the chalky ball, quick bound far below;
 while, half forgetful of his simple task,
 hardly his lengthen shadow, or the bells
slow tinkle of his flock, that sup tend
 to the brown fallows in the vale beneath,
 where nightly it be fold, from his sport
 recall the happy idler. — while i gaze
 on his gay vacant countenance, my thought
 compare with his obscure, laborious lot,
 thy, most unfortunate, imperial boy! 
who round thy sullen prison daily hear
 the savage howl of murder, as it seek
 thy unoffending life: while sad within
 thy wretched mother, petrify with grief,
 view thou with stony eye, and can weep! —
 ah! much i mourn thy sorrow, hapless queen! 
and deem thy expiation make to heaven
 for every fault, to which prosperity
 betray thou, when it place thou on a throne
 where boundless power be thy, and thou be raise
 high (as it seem) above the envious reach
 of destiny! whatever thy error be,
 be they not more remember; though the rage
 of party swell they to such crime, as bid
 compassion stifle every sigh that rise
 for thy disastrous lot — more than enough
 thou have endure; and every english heart,
 even those, that high beat in freedom cause,
 disclaim as base, and of that cause unworthy,
 the vengeance, or the fear, that make thou still
 a miserable prisoner! — ah! who know,
 from sad experience, more than i, to feel
 for thy despond spirit, as it sink
 beneath procrastinate fear for those
 more dear to thou than life! but eminence
 of misery be thy, as once of joy;
 and, as we view the strange vicissitude,
 we ask anew, where happiness be find? —
 alas! in rural life, where youthful dream
 see the Arcadia that romance describe,
 not even content reside! — in yond low hut
 of clay and thatch, where rise the grey smoke
 of smold'r turf, cut from the adjoin moor,
 the labourer, its inhabitant, who toil
 from the first dawn of twilight, till the sun
 sink in the rosy water of the west,
 find that with poverty it can dwell;
 for bread, and scanty bread, be all he earn
 for he and for his household — shall disease,
 bear of chill wintery rain, arrest his arm,
 then, through his patch and straw-stuffed casement, peep
 the squalid figure of extreme want;
 and from the parish the reluctant dole,
 deal by the unfeeling farmer, hardly save
 the linger spark of life from cold extinction:
 then the bright sun of spring, that smile bid
 all other animal rejoice, behold,
 creep from his pallet, the emaciate wretch
 attempt, with feeble effort, to resume
 some heavy task, above his waste strength,
 turn his wistful look (how much in vain!) 
to the desert mansion, where no more
 the owner (go to gay scene) reside,
 who make even luxury, virtue; while he give
 the scatter crumb to honest poverty. —
 but, though the landscape be too oft deform
 by figure such as these, yet peace be here,
 and over our valley, clothe with spring corn,
 no hostile hoof shall trample, nor fierce flame
 wither the wood young verdure, ere it form
 gradual the laugh May luxuriant shade;
 for, by the rude sea guard, we be safe,
 and feel not evil such as with deep sigh
 the emigrant deplore, as they recall
 the summer past, when nature seem to lose
 her course in wild distemperature, and aid,
 with season all reverse, destructive war. 
shudder, i view the picture they have draw
 of desolate country, where the ground,
 strip of its unripe produce, be thick strew
 with various death — the war-horse fall there
 by famine, and his rider by the sword. 
the mope cloud sail heavy charge with rain,
 and burst over the mountain misty brow,
 deluge, as with a inland sea, the vale;
 where, through the sullen evening lurid gloom,
 rise, like column of volcanic fire,
 the flame of burn village illume
 the waste of water; and the wind, that howl
 along its trouble surface, bring the groan
 of plunder peasant, and the frantic shriek
 of mother for their child; while the brave,
 to pity still alive, listen aghast
 to these dire echo, hopeless to prevent
 the evil they behold, or check the rage,
 which ever, as the people of one land
 meet in contention, fire the human heart
 with savage thirst of kindred blood, and make
 man lose his nature; render he more fierce
 than the gaunt monster of the howl waste. 
oft have i hear the melancholy tale,
 which, all their native gaiety forget,
 these exile tell — how hope impel they on,
 reckless of tempest, hunger, or the sword,
 till order to retreat, they know not why,
 from all their flatter prospect, they become
 the prey of dark suspicion and regret:
 then, in despondence, sink the unnerved arm
 of gallant loyalty — at every turn
 shame and disgrace appear, and seem to mock
 their scatter squadron; which the warlike youth,
 unable to endure, often implore,
 as the last act of friendship, from the hand
 of some brave comrade, to receive the blow
 that free the indignant spirit from its pain. 
to a wild mountain, who bare summit hide
 its break eminence in cloud; who steep
 be dark with wood; where the recede rock
 be wear by torrent of dissolve snow,
 a wretched woman, pale and breathless, fly! 
and, gaze round she, listen to the sound
 of hostile footstep — no! it die away:
 nor noise remain, but of the cataract,
 or surly breeze of night, that mutter low
 among the thicket, where she tremble seek
 a temporary shelter — clasp close
 to her hard-heaving heart her sleep child,
 all she can rescue of the innocent group
 that yesterday surround her — escape
 almost by miracle! fear, frantic fear,
 winge her weak foot: yet, half repentant now
 her headlong haste, she wish she have stay
 to die with those affright fancy paint
 the lawless soldier victim — hark! again
 the drive tempest bear the cry of death,
 and, with deep sullen thunder, the dread sound
 of cannon vibrate on the tremulous earth;
 while, burst in the air, the murderous bomb
 glare over her mansion. where the splinter fall,
 like scatter comet, its destructive path
 be mark by wreath of flame! — then, overwhelm
 beneath accumulate horror, sink
 the desolate mourner; yet, in death itself,
 true to maternal tenderness, she try
 to save the unconscious infant from the storm
 in which she perish; and to protect
 this last dear object of her ruin hope
 from prowl monster, that from other hill,
 more inaccessible, and wild waste,
 lure by the scent of slaughter, follow fierce
 contend host, and to pollute field
 add dire increase of horror — but alas! 
the mother and the infant perish both! —
 the feudal chief, who gothic battlement
 frown on the plain beneath, return home
 from distant land, alone and in disguise,
 gain at the fall of night his castle wall,
 but, at the vacant gate, no porter sit
 to wait his lord admittance! — in the court
 all be drear silence! — guess but too well
 the fatal truth, he shudder as he go
 through the mute hall; where, by the blunt light
 that the dim moon through paint casement lend,
 he see that devastation have be there:
 then, while each hideous image to his mind
 rise terrific, over a bleed corpse
 stumble he fall; another interrupt
 his stagger foot — all, all who use to rush
 with joy to meet he — all his family
 lie murder in his way! — and the day dawn
 on a wild rave maniac, who a fate
 so sudden and calamitous have rob
 of reason; and who round his vacant wall
 scream unregarded, and reproach heaven! —
 such be thy dreadful trophy, savage war! 
and evil such as these, or yet more dire,
 which the pain mind recoil from, all be thy —
 the purple pestilence, that to the grave
 send who the sword have spare, be thy; and thy
 the widow anguish and the orphan tear! —
 woe such as these do man inflict on man;
 and by the closet murderer, who we style
 wise politician, be the scheme prepare,
 which, to keep europe waver balance even,
 depopulate her kingdom, and consign
 to tear and anguish half a bleed world! —
 oh! can the time return, when thought like these
 spoil not that gay delight, which vernal sun,
 illuminate hill, and wood, and field,
 give to my infant spirit — memory come! 
and from distract care, that now deprive
 such scene of all their beauty, kind bear
 my fancy to those hour of simple joy,
 when, on the bank of arun, which i see
 make its irriguous course through yonder mead,
 i play; unconscious then of future ill! 
there (where, from hollow fringe with yellow broom,
 the birch with silver rind, and fairy leaf,
 aslant the low stream tremble) i have stand,
 and meditate how to venture best
 into the shallow current, to procure
 the willow herb of glow purple spike,
 or flag, who swordlike leaf conceal the tide,
 startle the timid reed-bird from her nest,
 as with aquatic flower i weave the wreath,
 such as, collect by the shepherd girl,
 deck in the village the turfy shrine,
 and mark the arrival of propitious may. —
 how little dream i then the time will come,
 when the bright sun of that delicious month
 shall, from disturb and artificial sleep,
 awaken i to never-ending toil,
 to terror and to tear! — attempt still,
 with feeble hand and cold despond heart,
 to save my child from the overwhelm wrong,
 that have for ten long year be heap on i! —
 the fearful spectre of chicane and fraud
 have, Proteus like, still change their hideous form
 (as the law lend its plausible disguise),
 pursue my faint step; and i have see
 friendship sweet bond (which be so early form,)
 and once i fond think of amaranth
 inwove with silver seven time try) give way,
 and fail; as these green fan-like leaf of fern
 will wither at the touch of autumn frost. 
yet there be those, who patient pity still
 hear my long murmur; who, unwearied, try
 with lenient hand to bind up every wound
 my weary spirit feel, and bid i go
 "right onward" — a calm votary of the nymph,
 who, from her adamantine rock, point out
 to conscious rectitude the rugged path,
 that lead at length to peace! — ah! yes, my friend
 peace will at last be i; for in the grave
 be peace — and pass a few short year, perchance
 a few short month, and all the various pain
 i now endure shall be forget there,
 and no memorial shall remain of i,
 save in your bosom; while even your regret
 shall lose its poignancy, as you reflect
 what complicate woe that grave conceal! 
but, if the little praise, that may await
 the mother effort, shall provoke the spleen
 of priest or Levite; and they then arraign
 the dust that can hear they; be it you
 to vindicate my humble fame; to say,
 that, not in selfish suffering absorb,
 "i give to misery all i have, my tear. " 
and if, where regulate sanctity
 pour her long orison to heaven, my voice
 be seldom hear, that yet my prayer be make
 to he who hear even silence; not in dome
 of human architecture, fill with crowd,
 but on these hill, where boundless, yet distinct,
 even as a map, beneath be spread the field
 his bounty clothes; divide here by wood,
 and there by commons rude, or wind brook,
 while i may breathe the air perfume with flower,
 or the fresh odour of the mountain turf;
 and gaze on cloud above i, as they sail
 majestic: or remark the redden north,
 when bicker arrow of electric fire
 flash on the evening sky — i make my prayer
 in unison with murmur wave that now
 swell with dark tempest, now be mild and blue,
 as the bright arch above; for all to i
 declare omniscient goodness; nor need i
 declamatory essay to incite
 my wonder or my praise, when every leaf
 that spring unfold, and every simple bud,
 more forcible impress on my heart
 his power and wisdom — ah! while i adore
 that goodness, which design to all that live
 some taste of happiness, my soul be pain
 by the variety of woe that man
 for man create — his blessing often turn
 to plague and curse: saint-like piety,
 mislead by superstition, have destroy
 more than ambition; and the sacred flame
 of liberty become a rage fire,
 when licence and confusion bid it blaze. 
from thy high throne, above yond radiant star,
 o power omnipotent! with mercy view
 this suffer globe, and cause thy creature cease,
 with savage fang, to tear her bleed breast:
 restrain that rage for power, that bid a man,
 himself a worm, desire unbounded rule
 over being like himself: teach the hard heart
 of ruler, that the poor hind, who die
 for their unrighteous quarrel, in thy sight
 be equal to the imperious lord, that lead
 his discipline destroyer to the field. —
 may lovely freedom, in her genuine charm,
 aid by stern but equal justice, drive
 from the ensanguine earth the hellborn fiend
 of pride, oppression, avarice, and revenge,
 that ruin what thy mercy make so fair! 
then shall these ill-starred wanderer, who sad fate
 these desultory line lament, regain
 their native country; private vengeance then
 to public virtue yield; and the fierce feud,
 that long have tear their desolate land,
 may (even as storm, that agitate the air,
 drive noxious vapour from the blight earth)
 serve, all tremendous as they be, to fix
 the reign of reason, liberty, and peace! 

note to the second book

