the eagle, the kite, and the cock.

a emblematic fable, most respectful address to the right Hon. general c——y.  write in the year 1788.  

in former day when bird can speak,
 and hold their court three time a week,
 nay, have their council — hold debate —
 have lord and commons, church and state;
 with gentle sway a eagle reign,
 his charity the poor maintain;
 so mild — benignant — that his mind,
 to heaven-born clemency incline;
 mercy and justice prop his throne,
 his deed be through Britannia know;
 but to sum up this eagle praise,
 our royal George his worth display;
 but as the best of eagle may
 by evil bird be lead astray,
 he place his confidence — delight,
 in a dissemble, cruel kite;
 from hatfield wood the tyrant come,
 nay, Hatfield still can tell his name;
 the generous heart be soon deceive,
 the kite profess, his king believe;
 and fatal tarnish to his reign,
 he name the kite, l—d c——b——n;
 then all that have a claim, or right,
 must pay obeisance to this kite;
 but to portray his wily deed,
 attend the fact that now succeed:
 in eagle court there dwell a cock,
 that rear a numerous happy flock;
 for nineteen chick his dame do brink,
 fifteen he mean to serve their king;
 and gentle partlet worth and grace,
 adorn the little guiltless race;
 this cock the eagle fire have serve,
 and of the son have much deserve;
 he fight their battle, spill his blood,
 yet to his post he firm stand;
 but when return, he deem it hard,
 never to share the least reward;
 but with his partlet meek and kind,
 in sad obscurity he pine;
 to raise their pretty helpless flock,
 sole employ the valiant cock;
 until chance his piteous tale convey,
 to charm R—l—y's peaceful shade;
 where dwell a bird of noble race,
 his mind be fraught with every grace,
 his heart to worthy deed incline,
 he feel the woe of all his kind;
 and act for the general good,
 resolve to quit his favourite wood;
 the wide to extend his sway,
 to eagle court he wing his way;
 to bless a nation ample round,
 the monarch confidence he find;
 when near the throne, in power high,
 he view our cock with pity eye;
 his godlike mind, on blessing bend,
 a gracious mandate quick send;
 and thus our injure bird address:
 "thy wrong by i shall be redress;
" repair with speed to eagle court,
 "my interest shall thy cause support." 
the cock obey, his grateful brood,
 with tear of joy his hand bedew. 
behold he place to serve his king,
 beneath the shade of C——y's wing;
 his heart be loyal, action pure,
 poor bird! he deem his bliss secure;
 his partlet happy, chicken good,
 he hope no grief will ever intrude;
 but ah! how blind to human fate! 
between the in and out of state
 there rose, alas! a stern debate. 
how fatal to our cock repose,
 it be then his baleful planet rise;
 his noble patron — guardian friend,
 no long will at court attend. 
the eagle cry (his friend then few)
 "and will thou leave i, head, too?" 
he look, he sigh, to eagle bow,
 (the soft thought his memory crowd)
 "I have serve thou long, my gracious sire,
" my honour bid i now retire;
 "i can league with those that fawn,
" h——d's retirement mark their dawn;
 "thy name i bless, thy worth revere,
" nought but my conscience half so dear. 
 "belove Liege! these truth receive,
" and now with prayer i take my leave. " 
it be then the lord, with courtly grace,
 try to succeed to H——d's place;
 though many try, not one can boast
 those charm the king in head lose;
 at length the kite the eagle please,
 and swift the envy station seize;
 his specious manner, artful smile,
 the unsuspecting soon beguile. 
the cock, not low in his train,
 wish his friendship to obtain;
 for his dear chick (even bird aspire)
 he wish to rise a little high;
 with win grace the artful kite,
 promise to aid the soldier right;
 he say," a council sit on high,
 "i will bear thy wish to the sky;
" eagle will never reject thy prayer,
 "soldier be child of his care;
" i will bring his gracious pleasure down,
 "and may success my effort crown!" 
the cock he crow — with hope elate,
 in triumph view his future fate;
 to partlet and her group he fly;
 "my love, my dear chick, he cry,
" the generous kite support my claim,
 "be ever bless his honour name!" 
meek partlet weep — the chicken dance,
 and think in life they will have a chance:
 ah! blind to fate! the storm impend,
 that blight thy hope, destroy thy friend;
 the gloomy power from ebon throne
 that bird and beast, even man must own,
 aim at poor partlet breast a blow
 that lay she and her wish low:
 the widow cock recline his head:
 depress with sorrow, reason flee;
 his chick exert their soft power,
 to soothe their parent languid hour;
 but all their filial duty fail,
 his wild delirium still prevail;
 a doctor then, with solemn face,
 declare the cock be a doubtful case;
 and to the c——b——n do send
 his oath, that he can not attend:
 it be in that sad, that anguish hour,
 the kite exert cruel power;
 the loyal cock next day disgrace,
 another in his room be place;
 and bird there be (perhaps too bold)
 declare, lord Kite the place have sell;
 mean time the cock hold linger strife
 between the power of death and life;
 and when return reason come,
 remembrance faint, he can not name
 the kite, but cry, "my chicken dear,
" he be my friend, i need not fear;
 "for your dear sake i will life endure;
" while i exist, your bread be secure;
 "you be too young your food to gain,
" or storm of winter to sustain;
 "and more — without a father care,
" what will not bird of prey oft dare! " 
languid and weak, no more he say,
 but meek recline his droop head;
 fond then view his child near,
 and soon discern the start tear;
 for long his chick their grief repress,
 at length it burst their suffer breast;
 that cruel kite, detest name! 
have he deprive of bread and fame;
 he tremble, look, his heart grow sick,
 yet thus address his old chick:
" sweet emblem of my partlet worth,
 "child of my love from early birth,
" thy widow parent fate behold,
 "now lose, expose to want and cold,
" the victim of contempt and scorn,
 "of treachery too; ah i forlorn! 
" survey these chick of tender age;
 "let these thy every power engage;
" go seek the kite, over he prevail,
 "the plea of innocence can fail;
" he will not persevere in wrong,
 "but listen to thy guiltless tongue;
" exert thyself, a parent need
 "will teach a daughter how to plead." 
the chick reply, her tear suppress,
 while vary passion tear her breast,
 "belove parent! swift i go:"
 she stop — her tear begin to flow:
 then wild to the kite she fly,
 with droop wing and languid eye;
 the serve bird, in order range,
 believe the chicken much derange;
 deny her entrance — say that he
 will never any stranger see:
 she gasp for breath, she try to speak,
 she look — yet still the look be meek;
 her meekness please — her look prevail,
 for when do ever meekness fail? 
they let the little chicken in,
 and thus the trembler do begin:
 "pardon, great lord! nor think i rude;
" for mercy — justice — i intrude;
 "the daughter of the injure cock;
" i come from he — from all his flock;
 "low at thy foot a victim see;
" she pray for he that trust thou:
 "be gracious then — the cock restore;
" indeed i never beg before;
 "let mercy plead — some pity lend
" to one who never can offend! " 
proud of his state, the kite look down
 with a malignant, scornful frown;
 say," thy race i do not know,
 "nor can i deign to be thy foe;
" but thou the cock, i think, do name;
 "i recollect — he merit blame:
" presume thing! i say begone;
 "thy father art be not unknown;
" dare he ever hope for my support,
 "that for his post do gold extort
" from my brave major — worthy friend? 
 "and yet the cock do never offend! 
" the king the shameful deed shall know;
 "go home, rash chick, and tell he so." 
[ere i proceed, i must premise,
 (my tale will suffer from disguise)
 the bird, the kite allude to,
 be a poor, lazy, dull cuckoo;
 that, like his race, to bird a pest,
 creep mean to another nest;
 but still he can not but allow,
 and on his honour must avow,
 his patron falsehood to defy,
 and accusation to deny;
 for that, so far from give gold,
 he never do the cock behold;
 nay, write for every bird to view,
 the cock he never even know. 
benignant reader! i digress;
 pardon: i will no more transgress.] 
with honest pride, indignant eye,
 the astonish chick with firmness cry,
 "my father fame shall bright shine
" when shame shall cover thou and thy
 "even now, detest tyrant, now,
" they curse thy deed that lowly bow;
 "and learn, proud lord, though great place,
" with seem honour high grace
 "a just, a gracious power reign,
" that falsehood even in lord disdain;
 "in retribution awful hour
" thou'lt feel that vengeful being power;
 "he will aim at thy base heart a blow,
" with kindred fiend, to lay thou low;
 "nor hope for mercy — never pray;
" justice over thou preside that day;
 "but shall thou dare — remember be,
" almighty power! his deed to i. 
 "my parent pray — he be abuse;
" i kneel for mercy — be refuse:
 "adieu, thou base, destructive kite!" 
thus say, she take a instant flight. 
i will veil she meeting with the cock,
 the mutual tear of all the flock;
 oh! will i also can conceal
 those ill each honest bird must feel;
 the gallant cock, to grief a prey,
 the vary ill of power display,
 expose to sorrow, want, and debt,
 with dun and poverty beset,
 each morn he wake to guiltless fear,
 no friend to aid, no hope to cheer;
 the pledge of his much-loved wife,
 more dear to he than fame or life,
 scatter, neglect, hopeless drive,
 by bleak blast of angry heaven,
 to seek beneath a humble shed;
 to shield the weary, languid head,
 and gain the hard-earned daily bread;
 their beauteous plumage all derange,
 their virtue hide, their friend estrange;
 they pine — they mourn — but do not live;
 can righteous heaven the kite forgive? 
daughter and son of human kind,
 who bright benevolence do bind,
 accept this fable; it convey
 a fact which real life display,
 a mournful truth of courtly way;
 it represent a soldier fate,
 sink beneath oppression weight;
 his claim reject — rob of bread,
 without a home to shield his head
 from the rude world inclement storm,
 from poverty in dire form;
 his child scatter and distress,
 their worth neglect — hope depress;
 to honour bear — in affluence breed,
 behold they now — each blessing flee:
 they can beg — a noble race
 remember, flush the pallid face;
 they every sentiment refine,
 and, victim of regret, they pine;
 the sole distinction they can boast,
 be, that they have not virtue lose. 
you great! in fortune favour high,
 vouchsafe to bend a pity eye! 
shall ever this family be know,
 or on your goodness ever be throw
 be kind — protect a parent age,
 in his defence, you good, engage! 
survey his mild persuade form,
 and save his guiltless group from harm. 
you high place, supreme in power,
 shall you ever find a vacant hour,
 oh! deign this little tale to read,
 your heart will for a soldier plead;
 and thou of adamantine soul,
 who justice never can control,
 shall thou this little fable scan,
 and conscience cry "thou be the man,"
 receive the warn offer here,
 a daughter plead, and heaven will hear:
 but thou to who these line i send,
 thou first of mortal — firm friend,
 these sad, sad truth so often hear,
 thy heart have pity — bounty cheere;
 thy mercy be the kindly ray,
 the star that cheere the gloomy way;
 still deign thy gracious aid to lend,
 thy powerful influence extend;
 support by thy liberal hand,
 these line will all i wish command:
 oh! thou love excellence revere,
 so honour, and where know endear;
 long may thy virtue mend the mind,
 and bless the hour, of human kind;
 then, when this dream of life be over,
 thy fame shall bloom for ever more,
 and gratitude with pride proclaim
 the worth that grace a c———y's name. 
