to a friend in love.

accept, dear youth, a sympathize lay,
 the only tribute pity love can pay. 
though vain the hope thy anguish to assuage,
 charm down desire, or calm fierce passion rage;
 yet still permit i in thy grief to grieve,
 relief to offer, if i can relieve;
 near thy sick couch with fond concern to attend,
 and reach out cordial to my die friend. 

poor hapless youth! what word can ease thy pain,
 when reason plead, and wisdom cry in vain! 
can feeble verse impetuous nature guide,
 or stem the force of blind affection tide? 
if reason check, or duty disallow,
 "reason, you cry, and duty be my foe:
" religion dictate ineffectual prove,
 "and god himself be impertinence in love. 

what be thou, love? thou strange mysterious ill,
 who none aright can know, though all can seel. 
from careless sloth thy dull existence flow,
 and feed the fountain whence itself arise:
 silent its wave with baleful influence roll,
 damp the young mind, and sink the aspire soul
 poison its virtue, all its power restrain,
 and blast the promise of the future man. 
to thou, curse fiend, the captive wretch consign,
 "his passion rampant, and his reason blind,
 reason, heaven great vicegerent, dare disown,
 and place a foolish idol in its throne:
 or wild raise his frantic rapture high,
 and pour out blasphemy at thy desire. 
at thy desire he bid a creature shine,
 he deck a worm with attribute divine;
 she to angelic beauty dare prefer,
" angel be paint fair to look like she! 
before her shrine the lowly suppliant lay,
 adore the idol that himself have make:
 from her almighty breath his doom receive,
 die by her frown, as by her smile he live. 
supreme she reign in all-sufficient state,
 to she he bow, from she expect his fate,
 "heaven in her love, damnation in her hate. 
he rear unhallowed altar to her name,
 where lust light up a black, pollute flame;
 where sigh impure, as impious incense rise,
 himself the priest, his heart the sacrifice:
 and thus god sacred word his horrid prayer supply. 

 "center of all perfection, source of bliss,
" in who thy creature live and move and be,
 "save, or i perish! hear my humble prayer,
" spare thy poor servant — o in mercy spare. 
 "thou be my joy, on thou depend my trust,
" hide not thy face, nor frown i into dust. 
 "send forth thy breath, and raise again i see
" my joy, my life, my final bliss in thou. 
 "for thou i be: for thou i all resign,
" be thou my one thing needful, ever i! 

but o forbear, presumptuous Muse forbear,
 nor wound with rant profane the christian ear:
 a just abhorrence in my friend i see,
 he start from love, when love idolatry. 
 "give i thy heart," if the creator cry,
 "it be give the creature," what bold wretch reply? 
not so my friend — he wake, he breathe again,
 and "reason take once more the slacken rein." 
in vain rebellious nature claim a part,
 when heaven require, he give up all his heart:
 ( "for love divine no partnership allow,
" and heaven averse reject divide vow)
 fix though she be, he rend the idol thence,
 nor let her power exceed omnipotence. 
command his god, "cut off the offend hand?" 
he hear, obedient to his god command:
 "pluck out thy eye," let the redeemer say;
 he tear, and cast the bleed orb away. 
victorious now to noble joy aspire,
 his bosom, touch with more than earthly fire:
 he leave rough passion for calm virtue road,
 give earth for heaven, and quit a worm for god. 
