address to friendship.

friendship! thou noble ardor of the soul! 
immortal essence! languor best support! 
chief dignify proof of glorious man! 
firm cement of the world! endear tie,
 which bind the will soul, and bring along
 her chaste, strong, and sublime power! 

all else the dregs of spirit. love soft flame,
 bewilder, lead infatuate soul;
 level, depress, wrap in endless mist,
 contract, dissolve, enervate and enslave,
 relax, sink, distract, while fancy fill
 th'inflaming draught, and aid the calenture. 
intoxicate charm! yet well refine
 by virtue brighten flame, pure it ascend,
 as incense in its grateful circle mount,
 till, mix and lose, with thou it boast thy name. 

thou unsound blessing! woo with eager hope,
 as clown the nightly vapour swift pursue,
 and fain will grasp to cheer their lonely way;
 vain the wide stretch, and vain the shorten breath,
 for, ah! the bright delusion onward fly,
 while the sad swain deceive, now cautious tread
 the common beat track, nor quit it more. 

not unexisting art thou, but so rare,
 that delv soul never find thou; it be to thou,
 when find, if ever find, sweet fugitive,
 the noble mind open all her rich store;
 thy firm, strong hold suit the courageous breast,
 where stubborn virtue dwell in secret league,
 and each conspire to fortify the rest. 

etherial spirit alone may hope to prove
 thy strong, yet soften rapture; soften more
 when penitence succeed to injury;
 when, doubt pardon, the meek, plead eye
 on which the soul have once with pleasure dwell,
 swim in the tear of sorrow and repentance. 
the faultless mind with triple pity view
 the tarnish friend, who feel the sting of shame;
 it be then too little bare to forgive;
 nor can the soul rest on that frigid thought,
 but rush swift from her stoic height,
 with all her freeze feeling melt down
 by pity genial beam, she sink, distress,
 share the contagion, and with lenient hand
 lift the warm chalice fill with consolation. 

yet friendship name oft deck the crafty lip,
 with seem virtue clothes the ruthless soul;
 grief-soothing note, well feign to look like truth,
 like a insidious serpent soft creep
 to the poor, guileless, unsuspecting heart,
 wind round in wily fold, and sink deep
 explore her sacred treasure, base heave
 her hoard of woe to a unpitying world;
 first sooth, ensnare, expose, and betray. 
what be thou, fiend, who thus usurpe the form
 of the soft cherub? tell i, by what name
 the ostentatious call thou, thou who wreck
 the gloomy peace of sorrow-loving soul? 
why thou be vanity, ungenerous sprite,
 who tarnish the action deem so great,
 and of soulsaving essence. but for thou,
 how pure, how bright will theron virtue shine;
 and, but that thou be incorporate with the flame,
 which else will bless wherever its beam illume,
 my grateful spirit have record here
 thy splendid seem. long I have know their worth. 

o, it be the deep error man can prove,
 to fancy joy disinterest can live,
 indissoluble, pure, unmixed with self;
 why, it be to be immortal, it be to own
 no part but spirit in this chill gloom. 

my soul ambitious, and its utmost stretch
 will be, to own a friend — but that be deny. 
now, at this bold avowal, gaze, you eye,
 which kind melt at my woe-fraught tale;
 start back, benevolence, and shun the charge;
 soft bend pity, fly the sullen phrase,
 ungrateful as it seem. my abject fate
 excite the will hand of charity,
 the momentary sigh, the pity tear,
 and instantaneous act of bounty bland,
 to misery so kind; yet not to you,
 bounty, or charity, or mercy mild,
 the pensive thought apply fair friendship name;
 that name which never yet can dare exist
 but in equality [...] 
