elegy, to the memory of mr. THOMAS Phillips of Fairford. 

no more i hail the morning golden gleam;
 no more the wonder of the view i sing:
 friendship require a melancholy theme;
 at her command the awful lyre i string. 

now as i wander through this leafless grove,
 where the dark vapour of the evening rise,
 how shall i teach the chord shell to move;
 or stay the gush torrent from my eye? 

Philips, great master of the boundless lyre,
 thou will the grateful muse attempt to paint;
 give i a double portion of thy fire,
 or all the power of language be too faint. 

say what bold number, what immortal line
 the image of thy genius can reflect? 
o, lend my pen what animate thy,
 to show thou in thy native glory deck. 

the joyous charm of spring delight see,
 their beauty double glare in thy lay:
 nothing be spring which Phillips do not draw,
 and every image of his muse be may. 

so rise the regal hyacinthal star;
 so shine the pleasant rustic daisy bed;
 so seem the woodland lessen from afar;
 you see the real prospect as you read. 

majestic summer bloom flowery pride
 next claim the honour of his nervous song;
 he teach the stream in hollow trill to glide,
 and lead the glory of the year along. 

when golden autumn, wreathe in ripen corn,
 from purple cluster press the foamy wine,
 thy genius do his sallow brow adorn,
 and make the beauty of the season thy. 

pale rugged winter bend over his tread,
 his grizzle hair bedrop with joy dew;
 his eye, a dusky light, congeal and dead;
 his robe, a tinge of bright etherial blue:

his train, a motleyed, sanguine, sable cloud,
 he limp along the russet dreary moor;
 while rise whirlwind, blast, keen, and loud,
 roll the white surge to the sound shore. 

nor be his pleasure unimproved by thou:
 pleasure he have, though horrid deform:
 the silvered hill, the polish lake, we see,
 be by thy genius fix, preserve, and warm. 

the rough November have his pleasure too;
 but i be insensible to every joy:
 farewell the laurel, now i grasp the yew,
 and all my little power in grief employ. 

in thou each virtue find a please cell,
 thy mind be honour, and thy soul divine:
 with thou do every power of genius dwell:
 thou be the Helicon of all the nine. 

fancy who various figure-tinctured vest,
 be ever change to a different hue:
 her head, with vary bay and floweret dress,
 her eye, two spangle of the morning dew. 

in dance attitude she sweep thy string,
 and now she soar and now again descend,
 and now recline on the zephyr wing,
 unto the velvet-vested mead she bend. 

peace, deck in all the softness of the dove,
 over thy passion spread her silver plume:
 the rosy vale of harmony and love,
 hang on thy soul in one eternal bloom. 

peace, gentle, soft of the virtue, spread
 her silver pinion, wet with dewy tear,
 upon her best distinguish poet head,
 and teach his lyre the music of the sphere. 

temperance, with health and beauty in her train,
 and massy-muscled strength in graceful pride,
 point at scarlet luxury and pain,
 and do at every cheerful feast preside. 

content, who smile at all the frown of fate,
 fan from idea every seem ill;
 in thy own virtue, and thy genius great,
 the happy muse lay anxious trouble still. 

but see! the sicken glare of day retire,
 and the meek evening shade the dusky grey:
 the west faint glimmer with the saffron fire,
 and, like thy life, o Phillips! die away. 

here, stretch upon this heaven ascend hill,
 i will wait the horror of the come night;
 i will imitate the gently-plaintive rill,
 and by the glare of lambent vapour write. 

wet with the dew the yellow hawthorn bow;
 the loud wind whistle through the echo dell;
 far over the lea the breathe cattle low,
 and the shrill shriek of the screech-owl swell. 

with rustle sound the dusky foliage fly,
 and wanton with the wind in rapid whirl:
 the gurg'le rivulet to the valley hie,
 and lose to sight, in die murmur curl. 

now as the mantle of the evening swell
 upon my mind, i feel a thicken gloom! 
ah! can i charm, by friendship potent spell,
 the soul of Phillips from the deathy tomb! 

then will we wander through the darken vale,
 in converse such as heavenly spirit use,
 and bear upon the plumage of the gale,
 hymn the creator, and exhort the muse. 

but horror to reflection! now no more
 will Phillips sing, the wonder of the plain,
 when doubt whether they may not adore,
 admire mortal hear the nervous strain. 

a madden darkness reign through all the lawn,
 nought but a doleful bell of death be hear,
 save where into a hoary oak withdraw,
 the scream proclaim the curse nocturnal bird. 

now, rest my muse, but only rest to weep,
 a friend make dear by every sacred tie! 
unknown to i be comfort, peace, or sleep,
 Phillips be dead, it be pleasure then to die! 
