occasion by read the memoir of Anne of Austria, write by madam de Motteville.

inscribe to the right honourable the countess of Hertford.

you heedless fair, who pass the live-long day,
 in dress and scandal, gallantry and play;
 who through new scene of pleasure hourly run,
 while life important business be undo;
 look here, when guilty conquest make you vain,
 and see, how sad remorse shut up the scene. 

if future bliss, or misery, must flow
 from what the heart delight in here below,
 think how these habit, root in the breast,
 will fit you for a commerce with the bless. 

you politician, who, in court to shine,
 study the maxim of the florentine;
 who, void of virtue, anxious to be great,
 will rise, though on the ruin of the state;
 see how delusive be ambition dream,
 see providence defeat all your scheme:
 the hand divine the well-laid plot prevent,
 and dash all with unforeseen event. 
yet the short-sighted atheist dare advance,
 these wondrous change be the work of chance. 
not so this pious, penetrate dame,
 who to the sacred fountain trace the stream:
 like lovely Hertford, who her hour employ,
 to form her mind for never-fading joy. 

excel fair! who all so just prize;
 who, in a court, find leisure to be wise;
 humane and humble, pious and sincere;
 who walk, untainted, through infectious air;
 thou honour to thy sex! may i pursue
 the path of wisdom, early tread by you! 
i, who be destine to a low estate,
 free from the vanity that vex the great;
 bless with a happiness to court unknown;
 for i, thank heaven, may call my hour my own:
 o may i pass those hour in such a way,
 as may prepare i for the last, great day! 
that i may, unappalled, lift up my head,
 when the arch-angel call — arise, you dead. 
when all the haughty, pompous son of dust,
 who here in fleet treasure place their trust;
 who here, to their confusion large quaff
 prosperity intoxicate draught;
 till drink with blessing, they despise their god,
 arraign his wisdom, and defy his rod;
 too late shall find, that arm they dare oppose,
 can pour eternal vengeance on his foe. 

reflect, my soul, that day be draw near;
 and timely think, what be thy business here. 
o thou, who arm, reach down from heaven to save,
 so late snatch i from the open grave;
 who bow thy ear, nor let i sue in vain,
 relieve my sickness, and remove my pain;
 in hallow strain, o, teach my soul to soar,
 to celebrate the mercy i adore! 
to thou alone to dedicate my lay,
 who hear my vow, and add to my day! 
watch over my heart, fix every duty there,
 and make eternity my only care. 
