two brother.

who press on my knee this kind pat,
 and with a merry archness in my face
 look up? — a youngling of my own liel race:
 come thou to woo my notice, little Matt? 
i think thou do, and thou shall have it too,
 for, whatsoever thou do or do not do,
 thou have upon my heart a potent claim, —
 Matthew Baillie be thy name;
 and wear by thou, o never may
 the light transmit fade away! 
the virtue of thy grandsire manly breast,
 may they within thy bosom ever rest! 
far be from thou, dear child, even in thy play,
 a crooked cunning trick or selfish way, —
 all greedy grasp, or of cake or toy! 
thou must be generous, kind and true, my boy. 
and if, in after day, thou needs must fight
 with angry school-mate, wrestle for the right. 
whatever the poor or wealthy do, thou must
 frank and straightforward be, faithful and just. 
no seek favour with fair gloze word! 
no dangle after little patron lord! 
in thou, or man or boy, still let we see
 trace of he who name now honour thou. 
he pass, through life with conscience for his guide,
 nor hesitate, wink, or turn aside. 
he live in court, all courtly fail near,
 and know not feign, flattery, or fear. 
be thou a Matthew then from right unswerving,
 and of thy name deserve. 

ah, little man! thy roguish eye
 when those thou love be stand by,
 thy scowl brow and stormy voice,
 when thwart of thy will or choice,
 show thou will have no easy play
 old aunty precept to obey. 
aye! and wee Willie too be near,
 his gladsome, coo voice, i hear;
 and there he come in all his charm,
 set perch in his nurse arm. 
in his sweet face beam smile of love
 that over cheek, chin, and forehead move;
 fat dimple arm, and shoulder bare,
 the same emotion seem to share;
 yea, can we see thou all, we shall discover
 thou be one living smile all over. 
thy small foot too, tinge like the rose,
 with all its spread and stir toe,
 its tiny heel and ankle stout,
 from muslin coaty peep out —
 what part of thou can we behold
 that be not worth a mine of gold? 
thy open mouth that offer kiss
 so win, and seldom miss
 a kind return, full twenty-fold,
 from stern or gentle, young or old;
 come sweet temptation! near — more near,
 and let i feel its pressure dear! 
thou little, love harmless baby,
 ah! what progressive change may be;
 when, with thy youth and manhood, future year
 have deal, and on thy countenance appear
 the mark expression of thy inward worth,
 by joy, and grief, and love, and generous ire draw forth! 
can we even now thy future fortune know,
 thy character and thy endowment! — no;
 why look through onward time to see
 what thou, dear baby, then may be? 
i will not from the present part,
 love so dear what thou be. 

Matthew and William, brother twain,
 God blessing on your head remain! 
soft pretty sign and token tell
 that now you love each other well,
 and nature self and parent kind
 will round your heart this blessing bind. 
in sacred word to each dear brother,
 a grand-ant say conclude, — "love one another." 
