part of a elegy of Tibullus, translate. 

(divitias alius fulvo sibi congerat auro.) 1729-30.

by the same.

let other heap of wealth a shine store,
and much possess labour still for more;
let they, disquiet with dire alarm,
aspire to win a dangerous fame in arm:
i tranquil poverty shall lull to rest,
humble secure and indolent bless;
warm by the blaze of my own cheerful hearth,
i will waste the wintery hour in social mirth;
in summer please attend to harvest toil,
in autumn press the vineyard purple spoil,
and oft to Delia in my bosom bear
some kid, or lamb that want its mother care:
with she i will celebrate each gladsome day,
when swain their sportive rite to Bacchus pay:
with her new milk on pales altar pour,
and deck with ripen fruit pomona bower.
at night how soothe will it be to hear,
shelter and warm, the tempest whistle near;
and while my charmer in my arm i strain,
slumber assist by the beat rain!
ah! how much happy, than the fool who brave
in search of wealth the black tempestuous wave!
while i, content with my little store,
in tedious voyage seek no distant shore,
but idle loll on some shady seat,
near cool fountain shun the dogstar heat;
for what reward so rich can fortune give
that i by absence shall my Delia grieve?
let great Messalla shine in martial toil,
and grace his palace with triumphal spoil;
i beauty hold in strong, though gentle chain,
far from tumultuous war and dusty plain.
with thou, my love, to pass my tranquil day,
how will i slight ambition painful praise!
how will i joy with thou, my love, to yoke
the ox, and feed my solitary flock!
on thy soft breast may i but lean my head,
how downy shall i think the woodland bed!

the wretch who sleep not by his fair one side,
detest the gild couch useless pride,
nor know his weary, weep eye to close,
though murmur rill invite he to repose.
hard be his heart, who thou, my fair, can leave
for all the honour prosperous war can give;
though through the vanquish east he spread his fame,
and parthian tyrant tremble at his name;
though bright in arm, while host around he bleed,
with martial pride he press his foam steed.
no pomp like these my humble vow require;
i ask, in thy embrace to expire:
thou may my close eye in death behold!
thou may my falter hand yet strive to hold!
then, Delia, then thy heart will melt in woe,
then over my breathless clay thy tear will flow;
thy tear will flow, for gentle be thy mind,
nor do thou think it weakness to be kind.
with thou each youth and tender maid shall join
in grief, and mix their friendly sigh with thy;
but ah! my Delia, i conjure thou spare
thy heave breast and loose dishevel hair:
wound not thy form; lest on the elysian coast
thy anguish shall disturb my peaceful ghost.

but now nor death, nor part shall employ
our sprightly thought, or damp our bridal joy:
we will live, my Delia, and from life remove
all care, all business, but delightful love.
old age in vain those pleasure will retrieve,
which youth alone can taste, alone can give;
then let we snatch the moment to be bless,
this hour be love — be Fortune all the rest.
