a epistle to lord b —

by the same.

how happy you! who vary joy pursue;
and every hour present you something new?
plan, scheme, and model, all palladio art,
for six long month have gain upon your heart;
of colonade, of corridore you talk,
the wind stair-case and the cover walk;
you blend the order with vitruvian toil,
and raise with wondrous joy the fancy pile:
but the dull workman slow perform hand
but cold execute his lord command.
with dirt and mortar soon you grow displease,
plant succeed, and avenue be raise,
canal be cut, and mountain level make;
bower of retreat, and gallery of shade;
the shave turf present a lively green;
the border flower in mystic knot be see:
with study art on nature you refine —
the spring behold you warm in this design,
but scarce the cold attack your favourite tree,
your inclination fail, and wish freeze.
you quit the grove, so late you admire;
with other view your eager hope be fire,
post to the city you direct your way;
not bloom paradise can bribe your stay:
ambition show your power bright side;
it be mean poor in solitude to hide.
though certain pain attend the care of state,
a good man owe his country to be great;
shall act abroad the high distinguish part,
or show at least the purpose of his heart.
with thought like these the shine court you seek;
full of new project for almost a week:
you then despise the tinsel glitter snare;
think vile mankind below a serious care.
life be too short for any distant aim;
and cold the dull reward of future fame:
be happy then while yet you have to live;
and love be all the blessing heaven can give.
fire by new passion you address the fair;
survey the opera as a gay parterre:
young cloe bloom have make you certain prize,
but for a sidelong glance from celia eye:
your beat heart acknowledge her power;
your eager eye her lovely form devour;
you feel the poison swell in your breast,
and all your soul by fond desire possess.
in die sigh a long three hour be past;
to some assembly with impatient haste,
with tremble hope, and doubtful fear you move,
resolve to tempt your fate, and own your love:
but there Belinda meet you on the stair,
easy her shape, attract all her air;
a smile she give, and with a smile can wound;
her melt voice have music in the sound;
her every motion wear resistless grace;
wit in her mien, and pleasure in her face:
here while you vow eternity of love,
cloe and Celia unregarded move.

thus on the sand of afric burn plain,
however deep make, no long impress remain;
the light leaf can leave its figure there;
the strong form be scatter by the air.
so yield the warm temper of your mind,
so touch by every eye, so toss by wind;
oh! how unlike the heaven my soul design!
unseen, unheard, the throng around i move;
not wish praise, insensible of love:
no whisper soften, nor no beauty fire;
careless i see the dance, and cold hear the lyre.

so numerous herd be drive over the rock;
no print be leave of all the pass flock:
so sing the wind around the solid stone:
so vain beat the wave with fruitless moan.
tedious the toil, and great the workman care,
who dare attempt to fix impression there:
but shall some swain more skilful than the rest,
engrave his name upon this marble breast,
not roll age can deface that name;
through all the storm of life it be still the same:
though length of year with moss may shade the ground,
deep, though unseen, remain the secret wound.
