a answer to the tale of a nettle.

write by d. d'foe.

when the good man be win to so gracious a deed,
 as to tolerate the nettle and his curse seed,
 he never imagine this viperous brood
 will be so ungrateful and monstrous rude,
 as to plead any title to the right of his ground;
 which have cost the just man so many fair pound.
he then cast about what to do in the main,
 and council he call to advise with the same.
good sir, say the council, do but try they with speed. 
they pretend to much sanctity, call emselve the lord seed
 and none be so righteous and seem holly,
 as the offspring of nettle. hypocritical folly
 i presume you have get, and instead of be just,
 i doubt they will betrap you on any disgust:
 therefore i advise you without more ado,
 you now be old, may grow wise too;
for experience will teach, what i now shall declare,
let none in your ground any port of it share,
but such as will swear to be true to your heir,
 and support you and he against all invader
 of you and he right; let no desperate bravado
 make you the more fear they, or esteem your self little,
 for they will soon cut you out by the scythe or the Sickle:
 if once they be sure that you dread their power,
 you nor you shall never be quiet one hour. 

i thank you, good friend, for your good advice,
 i will follow your counsel, and strait in a trice
 he summon the nettle, and tell they the cause.
a motion he make for to bind they in law,
 for their good and his own; and so will in short
 admit they to hold that possession in part
 of his ground they possess, if they will with speed
 swear to preserve it to he and his seed.
they unanimous consent, and without more ado,
 take the oath unto he, and his successor too;
 thus be admit to a free toleration,
 a handle they get for their present possession,
 and now they begin to dispute with their master,
 and encroach on he, even fast and fast,
 and tell he in short they will aright to his land,
 for he give they possession under his own hand.
and thus they daily create he trouble,
 and plagu vex the good man that be noble;
 they mighty combustion do raise in his ground,
 and Cedars and elm they meet their death wind,
 and all sort of tree that be royal give,
 be root up quite, though their top reach to heaven:
 and after they have thus destroy his possession,
 the royal-oaks-head be cut off by commission,
 and nothing there leave but bramble and bush,
 viporous sting nettle and silly poor rush;
 the bramble bear sway, and beat down the rest
 of all his fine plant, and fruit of the best,
 and so it continue in confusion so long,
 till right do take place and overcome wrong. 
and now since the ground be restore as before,
 take care how the nettle sting you any more:
 and since the handle you have once again get,
 keep it fast lest your ground go once more to pot.
