advice to a lady.

by the same. 1731. 

the counsel of a friend, Belinda, hear,
too rough kind to please a lady ear,
unlike the flattery of a lover pen,
such truth as woman seldom learn from man.
nor think i praise you ill, when thus i show
what female vanity may fear to know:
some merit i, to dare to be sincere,
but great you, sincerity to bear.

hard be the fortune that your sex attend;
woman, like prince, find few real friend:
all who approach they their own end pursue:
lover and minister be seldom true.
hence oft from reason heedless beauty stray,
and the most trust guide the most betray:
hence by fond dream of fancy power amuse,
when most you tyrannize you be most abuse.

what be your sex early, late care,
your heart be supreme ambition? to be fair:
for this the toilet every thought employ,
hence all the toil of dress, and all the joy:
for this, hand, lip, and eye be put to school,
and each instructive feature have its rule;
and yet how few have learn, when this be give.
not to disgrace the partial boon of heaven?
how few with all their pride of form can move?
how few be lovely, that be make for love?
do you, my fair, endeavour to possess
a elegance of mind as well as dress;
be that your ornament, and know to please
by grateful nature unaffected ease.

nor make to dangerous wit a vain pretence,
but wise rest content with modest sense;
for wit, like wine, intoxicate the brain,
too strong for feeble woman to sustain;
of those who claim it, more than half have none,
and half of those who have it, be undo.

be still superior to your sex art,
nor think dishonesty a proof of part;
for you the plain be the wise rule,
a cunning woman be a knavish fool.

be good yourself, nor think another shame
can raise your merit, or adorn your fame.
prude rail at whore, as statesman in disgrace
at minister, because they wish their place.
virtue be amiable, mild, serene,
without all beauty, and all peace within:
the honour of a prude be rage and storm,
it be ugliness in its most frightful form:
fierce it stand defy god and man,
as fiery monster guard a giant den.

seek to be good, but aim not to be great:
a woman noble station be retreat;
her fair virtue fly from public sight,
domestic worth, that shun too strong a light.

to rough man ambition task resign:
it be we in senate or in court to shine,
to labour for a sink corrupt state,
or dare the rage of envy, and be great.
one only care your gentle breast shall move,
the important business of your life be love:
to this great point direct your constant aim,
this make your happiness, and this your fame.

be never cool reserve with passion join;
with caution choose; but then be fond kind.
the selfish heart, that but by half be give,
shall find no place in love delightful heaven;
here sweet extreme alone can true bless,
the virtue of a lover be excess.

a maid unasked may own a well-placed flame,
not love first, but love wrong be shame.

contemn the little pride of give pain,
nor think that conquest justify disdain;
short be the period of insult power;
offend Cupid find his vengeful hour,
soon will resume the empire which he give,
and soon the tyrant shall become the slave.

bless be the maid, and worthy to be bless,
who soul, entire by he she love possess,
feel every vanity in fondness lose,
and ask no power, but that of please most:
she be the bliss in just return to prove
the honest warmth of undissembled love;
for she, inconstant man may cease to range,
and gratitude forbid desire to change.

but lest harsh care the lover peace destroy,
and rough blight the tender bud of joy,
let reason teach what passion fain will hide,
that Hymen band by prudence shall be tie,
Venus in vain the wed pair will crown,
if angry fortune on their union frown:
soon will the flatter dream of bliss be over,
and cloy imagination cheat no more.
then wake to the sense of last pain,
with mutual tear the nuptial couch they stain;
and that fond love, which shall afford relief,
do but increase the anguish of their grief;
while both can easy their own sorrow bear,
than the sad knowledge of each other care.

yet may you rather feel that virtuous pain,
than sell your violate charm for gain;
than wed the wretch who you despise, or hate,
for the vain glare of useless wealth or state.
the most abandon prostitute be they,
who not to love, but avarice fall a prey:
nor aught avail the specious name of wife;
a maid so wed, be a whore for life.

even in the happy choice, where favour heaven
have equal love, and easy fortune give,
think not, the husband gain, that all be do;
the prize of happiness must still be win;
and oft, the careless find it to their cost,
the lover in the husband may be lose;
the grace may alone his heart allure;
they and the virtue meet must secure. 

let even your prudence wear the please dress
of care for he, and anxious tenderness. 
from kind concern about his weal or woe,
let each domestic duty seem to flow;
the household sceptre, if he bid you bear,
make it your pride his servant to appear;
endear thus the common act of life,
the mistress still shall charm he in the wife;
and wrinkle age shall unobserved come on,
before his eye perceive one beauty go:
even over your cold, and ever-sacred urn,
his constant flame shall unextinguished burn.

thus i, Belinda, will your charm improve,
and form your heart to all the art of love;
the task be hard to secure my own
against the power of those already know;
for well you twist the secret chain that bind
with gentle force the captivate mind,
skill every soft attraction to employ,
each flatter hope, and each allure joy;
i own your genius, and from you receive
the rule of please, which to you i give.
