to a gentleman, who request a copy of verse from the author.

i have, before the time prescribe by you,
 expose my weak production to your view,
 which may, i hope, have pardon at your hand,
 because produce to light by your command
 perhaps you may expect some finish ode,
 or sacred song, to sound the praise of god;
 a glorious thought, and laudable! but then
 think what illiterate poet guide the pen:
 ill suit such task with one who hold the plough,
 such lofty subject with a fate so low. 

sir, be your eloquence and learning mine,
 and i, like you, a favourite of the nine;
 i quick will parnassus summit climb,
 and find a hero worthy of my rhyme:
 nor shall my muse the grecian monarch trace,
 nor will i celebrate the trojan race;
 nor any of those martial son of fame,
 pagan, unworthy of a christian theme. 
far noble thought my grateful voice shall raise,
 in lofty strain, to great messiah praise:
 i will joyful resound his wondrous birth,
 and paint his godlike virtue, while on earth;
 then, with reluctance, horror, and surprise,
 i will mournful relate his agony;
 i will trace the heavenly hero to the tree,
 sing what he suffer there for you and i;
 next, in heroic number, will i tell,
 how soon he baffle death, and vanquish hell,
 subdue the grave, and show the glorious way,
 from realm of darkness, to eternal day. 
such noble subject shall my lay excite;
 and you, my patron, will in such delight;
 grateful to i, when you, well-pleased, shall view
 th'accomplish sacred song inscribe to you. 

but now i must omit messiah praise,
 lest i degrade he with unworthy lay;
 my fate compel i silent to remain,
 for want of learning to improve my strain:
 by which no thought, though well conceive, can rise
 to full perfection, but in embryo die:
 yet my unpolished genius will produce,
 and bring forth something, though of little use. 

thus, in the country, often have i find,
 through slothful man neglect, a plate of ground,
 waste and uncultivated, void of seed,
 produce nothing, but some trifle weed. 

but why stand i my fate accuse so? 
the field call i to labour; i must go:
 the kine low after meat; the hungry steed,
 neigh, complain he want his usual feed. 
then, sir, adieu: accept what you do crave,
 and be propitious to your humble slave. 
