STOKLEWATH;

or, the cumbrian village.

from where dark cloud of curl smoke arise,
 and the tall column mount into the sky;
 where the grim arch of the forge appear,
 who flute pillar prop the thicken air;
 where dome of peer and humble roof be find
 alike to spread their mingle vapour round;
 from denser air and busy town i run,
 to catch a glimpse of the unclouded sun;
 foe to the toil which wealth and pomp create,
 and all the hard-wrought tinsel of the great. 

Aurora now have leave her crimson bed,
 and the sky glow with pure reflect red;
 the move star withdraw their timorous light,
 as her gild chariot burst upon the sight;
 the glitter pearl that gentle eve have bear,
 be all adorn the sweet brow of morn;
 and every shrub, and every open flower,
 unlock some jewel for the rise hour. 
meanwhile unseen the fragrant zephyr fly,
 and gather essence from the balmy dew;
 i wander on, till fancy bid i stay,
 and spend with health and her one holiday. 

where the clear stream its useful tenor hold,
 and the shear flock come whiten from the fold;
 where on each side the cottage be see,
 which orchard shelter, and which poplar screen;
 there many a apple, in autumnal pride,
 glow with red cheek, and blush side by side;
 which with nice care be lock in oaken chest,
 till christmas come, and tart draw out the feast. 
nor do the garden useful herb deny,
 fence round with thorn that point their spear on high;
 there the thyme blow, from which brown bee distil
 the sweet that all their waxen storehouse fill. 
the parsley next extend its useful row,
 and marjorum sweet be ever teach to grow;
 next balm, and sage, and hyssop, physic yield,
 with cordial mint, the doctor of the field. 
there spread cabbage all their strength produce,
 and take firm root to stand for winter use. 
carrot and turnip sunday-feast, supply,
 till bless potato meet the thankful eye. 
there the tall pea in stately grandeur stalk,
 and humble bean midst her own fragrance walk. 
the ripen currant many a warbler bring,
 among who the blackbird spread his sooty wing. 
but o! forbear with lure or artful snare
 to trap this sweet songster of the air,
 nor quench in darkness his quick visual ray,
 shut out from liberty and glorious day. 
enough, enough! while to the cage confine,
 through all the house his wilding wood-note wind;
 let he at least the gift of light retain,
 nor hear his whistle pipe with conscious pain! 
and, look, where ornament her care bestow! 
above the lily nod the blush rose,
 the fringe poppy and the peony vie
 which shall look gay in the village eye. 
nor think not these unmeet for Sunday pride,
 when with a woollen thread the nosegay tie! 
there southernweed, and thyme, like broom, behold
 spread their shade over the dark marigold. 
Sweetwilliam next, in wig of early pride,
 smile on himself as if his bob he eye;
 the rose and lily round the posy stray,
 and in the church waft faintness far away,
 when tire with walk many a sultry morn
 through new cut hay, or field of stand corn;
 even while at prayer a sudden chillness steal,
 and all the heart the creep sickness feel;
 no salt be there, — yet thyme and mint renew
 the waste sense, and cheer from pew to pew. 

but now the sun send forth his scorch ray,
 and the hot cattle startle cease to graze;
 while to the pool, or dark shade they hie,
 and with the scourge tail whip off the offend fly. 

along the path that wind around the hill
 you lose the milkmaid — though you hear she still. 
at the last fair she catch yond thrill lay,
 and now the wood repeat "old robin grey." 
the wave pail swim light on her head,
 for equal step to measure music tread. 

down the stream where wood begin to throw
 their verdant arm around the rock below,
 a rustic bridge across the tide be throw,
 where brier and woodbine hide the hoary stone,
 a simple arch salute the admire eye,
 and the mill be clack the tumble wave supply. 
but lest society some loss shall share,
 and near neighbour lack their neighbour fare,
 the totter step-stone cross the stream be lay,
 over which trip light many a busy maid,
 and many a matron, when one fail cow
 bid no big cheese within the cheese-vat grow,
 their wealthy neighbour then, her bowl to swell,
 will glad take what they as glad sell. 

the morning toil be now complete over,
 the bowl well scald, and well sweep the floor. 
the daughter at the needle ply the seam,
 while the good mother hasten to the stream:
 there the long web, that wintery moon begin,
 lie stretch and beam in the summer sun;
 and lest he scorch they in his fervid hour,
 she scoop along the nice conduct shower;
 till like the snow, that tip the mountain height,
 the brown dull shade give place to pure white;
 while her sweet child knee-deep be wade see,
 pick bright stone, or tumble on the green. 

but now the sun be bright whirl wheel appear
 on the broad front of noon, in full career,
 a sign more welcome hang not in the air,
 for now the sister call the brother hear;
 dinner the word, and every cave around
 devour the voice, and feast upon the sound. 
it be dinner, father! all the brother cry,
 throw down the spade, and heave the pickaxe by;
 it be dinner, father! home they pant go,
 while the tire parent still pant on more slow. 
now the fry rasher meet they on the way,
 and savoury pancake welcome steam convey. 
their pace they mend, till at the pump they stand,
 deluge the face, and purify the hand,
 and then to dinner. there the woman wait,
 and the tire father fill his chair of state;
 smoke potato meet their thankful eye,
 and hunger waft the grateful sacrifice;
 to her libation of sweet milk be pour,
 and peace and plenty watch around the board. 

now, till the sun have somewhat sink in height,
 yet long before he dip his wheel in night,
 the nutbrown labourer their sense steep
 in the soft dew of renovate sleep;
 the worthy sire to the soft bed repair,
 the son beneath the shade forget their care. 
the clock strike two, it beat upon the ear,
 and soon the parent anxious voice they hear;
 come, come, my lad, you must not sleep all day! 
they rub their eye, start up, then stalk away. 

but let i not at twelve forget to eye
 the learned school-dame jump, shrill-toned fry. 
some near at home to dinner dance run,
 eager for play when the repast be do;
 other more distant, bring their satchele fare
 safe enfold by a mother care. 
on a wood trencher stand the towerlike pie,
 while bread and cheese form battlement on high;
 a crust for 'tween-meal in a corner stow,
 and guard butter oaten-cake enclose;
 and shine tin-flask of new milk, which seem
 best to demand the name of good thick cream! 

the dinner do; the happy train so gay,
 in various group disperse to various play;
 some to the hounded-hare the sinew strain,
 and fleet as greyhound scour along the plain. 
at last the hare through all her wind catch
 get leave to breathe, and breath bring change of thought;
 for race some, but more for football cry,
 mark out their ground, and toss the globe on high;
 the well fight field deal many a gall stroke,
 and many a chief overthrow, and many a shin be break. 

these active feat, while manly imp essay,
 the gentle sex choose out a gentle play;
 they form a smile circle on the green,
 where chuckstone, doll, and totum, all be see;
 a nest of linnet, a few happy elf,
 run home to see if yet they pick themselves,
 though but a hour ago their throat they cram,
 and chirp, and cheep, and well the mother sham. 

escape in happy hour from rod-taught lore,
 their book forget, nor work remember more;
 all share the joy, but one imprison slave,
 who from offend worth no boon will save. 
the dame he say be like a clock hen,
 who never will let they out when it do rain;
 and if again his hand she dare to switch,
 he will call she to her face a wrinkle witch. 
this tell a wheedler, much dislike by all,
 who in abhorrence they tale-pyet call,
 who for a raisin or a fig will tell
 fault of a brother he love never so well;
 the offender soul no threaten pain unbend,
 nor with the dame will his proud heart be friend,
 he love she not; for this the hour of play,
 and much-wished dinner, both be snatch away. 
and now the dame in neat white mob be see,
 her russet gown, silk kerchief, apron clean,
 at the school door her tremulous voice be hear,
 and the blithe game unwilling defer. 

from noon till morn rest female toil; save come
 the evening hour when low cow draw home. 
now the good neighbour walk her friend to see,
 and knit a hour, and drink a dish of tea. 
she come unlooked for, — wheat-bread be to seek,
 the baker have none, get no yeast last week;
 and little Peggy think herself ill speed,
 though she have get a great piece gingerbread. 
home she return, but disappointment trace
 darken her eye, and lengthen all her face;
 she whisper lowly in her sister ear,
 scarce can restrain the glisten, swell tear. 
the mother mark, and to the milk-house go,
 Blythe Peggy smile, she well the errand know
 there from the bowl where cream so cool swim,
 the future butter generous skim,
 and, flour commix, form a rural bread
 that for the wheaten loaf oft stand in stead;
 cup after cup send steam circle round,
 and oft the weak tea in the full pot drown;
 it matter not, for while their news they tell
 the mind content, and all thing move on well. 

the sun have now his saffron robe put on,
 step from his chariot that with ruby shine,
 the glitter monarch gain the western gate,
 and for a moment shine in regal state;
 his stream mantle float along the sky,
 while he glide soft from the gaze eye;
 from saffron tinge to yellow soon it fly,
 sea-green the next, and then to dark blue. 

now different care employ the village train,
 the rich in cattle press the milky vein;
 when, lo! a voice send direful note around,
 and sharp vexation mingle in the sound;
 it be little Peggy, she the pail will fill,
 and on old Hawky try her early skill. 
she stroke and clap she, but she will not allow;
 the well know hand best please the know cow;
 though cabbage leave before her band be cast,
 Hawky refuse the coax rich repast;
 and when the little hand unapt she find,
 she kick, and whelm she on the slippery ground. 

along yond hedge now moulder and decay,
 in gather heap you see the fragment lay;
 pile up with care to swell the nightly blaze,
 and in the widow hut a fire to raise. 
see where she come with her blue apron full,
 crown with some scatter lock of dingy wool. 
in year she seem, and on she well patch clothes
 want much have add to her other woe. 
there be a poor-house; but some little pride
 forbid she there her humble head to hide;
 over former scene of better day she run,
 and every thing like degradation shun! 

now hood eve slow glide come in view,
 busy in thread pearl of diamond dew;
 wake the flower that early close the eye,
 and give drop to those that else will die. 
and what be man but such a tender flower,
 that bud, bloom, fade, and die within the hour? 

where round yond cottage the rosemary grow,
 and turncap lily flaunt beside the rose,
 two age female turn the weary wheel,
 and, as they turn, their slumber thought reveal:
 "how long be it, think you, since the old style be lose
 poor England may remember to her cost! 
ever since that time the weather have grow cold,
 (for Jane forget that she be now grow old). 
i know when i live servant at Woodmile,
 so scorch hot the weather be in April,
 the cow will startle, and by ten o'clock
 my master use his horse to unyoke;
 it be not so now; the sun have lose its power;
 the very apple nowadays be sour! 
can not the parson tell the reason why
 there be such change both in earth and sky?" 

 "it be not these only," Margaret reply,
 "for many a change beside have i espy. 
look at the girl! — they all dress nowadays
 like they fine folk who act they nonsense play! 
no more the decent mob surround the face,
 border with edge, or bit good bonelace;
 gauze flappet soon — that will not last a day —
 we will see they flaunt while they be make hay! 
all thing be change, the world be turn upside down,
 and every servant wear a cotton gown,
 bit flimsy thing, that have no strength to wear,
 and will like any blotting-paper tear! 
i make my Nelly a half-worsted gown,
 she slight tell i it will not do in town! 
this pride! this pride! it sure must have a fall,
 and bring some heavy judgement on we all! 
they be grow so bold too, and their lad allow,
 when court they, to skulk behind a cow,
 till all be in bed. my John, when court i,
 use after supper to come manful;
 for oft he use to say he know no place
 where honesty need fear to show its face. 
no more it need! my master use to cry, —
 he fear but two thing — to turn thief, and lie." 

the lead crow her colony bring home,
 and two by two they seek their leafy dome. 
of all the branch that invite to rest,
 each love the one that hang above its nest;
 what though of rude architecture make,
 nor thorn surround nor with clay inlay,
 yet it be the spot where infant day begin,
 that thus attach both the crow and man! 
now on the green the youth their gambol keep,
 stretch their sinew in the bound leap;
 other the wrestler glory will maintain,
 twist the strong nerve and fill the swell vein;
 one youth his pipe blow from the rocky hill,
 seat like Pan above the clack mill;
 another strike the violin cheerful string,
 light to the dance the bound virgin spring:
 it be most part nature, yet some art be find
 when one — two — three lie heavy on the ground;
 for it be not airy foot which seem to fly,
 then come descend quiver from the sky,
 nor form that every grace be know to bend,
 nor foot that every feather hour will lend,
 have any merit here; — but foot of sound,
 which tabour-like re-echo on the ground;
 or as the drum a certain sound repeat,
 flutter now low, and then in thunder beat;
 from nature and from art how wide the sphere
 court unimproved will be what you see here. 

now eve have sprinkle every flower with dew,
 and her gauze hood be wet and drip through;
 a light grey cloak to the warm fleece ally,
 her chilly finger close and close tie,
 that, with a fur-lined cap, the ears delight,
 be give she by her elder sister night. 

from walk retire, that shun the inquire view,
 a faithful couple to the shade withdraw. 
the maid have every blush that bloom can give,
 where youth fresh glow bid the blossom live,
 and the fair cheek, with lily all bespread,
 shade the full rose, and hide its bold red,
 pure as the drop that in the early morn
 hang with such sweetness smile on the thorn,
 artless as youth before the cranky wile
 shadow the frown, or play within the smile;
 she move, the wonder of the rural plain,
 and many a sigh steal to her ear in vain. 

a youth there be like she, of better mould,
 who soul deem light of the weight of gold. 
around his birth some favour fortune shine,
 which some call merit, though no way their own;
 the church be lay out as his rise line,
 himself delight in the text divine;
 that text, at home by country master teach,
 may stint the learning but keep back the fault,
 for sure great knowledge we shall all despise,
 unless the man be virtuous as he be wise. 

the mother eye have long over all her son
 with many a fear, and much observance run,
 see where beneath the elm a path be wear, —
 mark he at pensive eve, and laugh morn
 still seek the shade, — now with sad step, and slow,
 with fold arm, and head decline low;
 then lively thought awake a quick pace,
 and hope break out and glow along his face. 
thus to the partner of her thirty year
 she soft begin: — thou calm of my fear,
 oft have thy firm mind my sorrow still,
 as from thy lip thy better sense distil,
 have thou observe our dear hope of late? 
who spirit flag with some uncommon weight, —
 some secret anguish sicken over his soul,
 and silent night have see the torrent roll,
 the wander stream have from his eyelid creep,
 and his moist pillow show he have not sleep. 
my life, rejoin the father, in thy mind
 the mist of tenderness the optic blind,
 imagine ill from feeling ever flow,
 all thing look big when see through cloud of woe;
 i have mark no difference save what study bring,
 they all turn grave who search the source of thing. 
this not believe, cease she to reply,
 but still send forth her keen inquire eye,
 mark when sweet anna name breathe in the sound,
 how quick his eye spring from the thoughtful ground;
 and when just praise the beauteous maid will grace,
 joy smooth his brow, and blush dye his face. 
this wake suspicion — rumour tell the whole,
 and now she know what sicken over his soul. 

the father skill in all the way of man,
 thus, to his mate affectionate, begin:
 in all distemper of the feverish mind,
 the great good from change of scene we find. 
though one dear object, touchstone of our woe,
 seem to go with we wheresoever we go,
 yet gay variety divide the view, —
 spite of ourselves we gaze at what be new;
 back-turning thought will far-past scene survey,
 that faint grow, wear out by length of way;
 a soft mist over every object spread,
 figure grow dim, and tower scarce show their head:
 back-turning thought strain his sink hollow eye,
 but scene retire, and dear object fly;
 he lag not more — by soft degree be stole
 the keen anguish that inwrap the soul. 
to college, then, our sorrow son shall go,
 new love, or friend, shall wear out all his woe;
 idea change as new view arise
 let in new light, and almost change the eye;
 object adore, that matchless seem before,
 excite no wonder, and delight no more. 
the mother sigh, the start tear withhold,
 to her fond partner ever fond to yield;
 nor ever feel she what be call command,
 his wish grow she in magic quickness bland. 

and now pretence have whisper to the maid
 through all the wood her new wash flock have stray;
 the youth too seek the shade in hope to clear
 her pearl-set eye that hang with many a tear. 
far from the uproar of the loud cascade,
 where the slow stream creep soft to the shade,
 beneath a rock with venturous tree overhang,
 that seem by some enchantment to have spring,
 for the scant soil nor moss nor grass bestow,
 but yawn cliff the sinewy root expose;
 there on her cheek the rose feel the dew,
 which drop by drop extract their soft hue:
 "why weep my Anna? sure she know this heart,
 and know in absence we but seem to part;
 though mountain rise, and the slow weary day
 draw out the journey a long length of way,
 yet trust i, Anna, still my soul shall be
 chain to thy soul, and never part from thou!" 
sweet Anna shake her head — sad sigh oppose
 the labour word that to the threshold rise;
 the lip keep move, but no accent fall,
 yet the round tear perhaps can speak as well. 
 "o cease, my Anna, or declare thy fear,
 i can, can bear these soften tear! 
what have i do to tempt thy generous mind
 to form a thought that i can grow unkind?" 
 "nothing" — she fob, — "but — but it can be —
 but every eye must take delight in thou! 
some maid who education soften over,
 to who rich mind each day keep add more;
 who win manner mix with every grace,
 invite the eye, and keep it from the face, —
 and, when she speak, persuasion lyre be string,
 and the sweet word come warble from her tongue;
 if such a one thy heart in fetter hold, —
 for i have not one fear from sordid gold,
 i shall not blame my William, — still may he
 taste every bless, whatever become of i." 
 "dear of woman," William thus rejoin,
 "how can such fear ever cloud so bright a mind! 
in fine art i know some may excel,
 some have more grace, and some few speak as well
 yet the sweet accent will but thrill my ear,
 trust i, my Anna, it will not reach i here. 
this heart be thy, and every faithful chord
 will only vibrate to thy well know word:
 from infant year thy grow worth i have know,
 our wish the same, and our delight but one;
 believe thou this? the wing hour shall press
 one after one, to crown my happiness;
 the day shall come when i shall claim my own,
 and free to the world my love make know." 
so say, to their home they separate go,
 he more at ease — she something less in woe. 

in this gay village hang a wondrous sign,
 the hound and hare be the immense design. 
there hunter crack their whip, and seem to bound
 over every hedge, nor touch the mimic ground;
 the huntsman wind his horn, his big cheek swell,
 and whippers-in make lag terrier yell;
 the sportive scene tempt many a wight to stay,
 as to the school he drag the unwilling way. 
around the front invite bench wait,
 conscious of many a glass and sage debate;
 the great man of the village crack his joke,
 read over the news, and whiff the curl smoke;
 tell tale of old, and nod, and heave the can,
 make fix decree, and seem much more than man. 
 "come, jack, sit down. thy father, man, and i,
 break many a glass, and many a freak have we. 
it be when he seek thy mother, at Carel fair
 (i mind the corn be very bad that year)
 we meet thy mother and my wife in the street,
 and take they into beck to get a treat;
 blind Joseph play, and i take out thy mother,
 thy father, he be shy, he get another;
 and when i take she back, as you may see,
 i whip she blush on thy father knee. 
then in come robin bell, who like she too,
 and bite his lip, and turn both red and blue,
 tease she to dance, as you may see, and then
 keep she himself, nor bring she back again. 
i fire at this, while up thy father rise,
 give he a kick, and tweak he by the nose. 
they strip to fight, as you may see, and i
 in see fair play get a blacken eye;
 i dare not show my face at home next day,
 but bid my mother say i go away,
 but keep my bed, i'feg, as you may see;
 who be it now fight for their lass? eh!" 
the blacksmith laugh, the cobbler give a smile,
 and the please tailor scratch his head the while. 

but hark! what sound of mingle joy and woe
 from yond poor cottage burst seem to flow. 
it be honest Sarah. sixpence-harry come,
 and, after all his toil, get safe home. 
 "welcome, old soldier, welcome from the war! 
honour the man, my lad, seam over with scar! 
come give thy hand, and bring the the other can,
 and tell we all thou have do, and see, my man." 
now expectation stare in every eye,
 the jaw fall down, and every soul draw nigh,
 with ear turn up, and head hold all awry. 
 "why, sir, the paper tell you all that be do,
 what battle lose, and what be hardly win. 
but when the eye look into private woe,
 and see the grief that from one battle flow,
 small cause of triumph can the brave feel,
 for never yet be brave heart make of steel. 
it happen once, in storm of a town,
 when our bold man have push the rampart down,
 we find they starve, the last loaf be go,
 beef be exhaust, and they flour have none;
 their spring we drain, to ditch yet they fly —
 the stagnant ditch lend treacherous supply;
 for soon the putrid source their blood distain,
 and the quick fever hasten through their vein. 
in the same room the die and the dead —
 nay, sometime, even in the self-same bed, —
 you see the mother with her child lie,
 none but the father leave to close the sink eye. 

in a dark corner, once myself i find
 a youth who blood be pour through the wound;
 no sister hand, no tender mother eye
 to stanch that wound be fond watch by;
 famine have do her work, and low be lay
 the love mother and the bloom maid. 
he raise his eye, and bid i strike the blow,
 i have nought to lose, he cry, so fear no foe;
 no foe be near, i soft make reply,
 a soldier, friend, will save and not destroy. 
a drop of cordial in my flask i find;
 (and i myself be sovereign for a wound;
 i will bleed you all, lad! if you shall be ill,
 and in the toothache I have no little skill. 
our drummer too, poor man, deal much in horn,
 and i have his very knack of cut corn.) 
well; as i dress the youth, i find it be he
 that oft have charm the sentinel and i;
 from post to post like lightning he will fly,
 and pour down thunder from his redhot sky;
 we praise he for it, — so i my captain tell,
 for well i know he like the foe that be bold;
 so then the surgeon take he in his charge,
 and the captain make he prisoner at large. " 
" be he a Spanishman, or frenchman, whether? 
but it be no matter; they be all rogue together! " 
" you be much mistake: goodness i have find
 spring like the grass that clothe the common ground;
 some more, some less, you know, grow every where;
 some soil be fertile, and some be but bare. 
nay, among the indian I have find kind cheer,
 and as much pity as i can do here! 
once in their wood i stray a length of way,
 and think i will know the path that homeward lie;
 we will go to forage, but i lose the rest,
 which, till quite out of hear, never guess. 
i hollow loud, some voice make reply,
 but not my comrade; not one friend be nigh. 
some man appear, their face paint over,
 the wampum-belt, and tomahawk they bear;
 their ear be hang with bead, that large spread
 a breadth of wing, and cover half the head. 
i kiss the ground; one old than the rest
 step forth, and lay his hand upon my breast,
 then seize my arm, and sign that i shall go,
 and learn with they to bend the sturdy bow:
 i bow and follow; sad do i mourn,
 and never more expect to return. " 
here Sarah fob, and step behind the door,
 and with her tear bedew the dusty floor. 
" we travel on some day through wood alone,
 at length we reach their happy silent home. 
a few green acre the whole plot compose,
 which wood surround, and fence rock enclose,
 skirt who bank, a river fond of play
 sometime stand still, and sometime run away;
 the branch deer will drink the dimple tide,
 and crop the wild herb on its flowery side, —
 around the silent hut will sometime stray,
 then, at the sight of man, bind swift away;
 but all in vain; the hunter fly dart
 spring from the bow, and quiver in the heart. 
a mother and four daughter here we find,
 with shell encircle, and with feather crown,
 bright pebble shine amid the plait hair,
 while less shell surround the moonlike ear. 
with scream at sight of i away they fly
 (for fear or pleasure spring from what be new);
 then, to their brother, scream still they run,
 think my clothes and i the self-same man;
 when bold groan, they venture something near,
 light touch my coat, but start back with fear. 
when time and use have chase their fear away,
 and i have learn some few short word to say,
 they oft will tell i, will i but allow
 the rampant lion to overhang my brow,
 and on my cheek the spot leopard wear,
 stretch out my ear, and let my arm go bare. " 
" o mercy on we? "cried the listener round,
 their gape wonder burst into sound. 
" though different in their manner, yet their heart
 be equal mine in every better part. 
brave to a fault, if courage fault can be;
 kind to their fellow, double kind to i. 
some little art my travel judgement teach,
 which, though a prize to they, seem great than they ought. 

 "needless with bow for i the wood to roam,
 i therefore try to do some good at home. 
the bird, or deer, or boar, be all their food,
 save the swift salmon of the silver flood;
 and when long storm the winter-store will drain,
 hunger may ask the stint meal in vain. 
some goat i see that browse the rock among,
 and oft i think to trap their playful young;
 but not till first a fence hedge surround
 their future field, and the enclosure bound;
 for many a father own a hatchet here,
 which fall descend to his wealthy heir. 
the playful kid we from the pitfall bring,
 overspread with earth, and many a tempt thing;
 light lay the branch over the treacherous deep,
 and favourite herb among the long grass creep. 
the little prisoner soon be teach to stand,
 and crop the food from the betrayer hand. 
a winter-store now rise up to their view,
 and in another field the clover grow;
 but, without scythe or hook, how can we lay
 the ridgy swath and turn it into hay;
 at last, of stone we form a sort of spade,
 broad at the end, and sharp, for cut make;
 we push along, the tender grass give way,
 and soon the sun turn every pile to hay. 
it be not long before the flock increase,
 and i first give the unknown milky feast. 
some clay i find, and useful bowl i make,
 though, i must own, i mar the potter trade;
 yet use be every thing — they do the same
 as if from china the rude vessel come. 
the curdle cheese i teach they next to press;
 and twirl on string the roast meat to dress. 
in all the wood the indian corn be find,
 who grain i scatter in the faithful ground;
 the will soil leave little here to do,
 or ask the furrow of the search plough;
 yet something like one with delight i make,
 for tedious be the labour of the spade,
 the coulter and the sock be point stone,
 the eager brother draw the trace on,
 i stalk behind, and throw the faithful grain,
 and wooden harrow close the earth again:
 soon spring the seed, and soon it be in the ear,
 nor wait the golden sheaf the fall year;
 in this vast clime two harvest lead the field,
 and fifty crop the exhaustless soil can yield. 

 "some brick i burn, and now a house arise,
 fine than aught the indian chieftain know;
 a wicker door, with clay-like plaster line,
 serve to exclude the pierce wintery wind;
 a horn-glazed window give a scanty light,
 but lamp cheere up the gloom of lengthen night;
 the cotton shrub through all the wood have run,
 and plenteous wicks our rock and spindle spin. 
around their field the yam i teach to grow,
 with all the fruit they either love or know. 
the bed i raise from the damp earth, and now
 some little comfort walk our dwelling through. 
my fame be spread: the neighbour indian come,
 view all our work, and strive to do the same. 
the wampum-belt my grow fame record,
 that tell great action without help of word. 
i gain much honour, and each friend will bring
 among various present many a high-prized thing. 
and when, with many a prayer, i ask once more
 to seek my friend, and wander to the shore,
 they all consent, — but drop a sorrow tear,
 while many a friend his load of skin will bear. 
riches be i; but fate will it not
 they grow the treasure of the spanish foe;
 my indian friend throw down their fleecy load,
 and, like the bound elk, leap back into the wood. 

 "what though a prisoner! countryman i find,
 hear my own tongue, and bless the cheerful sound;
 it seem to i as if my home be there,
 and every dear friend will soon appear. 
at length a cartel give we back to share
 the wound and danger of a bloody war. 
peace dawn at last, and now the sail be spread,
 some climb the ship unhurt, some few half dead. 
not this afflict the gallant soldier mind,
 what be it to he though limb be leave behind! 
Chelsea a crutch and bench will yet supply,
 and be the veteran dear lose limb and eye! 

 "when english ground first strike the sailor view,
 huzza! for England, roar the jovial crew. 
the wave crutch leap up in every hand,
 while one poor leg be leave alone to stand;
 the very name another limb bestow,
 and through the artery the blood now flow. 
we reach the shore, and kiss the much-loved ground,
 and fond fancy friend will crowd around;
 but few with wretchedness acquaintance claim,
 and little pride be every where the same. 

 "in come down, the see eye of day
 darken around i, and i lose my way. 
wherever a light shot glimmer through the tree,
 i thither urge my weary tremble knee,
 tap at the door, and beg, in piteous tone,
 they will let a wander soldier find his home;
 they bar the door, and bid i beg elsewhere,
 they will not spare bed for vagabond to share. 
this be the tale wherever i make a halt,
 and great house grow upon the fault;
 the dog be loose to keep i far at bay,
 and saucy footman bid i walk away,
 or else a constable shall find a home
 for wander captain from the war new come. 
alas! thought i, be this the soldier praise
 for loss of health, of limb, and length of day? 
and be this England? — England, my delight! 
for who i think it glory but to fight —
 that have no covert for the soldier night! 
i turn half faint, lead through all the gloom
 by the faint glimmer of the cloud moon. 
one path i keep, that seem at time to end,
 and oft refuse the guide clew to lend;
 the thread unhoped as oft again i find,
 till it forsake the open field around;
 by slow degree, to tower wood it creep,
 as if beneath their shade it nightly sleep. 
i here have halt, lest some beast of prey,
 in midnight theft, have pace the treacherous way,
 but that a twinkle light sometime appear,
 sometime grow dim, and sometime bright clear
 this can not be the lure of beast of prey;
 they know no art of imitate day,
 much please i think. the mazy path yet lead
 through shrubby copse, by tall tree overspread;
 a wimple rill run on, and wreathe its way
 through tuft of flower, that make its border gay;
 and now a rock the part leaf unfold,
 on which a wither oak have long grow old,
 the curl ivy oft attempt to hide
 its sad decay, with robe of verdant pride,
 yet through her leafy garb the eye can peer,
 and see it buy the youthful dress too dear. 
a hollow cavern now methinks i spy,
 where cluster grape come wander down its side,
 between who leave a ray of light will dart,
 that both rejoice and terrify my heart. 
i venture in, — my breath i scarce draw,
 nought save a taper meet my wonder view;
 a inner cavern beam with full light,
 and give a holy hermit to my sight;
 himself and piety seem but the same,
 and wisdom for grey hair another name;
 some trace yet of sorrow may be find,
 that over his feature walk their pensive round;
 devotion seem to bid they not to stray,
 but human feeling give the wanderer way. 
his eye he raise from the instructive page,
 a eye more sink by wear grief than age;
 surprise a moment over his feature spread,
 and give they back their once accustom red." 
 "welcome my son — a hermit welcome share,
 and let the welcome mend the scanty fare. 
a soldier toil the soft couch require,
 the strengthen food, and renovate fire;
 not such the hermit needy cell bestow,
 pamper alone by luxury of woe,
 the fall tear bedew the crusty bread,
 and the moss pillow prop the weary head;
 the limpid brook the heat of thirst allay,
 and gather fruit the toilsome search repay;
 when hunger call, these be a feastful store,
 and languid sorrow ask for nothing more;
 sufficient that her eye unseen can weep,
 stream while awake, and flow yet more in sleep. 
it be now twelve year since solitude first draw
 her close curtain round my open view,
 since first i leave my once delightful home,
 along with grief and solitude to roam." 

much i express my wonder, how a mind
 so store as he can herd from all mankind. 
 "you speak," he say, "like one who soul be free,
 slave to no wish, nor chain to misery. 
when ceaseless anguish cloud the summer sky,
 and fair prospect tarnish in the eye;
 when cheerful scene spread every lure in vain,
 and sweet society but add to pain;
 when weep memory incessant bring
 the sad reversion of all former thing,
 and show-like fancy all her colour lend,
 to gild those view that open with our friend:
 when joyful day through the whole year will run,
 and mirth set out and travel with the sun;
 when youth and pleasure hand in hand will stray,
 and every month be little less than may;
 when change fortune shift the incessant scene,
 and only point to where our joy have be,
 be it a wonder from the world we run,
 and all its fleet empty pageant shun? 

 "there be a something in a well know view,
 that seem to show our long past pleasure through;
 sure in the eye a fairy land be find,
 when former scene bring former friend around. 
let but the wood, the rock, the stream appear,
 and every friend you see and think you hear;
 their word, their dress, their every look, you find
 swell to the sight, and burst upon the mind;
 though many a spring have lend the blossom gay,
 and many a autumn blow the leaf away,
 unchanged the last image remain,
 of which remembrance ever hold the chain. 
even the mind eye a glassy mirror show,
 and far too deep her bold pencil draw;
 the life-like picture rise before the sight,
 glow through the day, and sparkle through the night. 
ah! sure even now my Ethelind appear,
 though dim see through this sad vale of tear. 
that win form, where elegance have weave
 the thousand softness of gentle love;
 that meaning eye, that artless blush cheek,
 which leave so little for the tongue to speak;
 the nameless grace of her polish mind;
 that laugh wit, and serious sense refine;
 that altogether which no art can reach,
 and which it be nature very rare to teach;
 that nameless something which pervade the soul,
 win not by half, but captivate the whole;
 yet, if one feature shine before the rest,
 it be sure pity by religion dress. 
have i not see the soft steal tear,
 hang in her eye, like gem in ethiop ear! 
while the dark orb the glitter diamond shed,
 from her fair cheek the frighten rose flee,
 ashamed that, such a gem so sweet clear,
 aught, save the lily, shall presume to wear. 

 "sure there be a pleasure in recount woe! 
and some relief in every tear that flow! 
else why call back those day for ever fly,
 and with they every joy this heart can own? 
pleasure and pain be the sad mixture still,
 taste but the good, and you must taste the ill;
 dear recollection be a sorceress fair
 that bring up pleasure lively than they be;
 delight fancy dwell upon the view,
 compare old scene with what she meet with new;
 the present hour grow dull, her charm decay,
 and, one by one, drop silent away. 
neglect succeed — neglect, the worst of foe,
 that marry love or single friendship know,
 who torpid soul congeal in stupor lie,
 nor see one charm, nor hear the smother sigh;
 see not the hourly load of comfort bring
 by fond affection, watch every thought,
 nor the heart beat with the wish to please, —
 cold, cold neglect, nor hear, nor feel, nor see! 

 "thus, in the present hour too, oft slide by
 the many a charm that may detain the eye;
 but just as if from woe we can not part,
 we veil the sight, and close shut up the heart;
 so i myself will never forget the day
 when Ethelinda vow her heart away. 
our birth be equal, but exalt view
 for the fair daughter bid the sire refuse. 
over sea i roam, in quest of much-prized wealth,
 though, after all, the great good be health! 
wherever i roam, my Ethelind be there,
 my soul companion join i every where;
 whatever scene entrap my travel eye,
 my fancy Ethelind stand smile by,
 her just opinion meet my listen ear,
 and her remark on man, and clime, i hear. 
this be not absence, or it be a dream,
 which, though unreal, yet will real seem. 
each day the tongue-like pen some story tell,
 of grow love, or less increase gold;
 yet fortune frown not; and, in lengthen time,
 one day i see that mark she to be i. 
hail! heaven-taught letter, that through year convey
 the deathless thought, as if just breathe today! 
that give the converse of a absent friend,
 and, for a moment, make that absence end;
 for, while the eager eye the line run over,
 distance step back, and drag the chain no more;
 for one short moment the dear friend we see
 close by our side, just as they use to be. 
such sweet delusion be not form to last,
 and fancy vision far too soon be past. 
no such delight my heart-wrote line attend,
 they meet the hand of a deceitful friend;
 her brother, anxious for a lord success,
 think it no sin to blast my happiness,
 keep up my letter, and base story tell,
 that i have sell myself to age, and gold. 
her good opinion baffle long the tale,
 and love for long keep down the struggle scale. 
but when, from year to year, hope point on,
 and the last hope with the last year be go,
 she try to think i must be base, and strive
 to scorn the man who can give up her love;
 yet her soft heart no other flame confess,
 it lodge the tenant of her faithful breast. 

 "home i return, much weary out with woe,
 and every fear that fretful silence know. 
fear for her death be far my great dread;
 how can i bear to think she with the dead! 
do she but live, methinks my grief may end,
 when the warm lover cool into the friend. 
i reach my home, and quick inquiry make,
 find her unmarried — find she be not dead. 
and now, to know the cause of all my woe,
 with hope and fear, and joy, and grief, i go;
 a thousand fear will stop i in my way,
 a thousand hope forbid one moment stay. 
as nigh the house with anxious step i draw,
 fond recollection crowd all the view;
 i feel a tear creep round and round my eye,
 that shame of man, and yet i know not why. 
while at the door her faithful maid i see,
 the short quick breath i scarce have power to draw;
 where — be — your la — my lip no more will move. 
" she be in the arbour, sir, you use to love. " 
" something like hope a cordial drop bestow,
 the heart grow warm, and the pale cheek now glow. 
near to the arbour silent i draw,
 and tremble look the leafy lattice through;
 the sprightly air which once light up her face,
 to pensive softness long have give place;
 its gentle charm around her feature crowd,
 and tender feeling her fine figure bow;
 more dear she seem, more interest far,
 than when her eye be call the evening star;
 on her fair hand she lean her droop head,
 and many a tear bedew the page she read;
 it be Milton paradise — the book i know,
 once my own profile on the leaf i draw,
 and write beneath this truth-dictated line —
 'with thou converse i forget all time;'
 her eye i see run every feature over,
 and scan the line where truth seem write no more;
 she shake her head, its meaning well i know:
 "it be even thus, you once love line adieu;"
 the book she shut — so soft be it close,
 as if life joy alone be there repose. 

 "i walk around, the crimp grass will say, —
 some heavy foot have brush our dew away;
 she start up, and, shake off the tear,
 strive hard to make the pearl-set eye more clear;
 but when my form the part leaf betray,
 and full light around my feature play,
 she grow a statue, wrought by Michael art,
 a marble figure, with a human heart,
 more pale, more cold, than Medici can seem,
 or all the form that from the quarry teem. 
i bow, but speak not, injure as i think,
 and wish much to show the sense i ought;
 i dare not trust the impatient tongue to move,
 for, ah! i feel it will but talk of love. 
i silent stand."  "what be thou, vision, say,
 why do thou cross a wretched wanderer way? 
sure it be the whimsy of a feverish mind
 that fancy form none but itself can find!" 
 "i bow again."  "oh! speak if thou be he
 that once be dear — so very dear to i?" 
 "yes, Ethelind, most sure — too sure i be he
 that once be dear, so very dear to thou;
 why have thy heart its fondness all forbear
 to swell my sail, and ask my quick return?" 
 "a marry man! — she sharp make reply,"
 with much resentment sparkle in her eye, —
 "a marry man have every right to hear
 what thought pursue we through the change year! 
yes, i will tell you: happy be the day
 in which you give your heart and hand away. 
i give not mine, yet free from every vow
 that will have tie i to a wretch like you. 
i feel as blissful in my single state,
 as you, no doubt, feel in your wealthy mate!" 
she rise to go: "my Ethelind, forbear! 
some cruel monster have abuse your ear;
 your faithful lover see before you stand,
 your faithful lover dare to claim your hand;
 no other vow that plight faith can stain,
 no other love melt over this heart again! 
let easy fortune nameless comfort spread,
 and slope for life the soft descend tread. 
no needful care, to study how the year
 shall rule its square, and run its circle clear;
 the generous hand no close restraint shall know,
 but open bounty from the finger flow. 
the sad sight the pity eye receive,
 be to see wretchedness with nought to give;
 the heartwrung tear, though ever so full shed,
 bring no warm clothe, and afford no bread. 
on you shall pleasure wait with ready call,
 speed to the play, or hasten to the ball;
 where safe ease her flowery carpet throw,
 and gild dome their rainbow-light dispose;
 where splendour turn even common thing to show,
 and plain good comfort ornamental grow. 
 'midst scene like these will Ethelinda blaze,
 while wreath diamond lend their mingle ray;
 wealth be her own, for it be i to give,
 as it be she, to bid i how to live. 
but shall domestic peace her soul allure,
 for splendour but hide grief, it can cure, —
 if in sweet converse hour shall steal away,
 while we still wander at the close of day;
 if every wish prevent love shall see,
 and all the world we to ourselves shall be,
 i only wait the soft assent smile,
 to be whatever her heart will ask the while;
 o yes, dear friend! i yet can read the line,
' with thou converse i forget all time; '
domestic peace have every charm for i,
 how double charm when enjoy with thou! 

 "now honour plead that my fame shall bleed. 
and life be rule by her detest creed;
 this idol, honour, at who shrine appear
 the heart-broke friend, dissolve in endless tear. 
he, fiery youth, impatient of control,
 and the grey veteran sorry from his soul,
 the injure and the injure both repair,
 and both expect her laurel wreath to wear;
 it matter not where right or wrong begin,
 the man who fight must be a honest man,
 though every baseness that the heart can know
 shall damp his soul, and keep his sword in awe;
 sole proof of excellence such warrior give —
 wretch who die, because they dare not live! 
the guilty breast be ever up in arm,
 and the least look the conscious soul alarm! 
shall your quick eye the shuffle card detect,
 or shall the gamester think you but suspect,
 his injure honour dare you to the fight,
 and all the world admit the challenge right! 
not to accept it blast a virtuous fame,
 and link your memory with eternal shame;
 it matter not though pure your life appear
 on the long record of revolve year;
 though heaven you fear, arid heaven forbid law,
 that stamp he criminal who dare to draw,
 yet man, vain man, break through the law of heaven,
 die by the sword, and hope to be forgive;
 for what we duel from high fashion call,
 be suicide, or murder, after all! 

 "sometime the heart almost approve the deed,
 when barbarous wound make reputation bleed;
 of all the crime of any shape or die,
 that look the black in true feeling be eye,
 if a dear sister purity we feel,
 nature cry out — where be the avenge steel? 
avenge steel! how impotent the word,
 and all the threat and cure that tend the sword! 

 "sweet reputation, like a lily fair,
 scent every breath that winnow through the air;
 the colour sunbeam on its whiteness play,
 and dance round and round with gild ray;
 anon dark cloud these gild ray withhold,
 and the leaf shrivel with the sudden cold;
 a blight vapour sail along the sky,
 and the meek lily droop its head, and die:
 nor can a sword, or the depend pen,
 clear the lose female character again;
 the vindication better never hear, —
 that fame be safe that have nought to clear;
 and female fame be such a tender flower,
 it can even bear a pity shower;
 courage in man be something near as nice,
 which life must buy, and wear at any price. 

 "much against my conscience, and against heaven law,
 my destine brother to account i draw;
 against his life i mean no hand to rear, —
 i mean but with the world to settle clear;
 a self-defense, even in the appoint field,
 be all the sword i ever think to wield. 
hard be the onset; in the fatal strife
 his hand i see aim only at my life;
 i wave its point, still hope to disarm,
 and guard both life secure from every harm. 
i parry long; he make a lounge stroke,
 and my sad weapon in his bosom break." 
 "it be past he say — much injure man, adieu! 
I have do you wrong — but you will forgive it now." 
 "in that sad moment every pang i find
 that dart through father, brother, sister, wound! 
in what new light i then see honour creed,
 how sink in sin seem the detest deed;
 the world applause be strip of all its charm,
 and the whole conscience meet the man in arm,
 guilt, sorrow, pity, war within the breast,
 with sad remorse, that never can have rest. 
my weep Ethelind now, too, i see,
 lose in the flood of never end woe! 
for, ah! what woe can ever hope a end
 that mourn a brother slaughter by a friend! 
then from his breast some brief, brief line he draw, —
 the blot be many, though the word be few:"
 "fly i, for ever, it be time we part,
 you have kill a brother, and you have break a heart." 
 "torture in soul from place to place i fly,
 but swift-winged thought as swift will pursue;
 unless from memory our thought can run,
 how vain to journey round and round the sun. 
at last this solitude my sorrow seek,
 for city leave no bar for enter thought;
 i here have live, in hope the time will come,
 that make my cell my wished-for silent tomb." 
 "his tear fresh flow, and i run down my cheek,
 our grief be such as neither tongue can speak;
 at last we part — he to endless woe,
 while happy i to wife and child go." 

now scold Nancy to the ale-house fly —
 "what be you do — hear Harry lie! 
Thomas, get in, and do not sit to drink,
 there be work enough at home, if you will think!" 

and now the sister take their evening walk;
 one fame for goodness, and one fame for joke,
 for physic, too, some little be renowned,
 with every salve that love to heal the wound;
 the pulse she feel with true mysterious air,
 while mrs. Graham of strengthen broth take care. 
that sickness must be hopeless of all end,
 which her good home-made wine no way can mend;
 the brother then his skill of medicine try,
 and rare in his hand the linger patient die. 

now the white owl flit over the dusky ground,
 forerun the night, and make his trumpet sound. 
the wind be lull asleep, and now you hear
 the murmur stream hum slumber in your ear. 
sweet row, flow on, and be thy little vale
 the future glory of the happy tale;
 long be thy bank bespread as they be now
 with nibble sheep, or rich feed cow;
 with rock, and scar, and cottage on the hill,
 with curl smoke, and busy useful mill;
 long may yond tree afford their leafy screen,
 and long from winter save the fade green;
 in every season in their speckle pride,
 safe may the trout through all thy wind glide;
 safe may the fowl down thy water swim,
 bathe the webbed foot, or over thy mirror skim,
 nor yet the schoolboy cast the deadly stone,
 and take that life, no frailer than his own;
 for peace and plenty, and the cheerful tale,
 for happy wife, for mirth, and honest ale,
 for maiden fair, and swain of matchless truth,
 and all the openness of artless youth,
 whenever a cumbrian village shall be fame,
 let Stoklewath be not the last that be name! 
