Hesiod:

 or, the rise of woman.

Hesiod: or, the rise of woman.

what ancient time (those time we fancy wise)
 have leave on long record of woman rise,
 what moral teach it, and what fable hide,
 what author write it, how that author die,
 all these i sing. in Greece they frame the tale
 (in Greece, it be think, a woman may be frail)
 you modern beauty! where the poet draw
 his soft pencil, think he dream of you;
 and warn by he, you wanton pen, beware
 how heaven concern to vindicate the fair. 
the case be hesiod; he the fable write;
 some think with mean, some with idle wit:
 perhaps it be either, as the lady please;
 i wave the contest, and commence the lay. 

in day of yore, (no matter where or when,
 it be ever the low creation swarm with man)
 that one Prometheus, spring of heavenly birth,
 (our author song can witness) live on earth. 
he carve the turf to mould a manly frame,
 and steal from Jove his animate flame. 
the sly contrivance over Olympus run,
 when thus the monarch of the star begin. 

oh verse in art! who dare thought aspire
 to kindle clay with never-dying fire! 
enjoy thy glory past, that gift be thy;
 the next thy creature meet, be fair i:
 and such a gift, a vengeance so design,
 as suit the counsel of a god to find;
 a please bosom-cheat, a specious ill,
 which feel they curse, yet covet still to feel. 

he say, and Vulcan strait the sire command,
 to temper mortar with etherial hand;
 in such a shape to mould a rise fair,
 as virgin-goddess be proud to wear;
 to make her eye with diamond-water shine,
 and form her organ for a voice divine. 
it be thus the sire ordain; the power obey;
 and work, and wonder at the work he make;
 the fair, soft, sweet frame beneath,
 now make to seem, now more than seem, to breathe. 

as Vulcan end, the cheerful queen of charm
 clasp the new-panting creature in her arm;
 from that embrace a fine complexion spread,
 where mingle whiteness glow with soft red. 
then in a kiss she breathe her various art,
 of trifle pretty with wound heart;
 a mind for love, but still a change mind;
 the lisp affect, and the glance design;
 the sweet confuse blush, the secret wink,
 the gentle-swimming walk, the courteous sink,
 the stare for strangeness fit, for scorn the frown,
 for decent yield look decline down,
 the practise languish, where well-feigned desire
 will own its melt in a mutual fire;
 gay smile to comfort; April shower to move;
 and all the nature, all the art, of love. 

gold-sceptered Juno next exalt the fair;
 her touch endow she with imperious air,
 self-valving fancy, highly-crested pride,
 strong sovereign will, and some desire to chide:
 for which, a eloquence, that aim to vex,
 with native trope of anger, arm the sex. 

Minerva (skillful goddess) train the maid
 to twirl the spindle by the twist thread,
 to fix the loom, instruct the reed to part,
 cross the long weave, and close the web with art,
 a useful gift; but what profuse expense,
 what world of fashion, take its rise from hence! 

young Hermes next, a close-contriving god,
 her brow encircle with his serpent rod:
 then plot and fair excuse, fill her brain,
 the view of break amorous vow for gain,
 the price of favour; the design art
 that aim at riches in contempt of heart;
 and for a comfort in the marriage life,
 the little, pilfer temper of a wife. 

full on the fair his beam Apollo fling,
 and fond persuasion tip her easy tongue;
 he give her word, where oily flattery lay
 the please colour of the art of praise;
 and wit, to scandal exquisite prone,
 which fret another spleen to cure its own. 

those sacred virgin who the bard revere,
 tune all her voice, and shed a sweetness there,
 to make her sense with double charm abound,
 or make her lively nonsense please by sound. 

to dress the maid, the decent grace bring
 a robe in all the die of beauty wrought,
 and place their box over a rich brocade
 where picture love on every cover play;
 then spread those implement that vulcan art
 have frame to merit cytherea heart;
 the wire to curl, the close-indented comb
 to call the lock that light wander, home;
 and chief, the mirror, where the ravish maid
 behold and love her own reflect shade. 

fair Flora lend her store, the purple hour
 confine her tress with a wreathe of flower;
 within the wreathe arise a radiant crown;
 a veil pellucid hang depend down;
 back roll her azure veil with serpent fold,
 the purfle border deck the floor with gold. 
her robe (which close by the girdle brace
 reveal the beauty of a slender waste)
 flow to the foot; to copy Venus air,
 when venus statue have a robe to wear. 

the new spring creature finish thus for harm,
 adjust her habit, practise her charm;
 with blush glow, or shine with lively smile,
 confirm her will, or recollect her wile:
 then conscious of her worth, with easy pace
 glide by the glass, and turn view her face. 

a fine flax than what they wrought before,
 through time be deep cave the sister fate explore,
 then fix the loom, their finger nimble weave,
 and thus their toil prophetic song deceive. 

flow from the rock my flax! and swift flow,
 pursue thy thread; the spindle run below. 
a creature fond and change, fair and vain,
 the creature woman, rise now to reign. 
new beauty bloom, a beauty form to fly;
 new love begin, a love produce to die;
 new part distress the trouble scene of life,
 the fondle mistress, and the rule wife. 

man, bear to labour, all with pain provide;
 woman have time, to sacrifice to pride:
 they want the care of man, their want they know,
 and dress to please with heart-alluring show,
 the show prevail, for the sway contend,
 and make a servant where they meet a friend. 

thus in a thousand wax-erected fort
 a loiter race the painful bee support,
 from sun to sun, from bank to bank he fly,
 with honey load his bag, with wax his thigh,
 fly where he will, at home the race remain,
 prune the silk dress, and murmur eat the gain. 

yet here and there we grant a gentle bride,
 who temper better by the father side;
 unlike the rest that double humane care,
 fond to relieve, or resolute to share:
 happy the man who thus his star advance! 
the curse be general, but the bless chance. 

thus sing the sister, while the god admire
 their beauteous creature, make for man in ire;
 the young Pandora she, who all contend
 to make too perfect not to gain her end:
 then bid the wind that fly to breath the spring,
 return to bear she on a gentle wing;
 with waft air the wind obsequious blow,
 and land the shine vengeance safe below. 
a golden coffer in her hand she bear,
 (the present treacherous, but the bearer more)
 it be fraught with pang; for Jove ordain above,
 that gold shall aid, and pang attend on love. 

her gay descent the man perceive afar,
 wonder he run to catch the fall star;
 but so surprise, as none but he can tell,
 who love so quick, and who love so well. 
over all his vein the wander passion burn,
 he call her nymph, and every nymph by turn. 
her form to lovely Venus he prefer,
 or swear that Venus must be such as she. 
she, proud to rule, yet strange frame to tease,
 neglect his offer while her air she play,
 shoot scornful glance from the bend frown,
 in brisk disorder trip it up and down,
 then hum a careless tune to lay the storm,
 and sit, and blush, smile, and yield, in form. 

 "now take what Jove design (she soft cry)
" this box thy portion, and my self thy bride: "
fire with the prospect of the double charm,
 he snatch the box, and bride, with eager arm. 

unhappy man! to who so bright she shine,
 the fatal gift, her tempt self, unknown! 
the wind be silent, all the wave asleep,
 and heaven be trace upon the flatter deep;
 but while he look unmindful of a storm,
 and think the water wear a stable form,
 what dreadful din around his ear shall rise! 
what frown confuse his picture of the sky! 

at first the creature man be frame alone,
 lord of himself, and all the world his own. 
for he the nymph in green forsake the wood,
 for he the nymph in blue forsake the flood,
 in vain the satyr rage, the Triton rave,
 they bear he hero in the secret cave. 
no care destroy, no sick disorder prey,
 no bend age his sprightly form decay,
 no war be know, no female hear to rage,
 and poet tell we, it be a golden age. 

when woman come, those ill the box confine
 burst furious out, and poison all the wind,
 from point to point, from pole to pole they fly,
 spread as they go, and in the progress grow:
 the nymph regret leave the mortal race,
 and alter nature wear a sickly face:
 new term of folly rise, new state of care;
 new plague, to suffer, and to please, the fair! 
the day of whine, and of wild intrigue,
 commence, or finish, with the breach of league;
 the mean design of well-dissembled love;
 the sordid match never join above;
 abroad, the labour, and at home the noise,
 (man double suffering for domestic joy)
 the curse of jealousy; expense, and strife;
 divorce, the public brand of shameful life;
 the rival sword; the qualm that take the fair;
 disdain for passion, passion in despair —
 these, and a thousand, yet unnamed, we find;
 ah fear the thousand, yet unnamed behind! 

thus on Parnassus tuneful Hesiod sing,
 the mountain echo, and the valley ring,
 the sacred groves a fix attention show,
 the crystal Helicon forbear to flow,
 the sky grow bright, and (if his verse be true)
 the muse come to give the laurel too. 
but what avail the verdant prize of wit,
 if love swear vengeance for the tale he write? 
you fair offend, hear your friend relate
 what heavy judgement prove the writer fate,
 though when it happen, no relation clear,
 it be think in five, or five and twenty year. 

where, dark and silent, with a twist shade
 the neighbour wood a native arbour make,
 there oft a tender pair for amorous play
 retire, toy the ravish hour away;
 a locrian youth, the gentle Troilus he,
 a fair milesian, kind Evanthe she:
 but swell nature in a fatal hour
 betray the secret of the conscious bower;
 the dire disgrace her brother count their own,
 and track her step, to make its author know. 

it chance one evening, (it be the lover day)
 conceal in brake the jealous kindred lie;
 when Hesiod wander, muse along the plain,
 and fix his seat where love have fix the scene:
 a strong suspicion strait possess their mind,
 (for poet ever be a gentle kind.) 
but when Evanthe near the passage stand,
 fling back a doubtful look, and shoot the wood,
 "now take, (at once they cry) thy due reward,"
 and urge with err rage, assault the bard. 
his corpse the sea receive. the dolphin bear
 (it be all the god will do) the corpse to shore. 

methinks i view the dead with pity eye,
 and see the dream of ancient wisdom rise;
 i see the muse round the body cry,
 but hear a Cupid loud laugh by;
 he wheel his arrow with insult hand,
 and thus inscribe the moral on the sand. 
 "here Hesiod lie: you future bard, beware
" how far your moral tale incense the fair:
 "unloved, unloving, it be his fate to bleed;
" without his quiver Cupid cause the deed:
 "he judge this turn of malice just due,
" and Hesiod die for joy he never know. 
