Southampton castle. 

inscribe to the marquis of Lansdowne.

the moonlight be without; and i can lose
a hour to gaze, though taste and splendour here,
as in a lustrous fairy palace, reign!
regardless of the light that blaze within,
i look upon the wide and silent sea,
that in the shadowy moonbeam sleep:
how still,
nor hear to murmur, or to move, it lie;
shine in fancy eye, like the soft gleam,
the eve of pleasant yesterday!
the cloud
have all sink westward, and the host of star
seem in their watch set, as gaze on;
while night fair empress, sole and beautiful,
hold her illustrious course through the mid heaven
supreme, the spectacle, for such she look,
of gaze world!
how different be the scene
that lie beneath this arch window height!
the town, that murmur through the busy day,
be hush; the roof one solemn breadth of shade
veil; but the tower, and taper spire above,
the pinnet, and the grey embattle wall,
and mast that throng around the southern pier,
shine all distinct in light; and mark, remote,
over yonder elm, saint Mary modest fane.

oh! if such view may please, to i they shine
how more attractive! but few year have pass,
since there i see youth, health, and happiness,
all circle round a age sire, who hair
be now in peace go down; he be to i
a friend, and almost with a father smile
hang over my infant Muse. the cheerful voice
of fellowship, the song of harmony,
and mirth, and wit, be there.
that scene be pass:
cold death and separation have dissolve
the evening circle of once-happy friend!

so have it ever fare, and so must fare,
with all! i see the moonlight watery tract
that shine far off, beneath the forest-shade:
what seem it, but the mirror of that tide,
which noiseless, 'amid the change of the world,
hold its inevitable course, the tide
of year depart; to the distant eye
still seem motionless, though hurry on
from morn till midnight, bear, as it flow,
the sail of pleasurable bark! these gleam
today, tomorrow other pass sail
catch the like sunshine of the vernal morn.

our pleasant day be as the moon brief light
on the pale ripple, pass as it shine!
but shall the pensive bard for this lament,
who know how transitory be all world
before his eye who make they!
cease the strain;
and welcome still the social intercourse
that soothe the world loud jar, till the hour
when, universal darkness wrap all
this nether scene, a light from heaven shall stream
through cloud divide, and a voice be hear:
here only pure and last bliss be find!
