by the same.

the institution of the order of the garter.

first spirit.

hither, all you heavenly power,
from your empyreal bower;
from the field for ever gay,
from the star-paved milky way,
from the moon relucent horn,
from the star that wake the morn;
from the bow, who mingle dye
sweet cheer the frown sky;
from the silver cloud that sail
shadowy over the darken vale;
from the elysiums of the sky,
spirit immortal, hither fly!

chorus of spirit.

fly, and through the limpid air
guard in pomp the slide car,
which to his terrestrial throne
waft britannia genius down.

second spirit.

hither, all you heavenly power!
from your empyreal bower!
chief you, who brow divine
crown with starry circlet shine;
who in various labour try,
once britannia strength and pride,
now in everlasting rest
share the glory of the bless!
peer and noble of the sky,
spirit immortal, hither fly!

chorus of spirit.

fly, and through the limpid air
guard in pomp the slide car,
which to his terrestrial throne
waft britannia genius down.

third spirit.

hither too, you tuneful throng,
master of enchant song,
sacred bard! who rapturous strain
sooth the toil hero pain,
sooth the patriot generous care;
sweet through their ravish ear
whisper to the immortal mind
heavenly vision, hope refine;
hope of endless peace and fame,
safe from envy blast flame,
pure, sincere, in those abode,
where to throng of listen god,
hymn bard, to virtue praise,
tune their never-dying lay.
sweet encomiast of the sky,
spirit immortal, hither fly!

chorus of spirit.

fly, and charm the limpid air,
while the softly-sliding car,
to his sea-encircled throne
waft britannia genius down.

chorus of bard.

gentle spirit, we obey;
thus along the aetherial way,
we attend our monarch car;
thus we charm the silent air.

song.

first bard.

you southern gale, that ever fly
in frolic april vernal train,
who, as you skim along the sky,
dip your light pinion in the main,
then shake they fraught with genial shower,
over bloom Flora primrose bower:

2. 

now cease awhile your wanton sport,
now drive each threaten cloud away;
then to the flowery vale resort,
and hither all its sweet convey;
and ever as you dance along,
with soft murmur aid our song.

song ii.

second bard.

but lo! fair windsor tower appear,
and hill with spread oak embrown!
hark! hark! the voice of joy i hear,
sing by a thousand echo round;
and now i view a glitter train,
in triumph march over yonder plain.

grand chorus of spirit and bard.

hail mighty nation! ever fame in war!
lo! heaven descend thy festival to share;
to view those hero, who immortal praise
celestial bard shall sing in live lay.

genius.

disdain not, you bless denizen of air,
to breathe this gross atmosphere awhile,
your service i shall need; mean time resort
to yond imperial palace, and in air
draw up your squadron in a radiant orb,
suspend over those lofty battlement,
like the bright halo that invest the moon,
or Saturn lucid ring: thence shed benign
your choice influence on the noble train,
there on this solemn day assemble round
the throne of british Edward: i awhile
must here await the approach of other spirit,
sage Druids, britain old philosopher;
fetch by my summons from the western isle,
that, scatter over the rough hibernian flood,
seem like huge fragment by the wild wave tear
from stormy Scotland, and the cambrian shore.
there, from the world retire in secret shade,
chief where Breint and meinai wash the oak
of ancient Mona, their academy
and school of sage and moral discipline
they hold; and to the neighbour briton round,
from their revere tribunal, holy mount,
dispense at once their oracle and law.
till fierce Paulinus, and his roman band,
they and their god defy, drive they thence
to seek for shelter in hibernian shade.
yet still enamour of their ancient haunt,
unseen of mortal eye, they hover round
their ruin altar, consecrate hill
once gird with spread oak, mysterious row
of rude enormous obelisk, that rise
orb within orb, stupendous monument
of artless architecture, such as now
oft time amaze the wander traveller,
by the pale moon discern on sarum plain.
but hence, aërial spirit: lo, they come!

chief druid.

inform we, happy spirit, protect power
of this our ancient country, wherefore now
from our sequester valley, pensive grove
and dark recess, thou have summon we
to wait thy order on this flowery hill?

genius.

a great event, sage Druids, that no less
import than this your ancient country fame,
from contemplation, and your silent shade,
call you to meet i on this flowery hill.

know, in yond castle, who proud battlement
sit like a regal crown upon the brow
of high-climbing lawn, do Edward hold
this day his solemn session to receive
the plea of all the aspire candidate,
who, summon by the herald public voice,
to Windsor, as to fame bright temple, haste
from every shore; the noble, wise, and brave,
knight, senator, and statesman, lord and king;
ambitious each to gain the splendid prize,
by Edward promise to transcendent worth.
for who of mortal be too great and high
in the career of virtue to contend?
of these select the most glorious name,
do England monarch purpose to compose
a princely brotherhood, himself the chief,
and worthy sovereign of the illustrious band;
a band of hero, list in the cause
of honour, virtue, and celestial truth,
under the name and holy patronage
of cappadocian GEORGE, britannia saint.

such be the plan by generous Edward form;
a plan of glory, that beyond the reach
of his own conquer arm, shall propagate
the sovereignty of Britain, and erect
her monarch into judge of mankind.

but from this day decision, from the choice
of his first colleague, shall succeed time
of Edward judge, and on his fame pronounce.
for dignity and title, when misplace
upon the vicious, the corrupt and vile,
like princely virgin to low peasant match,
descend from their nobility, and soil
by base alliance, not their pride alone
and native splendour lose, but shame retort
even on the sacred throne, from whence they spring.
so may the lustre of this order bright,
this old child of chivalry be stain,
if at her first espousal, her great sire,
catch by the specious outside, that deceive
and captivate the world, admit the suit
of vain pretender void of real worth;
light empty bubble, by the wanton gale
of fortune swell, and only form to dance
and glitter in the sunshine of a court.

begin we then with Edward; first let he
at his own high tribunal undergo
the rigid inquisition — i for this
have leave my lucid star-encircled throne:
for this, immortal sage have require
your wise and prudent ministry, well skill
in various science and the human heart.
search Edward to the bottom: sound the depth
and shallows of his soul; if he possess
that first of regal talent, to discern
with quick-eyed penetration, through the veil
of art, each character intrinsic worth,
and all the labyrinth of the human mind.
nor blush for this good end yourself to wear
fallacious form to plead the cause of false
but specious merit; at his throne appear
in borrow shape, and there with artful guile,
when the shrill trumpet cite the candidate,
urge your pretension: all the power employ
of wit and eloquence: Edward, i trust,
the trial shall abide; which shall but tend
to manifest, that not from arrogance,
but conscious virtue, have he thus assume
above all other king, to be the judge
and great rewarder of heroic deed.
nor whole unassisted will i leave
my royal charge, but with bless influence clear
his intellectual eye from the dim mist
it haply have contract from a long
unebbing current of felicity,
unhoped, unequalled triumph, from the view
of captive monarch, and the glitter throng,
who at his summons from all climates come,
to take, as from their sovereign, honour new.
when heaven try mortal in unusual way,
it be fit it shall afford unusual aid.

now, sage, to yond spread oak retire
there wait my summons; and mean time advise
how best to execute the task enjoin.

EDWARD.

that hither from your distant residence,
by solemn invitation, noble guest,
i have entreat your illustrious train,
misconstrue not to levity and pride,
or ostentatious vain magnificence,
unworthy the grave majesty of king,
unworthy your atention, my renown.
this bright assemblage of the wise, the brave,
the noble, the magnificent, the fair,
the ornament of Europe, have i seek
to grace the pomp of virtue, to adorn
with noble offering her unspotted shrine,
attract thus to her divine command
the awful veneration of mankind.
this be the cause, great prince, this the call,
the voice of virtue, not of England king,
that with respectful zeal you hear and follow:
from burgundy rich vineyard, from the mead
of Hainault and Brabant, the rocky wave
of Danube, from germania warlike tower,
imperial mother of a hundred state;
from Spain, long exercise by moorish arm,
from italy fair princedom, and the wall
of sea-washed Venice, adria haughty spouse.
with i then, all you virtuous, by what stile
record in the register of fame,
knight, senator, or soldier, ermine lord,
or sceptre prince; from whatever clime
you come, ennoble by heroic act,
with i unite the splendour of your name
to dignify the erection of a new
and noble order, which to heaven high praise,
and to heaven champion cappadocian GEORGE,
on this his holy festival i mean
to find a recompense for worthy deed.
thus as the orient sun, adore of old
by prostrate Persia, owe his deity
less to that genial and benignant heat
that cherish and warm the seed of life,
than to those gorgeous beam, that deck with gold
and crimson the gay portal of the morn;
so shall this rise order owe its fame
and bright lustre to the splendid train
of lord and purple prince, who be meet
this day to usher and adorn its birth.

nor deem that to allure heroic mind,
my private interest partial to serve,
to lift the valiant in ambition cause,
and form a league of conquest, i have lay
in subtle policy this great design:

ashamed be he who with malignant eye
so read my purpose: and be he accurse
whoever in aftertime shall so pervert
this sacred institution. to the world
i here consign it, to the good and great
of every age and clime, and they alone. 

now sound the trumpet; bid the candidate
with confidence appear, and urge their claim.

Spaniard.

illustrious monarch! emperor of the isle!
my name be Guzman — from those hero spring,
who with pelagio amid the asturian rock
against the invasion of unnumbered moor,
maintain the same and empire of the goth,
and found at Oviedo once again
the spanish monarchy and catholic faith,
transport from the mountain dreary womb
to glitter temple she most holy altar.
thence on the border moor their valiant son
wage incessant war, ere long regain
their ancient realm of Leon, Arragon,
and rich castilia: in which great exploit
my brave progenitor, by valour, zeal,
and loyalty distinguish, from their king
gain those high honour, princely signory,
and proud prerogative, which have extol
the name of Guzman to such envy grandeur,
that scarce above it tower the regal throne.

these honour undiminished, undefiled,
to i deliver down, may well content
a vulgar mind; but spirit high bear
be full of generous and aspire thought;
and use the vantage ground of rank and power
but to ascend still high. thus i come
thy garter to solicit; please, great prince,
with thou to be enrol thy brother knight,
and fear no repulse. nobility,
as near in her orbit, first receive
the beam of majesty; alone can bear
the fullness of that glory, which overpower
inferior nature. virtue self will blush,
do she at once approach too near the throne.
but the young eagle bear amid the blaze
of glance lightning, with undazzled eye
soar to the court of heaven, and perch bold
on the bright sceptre of imperial Jove.

the great king be he, who be the king
of great subject. seek thou to advance
the glory of thy order? to thy self
associate those, who high-exalted name
for age past from envy self have force
habitual veneration, never pay
to new and upstart merit. such be i,
who pure and generous blood descend down
from noble fountain, in its course enrich
by glorious mixture with each royal stream
that fair Iberia boast, may even pretend
to thy alliance, Edward. view this scroll,
the faithful blazon of my ancient line,
a line of potentate, who every son
deserve to wear the garter i demand.
in i their representative, the heir,
of all their honour, son of their renown,
do thou reward their virtue: in their name
i claim, and on hereditary right,
the right of monarch, Edward, rest my plea.

EDWARD.

the high desert of thy renowned forefather
well have thou show; but have thou therefore prove
thy self deserve to be call their son?
to thou their prosperous virtue have indeed
transmit lineal rank, and title proud,
by they more hardly gain; for which thou stand
to custom and the indulgence of thy country
indebt, Guzman, in a large account;
which thou must first discharge by noble deed,
ere thou can stile those dignity thy own.
this if thou have not pay, why do thou seek,
like thriftless prodigal, to swell the debt,
and overwhelm thy self with obligation?

virtue be honour, and the noble title
be but the public stamp set on the over
to ascertain its value to mankind.
it be a kind of treason to my crown,
to mark base metal with the royal impress,
and put off lazy pride in virtue name.

will thou attain my garter? seek it there
where thy heroic ancestor acquire
their glorious honour, in the embattle field
among the squadron of the warlike moor:
or in the council of thy king, by truth
and wisdom equal to the important trust.
be what thy father be, and then return
to ask the pledge of merit from my hand,
and be the fit companion of a king.

Genoese.

from Genoa the opulent, the bank
and treasury of the world, most puissant king,
invite by thy herald, be i come
to claim the honour by thy promise due,
due by thy justice to superior worth;
due then to i, great Edward, who possess
that object of the toil, the care, the vow
of all mankind, that comprehensive good,
source of all power and grandeur, boundless wealth.

behold yond glitter train, who sumptuous pride,
bright with the treasure of each precious mine,
invest with glory thy imperial throne:
whence be their dignity? the ray august,
that awe and dazzle the respectful crowd,
proceed it from nobility, from virtue,
their wisdom, or their valour, or their fame?
come it not rather from the beam over?
the diamond starlike radiance? wealth, o king,
wealth be the sun that deck the gorgeous scene;
that cherish, adorn, and call to view
these princely flower of honour, virtue, fame,
which in the shade of poverty be lose.
whatever man desire or venerate,
on wealth attend; even empire self be buy.
nor can the mighty Julius have attain
by wisdom or by valour sovereign power,
have not the gold of vanquish Gaul subdue
the liberty of Rome. on wretched want,
contempt and narrow-souled dependence wait.
even king, of necessary wealth deprive,
in powerless indigence lose all respect,
all homage from their subject: while the rich,
like god adore, over every neck extend
their potent sceptre, and in golden chain
fierce faction and rebellious freedom bind.

the glory, strength, importance of a realm
be measure by its riches: Venice thus,
thus genoa petty state out-balance,
in europe scale, the boundless wild that cloth
with tributary fur the russian czar.
with like preeminence exalt shine
in every land above the proud name,
the bless possessor of all-worshipped gold.

my birth or rank i boast not here, though bear
a senator of Genoa. the desert,
on which i find my claim, be all my own;
to have adorn and dignify the state
of my decline house with great wealth
than ever my thriftless ancestor possess;
who rich acquisition be but sprig
of barren laurel, or the flaunt rag
of some tear ensign, to their needy son
a worthless heritage. yet not to swell
my narrow fortune will my soul descend
to the base method of ignoble trade,
and vulgar mercantile pursuit of gain.
i be the noble art of raise gold
from gold, of nurse and improve wealth
by gainful use; art practise heretofore
by senator and sage of old Rome,
illustrious Crassus, and wise Seneca.
thus have i grace the splendour of my name
with suitable possession; thus i hold
in firm subjection to my will the poor
of every rank and order, soldier, priest,
the venturous merchant, and the sumptuous lord,
who in a low vassalage to i,
than to thy sceptre, Edward, bow their head,
pledge their land and liberty for gold.

hence be i bold to stand before thy throne
a candidate for glory high prize:
and let i add, that policy alone
shall teach thy prudence to approve my claim;
shall teach thou in thy subject to excite,
by honour on superior wealth bestow,
a useful emulation to be rich:
which once inspire, thy Albion shall become
the first of nation, thou the first of king.

EDWARD.

have thou by open to thy native land
the golden vein of commerce, by employ
the useful hand of industry in work
of national advantage, by unite
remote region in the friendly band
and honest intercourse of mutual trade;
have thou by these humane and generous art,
which thy mistaken pride so much disdain,
enrich at once thy country and thy self,
then not unworthy have thou be to wear
the bright mark of honour; but thy wealth,
the baseborn child of sordid usury,
that foe to commerce, nurse of idleness,
stain and degrade thou from thy noble birth;
nor in the usurer can i discern
the senator of Genoa. — to enlarge
the mind with generous sentiment, to raise
its aim by virtuous emulation, here
i sit; but not to gild with honour beam
that selfish passion which congeal the heart,
and stop the stream of sweet benevolence,
mean avarice, the vice of narrow soul,
incapable of glory. — wealth, thou say,
can buy even empire, and to Julius give
dominion over his country — fatal gift,
and ruinous to both! but what to Rome,
what to that caesar successor avail
the boundless treasure of the ravage world,
when they have lose their virtue? do not soon
the valiant son of poverty, the goth,
the hun and vandal, from their barren hill
and rugged wood descend, to their steel
subject the roman gold? yet i deny not
the power and use of riches: to the wise
and good, in public or in private life,
they be the mean of virtue, and best serve
the noble purpose; but in the use,
not in the bare possession, lie the merit.
shew i thy merit then, thy bounteous act,
public munificence, or private alm,
the hungry and the naked, and the sick,
sustain and cherish by thy save hand;
plead this, and i allow thy worthy claim,
for this be virtue, and deserve reward.

neapolitan.

not on my wealth, nor on my noble blood,
shall i presume to claim thy royal gift,
auspicious prince, but on the skill to give
that splendour to nobility and wealth,
that elegance of taste, from which alone
their value they derive; of this to judge,
this to direct, i boast, fit arbiter
of all refine delight. — but chief to king
my happy talent i devote; on they
my genius wait with duteous care, and waft
the golden cup of pleasure to their lip,
like Ganymede before the throne of Jove.
and who indeed will wish to be a god
only to thunder, and to hear the prayer
of clamorous suitor? it be the nectar feast,
the dance of grace, and the wanton charm
of Venus, sport with the smile and love,
that make the court of heaven a bless abode.
far happy be the mean peasant lot
who sleep or sing in careless ease beneath
the sun-burnt haycock, or the flowery thorn,
than to be place on high in anxious pride,
the purple drudge and slave of tiresome state,
if to superior power superior mean
of joy be not annex, and large scope
for every wish the lavish heart can form:
if the soft hand of pleasure do not wreathe
around the royal diadem, who weight
oppressive load the monarch ache brow,
her fair growth of ever-blooming flower.

on thou, victorious prince, propitious fortune
have pour her rich gift, renown and wealth,
and greatness equal to thy mighty mind;
one only bliss be want to thy court,
voluptuous elegance, the lovely child
of ease and opulence; that never come,
but like a bird of summer to attend
the bright sunshine of a glorious state.
to she, and her alone belong the task,
by learned delicacy to remove
what yet remain in this thy ancient realm
of gothic barbarism, the rust of war,
and valiant ignorance. — her artful hand
thy rugged briton shall refine, and teach
more courtly manner, to their sovereign will
polite pliant: do but thou command
thy will servant, with thy favour grace,
from fair joanna ever-smiling court,
under who happy influence i be train,
from polish Naples, her delightful seat,
the bloom goddess to transport, with all
her train of joy, and fix they here beneath
thy great protection. — but perhaps thou fear
the voice of censure, and the grave reproof
of moralize dullness: idle fear!
the vulgar herd, indeed, religious craft
and policy of state have well confine
with wise severity to rigid law:
else will that headstrong beast the multitude
forget obedience, and its rider voice
disdain. but shall the rider put a curb
in his own mouth? the law that king have make
shall they restrain the maker? Edward, no!
for thou indulgent justice shall relax
her harsh decree, and piety shall wait
to give her reverend sanction to thy will.
it be thy to rove at large through nature field,
crop every flower, and taste of every fruit;
by sweet variety provoke still
the languid appetite to new desire.
nor useless to thy pleasure, happy prince,
shall be my faithful service; nice joy,
joy of a quick, more exalt taste,
than ever ripen in this northern clime,
the growth of soft region, shall my hand
by skilful culture in thy Britain raise.

to they, who gross and dull capacity
be fit to bear the burden of the state,
the labour mule, that through the mire of form
draw the slow car of government along,
glad the task of business i resign.
be mine the bright province, to direct
thy pleasure, Edward, minister supreme
of all thy soft hour: to serve the king
be they the glory, let i serve the man.

but shall thy stern genius, only please
with arm and royalty important care,
the duty of a king, my gentle art
too light prize, and thence reject my suit:
permit at least, that to philippa ear,
divine Philippa, thy and beauty queen,
and her attendant grace, i may plead
the cause of bliss, a cause so much their own:
they will approve my claim, to who the care,
the labour of my life, my head, my heart
be all devote — let i from their hand
receive the garter, and be call their knight.

Philippa.

permit i, gracious Edward, to reply
to this irreverent flatterer, who presume
before a matron and a queen to plead
the cause of vice, and impudent hope
to find in she a fautress of his suit.
but know, pernicious sophister, my heart
have learn from Edward love, and this high rank
which i partake with he, a noble pride,
that ill can brook the too familiar eye
and saucy tongue of riot and debauch;
in who unmannered light society,
nor majesty, nor virtue can maintain
that dignity, which be their proper guard.

thy vile refinement, and luxurious art,
miscall politeness, i detest; and feel,
in the soft duty of a virtuous love,
such pure, serene delight, as far transcend
what thou styl pleasure, the delirious joy
of a intoxicate feverish brain.
behold my royal lord, the first and best
of king, the love and wonder of mankind!
behold my child, worthy their great sire,
the general theme of praise and benediction!
these be my pleasure; can thy skill bestow
superior bliss? ah no, the vain attempt.
will only bring disgust, remorse, and shame.

EDWARD.

that i have love, Philippa, and esteem thou
more for thy virtue than those female charm,
which this vile flatterer deem single worth
his panegyric, be thy happiness
and glory, as it be thy Edward pride.

with the like spirit have i also woo
and wed sovereign power; nor weak catch
with outward pomp, or seek to myself
a privilege to riot uncontrolled
in sensual pleasure, and behind the throne
to laugh secure at restraint and law.
no: i embrace she as the child of heaven,
dowr with the ample mean of do good;
from who espousal i may hope to raise
a offspring, worth the ambition of a king,
immortal glory; to a generous mind
as far surpass all the wanton toy,
which he call pleasure, as thy faithful love
(the sweet overflow of heart-felt delight)
excel, Philippa, the lascivious smile
of common prostitute, caress and loathe.

hence from my sight with thy detest art,
base minister of luxury, the bane
of every flourish and happy state:
presume no more within my court to sing
thy syren-song, nor soften into slave
and coward my brave subject. — i disdain
that elegance, which such as thou can teach.
virtue alone be elegant, alone
polite; vice must be sordid and deform,
though to adorn she every art contend.
and rather will i see my briton roam
untutored savage, among the wood,
as once they do, in naked innocence,
than polish like the vile degenerate race
of modern italy corrupt son.

soldier.

nor riches, nor nobility of birth,
nor the soft art of base effem'nate ease,
which just thou reject, valiant prince,
but thy own darling attribute i boast,
undaunted courage, try in many a field,
in every clime, and under every banner,
that for these forty summer have be wave
over europe plain, by Ister, Rhine, and po,
hungarian and bohemian, flemish, french,
venetian, spanish, Guelph and gibbeline:
whence in just confidence secure i come
this military honour to demand,
due to my toil and service, to my wound,
my laurel, and that generous love of glory,
which without any call, or public cause,
or private animosity, alone
raise my strong arm, and draw my dreadful sword.

wherever Mars his crimson flag display,
that be my country, thither swift i bear
my ready valour, and the dauntless band
of various nation, under my command,
prepare to sell their blood, their limb, their life:
nor where the right, nor where the just cause,
deign we to ask — those intricate debate
we leave to lazy penman in the shade
of coward ease; while our impetuous fire
still bear we forward, ardent to pursue
through danger rough path the step to fame.
on such a spirit shall thy favour smile.

but let i wonder, Edward, that so long
thy ear the vain pretension can endure
of man unknown to war, attendant meet
of some luxurious asiatic court,
or female distaff-reign; but suit ill
the presence of a monarch great in arm.
have thou to those inglorious son of peace
thy martial order give, the warrior-saint
have blush to see his image so profane,
which on my manly breast, indent over
with many a noble scar, will fit shine.
but wherefore stand i thus harangue here,
unskilful as i be in smooth discourse,
the coward argument? on force alone
i rest my title: let the glorious prize
be hang on high amid the list field,
and let i there dispute it; there my lance
shall plead my cause far better than my tongue,
if any dare deny my rightful claim.

EDWARD.

not for the brave alone have i ordain
this institution, but for all desert,
all public virtue, wisdom, all that serve,
improve, defend, or dignify a state:
though first indeed to valour, as the guard
of all the rest, when in the public cause,
with justice and benevolence employ.

but thou, base mercenary, can thou dare
the glorious name of valour to usurp,
who know not public cause, no sense of right,
nor pity, nor affection, nor remorse?
who under any chief, in any quarrel,
can stain with gore thy prostitute arm?
call it not love of glory; that be build
on act for the deliverance of mankind;
on generous principle, and noble scorn
of sordid interest: call it cruel pride,
and savageness of nature, that delight
to conquer, and oppress, afflict, insult;
or call it love of plunder, that can draw
unauthorised, uninjured, unprovoked,
the sword of war; that bravo-like can lift
for hire the venal hand to perpetrate
assassination, murder, massacre.

but thou have serve with courage: be it so —
thou have thy pay, and with it thy reward;
pretend no farther, nor compare thy deed,
dishonour by the mean desire of gain,
with he, who for his country and his king
resign his ease, his fortune, or his life.
those battle thou have fight, those forty year
of blood and horror, which thy vaunt tongue
so high have sound, be indeed thy crime,
flagitious crime; for which the impartial bar
of reason will condemn thou, as the foe
of human nature, do not custom screen
by her unjust esteem thy guilty head.
but hope not honour or employment here.
unsafe and wretched be that monarch state
who weak trust to mercenary band,
the guard or of his person, or his realm:
unfaithful, insolent, rapacious, base
he soon shall prove they, and become himself
their slave, to hold his kingdom at their will.
for this within my Britain have i seek
to raise a martial spirit, and ordain
these new incitement, honour, and reward,
to virtuous chivalry, that never make
who wear hereafter my imperial crown,
may need to stoop to the precarious aid
of venal foreign sword; but in the heart
of his brave subject find a strong guard,
prepare with zeal unbought, and english valour,
his right to vindicate, and save their own.

politician.

well have thy sovereign wisdom, royal judge,
the suit refuse of these pretender vain,
and, by reject they, embolden i.
for valour, and nobility, and wealth,
though by their proud possessor vaunt high,
be but subordinate, the slave and tool,
not the companion, and the counsellor
of godlike monarchy; who awful throne
by darksome cloud envelop, far beyond
the ken of vulgar eye, support stand
on that deep-rooted prop, the craft of state,
mysterious policy. — who best have learn
her wily lesson, best deserve to share
the honour, counsel, and the heart of king.
by he instruct, even the mean prince
shall rise to envy greatness, shall advance
his dread power above restraint and fear,
and all the rule that in fantastic chain
inferior mind confine. thus milan duke,
thus padua lord above their country law
have raise their head, and trample to the dust
the pride of freedom, that essay in vain
their high superior genius to control.
these be my master, mighty prince; beneath
their rule, and in their council be i form
to know the false corrupt heart of man,
his every weakness, every vice, and thence
to tempt, or break his passion to the yoke:
to scorn the public as a empty name,
and on the helpless multitude impose
the adamantine bond of fraud and force.
thus be i train, thus fit to conduct
the fate of proud empire; thus i come
to claim thy garter, Edward, the just meed
of worth pre-eminent, and in return
my service to offer, which no doubt
thy wisdom glad will accept: for who
so fit to serve the majesty of king,
as he, who slight every mean tie,
friend, parent, country, to advance their power
devote his toil, experience, fortune, fame,
nor other favour court, nor refuge hope
but in their high protection? — lead by i,
thou, royal Edward, shall attain that height,
that glorious summit of imperial power,
which not thy mighty ancestor have reach;
where in a free air, a more enlarge
horizon, bound only by thy will,
thou shall exalt sit, and view beneath,
in humble distance and safe bound,
those subject, who presumptuous now approach
too near, and with rude hand profane thy throne.

nor let weak scruple check thy manly soul
in the bright task of glory; know, great prince,
a king divinity be sovereign power,
the only god, before who shrine the wise
their incense offer, whence inspire, they draw
divine ambition, and heroic scorn
of vulgar prejudice, vulgar fear.
virtue the people idol, and by they
reward well with popular applause,
that idle breath, the gift and prize of fool.
it be thy to govern, not to court mankind,
nor on their smile precarious to depend,
but noble force they to depend on thy.
o sacred sir, can virtue give thou this,
this bright supremacy? trust not her boast,
her idle pageanty of barren praise:
reject she saucy claim, importunate,
and self-supported; nor admit her train,
proud independency, and public zeal,
those factious demagogue, the foe of king.

EDWARD.

be virtue then, and love of public good,
the foe of monarchy? and be deceit,
injustice and oppression, quality
become and expedient in a king?
then know i not to govern; but have nurse
for twice these fifteen year even in my heart,
a poisonous viper; nay unkinged myself,
by yield to restrain my sovereign power
with law and charter of enfranchisement,
not due, it seem, from monarch to their slave.

but know, vile counsellor of infamy,
that i disdain thy politics, those false
and shallow politics, by which my sire,
weak judge Edward, be betray to shame
and foul destruction, while to such as thou
his ear and heart incautious he resign,
and be indeed their slave, not England king.

by maxim different far have i sustain
the strength and splendour of my regal state,
on the broad basis of true wisdom fix
with solid firmness. by encourage
the generous love of virtue and of fame,
that source of valour, pledge of victory.

by grant to my subject, what indeed
be their inherent right, security,
the cheerful father of content and peace,
of industry and opulence, which fill
with smile multitude the land, and pay
in will subsidy that prince care,
who lay up treasure in his people heart.

by hold with a firm impartial hand
the sleddy scale of justice; not alone
betwixt my subject in their private right,
but in the general, more important cause,
betwixt the crown and they, the different claim
of freedom and of just prerogative:
transgress not myself by boundless power,
nor suffering other to transgress those law,
that in their golden chain together bind,
for common good, the whole unite state.

but more than all, by guard from contempt,
or impious violation, that supreme
protrectress of all government and law,
religion; in who train for ever wait
obedience, order, justice, mercy, love,
a guard of angel place around the throne.
her sacred counsel have i still revere,
her high command enforce, her power implore,
over all my subject nation to call down
from heavenly wisdom, her eternal fire,
a fix secure felicity, beyond
the force of human prudence to attain.

these be my art of government, those art
by which my british crown i have advance
above the imperial diadem, above
the pride of afric, or of asia throne.
i will not tell thou this, but that thou seem
a stranger to my fame, as to my realm,
and to the real greatness of a king:
who sacred dignity, by thou traduce,
much it behove a king to vindicate;
not by reject only with disdain
thy arrogant pretension, but in thou
dishonour and brand with reproach
thy tenet also, the pernicious lore
of tyrant and usurper, which thy tongue,
blaspheme justice, government, and law,
have in a land of freedom dare to vent.
hence! from my kingdom, with thy quick speed,
lest the revenge of a insult king
with sudden ruin intercept thy flight.

king JOHN.

permit i, Edward, to thy royal voice
to add my suffrage also, and with thou
protest against this coward policy,
that mean skulk behind opprobrious fraud,
and low unprincely artifice; i feel
a virtue in my heart, a generous pride,
that tell i king be clothe with majesty,
encircle with authority, revere
and almost deify, to teach they thence
that goodness and the save attribute
of heaven become their office, justice chief,
and truth, the virtue of heroic mind,
which, be it banish from all other breast,
shall dwell for ever in the heart of king.

chief druid.

behold in we, great king, the ancient priest
and judge of this land, the Druids old:
who late in borrow character have stand
before thy sage tribunal, to prefer
the claim of valour, wealth, nobility,
and those soft specious flatterer, who beneath
the rosy wreath of pleasure and of love
conceal the sickly and disgustful brow
of riot and debauch, and often win
from weak unmanly prince the rich prize
to virtue due and wisdom, not to these
the canker of a state; but least of all
due to that traitor of his king and country,
who labour to build up the regal throne
beyond its due proportion, and the strength
of those foundation which the law have lay,
overwhelm the people, and at once overturn
his royal master, place he at best
on a uneasy totter pinnacle,
the mark of execration and reproach.

these claim have thou reject; like a king
discern in mankind, and know well
the value of his favour: like a king
deserve the high office of the judge
and arbiter of Europe: like a king
equal to his great fame, and worth the care
of those immortal spirit, who this day
have quit their celestial residence,
to view and to approve thy glorious deed.

but, Edward, be not thou amaze to find
that those who late for thy favour sue
be not the personage they assume.
o king! thou be beset with counterfeit
the very opposite to we, who seem
far better than they be. for flattery,
chameleonlike, accommodate with care
to the court-hue his changeful countenance.
and when a prince be brave, magnanimous,
and high in spirit, then ambition wear
a face of dignity, and nothing breathe
but lofty enterprise, conquest, power,
and scheme of glory to the sovereign ear,
pretend love and care for his renown
with more than duteous zeal. — of these beware!
for as the theban queen, in fable old,
be, by the specious guile of fraudful Jove,
in her amphitryon form to guilt betray,
so by these counterfeit be king seduce,
even in the most belove suspectless shape,
to take a traitor to their royal arm.
but thou shall know they, Edward, by their work,
and of this truth be most assure, that he,
who in his private commerce with mankind
be mean, dishonest, interest, false,
can never be true to thou; nor can he love
his prince, who feel not for his country good.

thus warn we leave thou, mighty prince: be firm,
be constant in the path of fair renown.
think it thy duty to revere thyself
the sacred law of chivalry, the wise
injunction by thy order lay on all
the garter knight; so shall thy fame remain
the great example of all future king.
farewell! for lo! the genius of thy realm
with all his pomp attend, come to share,
and grace the glory of this signal day.
these cloud of fragrance, that far-beaming blaze
of heavenly brightness, his approach declare.

genius.

from the gay realm of cloudless day i come,
where in the glitter of unnumbered world,
that like to isle of various magnitude
float in the ocean of unbounded space;
on my invisible aërial throne
i sit, attend with a radiant band
of spirit immortal, who pure essence,
while clad in human shape on earth they dwell,
through the dull clay of gross mortality
disclose their heavenly vigour, and burst forth
in godlike virtue and heroic deed,
their Albion grace with as fair a growth
of fame, as ever enrich imperial Rome.
thence ripe for heaven and immortality,
to i, the genius of this happy isle,
they fly, and claim the meed of their desert,
celestial crown, and everliving praise
record in the song of heavenly bard,
that round my throne their hymn of triumph sing,
attune to the sweet harmonious sphere
their undiscording lyre and voice divine.

nor thus remove to heaven, and thus employ
in careless rapture, wont they to forget
their native country, and the public weal,
to which on earth their labour and their life
they once devote; but pursue still
the bent and habit of their soul, with i
they watch the british empire, still intent
to check alternate the encroach wave
of regal power and popular liberty:
i, chief attentive near the royal throne,
take up my watchful station, to infuse
my sage and moderate counsel in those ear,
which wisdom have prepare and purify
to relish honest, though unpleasing truth.

thus be i always, though invisible,
attendant, Edward, on thy glorious deed.
but on this solemn day have i vouchsafe
to manifest my presence; to declare,
not in those whisper which have often speak
peace to thy conscious heart, but audible
and evident to all, the assent of heaven
to the great business, which have gather here
this troop of prince from all nation round.
hence all may know that virtue have a train
more bright than earthly empire can command:
know, that those action which be great and good,
receive a noble sanction from the free
and universal voice of all mankind,
which be the voice of heaven, than from the high,
the most illustrious act of regal power.

this noble sanction, Edward, in the name
not of this age alone, but late time,
here do i solemn annex to each
of thy great act, but chief to this most wise,
most virtuous institution, which extend
wide as thy fame, beyond thy empire bound,
a prize of virtue publish to mankind.

you register of heaven, record the deed.

bard.

now tune, you bard, the british lyre;
now wake the vocal string;
while heaven and earth in Edward praise conspire,
join to the general voice your sacred choir,
and on your soar wing,

from time and envy waft his glorious name,
and place it in the shrine of incorruptive fame.
begin: the listen echo round
shall catch with joy the long-forgotten sound,
and warble through each grove the british strain
to windsor smile nymph, recall their Arthur reign.

you nymph of windsor bowery wood,
you power who haunt yond glisten flood,
that with reluctant fond delay
around yond flowery valley stray;
say, from your mind have time erase
the please image of glory pass?
review you now those scene no more?
when noble stain with saxon gore,
from badon long-contended plain
great Arthur with his martial train
to windsor choose shade repair,
and with his knight the festive banquet share.

then first exult Thames behold
the triumph of the list field;
behold along his level mead
career knight, encounter steed,
heroic game, who toil inspire
the thirst of praise, and kindle martial fire.

fair peace in war bright mail array,
with smile the glorious list survey;
so shall the brave (she cry) prepare
their heart and sinewy arm for war:
such combat break not my repose,
such son best guard my right from dare foe.

then too in feastful hall or bower,
attendant on the genial hour,
the british harp sweet lyrist string,
and albion generous victor sing:
while valiant Arthur copious fame
incessant feed the bright poetic flame.

but mortal err in excess,
overwhelm the virtue they caress.
thus Arthur his great story mourn,
by too fond praise to fable turn:
mourn the companion of his toil,
mock with false glory and fantastic spoil.

till through the dark romantic tale,
through superstition magic veil,
sage Edward pierce view, and own
the chief with genuine lustre crown:
view the great model, and restore
the long-lost honour of his martial board.

hail british prince! these faithful lay,
eternal record of heroic worth,
shall reassert thy ancient praise,
and from the cloud of fiction call thou forth,
in glory sphere thy orbit to reclaim,
and at great Edward beam relume thy darken fame.

but see in heavenly panoply array,
who stream radiance skirt the cloud with gold,
i view Pendragon burst the veil shade,
and all his blaze magnitude unfold!
over yond broad tower he take his airy stand,
and point, Edward, towards the royal throne,
to his fame knight around, a laureled band,
show on thy knee the bright sky-tinctured zone.

virtue, he cry, (the aetherial sound
thy gross material organ can hear)
virtue on earth by british Edward crown.
her reverend throne once more shall rear.

to her own self-applauding breast
force for reward no long to retreat,
she see her awful charm by king caress,
see honour woo she for his mate.

honour, her heaven-elected spouse,
from her embrace by lawless power withhold,
now at yond altar plight his holy vow,
vow by assent Edward seal.

and now the fair angelic bride
gather her noble train from every land,
to her late wed lord with decent pride
present the venerable band.

the great procession Edward lead;
i see yond hallow dome with hero throng:
incessant still the white-plumed pomp proceed,
through time eternal course prolong.

and you, dear partner of my fame,
your ancient honour now again shall boast;
this noble order shall retrieve our name,
in visionary fable lose.

this from our martial board derive,
these for our brother let we proud own,
more please to view our deed by thou revive,
then grieve, great king, to be outdo.

chorus.

hail british prince! these faithful lay
shall reassert thy ancient praise.
nor thou, o Windsor, shall i pass unsung,
mansion of prince, and fit haunt of god,
who frequent shall desert their bright abode,
to view thy sacred wall with trophy hang:
thy wall by british Arthur first renowned,
the early seat of chivalry and fame;
by Edward now with deathless honour crown,
illustrious by his birth, his garter, and his name.

genius.

confer just reward, most worthy prince,
be the first attribute of sovereign power,
and that which best distinguish a king:
for punishment, and all the nice award
of civil justice, by the law be fix,
and king but execute what they decree.
while in reward merit, uncontrolled,
unguided, unassisted be the hand
of majesty; the prince himself alone
there judge, and his wisdom be the law.
well do thy court, great king, with every worth
and every virtue fill, this wisdom show
in thou transcendent: well have thou approve
its force in this great trial, which my power
command, in no common way to prove
thy royal mind. — but that a father name
may not restrain thy justice in the choice
of the first knights-companion of saint GEORGE,
myself here take upon i to present
a candidate, who, be he not thy son,
thou will thyself select from all mankind.
his modesty compel i to declare
that candidate be Edward, prince of Wales.

prince EDWARD.

inhabitant of heaven! i not presume
to deprecate or question that high will,
to which it best become i to submit.
but, gentle spirit, be propitious to i;
and thou, my gracious liege, if i request
that this illustrious monarch, who desert
be equal to the grandeur of his crown,
may stand before i in this list of fame.

king JOHN.

o generous youth! in vain thy goodness strive
to raise thy captive thus above his fortune.
the king that be not free, be not a king;
nor can thy bounteous favour reconcile
honour and bondage. — to thy conquer son
do thou, great Edward, give this noble mark
of prosperous virtue; ill become it i,
to wear at once thy garter and thy chain.
though by my former dignity i swear,
that be i reinstate in my throne,
the throne of Capet and of Charlemagne,
thus to be join in fellowship with thou,
will be the first ambition of my soul;
a ray of glory i will sue to gain,
and prize it equal with my diadem.

genius.

wise thou have determine, worthy prince,
for thy and Edward honour, and have fix
its proper value on his royal gift,
which as the meed of merit, may become
the proud monarch, by this garter mark
for something more than monarch, virtuous man.
this be the glory of thy order, Edward.
and never shall it want the great name
of all succeed time to grace its annal.
France, Sweden, Poland, Germany, and Spain,
each realm of europe wide-extended bound,
shall count among thy knight its mighty lord,
and see, in emulation of thy fame,
new royal founder of like order rise.
proceed then, mighty king, and set the world
the precedent of glory: thou begin
the radiant list of sovereign, while thy son,
like a young bride, that on her nuptial morn
lead on with modest pride the virgin-choir,
herself the bright, head the shine band
of knights-companion, noble second
his father glorious deed with equal fame.

EDWARD.

the testimony of heaven to thou, my son,
thus glorious accord, render vain
all farther trial. — to my people voice,
by this their tutelary power declare,
with pleasure i consent, direct still
by they my choice, my judgement, my desire.

approach then, my belove, my noble son,
strength of my crown, and honour of my realm;
in who my heart more joy, and glory more,
than in the high pride of sovereign power.

thus i admit thou, Edward prince of Wales,
first founder of the order of saint GEORGE;
in evidence whereof, about thy knee
i bind this mystic garter; to denote
the bond of honour that together tie
the brother of saint GEORGE in friendly league,
unite to maintain the cause of truth
and justice only —"may propitious heaven
"grant thou may henceforth wear it to his praise,
"the exaltation of this noble order,
"and thy own glory." — with like reverence,
my son receive and wear this golden chain,
"grace with the image of britannia saint,
"heaven valiant soldier, cappadocian GEORGE;
"in imitation of who glorious deed
"may thou triumphant in each state of life,
"or prosperous or adverse, still subdue
"thy spiritual and carnal enemy;
"that not on earth alone thou may obtain
"the guerdon of thy valour, endless praise,
"but with the virtuous and the brave above,
"in solemn triumph, wear celestial palm,
"to crown thy final noble victory."

prince EDWARD.

accept, my sovereign liege, my grateful thanks,
that thou have thus vouchsafe to place thy son
first next thyself upon the roll of fame,
as he indeed be first in filial love,
and emulation of thy royal virtue
and may thy benediction, gracious lord,
may thy paternal vow be hear in heaven!
that he, who thou have list in the cause
of truth and virtue, never may forget
his vow engagement, nor defraud thy hope,
by soil with dishonourable deed
the lustre of that order, which thy name
shall teach he to respect and to adorn.

ode.

strophe i. bard.

celestial maid!
bright spark of that aetherial flame,
who vivid spirit through all nature spread,
sustain and actuate this boundless frame!
o by whatever stile to mortal know,
virtue, benevolence, or public zeal,
divine assessor of the regal throne,
divine protectress of the common weal,
o in our heart thy energy infuse!
be thou our muse,
celestial maid,
and, as of old, impart thy heavenly aid
to those, who warm by thy benignant fire,
to public merit and their country good
devote ever their recording lyre,
will along deva sacred flood,
or, beneath mona oak retire,
to warble forth their patriot lay,
and nourish with immortal praise
the bright heroic flame by thou inspire.

antistrophe i 

i feel, i feel
thy soul-invigorating heat;
my bound vein distend with fervent zeal,
and to britannia fame responsive beat. —
hail Albion, native country! but how change
thy once grim aspect, how adorn and gay
thy howl forest! where together range
the naked hunter and his savage prey:
where amid black inhospitable wood
the sedge-grown flood
all cheerless stray.
not in their lonely wander course survey,
or tower, or castle, heaven-ascending fane,
or lowly village, residence of peace
and joyous industry, or furrow plain,
or low herd, or silver fleece
that whiten now each verdant vale;
while load with their precious store
far trade bark to every shore,
swift herald of britannia glory, sail.

epode i 

these be thy shine work: this smile face
of beauteous nature thus in regal state,
deck by each handmaid art, each polish grace,
that on fair liberty and order wait.
this pomp, these riches, this repose,
to thou imperial Britain owe.
to thou, great substitute of heaven,
to who the charge of earthly realm be give;
their social system by wise nature plan
to form and rule by her eternal law;
to teach the selfish soul of wayward man
to seek the public good, and aid the common cause.
so do thou move the mighty heart
of Alfred, founder of the british state:
so to matilda sceptre son,
to he who virtue and renown
first make the name of Edward great,
thy ample spirit so do thou impart:
protect thus in every age,
from greedy power and factious rage,
the law of freedom, which to britain shore
from saxon elva many-headed flood,
the valiant son of Odin with they bear,
their national, adore, inseparable good.

strophe ii.

on yonder plain,
along who willow-fringed side
the silver-footed naiad, sportive train,
down the smooth Thames amid the cygnet glide,
i see, when at thy reconcile word,
injustice, anarchy, intestine jar,
despotic insolence, the waste sword,
and all the brazen throat of civil war,
be hush in peace; from his imperious throne
hurl furious down,
abash, dismay,
like a chase lion to the savage shade
of his own forest, fall oppression flee,
with vengeance brood in his sullen breast.
then justice fearless rear her decent head,
heal every grief, each wrong redress;
while round her valiant squadron stand,
and bid her awful tongue demand,
from vanquish John reluctant hand,
the deed of freedom purchase with their blood.

antistrophe ii.

o vain surmise!
to deem the grandeur of a crown
consist in lawless power! to deem they wife
who change security and fair renown,
for detestation, shame, distrust, and fear!
who, shut for ever from the blissful bower,
with horror and remorse at distance hear
the music that inchant the immortal power,
the heavenly music of well-purchased praise,
seraphic lay,
the sweet reward
on hero, patriot, righteous king confer.
for such alone the heaven-taught poet sing.
tune you for Edward, then, the mortal strain,
his name shall well become your golden string,
begird with this aetherial train,
seem he not rank among the god?
then let he reap the glorious meed
due to each great heroic deed,
and taste the pleasure of the bless abode.

epode ii.

hail, happy prince! on who kind fate bestow
sublime joy, and glory bright far
than cressy palm, and every wreath that grow
in all the blood-stained field of prosperous war;
joy that may charm a heavenly breast,
to make dependent million bless,
a die nation to restore
and save fall liberty with kingly power;
to quench the torch of discord and debate,
relume the languid spark of public zeal,
repair the breach of a shatter state,
and glorious complete the plan of England weal;
complete the noble gothic pile,
that on the rock of justice rear shall stand
in symmetry, and strength, and fame,
a rival of that boast frame
which virtue raise on tiber strand.
this, Edward, guardian, father of our isle,
this god-like task, to few assign,
exalt thou above humankind,
and from the realm of everlasting day
call down celestial bard thy praise to sing;
call this bright troop of spirit to survey
thou, the great miracle of earth, a patriot-king.

genius.

now reascend your sky, immortal spirit!
the important act, that draw you down to earth,
be finish. spare we now their mortal sense,
that can long endure the unshrouded beam
of high nature. well have Edward lay,
under your happy auspices, the base
of his great order: let he undisturbed,
but not unaided by the heavenly power,
complete the illustrious work, which future king,
strike with the beauty of the noble plan,
shall emulous labour to maintain.
and may thy spirit, Edward, be their guide!
in every chapter, thou henceforth preside,
in every breast infuse thy virtuous flame,
and teach they to respect their country fame.
