the man of taste. 

occasion by a epistle of mr. pope on that subject. 

by the same.

whoever he be that to a taste aspire,
let he read this, and be what he desire.
in man and manner verse from life i write,
not what be once, but what be now polite.
those who of courtly France have make the tour,
can scarce our english awkwardness endure.
but honest man who never be abroad,
like England only, and its taste applaud.
strife still subsist, which yield the better goût;
book or the world, the many or the few.

true taste to i be by this touchstone know,
that be always best that be near to my own.
to show that my pretension be not vain,
my father be a player in Drury-lane,
pear and pistachio-nut my mother sell,
he a dramatic poet, she a scold.
his tragic muse can countess affright,
his wit in box be my lord delight.
no mercenary priest ever join their hand,
uncramped by wedlock unpoetic band.
law my pindaric parent matter not,
so i be tragicomical get.
my infant tear a sort of measure keep,
i squall in distich, and in triplet weep.
no youth do i in education waste,
happy in a hereditary taste.
write never cramp the sinew of my thumb,
nor barbarous birch ever brush my tender bum.
my guts never suffer from a college cook,
my name never enter in a buttery-book.
grammar in vain the son of Priscian teach,
good part be better than eight part of speech:
since these decline, those undeclined they call,
i thank my star, that i decline they all.
to greek or latin tongue without pretence,
i trust to mother wit and father sense.
nature my guide, all science i scorn,
pain i abhor, i be a poet bear.

yet be my goût for criticism such,
i have get some french, and know a little dutch.
huge commentator grace my learned shelf,
note upon book outdo the book themselves.
critic indeed be valuable man,
but hypercritic be as good again.
though blackmore work my soul with rapture fill,
with note by BENTLEY they will be better still.
the boghouse-miscellany's well design.
to ease the body, and improve the mind.
swift whim and joke for my resentment call,
for he displease i that please all.
verse without rhyme i never can endure,
uncouth in number, and in sense obscure.
to he as nature, when he cease to see,
milton a universal blank to i.
confirm and settle by the nation voice,
rhyme be the poet pride, and people choice.
always uphold by national support,
of market, university, and court:
Thomson, write blank; but know that for that reason,
these line shall live when thy be out of season.
rhyme bind and beautify the poet lay,
as London lady owe their shape to stay.

have cibber self the careless husband write,
he for the laurel never have have my vote:
but for his epilogue and other play,
he thorough deserve the modern bay.
it please i, that pope unlaureled go,
while cibber wear the bay for playhouse prose:
so britain monarch once uncover sit,
while Bradshaw bully in a broad-brimmed hat.

long live old curl! he never to publish fear
the speech, verse, and last will of peer.
how oft have he a public spirit show,
and please our ear, regardless of his own?
but to give merit due, though curl the fame,
be not his brother bookseller the same?
can statute keep the british press in awe,
while that sell best, that be most against the law?

live of dead player my leisure hour beguile,
and sessions-paper tragedize my stile.
it be charm read in Ophelia life,
so oft a mother, and not once a wife:
she can with just propriety behave,
alive with peer, with monarch in her grave:
her lot how oft have envious harlot weep,
by prebend bury, and by general keep.

to improve in moral mandevil i read,
and tyndal scruple be my settle creed.
i travel early, and i soon see through
religion all, ere i be twenty-two,
shame, pain, or poverty shall i endure,
when rope or opium can my ease procure?
when money be go, and i no debt can pay,
self-murder be a honourable way.
as pasaran direct i will end my life,
and kill myself, my daughter, and my wife.
burn but that bible which the parson quote,
and man of spirit all shall cut their throat.

but not to write i confine my pen,
i have a taste for building, music, man.
young travel coxcomb mighty knowledge boast,
with superficial smattering at most.
not so my mind, unsatisfied with hint,
know more than budgel write, or Roberts print.
i know the town, all house i have see,
from high-park corner down to bednal-green.
sure wretched Wren be teach by bungle Jones,
to murder mortar, and disfigure stone!
who in Whitehall can symmetry discern?
i reckon covent-garden church a barn.
nor hate i less thy vile catheral, Paul!
the choir too big, the cupola too small:
substantial wall and heavy roof i like,
it be vanbrug structure that my fancy strike:
such noble ruin every pile will make,
i wish they will tumble for the prospect sake.
to lofty Chelsea, or to Greenwich dome,
soldier and sailor all be welcome home.
her poor to palace Britannia bring,
saint James hospital may serve for king.
building so happy i understand,
that for one house i will mortgage all my land.
doric, ionick, shall not there be find,
but it shall cast i threescore thousand pound.
from out my honest workman, i will select
a bricklayer, and proclaim he architect;
first bid he build i a stupendous dome,
which have finish, we set out for Rome;
take a week view of Venice and the brent,
stare round, see nothing, and come home content.
i will have my villa too, a sweet abode,
its situation shall be London road:
pot over the door i will place like cit balcony,
which BENTLEY call the garden of Adonis.

i will have my garden in the fashion too,
for what be beautiful that be not new?
fair four-legged temple, theatre that vie
with all the angle of a christmas-pye.
do it not merit the beholder praise,
what be high to sink? and what be low to raise?
slope shall ascend where once a green-house stand,
and in my horsepond i will plant a wood.
let miser dread the hoard gold to waste,
expense and alteration show a taste.

in curious painting i be exceed nice,
and know their several beauty by their price.
auction and sale i constant attend,
but choose my picture by a skilful friend.
original and copy much the same.
the picture value be the painter name.

my taste in sculpture from my choice be see,
i buy no statue that be not obscene.
in spite of ADDISON and ancient Rome,
sir cloudesly shovel be my favourite tomb.
how oft have i with admiration stand,
to view some city-magistrate in wood!
i gaze with pleasure on a lord-mayor head,
cast with propriety in gild lead.
oh can i view through London as i pass,
some broad sir Balaam in corinthian brass:
high on a pedestal, you freeman, place
his magisterial paunch and gripe face;
letter and gild, let he adorn Cheapside,
and grant the tradesman, what a king deny.

old coin and medal i collect, it be true,
sir Andrew have they, and i will have they too.
but among friend if i the truth may speak,
i like the modern, and despise the antique.
though in the drawer of my japan bureau,
to lady gripeall i the caesar show,
it be equal to her ladyship or i,
a copper Otho, or a scotch baubeè.

without italian, or without a ear,
to bononcini music i adhere:
music have charm to sooth a savage breast,
and therefore proper at a sheriff feast.
my soul have oft a secret pleasure find,
in the harmonious bagpipe lofty sound.
bagpipe for man, shrill german-flute for boy,
i be english bear, and love a grumble noise.
the stage shall yield the solemn organ note,
and scripture tremble in the eunuch throat.
let senesino sing, what David write,
and hallelujah charm the pious pit.
eager in throng the town to Hester come,
and oratorio be a lucky name.
thou, heidegger! the english taste have find,
and rule the mob of quality with sound.
in lent, if masquerade displease the town,
call e'm ridotto, and they still go down.
go on prince phiz! to please the british nation,
call thy next masquerade a convocation.

bear, lion, wolf, and elephant i breed,
and philosophical transaction read.
next lodge i will be free-mason, nothing less,
unless i happen to be F. R. S. 

i have a palate, and (as yet) two ear,
fit company for porter or for peer.
of every useful knowledge i have a share,
but my top talent be a bill of fare.
sir loin and rump of beef offend my eye,
please with frog fricassee, and coxcomb-py.
dish i choose though little, yet genteel,
snail the first course, and peeper crown the meal.
pig head with hair on, much my fancy please,
i love young colly-flower if stew in cheese,
and give ten guinea for a pint of pea.
no tattle servant to my table come,
my grace be silence, and my waiter dumb,
queer country-put extol queen Bess reign,
and of lose hospitality complain.
say thou that do thy father table praise,
be there mahogena in former day?

oh! can a british barony be sell!
i will bright honour buy with dazzle gold.
can i the privilege of peer procure,
the rich i will bully, and oppress the poor.
to give be wrong, but it be wrong still,
on any term to pay a tradesman bill.
i will make the insolent mechanic stay,
and keep my ready money all for play.
i will try if any pleasure can be find,
in toss up for twenty-thousand pound.
have i whole county, i to White will go,
and set land, wood, and river, at a throw.
but shall i meet with a unlucky run,
and at a throw be glorious undo;
my debt of honour i will discharge the first,
let all my lawful creditor be curse:
my title will preserve i from arrest,
and seize hire horse be a jest.

i will walk the morning with a oaken stick,
with glove and hat, like my own footman, Dick.
a footman i will be, in outward show,
in sense, and education, true so.
as for my head it shall ambiguous wear
at once a periwig and its own hair.
my hair i will powder in the woman way,
and dress and talk of dress more than they.
i will please the maid of honour, if i can;
without black velvet breech, what be man?
i will my skill in button-hole display,
and brag how oft i shift i every day.
shall i wear clothes in awkward England make?
and sweat in cloth, to help the woollen trade?
in french embroidery and in Flanders lace
i will spend the income of a treasurer place.
deard bill for bauble shall to thousand mount,
and i will out-diamond even the diamond count.
i will convince the world by tawdry clothes
that bell be less effeminate than beaux,
and doctor lamb shall pare my lordship toe.

to boon companion i my time will give,
with player, pimp, and parasite i will live.
i will with jockey from Newmarket dine,
and to rough-rider give my choice wine;
i will caress some stableman of note,
and imitate his language and his coat.
my evening all i will with sharper spend,
and make the thief-catcher my bosom friend.
in fig the prizefighter by day delight,
and sup with Colley cibber every night.

shall i perchance be fashionable ill,
i will send for misaubin, and take his pill.
i shall abhor, though in the utmost need,
Arbuthnot, Hollins, Wigan, lee, or Mead;
but if i find that i grow worse and worse,
i will turn off misaubin and take a nurse,
how oft when eminent physician fail,
do good old woman remedy prevail?
when beauty go, and Chloe strike with year,
eye she can touch, or she can syringe ear.
of graduate i dislike the learned rout,
and choose a female doctor for the gout.

thus will i live, with no dull pedant curse,
sure, of all blockhead, scholar be the worst.
back to your university, you fool,
and dangle argument on string in school:
those school which university they call,
it be well for England be there none at all.
with ease that loss the nation may sustain,
supply by goodman field and Drury-lane.
Oxford and Cambridge be not worth one farthing,
compare to Haymarket and covent-garden:
quit those, you british youth, and follow these,
turn player all, and take your squire degree.
boast not your income now, as heretofore,
you book-learned seat! the theatre have more:
you stiff-rumped head of college be dumb;
a single eunuch get a large sum.
have some of you three hundred by the year;
booth, rich, and cibber, twice three thousand clear.
shall Oxford to her sister Cambridge join
a year rackrent, and arbitrary fine:
thence not one winter charge will be defray,
for playhouse, opera, ball, and masquerade.
glad i congratulate the judge age,
the player be the world, the world the stage.

i be a politician too, and hate
of any party, minister of state:
i be for a act, that he, who seven whole year
have serve his king and country, lose his ear.

thus from my birth i be qualify you find,
to give the law of taste to human kind.
i be the gallant scheme of politesse,
for book, and building, politics, and dress.
this be true taste, and whoso like it not,
be blockhead, coxcomb, puppy, fool, and sot.
