the fraternal duel.

 'oh! hide i from the sun! i loath the sight! 
i can bear his bright, obtrusive ray:
 nought be so dreadful to my gloom as light! 
nothing so dismal as the blaze of day! 

no more may i its sparkle glory view! 
no more its pierce lustre meet my eye! 
on night black wing my only comfort fly;
 at breath of morn i sicken and i die. 

where can i fly? in what sequester clime
 do darkness ever hold her ebon reign? 
where woeful dirge measure out the time,
 and endless echo breathe the sullen strain. 

where dreary mountain rear their lower head,
 to pierce the heavy and umbrageous cloud;
 and where the cavern dewy moisture shed,
 and night thick veil the guilty mourner shroud. 

there, lose in horror, i may vent my sigh;
 to open misery myself resign;
 may snatch each torture vision ere it fly,
 and feast on prospect desolate as i. 

oh! let i thither quick take my flight,
 and choose a favourite and a final seat,
 in scene which will each gentle mind affright,
 but for my guilt afford a fit retreat. 

there, where no ray, no gleam of light can come,
 there, and there only, can i find relief;
 there may i ruminate on Edward doom,
 and lose myself in luxury of grief. 

and, as it be, though joy around i shine,
 though pleasure here erect her dazzle brow,
 wrap in despondence, will i droop and pine,
 and tear of anguish shall for ever flow. 

oh Edward! can thou see this alter frame,
 which youthful grace late do adorn! 
can thou behold, and think i still the same,
 thy once gay friend, thus hapless and forlorn? 

the cheek, so late by ruddy health embrown,
 now pale and fade with incessant tear;
 the eye, which once elate, disdain the ground,
 now sink and languid in its orb appear. 

oh! never, never will i cease to grieve! 
and sure repentance pardon may obtain! 
can woe unfeigned incite heaven to relieve
 a wretch oppress with agonize pain? 

ah no! my hand be stain with brother blood! 
a father curse load my sink head! 
i wish to die, but dare not pass the flood,
 for there, as well as here, my hope be flee. 

sleep, which be mean to chase away the thought,
 to lull the sound of dissonant despair,
 appear to i with add terror fraught,
 and my tear heart can find no refuge there. 

if, for a moment, i its fetter wear,
 and its soft pressure these pale eye control,
 i injure Emma just reproach hear,
 or Edward form appal my shrink soul. 

when in those transitory sleep i lie,
 i oft his beauteous, bleed form review;
 a mild, benignant lustre light his eye,
 as come to bid a friend a last adieu. 

i start, i shudder at his tuneful voice,
 when it, in soothe whisper, meet my ear;
 that sound, which oft have make my heart rejoice,
 i now all-trembling and affright hear. 

be it thy fault, dear, much-lamented youth
 if lovely Emma do thy suit prefer? 
she see thou form of tenderness and truth,
 and king may glory to be love by she. 

thy native sweetness win her artless heart;
 and well our different character she know;
 while thy mild look do happiness impart,
 she see the murderer in each glance i throw. 

yet for this, mean, do i thou upbraid,
 and base urge a elder brother right;
 then, call impious passion to my aid,
 force thou, unwilling, to the fatal fight. 

oh! never shall i forget the dreadful hour,
 i sheathe my weapon in thy noble breast
 thy die hand clasp i, with feeble power,
 and to thy mangle bosom fond press. 

while over thou, i, in speechless anguish hang,
 thou see the wild distraction of my eye;
 and, though the chill of death restrain thy tongue,
 thy bosom heave a sympathetic sigh. 

with cruel tenderness my friend cotrive,
 to bear i from the drear, pollute shore;
 of every joy, of peace itself deprive,
 which this despair breast shall know no more. 

since this what frenzy have inspire my mind! 
my torture memory can it retrace;
 no relic now of former day i find,
 but horror, which even madness can efface. 

my dear brother, and my tender friend,
 o come, and save i from this dark abyss! 
draw hence i dart which my rack bosom rend! 
and bear i with you to the realm of bliss! 

ah! whence that pang which smite my shudder heart? 
where now, for refuge, can lose Anselm fly? 
it be death! i know he by his crimson dart! 
and, be i fit? oh heaven! i can die! 

my spirit be not form for rapid flight;
 it can cut the vast expanse of air,
 no, never can it reach the realm of light,
 for sin, a weight immoveable, lie there! ' 

thus wretched Anselm rave: unhappy youth! 
though passion hurry thou so far astray,
 thy infant soul adore the god of truth,
 and virtue ushure in thy vernal day. 

oh! have he learn his passion to restrain,
 and let cool reason in his breast preside,
 his open wisdom have not bloom in vain,
 nor have he, ere the prime of manhood, die. 

yet, if remorse can expiate his guilt,
 if the worst suffering can the crime erase,
 if tear can wash away the blood he spill,
 then anselm penitence obtain he grace. 
