to the memory of a honest man, mr. B.  d., address to his widow.

when wealthy, proud, or title fool expire,
 (those splendid trifle which the vain admire,)
 the flatterer pen, the sculptor curious art,
 may strike the eye — but seldom reach the heart;
 though gaudy trappings do not grace his birth,
 and undistinguished, save, by honest worth,
 though polish marble do record his praise,
 nor humble fortune, monument can raise;
 though his low grave can boast no feature bust,
 celestial guardian watch his sleep dust;
 and heaven have spare his memory one friend,
 who know his goodness — view his peaceful end;
 then thou pure spirit deign one glance to see,
 how sweet the task to utter truth of thou;
 and thou sad mourner, take it from my hand,
 this boon thy friendship from my pen demand;
 nor mourn thy want of power to save his name,
 by mean, which only wealth or pride can claim. 
accuse not fate, but vanity despise,
 his humble ash will as safe rise,
 and claim as just a title to the sky
 as those who marble history proclaim
 the only title they ever have to fame. 
he know no guile, to please his chief delight,
 serene his conscience — his intention right;
 his sentiment superior to his state,
 too noble mind for his lowly fate;
 since upon earth none be from error free,
 why shall i blush to own a fault in thou? 
from prudent caution thou do wide roam,
 nor once remember want may visit home;
 in this wise age, well practise how to save,
 wealth will condemn what generous pity give;
 who now will soothe thy lonely widow care? 
give she, what oft thy little store do spare. 
presumptuous pen! be calm foreboding mind,
 heaven will be ever bounteous, good and kind;
 in mercy annal be his deed enrol,
 the first of being be will reward unfold. 
and now dear mourner will you condescend
 to accept this offer from a constant friend? 
ah! cease to weep thy saint partner fate,
 who, place above this sublunary state,
 must now condemn the tender flow tear,
 wonder who love so well, can wish he here;
 or can thy sorrow, can thy pine grief,
 restore thy husband, or bring thou relief,
 can gush tear recall the spirit flee,
 or burst sigh awake the sleep dead;
 or can thy mourning bring he back to woe,
 say — can thy love disturb his sweet repose? 
ah no! in realm of bliss remote from pain,
 he wait the hour, to reunite again;
 but be remind, (deem it not severe),
 it be the reward of patient suffering here;
 farewell, my friend! in heaven gracious time,
 thou will meet thy husband in a pure clime;
 where boundless joy await the true good,
 and no rude storm can ever more intrude. 
