patience.

content.

of patience. a epistle to the right honourable SAMUEL lord Masham. 

patience, my lord, a virtue rare, i grant;
 and what, i fear, the wise of we want:
 easy the task in action to excel,
 the soul last trial lie in suffering well. 
from fear, or shame what specious act proceed! 
and worldly aim oft prompt the shine deed. 
look but on half the boast thing we do,
 and praise, or profit be the point in view. 
from these, what crop of virtue bless the land! 
with these, how oft the mower fill his hand! 
prompt by these the knave we oft regard,
 while suffering virtue be her own reward;
 silent and meek she pass unobserved,
 nor praise by who she be overreach or starve. 

but grant noble motive to the few,
 and same or interest not the point in view;
 grant of the wretched suffering we partake,
 and praise, or pity even for virtue sake;
 yet that soft temper of the generous mind,
 that very breast, benevolent and kind,
 that noble sense, which feel what other feel,
 which you, my lord, who know it, best can tell;
 itself oppress, can least resistance show,
 but pine, or sink beneath its proper woe. 
what though in action brave, unawed by fear,
 resolve as Clayton, or as swift severe;
 in different view their trial, temper scan,
 even swift can weep, and Clayton be a man. 
superior faculty avail not here,
 wit point the shaft, and valour pour the tear. 
the same nice nerve which vibrate to the brain
 its sense of pleasure, give as quick its pain:
 and all the difference betwixt the fool and wise,
 in their sensation, and perception lie. 

the man of wit in many part be sore,
 touch but a genius, and he smart all over. 
the wife his wisdom to resentment owe,
 the fool feel little, for he little know. 
the downright ass be passive, mild, and tame,
 by blow or kindness urge, be still the same:
 he stoic breast no kindle passion prove,
 kick he you may, but you can never move. 

o envy creature! who nor feel or fear,
 who all thing suffer, all thing brave bear. 
who neither hope, or fear, or shame can move,
 nor kindle mount to rage, or melt to love. 
his pleasure always equal, flow, full,
 for ever patient and for ever dull! 

if then from wisdom half our pain arise,
 say, Masham, what avail it to be wise? 
the great good proud science can bestow,
 but learn the late, be — our self to know. 
yet after all their search, the wise complain,
 this very knowledge irritate their pain. 

in vain you tell i of the stoic train:
 where be the man not sensible of pain? 
all find, all feel it too in some degree;
 it make old Zeno fret as well as i. 
else why not choose, for contemplation sake,
 the burn plough-share, or the torture rack? 
if pain no ill., why not prefer the stone
 to velvet cushion, and to bed of down? —
 i grant he reason calm in the gout,
 but try he farther, and you will find he out. 
touch but his pride, at once you make he smart:
 a stoic only, just in such a part;
 in all the rest susceptible of pain,
 and feel and reason much like other man. 

among the intrepid breed i know there be,
 who any hardship, any pain can bear. 
to who less shock be the impend sword,
 than to the meek of soul, a slight word. 
what hardy 'squire, what soldier daily feel,
 a thousand soft adonise will kill. 

 "yet whence be this?" — from reason, sir, no doubt. 
but pray, will abstract reason cure the gout? 
do ever axiom sooth the nervous ill? 
or syllogism pay the doctor bill? 
too much, i fear, of reason aid we boast,
 where most it be want, there it fail we most. 
it be not the soldier reason make he bear
 the inclement season, and the toilsome war;
 it be not the nice deduction of the 'squire,
 that keep he well and warm without a fire:
 the mind do little; it be the body here,
 that be, in strictness, the philosopher. 

those only then be true say to bear,
 who feel the pain, no matter what, or where. 
suppose it of the acute, or linger kind,
 suppose it of the body, or the mind;
 suppose it touch the welfare of a friend,
 suppose it only at the finger end;
 yet, if you feel the stroke, it be pain to you,
 and if you bear it well, you be patient too. 

for pain, as such, be neither more or less,
 but borrow all its sting from passiveness. 
from those nice touch which from sense arise,
 or which when past, reflection oft supply. 
in this, i grant, be infinite degree,
 but hence result our misery or ease:
 not from the stroke, so much as from the smart,
 not from the wound, but from the head or heart. 
hence timon peevish, dromio mild and tame;
 but shall we flatter one, the other blame,
 because their feeling be not just the same? 
yet quite a wretch who feel and fret we call,
 and quite a saint who nothing feel at all. 

this too, perchance, may serve to reconcile
 the virgin panic, and the stoic smile. 
it be this make Charlot at a spider scream —
 this spite of reason, resolution, fame,
 may make a soldier shrink, a saint blaspheme. 
this to a medium every station bring,
 this level with their slave the proud king,
 and reconcile the unequal face of thing. 

this inward sense, the feeling of the soul,
 of pain and pleasure comprehend the whole. 
in vain soft Conti warble in my ear,
 if the lax nerve convey no pleasure there. 
in vain the picture, and the splendid feast,
 if this not strike the eye, nor that the taste. 
less please be i with farinelli note,
 than the rude cobbler in his merry throat:
 he, who beneath some shatter bulk recline,
 smile at the tempest, and deride the wind. 
who hunger, dirt, and all but thirst can bear,
 to spleen a stranger, and a foe to fear. 
his mind no rude sensation discompose,
 nor smell offensive ever affront his nose;
 nor high debate, nor fall stock he mind,
 his awful temple, lo! a fillet bind;
 patient he eye the future and the past,
 and, as a king, be happy to the last. 

to i it seem, however our lot may fall,
 that pain and pleasure deal alike to all;
 that every station have its proper ill,
 in what we fancy, or in what we feel;
 that every worldly pleasure we may gain,
 be drop again in some attendant pain. 
thus wise deal the impartial hand of heaven,
 to check our pride, and keep the balance even. 

tell i, you proud one! who this world possess,
 be not the high and low, the great and less,
 bear with a equal plea to happiness? 
true, in your want and wish you succeed;
 but be you better than the slave you feed? 
have you more virtue who of venison eat,
 than he who thirst and hunger at your gate? 
alas! with plenty, peace be seldom give,
 nor beccaficoe always gift of heaven. 

tell i, you poor one! and your state explain,
 who patience heaven proportion to your pain,
 to who be want every earthly good,
 but quiet sleep, and appetite subdue;
 who hope to no wild summit ever press,
 no keen sensation to disturb your breast:
 say, why be all these wondrous blessing give,
 but to convince you of the care of heaven? 
to show how equal its gift be lend,
 to some in gold, to other in content. 

still those be restless, discontent these,
 the poor for riches sigh, the rich for ease. 
thus Curio pine with envy at the great,
 while you, my lord, be sick of pomp and state. 
 "my fate be hard, (cry one) overlook! forget! 
yet all life comfort be my neighbour lot. 
see, he be posless of all that heaven can grant,
 but i, unhappy! every blessing want;
 his life, though vile, be one luxurious treat,
 while i have virtue, but not bread to eat." 
well, but you have friend, in health too pretty sound. 
 "that be not the case; i want — tenthousand pound." 
still you have — "what! no reason to complain?" 
perhaps not much. however, think again. 
as yet but half this envy man you have see,
 the outside fair indeed, but look within;
 perhaps there be something there corrode his breast,
 that cruel something, common to the rest:
 some favourite wish too wild, or weak to own,
 some secret pang, to all beside unknown. 
or with his blessing, count his want of health,
 and to the pleasure, add the plague of wealth:
 on every side the envy creature view,
 then tell i which be happy, he or you? 

possess all thing, can we all enjoy,
 will neither appetite, nor object cloy,
 be every sense, each please passion keen,
 not pall by surfeit, nor chastise with spleen;
 how bless the rich! how curse indeed the poor! 
one to enjoy, the other to endure. 
but why repine at what to wealth be give? 
since gout and cholic set the matter even. 

behold the man of luxury and wine! 
his station too, it seem, be hard as thy. 
what, though for he our stately turbots swim,
 and France her vine luxuriant prune for he;
 yet he complain, when labour through the feast,
 of loss of appetite, and want of taste;
 envy the very beggar at his gate,
 who hardly know the luxury to eat. 
but what? your barn be full, your rent increase;
 sir ROBERT too have promise you a place. 
have comfort, man! let not your spirit fail! 
perhaps to morrow you may relish quail. 
think rather of the pleasure which you share,
 and learn their inconveniency to bear. 
rejoice in crayfish soup! be glad in trout! 
but pray have patience, when you feel the gout;
 sit down resign, when cholic rack your breast,
 or rise, like Bethel, from the intemperate feast. 

thus each have something to enjoy, and bear;
 and none may envy much his neighbour share. 
envy! the source of half the wretched feel,
 and where it strike, the hard wound to heal. 
yet why repine at what my neighbour taste? 
since i in something else be just as bless. 
to i perhaps kind heaven indulgent grant
 the spirit, health, or limb my neighbour want;
 to i have give a quick sense of shame,
 while he feel nothing of contempt or blame:
 to i no acre of paternal ground,
 to he the spleen and fifty thousand pound. 
if doom severe trial to sustain,
 some secret power may blunt the edge of pain:
 the keen sensation use may reconcile,
 and add hope affliction sting beguile. 

will you inquire, why man be to suffering bear;
 to feel his frailty, and his nature mourn? 
why each have his peculiar ill assign,
 some pain of body, or some plague of mind;
 some linger malady for year endure,
 some hopeless passion, never to be cure:
 and why not rather temperate, wise, serene,
 without all healthful, and all peace within? 
know, thankless man! that he, who rule the ball,
 in goodness infinite permit it all. 
for natural evil, right understand,
 work but the grand design, our moral good;
 and he unjust of his lot complain,
 who find his strength proportion to his pain. 

this life, with pain and pleasure intermix,
 be but a state of trial for the next;
 a stage, on which amid 'the vary scene,
 promiscuous cesar tread with harlequin. 
where none of all the self-admiring train,
 may choose his part, or strut his hour again:
 our business only through the measure span,
 to act it well, and wise as we can. 

pain be permit in the various part,
 to check the manner, and chastise the heart;
 to blunt the appetite to moral ill;
 to curb, restrain, and rectify the will;
 to call we back from every wild pursuit;
 to clear the soil for virtue plant to shoot;
 to move compassion for our neighbour ill,
 and teach we where to weep, from what we feel:
 to fix, to urge the business of our span;
 to raise the hero, and to mend the man. 

strong trial must the headstrong temper break,
 as gentle method oft reclaim the meek. 
when lightning flash, the most obdurate mind
 some effort sure of penitence must find:
 even Felix tremble at a general doom,
 and own the terror of a world to come. 

these be the end for which affliction come,
 to rouse our reason, and our passion tame;
 to set fair virtue in her proper light,
 and fix the waver attention right. 
what though your part amid 'the general scene,
 too high or hard appear, too low or mean;
 beset with want, with care and fear oppress,
 the sport of fortune, and of man the jest:
 yet wait awhile, whatever chance befall,
 heaven way be equal, thy unequal all. 
here but as stranger journey for a space,
 to seek some sure, some distant resting-place;
 some peril by the way we must endure,
 the cruel robber, and the night obscure. 
yet, arm with patience, let we bold dare,
 the end be certain, and the prospect fair. 
he, who proportion large all our gain,
 weigh every loss, and count out every pain;
 see all our frailty, measure dust by dust,
 in all he give and take, supreme just:
 that power eternal will our step befriend,
 and guide we safe to our journey end;
 where every pang, where every fear shall cease,
 and each immortal guest subside to peace. 
to he who suffer well, will much be give,
 and patience wear the bright wreath in heaven. 

for you, my lord, in various conflict see,
 not spoil with peevishness, nor sow'rd with spleen,
 the best of temper, and the best of man:
 for you, alas! one trial yet remain;
 o suffer righteous these prove strain! 
and if unmoved, unruffled you can hear,
 what patience 'self perchance can hardly bear;
 if yet this fore trial you survive,
 your lordship be the patient man alive. 
