temora: a epic poem.

the blue wave of Ullin roll in light. the green hill be cover with day. tree shake their dusky head in the breeze; and grey torrent pour their noisy stream. — two green hill, with their age oak, surround a narrow plain. the blue course of the mountain-stream be there; cairbar stand on its bank. — his spear support the king: the red eye of his fear be sad. Cormac rise in his soul, with all his ghastly wound. the grey form of the youth appear in the midst of darkness, and the blood pour from his airy side. — cairbar thrice throw his spear on earth; and thrice he stroke his beard. his step be short; he often stop: and toss his sinewy arm. he be like a cloud in the desert; that vary its form to every blast: the valley be sad around, and fear, by turn, the shower.

the king, at length, resume his soul, and take his point spear. he turn his eye towards Lena. the scout of ocean appear. they appear with step of fear, and often look behind. cairbar know that the mighty be near, and call his gloomy chief. the sound step of his hero come. they draw, at once, their sword. there morlath stand with darken face. hidalla bushy hair sigh in the wind. red-haired cormar bend on his spear, and roll his side-long-looking eye. wild be the look of malthos from beneath two shaggy brow. — Foldath stand like a oozy rock, that cover its dark side with foam; his spear be like slimora fir, that meet the wind of heaven. his shield be mark with the stroke of battle; and his red eye despise danger. these and a thousand other chief surround carborne cairbar, when the scout of ocean come, mor-annal, from streamy Lena. — his eye hang forward from his face, his lip be tremble, pale.

do the chief of Erin stand, he say, silent as the grove of evening? stand they, like a silent wood, and Fingal on the coast? Fingal, who be terrible in battle, the king of streamy Morven.

and have thou see the warrior, say cairbar with a sigh? be his hero many on the coast? lift he the spear of battle? or come the king in peace?

he come not in peace, o cairbar: for i have see his forward spear it be a meteor of death: the blood of thousand be on its steel. — he come first to the shore, strong in the grey hair of age. full rose his sinewy limb, as he stride in his might. that sword be by his side which give no second wound. his shield be terrible, like the bloody moon, when it rise in a storm. — then come Ossian king of song; and morni son, the first of man. Connal leap forward on his spear: Dermid spread his dark-brown lock. — Fillan bend his bow: Fergus stride in the pride of youth. who be that with age lock? a dark shield be on his side. his spear tremble at every step; and age be on his limb. he bend his dark face to the ground; the king of spear be sad! — it be usnoth, o cairbar, come to revenge his son. he see green Ullin with tear, and he remember the tomb of his child. but far before the rest, the son of Ossian come, bright in the smile of youth, fair as the first beam of the sun. his long hair fall on his back. — his dark brow be half hide beneath his helmet of steel. his sword hang loose on the hero side. his spear glitter as he move. i flee from his terrible eye, king of high temora!

then fly, thou feeble man, say the gloomy wrath of Foldath: fly to the grey stream of thy land, son of the little soul! have not i see that Oscar? i behold the chief in battle. he be of the mighty in danger: but there be other who lift the spear. — Erin have many son as brave: yes — more brave, o carborne cairbar! — let Foldath meet he in the strength of his course, and stop this mighty stream. — my spear be cover with the blood of the valiant; my shield be like tura wall.

shall Foldath alone meet the foe, reply the dark-browed malthos? be not they numerous on our coast, like the water of a thousand stream? be not these the chief who vanquish swaran, when the son of Erin flee? and shall Foldath meet their brave hero? Foldath of the heart of pride! take the strength of the people by thy side; and let malthos come. my sword be red with slaughter, but who have hear my word?

son of green Erin, begin the mild hidalla, let not Fingal hear your word: lest the foe rejoice, and his arm be strong in the land. — you be brave, o warrior, and like the tempest of the desert; they meet the rock without fear, and overturn the wood in their course. — but let we move in our strength, and slow as a gather cloud, when the wind drive it from behind. — then shall the mighty tremble, and the spear drop from the hand of the valiant. — we see the cloud of death, they will say; and their face will turn pale. Fingal will mourn in his age; and say that his fame be cease. — Morven will behold his chief not more: the moss of year shall grow in Selma.

cairbar hear their word, in silence, like the cloud of a shower: it stand dark on cromla, till the lightning burst its side: the valley gleam with red light; the spirit of the storm rejoice. — so stand the silent king of temora; at length his word be hear.

spread the feast on Lena: and let my hundred bard attend. and thou, redhaired olla, take the harp of the king. go to Oscar king of sword, and bid he to our feast. today we feast and hear the song; tomorrow break the spear. tell he that i have raise the tomb of cathol; and that my bard have sing to his ghost. — tell he that cairbar have hear his fame at the stream of distant carun.

cathmor be not here; the generous brother of cairbar; he be not here with his thousand, and our arm be weak. cathmor be a foe to strife at the feast: his soul be bright as the sun. but cairbar shall fight with Oscar, chief of the high temora! his word for cathol be many; and the wrath of cairbar burn. he shall fall on Lena: and my fame shall rise in blood.

the face of the hero brighten. they spread over lena heath. the feast of shell be prepare. the song of the bard arise.

we hear the voice of joy on the coast, and we think that the mighty cathmor come. cathmor the friend of stranger! the brother of red-haired cairbar. but their soul be not the same: for the light of heaven be in the bosom of cathmor. his tower rise on the bank of atha: seven path lead to his hall. seven chief stand on those path, and call the stranger to the feast! but cathmor dwell in the wood to avoid the voice of praise.

olla come with his song. Oscar go to cairbar feast. three hundred hero attend the chief, and the clang of their arm be terrible. the grey dog bound on the heath, and their howl be frequent. Fingal see the departure of the hero: the soul of the king be sad. he dread the gloomy cairbar: but who of the race of trenmor sear the foe?

my son lift high the spear of Cormac: a hundred bard meet he with song. cairbar conceal with smile the death that be dark in his soul. the feast be spread, the shell resound: joy brighten the face of the host. but it be like the part beam of the sun, when he be to hide his red head, in a storm.

cairbar rise in his arm; darkness gather on his brow. the hundred harp cease at once. the clang of shield be hear. far distant on the heath olla raise his song of woe. my son know the sign of death; and rise seize his spear.

Oscar! say the dark-red cairbar, i behold the spear of erin king. the spear of temora glitter in thy hand, son of the woody Morven! it be the pride of a hundred king, the death of hero of old. yield it, son of Ossian, yield it to carborne cairbar.

shall i yield, Oscar reply, the gift of erin injure king: the gift of fair-haired Cormac, when Oscar scatter his foe? i come to his hall of joy, when swaran sle from Fingal. gladness rise in the face of youth: he give the spear of temora. nor do he give it to the feeble, o cairbar, neither to the weak in soul. the darkness of thy face be not a storm to i; nor be thy eye the flame of death. do i fear thy clang shield? do my soul tremble at olla song? no: cairbar, frighten thou the feeble; Oscar be like a rock.

and will thou not yield the spear, reply the rise pride of cairbar? be thy word mighty because Fingal be near, the gray-haired warrior of Morven. he have fight with little man. but he must vanish before cairbar, like a thin pillar of mist before the wind of atha.

be he who fight with little man near the chief of atha: atha chief will yield green Erin to avoid his rage. speak not of the mighty, o cairbar! but turn thy sword on i. our strength be equal: but Fingal be renown! the first of mortal man!

their people see the darken chief. their crowd step be hear around. their eye roll in fire. a thousand sword be half unsheathe. red-haired olla raise the song of battle: the tremble joy of oscar soul arise: the wonted joy of his soul when fingal horn be hear.

dark as the swell wave of ocean before the rise wind, when it bend its head near the coast, come on the host of cairbar. — daughter of toscar! why that tear? he be not fall yet. many be the death of his arm before my hero fall! — behold they fall before my son like the grove in the desert, when a angry ghost rush through night, and take their green head in his hand! morlath fall: Maronnan die: conachar tremble in his blood. cairbar shrink before oscar sword; and creep in darkness behind his stone. he lift the spear in secret, and pierce my oscar side. he fall forward on his shield: his knee sustain the chief: but his spear be in his hand. see gloomy cairbar fall. the steel pierce his forehead, and divide his red hair behind. he lie, like a shatter rock, which cromla shake from its side. but never more shall Oscar rise! he lean on his bossy shield. his spear be in his terrible hand: erin son stand distant and dark. their shout arise, like the crowd noise of stream, and Lena echo around.

Fingal hear the sound; and take his father spear. his step be before we on the heath. he speak the word of woe. i hear the noise of battle: and Oscar be alone. rise, you son of Morven, and join the hero sword.

Ossian rush along the heath. Fillan bound over Lena. Fergus fly with foot of wind. Fingal stride in his strength, and the light of his shield be terrible. the son of Erin see it far distant; they tremble in their soul. they know that the wrath of the king arise: and they foresee their death. we first arrive; we fight; and erin chief withstand our rage. but when the king come, in the sound of his course, what heart of steel can stand! Erin flee over Lena. death pursue their flight.

we see Oscar lean on his shield. we see his blood around. silence darken on every hero face. each turn his back and weep. the king strive to hide his tear. his grey beard whistle in the wind. he bend his head over his son: and his word be mix with sigh.

and be thou fall, Oscar, in the midst of thy course? the heart of the age beat over thou! he see thy come battle. he behold the battle which ought to come, but they be cut off from thy fame. when shall joy dwell at Selma? when shall the song of grief cease on Morven. my son fall by degree: Fingal shall be the last of his race. the fame which i have receive shall pass away: my age will be without friend. i shall sit like a grey cloud in my hall: nor shall i expect the return of a son, in the midst of his sound arm. weep, you hero of Morven! never more shall Oscar rise!

and they do weep, o Fingal; dear be the hero to their soul. he go out to battle, and the foe vanish; he return, in peace, amid their joy. no father mourn his son slay in youth; no brother his brother of love. they fall, without tear, for the chief of the people be low! bran be howl at his foot: gloomy luath be sad, for he have often lead they to the chace; to the bound roe of the desert.

when Oscar behold his friend around, his white breast rise with a sigh. — the groan, he say, of my age hero, the howl of my dog, the sudden burst of the song of grief, have melt oscar soul. my soul, that never melt before; it be like the steel of my sword. — Ossian, carry i to my hill! raise the stone of my fame. place the horn of the deer, and my sword within my narrow dwelling. — the torrent hereafter may raise the earth of my tomb: the hunter may find the steel and say, "this have be oscar sword."

and fall thou, son of my fame! and shall i never see thou, Oscar! when other hear of their son, i shall not hear of thou. the moss be on the stone of his tomb, and the mournful wind be there. the battle shall be fight without he: he shall not pursue the dark-brown hind. when the warrior return from battle, and tell of other land, he will say, i have see a tomb, by the roar stream, where a warrior dark dwell: he be slay by carborne Oscar, the first of mortal man. — i, perhaps, shall hear he, and a beam of joy will rise in my soul.

the night will have descend in sorrow, and morning return in the shadow of grief: our chief will have stand like cold drop rock on Lena, and have forget the war, do not the king disperse his grief, and raise his mighty voice. the chief, as new-wakened from dream, lift their head around.

how long shall we weep on Lena; or pour our tear in Ullin? the mighty will not return. Oscar shall not rise in his strength. the valiant must fall one day, and be no more know on his hill. — where be our father, o warrior! the chief of the time of old? they have set like star that have stone, we only hear the sound of their praise. but they be renown in their day, and the terror of other time. thus shall we pass, o warrior, in the day of our fall. then let we be renown when we may; and leave our fame behind we, like the last beam of the sun, when he hide his red head in the west.

Ullin, my age bard! take the ship of the king. carry Oscar to Selma, and let the daughter of Morven weep. we shall fight in Erin for the race of fall Cormac. the day of my year begin to fail: i feel the weakness of my arm. my father bend from their cloud, to receive their gray-haired son. but, trenmor! before i go hence, one beam of my fame shall rise: so shall my day end, as my year begin, in fame: my life shall be one stream of light to other time.

Ullin raise his white sail: the wind of the south come forth. he bound on the wave towards selma wall. — i remain in my grief, but my word be not hear. — the feast be spread on Lena: a hundred hero rear the tomb of cairbar: but no song be raise over the chief; for his soul have be dark and bloody. we remember the fall of Cormac! and what can we say in cairbar praise?

the night come roll down. the light of a hundred oak arise. Fingal sit beneath a tree. the chief of etha sit near the king, the gray-haired strength of usnoth.

old althan stand in the midst, and tell the tale of fall Cormac. althan the son of conachar, the friend of carborne Cuchullin: he dwell with Cormac in windy temora, when semo son fight with generous torlath. — the tale of althan be mournful, and the tear be in his eye.

the set sun be yellow on Dora. grey evening begin to descend. temora wood shake with the blast of the unconstant wind. a cloud, at length, gather in the west, and a red star look from behind its edge. — i stand in the wood alone, and see a ghost on the darken air. his stride extend from hill to hill: his shield be dim on his side. it be the son of Semo: i know the sadness of his face. but he pass away in his blast; and all be dark around. — my soul be sad. i go to the hall of shell. a thousand light arise: the hundred bard have string the harp. Cormac stand in the midst, like the morning star, when it rejoice on the eastern hill, and its young beam be bathe in shower. — the sword of artho be in the hand of the king; and he look with joy on its polish stud: thrice he attempt to draw it, and thrice he fail: he yellow lock be spread on his shoulder: his cheek of youth be red. — i mourn over the beam of youth, for he be soon to set.

althan! he say, with a smile, have thou behold my father? heavy be the sword of the king, sure his arm be strong. o that i be like he in battle, when the rage of his wrath arise! then will i have meet, like Cuchullin, the carborne son of cantéla! but year may come on, o althan! and my arm be strong. — have thou hear of semo son, the chief of high temora? he may have return with his fame; for he promise to return tonight. my bard wait he with their song, and my feast be spread. —

i hear the king in silence. my tear begin to flow. i hide they with my grey lock; but he perceive my grief.

son of conachar! he say, be the king of tura low? why burst thy sigh in secret? and why descend the tear? — come the carborne torlath? or the sound of the red-haired cairbar? — they come! — for i see thy grief; and tura king be low! — shall i not rush to battle? — but i can lift the arm of my father! — o have my arm the strength of Cuchullin, soon will cairbar fly; the fame of my father will be renew; and the action of other time!

he take his bow of yew. tear flow from his sparkle eye. — grief sadden around: the bard bend forward from their harp. the blast touch their string, and the sound of woe ascend.

a voice be hear at a distance, as of one in grief; it be carril of other time, who come from the dark slimora. — he tell of the death of Cuchullin, and of his mighty deed. the people be scatter around his tomb: their arm lie on the ground. they have forget the battle, for the sound of his shield have cease.

but who, say the soft-voiced carril, come like the bound roe? their stature be like the young tree of the plain, grow in a shower: — soft and ruddy be their cheek: but fearless soul look forth from their eye? — who but the son of usnoth, the carborne chief of etha? the people rise on every side, like the strength of a half-extinguished fire, when the wind come sudden from the desert, on their rustle wing. — the sound of caithbat shield be hear. the hero see Cuchullin, in the form of lovely nathos. so roll his sparkle eye, and such be his step on his heath. — battle be fight at lego: the sword of nathos prevail. soon shall thou behold he in thy hall, king of woody temora! —

and soon may i behold he, o carril! reply the return joy of Cormac. but my soul be sad for Cuchullin; his voice be pleasant in my ear. — often have we move on Dora, at the chace of the dark-brown hind: his bow be unerring on the mountain. — he speak of mighty man. he tell of the deed of my father; and i feel the joy of my breast. — but sit thou, at the feast, o carril; i have often hear thy voice. sing in the praise of Cuchullin; and of that mighty stranger.

day rise on temora, with all the beam of the east. trathin come to the hall, the son of old Gellama. — i behold, he say, a dark cloud in the desert, king of inisfail! a cloud it seem at first, but now a crowd of man. one stride before they in his strength; and his red hair fly in the wind. his shield glitter to the beam of the east. his spear be in his hand.

call he to the feast of temora, reply the king of Erin. my hall be the house of stranger, son of the generous gellama! — perhaps it be the chief of etha, come in the sound of his renown. — hail, mighty stranger, be thou of the friend of Cormac? — but carril, he be dark, and unlovely; and he draw his sword. be that the son of usnoth, bard of the time of old?

it be not the son of usnoth, say carril, but the chief of atha. — why come thou in thy arm to temora, cairbar of the gloomy brow? let not thy sword rise against Cormac! whither do thou turn thy speed?

he pass on in his darkness, and seize the hand of the king. Cormac foresee his death, and the rage of his eye arise. — retire, thou gloomy chief of atha: nathos come with battle. — thou be bold in cormac hall, for his arm be weak. — the sword enter cormac side: he fall in the hall of his father. his fair hair be in the dust. his blood be smoke round.

and be thou fall in thy hall, i say, o son of noble artho? the shield of Cuchullin be not near. nor the spear of thy father. mournful be the mountain of Erin, for the chief of the people be low! — bless be thy soul, o Cormac! thou be snatch from the midst of thy course.

my word come to the ear of cairbar, and he close we in the midst of darkness. he fear to stretch his sword to the bard: though his soul be dark. three day we pine alone: on the four, the noble cathmor come. — he hear our voice from the cave; he turn the eye of his wrath on cairbar.

chief of atha! he say, how long will thou pain my soul? thy heart be like the rock of the desert; and thy thought be dark. — but thou be the brother of cathmor, and he will fight thy battle. — but cathmor soul be not like thy, thou feeble hand of war! the light of my bosom be stain with thy deed: the bard will not sing of my renown. they may say, "cathmor be brave, but he fight for gloomy cairbar."they will pass over my tomb in silence, and my fame shall not be hear. — cairbar! loose the bard: they be the son of other time. their voice shall be hear in other age, when the king of temora have fail. —

we come forth at the word of the chief. we see he in his strength. he be like thy youth, o Fingal, when thou first do list the spear. — his face be like the plain of the sun when it be bright: no darkness travel over his brow. but he come with his thousand to Ullin; to aid the red-haired cairbar: and now he come to revenge his death, o king of woody Morven. —

and let he come, reply the king; i love a foe like cathmor. his soul be great; his arm be strong, and his battle be full of fame. — but the little soul be like a vapour that hover round the marshy lake: it never rise on the green hill, lest the wind meet it there: its dwelling be in the cave, and it send forth the dart of death.

usnoth! thou have hear the fame of etha carborne chief. — our young hero, o warrior, be like the renown of our father. — they fight in youth, and they fall: their name be in the song. — but we be old, o usnoth, let we not fall like age oak; which the blast overturn in secret. the hunter come past, and see they lie grey across a stream. how have these fall, he say, and whistle pass along.

raise the song of joy, you bard of Morven, that our soul may forget the past. — the red star look on we from the cloud, and silent descend. soon shall the grey beam of the morning rise, and show we the foe of Cormac. — Fillan! take the spear of the king; go to mora dark-brown side. let thy eye travel over the heath, like flame of fire. observe the foe of Fingal, and the course of generous cathmor. i hear a distant sound, like the fall of rock in the desert. — but strike thou thy shield, at time, that they may not come through night, and the same of Morven cease. — i begin to be alone, my son, and i dread the fall of my renown.

the voice of the bard arise. the king lean on the shield of trenmor. — sleep descend on his eye, and his future battle rise in his dream. the host be sleep around. dark-haired Fillan observe the foe. his step be on a distant hill: we hear, at time, his clang shield.


one of the fragment of ancient poetry late publish, give a different account of the death of Oscar, the son of Ossian. the translator, though he well know the more probable tradition concern that hero, be unwilling to reject a poem, which, if not real of ossian composition, have much of his manner, and concise turn of expression. a more correct copy of that fragment, which have since come to the translator hand, have enable he to correct the mistake, into which a similarity of name have lead those who hand down the poem by tradition. — the hero of the piece be Oscar the son of Caruth, and Dermid the son of diaran. Ossian, or perhaps his imitator, open the poem with a lamentation for Oscar, and afterwards, by a easy transition, relate the story of Oscar the son of Caruth, who seem to have bear the same character, as well as name, with Oscar the son of Ossian. though the translator think he have good reason to reject the fragment as the composition of Ossian; yet as it be, after all, still somewhat doubtful whether it be or not, he have here subjoin it.


why open thou afresh the spring of my grief, o son of Alpin, inquire how Oscar fall? my eye be blind with tear; but memory beam on my heart. how can i relate the mournful death of the head of the people! chief of the warrior, Oscar, my son, shall i see thou no more!

he fall as the moon in a storm; as the sun from the midst of his course, when cloud rise from the waste of the wave, when the blackness of the storm inwrap the rock of ardannider. i, like a ancient oak on Morven, i moulder alone in my place. the blast have lop my branch away; and i tremble at the wing of the north. chief of the warrior, Oscar, my son! shall i see thou no more!

but, son of Alpin, the hero fall not harmless as the grass of the field; the blood of the mighty be on his sword, and he travel with death through the rank of their pride. but Oscar, thou son of Caruth, thou have fall low! no enemy fall by thy hand. thy spear be stain with the blood of thy friend.

Dermid and Oscar be one: they reap the battle together. their friendship be strong as their steel; and death walk between they to the field. they come on the foe like two rock fall from the brow of ardven. their sword be stain with the blood of the valiant: warrior faint at their name. who be equal to Oscar, but Dermid? and who to Dermid, but Oscar!

they kill mighty dargo in the field; dargo who never sle in war. his daughter be fair as the morn; mild as the beam of night. her eye, like two star in a shower: her breath, the gale of spring: her breast, as the new-fallen snow float on the move heath. the warrior see she, and love; their soul be fix on the maid. each love she as his fame; each must possess she or die. but her soul be fix on Oscar; the son of Caruth be the youth of her love. she forget the blood of her father; and love the hand that slay he.

son of Caruth, say Dermid, i love; o Oscar, i love this maid. but her soul cleave unto thou; and nothing can heal Dermid. here, pierce this bosom, Oscar; relieve i, my friend, with thy sword.

my sword, son of diaran, shall never be stain with the blood of Dermid.

who then be worthy to slay i, o Oscar son of Caruth? let not my life pass away unknown. let none but Oscar slay i. send i with honour to the grave, and let my death be renown.

Dermid, make use of thy sword; son of diaran, wield thy steel. will that i fall with thou! that my death come from the hand of Dermid!

they fight by the brook of the mountain, by the stream of branno. blood tinge the run water, and curdle round the mossy stone. the stately Dermid fall; he fall, and smile in death.

and fall thou, son of diaran, fall thou by oscar hand! Dermid who never yield in war, thus do i see thou fall! — he go, and return to the maid of his love; he return, but she perceive his grief.

why that gloom, son of Caruth? what shade thy mighty soul?

though once renown for the bow, o maid, i have lose my same. fix on a tree by the brook of the hill, be the shield of the valiant gormur, who i slay in battle. i have waste the day in vain, nor can my arrow pierce it.

let i try, son of Caruth, the skill of Dargo's daughter. my hand be teach the bow: my father delight in my skill.

she go. he stand behind the shield. her arrow fly, and pierce his breast.

bless be that hand of snow; and bless that bow of yew! who but the daughter of dargo be worthy to slay the son of Caruth? lay i in the earth, my fair one; lay i by the side of Dermid.

Oscar! the maid reply, i have the soul of the mighty dargo. well please i can meet death. my sorrow i can end. — she pierce her white bosom with the steel. she fall; she tremble; and die.

by the brook of the hill their grave be lay; a birch unequal shade cover their tomb. often on their green earthen tomb the branchy son of the mountain feed, when midday be all in flame, and silence over all the hill.

