truth.

man on the dubious wave of error toss,
 his ship half founder and his compass lose,
 see far as human optic may command,
 a sleep fog, and fancy it dry land:
 spread all his canvas, every sinew ply,
 pant for it, aim at it, enter it, and die. 
then farewell all self-satisfying scheme,
 his well-built system, philosophic dream,
 deceitful view of future bliss, farewell! 
he read his sentence at the flame of hell. 
hard lot of man! to toil for the reward
 of virtue, and yet lose it — wherefore hard? 
he that will win the race, must guide his horse
 obedient to the custom of the course,
 else, though unequalled to the goal he fly,
 a mean than himself shall gain the prize. 
grace lead the right way, if you choose the wrong,
 take it and perish, but restrain your tongue;
 charge not, with light sufficient and left free,
 your wilful suicide on God decree. 
oh how unlike the complex work of man,
 heaven easy, artless, unincumbered plan! 
no meretricious grace to beguile,
 no cluster ornament to clog the pile,
 from ostentation as from weakness free,
 it stand like the caerulean arch we see,
 majestic in its own simplicity. 
inscribe above the portal, from afar
 conspicuous as the brightness of a star,
 legible only by the light they give,
 stand the soul-quickening word — believe and live. 
too many shock at what shall charm they most,
 despise the plain direction and be lose. 
heaven on such term! they cry with proud disdain,
 incredible, impossible, and vain —
 rebel because it be easy to obey,
 and scorn for its own sake the gracious way. 
these be the sober, in who cool brain
 some thought of immortality remain;
 the rest too busy or too gay, to wait
 on the sad theme, their everlasting state,
 sport for a day and perish in a night,
 the foam upon the water not so light. 
who judge the pharisee? what odious cause
 expose he to the vengeance of the law? 
have he seduce a virgin, wrong a friend,
 or stab a man to serve some private end? 
be blasphemy his sin? or do he stray
 from the strict duty of the sacred day? 
sit long and late at the carouse board? 
(such be the sin with which he charge his lord)
 no — the man moral be exact, what then? 
it be his ambition to be see of man;
 his virtue be his pride; and that one vice
 make all his virtue gewgaw of no price;
 he wear they as fine trappings for a show,
 a pray, synagogue frequent beau. 
the self-applauding bird, the peacock see —
 mark what a sumptuous pharisee be he! 
Meridian sunbeam tempt he to unfold
 his radiant glory, azure, green, and gold;
 he tread as if some solemn music near,
 his measure step be govern by his ear,
 and seem to say, you mean fowl, give place,
 i be all splendour, dignity and grace. 
not so the pheasant on his charm presume,
 though he too have a glory in his plume. 
he, christian like, retreat with modest mien,
 to the close copse or far sequester green,
 and shine without desire to be see. 
the plea of work, as arrogant and vain,
 heaven turn from with abhorrence and disdain;
 not more affront by avow neglect,
 than by the mere dissembler feign respect. 
what be all righteousness that man devise,
 what, but a sordid bargain for the sky? 
but Christ as soon will abdicate his own,
 as sloop from heaven to sell the proud a throne. 
his dwelling a recess in some rude rock,
 book, bead, and maple-dish his meager stock,
 in shirt of hair and weed of canvas dress,
 gird with a bell-rope that the pope have bless,
 adust with stripe tell out for every crime,
 and sore torment long before his time,
 his prayer prefer to saint that can aid,
 his praise postpone, and never to be pay,
 see the sage hermit by mankind admire,
 with all that bigotry adopt, inspire,
 wear out life in his religious whim,
 until his religious whimsy wear out he. 
his work, his abstinence, his zeal allow,
 you think he humble, god account he proud;
 high in demand, though lowly in pretence,
 of all his conduct, this the genuine sense —
 my penitential stripe, my stream blood
 have purchase heaven, and prove my title good. 
turn eastward now, and fancy shall apply
 to your weak sight her telescopic eye. 
the bramin kindle on his own bare head
 the sacred fire, self-torturing his trade,
 his voluntary pain, severe and long,
 will give a barbarous air to british song,
 nor grand inquisitor can worse invent,
 than he contrive to suffer, well content. 
which be the saintly worthy of the two? 
past all dispute, yond anchorite say you. 
your sentence and mine differ. what be a name? 
i say the bramin have the fair claim. 
if suffering scripture no where recommend,
 devise by self to answer selfish end
 give saintship, then all Europe must agree,
 ten starveling hermit suffer less than he. 
the truth be (if the truth may suit your ear,
 and prejudice have leave a passage clear)
 pride have attain its most luxuriant growth,
 and poison every virtue in they both. 
pride may be pamper while the flesh grow lean;
 humility may cloth a english Dean;
 that grace be cowper — his confess by all —
 though place in golden durham second stall. 
not all the plenty of a bishop board,
 his palace, and his lacquey, and, my lord! 
more nourish pride, that condescend vice,
 than abstinence, and beggary and louse. 
it thrive in misery, and abundant grow
 in misery fool upon themselves impose. 
but why before we protestant produce
 a indian mystic or a french recluse? 
their sin be plain, but what have we to fear,
 reform and well instruct? you shall hear. 
yond ancient prude, who wither feature show
 she may be young some forty year ago,
 her elbow pinion close upon her hip,
 her head erect, her fan upon her lip,
 her eyebrow arch, her eye both go astray
 to watch yond amorous couple in their play,
 with boney and unkerchiefed neck defy
 the rude inclemency of wintery sky,
 and sail with lappet-head and mince air
 due at clink of bell, to morning prayer. 
to thrift and parsimony much incline,
 she yet allow herself that boy behind;
 the shiver urchin, bend as he go,
 with slipshod heel, and dew drop at his nose,
 his predecessor coat advance to wear,
 which furture page be yet doom to share,
 carry her bible tuck beneath his arm,
 and hide his hand to keep his finger warm. 
she, half a angel in her own account,
 doubt not hereafter with the saint to mount,
 though not a grace appear on strict search,
 but that she fast, and item, go to church. 
conscious of age she recollect her youth,
 and tell, not always with a eye to truth,
 who span her waist, and who, wherever he come,
 scrawl upon glass miss bridget lovely name,
 who steal her slipper, fill it with tokay,
 and drink the little bumper every day. 
of temper as envenom as a asp,
 censorious, and her every word a wasp,
 in faithful memory she record the crime,
 or real, or fictitious, of the time,
 laugh at the reputation she have tear,
 and hold they dangle at arm length in scorn. 
such be the fruit of sanctimonious pride,
 of malice feed while flesh be mortify. 
take, madam, the reward of all your prayer,
 where hermit and where bramin meet with they,
 your portion be with they: nay, never frown,
 but, if you please, some fathom lower down. 
artist attend — your brush and your paint —
 produce they — take a chair — now draw a saint. 
oh sorrowful and sad! the stream tear
 channel her cheek, a Niobe appear. 
be this a saint? throw tint and all away,
 true piety be cheerful as the day,
 will weep indeed and heave a pity groan
 for other woe, but smile upon her own. 
what purpose have the king of saint in view? 
why fall the gospel like a gracious dew? 
to call up plenty from the teem earth,
 or curse the desert with a tenfold dearth? 
be it that Adam offspring may be save
 from servile fear, or be the more enslave? 
to loose the link that gall mankind before,
 or bind they fast on, and add still more? 
the free-born christian have no chain to prove,
 or if a chain, the golden one of love;
 no fear attend to quench his glow fire,
 what fear he feel his gratitude inspire. 
shall he for such deliverance free wrought,
 recompense ill? he tremble at the thought:
 he master interest and his own combine,
 prompt every movement of his heart and mind;
 thought, word, and deed, his liberty evince,
 his freedom be the freedom of a prince. 
man obligation infinite, of course
 his life shall prove that he perceive their force,
 his utmost he can render be but small,
 the principle and motive all in all. 
you have two servant — Tom, a arch, sly rogue,
 from top to toe the Geta now in vogue;
 genteel in figure, easy in address,
 move without noise, and swift as a express,
 report a message with a please grace,
 expert in all the duty of his place:
 say, on what hinge do his obedience move? 
have he a world of gratitude and love? 
no, not a spark — it be all mere sharper play;
 he like your house, your housemaid and your pay;
 reduce his wage, or get rid of she,
 Tom quit you, with, your most obedient sir —
 the dinner serve, Charles take his usual stand,
 watch your eye, anticipate command,
 sigh if perhaps your appetite shall fail,
 and if he but suspect a frown, turn pale;
 consult all day your interest and your ease,
 rich reward if he can but please,
 and proud to make his firm attachment know,
 to save your life will noble risque his own. 
now, which stand high in your serious thought? 
Charles, without doubt, say you — and so he ought;
 one act that from a thankful heart proceed,
 excel ten thousand mercenary deed. 
thus heaven approve as honest and sincere,
 the work of generous love and filial fear,
 but with avert eye th'omniscient judge,
 scorn the base hireling and the slavish drudge. 
where dwell these matchless saint? old Curio cry —
 even at your side, sir, and before your eye,
 the favour few, the enthusiast you despise. 
and please at heart because on holy ground,
 sometime a cant hypocrite be find,
 reproach a people with his single fall,
 and cast his filthy raiment at they all. 
attend — a apt similitude shall show,
 whence spring the conduct that offend you so. 
see where it smoke along the sound plain,
 blow all aslant, a drive dash rain,
 peal upon peal redouble all around,
 shake it again and fast to the ground,
 now flash wide, now glance as in play,
 swift beyond thought the lightning dart away;
 ere yet it come the traveller urge his steed,
 and hurry, but with unsuccessful speed,
 now drench throughout, and hopeless of his case,
 he drop the rein, and leave he to his pace;
 suppose, unlooked for in a scene so rude,
 long hide by interpose hill or wood,
 some mansion neat and elegant dress,
 by some kind hospitable heart possess,
 offer he warmth, security and rest;
 think with what pleasure, safe and at his ease,
 he hear the tempest howl in the tree,
 what glow thanks his lip and heart employ,
 while danger past be turn to present joy. 
so fare it with the sinner when he feel,
 a grow dread of vengeance at his heel,
 his conscience like a glassy lake before,
 lash into foam wave begin to roar,
 the law grow clamorous, though silent long,
 arraign he, charge he with every wrong,
 assert the right of his offend lord,
 and death or restitution be the word;
 the last impossible, he fear the first,
 and have well deserve, expect the worst
 then welcome refuge, and a peaceful home,
 oh for a shelter from the wrath to come! 
crush i you rock, you fall mountain hide,
 or bury i in ocean angry tide —
 the scrutiny of those all see eye
 i dare not — and you need not, god reply;
 the remedy you want i free give,
 the book shall teach you, read, believe and live:
 it be do — the rage storm be hear no more,
 mercy receive he on her peaceful shore,
 and justice, guardian of the dread command,
 drop the red vengeance from his will hand. 
a soul redeem demand a life of praise,
 hence the complexion of his future day,
 hence a demeanour holy and unspecked,
 and the world hatred as its sure effect. 
some lead a life unblameable and just,
 their own dear virtue, their unshaken trust. 
they never sin — or if (as all offend)
 some trivial slip their daily walk attend,
 the poor be near at hand, the charge be small,
 a slight gratuity atone for all. 
for though the pope have lose his interest here,
 and pardon be not sell as once they be,
 no papist more desirous to compound,
 than some grave sinner upon english ground:
 that plea refute, other quirk they seek,
 mercy be infinite and man be weak,
 the future shall obliterate the past,
 and heaven no doubt shall be their home at last. 
come then — a still, small whisper in your ear,
 he have no hope that never have a fear;
 and he that never doubt of his state,
 he may perhaps — perhaps he may — too late. 
the path to bliss abound with many a snare,
 learning be one, and wit, however rare:
 the frenchman first in literary fame,
 (mention he if you please — Voltaire? the same)
 with spirit, genius, eloquence supply,
 live long, write much, laugh hearty and die:
 the scripture be his jest-book, whence he draw
 bon môt to gall the christian and the Jew:
 a infidel in health, but what when sick? 
oh then, a text will touch he at the quick:
 view he at Paris in his last career,
 surround throng the demi-god revere,
 exalt on his pedestal of pride,
 and fume with frankincense on every side,
 he beg their flattery with his late breath,
 and smother in it at last, be praise to death. 
yond cottager who weave at her own door,
 pillow and bobbin all her little store,
 content though mean, and cheerful, if not gay,
 shuffle her thread about the live-long day,
 just earn a scanty pittance, and at night
 lie down secure, her heart and pocket light;
 she for her humble sphere by nature fit,
 have little understanding, and no wit,
 receive no praise, but (though her lot be such,
 toilsome and indigent) she render much;
 just know, and know no more, her bible true,
 a truth the brilliant frenchman never know,
 and in that charter read with sparkle eye,
 her title to a treasure in the sky. 
oh happy peasant! oh unhappy bard! 
he the mere tinsel, she the rich reward;
 he praise perhaps for age yet to come,
 she never hear of half a mile from home;
 he lose in error his vain heart prefer,
 she safe in the simplicity of she. 
not many wise, rich, noble, or profound
 in science, win one inch of heavenly ground;
 and be it not a mortify thought
 the poor shall gain it, and the rich shall not? 
no — the voluptuary, who never forget
 one pleasure lose, lose heaven without regret;
 regret will rouse they and give birth to prayer,
 prayer will add faith, and faith will fix they there. 
not that the former of we all in this,
 or aught he do, be govern by caprice,
 the supposition be replete with sin,
 and bear the brand of blasphemy burn in. 
not so — the silver trumpet heavenly call,
 sound for the poor, but sound alike for all;
 king be invite, and will king obey,
 no slave on earth more welcome be than they:
 but royalty, nobility, and state,
 be such a dead preponderate weight,
 that endless bliss (how strange soever it seem)
 in counterpoise, fly up and kick the beam. 
it be open and you can enter — why? 
because you will not, Conyers will reply —
 and he say much that many may dispute
 and cavil at with ease, but none refute. 
oh bless effect of penury and want,
 the seed sow there, how vigorous be the plant! 
no soil like poverty for growth divine,
 as lean land supply the rich wine. 
earth give too little, give only bread,
 to nourish pride or turn the weak head:
 to they, the sound jargon of the school,
 seem what it be, a cap and bell for fool:
 the light they walk by, kindle from above,
 show they the short way to life and love:
 they, stranger to the controversial field,
 where deist always foil, yet scorn to yield,
 and never check by what impede the wise,
 believe, rush forward, and possess the prize. 
envy you great the dull unlettered small,
 you have much cause for envy — but not all;
 we boast some rich one who the gospel sway,
 and one that wear a coronet and pray;
 like glean of a olive tree they show,
 here and there one upon the topmost bough. 
how ready upon the gospel plan,
 that question have its answer — what be man? 
sinful and weak, in every sense a wretch,
 a instrument who chord upon the stretch
 and strain to the last screw that he can bear,
 yield only discord in his maker ear:
 once the bless residence of truth divine,
 glorious as solyma interior shrine,
 where in his own oracular abode,
 dwell visible the light-creating god;
 but make long since like Babylon of old,
 a den of mischief never to be tell:
 and she, once mistress of the realm around,
 now scatter wide and no where to be find,
 as soon shall rise and reascend the throne,
 by native power and energy her own,
 as nature at her own peculiar cost,
 restore to man the glory he have lose. 
go bid the winter cease to chill the year,
 replace the wander comet in his sphere,
 then boast (but wait for that unhoped-for hour)
 the self-restoring arm of human power. 
but what be man in his own proud esteem? 
hear he, himself the poet and the theme;
 a monarch clothe with majesty and awe,
 his mind his kingdom and he will his law. 
grace in his mien and glory in his eye,
 supreme on earth and worthy of the sky,
 strength in his heart, dominion in his nod,
 and, thunderbolt except, quite a god. 
so sing he, charm with his own mind and form,
 the song magnificent, the theme a worm:
 himself so much the source of his delight,
 his maker have no beauty in his sight:
 see where he sit contemplative and fix,
 pleasure and wonder in his feature mix,
 his passion tame and all at his controul,
 how perfect the composure of his soul! 
complacency have breathe a gentle gale
 over all his thought, and swell his easy sail:
 he book well trim and in the gay stile,
 like regiment coxcomb rank and file,
 adorn his intellect as well as shelf,
 and teach he notion splendid as themselves:
 the bible only stand neglect there,
 though that of all most worthy of his care,
 and like a infant, troublesome awake,
 be leave to sleep for peace and quiet sake. 
what shall the man deserve of human kind,
 who happy skill and industry combine,
 shall prove (what argument can never yet)
 the bible a imposture and a cheat? 
the praise of the libertine profess,
 the worst of man, and curse of the best. 
where shall the living, weep over his woe,
 the die, tremble at their awful close,
 where the betray, forsake and oppress,
 the thousand who the world forbid to rest,
 where shall they find (those comfort at a end
 the scripture yield) or hope to find a friend? 
sorrow may muse herself to madness then,
 and seek exile from the sight of man,
 bury herself in solitude profound,
 grow frantic with her pang and bite the ground. 
thus often unbelief grow sick of life,
 fly to the tempt pool or felon knife,
 the jury meet, the coroner be short,
 and lunacy the verdict of the court:
 reverse the sentence, let the truth be know,
 such lunacy be ignorance alone;
 they know not, what some bishop may not know,
 that scripture be the only cure of woe:
 that field of promise, how it fling abroad
 its odour over the christian thorny road;
 the soul repose on assure relief,
 feel herself happy amid all her grief,
 forget her labour as she toil along,
 weep tear of joy, and burst into a song. 
but the same word that like the polish share
 plough up the root of a believer care,
 kill too the flowery weed wherever they grow,
 that bind the sinner bacchanalian brow. 
oh that unwelcome voice of heavenly love,
 sad messenger of mercy from above,
 how do it grate upon his thankless ear,
 cripple his pleasure with the cramp of fear! 
his will and judgement at continual strife,
 that civil war imbitter all his life;
 in vain he point his power against the sky,
 in vain he close or avert his eye,
 truth will intrude — she bid he yet beware —
 and shake the sceptic in the scorner chair. 
though various foe against the truth combine,
 pride above all oppose her design;
 pride, of a growth superior to the rest,
 the subtle serpent with the lofty crest,
 swell at the thought, and kindle into rage,
 will hiss the cherub mercy from the stage. 
and be the soul indeed so lose, she cry,
 fall from her glory and too weak to rise,
 torpid and dull beneath a freeze zone,
 have she no spark that may be deem she own? 
grant she indebt to what zealot call
 grace undeserved, yet sure not for all —
 some beam of rectitude she yet display,
 some love of virtue and some power to praise,
 can lift herself above corporeal thing,
 and soar on her own unborrowed wing,
 possess herself of all that be good or true,
 assert the sky, and vindicate her due. 
past indiscretion be a venial crime,
 and if the youth, unmellow yet by time,
 bear on his branch luxuriant then, and rude,
 fruit of a blight size, austere and crude,
 maturer year shall happy store produce,
 and meliorate the well concoct juice. 
then conscious of her meritorious zeal,
 to justice she may make her bold appeal,
 and leave to mercy with a tranquil mind,
 the worthless and unfruitful of mankind. 
hear then how mercy slight and defy,
 retort the affront against the crown of pride. 
perish the virtue, as it ought, abhor,
 and the fool with it that insult his lord. 
the atonement a redeemer love have wrought
 be not for you, — the righteous need it not. 
see thou yond harlot woo all she meet
 the worn-out nuisance of the public street,
 herself from morn to night, from night to morn,
 her own abhorrence, and as much your scorn,
 the gracious shower, unlimited and free,
 shall fall on she, when heaven deny it thou. 
of all that wisdom dictate, this the drift,
 that man be dead in sin, and life a gift. 
be virtue then, unless of christian growth,
 mere fallacy, or foolishness, or both,
 ten thousand sage lose in endless woe,
 for ignorance of what they can not know? 
that speech betray at once a bigot tongue,
 charge not a god with such outrageous wrong. 
true not i — the partial light man have,
 my creed persuade i, well employ may save,
 while he that scorn the noonday beam perverse,
 shall find the blessing, unimproved, a curse. 
let heathen worthy who exalt mind,
 leave sensuality and dross behind,
 possess for i their undisputed lot,
 and take unenvied the reward they seek. 
but still in virtue of a saviour plea,
 not blind by choice, but destine not to see. 
their fortitude and wisdom be a flame
 celestial, though they know not whence it come,
 derive from the same source of light and grace
 that guide the christian in his swift race;
 their judge be conscience, and her rule their law,
 that rule pursue with reverence and with awe,
 lead they, however falter, faint and slow,
 from what they know, to what they wish to know;
 but let not he that share a bright day,
 traduce the splendour of a noontide ray,
 prefer the twilight of a dark time,
 and deem his base stupidity no crime;
 the wretch that slight the bounty of the sky,
 and sink while favour with the mean to rise,
 shall find they rate at their full amount,
 the good he scorn all carry to account. 
marshal all his terror as he come,
 thunder and earthquake and devour flame,
 from sinai top Jehovah give the law,
 life for obedience, death for every flaw. 
when the great sovereign will his will express. 
he give a perfect rule; what can he less? 
and guard it with a sanction as severe
 as vengeance can inflict, or sinner fear:
 else his own glorious right he will disclaim,
 and man may safe trifle with his name:
 he bid he glow with unremitting love
 to all on earth, and to himself above;
 condemn the injurious deed, the slanderous tongue,
 the thought that meditate a brother wrong;
 bring not alone, the more conspicuous part,
 his conduct to the test, but try his heart. 
hark! universal nature shake and groan,
 it be the last trumpet — see the judge enthrone:
 rouse all your courage at your utmost need,
 now summon every virtue, stand and plead. 
what, silent? be your boast hear no more? 
that self-renouncing wisdom learn before,
 have shed immortal glory on your brow,
 that all your virtue can purchase now. 
all joy to the believer! he can speak —
 tremble yet happy, confident yet meek. 
since the dear hour that bring i to thy foot,
 and cut up all my folly by the root,
 i never trust in a arm but thy,
 nor hope, but in thy righteousness divine:
 my prayer and alm, imperfect and defile,
 be but the feeble effort of a child,
 however perform, it be their bright part,
 that they proceed from a grateful heart:
 cleanse in thy own all-purifying blood,
 forgive their evil and accept their good;
 i cast they at thy foot — my only plea
 be what it be, dependence upon thou;
 while struggle in the vale of tear below,
 that never fail, nor shall it fail i now. 
angelic gratulation rend the sky,
 pride fall unpitied, never more to rise,
 humility be crown, and faith receive the prize. 
