Amanda:

a elegy on the death of mrs. —, personate her husband. 

where can the wretched find relief from woe,
 or sue for comfort in life dreary vale? 
here can philosophy no aid bestow,
 and reason must in all her effort fail. 

what bosom feel not, while with deep sigh,
 in falter accent, i of fate complain? 
a pale and mangle corps amanda lie;
 o that by savage hand she have be slay! 

it be her own, on fatal purpose bend,
 to dark oblivion be the deed consign;
 nor let officious memory thus torment,
 with wild reflection my disorder mind. 

ah! what be happiness? a airy dream:
 while stupid mortal fond hope its stay,
 supine bask in the transient gleam,
 a sudden blast dispel the glimmer ray. 

Amanda, late the fair of the throng,
 of all our rural nymph she be the pride:
 i see, i love, nor do i languish long,
 with modest blush she become my bride. 

we then the sweet of social life do prove,
 bless in our lot, nor do we sigh for fame. 
a comely boy, the pledge of mutual love,
 enhance our pleasure, and our care do claim. 

what word can paint the horror of my breast,
 while brief i the tragic scene disclose? 
pale death our darling infant do arrest,
 one direful night when sink in soft repose. 

no tender guardian mark his late sigh;
 no cordial do his quiver lip receive;
 so have i see a flower of fair die,
 but in the morn, and fade before it be eve. 

Amanda view the change with wild surprise;
 tumultuous passion do her bosom swell;
 nor can she long the fervid flame disguise;
 a awful victim to despair she fall! 

she be go, and nature seem a blank to i;
 no charm appear in all its large domain. 
the songster silent sit upon the tree,
 or pour their note in melancholy strain. 

the bank of Irvine yield i no delight,
 nor can bright Phoebus cheer i by his ray:
 in restless toss still i spend the night,
 nor comfort find at the return of day. 

the briny tear in copious torrent flow,
 nor can my tremble hand the theme pursue:
 the pang i feel may Damon never know
 amanda go, my dear friend adieu. 
