content.

a essay on satire.

part i 

fate give the word; the cruel arrow speed;
and pope lie number with the mighty dead!
resign he fall superior to the dart,
that quench its rage in you and britain heart:
you mourn: but Britain, lull in rest profound,
(unconscious Britain!) slumber over her wound.
exult dullness eye the set light,
and flap her wing, impatient for the night:
rouse at the signal, guilt collect her train,
and count the triumph of her grow reign:
with inextinguishable rage they burn,
and snake-hung envy hiss over his urn:
the envenom monster spit their deadly foam,
to blast the laurel that surround his tomb.

but you, o Warburton! who eye refine
can see the greatness of a honest mind;
can see each virtue and each grace unite,
and taste the rapture of a pure delight;
you visit oft his awful page with care,
and view that bright assemblage treasure there;
you trace the chain that link his deep design,
and pour new lustre on the glow line.
yet deign to hear the effort of a muse,
who eye, not wing, his ardent flight pursue;
intent from this great archetype to draw
satire bright form, and fix her equal law;
please if from hence the unlearned may comprehend,
and reverence his and satire generous end.

in every breast there burn a active flame,
the love of glory, or the dread of shame:
the passion one, though various it appear,
as brighten into hope, or dim by fear.
the lisp infant, and the hoary sire,
and youth and manhood feel the heart-born fire;
the charm of praise the coy, the modest woo,
and only fly, that glory may pursue:
she, power resistless, rule the wise and great;
bend even reluctant hermit at her foot:
haunt the proud city, and the lowly shade,
and sway alike the sceptre and the spade. 

thus heaven in pity wake the friendly flame,
to urge mankind on deed that merit fame:
but man, vain man, in folly only wise,
reject the manna send he from the sky:
with rapture hear corrupt passion call,
still proud prone to mingle with the stall.
as each deceitful shadow tempt his view,
he for the image substance quit the true:
eager to catch the visionary prize,
in quest of glory plunge deep in vice;
till mad zealous, impotent vain,
he forfeit every praise he pant to gain.

thus still imperious nature ply her part;
and still her dictate work in every heart.
each power that sovereign nature bid enjoy,
man may corrupt, but man can never destroy.
like mighty river, with resistless force
the passion rage, obstruct in their course;
swell to new height, forbid path explore,
and drown those virtue which they feed before. 

and sure, the dreadly foe to virtue flame,
our worst of evil, be pervert shame. 
beneath this load what abject number groan,
the entangle slave to folly not their own!
mean by fashionable fear oppress,
we seek our virtue in each other breast;
blind to ourselves, adopt each foreign vice,
another weakness, interest, or caprice.
each fool to low ambition, poor great,
that pine in splendid wretchedness of state,
tire in the treacherous chase, will noble yield,
and but for shame, like Sulla, quit the field:
the daemon shame paint strong the ridicule,
and whisper close "the world will call you fool."

behold, yond wretch, by impious fashion drive,
believe and tremble while he scoff at heaven.
by weakness strong, and bold through fear alone,
he dread the sneer by shallow coxcomb throw;
dauntless pursue the path Spinoza tread;
to man a coward, and a brave to god. 

faith, justice, heaven itself now quit their hold,
when to false fame the captive heart be fold:
hence blind to truth, relentless Cato die:
nought can subdue his virtue, but his pride.
hence chaste lucretia innocence betray
fell by that honour which be mean its aid.
thus virtue sink beneath unnumbered woe,
when passion bear her friend, revolt, her foe.

hence satire power: it be her corrective part
to calm the wild disorder of the heart. 
she point the arduous height where glory lie,
and teach mad ambition to be wise:
in the dark bosom wake the fair desire,
draw good from ill, a bright flame from fire;
strip black oppression of her gay disguise,
and bid the hag in native horror rise;
strike tower pride and lawless rapine dead,
and plant the wreath on virtue awful head.

nor boast the muse a vain imagine power,
though oft she mourn those ill she can cure. 
the worthy court she, and the worthless fear;
who shun her pierce eye, that eye revere.
her awful voice the vain and vile obey,
and every foe to wisdom feel she sway.
smart, pedant, as she smile, no more be vain;
despond fop resign the cloud cane:
hush at her voice, pert folly self be still,
and dullness wonder while she drop her quill.
like the arm bee, with art most subtle true
from poisonous vice she draw a heal dew:
weak be the tie that civil art can find,
to quell the ferment of the taint mind:
cunning evade, secure wrap in wile;
and force strong-sinewed rend the unequal toil:
the stream of vice impetuous drive along,
too deep for policy, for power too strong.
even fair religion, native of the sky,
scorn by the crowd, seek refuge with the wise;
the crowd with laughter spurn her awful train,
and mercy court, and justice frown in vain. 
but satire shaft can pierce the harden breast:
she play a rule passion on the rest:
undaunted mount the battery of his pride,
and awe the brave, that earth and heaven defy.
when fell corruption, by her vassal crown,
deride fall justice prostrate on the ground;
swift to redress a injure people groan,
bold satire shake the tyrant on her throne;
powerful as death, defy the sordid train,
and slave and sycophant surround in vain. 

but with the friend of vice, the foe of satire,
all truth be spleen; all just reproof, ill-nature.

well may they dread the muse fatal skill;
well may they tremble when she draw her quill:
her magic quill, that like ithuriel spear
reveal the cleave hoof, or lengthen ear:
bid vice and folly take their natural shape,
turn duchess to strumpet, beaux to apes;
drag the vile whispere from his dark abode,
till all the daemon start up from the toad. 

o sordid maxim, form to screen the vile,
that true good-nature still must wear a smile!
in frown array her beauty strong rise,
when love of virtue wake her scorn of vice:
where justice call, it be cruelty to save;
and it be the law good-nature hang the knave.
who combat virtue foe be virtue friend;
then judge of satire merit by her end:
to guilt alone her vengeance stand confine,
the object of her love be all mankind. 
scarce more the friend of man, the wise must own,
even allen bounteous hand, than satire frown:
this to chastise, as that to bless, be give;
alike the faithful minister of heaven.

oft on unfeeling heart the shaft be spend:
though strong the example, weak the punishment.
they least be pain, who merit satire most;
folly the laureate, vice be chartres boast;
then where be the wrong, to gibbet high the name
of fool and knave already dead to shame? 
oft satire act the faithful surgeon part;
generous and kind, though painful be her art:
with caution bold, she only strike to heal,
though folly rave to break the friendly steel.
then sure no fault impartial satire know,
kind, even in vengeance kind, to virtue foe.
who be the crime, the scandal too be they:
the knave and fool be their own libeller.

part ii.

dare noble then: but conscious of your trust,
as ever warm and bold, be ever just:
nor court applause in these degenerate day:
the villain censure be extort praise.

but chief, be steady in a noble end,
and show mankind that truth have yet a friend.
it be mean for empty praise of wit to write,
as fopling grin to show their tooth be white:
to brand a doubtful folly with a smile,
or mad blaze unknown defect, be vile:
it be double vile, when but to prove your art,
you fix a arrow in a blameless heart. 
o lose to honour voice, o doom to shame,
thou fiend accurse, thou murderer of fame!
fell ravisher, from innocence to tear
that name, than liberty, than life more dear!
where shall thy baseness meet its just return,
or what repay thy guilt, but endless scorn!
and know, immortal truth shall mock thy toil:
immortal truth shall bid the shaft recoil;
with rage retort, wing the deadly dart;
and empty all its poison in thy heart. 

with caution, next, the dangerous power apply;
a eagle talon ask a eagle eye:
let satire then her proper object know,
and ere she strike, be sure she strike a foe.
nor fond deem the real fool confess,
because blind ridicule conceive a jest:
before who altar virtue oft have bleed,
and oft a destine victim shall be lead:
lo, shaftsbury rear her high on reason throne,
and load the slave with honour not her own:
big-swollen with folly, as her smile provoke,
profaneness spawn, pert dunce nurse the joke!
come, let we join awhile this titter crew,
and own the idiot guide for once be true;
deride our weak forefather musty rule,
who therefore smile, because they see a fool;
sublime logic now adorn our isle,
we therefore see a fool, because we smile.
truth in her gloomy cave why fond seek?
lo, gay she sit in laughter dimple cheek:
contemn each surly academic foe,
and court the spruce freethinker and the beau.
daedalian argument but few can trace,
but all can read the language of grimace.
hence mighty ridicule all-conquering hand
shall work herculean wonder through the land:
bind in the magic of her cobweb chain,
you, mighty Warburton, shall rage in vain,
in the vain trackless maze of truth you scan,
and lend the inform clue to err man:
no more shall reason boast her power divine,
her base eternal shake by folly mine!
truth be sacred fort the explode laugh shall win;
and coxcomb vanquish Berkley by a grin.

but you, more sage, reject the invert rule,
that truth be ever explore by ridicule:
on truth, on falsehood let her colour fall,
she throw a dazzle glare alike on all;
as the gay prism but mock the flatter eye,
and give to every object every dye. 
beware the mad adventurer: bold and blind
she hoist her sail, and drive with every wind;
deaf as the storm to sink virtue groan,
nor heed a friend destruction, or her own.
let clear-eyed reason at the helm preside,
bear to the wind, or stem the furious tide;
then mirth may urge, when reason can explore,
this point the way, that waft we glad to shore.

though distant time may rise in satire page,
yet chief it be she to draw the present age:
with wisdom lustre, folly shade contrast,
and judge the reign manner by the past:
bid britain hero (awful shade!) arise,
and ancient honour beam on modern vice:
point back to mind ingenuous, action fair,
till the son blush at what their father be:
ere yet it be beggary the great to trust;
ere yet it be quite a folly to be just;
when low-born sharper only dare a lie,
or falsify the card, or cogged the dye:
ere lewdness the stain garb of honour wear,
or chastity be cart for the whore;
vice flutter, in the plume of freedom dress;
or public spirit be the public jest.

be ever in a just expression bold,
yet never degrade fair satire to a scold:
let no unworthy mien her form debase,
but let her smile, and let her frown with grace:
in mirth be temperate, temperate in her spleen;
nor while she preach modesty, obscene. 
deep let her wound, not rankle to a sore,
nor call his lordship —, her grace a —:
the muse charm resistless then assail,
when wrap in irony transparent veil:
her beauty half-concealed the more surprise,
and keen lustre sparkle in her eye.
then be your line with sharp encomium grace:
stile Clodius honourable, bufa chaste.

dart not on folly a indignant eye:
who ever discharge artillery on a fly? 
deride not vice: absurd the thought and vain,
to bind the tiger in so weak a chain.
nay more: when flagrant crime your laughter move,
the knave exult: to smile be to approve.
the muse labour then success shall crown,
when folly feel her smile, and vice her frown.

know next what measure to each theme belong,
and suit your thought and number to your song:
on wing proportion to your quarry rise,
and stoop to earth, or soar among the sky. 
thus when a modish folly you rehearse,
free the expression, simple be the verse.
in artless number paint the ambitious peer
that mount the box, and shine a charioteer:
in strain familiar sing the midnight toil
of camp and senate discipline by Hoyle. 
patriot and chief who deep design invade
and carry off the captive king of — spade! 
let satire here in mild vigour shine,
and gayly graceful sport along the line;
bid courtly fashion quit her thin pretence,
and smile each affectation into sense.

not so when virtue by her guard betray,
spurn from her throne, implore the muse aid;
when crime, which erst in kindred darkness lie,
rise frontless, and insult the eye of day;
indignant HYMEN veil his hallow fire,
and white-robed chastity with tear retire;
when rank adultery on the genial bed
hot from Cocytus rear her baleful head:
when private faith and public trust be sell,
and traitor barter liberty for gold;
when fell corruption dark and deep, like fate,
Saps the foundation of a sink state:
when giant-vice and irreligion rise,
on mountained falsehood to invade the sky:
then warm number glow through satire page,
and all her smile be darken into rage:
on eagle-wing she gain parnassus height,
not lofty epic soar a noble flight:
then keen indignation fire her eye;
then flash her lightning, and her thunder fly;
wide and more wide her flame bolt be hurl,
till all her wrath involve the guilty world.

yet satire oft assume a gentle mien,
and beam on virtue friend a look serene:
she wound reluctant, pour her balm and joy,
glad to commend where merit strike her eye.
but tread with cautious step this dangerous ground,
beset with faithless precipice round:
truth be your guide: disdain ambition call;
and if you fall with truth, you great fall.
it be virtue native lustre that must shine:
the poet can but set it in his line:
and who unmoved with laughter can behold
a sordid pebble mean grace with gold? 
let real merit then adorn your lay,
for shame a tend on prostitute praise:
and all your wit, your most distinguish art
but make we grieve, you want a honest heart. 

nor think the muse by satire law confine:
she yield description of the noble kind,
inferior art the landskip may design,
and paint the purple evening in the line:
her dare thought essay a high plan;
her hand delineate passion, picture man.
and great the toil, the latent soul to trace,
to paint the heart, and catch internal grace;
by turn bid vice or virtue strike our eye,
now bid a Wolsey or a Cromwell rise;
now with a touch more sacred and refine,
call forth a Chesterfield or Lonsdale mind.
here sweet or strong may every colour flow,
here let the pencil warm, the canvas glow:
of light and shade provoke the noble strife,
and wake each strike feature into life.

part iii.

through age thus have satire keen shine,
the friend to truth, to virtue, and mankind:
yet the bright flame from virtue never have spring,
and man be guilty ere the poet sing. 
this muse in silence joy each better age,
till glow crime have wake she into rage.
truth see her honest spleen with new delight,
and bid her wing her shaft, and urge their flight.
first on the son of Greece she prove her art,
and Sparta feel the fierce iambick dart.
to Latium next avenge satire fly:
the flame falchion rough Lucilius draw;
with dauntless warmth in virtue cause engage,
and conscious villain tremble as he rage. 

then sportive Horace catch the generous fire
for satire bow resign the sound lyre:
each arrow polish in his hand be see,
and as it grow more polish, grow more keen.
his art, conceal in study negligence
polite sly, cajole the foe of sense:
he seem to sport and trifle with the dart,
but while he sport, drive it to the heart.

in grave strain majestic Persius write,
big with a ripe exuberance of thought:
great sedate, contemn a tyrant reign,
and lash corruption with a calm disdain.

more ardent eloquence, and boundless rage
inflame bold juvenal exalt page.
his mighty number awe corrupt Rome,
and sweep audacious greatness to its doom;
the headlong torrent thunder from on high,
rend the proud rock that late brave the sky.

but lo! the fatal victor of mankind,
swell luxury! — pale ruin stalk behind! 
as countless insect from the northeast pour,
to blast the spring, and ravage every flower:
so barbarous million spread contagious death:
the sicken laurel wither at their breath.
deep superstition night the sky overhang,
beneath who baleful dew the poppy spring.
no long genius woo the nine to love,
but dullness nod in the muses grove:
wit, spirit, freedom, be the sole offence,
nor aught be hold so dangerous as sense. 

at length, again fair science shoot her ray,
dawn in the sky, and speak return day.
now satire, triumph over thy fly foe,
now load thy quiver, string thy slacken bow!

it be do — see, great Erasmus break the spell,
and wound triumphant folly in her cell!
(in vain the solemn cowl surround her face,
vain all her bigot cant, her sour grimace)
with shame compel her leaden throne to quit,
and own the force of reason urge by wit. 

it be then plain Donne in honest vengeance rise,
his wit refulgent, though his rhyme be prose:
he amid a age of pun and pedant write
with genuine sense, and roman strength of thought.

yet scarce have satire well relume her flame,
(with grief the muse record her country shame)
ere Britain see the foul revolt commence,
and treacherous wit begin her war with sense.
then arise a shameless, mercenary train,
who late time shall view with just disdain:
a race fantastic, in who gaudy line
untutored thought, and tinsel beauty shine;
wit shatter mirror lie in fragment bright,
reflect not nature, but confound the sight.
dry moral the court-poet blush to sing:
it be all his praise to say "the odd thing."
proud for a jest obscene, a patron nod,
to martyr virtue, or blaspheme his god.

ill-fated Dryden! who unmoved can see
the extreme of wit and meanness join in thou! 
flame that can mount, and gain their kindred sky,
low creep in the putrid sink of vice:
a muse who wisdom woo, but woo in vain,
the pimp of power, the prostitute to gain:
wreath, that shall deck fair virtue form alone,
to strumpet, traitor, tyrant, vile throw:
unrivalled part, the scorn of honest fame;
and genius rise, a monument of shame!

more happy France: immortal Boileau there
support genius with a sage care:
he with her love propitious satire bless,
and breathe her air divine into his breast:
fancy and sense to form his line conspire,
and faultless judgement guide the pure fire.

but see, at length, the british genius smile,
and shower her bounty over her favour isle:
behold for pope she twine the laurel crown,
and centre every poet power in one:
each roman force adorn his various page;
gay smile, collect strength, and manly rage. 
despair guilt and dullness loath the sight,
as spectre vanish at approach light:
in this clear mirror with delight we view
each image just fine, and bold true:
here vice, drag forth by truth be supreme decree,
behold and hate her own deformity:
while self-seen virtue in the faithful line
with modest joy survey her form divine.
but oh, what thought, what number shall i find,
but faint to express the poet mind! 
who yonder star effulgence can display,
unless he dip his pencil in the ray?
who paint a god, unless the god inspire?
what catch the lightning, but the speed of fire?
so, mighty pope, to make thy genius know,
all power be weak, all number — but thy own.
each muse for thou with kind contention strive,
for thou the grace leave the idalian grove:
with watchful fondness over thy cradle hang,
attune thy voice, and form thy infant tongue. 
next, to her bard majestic wisdom come;
the bard enrapture catch the heavenly flame:
with taste superior scorn the venal tribe,
who fear can sway, or guilty greatness bribe;
at fancy call who rear the wanton sail,
sport with the stream, and trifle in the gale:
sublime view thy dare spirit bind;
thy mighty voyage be creation round;
intent new world of wisdom to explore,
and bless mankind with virtue sacred store;
a noble joy than wit can give, impart;
and pour a moral transport over the heart.
fantastic wit shoot momentary fire,
and like a meteor, while we gaze, expire:
wit kindle by the sulphurous breath of vice,
like the blue lightning, while it shine, destroy:
but genius, fire by truth eternal ray,
burns clear and constant, like the source of day:
like this, its beam prolific and refine
feed, warm, inspirit, and exalt the mind;
mild dispel each wintery passion gloom,
and open all the virtue into bloom.
this praise, immortal pope, to thou be give:
thy genius be indeed a gift from heaven.
hail, bard unequalled, in who deathless line
reason and wit with strength collect shine:
where matchless wit but win the second praise,
lose, noble lose, in truth superior blaze.
do friendship ever mislead thy wander muse?
that friendship sure may plead the great excuse:
that sacred friendship which inspire thy song,
fair in defect, and amiable wrong.
error like this even truth can scarce reprove;
it be almost virtue when it flow from love.

you deathless name, you son of endless praise,
by virtue crown with never-fading bay!
say, shall a artless muse, if you inspire,
light her pale lamp at your immortal fire?
or if, o Warburton, inspire by you,
the dare muse a noble path pursue,
by you inspire, on tremble pinion soar,
the sacred fount of social bliss explore,
in her bold number chain the tyrant rage,
and bid her country glory fire her page:
if such her fate, do thou, fair truth, descend,
and watchful guard she in a honest end:
kind severe, instruct she equal line
to court no friend, nor own a foe but thy. 
but if her giddy eye shall vain quit
thy sacred path, to run the maze of wit;
if her apostate heart shall ever incline
to offer incense at corruption shrine;
urge, urge thy power, the black attempt confound,
and dash the smoke censer to the ground.
thus awe to fear, instruct bard may see,
that guilt be doom to sink in infamy.
