An EPITAPH.

Interr'd beneath this Marble Stone,
 Lie Saunt'ring Jack, and Idle Joan. 
While rolling Threescore Years and One
 Did round this Globe their Courses run;
 If Human Things went Ill or Well;
 If changing Empires rose or fell;
 The Morning past, the Evening came,
 And found this Couple still the same. 
They Walk'd and Eat, good Folks: What then? 
Why then They Walk'd and Eat again:
 They soundly slept the Night away:
 They did just Nothing all the Day:
 And having bury'd Children Four,
 Wou'd not take Pains to try for more. 
Nor Sister either had, nor Brother:
 They seem'd just Tally'd for each other. 

Their Moral and Oeconomy
 Most perfectly They made agree:
 Each Virtue kept it's proper Bound,
 Nor Trespass'd on the other's Ground. 
Nor Fame, nor Censure They regarded:
 They neither Punish'd, nor Rewarded. 
He car'd not what the Footmen did:
 Her Maids She neither prais'd, nor chid:
 So ev'ry Servant took his Course;
 And bad at First, They all grew worse. 
Slothful Disorder fill'd His Stable;
 And sluttish Plenty deck'd Her Table. 
Their Beer was strong; Their Wine was Port;
 Their Meal was large; Their Grace was short. 
They gave the Poor the Remnant-meat,
 Just when it grew not fit to eat. 

They paid the Church and Parish-Rate;
 And took, but read not the Receit:
 For which They claim'd their Sunday's Due,
 Of slumb'ring in an upper Pew. 

No Man's Defects sought They to know;
 So never made Themselves a Foe. 
No Man's good Deeds did They commend;
 So never rais'd Themselves a Friend. 
Nor cherish'd They Relations poor:
 That might decrease Their present Store:
 Nor Barn nor House did they repair:
 That might oblige Their future Heir. 

They neither Added, nor Confounded:
 They neither Wanted, nor Abounded. 
Each Christmas They Accompts did clear;
 And wound their Bottom round the Year. 
Nor Tear, nor Smile did They imploy
 At News of Public Grief, or Joy. 
When Bells were Rung, and Bonfires made;
 If ask'd, They ne'er deny'd their Aid:
 Their Jugg was to the Ringers carry'd;
 Who ever either Dy'd, or Marry'd. 
Their Jugg was to the Ringers carry'd;
 Who ever either Dy'd, or Marry'd. 
Their Billet at the Fire was found;
 Who ever was Depos'd, or Crown'd. 

Nor Good, nor Bad, nor Fools, nor Wise;
 They wou'd not learn, nor cou'd advise:
 Without Love, Hatred, Joy, or Fear,
 They led — a kind of — as it were:
 Nor Wish'd, nor Car'd, nor Laugh'd, nor Cry'd:
 And so They liv'd; and so They dy'd. 
