Julia, or the convent of saint Claire: a tale found on fact.

Julia,

or the convent of saint Claire.

stranger, that massy, moulder pile,
 who ivy ruin load the ground,
 reechoe once to pious strain
 by holy sister breathe around. 

there many a noble virgin come
 to bid the world she love .... adieu;
 there, victim of parental pride,
 to year of hopeless grief withdraw. 

yes, proud saint Claire! thy costly wall
 have witness oft the mourner pain;
 and heart in joyless durance bind,
 which sigh for kindred heart in vain. 

but never more within thy cell
 shall beauty breathe the fruitless sigh,
 nor hide beneath the envious veil
 shall sorrow dim the sparkle eye. 

for now, a sight by reason bless,
 thy gloomy dome in ruin fall,
 while bat and screechowl harbour there,
 sole tenant of thy crumble wall. 

and soon, bless change! as those dread plain,
 where etna burn torrent pour,
 become, when time its power have shed,
 with softly-smiling verdure store:

so, when thy darkly-frowning tower
 the verdant plain no long load,
 these scene, where sorrow reign, may prove
 fond, faithful lovers bless abode. 

and they shall pledge the nuptial vow,
 where once far different vow be hear;
 and where thy pine virgin mourn,
 shall babe, sweet smile babe, be rear. 

hail, glorious change, to nature dear! 
methinks i see the bridal throng;
 and hark, where lonely sister pray,
 how sweet swell the social song! 

but nought, o! nought can she restore
 to social life, to happy love,
 who once amid thy cloister train
 with passion hopeless sorrow strive. 

lament maid! my faithful muse
 to pity ear shall tell thy tale;
 shall tell, at midnight awful hour
 why groan ghost affright the vale. 

on julia soft dimple cheek
 just bloom to view youth open rose,
 when, proud stern, her father bid
 saint claire dark wall her bloom enclose. 

but no reluctance to obey
 with tear bedew she beauteous cheek,
 since love with soft persuasive power
 not yet have teach her heart to speak. 

 "yes, .... be a nun vocation mine,
 so i my brother bliss improve;
 his be their wealth," sweet Julia cry,
 so i may boast my parent love! " 

proud Clermont bless his generous child;
 her gentle mother drop a tear,
 as if her bode heart foretell
 that love and julia woe be near. 

for lo! where glow the nuptial feast,
 and clermont heir lead in his bride,
 while Julia, call that feast to grace,
 sit by a bloom baron side. 

dear, fatal hour! the feast be over,
 but still in faithful memory charm,
 and julia conscious heart have learn
 to throb with passion new alarm. 

 "now then i feel the power of love,"
 she on her sleepless pillow cry,
 "then must i still my sire obey,
 and this warm heart in cloister hide? 

 "but hold, fond girl! thy throb breast
 may be with hopeless fondness fraught;
 yet sure montrose speak eye
 declare he feel the love he teach." 

and well her hope his glance have read, .... 
Montrose a mutual passion feel,
 nor long his tender pang conceal,
 but at her foot impassion kneel. 

her downcast eye, her blush, her smile
 to crown her lover suit conspire,
 who, bold in hope, to Clermont tell
 the artless wish by fondness fire. 

but tell in vain — "away!" he cry;
 "over i your plead boast no power:
 think not my son his right shall yield,
 to swell my pine daughter dower." 

 "no: — let his right still sacred be,"
 Montrose with throb heart reply,
 "give i but julia will hand,
 i ask, i wish for nought beside." 

 "and dare thou think that clermont child
 shall ever pronounce the nuptial vow
 unless," he say, "i can a dower
 equal to clermont rank bestow! 

 "away, young lord! entreat no more! 
nor thus with vain complain mourn;
 for, ere tomorrow sun have set,
 my child shall to her cell return." 

he speak, and frown. — alas, Montrose! 
in vain thy manly bosom mourn
 for, ere tomorrow sun have set,
 thy Julia to her cell return. 

but change indeed! youth open rose
 now on her cheek no long glow;
 and now, with earthly care oppress,
 before the holy shrine she bow. 

now to religion rite no more
 her heart with ready zeal impel;
 no more with genuine fervour warm,
 her voice the holy anthem swell. 

 "whence thy pale cheek? and whence, my child,
 proceed this change?" the abbess say,
 "why heave thy breast with deep-drawn sigh,
 and wherefore droop thy youthful head?" 

 "yes, .... you shall know," the sufferer cry,
 "and let my fate your pity move! 
see passion victim! morn and eve
 this struggle soul be lose in love. 

 "and i yond sacred shrine profane;
 the cross with languid zeal i press;
 montrose image claim the vow
 which my false lip to heaven address. 

 "yes: — while i drop the sacred bead,
 his form obtrude upon my view,
 and love warm tear my rosary wet,
 love claim the sigh devotion due. 

 "inhuman father! will thou risk
 my peace on earth, and hope of heaven? 
tremble, tyrannic parent, think
 what love may do to madness drive!" 

with pity heart the abbess hear;
 for she a answer pang have know,
 and well her gentle soul can mourn
 a fate, a grief, so like she own. 

 "but why despair, my child?" she say,
 "before thy father lowly kneel,
 and teach that heart, though fence by pride,
 compassion generous throb to feel." 

Julia the kind advice obey;
 and when the haughty Clermont come,
 before his foot she lowly kneel,
 and hail he by a parent name. 

 "think thou to wrong thy brother right
 i ever can be by thou beguile?" 
 "father!" she tremble lip reply,
 "say, be not Julia too your child? 

 "for he you bid the nuptial feast,
 and all life dear blessing glow,
 while i, alike your child, you doom
 to hopeless love, and lonely woe." 

but vain remonstrance, tear, and prayer;
 the count proud heart can all deride,
 for nature voice can never melt
 the callous bosom fence by pride. 

 "urge i no more," he fierce say,
 "but know, not long these prayer can last;
 reflect, fond girl! at morning dawn
 the year of thy probation past!" 

pale, pale grow then her youthful cheek,
 heart-piercing seem her mournful cry:
 "Clermont! relent," her mother cry,
 "nor cold doom thy child to die." 

but vain be julia pierce shriek;
 nor justice he nor mercy know:
 "receive," he say, "my last embrace," .... 
then from the mournful scene withdraw. 

loud call the evening bell to prayer,
 but still on Julia vain call,
 who, lean on her mother breast,
 with desperate word that breast appall. 

 "suppress, suppress thy grief, my child,
 or fear to call dread vengeance down:
 will thou not tremble, impious girl! 
before thy God avenge frown?" 

 "paint not that gracious god in frown,
 do not for we a saviour bleed? 
in mercy clothe his awful power,
 for i shall soon that mercy need." 

dark, cheerless, awful be the night
 when tempest load the trouble air;
 but dark, gloomy be the mind
 where reign the ghastly fiend despair. 

fond mother! in thy julia eye
 can thou not see his reign be near? 
inhuman father! hark! loud groan
 shall swell the blast; .... beware! beware! 

 "mother, the hour command thou hence,"
 sad Julia cry, "we now must part;
 and never may thy bosom know
 a grief like that which rend my heart! 

 "in all thy prayer tonight for i,
 the awful throne of heaven address,
 while i with grateful bosom kneel,
 and bid its power thy goodness bless." 

speechless the mourn mother hear;
 her tongue deny the word 'farewell!' 
at length her quiver lip she press,
 and Julia hurry to her cell ..... 

now chill and loud the north wind blow,
 through the long aisle hoarse murmur run;
 the shudder sisters cheek be pale,
 when they their midnight task begin. 

mock by deep groan each anthem seem,
 the vault roof still gloomy grow:
 the blast of night be swell by shriek,
 the bird of night ill-omened fly. 

the tremble taper grow more pale,
 while, where their languid radiance fall,
 a phantom dim seem to glide,
 and loud be hear the pass bell. 

 "do you not see a phantom flit? 
do you not hear the pass bell?" 
each sister cry; while, pale with dread,
 with hurry step she seek her cell. 

at length arise the fatal morn
 decree to seal sad julia doom,
 and make the worm of hopeless love
 feed on her beauty open bloom. 

 "Julia, thy bridal vest prepare;
 thy heavenly spouse expect thou; rise!" 
the abbess cry. — "oh, stay awhile,"
 Julia with break tone reply. 

 "the taper burn, the altar glow,
 robe be the priest in costly pride,
 the organ sound! prepare!" — again
 "one moment stay!" the victim cry. 

when through the long and echo aisle
 a unknown voice the abbess hear —
 it seem with wild, impatience fraught —
 and lo! Montrose himself appear! 

 "i come," he cry, "to claim my bride;
 a father frown no more impede:
 he son be not more! — and Julia now
 to clermont wealth and power succeed." 

distress, yet please, the abbess hear,
 while on to julia cell she lead,
 and, as she go, to pity heaven
 her arm in pious homage spread. 

 "Julia, come forth! come forth, my child! 
unlock thy cell, montrose bride! 
now thou be he, a father frown
 no long will your fate divide. 

 "behold he here to snatch thou hence,
 and give thou to thy father sight." 
 "how! silent still?" Montrose exclaim;
 "why thus thy lover soul affright?" 

the door with tremble speed he force .... 
ah i! what object meet their eye! 
stretch on her bed in death last pang,
 and bathe in blood, his Julia lie. 

presumptuous girl! when heaven afflict
 shall we its dread decree arraign? 
lo! heaven thy woe with mercy see,
 but thou have make its mercy vain. 

 "behold the work of rash despair!" 
in flutter, feeble word she say:
 "have i be patient still, Montrose,
 this day have blessing on i shed. 

 "do thou not say my father heart
 have deign at length thy vow to hear? 
too late remorse! but oh, to he
 my pardon, and my blessing bear. 

 "but must i die? and can not thou
 thy Julia from death terror save? 
we shall have be so bless, Montrose! 
and must i leave thou for the grave? 

 "help i! they tear i from thy arm,
 save i, o save thy destine bride! 
it will not be; .... forgive i, heaven!" 
she feeble say, then groan and die. 

oh! who can paint the lover woe,
 or childless father deep remorse,
 while, bend over the blood-stained bed,
 he clasp his daughter pallid corpse! 

but from this scene of dreadful woe,
 learn why the village swain turn pale,
 when he at midnight wander near
 the moulder convent in the vale. 

there, faint hear through whisper tree,
 a mournful voice on Julia call;
 there, dim see, a blood-stained vest
 stream ghastly over the ivy wall. 
