verse write at the commencement of spring. — 1802.  

oh, breathe once more upon my brow,
 soft gale of spring, forget never! 
for thus thy breath appear as now
 in day of joy, ah! lose for ever. 

put forth thy fresh and tender leaf,
 soft eglantine, of fragrance early,
 thou memory first revive perceive,
 from childhood dawn still welcome yearly. 

burst from thy leafy sheath once more,
 bright hyacinth! thy splendour show,
 the sun thy hue shall now restore
 in all their foreign lustre glow. 

oh, plume again thy jetty wing,
 sweet blackbird, charm thy listen lover! 
for thus, even thus, i hear thou sing,
 when hope can smile that now be over. 

and thou, dear bed-breast, let i hear,
 exchange once more thy wintery measure,
 thy note proclaim the springtide near,
 as they be wont in hour of pleasure. 

the lark shall mount the sapphire sky
 and wake the grateful song of gladness;
 one general peal from earth shall rise,
 and man alone shall droop in sadness. 

it be here by peace and friendship bless,
 i pay to spring my yearly duty,
 when last she deck her fragrant breast
 in all the glow pride of beauty. 

it be here the cordial look of love
 from every eye benign flow,
 bid the kind hour in union move,
 each lip the ready smile bestow. 

but where the bloom cherub boy,
 who hail with we the pleasant season,
 who smile recall each childish joy,
 that sad year resign to reason? 

those bright, those laugh eye, where love
 and innocence be see embrace;
 those fairy hand, that graceful move
 their fancy-formed circle trace. 

oh, haste as thou be wont to do;
 we will mount yond shrubby steep together:
 thy care the first wood flower shall show,
 thyself all bloom as the weather. 

haste, sweet babe, belove of all! 
our cheerful hour without thou languish: '
ah! hush! .... he hear no more thy call! 
all! hush! .... nor wake a parent anguish! 

that lip of rose glow no more;
 that beam glance in night be cloud;
 those bland endearment all be over,
 in death dark pall for ever shroud. 

no, angel sweetness! not for ever,
 though heaven from we thy charm have hide,
 we joy for thou, though force to sever;
 o favour guest, thus early bid! 

even over thy die couch, sweet boy! 
a heavenly messenger preside;
 he beckon thou to seat of joy,
 to field of endless rapture guide. 

no, not for thou this bitter tear,
 it fall for those yet doom to sorrow;
 who feel the load of life severe,
 who mourn the past, nor hope the morrow. 

it fall for those who, leave behind,
 must fill their woe allot measure;
 who muse in hope to death consign
 on vision of depart pleasure. 

for those who through life dreary night
 full many a watchful hour shall number,
 and sigh for long delay light,
 or envy those who early slumber. 
