the maid of Arragon.

oh, you! who sympathetic heart be form
 to woe responsive, and who tremulous nerve
 vibrate to sorrow mournful air — attend! 
not you, you gay! not you, you vacant croud! 
who labour through the pleasure of the world,
 nor feel existence when they cease impel;
 i call not you! — for, oh, your callous bosom
 fall dissipation steels, and rob your mind
 of the sweet energy bestow by heaven:
 but, come, you few! who love the lonely hour;
 who know the sense refine, the charm agony,
 which pity give the hallow heart she fill;
 to you i call! oh, come, and trace with i
 (while glitter Hesperus hold high his torch)
 the mazy wind of yond solemn wood. 
behold the lawn, which open on the left,
 with crocus border, aromatic thyme,
 and every fragrant shrub that tempt the bee
 down from the liquid air, to bathe in sweet. 

the open wicket of that humble cot,
 by slow degree, move gentle on its hinge:
 and now, with cautious tread, the soft Osmida,
 look a blessing on her slumber sire,
 the threshold quit; when, from his short repose,
 age Almanzor start: — where be thou, child? 
where be my darling? oh! return, Osmida! 
why will thou wander in night chilly air,
 and trust thy bosom to its pierce dew? 
return, my child! the unpitying wind will shake
 thy tender frame. —

the night be calm, my father! 
scarce a zephyr move the restless aspen;
 and the clear moon, with soft invite beam,
 look through the foliage of the lofty pine. 
a moment let i breathe the balmy air! 
confine beneath the cottage roof by fear,
 and more confine by duteous care for thou,
 all day i live immure. then let i now
 taste nature blessing — exercise and air. 

heaven guard my child! but soon return, Osmida;
 and downy sleep shake slumber on thy pillow! 

Osmida quit the cot, and bend her step
 towards the margin of a neighbour lake:
 but not its lucid bosom tempt her step,
 nor moon invite through the lofty pine,
 nor balmy air, nor healthful exercise;
 ah, no! — it be to breathe her bosom anguish,
 where grief, though audible, waste her sad voice
 in ambient air — not torture the ear
 of the revere Almanzor, sire belove! 

bend to earth, with eye that penetrate
 the glow canopy of heaven; in sound
 more mournful than the widow stock-dove plaint
 — tender as youthful mother lull song,
 she thus address omnipotence divine:

oh, thou! in who eternal, boundless sight,
 the woe, or happiness, that overpower
 the mind of finite man, seem but as drop,
 that in the vast abyss unite their littleness,
 to form one mighty whole — to thou i pray! 
not for myself i pray, but for my father;
 for he who care-worn heart, droop, oppress,
 and tear with barb grief, seem tear from thou. 
his soul her wonted confidence forsake;
 he fall from thou; he lean not on the rock,
 the sacred rock, by which alone he stand
 — and quit, sink to measureless despair. 
oh, thou, accept my humble heart for he! 
hear, hear Almanzor, in osmida voice! 
it be he implore. bless, comfort, heal his grief;
 and to thyself attach he sorrow-tempted heart! 

next for my country, heaven, oh, hear my prayer! 
behold her struggle with a pity eye! 
drive from thy temple-gate the mock infidel! 
restore thy altar! send —

the pious virgin voice, with terror choke,
 unfinished leave her prayer. forth, from the shade
 of the surround thicket, rush a knight,
 in shine armour clad, bear on a steed
 who seem to scorn the earth, his light heel pass,
 as though his element have be the air:
 swift, as the breath of fierce Euroclydon
 he bear his master to the spangle lake,
 who border, by osmida knee still press,
 in thousand glow colour bloom around she,
 in thousand scent perfume the tranquil air. 

light vault on the ground, the knight approach,
 and in such courteous phrase address the maid,
 that half her terror end with his word. 
leave i, sir knight! with firmness she reply;
 and as she speak, her voice, though sweet, express
 a custom to command. leave i, sir knight! 
this solitude be to misfortune sacred;
 none ever tread these unfrequented wild,
 but those to who the door of sweet society,
 and friendship holy gate, be shut forever. 

and can the social door, and friendship gate,
 to thou oppose their brazen lock? o heaven! 
the people world thy angel have forsake,
 and here in desert dwell — in human form,
 but in celestial beauty! tell i, virgin!
 — for sure the awe, with which thy eye inspire,
 bespeak thy vestal state — tell i, fair maid! 
what ill, what sore affliction, thou have drive
 to seek, in these sequester shade, felicity
 by man refuse? 

my sorrow, gentle knight! 
i dare not whisper to the speechless air
 — still less intrust they to a stranger ear:
 yet, from your courtesy, i must demand
 my solitude again; and, as you hope
 for blessing from the power who hear my voice,
 swear never to divulge, that in these glade
 a maid you find — by outward beauty grace,
 but who sad heart, sorrow have call she own,
 and stern affliction long enrol a sister! 

the stranger pause: and then, as if to win
 her confidence, and woo she from reserve
 by frank example, thus the nymph address:
 to who shall i reveal this bless abode? 
who foot conduct to violate your haunt? 
i, who, like you, by keen misfortune press,
 seek shelter from the world; and even now
 forsake my native sky; quit gallia shore,
 her purple vineyard leave, her fertile mead,
 her ever bloom field — all these i quit —
 for these, to wretched heart, bloom, swell, and fertilise, in vain. 

unhappy youth! breathe forth the sad Osmida;
 and be affliction appetite so vast,
 that daily victim can allay her rage? 
but, gentle knight! where will your journey end? 
what porter wait to hear your bugle sound,
 and open the gate, with welcome in his face
 to greet his honour lord expect guest? 

alas! sweet maid! no hospitable gate
 de courci seek; no welcome wait his step:
 to eastern clime i bend my weary course;
 — Jerusalem the home which end my progress. 
there let i bear your woe. instruct i, lady! 
that at the holy sepulchre your name
 may animate my prayer; that there your grief
 may, sanctify, ascend the porch of heaven,
 and, in their stead, soft peace, and bloom joy,
 return into your breast. that duty pass,
 my sword shall lend its vigour to the cause
 — the sacred cause, which arm our christian legion,
 and drain our city of their valorous knight. 

osmida eye, beam with new-born hope,
 and gratitude awake, shoot forth her thought,
 ere from she vermeil lip these accent stole
 — in breath more fragrant than a eastern morn:
 will thou remember i at zion gate? 
and shall my sorrow from the holy cave,
 in which the saviour draw his second breath,
 ascend to the almighty throne? — again
 she stop, and check her grow frankness. 
the stranger see instinctive prudence rise,
 and fear to give the virtue time to act. 
yes, he rejoin, with zeal more pure and ardent
 than convert feel, who, at the holy altar,
 bewail a life of curse idolatry,
 will i your sorrow pour, in that bless spot
 where sorrow sure can plead in vain. 

strike with the piety which deck his word,
 yet doubt still, the timid, trust virgin,
 in silence, with herself thus cogitate:
 a christian knight he be, and with his life
 now hasten to support the christian cause. 
ocean and continent will soon divide we:
 why then the knowledge of my woe withhold,
 when bless benevolence demand the tale? 
then, turn to the stranger, meek say
 — such kind persuasion confidence demand;
 yet patience will you need, while i relate
 event so strong, they fit will become
 a manly tongue. of battle i must speak,
 of fall kingdom, and victorious arm. 
these strain accord not with a female voice;
 yet will i strive to nerve my thought and language,
 and raise my fancy to the lofty theme. 
but not alone of war shall i discourse,
 of meet army, or contend state. 
— here on this slope bank, sir knight, repose;
 and i a tale — for pity — will unfold,
 be pity tear innumerous as the sand. 

the knight, with token of respect, obey. 
Osmida, with the grace of sweet reserve,
 at gentle distance, near the moss-grown root
 of a expand beech, a wood-nymph seem
 — a woodland goddess! and her grassy seat
 chaste dian rural throne. grave recollection
 on her sweet feature spread a air compose;
 while in night zenith — amid her radiant court,
 the crystal moon seem fix in still attention:
 the silent water of the lake more silent flow:
 the zephyr, draw close their silken wing,
 in soft subjection hold the rustle branch:
 the wheel bat far off her circle draw;
 while the night sweet musician still her song,
 to learn a sad note — from fair Osmida. 
all thus in silence wrap, the thoughtful maid,
 with tone sedate, begin the promise tale. 

this happy clime — this arragonian realm,
 have late a monarch, who her son revere;
 — as king revere he, as a father love:
 he love his people, know no care but they;
 and the fond blessing, which they give his name,
 blunt the thorn a diadem conceal. 
peace, in this happy reign, her throne establish,
 and bring her proper blessing in her train;
 fair commerce wave her pennon in our port;
 the fertile plough subdue our sterile field;
 our granary, like those of Egypt, draw
 from neighbour country, riches and renown. 
the cottage peasant, round his well-filled board,
 see thankful face and content heart:
 no iron tax gripe his pallid frame,
 nor tear the morsel from his child mouth:
 blithe as the morn he rise to healthful labour,
 and hail, with joy, the approach of festive eve. 

such once the favour lot of envy Arragon. 
her fame, her riches, spread to the east,
 entice the moor from their pollute home:
 sudden their prow invade our peaceful sea;
 — sudden the bold barbarian crowd our shore;
 defenceless hamlet turn unnatural beacon,
 and blaze the woe-fraught tiding through the land. 
like a night-torrent, fierce, unchecked, they come
 with devastation at their courser heel;
 death, rapine, ruin, mark their dreadful progress,
 and reach the bulwark of the royal city. 

deep consternation spread through every street;
 the affright virgin to the temple run;
 the mother grasp her child, and shriek fly;
 while husband, father, brother, all in arm,
 chide the dear mourner who retard their speed,
 snatch last adieu, and rush upon the wall. 

but from the wall, what image strike the view! 
a turbane phalanx on the hill appear,
 rapid descend to the plain below. 
upon the right advance a mighty column,
 of arm chariot form — so thick set
 with scythe, and sword, and barb spear, each seem
 a steely porcupine; who burnish quill,
 catch the ray of the meridian sun,
 gleam back upon the town refulgent horror. 
upon the left hand move the tawny marksman,
 who ebon bow, and quiver rich store,
 they sing, be give by death — unerring archer! 

the dreadful pomp descend to the plain,
 fix their bold standard, and entrenchment form,
 — while our scar citizen observe their work,
 like tremble bird, who, look from their nest
 upon the charm cockatrice, behold
 inevitable fate. but black despair,
 that first enerved, next lend their courage fury:
 lead we! they cry — lead to the moorish camp! 
what be their number, single as they come? 
with we, our parent, child, lover, law,
 religion, liberty — all join the battle,
 — brace our firm arm, and give ten thousand point,
 ten thousand death, to every christian sword. 

this holy rage, like spark electric, fly
 from man to man. each urge his valiant friend,
 to save their city, matron, daughter, wife,
 — as if on each their preservation hang. 
scarce can the pious king restrain their ardor,
 so sure they seem of conquest and revenge. 
but he, who know that from the almighty arm
 their foes destruction only can proceed,
 the gate of every temple open throw,
 and, with humiliation deep, repair
 before the sacred altar of our god. 
the soldier, citizen, the noble crowd,
 and every holy roof grow instant vocal. 
prostrate and weep, they implore the high
 for gideon sword, and mighty Joshua arm. 
 "shield we!" they cry — "oh, save thy faithful people! 
nor give we to the mocker, for a scorn! 
omnipotence! preserve we from the yoke
 the foe prepare for our devote neck! 
humble the boaster, who repose their strength,
 not on thy arm, but in their own frail number! 
to thou! o god of battle! we appeal. 
hear, hear our voice!" — when lo! from heaven bright concave,
 in gracious intimation, that their prayer,
 waft by guardian spirit, reach the throne,
 a mighty peal of thunder rapt their ear,
 and purple lightning quiver in the sky. 

the arragon, with hope thus sanctify,
 rush from the temple, like impetuous flame;
 — or like fierce tiger, who their destine prey
 at distance see; and pant, and foam, and rage,
 with pride of certain conquest. but their prince
 strive this incautious ardor to restrain. 
— all-bounteous heaven, he cry, by mean, not miracle,
 decide the fate of army, and of king. 
let prudent foresight, then, direct your aim,
 lest rashness blight the harvest of your courage! 
the haughty moor, contemptuous of our strength,
 doubtless expect to see our open gate
 receive they, master, at the trumpet signal:
 to aid their blindness, we will offer make,
 of term too humble for a state in freedom,
 and yet too high for conqueror to accept. 
then, in the night meridian, when no star,
 with telltale beam upon our polish mail,
 shall show we to the watchful centinel,
 — then will we rouse the lion from his den,
 and prove our courage worthy of our cause. 

the hum note of grow apprchation,
 like distant thunder, gain on the ear,
 break forth at once into applausive shout. 
live! live the king! re-echoed every mouth;
 o guard my people! say the heart-touched king. 

the herald send, and their mislead term,
 to blind, with fear unfelt, the moorish camp,
 all now prepare, for the wish hour of onset. 
the sound anvil beat their clang music;
 peace-rusted sword regain their edge and polish;
 the nervous archer try his idle bow,
 and give new plumage to his missile dart. 
the matron, virgin, catch the martial fire:
 these song prepare, these rosy garland twine,
 to greet, on their return, the conquer hero. 

yet, among the virgin, one sad heart be find;
 it be in the bosom of the royal princess. 
her vow, her plight troth, have long be give
 to young montenos, duke medina heir. 
he, only he, can melt her icy breast;
 — none can so well deserve a untouched heart. 
his mind, more noble than his princely birth,
 lent glory to his name: matchless his form! 
as poet feign celestial virtue wear,
 when visible to man. oh! wonder not,
 the princess love with strength no common flame
 can have inspire! her soul be full of love:
 she live, she breathe, she think, but for montenos. 
ten thousand terror now besiege her soul;
 ten thousand nothing, which her fancy dress
 in colour, substance, circumstance, and form. 
yet, from her lover, it be her care to hide
 the tender weakness which her heart confess. 
shall i, she cry, a mighty kingdom heir,
 show terror that the humble maid despise? 
my country rock upon a precipice. 
— go then, montenos! prop she fall state! 
repel the invader! tread on slavery neck! 
and among her dear preserver be thou chief! 

the shade of eve advance, and from the camp
 the subtle messenger return — return
 with insult load, and contemptuous threat. 
no less the moor demand than general vassalage;
 that conquer Arragon — so proud their style! 
shall yield they homage, and perpetual tribute. 
a day they grant we to resolve on slavery,
 — to turn apostate, and revolt from heaven,
 or see our tower extend in the dust. 
no term or messenger they will receive;
 but open gate, and crescent on our spire,
 the answer they expect. this lofty menace
 less with surprise than anger be receive;
 — it speak the spirit of the fierce invader. 

some hour — tremendous pause! be yet to pass
 between this period, and that mean for action:
 gloomy suspense sit brood over the army,
 and hide, not damp, the ardor of their courage. 
all, self-collected, seem retire within,
 and the full mind have render language mute. 
at this grand moment, when no thought of aid,
 — of human aid, have glance across the soul,
 in from the western gate — like bee return
 from their diurnal circuit — rush amain
 ten thousand son of war. at this bless sight,
 such transport seize the citizen, and troop,
 it seem triumphant holiday, and joy
 will even in frolic sport — so sudden the effect. 
to leon king we owe this grateful succour:
 he hear the moor be hover on our coast,
 and, as a christian king, the cause adopt. 

but now the street, choke up with arm man,
 pour back their warrior through the western portal:
 there, in the marshy vale, that to the north
 extend its rich campaign, the army grow
 in form. pardon if i, a simple maid,
 can relate, sir knight! in artful term,
 how, in what order grow. i have not skill
 to use the phrase chance have give my ear.
 be i to speak of flank, and rear, and van,
 you will find my tongue to wild confusion lead. 
— learn then but this: the king the centre keep;
 montenos, stately pine! lead on the front. 

the stranger bow reply, in mute respect. 
Osmida, gentle pause, thus resume:

the tender twilight, which till now have look
 with timid eye upon the martial plain,
 withdraw her beam, to follow distant day:
 night, oft invoke, advance her ebon standard,
 to which all nature yield well-pleased obeisance:
 but iron war, scornful of nature law,
 make rest his captive, and the ear of silence
 frequent invade, while from the throne of night,
 coëval power! she rule the drowsy world. 
so now through arragonia street, his march
 — unmeasured by the drum imperious note,
 in awful pomp he take. balcony crowd
 shower down their blessing as the soldier pass,
 while thousand voice spend themselves in prayer,
 and thousand ardent eye appeal to heaven. 

at length arrive towards the eastern tower,
 the army make a momentary halt. 
when, lo! the holy prelate, with a train
 of cloister saint, barefooted, rob in white,
 and hold each a crucifix, advance. 
you more than warrior, say the man of god,
 you christian soldier, think who sword you bear! 
the barbarous nation of the earth, who ear
 be never bless with sound of gospel truth,
 have yet achieve such wondrous deed in arm,
 as will convey their name, with glory deck,
 to the remote age in time be dark womb. 
a thousand nation have for freedom fight,
 a thousand other for revenge have arm,
 and give destruction to offend foe:
 to save their matron from the brutal rape,
 their daughter from pollution arm, have send
 victorious myriad to th'imbattled field. 
all these you fight for; but you fight for more —
 — you fight for Christ. see here! behold your saviour! 
tear on the rack cross! these wound for you
 be give. this blood — this sacred blood! for you
 gush forth, and mingle with corruption. go then! 
bleed, agonise, and die for he! rapt seraphim
 be now prepare your celestial crown:
 — go and achieve they! choirs of holy angel
 now tune their golden harp, and hymn prepare
 to greet you conqueror in the gate of heaven:
 — go! bless soldier — go! 

the father cease. 
from every mouth burst forth — as if one soul,
 one voice, through all the army reign — "we go!" 
inspire thus by the priest heroic charge,
 each seem to press to be the early victim;
 their soul on fire, be eager to depart
 the earthly sphere, and seize on their immortal crown. 
thus rapt, the soldier pass; and through the gate,
 like mist exhal from the earth moist bosom,
 spread on the surface of the hostile plain. 
the gate shut close their wide-extended jaw,
 — shut close for ever, on the valiant youth,
 who foot now leave they — to return no more:
 but they, by other hope than life inspire,
 march on; while night her curtain close draw
 to hide their progress from the watchful foe. 
in vain the night her sable curtain draw,
 and bid the star keep hoodwink in their course;
 for faithless echo to the moorish guard
 betray the distant sound of pace step. 
from guard to guard the hasty signal fly,
 and shoot like meteor through the dark expanse. 
the infidel, alarm, seem all in motion,
 while the faint quiver light, that late serve
 to guide the hunter in their dangerous chace,
 now blaze and multiply, till all the camp
 a vast illumination seem, that gild
 with dreadful splendour the surround gloom. 
our troop, undaunted, quicken as they tread,
 and hasty march grow to eager speed. 
to arm! to arm! the scar besieger cry. 
your arm be here! the advance foe reply,
 — thirst to drench their sword in moorish blood! 

silence, no long useful, now give way
 to all the dreadful din that battle love. 
the haughty trumpet, and the vigorous drum,
 with the shrill fife acute voice, accord
 to summon valour in the fearful heart. 
the moor rush forth, impetuous and confuse. 
no order think on, and no order hear:
 some to the trench, some to the chariot fly
 to buckle to the shaft the fright horse:
 — the restive steed reject accustom yoke,
 dash their fierce leader wild to the earth,
 then, plunge, bind along the beamy plain. 

our troop have gain the ditch, and to the beard
 of the besieger — now besiege, advance,
 ere the first panic leave their courage calm
 — the battlo fury in a instant spread,
 and all its horror rage mature at once. 
the bow be useless; throat to throat they fight;
 — foe mix with foe, rank press on hostile rank,
 till each be lose, and form one dreadful whole. 
death never triumph as he triumph now;
 — with hasty victim never be so gorge:
 he who be kill, by another slay;
 and he, in finish his blow, partake
 the fate he give. scarce have the army join
 ere thousand soul have pass the eternal bourn:
 on every side bulwark of dead appear
 — torrent of reek gore. the blood of moor
 and christian form one common flood, and roll
 its heavy tide in stagnant stream along. 

say, stranger, have thou see the warlike sport. 
yearly present in our vast steccado? 
superior to the rest, the bull-fight claim
 glorious preeminence. forth from their den
 the bellow monster rush, and the earth ring
 beneath their haughty hoos. the ireful foam
 run from their churn jaw; their burnish horn
 now raze the earth, now proud toss in air,
 challenge the wait warrior to the combat:
 the wait warrior, ardent for the sign,
 dart on their foe: the lordly beast evade
 the well-aimed spear, and, clad in native might,
 scorn the bright corslet and the nod helm:
 onward they rush — while deathful fury burst
 in livid sparkle from their blood-red eye;
 they gore the generous steed, their rider crush,
 or send they clash through the dusty air. 
throughout the concave, sound the eager plaudit,
 and boisterous admiration speak the joy:
 at length the favourite bull — he who the keeper,
 for fire and strength, superior to the rest,
 have long mark out, be loose upon the plain:
 all marvel cease the instant he appear;
 and what seem wondrous but a moment since,
 have now no tongue to speak the mighty act
 — so much beyond all think his deed excel
 the glorious devastation of his peer. 
just so montenos shine among the hero
 who bitter chastisement the moor endure. 
wherever he move, destruction mark his progress,
 and death seem couchant on his ponderous axe. 

the night, so dreadful! lengthen out her hour,
 as though she stay to view the battle conflict,
 or hide its horror from the spring day. 
at length the glow portal of the east
 disclose the morn — in splendour she arise;
 but, as if grief-struck at the murderous scene,
 her face in humid cloud she instant wrap,
 and seem to weep in drop of sacred pity. 
yet conquest cease not, with her vigorous arm,
 to plant her banner over the reek field:
 — for we her banner wave — for we she triumph,
 and victory sing loud iö for the christian. 

the moor, now see that his scatter host
 have their chief leader lose — their number waste,
 like sift corn before the drive tempest,
 for quarter call. his troop, upon their knee,
 yield up their arm, and Mahomet invoke,
 to screen his worshipper from dread vengeance;
 but christian soldier be not for revenge,
 nor know to trample on a vanquish foe. 
their homage be accept, and their chief,
 with lower front, and heart by malice gnaw,
 follow the victor in their march triumphant. 
strait to the city-gate they bend their course,
 where from the wall the holy priest have watch
 the issue of the fight. there too, the princess
 — in horror exquisite! have pass the night. 
judge then her rapture, her exalt joy,
 when she behold, on their victorious march,
 betroth montenos, and her royal sire! 
forth to the plain — heedless of form, she rush:
 her virgin follow, and the reverend priest,
 lead by the holy bishop, form her train. 
the day — as if she bear a active part
 in all th'event her teem hour bring forth —
 chace the dark cloud, unveiled her radiant face,
 and give new glory to the scene she view. 

the king approach — the princess, at his foot,
 adore the mighty arm which thus restore he,
 load with laurel, from the deathful field:
 her valiant lover, lead in his hand
 the moorish prince, with eager pace advance,
 to claim his share of her enrapture welcome. 
receive, he cry, a conquest which your eye,
 and not my sword, achieve. inspire by you,
 who can resist my arm? this princely foe,
 who wonder act, and who arm deserve
 a righteous cause; by you, bright maid, subdue,
 your victim i present. the sullen prince
 scarce deign to lift his eye; when, with a grace
 no fancy can portray, the gallant youth
 make to his mistress this heroic gift. 
oh fatal present! gift replete with woe! 
why do not heaven in its mercy send
 its wing shaft, and at that instant strike
 the royal maid, where, fix with joy, she stand! 
then have her breast, untorn with throb anguish,
 sink peaceful — alas! where rove my tongue! 
let i, in order, lead you to the sequel. 

it needless be my story to prolong
 in paint scene your fancy will supply:
 the joyful entry, and triumphant feast,
 devout procession, and heroic sport,
 all these be fruitful theme, and will demand
 a time the wane night deny. in brief,
 the captive prince a mighty ransom offer,
 with league of amity and last peace. 
the term accept, galley be dispatch
 to bring the barter price of his redemption. 
mean while he join the game, and seem to lose
 his barbarous roughness in the toil of pleasure. 
alas! in other toil his mind be catch;
 the princess seem too lovely to zorador,
 who sensual soul she touch with fierce passion. 
he dare to speak of love, and to herself
 vaunt his bold hope; while he behold approach
 the day, which be to join in nuptial band
 the royal maiden and her love montenos:
 the marriage sport already be prepare,
 and yet the moor, audacious! talk of love. 
— repulse with just disdain, he to the king
 his lovesick tale, with sullen port, address:
 i be not use, he cry, to offer crown,
 and have they spurn, like vulgar lovers toy. 
give i your daughter! i will give she a throne:
 dominion she shall have, to which your Arragon,
 with all its boast field, and blush vineyard,
 seem but a fertile spot; so vast the country
 who sceptre i command! the king firm answer
 show the proud infidel, his suit be vain;
 and, that a christian princess, to a subject
 more fit will be match, than with the monarch
 of wide-stretched continent — who wretched son
 be teach to scorn the doctrine of a Christ. 
zorador fury to such transport grow
 at this destruction of his hope, he seem
 no long man — his eye-ball glare with madness;
 his foamy rage — like a tempestuous sea
 lash her shore in vain — spare not himself:
 his beard in frightful fragment strew the floor;
 while his inflate bosom rack within,
 without resound from his barbarous blow. 
he curse, blaspheme, and weep: his strength exhaust
 leave he at length, as though a wakeful sleep
 have seize his faculty, and numb the fire
 which fill his torrid vein. his slave, who oft
 behold their lord a victim to himself,
 bear to his couch the prostrate harmless tyrant;
 and there, with tremulous lute and vocal harmony,
 in sweet enchantment wake he from his trance. 
his haughty soul, that scorn all other law,
 will yield to music all her boisterous passion
 — hang on each strain, melt at each magic note,
 and transient virtue catch from trill air. 

compose, at length, or mask what he feel,
 again zorador seek the pensive king;
 pardon, he cry, oh prince! a wretch undo! 
forgive the frenzy of a heart unsteel
 by disappointment shock. nurse by prosperity,
 by fortune follow, i have learn — fond man! 
that fate, that earth, that heaven, for i combine,
 and from misfortune hallow my encircle head. 
your powerful arm, o king of Arragon! 
first teach zorador that he be a man;
 and now your daughter be still more powerful eye
 have teach zorador, that he be a slave. 
master and tyrant of a thousand beauty,
 who court my passion, live for my delight,
 i breathe, unknow that i have a heart,
 till cruel love, wrap in despair wild torment,
 give all its nerve a sense of curse existence! 
i love — with agony — with madness, love! 
oh, spare i then the horror of a sight
 my fiery brain split but to think on! save,
 — father of she who charm thus abject make i,
 save from the torture of her marriage rite,
 the heart which burn and waste with hopeless ardour! 
the linger moon have number all the hour
 that i allot for my fleet return:
 soon as the eastern wind invade their canvas,
 the belly sail will whiten all your channel,
 and their red streamer blush along your shore. 
my ransom pay, i quit these hostile wall,
 — where my lose peace will stay enchain for ever. 
then, while i bear my woe to distant sea,
 then may the spousal be triumphant sing,
 and not one wretch remain to curse the sound. 

here cease zorador; while the melt king,
 unable to withstand a claim so urge,
 grant his royal suitor all he ask. 
the moor, impress with thankfulness, retire,
 and the good monarch give medina heir
 command to curb his warm, impetuous wish,
 until his rival seek his native sky. 

the shift wind soon waft to our port
 the moorish squadron. to the capital
 the fleet camel bear the various treasure
 mean for redemption of their captive prince. 
stuff, ingot, ivory, form their precious burden;
 carpet of Persia, hang wrought with gold,
 muscovian sable, scarf enrich with pearl;
 silk robe, by grecian damsel teach to glow
 in flower of vivid tint, and bud so prompt,
 they seem to blow beneath the gazer eye;
 sabre with glitter hilt of curious art,
 and scimitar who sheath diamond illume,
 and sanguine ruby die; all these be bear
 in pompous march, through saragossa street;
 while haughty courser, from arabia hill,
 champ gold bit, adorn with sumptuous house,
 — or bearing turkish tent of gaudy drapery,
 shut, from the wonder-loving crowd, the long procession. 
and now approach the joyful, wished-for morn,
 who breath upon our happy plain the moor
 be doom to leave. zorador, with such port
 as disappointment give to tumid spirit,
 make to the king and princess his adieu. 
he leave the city with a train of slave,
 shed profuse, as they pass along,
 rich shower of gold upon the gape rabble,
 — who venal voice pierce heaven with "live zorador! 

soon as the tiding of the moors departure
 our speedy courier bring, the word be give
 to make all ready for the royal marriage. 
rapture montenos, madden with his bliss,
 can scarce support the intermediate hour
 that lead, with lag step, the nuptial morn. 
the nuptial morn arrive — rouse from her slumber
 by the shrill voice of silver clarion, join
 by the soft hautboy, the seducive lute,
 and sweet pipe of choral maid, symphonious. 
forth from the palace to the church, through street
 with carpet lay, and myrtle garland hang,
 the glad procession lead its lengthen train. 
the king, beneath his canopy of state,
 precede by his guard, first object move:
 next to his suite the princess, blush, follow;
 her train uphold by twenty noble maid,
 who beauty, in their snowy robe, seem chastity
 incarnate. next, at distance — as of rank
 that yet allow not of a royal state,
 montenos walk, succeed by the court. 

the king have almost reach the holy portal,
 when from the crowd a youth advance, who catch
 each wonder eye. his face, a mask — design
 for youthful beauty, hide. his airy form
 seem worthy such a face. his habit tissue,
 emboss with purple stud. his flow hair
 with knot of pearl be tie, and on his head
 a garland bloom. a ivory flute he hold,
 through which he breathe such melt, touch, strain,
 that harmony herself have stay to listen. 
as he approach, the soldier clear his way,
 till in the front before the guard he stand. 
the princess come, while he, with reverence low,
 and soft breathe, seem to great her presence. 
she pass; the bridegroom come — in quick note
 he bid his music flow; and, forward step,
 offer, with courteous air, the tuneful pipe. 
montenos, smile, stretch his hand, when — horror! 
his breast receive the flute, which hide a poniard —
 — a second blow, ere thought can be recall;
 the third, the murderer on himself bestow,
 and welter drop into the arm of death. 

astonishment usurp each vital faculty,
 and root all who see the bloody deed. 
the bridegroom, sink on assassin corps,
 rouse from their trance his horror-struck attendant;
 while the chill sound of death! montenos! murder! 
flee to the wretched maid — almost a wife. 
not dare to demand the cause; her pulse,
 stop by congeal fear, forbear its office,
 and a kind stupor hide she from her woe. 

back to the palace, now, the die bridegroom,
 by knight in hymeneal robe be bear,
 while other drag his murder mangle corps,
 to search for motive to the cruel deed. 
his mask unclasp, disclose a wellknown face
 — a mute he be, and in zorador train. 
a fiendlike scroll, conceal within his vest,
 develop all the murderous hellborn project. 
these be its word: "it be not the slave, but i,
 who give the blow. vengeance, if not my love,
 shall be appease. learn, king of Arragon! 
learn both to know and dread the scorn zorador!" 

such be the line which bear the stamp of fate. 
the lovely victim of the moor revenge,
 breathe not a word, but strain his beamless eye
 to find the object that his heart last pulse
 adore — not see she, they seem to shut
 all other out — and death, with hasty seal,
 close their dim lid in everlasting sleep. 

here pause the virgin, as immerse in thought;
 the story, fraught with woe, have cast a shade
 of deep sorrow over her pensive brow:
 her labour bosom send forth heavy sigh,
 and her sad mind seem lose in one idea. 
the knight, who eager grow to know the tale
 she promise of herself, presume at length
 to bring her recollection to the point;
 at which her rosy lip their portal close,
 and cease to charm he with their touch accent. 

i will not, stranger! say the fair narrator,
 tax your attention with event unneedful,
 the court distress, the sorrow of the king,
 the bride, th'unwedded bride, forlorn distraction. 
long tedious month lead round their joyless sun,
 ere comfort beam upon her widow heart;
 nor then, till, at the tomb of her lose lord,
 her solemn vow she make, never to hear
 a lover soothe tale; but, in virginity
 perpetual, wait the hour that shall unite
 her faithful spirit with her murder lord. 

this duty pay, a dawn, like that of peace,
 by soft degree illume the mourner mind. 
the court, prompt in expedient to divest
 misfortune of her sting, ransack all pleasure,
 invent fresh delight, new joy invoke,
 for their sweet antidote to poisonous grief. 

thus have two year their slow-revolving hour
 bring to the great account; when from the east
 a dark portentous cloud, labour with ill,
 pregnant with thousand woe, obscure the horizon. 
zorador — he who soul from inmost hell
 be send to scourge the earth — not glut yet
 with all the horrid joy that wait on vengeance,
 not yet forgive our triumphant arm,
 which shear the laurel his whole life have reap,
 — again come pour, like a mighty deluge,
 to overwhelm the land in last ruin. 

he come. — why shall i lengthen out my tale? 
our nation force, oppose to the moor army,
 be kindle torch to obscure the sun. 
again we see they hover on the hill:
 again we see — like famine-bringing locust,
 their host descend, and spread upon the plain. 
no parley, as at first, they will allow:
 their battering-ram the messenger they use;
 — arrow and catapult, their kill word. 
a dreadful day our troop sustain the siege,
 and fill the breach with their slaughter foe. 
at length, a billet on a javelin point
 the rampart pass, denounce rape and sackage,
 if stubborn our citizen delay
 to own zorador conqueror and king. 
the threat effect all the moor have hope,
 and arragon grey monarch be abandon
 by those who right he will guard with his blood,
 — by those his smile have cherish, and his honour grace. 

the throneless sovereign, when he see his gate
 open their faithless jaw t'admit the foe,
 rush, in distraction, to his daughter chamber:
 fly! let we instant fly! he gasp say;
 the moor have vanquish, and my child all slave. 
their standard now insult our conquer street,
 and curse zorador will not long delay,
 within my palace wall to assert his right. 
come then, my daughter! lest dishonour find thou,
 and kill they parent with a thousand death! 
the princess, who affliction have subdue,
 and teach a firmness stranger to her year,
 grasp her love father hand — lead i, she cry,
 where providence ordain! my duteous step
 shall ever follow you, soften your path,
 and cheer, to life last sigh, your rugged journey. 

a golden casket, as she speak, she seize,
 that hold, till now, a hoard useless treasure;
 and through the gallery, with breathless haste,
 and step precipitate, follow the king,
 — unknowing to what corner of the earth
 to point their foot, or who they shall intrust
 with their adventurous flight. a faithful lord,
 in this sad exigence, with cordial word,
 the royal fugitive thus meet and cheere. 
 "o sire! from arlos take the only duty
 that stormy fate now suffer he to pay:
 my horse wait, close to the garden wall,
 with trusty knight to guide you to my castle. 
dread the worst, i have prepare this refuge,
 when the fell moor begin his fierce assault. 
for i, i will stay and greet, with smile deceitful,
 zorador, who i hate, to ward, if possible,
 what further ill his malice may devise." 

the king embrace, with fervent gratitude,
 the noble youth — and follow where he lead. 
there a close chariot, harness and attend,
 wait to bear they from the dangerous spot. 
the fly steed seem conscious of their office,
 and instant cleave the air with eagle swiftness. 
mean while the moorish troop rush through the gate,
 and on our bulwark fix their haughty standard. 
no term the citizen obtain, but those
 of vassalage and unconditioned slavery;
 while their chief officer be instant swear
 to be allegiant to the swarthy infidel. 
mean time, with speed, towards the royal palace,
 as to his home, zorador bend his course;
 vaunt, that now the christian king shall, kneel,
 ask he to wed the daughter who he woo
 with offer throne, and be, with scorn, reject. 
but, when he find no sovereign to insult,
 no princess to affront with odious passion,
 his furious transport make a thousand victim. 
the nobles house be with strictness search:
 the church, monast'ry, be all defile
 by the unhallowed infidel, in vain. 
three day the search continue, when the moor,
 foam with disappoint pride, make oath,
 that, if the princess in eight day appear not,
 the convents-wall shall to the ground be rase,
 and their pure vestal sit his savage soldier. 

these dreadful tiding to the king and princess
 the faithful arlos send.  "my castle wall,"
 he say, "no long will protect my sovereign. 
the church itself will aid the keen pursuit,
 — deem it better that one royal maid
 shall feed the lust of a detest tyrant,
 than that their holy virgin shall become
 the prey of the licentious soldiery. 
fly then, my prince! the loyal knight, who hand
 present this testimony of my faith,
 will to a secret spot (where he himself
 asylum find) attend your wander step;
 — not wander long! for sure heaven, that try
 the virtue which it love, will reconduct you
 to your lose people arm, and rightful throne." 

the dark robe of night overspread the hemisphere,
 when at the castle Gonzales arrive. 
the royal pair, in humble weed disguise,
 instant forsake the hospitable roof,
 and seek untraveled wild, and gloomy desert. 
the spirit of the king, weigh down with sorrow,
 have sink beneath accumulate ill,
 have not wise heaven endue his daughter mind
 with strength to bear her grief, and cheer her father. 
with tender talk the tedious way she shorten;
 and, when exhaust nature ask recruit,
 hymned he to sleep beneath umbrageous tree. 
a whole day sun behold her duteous care:
 the moon arise, and still they journey on;
 but the succeed sun, with early beam,
 guide the traveller to a forest verge. 
here Gonzales the steed unreined, and drive,
 in envy freedom, to a neighbour mountain,
 lest their betray hoof shall guide pursuer
 to the asylum of the hunt king. 
in the wood centre they a cottage find,
 form, by misfortune hand, of humble clay:
 two room it have, in each a rustic bed;
 for stately chair, a bench; a rough-hew table,
 that never with other dainty have be fill,
 than labour cull from the surround herb;
 or from the vine — that in the desert air,
 with their delicious burden long have swell,
 nor find one tempt hand to ease the load. 

such the retreat the fugitive have find. 
adieu to gild roof, and chord minstrelsy! 
adieu to greatness, and unhealthful pomp! 
the wind now rustle through their straw-crowned cot,
 and bird, with wild-note sweet, compose their concert! 
full seven slow moon have turn their monthly orb,
 since Gonzales the cottage leave, and since
 no human sound, but their own pensive tone,
 have reach the princess and her father ear. 
what can i more? if my eventful tale
 have touch the chord of pity in your heart,
 and swell the sympathetic tear — soft tribute! 
by gentle mind, to sorrow ever pay,
 — know, it be no stranger woe i have relate;
 i be the object of my own sad story —
 it be the princess speak —

enough! exclaim
 the knight, spring with ardor from the bank,
 enough! our prize be find! and wealth and rank,
 and bright zuleda smile, be now de courci have! 
thus speak, to his lip he fix a bugle,
 who pierce sound ten thousand echo bear
 on airy wing, through the surround wood. 
the signal hear, six moor obey its voice,
 and spur their horse headlong through the glade. 
for these Osmida stay not. the false knight
 no soon speak his joy, than, like a fawn
 who from the neighbour thicket hear the voice. 
of the fierce wolf — she bound leave her seat,
 and flee to safe shade. a start star
 less rapid cleave the air, when Ethiop night
 show on her wanton breast his lucid trail. 

meanwhile, the royal cottager, who sleep,
 spite of his care, have woo to her embrace,
 break from her tempt arm. he call Osmida. 
listen in vain, to hear she cheer voice,
 he start from his couch, and, rob in haste,
 rush forth to seek she in her favourite haunt:
 dart his fearful eye across the lawn
 on which their cottage stand, close on its edge,
 — pant and breathless he behold his darling. 
with all the little strength that age have leave,
 he hasten to receive she. what his dread! 
when at his foot he see the princess drop,
 exclaim, as she fall, in faint voice,
 father! Almanzor! king! — the fear-struck monarch,
 unable from the mossy grass to raise
 its lovely burden, sink by her side,
 strive by his tear, and fond paternal voice,
 to rouse her torpid sense, and wake her soul. 
not guess at extremity of woe,
 which soon must burst upon his hoary head,
 he think some frightful reptile have surprise,
 and chill, with female fear, her timorous mind. 
but, oh! how short a while his fate allow
 this soft delusion! through the night still air
 the sound of human voice, and the clank
 of iron hoof, reveal a scene at once,
 that almost shake his soul from her frail tenement. 

the Gallic leader of the moorish band,
 (and sure no soil but gallia can produce
 a knight thus treacherous, thus complete form
 to guide a project hatch in nether hell!) 
mark with his eye osmida fly course. 
courage! he cry — as the base slave advance:
 all our past trouble, and our long fatigue,
 this happy hour repay. osmida find! 
find at the instant that my famish hope
 scarce lend a ray to guide i in the chace. 
when, through the tissue thicket, to my eye
 the friendly moon reveal she, hope prophetic
 call she Osmida — yet my eager tongue
 i dare not with that hope intrust, lest fear
 shall draw her veil upon the dangerous truth. 
in prayer she be employ; which instant teach i
 that piety must be the bait to snare she,
 — so win her confidence, and read her heart. 

Allah be praise! rejoin a beard infidel,
 freedom be we — zorador favour thy! 
but, christian, be thou sure thou have behold
 almanzor daughter? one fair maid, alas! 
we have already to our master bear
 for she he seek, and scarce with life escape,
 so fierce and rageful be zorador anger! 
the princess, self-acknowledged, say the knight,
 flee from this spot, scar at my bugle sound. 
a cottage, somewhere in the sombrous forest,
 conceal the trembler, and her age sire. 
i mark the road she take, and now will guide you
 to those who will not hail we — welcome guest. 
thus speak, he push onward through the wood,
 and soon espy the little peaceful dwelling,
 in which, for seven long month, the exile king
 have sigh his anguish to the pass wind. 
upon the earth they see the hoary monarch,
 support on his knee the droop head
 of his unhappy child: his hand be clasp,
 and raise towards that heaven which now allow
 sorrow to drain her vial on his brow. 

this move picture, even de courci eye
 can scarce see, with pity unsuffused. 
skilled in deceit, and hide a bad heart
 with all the polish learn in faithless court,
 he, with a air so meek, approach Almanzor,
 as though he seek he only to bewail
 the sad event that shut he from the world. 
the king, perhaps, have yield for a moment
 to the delusive hope his look inspire,
 have not the group of moor — who yet approach not,
 explain the dreadful purport of the visit. 

unhappy monarch! say the soft-tongued knight,
 much it afflict i that my barbarous fortune,
 from all zorador court, de courci choose
 to explore the sacred spot of your retirement. 
have not the tyrant at his hateful nod
 devote moor enough, and callous slave,
 use to the work of infamy and guilt,
 but i, a christian knight, must be select,
 to guide a enterprise so curse? — oh fate! 
thou never loadedst i with ill till now! 

the king, experience in mankind, see through
 the thin disguise of this most florid speech:
 he see the serpent in the spicy shrub;
 — he see the villain in the gentle eye. 
not deign a reply, he bend his head
 over the revive princess. oh, Osmida! 
exclaim afflict prince, thy beat pulse,
 thy dear return breath be now unwelcome. 
rather i will see those eye for ever close,
 this flutter heart fix by death potent voice,
 than thus receive thou back again to life. 

the royal virgin scarce-recovered faculty
 announce themselves in fear: "oh! let we fly,
 my father! — let we fly!" she murmur forth:
 "we be pursue — the knight! the wiley knight!" 
pursue, indeed! reply the weep king;
 pursue and catch. o! my heart be dear Osmida! 
they have we in their toil — we be lose! we be lose! 

rouse at this dreadful sound, the waken princess,
 start, throw round her eye — they meet de courci have! 
a grave-sent spectre, in the deep of night,
 scarce give such horror to the shrink sinner,
 as do de courci form, to shock Osmida. 
speechless, she hide her face, and clasp her father;
 who strive to inspire a calm his heart disown. 
the polish villain, who the black crime
 with impoliteness can not stain, withdraw,
 that the bewail mourner, unrestrained,
 may pour their anguish in each other breast. 
— vain be the task, to paint impassion scene
 which grief, and fear, and thousand rack thought,
 with glow horror, all conspire to fill. 

the courteous knight, observe where he stand,
 that the first torrent of their grief be spend,
 venture again to approach the wretched pair. 
pardon, illustrious prince! he cry, the slave,
 who harsh necessity, alas! compel
 to stop your converse with your beauteous daughter. 
zorador — he, who know no law but will,
 the small breach of who command, the rack,
 or more inevitable death await —
 — ordain, that soon as your retreat be find,
 a moment to delay shall not be give;
 but instant! maugre circumstance, or tear,
 that we shall bear to their forsake home
 unwilling princess, and her royal sire. 
now, if it please you, we must leave this desert,
 for haunt more fit to your royal rank. 

this mockery of respect, return the king,
 to those who you command, add point to insult. 
our master you; then treat we as your slave! 
the only boon i can descend to ask,
 be, that my daughter, in this fatal journey,
 may not be tear from i. from thou! ah, no,
 precipitant exclaim the royal maid. 
together let we go, whatever our fate! 
still let my filial voice my father cheer,
 and pierce the night of his collect sorrow! 

de courci seem to pause, when strait a moor,
 of port superior to the rest, thus answer —
 it be our sovereign will, that you, fair lady! 
shall hold no converse with your princely sire,
 until your arrival in your native city. 
doubt not, but then, each boon you ask, and all
 your fruitful fancy can devise, our master,
 gracious to charm like you, will grant with rapture. 
when beauty sue, he know not to deny. 
what then will be your beauty power? you —

the king, impatient and enrage, break in
 upon the moor. cease, Saracen! he cry,
 nor dare thus violate my daughter ear! 
or thou shall find, that in a desert, old,
 — unarmed, Almanzor be a king. lead on! 
and since high heaven ordain, thy impious master
 shall hold the balance of our fate, obey
 his harsh command! tear we asunder! yes! 
drag from the old man heart, the last sole joy
 his woe have leave to save he from despair. 
plunge i at once in horror deep abyss. 
not long — not long, my friend, will you afflict i. 
a shower of tear, that down his furrow cheek
 upon the bosom of Osmida fall,
 end a speech — which man steel by long use
 against the touch voice of heaven-born pity,
 can not unsoftened hear; but strive to palliate
 to their own heart, in coarse-spun sophistry,
 the baseness of their voluntary task. 

sprightly Aurora look through the cloud,
 which blush with pleasure at her near approach,
 chase from the hemisphere the pale-eyed moon,
 — who have so sweet shine, she seem until now
 the morning counterfeit. but oh! to misery
 whether the pale-eyed moon, or sprightly morn,
 or sun refulgent lead the pass hour;
 all, all alike, they undistinguished roll,
 one cheerless chaos, one impervious gloom. 

if to de courci, and the wonder moor,
 Osmida lovely seem — how lovely now! 
when brighten day disclose she to their view,
 one blaze of charm — charm of that tender cast,
 which sorrow do not sully, but become! 
her polish form be graceful as the antelope;
 her air majestic, as the sail eagle —
 when among the fleecy cloud he gentle wave,
 and view high Skiddaw, like a shrub below. 
her face a Raphael will have catch, to form
 a young madonna, bend over her child
 with brow serene, and love-distilling eye. 
her lock — such lock as nature only give
 once in a age, to perfect some rare beauty,
 seem like a golden veil — part hang before,
 shade a polish neck; which look, between
 the burnish thread, like pure ivory
 through gild net-work: part the zephyr snatch,
 play enamour in the beauteous toil:
 the rest in drop ringlet fall behind,
 and kiss the fold of her flow robe. 

such be the princess; who a moor now seize,
 and on de courci steed secure fix. 
a silken sash, hold by the treacherous knight,
 pass through osmida girdle, and enchain
 the mourn virgin, and her deadly foe. 
upon another steed be place Almanzor,
 behind a guide moor. this be the state
 the kingdom monarch, and the kingdom heir,
 be now constrain to use. no pompous guard,
 no blessing populace, no proud grandee,
 their step attend; — but oh! how small that grief,
 weigh with the horrid fear, the torture doubt,
 which fill their bosom, and absorb their thought! 

the leafy desert — which so long have seem
 a cheerless prison to the illustrious pair
 — they quit, with ache heart, and heavy sigh. 
its solitary shade — how welcome, now! 
its humble turf-formed cot, its devious glade,
 its choral grove, they will with rapture greet,
 and hail they, as the dear abode of peace. 

but these they have for ever — ever leave;
 and soon the forest verdant roof grow dun
 upon the distant eye. the eager moor,
 with spur and slacken reins, keep pour on,
 leave whole league obscure with float dust. 
the royal prisoner, scarce with a glance,
 can speak a thought, much less converse, and share,
 with kind participance, each other woe. 

thus they continue through untrodden wild,
 who savage echo never yet have learn
 to imitate the cordial voice of man:
 — the churn boar, and howl midnight wolf,
 have teach they all the language that they know. 
at length the sun, behind the western mountain,
 hide his pervade eye: the humid eve
 lead on her deepen shade, to quench the thirst,
 the feverish orb have leave, on plant and flower. 
the moor now strain their wistful eye,
 to meet some woodland, or some shelter cave,
 in which to court their strength-restoring sleep. 
the last they find — it seem to have be the haunt
 of fierce banditti — or more peaceful home
 of some sequester hermit; for its floor
 the chisel edge have smooth, and its low roof
 be rude fashion to a semi-dome. 
here the sad traveler be allow the rest
 which through the fervid day they will ask in vain. 
the princess, who soft limb be not inure
 to such extreme fatigue, sink lifeless down,
 soon as her foot have touch the solid earth. 
the age king, with scarce more strength, approach
 to catch his fall child — the flinty floor
 receive they both — Osmida and her sire. 

with care officious, the attend slave
 the duty of humanity perform. 
the princess they recover; and a spot,
 with their own garment, spread, to form a seat
 less rigurous than the rock, for its high inmate. 
parch corn, sun-candied grape, and racy wine,
 they place, respectful, before the king:
 exhaust nature crave the cordial draught;
 while to her sire request Osmida yield,
 and of the patriarchal feast partake. 

de courci and the moor dare not resign
 their heavy lid to sleep, but in rotation. 
two, the cave entrance guard; and the third,
 place near Almanzor, interruption give,
 whenever the royal parent and his child
 strive to beguile the melancholy hour
 with such sad converse as their grief allow. 
this have zorador order, lest Osmida
 shall from her father catch more fortitude
 to oppose his furious passion, than he think
 a female can possess. celestial chastity
 he hold a phantom breed from custom law,
 and that the magic of licentious love
 can melt its airy form — for now he mean
 to assert a conqueror right, and place the princess
 — not on a throne, but among his favourite slave,
 and make her sovereign of his loose seraglio. 

constrain to silence; sorrow bless physician
 steal by degree upon their ache eye. 
o soft enchanter, sleep! why do idolater
 never build thou temple? thou, who sweet dominion
 boundless extend, wherever nature breathe! 
thou, in who arm anguish forget her throb;
 chill want, the nip blast; and wild despair
 find gleam of comfort — i sing paean to thou, sleep! 

scarce have the mettle courser of the morn
 bring her gay chariot to horizon edge,
 and coif the mountain with her ruddy gold,
 — ere prompt de courci, and the watch moor,
 fly to caparison their graze steed. 
return quick, they rouse their torpid fellow,
 and last awake Osmida and the king. 
what a awaken! touch not, o my pen! 
upon the catch theme! of woe enamour,
 thou will hang too long upon the tear, the sigh,
 the grief-fraught word, with which they hail the day. 
— event more active ask thy little skill. 

some hour they have pursue their steady course,
 when, from a coppice border on the road,
 a arm troop rush forth. so quick their motion,
 de courci band, ere they behold their danger,
 be in a circle draw — more dreadful portentous,
 than wand of witch or visard ever form. 
the gallant knight, who at his girdle wear
 unwilling beauty, seem at once the object. 
three vizored warrior at his stirrup stand;
 two hold their lance to his throat; the third
 destroy the magic zone which hold the princess,
 and snatch her instant from de courci side. 
with such dispatch be this achievement make,
 the knight have scarce draw to save his prize,
 ere he behold she ravish from his arm
 — and at a distance from the astonish troop. 
turn, with fury, on his foe — who thus
 have all his splendid hope rest from his heart,
 he raise his arm, and aim a ponderous sword,
 where guiltless it can not have fall; when instant
 his unpoised body, with herculean force,
 be to the earth propel: breathless he lie,
 and trample steed soon fix he to the spot,
 from whence unhappy youth never rise again. 
the moor, undaunted at their leader fate,
 sustain th'assailant's shock, as if resolve
 their prisoner and their life shall both be lose,
 or undivided keep. two force their way
 towards the spot where, guard by her knight,
 the princess stand; three of the foe pursue,
 and make the path which lead to she, the road
 to death inglorious. the remain Saracens
 fight as those fight, who, know they must die,
 resolve the victor shall buy conquest dear. 
but he who at his crupper hold the king,
 more fierce than the rest — more mad fight. 
his fellow too hem in the struggle monarch;
 and, turn to the prince their horse haunch,
 form with their spear a threaten glory round he. 
when he who hold he — watch for the moment,
 break from the rest, and on the distant wind
 seem bear away. the demon who preside
 over evil act, and aid the deed that most
 partake of hell — sure his steed impel,
 and brace his sinew with unnatural vigor. 
his fiery eye, dart over hill and plain,
 scarce outstrip his hoof; the vale, the wood,
 his glance devour, be in a instant leave
 behind his feathery heel, that onward press —
 while the pursue, stretch, madden foe,
 behold new hill, new plain, new wood, arise
 between their courser and their ravish prince. 

meanwhile Osmida, in amazement lose,
 behold herself unchain, and yet not free. 
those who have hold her prisoner, she see slay;
 but who be these, who risk, thus gallant,
 their life for she and the dethrone king? 
perchance new master; perhaps again they be slave. 
scarce have this question, in her whirl of thought,
 have time to firm itself, ere at her side
 she see the noble arlos. — hence! vain fear. 
the magic touch of hope her bosom swell,
 and confidence chace every doubt away. 
raise the snowy veil which hide her face,
 she beam a smile upon the loyal knight,
 that in his mind overpay ten thousand danger. 
fly, my best arlos! say the charm maid,
 (as at her foot he kneel) and save the king! 
see where he sit, unarmed, amid his foe! 
be he in safety, all my thought be peace. 
the knight upspring, stay not to reply,
 but instant horse, spur onward to his troop:
 he troop he join, but not till the rich prize
 he fly to save, be ravish from his hope. 
three of the band he instant dispatch,
 to stop the progress of the fly Saracen. 
the few remain moor, urge by despair,
 still mad fight, prefer present death
 to the slow torture, which they know their tyrant
 will fail not to inflict, on those who lose
 the beauteous object of his brutal love. 
their wish they soon receive, and their free spirit
 seek the eternal shore. the princess now
 remain sole object of the care of arlos. 
with eager speed he seek the tremble maid,
 who see her parent bear over distant wild,
 and in that sight lose every new-born comfort. 
her tear bedew the senseless earth; her cry
 rend heaven, and her unconscious foot move quick
 towards the course, in which she see her father. 
arlos, in soothe term, implore the fair-one
 to moderate her grief. doubtless, he cry,
 the gallant youth, who now pursue the moor,
 will not pursue the fly slave in vain. 
they know the mazy road — each devious path,
 each secret turn — and will meet the villain
 when least he can suspect his danger. now,
 sweet princess! to my castle let i lead you. 
there, if not happy, yet at least secure
 your tear you may indulge, and feed your sorrow. 

scarce sensible to what be urge, Osmida
 allow herself once more upon a steed
 to be replace: her horseman, noble arlos;
 who through morass, underwood, and road
 almost impervious, bring his royal ward
 in safety to his mansion. oh! how bless
 this moment have appear, have the same roof
 that shelter she, be shelter to her father! 
that solace want, other lose their taste. 
her sorrow to suspend, arlos relate
 event that yet can not have reach her ear. 
the faithful Gonzales, he tell the princess,
 suspect by zorador, bear the rack
 with undiminished courage, nor confess,
 — though life be promise, and immense reward,
 the place of her retreat: that he, lord arlos,
 by wile and art, the jealous tyrant blind,
 who hold he true servant of the christian. 
thus, unsuspected, he have watch the road
 which lead towards her forest; with his life
 to rescue from the moor the royal fugitive,
 if fate malevolent shall ever betray they. 
another tale in pity he withhold:
 that the curse moor, insatiate in revenge,
 have cause montenos father, duke Medina,
 to die upon the block — on stale pretence,
 that he have form a plot to wrest the crown. 
his family he banish, their rich land
 confiscate make — and yet the tyrant live! 

as the sad princess hear, with grow horror,
 repeat act of cruelty scarce human;
 the knight return who have pursue her father. 
it be enough: she see they pass the gate,
 without the king; no circumstance be needful;
 none can she anguish lessen — none her woe increase. 
their tale scarce win attention. much they talk
 of hot pursuit, and of the villain speed;
 — that once his flag courser raise their hope,
 when sudden on a neighbour plain appear
 a troop of spahy in a mock engagement:
 the Saracen gain vigor at the sight;
 while those who follow, measure back their road,
 know the ruin of their lord inevitable,
 shall they, his faithful vassal, be discover. 

vain be th'attempt of arlos, to dispel
 the deep distress which seize osmida heart. 
the sweet word, ever frame by consolation,
 be spend upon the air. the young elvera,
 sister to arlos, lend her infant aid
 to cheer the royal guest; and with soft prattle,
 — kiss the drown rose on her cheek,
 strive to divide her sorrow-fixt attention. 
but, oh! her father be a wretched captive:
 what can abate the anguish of that thought? 
in vain surround slave watch every motion;
 in vain the ceiling rise on stately column,
 force their grandeur on the awe-struck eye;
 in vain the downy bed invite rest,
 beneath rich canopy imboss with gold. 
dear the russet pillar of the forest,
 who meet branch canopy the earth
 where stand her lonely cot. oh! dear far
 the humble couch on which her father head
 secure rest; where her ready hand
 his pillow smooth, and filial care excite
 sweet slumber! who, now, will watch his sleep,
 or sooth his grief to rest? who wait his wake,
 to cheer, with tender voice, the lengthen day? 

so speak the heart of the unhappy princess. —
 now to the hospitable care, her fate afford,
 we leave the mourner, and pursue the king. 
