liberty.

part v. 

here interpose, as the goddess pause, —
 "oh bless Britannia! in thy presence bless,
" thou guardian of mankind! whence spring, alone,
 "all human grandeur, happiness and fame:
" for toil, by thou protect, feel no pain;
 "the poor man lot with milk and honey flow;
" and, gild with thy ray, even death look gay. 
 "let other land the potent blessing boast
" of more exalt sun. let asia wood,
 "untended, yield the vegetable fleece:
" and let the little insect-artist form,
 "on high life intent, it be silken tomb. 
" let wonder rock, in radiant birth, disclose,
 "the various-tinctured child of the sun. 
" from the prone beam let more delicious fruit
 "a flavour drink, that in one pierce taste
" bid each combine. let Gallic vineyard burst
 "with flood of joy, with mild balsamic juice
" the Tuscan olive. let Arabia breathe
 "her spicy gale, her vital gum distil. 
" turbid with gold, let southern river flow;
 "and orient flood draw soft, over pearl, their maze. 
" let Afric vaunt her treasure; let Peru,
 "deep in her bowel her own ruin breed,
" the yellow traitor that her bliss betray, —
 "unequalled bliss! — and to unequalled rage! 
" yet nor the gorgeous east, nor golden south,
 "nor, in full prime, that new-discovered world,
" where flame the fall day, in wealth and praise,
 "shall with Britannia vie, while, goddess, she
" derive her praise from thou, her matchless charm. 
 "her hearty fruit the hand of freedom own;
" and, warm with culture, her thick-clustering field
 "prolific teem. eternal verdure crown
" her mead; her garden smile eternal spring. 
 "she give the hunter-horse, unqelled by toil,
" ardent, to rush into the rapid chace:
 "she, whiten over her down, diffusive, pour
" unnumbered flock: she weave the fleecy robe,
 "that wrap the nation: she, to lusty drove,
" the rich pasture spread; and she deep-wave
 "autumnal sea of please plenty round. 
" these her delight: and by no baneful herb,
 "no dart tiger, no grim lion glare,
" no fierce-descending wolf, no serpent roll
 "in spire immense progressive over the land,
" disturb. enliven these, add city, full
 "of wealth, of trade, of cheerful toil crowd:
" add thrive town: add village and farm,
 "innumerous fow along the lively vale,
" where bold unrivalled peasant happy dwell:
 "add ancient seat, with venerable oak
" embosomed high, while kindred flood below
 "wind through the Mead; and those of modern hand,
" more pompous, add, that splendid shine afar:
 "need i her limpid lake, her river name,
" where swarm the finny race? thou, chief, o Thames! 
 "on who each tide, glad with return sail,
" flow in the mingle harvest of mankind? 
 "and thou, thou Severn, who prodigious swell,
" and wave, resound, imitate the main? 
 "why need i name her deep capacious port,
" that point around the world? and why her sea? 
 "all ocean be her own, and every land
" to who her rule thunder ocean bear. 
 "she too the mineral feed: the obedient lead,
" the warrior-iron, nor the peaceful less,
 "form of life art-civilized the bond;
" and that the Tyrian merchant seek of old,
 "not dream then of britain bright fame. 
" she rear to freedom a undaunted race:
 "compatriot zealous, hospitable, kind,
" she the warm cambrian: she the lofty Scot,
 "to hardship tame, active in art and arm,
" fire with a restless a impatient flame,
 "that lead he rapture where ambition call:
" and english merit she; where meet, combine,
 "whatever high fancy, sound judicious thought,
" a ample generous heart, undrooping soul,
 "and firm tenacious valour can bestow. 
" great nurse of fruit, of flock, of commerce, she! 
 "great nurse of man! by thou, o goddess, teach,
" her old renown i trace, disclose her source
 "of wealth, of grandeur, and to briton sing
" a strain the muse never touch before. " 

 "but how shall this thy mighty kingdom stand? 
" on what unyielding base? how finish shine? " 

at this her eye, collect all it be fire,
 beam more than human; and her awful voice,
 majestic, thus she raise — "to briton bear
" this close strain, and with intenser note
 "loud let it sound in their awaken ear." 

on virtue can alone my kingdom stand,
 on public virtue, every virtue join. 
for, lose this social cement of mankind,
 the great empire, by scarce-felt degree,
 will moulder soft away; until, totter loose,
 they prone at last to total ruin rush. 
unblest by virtue, government a league
 become, a circle junto of the great,
 to rob by law; religion mild a yoke
 to tame the stoop soul, a trick of state
 to mask their rapine, and to share the prey. 
what be without it senate, save a face
 of consultation deep and reason free,
 while the determine voice and heart be sell? 
what boast freedom, save a sound name? 
and what election, but a market vile
 of slave self-bartered? virtue! without thou,
 there be no rule eye, no nerve, in state;
 war have no vigour, and no safety peace:
 even justice warp to party, law oppress,
 wide through the land their weak protection fail,
 first break the Ballance, and then scorn the sword. 
thus nation sink, society dissolve;
 rapine and guile and violence break loose,
 evert life, and turn love to Gall;
 man hate the face of man, and indian wood
 and lybia hiss sand to he be tame. 

by those three virtue be the frame sustain,
 of british freedom: independent life;
 integrity in office; and, over all
 supreme, a passion for the commonweal. 

hail! independence, hail! heaven next best gift,
 to that of life and a immortal soul! 
the life of life! that to the banquet high
 and sober meal give taste; to the bow roof
 fair-dreamed repose, and to the cottage charm. 
of public freedom, hail, thou secret source! 
who stream, from every quarter confluent, form
 my better Nile, that nurse human life. 
by rill from thou deduce, irriguous, feed,
 the private field look gay, with nature wealth
 abundant flow, and bloom with each delight
 that nature crave. it be happy master there,
 the only free-man, walk his please round:
 sweet-featured peace attend; fearless truth;
 firm resolution; goodness, bless all
 that can rejoice; contentment, sure friend;
 and, still fresh store from nature book derive,
 philosophy, companion ever-new. 
these cheer his rural, and sustain or fire,
 when into action call, his busy hour. 
mean time true-judging moderate desire,
 economy and taste, combine, direct
 his clear affair, and from debauch fiend
 secure his little kingdom. nor can those
 who fortune heap, without these virtue, reach
 that truce with pain, that animate ease,
 that self-enjoyment spring from within,
 that independence, active, or retire,
 which make the sound bliss of man below:
 but, lose beneath the rubbish of their mean,
 and drain by want to nature all unknown,
 a wander, tasteless, gaily-wretched train,
 though rich, be beggar, and, though noble, slave. 

lo! damn to wealth, at what a gross expense,
 they purchase disappointment, pain and shame. 
instead of hearty hospitable cheer,
 see! how the hall with brutal riot flow;
 while in the foam flood, ferment, steep,
 the country madden into party-rage. 
Mark! those disgraceful pile of wood and stone;
 those park and garden, where, his haunt be-trimmed,
 and nature by presumptuous art oppress,
 the woodland genius mourn. see! the full board
 that steam disgust, and bowl that give no joy:
 no truth invite there, to feed the mind;
 nor wit, the wine rejoice reason quaff. 
hark! how the dome with insolence resound,
 with those retain by vanity to scare
 repose and friend. to tyrant fashion mark! 
the costly-worship pay, to the broad gaze
 of fool. from still delusive day to day,
 lead a eternal round of lie hope,
 see! self-abandoned, how they roam adrift,
 dash over the town, a miserable wreck! 
then to adore some warble eunuch turn,
 with Midas 'ear they crowd; or to the buzz
 of masquerade unblushing: or, to show
 their scorn of nature, at the tragic scene
 they mirthful sit, or prove the comic true. 
but, chief, behold! around the rattle board,
 the civil robber range; and even the fair,
 the tender fair, each sweetness lay aside,
 as fierce for plunder as all-licensed' troop
 at some sack city. thus dissolve their wealth,
 without one generous luxury dissolve,
 or quarter on it many a needless want,
 at the throng leave bend the venal tribe:
 with fair but faithless smile each varnish over,
 each smooth as those that mutual deceive,
 and for their falsehood each despise each;
 till shake their patron by the wintery wind,
 wide fly the wither shower, and leave he bare. 
o far superior afric sable son,
 by merchant pilfer, to these will slave! 
and, rich, as unsqueeze favourite, to they,
 be he who can his virtue boast alone! 

briton! be firm! — nor let corruption sly
 twine round your heart indissoluble chain! 
the steel of Brutus burst the gross bond
 by Cesar cast over Rome; but still remain
 the soft enchant fetter of the mind,
 and other cesar rise. determine, hold
 your independence; for, that once destroy. 
unfounded, freedom be a morning dream,
 that flit aerial from the spread eye. 

forbid it heaven! that ever i need urge
 integrity in office on my son;
 inculcate common honour — not to rob. —
 and who? — the gracious the confide hand,
 that lavish reward; the toil poor,
 who cup with many a bitter drop be mix;
 the guardian public; every face they see,
 and every friend; nay, in effect, themselves. 
as, in familiar life, the villain fate
 admit no cure; so, when a desperate age
 at this arrive, i the devote race
 indignant spurn, and hopeless soar away. 

but, ah too little know to modern time! 
be not the noble passion past unsung;
 that ray peculiar, from unbounded love
 effuse, which kindle the heroic soul;
 devotion to the public. glorious flame! 
celestial ardor! in what unknown world,
 profuse scatter through the blue immense,
 have thou be blessing myriad, since in Rome,
 old virtuous Rome, so many deathless name
 from thou their lustre draw? since, teach by thou,
 their poverty put splendour to the blush,
 pain grow luxurious, and even death delight? 
o will thou never, in thy long period, look,
 with blaze direct, on this my last retreat? 

it be not enough, from self right understand
 reflect, that thy ray inflame the heart:
 though virtue not disdain appeal to self,
 dread not the trial; all her joy be true,
 nor be there any real joy save she. 
far less the tepid the declaim race,
 foe to corruption, to it be Wages friend,
 or those who private passion, for a while,
 beneath my standard list, can they suffice
 to raise and fix the glory of my reign? 

a active flood of universal love
 must swell the breast. first, in effusion wide,
 the restless spirit rove creation round,
 and seize every be: strong then
 it tend to life, whatever the kindred search
 of bliss ally: then, more collect still,
 it urge humankind: a passion grow,,
 at last, the central parent-public call
 it be utmost effort forth, awake each sense,
 the comely, grand and tender. without this,
 this awful pant, shake from sublime power
 than those of self, this heaven-infused delight,
 this moral gravitation, rush prone
 to press the public good, my system soon,
 traverse, to several selfish centre draw,
 will reel to ruin: while for ever shut
 stand the bright portal of despond fame. 

from sordid self shoot up no shine deed,
 none of those ancient light, that gladden earth,
 give grace to be, and arouse the brave
 to just ambition, virtue quicken fire! 
life tedious grow, a idly-bustling round,
 fill up with action animal and mean,
 a dull gazette! the impatient reader scorn
 the poor historic page; until kind come
 oblivion, and redeem a people shame. 
not so the time when, emulation-stung,
 Greece shine in genius, science, and in art,
 and Rome in virtue dreadful to be tell! 
to live be glory then! and charm mankind,
 through the deep period of devolve time,
 those, rapture, copy; these, astonish, read. 

true, a corrupt state, with every vice
 and every meanness foul, this passion damp. 
who can, unshocked, behold the cruel eye? 
the pale inveigle smile? the ruffian front? 
the wretch abandon to relentless self,
 equal vile if miser or profuse? 
power not of god, assiduous to corrupt? 
the fell depute tyrant, who devour
 the poor and weak, at distance from redress? 
delirious faction bellow loud my name? 
the false fair-seeming patriot hollow boast? 
a race resolve on bondage, fierce for chain,
 my sacred right a merchandise alone
 esteem, and to work their feeder will
 by deed, a horror to mankind, prepare,
 as be the dregs of Romulus of old? 
who these indeed can undetesting see? —
 but who unpitying? to the generous eye
 distress be virtue; and, though self-betrayed,
 a people struggle with their fate must rouse
 the hero throb. nor can a land, at once,
 be lose to virtue quite. how glorious then! 
fit luxury for god! to save the good,
 protect the feeble, dash bold vice aside,
 depress the wicked, and restore the frail. 
posterity, beside, the young be pure,
 and son may tinge their father cheek with shame. 

shall then the time arrive (which heaven avert!) 
that briton bend unnerved, not by the force
 of arm, more generous, and more manly, quell,
 but by corruption soul-dejecting art,
 art impudent! and gross! by their own gold,
 in part bestow, to bribe they to give All.
 with party rage, or immerse in sloth,
 shall they britannia well-fought laurel yield
 to slily-conquering Gaul; even from her brow
 let she own naval oak be base tear,
 by such as tremble at the stiffen gale,
 and nerveless sink while other sing rejoice. 
or (dark prospect! scarce one gleam behind
 disclose) shall the broad corruptive plague
 breathe from the city to the farther hut,
 that sit serene within the forest-shade;
 the sever people fire, inflame their want,
 and their luxurious thirst, so gather rage,
 that, be a buyer find, they stand prepare
 to sell their birthright for a cool draught. 
shall shameless pen for plain corruption plead;
 the hire assassin of the commonweal! 
deem the declaim rant of Greece and Rome,
 shall public virtue grow the public scoff,
 until private, fail, stagger through the land:
 until round the city loose mechanic want,
 dire-prowling nightly, make the cheerful haunt
 of man more hideous than numidian wild,
 nor from it be fury sleep the vale in peace;
 and murder, horror, perjury abound:
 nay, until to low deed the high stoop;
 the rich, like starve wretch, thirst for gold;
 and those, on who the vernal shower of heaven
 all-bounteous fall, and that prime lot bestow,
 a power to live to nature and themselves,
 in sick attendance wear their anxious day,
 with fortune, joyless, and, with honour, mean. 
meantime, perhaps, profusion flow around,
 the waste of war, without the work of peace;
 no mark of million in the gulph absorb
 of uncreat vice, none but the rage
 of rouse corruption still demand more. 
that very portion, which (by faithful skill
 employ) may make the smile public rear
 her ornament head, drill through the hand
 of mercenary tool, serve but to nurse
 a locust-band within, and in the bud
 leave starve each work of dignity and use. 

i paint the worst. but shall these time arrive,
 if any noble passion yet remain,
 let all my son all party fling aside,
 despise their nonsense, and together join;
 let worth and virtue, scorn low despair,
 exert full, from every quarter shine,
 commix in heighten blaze. light flash to light,
 moral, or intellectual, more intense
 by give glow. as on pure winter eve,
 gradual, the star effulge; faint, at first,
 they, straggle, rise; but when the radiant host,
 in thick profusion pour, shine out immense,
 each cast vivid influence on each,
 from pole to pole a glitter deluge play,
 and world above rejoice, and man below. 

but why to briton this superfluous strain? —
 good-nature, honest truth even somewhat blunt,
 of crooked baseness a indignant scorn,
 a zeal unyielding in their country be cause,
 and ready bounty, wont to dwell with they. —
 nor only wont — wide over the land diffuse,
 in many a bless retirement still they dwell. 

to soft prospect turn we now the view,
 to laureled science, art, and public work,
 that lend my finish fabric comely pride,
 grandeur and grace. of sullen genius he! 
curse by the muse! by the grace loathe! 
who deem beneath the public high regard
 these last enliven touch of my reign. 
however puff with power, and gorge with wealth,
 a nation be; let trade enormous rise,
 let east and south their mingle treasure pour,
 until, swell impetuous, the corrupt flood
 burst over the city and devour the land:
 yet these neglect, these recording art,
 wealth rot, a nuisance; and, oblivious, sink,
 that nation must another Carthage lie. 
if not by they, on monumental brass,
 on sculpture marble, or the deathless page
 impress, renown have leave no trace behind:
 in vain, to future time, the sage have think,
 the legislator plan, the hero find
 a beauteous death, the patriot toil in vain. 
the awarder they of fame immortal wreathe,
 they rouse ambition, they the mind exalt,
 give great idea, lovely form infuse,
 delight the general eye, and, dress by they,
 the moral Venus glow with double charm. 

science, my close associate, still attend
 whereve i go. sometime, in simple guise,
 she walk the furrow with the Consul-Swain,
 whisper unlettered wisdom to the heart,
 direct; or, sometime, in the pompous robe
 of fancy dress, she charm athenian wit,
 and a whole sapient city round her burn. 
then over her brow minerva terror nod:
 with Xenophon, sometime, in dire extreme,
 she breathe deliberate soul, and make retreat
 unequalled glory: with the theban sage,
 Epaminondas, first and best of man! 
sometime she bid the deep-embattled host,
 above the vulgar reach, resistless form,
 march to sure conquest, — never gain before! 
nor on the treacherous sea of giddy state
 unskilful she: when the triumphant tide
 of high-swollen empire wear one boundless smile,
 and the gale tempt to new pursuit of fame,
 sometime, with Scipio, she collect her sail,
 and seek the blissful shore of rural ease,
 where, but the aonian maid, no siren sing. 
or shall the deep-brewed tempest mutter rise,
 while rock and shoal perfidious lurk around,
 with Tully she her wide-reviving light
 to senate hold, a Catiline confound,
 and save awhile from Cesar sink Rome. 
such the kind power, who pierce eye dissolve
 each mental Fetter, and set reason free;
 for i inspire a enlighten zeal,
 the more tenacious as the more convince
 how happy Freemen, and how wretched slave. 
to briton not unknown, to briton full
 the goddess spread her store, the secret soul
 that quicken trade, the breath unseen that waft
 to they the treasure of a balance world. 
but fine art (save what the Muse have sing,
 in dare flight, above all modern wing)
 neglect droop the head; and public work,
 break by corruption into private gain,
 not ornament, disgrace, not serve, destroy. 

shall briton, by their own joint wisdom rule
 beneath one royal head, who vital power
 connect, enliven and exert the whole;
 in fine art, and public work, shall they
 to Gallia yield? — yield to a land that bend,
 depress, and break, beneath the will of one? 
of one — who, shall the unkingly thirst of gold,
 or tyrant passion, or ambition, prompt,
 call locust-army over the blast land:
 drain from it be thirsty bound the spring of wealth,
 his own insatiate reservoir to fill:
 to the lone desert patriot-merit frown,
 or into dungeon art, when they, their chain,
 indignant, burst, for their noble work
 all other licence scorn but truth and mine. 
oh shame to think! shall briton, in the field
 unconquered still, the better laurel lose? 
even in that monarch reign, who vain dream,
 by giddy power, betray, and flatter pride,
 to grasp unbounded sway; while, swarm round,
 his army dare all Europe to the field;
 to hostile hand while treasure flow profuse,
 and, that great source of treasure, subject 'blood,
 inhuman squander, sicken every land;
 from Britain, chief, while my superior son,
 in vengeance rush, dash his idle hope,
 and bad his agonize heart be low:
 even then, as in the golden calm of peace,
 what public work, at home, what art arise! 
what various science shine! what genius glow! 

it be not for i to paint, diffusive shot
 over fair extent of land, the shine road;
 the flood-compelling arch; the long canal,
 through mountain pierce, and unite sea;
 the dome resound sweet with infant joy,
 from famine save, or cruel-handed shame,
 and that where valour count his noble scar;
 the land where social pleasure love to dwell,
 of the fierce demon, gothic duel, free;
 the robber from his farther forest chase;
 the turbid city clear, and, by degree,
 into sure peace the best police refine,
 magnificence, and grace, and decent joy. 
let Gallic bard record, how honour art,
 and science, by despotic bounty bless,
 at distance flourish from my parent-eye. 
restore ancient taste, how Boileau rise. 
how the big roman soul shake, in Corneille,
 the tremble stage. in elegant Racine,
 how the more powerful though more humble voice
 of nature-painting Greece, resistless, breathe
 the whole awaken heart. how moliere scene,
 chastise and regular, with well-judged wit,
 not scatter wild, and native humour, grace,
 be life itself. to public honour raise,
 how learning in warm seminary spread;
 and, more for glory than the small reward,
 how emulation strive. how their pure tongue
 almost obtain what be deny their arm.
 from Rome, awhile, how paint, court long,
 with Poussin come; ancient design, that lift
 a fair front, and look another soul. 
how the kind art, that, of unvalued price,
 the fame and only picture, easy, give,
 refine her touch, and, through the shadow piece,
 all the live spirit of the painter pour. 
coy of art, how sculpture northward deign
 a look, and bad her girardon arise. 
how lavish grandeur blaze; the barren waste,
 astonish, see the sudden palace swell,
 and fountain spout amid it be arid shade. 
for league, bright vistas open to the view,
 how forest in majestic garden smile. 
how menial art, by their gay sister teach,
 weave the deep flower, the bloom foliage train
 in joyous figure over the silky lawn,
 the palace cheere, illume the story wall,
 and with the pencil vie the glow loom. 

these laurel, louis, by the droppings raise
 of thy profusion, it be dishonour shade,
 and, green through future time, shall bind thy brow;
 while the vain honour of perfidious war
 wither abhor, or in oblivion lose. 
with what prevail vigour have they shoot,
 and steal a deep root, by the full tide
 of war-sunk million feed? superior still,
 how have they branch luxuriant to the sky,
 in Britain plant, by the potent juice
 of freedom swell? force be the bloom of art,
 a false uncertain spring, when bounty give,
 weak without i, a transitory gleam. 
fair shine the slippery day, entice sky
 of favour smile, and courtly breeze blow;
 until art, betray, trust to the flatter air
 their tender blossom: — then malignant rise
 the blight of envy, of those insect-cloud,
 that, blast merit, often cover court:
 nay, shall, perchance, some kind moecenas aid
 the doubtful beam of his prince soul,
 his waver ardor fix, and unconfined
 diffuse his warm beneficence around;
 yet death, at last, and wintery tyrant come,
 each sprig of genius kill at the root. 
but when with i imperial bounty join,
 wide over the public blow eternal spring;
 while mingle autumn every harvest pour
 of every land; whatever invention, art,
 create toil and nature can produce. 

here cease the goddess; and her ardent wing,
 dip in the colour of the heavenly bow,
 stand wave radiance round, for sudden flight
 prepare, when thus, impatient, burst my prayer. 
 "oh form light of life! oh better sun! 
" sun of mankind! by who the cloudy north,
 "sublime, not envy languedocian sky,
" that, unstained ether all, diffusive smile:
 "when shall we call these ancient laurel we? 
" and when thy work complete? " strait with her hand,
 celestial red, she touch my darken eye. 
as at the touch of day the shade dissolve,
 so quick, methinks, the misty circle clear,
 that dim the dawn of be here below:
 the future shine disclose, and, in long view,
 bright rise aeras instant rush to light. 

 "they come! great goddess! i the time behold! 
" the time our father, in the bloody field,
 "have earn so dear, and, not with less renown,
" in the warm struggle of the senate-fight. 
 "the time i see! who glory to supply,
" for toil age, commerce round the world
 "have winge unnumbered sail, and from each land
" material heap, that, well-employed, with Rome
 "may vie our grandeur, and with Greece our Art.  

 "lo! prince i behold! contrive still,
" and still conduct firm some brave design;
 "king! that the narrow joyless circle scorn,
" burst the blockade of false design man,
 "of treacherous smile, of adulation fall,
" and of the blind cloud around they throw:
 "their court rejoice million; worth, alone,
" and virtue dear to they; their best delight,
 "in just proportion, to give general joy;
" their jealous care thy kingdom to maintain;
 "the public glory they; unsparing love
" their endless treasure; and their deed their praise. 
 "with thou they work. nought can resist your force:
" life feel it quicken in her dark retreat:
 "strong spread the bloom of genius, science, art;
" he bashful bound disclose merit break;
 "and, big with fruit of glory, virtue blow
" expansive over the land. another race
 "of generous youth, of patriot-sire, i see! 
" not those vain insect flutter in the blaze
 "of court and ball and play; those venal soul,
" corruption veteran unrelenting band,
 "that, to their vice slave, can never be free. 

 "i see the fountain purge! whence life derive
" a clear or turbid flow; see the young mind. 
 "not feed impure by chance, by flattery fool,
" or by scholastic jargon bloat proud,
 "but fill and nourish by the light of truth. 
" then beam through fancy the refine ray,
 "and pour on the heart, the passion feel
" at once inform light and move flame;
 '"till moral, public, graceful action crown
" the whole. behold! the fair contention glow,
 "in all that mind or body can adorn,
" and form to life. instead of barren head,
 "barbarian pedant, wrangle son of pride,
" and truth-perplexing metaphysic wit,
 "man, patriot, chief and citizen be form. 

 "lo! justice, like the liberal light of heaven,
" unpurchased shine on all, and from her beam,
 "appal guilt, retire the savage crew,
" that prowl amid the darkness they themselves
 "have throw around the law. oppression grieve,
" see! how her legal fury bite the lip,
 "while york and talbot their deep snare detect,
" and seize swift justice through the cloud they raise. 

 "see! social labour lift his guard head,
" and man not yield to government in vain. 
 "from the sure land be root ruffian force,
" and, the lewd nurse of villain, idle waste;
 "lo! raze their haunt, down dash their madden bowl,
" a nation poison! beauteous order reign! 
 "manly submission, unimposing toil,
" trade without guile, civility that mark
 "from the foul herd of brutal slave thy son,
" and fearless peace. or shall affront war
 "to slow but dreadful vengeance rouse the just,
" unfailing field of Freemen i behold! 
 "that know, with their own proper arm, to guard
" their own bless isle against a league world. 
 "despair Gaul her boil youth restrain,
" dissolve she dream of universal sway:
 "the wind and sea be britain wide domain;
" and not a sail, but by permission, spread. 

 "lo! swarm southward on rejoice sun,
" gay colony extend; the calm retreat
 "of undeserved distress, the better home
" of those who bigot chase from foreign land. 
 "not build on rapine, servitude and woe,
" and, in their turn, some petty tyrant prey;
 "but, bind by social freedom, firm they rise;
" such as, of late, a Oglethorpe have form,
 "and, crowd round, the charm Savannah fee. 

 "horrid with want and misery, no more
" our street the tender passenger afflict. 
 "nor shiver age, nor sickness without friend,
" or home, or bed to bear his burn load,
 "nor agonize infant, that never earn
" it be guiltless pang, i see! the store, profuse,
 "which british bounty have to these assign,
" no more the sacrilegious riot swell
 "of cannibal devourer! right apply,
" no starve wretch the land of freedom stain:
 "if poor, employment find; if old demand,
" if sick, if maim, his miserable due;
 "and will, if young, repay the fond care. 
" sweet set the sun of stormy life, and sweet
 "the morning shine, in mercy dew array. 
" lo! how they rise! these family of heaven! 
 " that! chief, (but why — you bigot! — why so late?) 
 "where bloom and warble glad a rise age:
" what smile of praise! and, while their song ascend,
 "the listen seraph lay his lute aside. 

 "hark! the gay muse raise a noble strain,
" with active nature, warm impassion truth,
 "engage fable, lucid order, note
" of various string, and heart-felt image fill. 
 "behold! i see the dread delightful school
" of tempere passion, and of polish life,
 "restore: behold! the well-dissembled scene
" call from embellish eye the lovely tear,
 "or light up mirth in modest cheek again. 
" lo! vanish monster-land. lo! drive away
 "those that apollo sacred walk profane:
" their wild creation scatter, where a world
 "unknown to nature, chaos more confuse,
" over the brute scene it be ouran-outang pour;
 "detest form! that, on the mind impress,
" corrupt, confound and barbarise a age. 

 "behold! all thy again the sister-art,
" thy grace they, knit in harmonious dance. 
 "nurse by the treasure, from a nation drain
" their work to purchase, they to noble rouse
 "their untamed genius, their unfettered thought;
" of pompous tyrant, and of dream monk,
 "the gaudy tool, and prisoner, no more. 

 "lo! Numerous dome a Burlington confess:
" for king and senate fit, the palace see! 
 "the temple breathe a religious awe;
" even frame with elegance the plain retreat,
 "the private dwelling. certain in his aim,
" taste, never idle work, save expense. 

 "see! sylvan scene, where art, alone, pretend
" to dress her mistress, and disclose her charm:
 "such as a pope in miniature have show;
" a Bathurst over the widen forest spread;
 "and such as form a RICHMOND, CHISWICK, STOWE. 

 "august, around, what public work i see! 
" lo! stately street, lo! square that court the breeze. 
 "in spite of those to who pertain the care,
" engulf more than found roman way,
 "lo! ray from city over the brighten land,
" connect sea to sea, the solid road. 
 "lo! the proud arch (no vile exactor stand)
" with easy sweep bestride the chafe flood. 
 "see! long canal, and deepen river join
" each part with each, and with the circle main
 "the whole enliven isle. lo! port expand,
" free as the wind and wave, their shelter arm.
 "lo! stream comfort over the trouble deep,
" on every point coast the Light-house tower;
 "and, by the broad imperious mole repel,
" hark! how the baffle storm indignant roar. " 

as thick to view these vary wonder rise,
 shake all my soul with transport, unassured,
 the vision break; and, on my wake eye,
 rush the still ruin of deject Rome. 
