the american village, etc. 

where yonder stream divide the fertile plain,
make fertile by the labour of the swain;
and hill and wood high tower over the rest,
behold a village with fair plenty bless:
each year tall harvest crown the happy field;
each year the mead their store of fragrance yield,
and every joy and every bliss be there,
and healthful labour crown the flow year.

though Goldsmith weep in melancholy strain,
desert auburn and forsake plain,
and mourn his village with a patriot sigh,
and in that village see Britannia die:
yet shall this land with rise pomp divine,
in it be own splendour and britannia shine.
o muse, forget to paint her ancient woe,
her indian battle, or her Gallic foe;
resume the pleasure of the rural scene,
describe the village rise on the green,
it be harmless people, bear to small command,
lose in the bosom of this western land:
so shall my verse run gentle as the flood,
so answer all you hill, and echo all you wood;
so glide you stream in hollow channel pen,
forever waste, yet not ever spend.
you cluster bough by hoary thicket bear!
you field high wave with eternal corn!
you woodland nymph the tender tale rehearse,
the fable author of immortal verse:
you dryad fair, attend the scene i love,
and heaven shall centre in yonder bloom grove.
what though thy wood, America, contain
the howl forest, and the tiger den,
the dangerous serpent, and the beast of prey,
man be more fierce, more terrible than they.
no monster with it be vile contagious breath,
no fly scorpion dart instant death;
no poisonous adder, burn to engage,
have half the venom or have half the rage.
what though the Turk protest to heaven his ire,
with lift up hand amid his realm of fire;
and russia empress send her fleet afar,
to aid the havoc of the burn war:
their rage dismay not, and their arm in vain,
in dreadful fury bathe with blood the plain;
their terror harmless, though their story hear,
how this one conquer or be noble spare:
vain be their rage, to we their anger vain,
the deep atlantic rave and roar between.

to yonder village then will i descend,
there spend my day, and there my evening spend;
sweet haunt of peace who mud 'wall side delight,
the rural mind beyond the city bright:
their top with hazle or with alder weave,
remurmur magic to the neighbour grove;
and each one labour in his own employ,
come weary home at night, but come with joy:
the soil which lie for many thousand year
over run by wood, by thicket and by bear;
now rest of tree, admit the cheerful light,
and leave long prospect to the pierce sight;
where once the lynx nocturnal sally make,
and the tall chesnut cast a dreadful shade:
no more the panther stalk his bloody round,
nor bird of night her hateful note resound;
nor howl wolf roar to the rise moon,
as pale arise she over yond eastern down.
some prune their tree, a large load to bear
of fruit nectarine bloom once a year:
see groan waggon to the village come
fill with the apple, apricot or plumb;
and heavy beam suspend from a tree,
to press their juice against the winter day:
or see the plough tear through the new make field,
ordain a harvest, yet unknown to yield.
the rise barn who spacious floor receive
the welcome thousand of the wheaten sheaf,
and spread it be arm to take the plenteous store,
sufficient for its master and the poor:
for as Eumoeus use his beggar guest
the great Ulysses in his tatter dress:
so here fair charity put forth her hand,
and pour her blessing over the grateful land:
no needy wretch the rage of winter fear,
secure he sit and spend his age year,
with thankful heart to generous soul and kind,
that save he from the winter and the wind.

a lovely island once adorn the sea,
between New-Albion and the Mexic 'bay;
who sandy side wash by the ocean wave,
scarce hear a murmur but what ocean give:
small it be circumference, nor high it be coast,
but shady wood the happy isle can boast;
on every side new prospect catch the eye,
there rise blue mountain to the arch sky:
here thunder ocean in convulsive throw,
and dash the island as it be water rise:
yet peaceful all within, no tumult there,
but fearless step of the unhunt hare;
and nightly chanting of the fearless dove,
or blackbird note, the harbinger of love.
so peaceful be this haunt that nature give,
still as the star, and silent as the grave;
no loud applause there raise the patriot breast,
no shout army their mad joy confess,
for battle gain, or trophy noble win,
or nation conquer near the rise sun;
no clamorous, crew, or wild nocturnal cheer,
or murderous russian for no man be here.
on it be east end a grove of oak be see,
and shrubby hazel fill the space between;
dry alder too, and aspen leaf that shake
with every wind, conspire to shade a brook,
who gentle stream just bubble from the ground,
be quick in the falter ocean drown.
beyond who fount, the centre of the isle,
wild plumb tree flourisheed on the shade soil.
in the dark bosom of this sacred wood,
have fate but smile, some village may have stand
seclude from the world, and all it be own,
of other land unknowing, and unknown.
here may the hunter have destroy his prey,
transfix the goat before the dawn of day;
and trudge homeward with his welcome load,
the fruit of wander through each by-way road:
throw down his burden with the needless sigh,
and glad feast his small family.
small field have shen suffice, and grateful they,
the annual labour of his hand to pay;
and free his right to search the briny flood
for fish, or slay the creature of the wood.

thus spend his day in labour pleasant, pain,
have live and die the homely shepherd swain:
have see his child and his child heir,
the fruit of love and memory of year
to agriculture first fair service bend,
the work of mortal, and their great intent,
so have the sire his day of pleasure know,
and wish to change no country for his own:
so have he with his fair endear wife,
pass the slow circle of a harmless life;
with happy ignorance divine bless,
the path, the centre and the home of rest.
long might the sun have run his bright career,
and long the moon her mantle visage rear;
and long the star their nightly vigil keep,
and sphere harmonious either sing or weep:
he have not dream of world beside his own,
and think they only star, beyond the moon;
enjoy himself, nor hear of future hell,
or heaven, the recompense of do well;
have scarce think of a eternal-state,
and leave his being in the hand of fate. —
o have this isle such soul sublime contain,
and there for age future son remain,
but envious time conspire with the sea,
wash all it be landscape, and it be grove away.
it be tree decline, stretch upon the sand,
no more their shadow throw across the land.
it be vine no more their cluster beauty show,
nor sturdy oak embrace the mountain brow.
bare sand alone now overwhelm the coast,
lose in it be grandeur, and it be beauty lose.

thus, though my favourite isle to ruin go,
inspire my sorrow, and demand my moon;
yet this wide land it be place can well supply
with landscape, hill and grassy mountain high.
o Hudson! thy fair flood shall be my theme,
thy wind river, or thy glassy stream;
on who tall bank tremendous rock i spy,
dread nature in primaeval majesty.
rock, to who summit cloud eternal cling,
or cluster bird in their wild wood note sing.
hill, from who side the mountain echo roar,
rebound dreadful from the distant shore;
or valley, where refresh breeze blow,
and rustic hut in fair confusion grow,
safe from the wind, secure by mountain high,
that seem to hide the concave of the sky;
to who top oft the curious hind ascend,
and wonder where the arch horizon bend;
please with the distant prospect rise new,
and hill over hill, a never end view.
through various path with hasty step he scour,
and breathe the odour of surround flower,
catch from their bosom by the fragrant breath,
of western breeze, or the gale of death. 
then low descend, seek the humble dome,
and centre all his pleasure in his home,
until day return, bring the welcome toil,
to clear the forest, or to tame the soil;
to burn the wood, or catch the timorous deer,
to scour the thicket, or contrive the snare.

such be the life our great forefather lead,
the golden season now from Britain flee,
ever since dread commerce stretch the nimble sail,
and send her wealth with every foreign gale. —
strange fate, but yet to every county know,
to love all other riches but it be own.
thus fall the mistress of the conquer earth,
great Rome, who owe to Romulus her birth,
fall to the monster luxury, a prey,
who force a hundred nation to obey.
she who nor mighty Carthage can withstand,
nor strong judea once thrice holy land:
she all the west, and Britain can subdue,
while victory with the roman eagle fly;
she, she herself eternal year deny,
like Rome she conquer, but by Rome she die:
but if America, by this decay,
the world itself must fall as well as she.
no other region latent yet remain,
this spacious globe have be researched in vain.
round it be whole circle oft have navy go,
and find but sea or land already know.
when she have see her empire, city, king,
time must begin to flap his weary wing;
the earth itself to bright day aspire,
and wish to feel the purify fire.

nor think this mighty land of old contain
the plunder wretch, or man of bloody mind:
renown sachem once their empire raise
on wholesome law; and sacrifice blaze.
the generous soul inspire the honest breast,
and to be free, be double to be bless:
until the east wind do here Columbus blow,
and wonder nation see his canvas flow.
till she Cabot descend on the strand,
and hail the beauty of the unknown land;
and ravenous nation with industrious toil,
conspire to rob they of their native soil:
then bloody war, and death and rage arise,
and every tribe resolve to be our foe.
full many a feat of they i can rehearse,
and action worthy of immortal verse:
deed ever glorious to the indian name,
and fit to rival greek or roman fame.
but one sad story shall my muse relate,
full of paternal love, and full of fate;
which when even yet the northern shepherd hear,
it swell his breast, and bath his face in tear,
prompt the deep groan, and lift the heave sigh,
or bring soft torrent from the female eye.

far in the arctic sky, where hudson bay
roll it be cold wave, and combat with the sea,
a dreary region lift it be dismal head,
true sister to the region of the dead.
here thunder storm continue half the year,
or deep-laid snow their joyless visage rear:
eternal rock, from who prodigious steep
the angry tiger stun the neighbour deep;
while through the wild wood, or the shroud plain,
the moose deer seek his food, but often seek in vain.
yet in this land, freeze by inclement sky,
the indian hut in wild succession rise;
and daily hunt, when the short-lived spring
shoot joyous forth, the industrious people bring
their beaver spoil beneath another sky,
port Nelson, and each british factory:
in slender boat from distant land they sail,
their small mast bend to the inland gale,
on traffic send to gain the little store,
which keep they plenteous, though it keep they poor.
hither CAFFRARO in his flighty boat,
one hapless spring his furry riches bring;
and with he come, for fail he not alone,
his consort colma, and his little son.
while yet from land over the deep wave he plough,
and towards the shore with manly prowess row.
his bark unfaithful to it be trust freight,
spring the large leak, the messenger of fate;
but no lament or female cry be hear,
each for their fate most manful prepare,
from bubble wave to send the part breath
to land of shadow, and the shade of death.

o fate! unworthy such a tender train,
o day, lament by the indian swain!
full oft of it the stripling youth shall hear,
and sad mourn their fortune with a tear:
the indian maid full oft the tale attend,
and mourn their colma as they will mourn a friend.

now while in wave the bark demerge, they strive,
dead with despair, though nature yet alive:
forth from the shore a friendly brother fly,
in one small boat, to save the drown crew.
he come, but in his bark of trifle freight,
can save but two, and one must yield to fate.
o dear CAFFRARO, say the hapless wife,
o save our son, and save thy dear life:
it be thou can teach he how to hunt the doe,
transfix the buck, or tread the mountain snow.
let i the sentence of my fate receive,
and to thy care my tender infant leave.
he sigh nor answer, but as firm as death,
resolve to save she with his late breath:
and as suspend by the barque's low side,
he raise the infant from the chill tide,
and place it safe; he force his colma too
to save herself, what more can mortal do?
but noble scorn life, she raise her head
from the flush wave, and thus divine say:

of life regardless, i to fate resign,
but thou, CAFFRARO, be forever i.
o let thy arm no future bride embrace,
remember colma, and her beauteous face,
which win thou youthful in thy gay pride,
with captive, trophy, victor at thy side;
now i shall quick to bloom region fly,
a spring eternal, and a nightless sky,
far to the west, where radiant Sol descend,
and wonder where the arch horizon end:
there shall my soul thy love idea keep;
and until thy image come, unceasing weep.
there, though the tiger be but all a shade,
and mighty panther but the name they have;
and proud hill, and lofty mountain there,
light as the wind, and yield as the air;
yet shall our soul their ancient feeling have,
more strong, more noble than this side the grave.
there lovely blossom blow throughout the year,
and airy harvest rise without our care:
and all our fire and mighty ancestor,
renown for battle and successful war,
behold their son in fair succession rise,
and hail they happy to serener sky.
there shall i see thou too, and see with joy
thy future charge, my much love indian boy:
the thoughtless infant, who with tear i see,
once seek my breast, or hang upon my knee;
tell he, ah tell he, when in manly year,
his dauntless mind, nor death nor danger fear,
tell he, ah tell he, how thy colma die
his fond mother, and thy youthful bride:
point to my tomb through yonder furzy glade,
and show where thou thy much love colma lay.
o may i soon thy bless resemblance see,
and my sweet infant all revive in thou.
till then i will haunt the bower or lonely shade,
or airy hill for contemplation make,
and think i see thou in each ghostly shoal,
and think i clasp thou to my weary soul.
oft, oft thy form to my expect eye,
shall come in dream with gentle majesty;
then shall i joy to find my bliss begin
to love a angel, who i love a man!
she say, and downward in the hoary deep
plunge she far form to everlasting sleep;
her part soul it be late struggle give,
and her last breath come bubble through the wave.

then sad CAFFRARO all his grief declare,
and swell the torrent of the gulph with tear;
and senseless stupid to the shore be bear
in deathlike slumber, until the rise morn,
then sorrow, to the sea his course he bend
full sad, but know not for what cause he go,
until, sight distress, from the lonely strand,
he see dead colma waft to the land.
then in a stupid agony of prayer,
he rend his mantle, and he tear his hair;
sigh to the star, and shake his honour head,
and only wish a place among the dead!
o have the wind be sensible of grief,
or whisper angel come to his relief;
then have the rock not echo to his pain,
nor hollow mountain answer he again:
then have the flood their peaceful course keep,
nor the sad pine in all it be murmur weep;
nor pensive deer stray through the lonely grove,
nor sad weep the sympathise dove. —
thus fare the fire through his long day of pain,
or with his offspring rove the silent plain;
until year approach, bow his sacred head
deep in the dust, and send he to the dead:
where now perhaps in some strange fancy land,
he grasp the airy bow, and fly across the strand;
or with his colma share the fragrant grove,
it be vernal blessing, and the bliss of love.

farewell lament pay, and whatever state
now clasp you round, and sink you deep in fate;
whether the firy kingdom of the sun,
or the slow wave of silent Acheron,
or christian heaven, or planetary sphere,
or the third region of the cloudless air;
or if return to dread nihility,
you will still be happy, for you will not be.

now fair village of the fertile plain,
make fertile by the labour of the swain;
who first my drowsy spirit do inspire,
to sing of wood, and strike the rural lyre:
who last shall see i wander from thy cell,
and grove of oak where contemplation dwell.
will fate but raise i over the small care,
of life unwelcome and distressful year,
pedantic labour and a hateful ease,
which scarce the hoary wrinkle sage can please.
hence spring each grief, each long reflective sigh,
and not one comfort leave but poetry.
long, long ago with she i can have stray,
to wood, to thicket or the mountain shade;
unfit for city and the noisy throng,
the drunken revel and the midnight song;
the gild beau and scene of empty joy,
which please a moment and forever die.
here then shall centre every wish, and all
the tempt beauty of this spacious ball:
no thought ambitious, and no bold design,
but heaven bear contemplation shall be i.
in yonder village shall my fancy stray,
nor rove beyond the confine of today;
the age volume of some plain divine,
in break order round my hut shall shine;
who solemn line shall soften all my care,
and sound devotion to the eternal star:
and if one fin my rigid breast do stain,
thou poetry shall be the darling sin;
which heaven without repentance may forgive,
and which a angel may commit and live:
and where yonder wave of silent water fall,
over the smooth rock or adamantine wall:
the summer morn and vernal eve shall see,
Milton, immortal bard my company;
or Shakespeare, Dryden, each high sound name,
the pride of Britain, and one half her fame:
or he who wake the fairy muse of old,
and please tale of land enchant tell.
still in my hand, he his soft verse shall find
his verse, the picture of the poet mind:
or heavenly pop, who now harmonious mourn,
"like the rapt seraph that adore and burn."
then in sharp satire, with a giant might,
forbid the blockhead and the fool to write:
and in the centre of the bard be show
the deathless line of godlike ADDISON;
who, bard thrice glorious, all delightful flow,
and wrap the soul of poetry in prose.

now cease, o muse, thy tender tale to chant,
the smile village, or the rural haunt;
new scene invite i, and no more i rove,
to tell of shepherd, or the vernal grove.
