on happiness.

o happiness! where be thou to be find? 
what bower be bless with thy perpetual gleam? 
from court, from cot, even while they seek thy stay,
 on thy soft pinion, rapid be thy flight. 
thy name, not substance, be to mortal know. 

repulse from thou make drunkard stand aghast,
 who nightly revel over the flow bowl. 
in vain they seek thy progress to retard,
 a guest too noble to be thus detain. 
thy quick elopement show their sad mistake;
 baulk hope, and certain disappointment bring. 

Misers for thou grope 'midst their bag of wealth,
 nor find thy residence in golden over:
 fear, anxious care, bleak avarice, and distrust,
 forbid thy access to the grovel soul. 

not riches, though in gorgeous pomp array,
 with all the dazzle splendour of the east,
 secure thou among the gay, fantastic train. 
pride and ambition, vulturelike, appear,
 gain access to the op'lent master heart,
 and bid defiance to thy sacred charm,
 now swift banish from his sumpt'ous seat. 

nor even the voice of honour can recall
 thy hasty step: thou pleasure sue in vain;
 a stranger to the gay, licentious crowd,
 the giddy flutter son of dance and song. 
thou to the libertine do ever prove
 a airy phantom; mock his eager grasp;
 leave he to cruel disappointment rage,
 remorse, despair, the inmate of his soul. 

in hope to meet thou in some distant clime,
 the ardent warrior quit his native shore,
 inure to martial toil; at danger smile,
 and unconcerned tread over the heap of slay:
 he enemy fly before he; at his foot
 million fall prostrate, and for mercy call:
 yet still in vain he make his court to thou;
 thou scarce vouchsafe he one auspicious smile. 

see lover too, in yond sequester grove,
 seek lonely walk, and spend their sigh in vain,
 for thou! for what? for some bewitch fair,
 who smile they deem can boundless bliss secure:
 their view contract will thou thus confine. 

nor art thou find in Hymen sacred rite,
 though silken cord of sweet affection bind. 
a thousand ill encompass the fond pair,
 and mix their sweet with bitterness and woe. 
bent in pursuit, through many a devious track,
 all seem to say, "successless be the search;
 to noble object henceforth bend your view." 

all hail, religion! thou celestial power! 
thy force alone can soothe the anxious breast,
 and quite dispel the solitary gloom,
 there sullen shade that steal upon the soul. 
o let i hear thy salutary voice! 
thy sacred dictate let i still revere;
 and ever prone in virtue step to tread,
 my hope, my wish centre all in he,
 who hand omnipotent the world do frame. 

o thou, great source of all supreme delight! 
without reluctance may i ever prove
 submissive to thy providential sway,
 to know and to observe thy law divine,
 my sole solicitude. 
how mean soever my humble station be,
 content, and calm serenity of mind,
 shall pave my path along the rugged vale;
 and when the vain delusive vision past,
 then happiness, in all its vast extent
 unmeasurable, ignorant of bound,
 shall through eternal age be my lot;
 the lot of all who hope be fix on thou. 
