heccar and gaira

a african eclogue.

JAN. 3, 1770. 

where the rough caigra roll the surgy wave,
 urge his thunder through the distant cave;
 where the sharp rock, in distant horror see,
 drive the white current through the spread green;
 where the loud tiger, paw in his rage,
 bid the black archer of the wild engage;
 stretch on the sand, two pant warrior lay,
 in all the burn torment of the day;
 their bloody javelin reek on live steem
 their bow be break at the roar stream:
 heccar the chief of jarra fruitful hill,
 where the dark vapour nightly dew distil,
 see gaira the companion of his soul,
 extend where loud caigra billow roll;
 gaira, the king of war archer find,
 where daily lightning blow the sandy ground,
 where brood tempest howl along the sky,
 where rise desert whirl in circle fly. 

heccar.

gaira, it be useless to attempt the chace,
 swift than hunt wolf they urge the race;
 their lessen form elude the strain eye,
 upon the plumage of macaw they fly. 
let we return, and strip the reek slay
 leave the body on the burn plain. 

gaira.

heccar, my vengeance still exclaim for blood,
 it will drink a wide stream than caigra flood. 
this javelin, oft in noble quarrel try,
 put the loud thunder of their arm aside. 
fast as the stream rain, i pour the dart,
 hurl a whirlwind through the tremble heart:
 but now my linger foot revenge deny,
 o can i throw my jaulin from my eye! 

heccar.

when gaira the unite army break,
 death winge the arrow; death impel the stroke. 
see, pile in mountain, on the sanguine sand
 the blast of the lightning of thy hand. 
search the brown desert, and the glossy green;
 there be the trophy of thy valour see. 
the scatter bone mantle in silver white,
 once animate, dare the force in fight. 
the child of the wave, who pallid race
 view the faint sun, display a languid face,
 from the red fury of thy justice flee,
 swift than torrent from their rocky bed. 
fear with a sicken silver tinge their hue:
 the guilty fear, when vengeance be their due. 

gaira.

Rouse not remembrance from her shadowy cell,
 nor of those bloody son of mischief tell. 
Cawna, o Cawna! deck in sable charm,
 what distant region hold thou from my arm? 
Cawna, the pride of afric sultry vale,
 soft as the cool murmur of the gale,
 majestic as the many colour snake,
 trail his glory through the blossom brake;
 black as the glossy rock, where eascal roar,
 foam through sandy waste to jaghir shore;
 swift as the arrow, haste to the breast,
 be Cawna the companion of my rest. 

the sun sit lower in the western sky,
 the swell tempest spread around the eye;
 upon my cawna bosom i reclind,
 catch the breathe whisper of the wind:
 swift from the wood a prowl tiger come;
 dreadful his voice, his eye a glow flame;
 i bend the bow, the never-erring dart
 pierce his rough armour, but escape his heart;
 he flee, though wound, to a distant waste,
 i urge the furious flight with fatal haste;
 he fall, he die — spend in the fiery toil,
 i stripid his carcase of the furry spoil
 and as the vary spangle meet my eye,
 on this, i cry, shall my love Cawna lie. 
the dusky midnight hang the sky in grey;
 impel by love, i winge the airy way;
 in the deep valley and the mossy plain,
 i seek my Cawna, but i seek in vain. 
the pallid shadow of the azure wave
 have make my Cawna and my child slave. 
reflection madden, to recall the hour,
 the god have give i to the daemon power. 
the dusk slow vanish from the hate lawn,
 i gain a mountain glare with the dawn. 
there the full sail, expand to the wind,
 strike horror and distraction in my mind,
 there Cawna mingle with a worthless train,
 in common slavery drag the hate chain. 
now judge my heccar, have i cause for rage? 
shall aught the thunder of my arm assuage? 
in ever-reeking blood this javelin die
 with vengeance shall be never satisfy:
 i will strew the beache with the mighty dead
 and tinge the lily of their feature red. 

heccar.

when the loud shriek of the hostile cry
 rough salute my ear, enrage i will fly;
 send the sharp arrow quiver through the heart
 chill the hot vital with the venom dart;
 nor heed the shine steel or noisy smoke,
 gaira and vengeance shall inspire the stroke. 
