the death of amnon.

Canto the first.

the royal youth i sing, who sister charm
 inspire his heart with love; a latent love
 that prey upon his health; he droop; so droop
 a beauteous flower, when in the stalk some vile
 opprobrious insect 'bide. in conscious pain
 he pass the hapless hour, while in his breast
 the aspire passion, yet by virtue sway,
 it be proper limit know. i love, say he,
 who do i love? my sister — ah; my sister;
 can i my misplace passion gratify,
 and bring disgrace on she? no, sweet maid,
 i be thy brother; it be a brother part
 thy honour to protect and not destroy. 
when Shechem burn with untamed desire
 dishonour Dinah, how her brother rage! 
each take his sword, the princely ravisher,
 and every citizen a victim fall
 to their just fury. i be a isra'lite;
 shall i forgo this high prerogative,
 and plunge myself and sister into ruin? 
a act that even a heathen will degrade. 
no; soon shall my passion unrevealed
 lie canker in my bosom, till it taint
 my very blood, and stop my pant breath. 
better my love companion pass my grave,
 and shed a tear to think i die so young,
 than shun i live as a vile reproach
 to nature, royalty, and Israel. 
already i perceive my strength to fail,
 the ruddy bloom of health forsake my cheek;
 perhaps death not far off. — o welcome guest,
 hasten thy tardy step, why linger thou,
 or wait on those, who wish thou far away? 
o thou, that have the power of life and death,
 take hence my life, and end my wretchedness. 
a spacious land i see on every side
 bless with fertility; the culture vale
 yield plenteous crop; the rise hill be rich,
 with verdant pasture mantle, crown with tree;
 my father kingdom this. — what be it to i? 
it fire not my ambition, all i ask
 be one small spot of earth to lay i down
 beneath the turf, forget and forget,
 a small request, and yet though small, deny. 
methinks i feel my strength renew; it be so;
 struggle with life i sigh for death in vain. 
again my passion rise, again rebel;
 i still must live and live in misery. 
but i have a thought, that sting i yet more deep;
 doubtless some happy rival will be crown
 with tamar love; o torture thought, must i
 behold she deck in bridal robe to bless
 a rival; it be too much; — i can bear
 even to suppose it, i will from court retire;
 my gay companion now be irksome grow,
 and all my pleasure be transform to pain. 
my sister cheer smile, that once convey
 soft rapture to my heart, awake such pang,
 as i can scarce endure. again i feel
 my spirit sink; oh! welcome fade sickness! 
i will cherish thou and aid thou with my sigh,
 to still this heart, that now rebellious beat
 against my reason strong argument. 
though tamar beauty prompt my warm wish,
 her fair virtue keep i still in awe,
 forbid my aspir' love to soar. 
with sweet simplicity she smile, secure
 in innocence, command my respect,
 and this command i must — i will obey;
 but fly her presence, lest some hapless smile
 inflame my soul, and i in passion phrensy
 shall act against my final resolution
 to bear my grief untold, and secret pine
 till sadden sorrow sink i to the grave. 
thus, to himself complain, he resolve,
 nor seek a confidant to share his grief. 
a friend he have, the son of Shimeah,
 name Jonadab; a man by nature subtle,
 proud and ambitious; yet will mean stoop
 to the most base and most ignoble act,
 to serve his private end. the artless youth
 oft to his plausibility give ear,
 not even suspect, that beneath the cloak
 of formal flattery self-interest hide
 it be serpent head. yet still the youth from he
 his wayward passion labour to conceal,
 by force smile to veil his grief; nor know,
 how little they resemble those, that spring
 from gentle impulse of heart at ease. 
for Jonadab, with penetrate eye,
 quick discern the grief, he strive to hide. 
what cause, say he, can amnon have to mourn? 
a king son now, — a king in time may be. 
be it in probability, that i
 shall be a king, the very contemplation
 will shut my soul to sorrow. oh! the thought
 swell my imagination. do but amnon
 aspire as much to greatness, i can plot
 surprise stratagem. but he poor prince
 have long imbibe such close contract notion,
 as bar his path to honour. like a maid. 
he talk of virtue, weep at other woe,
 yet talk of greatness too; it be in the soul,
 he say, all greatness dwell; it be not the crown,
 that make his father great, but it be his virtue;
 and those alone he wish to inherit,
 thereby to gain dominion over himself,
 and reign unenvied; but perchance there now
 spring in his soul some change of sentiment;
 and he his principle, so long retain,
 loath to renounce, may want a friend to prompt,
 and urge he to the attainment of his will. 
then who so fit for such a talk as i? 
i be great in his esteem, have free access
 to he at all time; but, if now i be slack,
 perhaps i may be rival in his favour
 by some more forward to promote his wish. 
i will to he straight, in these cool evening hour
 into his private garden he retire,
 sigh to the wind, and to the moon complain. 
but i must he approach with seem awe,
 as fearful to disturb his solitude,
 and with a gentle flow of soothe word
 insinuate myself into his soul,
 then guide he as i please. the lovesick youth
 beneath the thick solitary shade
 be wander, lose in melancholy mood,
 so deep in thought, he never perceive the approach
 of Jonadab, till startle by his voice;
 then smile, as usual, as his friend draw near,
 who thus the royal youth address — oh! why
 do thou, a king son, pine in discontent? 
can there be ought, that be unattainable
 to crown thy soul with peace? thy father kind,
 too fond and too indulgent to refuse
 a son request, be what it will methinks. 
but why from i conceal thy grief? be i
 a friend, unworthy of thy confidence? 
have i ever be unfaithful to my trust? 
or have some jealous whispere impose
 upon my royal friend credulity,
 to vilify his faithful Jonadab? 
half lose in thought, the prince make no reply. 
and Jonadab a while suspend stand;
 but, recollect, take his hand and say;
 why weep my prince? what sorrow wound thy heart? 
i love, say amnon; and his hand withdraw
 to wipe his tear, and turn from Jonadab:
 then seem return, then he onward go
 in pensive sadness. Jonadab pursue,
 resolve to urge his full confession, lest
 some other shall be make his confidant,
 and he discard, lose the prince favour. 
amnon return, as ready to confess
 as he to hear, and thus his speech begin. 
o friend, i love — i love thou as my friend,
 and such thou be, the sharer of my joy;
 all my delight be double, share with thou. 
but now a strange dilemma have befall i;
 i will not speak it to a ear but thy;
 i love my sister tamar; tell it not,
 my reason almost fail to be my guide. 
this passion, oh! this wild rebellious passion,
 if cherish, fast it grow as noisome weed,
 and, if suppress, still strengthen in the stalk. 
so let it strengthen, till, too strong for i,
 i sink beneath its weight. but Jonadab,
 never let the secret pass thy lip, for i
 so much respect and honour she i love,
 that for the rich diadem on earth
 i will not give her pain; her heart be so prone
 to pity, it will burst in grief for i,
 do she but know the half i feel for she. 
then Jonadab, with seem kind affection,
 and tear of sympathy reply; kind prince,
 distrust i not, thy confidence i claim;
 thou know the feeling of my friendly heart
 admit no rest, if amnon be unhappy;
 shall David mean subject smile secure
 beneath his prudent equitable sway,
 their least complaint regard? and his son
 repine without redress? it must not be. 
amnon reply, i can thou distrust,
 and if thou know a way to ease my heart,
 discover it my friend, for i despair. 
dispel those useless tear, say Jonadab:
 think not to drown it in those briny flood;
 love be a flame those water can quench;
 nor be there any cure short of enjoyment. 
then there be no hope for i, the prince reply,
 till the kind earth receive i; for can i? 
i can — oh! i can injure she. 
droop not, my gentle friend, say Jonadab;
 this timorous tenderness but ill become
 a royal prince, the hope of Israel,
 the son of David; think but who thou be,
 the old son of israel mighty king;
 who dread name through all the nation round
 strike terror to his enemy, and fill
 the grateful heart of all his friend with joy;
 who tongue with pleasure tell his mighty deed,
 and virgin celebrate his fame in song;
 while amnon thus effeminate weep,
 like some fair captive maid, snatch from the arm
 of her fond lover. o my royal friend,
 better ten thousand injure virgin mourn,
 than David son thus live inglorious. 
there be a sort of viand she prepare,
 unparallelled, of which none other know
 the just proportion of ingredient use. 
a sickness feign may veil the deep design,
 and put she in thy power; by this excuse
 that thou can take nought else; nor fear but she
 will keep the secret, to preserve her fame. 
after a little pause the youth reply,
 it shall be so; — but yet i doubt — i fear —
 if i — i will think no more of consequence,
 i be determine — yes, it shall be so. 
tomorrow be it do, say Jonadab. 
amnon reply — tomorrow be the day. 
so part they that night; and Jonadab,
 in conscious pride of self-sufficiency,
 thus to himself his royal friend deride. 
poor thing, how easy he be wrought upon? 
in time the kingdom will be he, and i,
 in fact, shall reign, though he the title bear. 
that time may be anticipate, but
 amnon want courage for so bold a stroke. 
he be unambitious, nor have resolution
 to seize a tempt crown within his reach;
 but shall it gentle fall upon his head,
 perhaps he will wear it, if some bold hand
 do snatch it off. but this amour may prove
 a clew to guide to great enterprise. 
when these precise one once extend beyond
 the bound their narrow mind have circumscribe,
 from step to step insensible they go,
 till so familiarise by custom, they
 with calmness will transact the very thing,
 which but to mention, ere they launch so far,
 they will shudder at. but i must wait the event. 
so say, he retire to take repose,
 the common blessing gracious diffuse
 through nature, to refresh her weary son;
 that with new strength and vigour they may hail
 the rise day, rejoice in the light. 

Canto ii.

from ammon waste city, with the crown
 of hanun, their proud contumacious king,
 who insolence have cause his overthrow,
 the conquer king of Israel return
 in glorious triumph to Jerusalem;
 there from exhaust toil of bloody war
 in safety to repose his weary soul,
 and taste the sweet of calm domestic bliss. 
but ere the tumult of triumphal joy
 subside, and the sacred rite perform
 of general praise with the harp and song,
 the king long-wished tranquillity disturb
 by the sad news, that amnon, his dear son,
 a captive now to dangerous sickness lie,
 while life and death dispute their doubtful right. 
the pious king lay down his harp, the song
 unfinished, and with anxious haste repair
 to amnon, who dissimulation pass
 quite unsuspected. how can he suspect
 a fraud of such sort in a virtuous son? 
full oft a partial parent overlook
 a obvious fault, or by affection blind
 discern it not; but here no cause appear
 the awake suspicion, for his languid eye
 and pallid cheek give signal of disease. 
while thus the son in feeble tone complain,
 the tender father stoop low to hear, —
 i be very sick, and whatsoever food
 my servant here prepare, give i disgust. 
my sister tamar, with superior skill,
 prepare a cake delicious to my taste;
 this i can eat methinks from her kind hand,
 be she permit to attend i here. 
the king with fond solicitude retire,
 and speedy dispatch a messenger
 to tamar, say, it be his royal will,
 that she shall go direct to amnon house,
 and there administer, with friendly aid,
 whatever his sickly appetite demand. 
the hour have pass, at which the royal maid
 come from her closet, splendid attire;
 her hair with precious sparkle gem beset,
 faint mimic of her more illustrious eye. 
about her neck a shine golden chain,
 and over she loose throw, in careless fold,
 a various colour robe, which, as she move,
 trail on the ground, or flutter in the wind. 
thus all the virgin daughter of the king
 in splendid raiment shine; but none so bright
 in beauty, as the daughter of Maacah. 
soon as the sun have drink the morning dew,
 into her garden walk the lovely fair;
 not like a proud imperious haughty queen,
 with toss head and scornful eye, that glare
 malignant, scatter discontent around,
 and vain in fancy greatness. great she
 in inoffensive modesty, and bright
 in virtue, as the ray that gild the morn,
 warm the flower to ripeness, and exhal
 their various sweet to fill the garden air. 
please with the grateful smell, she skip about
 from flower to flower, and cautious select
 the sweet in a wreath, to deck that breast,
 which never yet inflame by vicious thought,
 or by unreasonable rebuke depress,
 have feel a secret pang, or learn to sigh. 
but oh! how happy for the mortal race,
 that from their eye the future be obscure;
 do we but know the secret ill that wait
 in darkness to surprise we, what will be
 our life, but one sad scene of misery? 
all present pleasure will be bitter make
 by aggravate thought of ill to come. 
but blind to future thing the present bless. 
when peace and plenty smile auspicious,
 the heart with sense of providence impress
 overflow with gratitude, and conscious joy. 
such joy now fill the royal fair one breast,
 intent on the formation of her wreath;
 when lo! her handmaid come to she in haste,
 with tiding, that a message have arrive
 straight from the king, declare his desire,
 that she to amnon house immediate
 will go, and dress he cake, for he be sick. 
the king command she instant obey;
 down drop the unfinished wreath; she skimm'dalong
 over the parterres, nor stay to find the path. 
her sweep garment gentle brush the flower;
 the ripe shed, strew the way she go
 with variegate fragment. so the breeze
 whisks over the forest, and some shatter leaf
 fall gentle rustle through the shrub beneath. 
then, gather up her robe, she onward spring,
 and sisterly affection urge her haste. 
amnon in high expectation lie
 count the-slow-paced moment as they pass;
 now think his scheme discover — he be betray —
 or some curse intervene accident
 delay, perhaps prevent her come. thus
 doubt, fear, and wild impatience in his breast
 tumultuous contend, till she come,
 with all the feeling of a tender sister;
 but not a thought of vile licentious love
 profane her breast; to see he thus she weep,
 but turn, wipe her tear, suppress her grief,
 and with officious haste the cake prepare. 
wisdom have power, like the meridian fun,
 to hide all other brightness in its glare;
 but virgin modesty, with win smile,
 shine a perpetual morning. so she shine
 serene mild, nor know her power to please. 
but oh! the graceful dignity of virtue
 unthinking captivate the worthy soul,
 the feeble good with emulation fire,
 and strike the very libertine with awe. 
so amnon, awe to see her lovely form,
 become irresolute; and recantation
 stagger his purpose. — first he pause; then thus
 expostulate with himself he lie;
 oh! how can i despoil this lovely maid,
 this fair of the fair? i can — no —
 i will let she go untouched. but then must i
 still pine in languishment, as heretofore;
 and Jonadab will at my weakness laugh. 
at last some wine he snatch, and eager drink
 to drown his scruple, and to fire his soul. 
such aid the most abandon oft require,
 when unsuspecting innocence at once
 tempt and forbid, more powerful forbid,
 than the persuasive eloquence of speech. 
but the defence, which innocence can boast
 with tear and mild entreaty, be but weak,
 when love and wine unite their frantic power,
 and leave virtue faint in the rear,
 rush on impetuous. — hapless tamar thus
 to lawless outrage fall the unwilling prey. 

Canto iii.

heaven give to man superior strength, that he
 the weak sex may succour and defend;
 but he that dare pervert this give blessing,
 to ruin and destroy their innocence,
 shall feel pursue vengeance, nor escape
 her rod uplift, nor avert the stroke. 
conviction sword shall pierce he, and remorse
 with all the torture of the mind assail,
 till he a victim fall to grim despair;
 except repentance timely to his aid
 come with her tear, to sooth, to mitigate;
 while her attendant hope extend a ray,
 to point where mercy spread her heal wing,
 nor even with this be vengeance satisfy,
 she will still pursue with some external ill,
 exhaust health and spirit; — droop — drear,
 a outcast of society he roam,
 alike discard by his friend and foe;
 perhaps assassination prove his end. 
the hapless amnon from his couch arise,
 inflame with hatred more than once with love. 
frantic with keen remorse and conscious guilt,
 he rave — he stamp — when to he Jonadab
 come to congratulate he; but the prince
 shoot from his eye a keen malignant glance,
 that speak displeasure, and with threaten hand
 uphold, thus in a angry tone begin:
 hence from my sight, thou base, worst of fiend,
 nor ever dare approach my presence more. 
strike with this strange reception, Jonadab
 step back, and bow with respectful awe,
 say, — o my prince, why be i thus discard? 
i still remain thy well affect friend,
 ready to — prompt i, (interrupt the prince)
 to do some great crime than i have do. 
curse on thy instigation; to my heart,
 my inexperienced heart thou drilld a way
 the infuse licentiousness; and thou a friend? 
ere thou presume to take that sacred name,
 abandon thy base principle, and learn
 it be virtue only constitute a friend. 
he pause — the astonish Jonadab approach
 near to amnon; beg he to resume
 his wonted calmness, but to hear he speak. 
i will hear no more of thou, reply the prince;
 i be lose, i be irrecoverable lose:
 what be the pain i feel to those i feel? 
a hell within i burn, and deep remorse,
 that never die worm, now gnaw my soul;
 and thou, my instigator. villain, flee,
 lest this my crime i complicate with murder. 
then Jonadab withdraw chagrin, and full
 of ran'crous malice; mutter as he go,
 shall murder crown thy crime young man? — it shall;
 but thou the murder, — not the murderer. 
i will hence to Absalom, the brother kind
 of this fair injure maid; he doubtless will
 avenge her wrong, and show himself a brother. 
he have a noble, calm, undaunted spirit;
 deliberate resolute, and fit
 for such a enterprise; and Jonadab
 shall not be slack to aggravate the crime,
 and urge he on, or aid he, if require. 
but i must veil my real sentiment
 with counterfeit sorrow, and observe
 each secret movement of his vary soul,
 and sympathise with he. young Absalom
 return from the field, where he have be
 to view his teem flock, jocund and gay,
 in all the sprightliness of youth and beauty,
 upon his slow-paced mule ride gentle on
 in careless attitude, and smile to see
 all nature smile around; when Jonadab,
 with solitary gait, approach, then turn
 aside, as if to shun the royal youth;
 which Absalom perceive, stop his mule,
 and lean on his neck, with courteous air
 thus Jonadab in gentle tone address:
 what mean those solemn look, that down-cast eye? 
now peace and plenty bless our happy land:
 joy shall methinks extend its cheer ray
 to every individual; but thou
 look half deject, wander in the field
 at this late hour; the day be in decline;
 the shepherd to their fold have lead their flock,
 and to their peaceful home be hasten. come,
 return with i, my friend, nor farther go;
 if ought distress thou, hide it not from i,
 i have a heart to feel for the distress;
 a hand too ever ready to revenge
 the wrong impose by violence and injustice
 smile and be happy, say the royal youth;
 and rise from his lean posture, look
 so graceful endear and so kind,
 that Jonadab thus venture to begin: —
 it be not for i to smile, most noble prince,
 while inconsolable and unredressed,
 dishonour tamar weep in bitter woe,
 dishonour, and by who? say Absalom,
 name but the villain, vengeance on his head
 shall instant fall; this hand shall strike the blow. 
earth, can thou bear the wretch foot to touch
 thy surface, and not groan? whoever he be,
 the miscreant shall not see tomorrow' sun. 
too hasty, prince, say Jonadab; be calm;
 recall the fatal sentence; it be too much
 to raise thy hand against a brother life,
 thy elder brother — brother, say the prince,
 and be it possible my brother thus
 shall be deprave? my brother amnon too? 
o virtue, where do thou reside, if not
 in amnon? but if he be thus lose to shame,
 it cancel all the duty that i owe he;
 henceforth shall intercourse between we cease,
 till i have form a scheme to be revenge;
 amnon shall die, and die by Absalom. 
go Jonadab, go home, and secret keep
 this purpose of my soul; — i will be thy friend,
 say Absalom. — then, onward as he pass,
 thus Jonadab congratulate himself:
 oh! happy i, no soon have i lose
 the favour of one prince, but i have gain
 another; Absalom be more aspire;
 not cool and passive, like the silly amnon,
 but pant to rule; he have a kingly spirit. 
once in his garden, as i lie conceal,
 i hear he in soliloquy, "oh! to reign —
 to wield a sceptre and establish law;
 oh! do the people seek to i for judgement,
 and prince wait for my decisive voice,
 ere they the cause determine; can i hear
 the loud applaud multitude exclaim,
 long live king Absalom. " — he be fit to rule. 
when amnon be dispatch, perhaps he may
 assume the kingdom — be it so, and i
 will be his ready agent, if he please,
 to aid his plot, or form they. oh! how sweet
 the counsel that be frame to please our will,
 how ready adopt; how despise
 that which be adverse, be it ever so good. 
but dear, dear self stand first in the account
 of friend, and that be the friend i will ever serve:
 whether to amnon or to Absalom
 i pay external homage. if to i
 this Absalom prove too imperious,
 i will aid the king, and keep myself secure. 
ay — that be the centre to which i must point
 all scheme and plot; then smile as he go,
 with eager pace he hasten to his home. 
grief and revenge now labour in the breast
 of Absalom; but artful he hide
 the struggle passion; a composure feign,
 sit on his countenance with placid ease;
 and he in seem gaiety ride home. 
his servant there in readiness attend,
 each anxious to receive the first command;
 nor fear unjust reproof, nor angry frown,
 the unwelcome greeting of imperious lord. 
too oft do master, void of judgement, check,
 by froward peevishness and discontent,
 the many little assiduity,
 which otherwise a servant zeal will mark,
 nor make distinction between good and bad;
 but Absalom, with nice judgement, scan
 their merit and defect; he in reproof
 be slow cautious, and exact just;
 no clamorous oath re-echo through his hall,
 nor mutter servant whisper imprecation;
 though affable and courteous, yet he never
 to low familiarity descend;
 but with great dignity be noble kind,
 reign in their heart, and by enliven smile
 encourage, they spontaneous attend,
 and love complete their servitude with joy,
 so now, as always at their lord approach,
 a secret transport thril through every heart. 
the gate one open, one receive the mule,
 while he dismount with a sprightly bound,
 trip light over the pavement; and those eye
 which ever spread serenity around,
 sparkle with seem pleasure till he come,
 enter his mansion, to where tamar sit
 in the most strike attitude of woe;
 her head, bestrew with ash and recline,
 one tremble hand support; the other hide
 among the fragment of her robe, which she
 in the first agony of her grief have tear. 
he stop, turn pale; then in his change face
 resentment flush, and sorrow swell his heart,
 which labour to suppress he tremble stand;
 but like a torrent, which break down a bank
 new raise to stop its course, so burst his grief
 through all his feign composure. in his arm
 he clasp the grieve fair, and mutual tear
 proclaim the anguish of their burden heart,
 but though his sorrow thus have burst its bound,
 revenge in ambush lurk, while thus the prince
 with soothe word his sister thus address, —
 i know the sad occasion of thy woe;
 but he be thy brother; silent bear thy wrong,
 nor by immoderate grief enhance the ill
 which can be redress. no blame be thy;
 my sister still in heart be undesile. 
tamar attempt reply; but from their spring
 in swift current flow the briny pearl;
 at length the power of speech return, the fair
 heave a deep sigh, and thus her moan begin, —
 o injury unparallelled! o deed
 more cruel than the murderer deadly blow! 
he take our life, it be lend but for a time;
 perhaps some year — perhaps a day — a hour:
 but he that rob a woman of her honour,
 rob she of more than life; — a brother too
 still aggravate the guilt. — o purity,
 thou first of female charm, to thou we owe
 our dignity; which, if in meekness clad,
 give we insuperable power; but, if
 of this deprive, our most presumptuous claim
 be cool compassion. o deject state! 
that humble homage we receive from man,
 in such proportion as our virtue fail,
 diminish. the inestimable gem,
 more precious than fine gold or ruby, — far
 outvie the dazzle ray of beauteous form,
 which like gay meteor but excite our gaze,
 then fade away. but this preeminence
 no more i boast; now stamp with infamy,
 that due respect, that deference ever pay
 to my exalt state shall hence be change
 to scorn: though by the dignity of birth
 protect from low insult, can i escape
 the meaning leer, the vain contemptuous smile,
 or, the more humble pity of the proud? 
such move strain in Absalom call forth
 all the fond rapture of fraternal love;
 who thus console her grief, — thou never shall be
 abandon to the scorn of taunt dame,
 who triumph in the downfal of the fair. 
my home be ever thy; in i behold
 thy guardian, brother, friend, companion kind. 
it shall be my early and my late care,
 with cheerful converse to enliv'n thy hour;
 all thou can with, which i have power to grant,
 expect from i. his sister give her hand,
 a earnest of conformity — he press
 the give pledge; her grateful heart reply, —
 o brother, always kind, now double so,
 to open thy friendly arm in this distress,
 and take i to protection: i accept
 thy offer boon. farewell, you courtly scene;
 no more shall tamar shine in your resort;
 but here recluse and tranquil ever 'bide;
 regale in that never-cloying feast,
 the internal calm of a untainted mind. 
this none can ravish from i; this be life. 
that god which raise my father to the throne,
 and still protect he with his powerful arm,
 shall be my all in all. to he i will pray
 incessant, and the great jehovah name
 shall fire my theme, and fill my heavenly song. 

Canto iv.

now solemn evening draw her silent veil
 over smile nature, and the pious king
 in supplication spend the sacred hour
 with special fervour, make intercession
 to the great sole dispenser of all good
 to bless his son, and soon restore his health. 
he scarce have end prayer, when tiding come
 that Jonadab beg audience. — the king
 eager to learn, thus instant reply,
 go send he hither; welcome to my soul
 be Jonadab, my amnon social friend;
 he doubtless come to bring i news of he. 
he enter. — thus the king, — o Jonadab,
 how do thy friend, my son, my amnon now? 
amnon be well, o king, say Jonadab. 
be well! return the astonish king, be well! 
it be but few hour since i myself he see,
 and see he sick, — and say thou now he be well;
 thou know it not, which much i wonder at,
 because i know he love thou; go now to he,
 go act a friendly part, go comfort he,
 i tell thou he be sick. — say Jonadab,
 i can inform thou of the whole device
 of his pretend sickness. then the king, —
 say thou pretend sickness? if there be
 dissimulation in my son, declare it;
 i will hear thou; — but take heed thou slander not,
 nor censure he unjust, on thy life. 
amnon have not be sick, say Jonadab;
 it be but a feint to lure his sister there
 to his embrace, and he have succeed. 
what do i hear? reply the king; my son
 defile my daughter! rise as he speak,
 with indignation flash from his eye;
 forth from his house he rush with hasty step
 to amnon, who be unprepared to see
 this unexpected visitant: the youth
 already self-convicted, now abash,
 never venture once to raise his down-cast eye,
 but speechless and confound stand to hear
 his sharp rebuke; when thus the king begin: —
 o son, thou shameful troubler of my house;
 what have thou do? where be thy princely virtue
 inculcate so long? now blast all. 
my elder-born, my first, my great joy,
 thus to debase thyself, thou that shall be
 the first in virtue, as the first in birth. 
how can a prince, himself debase with crime,
 aspire to judge and punish wicked man? 
in which of all my son can i confide,
 now amnon fail, who i have faultless deem? 
thou bitter herb, — thou blemish of my honour;
 how can i brook this foul disgrace? must i
 for ever bear confusion in my face,
 and blush for thou, thou worse than enemy? 
amnon, no long able to support
 such just reproof, in silence turn away,
 and burst into tear withdraw. — the king
 return with anger burn in his breast,
 mingle with sorrow for his daughter wrong;
 my daughter! oh! my daughter! he exclaim,
 i will avenge thy wrong; but oh! if i
 avenge my daughter, i destroy my son. 
then, all a father tenderness prevail,
 he weep, — his wrath subside and he pause,
 his own past fail rise in his mind;
 his guilty love for Bathsheba — he sigh
 her murder husband; shudder at the thought,
 he see no way to sooth the present ill
 but suffering and forbearance. — then the king,
 as if the stroke come from the hand of heaven,
 fall prostrate to the earth, submit thus:
 righteous art thou, o lord, and all thy judgment just,
 amnon mean while, with pierce grief oppress,
 double by the fore displeasure of the king,
 sit down and weep, while tear supply their stream. 
then rise, walk about with restless step,
 and thus in bitter agony complain:
 what be i now, and where? of late i pine
 in hopeless love, yet then i have some stay,
 a heart-felt innocence, that can support
 and cheer the droop spirit. but alas! 
virtue have leave i now, and i be expose;
 expose to what? to what, alas! i know not;
 it be hell itself burst in upon my soul,
 and pour forth all its torment. — terror! death! 
o irrecoverable innocence! 
where be thou go? for ever banish hence. 
arise you thick mist, you dark cloud
 overcast those twinkle star. o sable night,
 wrap i in deep shade, nor let a beam
 of penetrate light expose i more;
 darkness be fit to the guilty mind
 that shrink and start at every glimmer ray. 
but oh! it be not in the power of darkness
 to hide the hate self from self; within
 a sacred light perpetual shine,
 exposingev'ry failure to the sense,
 that vain struggle to compose the mind,
 and hush her sad inquietude to peace. 
but peace, the guest of innocence alone,
 take a eternal leave when guilt intrude,
 and now have take eternal leave of i. 
ah! wretched metaphor! oh! curse on vicious friend! 
have Jonadab advise i virtuous,
 i will still be innocent, and tamar pure;
 my father still have smile on i with joy,
 nor have i tremble at his chide frown;
 Absalom will have call i brother still,
 but now he will own i not. — this slight be just,
 and this the least part of my punishment;
 for inward guilt have yet severe pang. 
so wander he, complain half the night,
 then seek for rest in sleep, but seek in vain:
 terrific dream invade his wish repose. 
he sleep, start, wake; — then sleep and start again;
 and rise soon, but not to meet the morn
 with joy as heretofore; but to bewail
 the loss of that sweet calm that ever dwell
 within the guiltless breast; and in the world
 dwell no one more entitle to the bliss
 that wait on virtue, than be amnon once:
 he therefore more severe feel the loss
 for have taste in its first degree
 its sovereign blessedness. — who will then forsake
 the peaceful path of virtue to pursue
 allure vice through folly labyrinth,
 grasp at shadow of felicity,
 until overtake by her evil train
 of shame, remorse, confusion, and despair? 
such evil now the hapless amnon haunt,
 while in the avenge hand of Absalom
 death lurk lie. — the ambitious prince, resolve
 at once to avenge his sister, and remove
 a obstacle betwixt he and the crown,
 with unremitting vigilance attend
 the silent shade and unfrequented path
 where amnon use to walk, and meditate,
 hope to meet defenceless and alone
 the destine youth, and steal away his life. 
but amnon now as cautious avoid
 his dread presence; not with dread of death;
 such fear never fill his unsuspicious breast;
 but conscious guilt, that daunter of the soul,
 that few can brave, deter the timid youth. 
two year within the breast of Absalom
 revenge in ambush lurk, while in his face
 the mild gentleness and sweetness play:
 thus secrèt burn the subterraneous fire,
 while on earth teem surface gay smile
 the verdant herbage strew with various flower,
 till, burst from beneath, the sulphurous fume
 overturn the mountain, and the crumble mould
 bury the bloom beauty that it bear:
 so he unable long to contain
 the hide rancour burn in his breast
 determine by some bold and desperate stroke
 the effect his purpose; and with Jonadab
 consult, who thus ready advise: —
 assume the friend, — entice he to thy house;
 the credulous youth will never suspect a fraud. 
now be the time, now come the yearly feast
 when shepherd fleece their flock: make he thy guest
 with all thy brother: when with mirth and wine
 his heart elate, how easy will it be
 to give the final blow. with lower brow
 revengeful Absalom the rash advice
 adopt, and a sullen gloom overcast
 his lively feature. stern as that grim lord
 that through the forest take his fearless way,
 with high deportment Absalom retire. 

Canto v. 

return summer now come smile on,
 excite every peaceful breast to mirth;
 but amnon meet with tear the fatal season:
 this sad remembrancer of his past crime
 awake his grief, and from his couch he rise
 ere yet the approach day begin to dawn,
 while the full moon reign mistress of the night. 
sleep on, you son of innocence and ease,
 (the restless amnon with a sigh exclaim,
 as from his window high he cast a look
 over the silent street, for not a voice
 disturb the solemn hour) sleep on — sleep on:
 so be i wont to sleep away the night,
 rise with the morn, and in the day rejoice:
 but now in morn or night, or sleep or 'wake,
 i feel no joy. oh that i can forget
 i once be happy! oh that this one step,
 one err step, shall kill my peace for ever. 
o moon, i blush beneath thy silver beam;
 i have oft behold thou with exult heart,
 but now i shrink at every thing that be pure:
 a modest virgin, innocent and fair,
 strike terror to my soul: to i she seem
 exalt high above my fall state:
 if such a one i venture to approach,
 i instant recoil, and just pay
 a secret adoration to the breast
 of innocence; for oh! what parity
 can there subsist betwixt innocence and guilt? 
the world reproach and censorious sneer
 harrow the heart and aggravate the sense:
 but yet that aggravation poise against
 the pang of guilt, be of but little weight:
 the world offend may again be win,
 or all its vain reproach set at nought,
 when the heart, firm steel with innocence,
 shrink not, but rise with true nobleness,
 superior to the grovel son of vice,
 and smile at powerless envy. — but alas! 
to i return, whether of day or night,
 aid sharp reflection and new point its spear. 
now wake bird in cheerful concert join. 
their every note proclaim they innocent. 
the fun arise and the world awake;
 the prince retire with melancholy step
 into his garden, where recluse and still
 beneath the arch bough of shady tree,
 with head decline and arm lock round his breast,
 he sigh the heavy slow-paced hour away;
 until interrupt by a messenger,
 who, with due deference approach near,
 thus speak: o prince, i come from Absalom,
 his sheep he shears tomorrow, and intreat
 thou, with thy royal brother, to partake
 the feast, and spend with he the day in mirth. 
surprise and pleasure rush into his heart
 at such a unexpected invitation,
 which he accept, nor do hesitate
 one moment to resolve; for amnon still
 be unsuspicious as a infant child,
 that fearless trust itself to every arm
 that open to receive it. with quick step
 he pace to and fro; his bosom glow,
 and thus anticipate the expect bliss. 
o joyful day when i again shall meet
 my dear offend brother, who so long
 I have cautious avoid: his good will
 great exceed my most adventurous hope:
 forgetful of my fault, he kind now
 invite i to his house, without reproach
 or intimation of my late misdeed. 
yes, my good brother, i will be thy guest —
 my grateful heart overflow; i now can fall
 down at thy foot, and from thy hand receive
 the death i do deserve. thus amnon still,
 in humble strain and true repentant heart,
 pour forth his soul in such foliloquy
 all day and night, till in the morning fair,
 the foremost of the princely cavalcade,
 he glad haste to the fatal feast. 
now Absalom with secret pleasure see
 the long wisthed day arrive, and in the morn
 assiduous in comely dress array
 his lovely person, lovely in extreme:
 not in all israel numerous tribe be find
 his peer in beauty; for from head to foot
 no blemish, no deformity be see,
 but well proportion limb, and feature fair,
 with every natural, every borrow grace
 that give to beauty power. the conscious prince
 omit no external ornament
 that may, if possible, such gift improve:
 but look at his spotless hand, he say, —
 must these be die in blood? a brother blood? 
no, i have servant, they shall give the blow. 
then to and fro he through his chamber stalk,
 revolve in his mind the consequence
 of open his design. he pause, he think
 his servant may refuse — or worse, betray. 
at length he say, — I be wrong to censure they;
 great proof i have have of their fidelity;
 i will trust they now. then call he those he love:
 they come. he say, you have do all thing well
 accord to my order for this feast,
 but on your care i can so well depend,
 that whatsoever be give to your charge
 i think no more of, for i have always find
 you true and faithful; therefore i make choice
 of you for my accomplice this day:
 it be not intend for a day of mirth,
 as it appear, and must as yet appear
 till i have fulfil the purpose of my soul. 
our guest must sumptuous be entertain:
 but when they have partake the rich repast,
 and wine exhilarate and mirth prevail,
 be you prepare, and when i give the word,
 pierce amnon to the heart, for he must die. 
his servant tremble at the dire command. 
why tremble you? say Absalom, fear not,
 it be i command you — all the deed be i;
 you be but instrument within my grasp,
 and of his blood be spotless: if there be guilt
 in take vengeance for the atrocious crime,
 let all that guilt be i: since justice sleep
 in his fond father hand, it be right that i
 assume the power, and on his impious head
 hurl vengeance. but observe, it next behove
 we to evade the storm that will ensue:
 in Geshur we shall find a safe retreat:
 my fleet horse for the flight prepare:
 soon as the wound be give, we will mount and flee;
 swift as the sweep wind we will over the hill,
 and leave the king to bury he, and mourn. 
his servant, more by love than duty bind,
 all bow obedient to his sovereign will. 
now come the royal guest, and amnon first
 dismount from his mule, with conscious blush
 and falter voice thus venture to address
 the offend brother: — o my Absalom,
 forgive, he say — and interrupt tear
 plead more powerful than eloquence,
 stagger the purpose of maacah son,
 and in his feeling soul a conflict raise
 betwixt his brother life and sister fame:
 he silent pause; but in his breast revenge
 be too deep root by a two year growth
 for one soft moment to eradicate:
 he therefore wipe away a piteous tear,
 and make to amnon this compose reply:
 i do not send for thou to weep and mourn;
 today i have a feast; this prosperous year
 increase flock increase the shepherd joy:
 rejoice with i, my brother, and be glad. 
then do he warm press his hand, and point
 the chief place. the prince shed tear of joy,
 then fat he down, forget his grief and smile. 
wine in profusion sparkle in the bowl,
 inspire social mirth; they free quaff;
 but Absalom the emolient draught evade,
 lest it relax his stern determination;
 but quick replenish the sink bowl,
 press on all the intoxicate cup,
 until mirth predominate, and every heart
 expand with social freedom; Absalom
 then give the fatal word; his servant plunge
 the destine dart, and from the prince side
 gush forth life be reek stream — he fall — uprise
 in consternation those who vengeance spare,
 each tremble for his life; confuse they flee:
 mingle with gore, the wine in current flow;
 while, roll in the flood, the murder prince
 alone, in all the agony of woe,
 groan out his soul, and close his eye in death. 
