the tale of cushi.

from ii. SAMUEL, chap. xviii.

how fare my son? the tremble monarch cry,
 why will thou ask? afflict Cush reply;
 a fate like he may all that hate thou feel,
 who blood, alas! have stain the guilty steel. 
he fall beneath the hand of David friend,
 but to my story let my lord attend. 

when the pale morning show her languid face,
 and the dim sun begin his usual race;
 who sullen orb receive a crimson dye,
 and tempest hover in the frown sky,
 as though the heaven weep a mortal fate,
 and nature tremble at domestic hate;
 within the shade of ephraim dusky wood,
 in just array the meeting army stand;
 the frown host with equal fury glow,
 and each to death defy his meeting foe;
 all tender thought be lose in horrid rage,
 and with a shout the charge host engage:
 then cloud of arrow hide the darken sky,
 and hiss lance lighten as they fly:
 dreadful the sight and horrid be the cry. 
here groan a steed that feel its smart wound,
 and there a soldier pinion to the ground:
 at length, proud Israel begin to fail,
 our juster cause can over their strength prevail;
 the vanquish army raise a fearful cry,
 and through the wood their mighty number fly;
 there horrid bramble tear their wound anew,
 and thousand death their fly heel pursue:
 then rage our general through the dreadful gloom,
 pale terror hover on his wave plume;
 from his know spear the shriek number run,
 and from his fury flee your conquer son;
 grim danger urge he on with fatal speed,
 and through black shade he lash the weary steed:
 in the dark center of this forest stand
 a lofty oak, which overlook the wood. 
through its thick arm he venture careless in,
 they spring catch he by the beauteous chin;
 his curl lock among the branch fly;
 his spirit fail he, and his foe pursue;
 around in vain he cast a mournful eye,
 and wish a friend; for none, alas! be nigh:
 but hostile shout invade his fright ear,
 and soon beneath he shine a grove of spear:
 now, traitor, fall — our mighty leader cry:
 (while glow vengeance sparkle in his eye)
 then step a captain of the loyal band,
 and vain strive to stay his fatal hand. 
that cruel arm impel the fly dart,
 and the keen weapon sink within his heart:
 then those fair cheek resign their rosy dye,
 yet life a moment struggle in his eye;
 as from so fair a mansion loath to fly,
 till the red torrent stain his throb tide;
 then with a groan the beauteous rebel die. 

hold, — "stop thy story,"— cry the weep king,
 thy horrid tale have leave a mortal sting;
 my soul though practise in the path of woe,
 grow sick and stagger at this mighty blow:
 from its cold fountain life forget to run;
 oh Absalom — oh Absalom, my son,
 eternal shade have seal thy cheerful eye;
 and on the ground thy breathless beauty lie:
 curse be the hand that all my hope beguile,
 and leave a parent to lament his child:
 without a tear let none his story tell,
 but curse the forest where my darling fall:
 while these wan eye with last sorrow run,
 lose to the world, and stranger to the sun;
 let mild song attend his noontide ray,
 for i will best become the close day,
 while round my lyre afflict father throng,
 and orphan listen to the mournful song. 
