the vigil of Venus. 

write in the time of Julius Caesar, and by some ascribe to Catullus.

let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

the spring, the new, the warb'le spring appear,
 the youthful season of revive year;
 in spring the love enkindle mutual heat,
 the feather nation choose their tuneful mate,
 the tree grow fruitful with descend rain
 and dress in differ green adorn the plain. 
she come; to morrow beauty empress rove
 through walk that wind run within the groves;
 she twine the shoot myrtle into bower,
 and tie their meeting top with wreath of flower,
 then raise sublime on her easy throne
 from nature powerful dictate draw her own. 
let those love now; who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

it be on that day which see the teem flood
 swell round, impregnate with celestial blood;
 wander in circle stand the finny crew,
 the midst be leave a void expanse of blue,
 there parent ocean work with heave throe,
 and drop wet the fair Dione rise. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love they more. 

she paint the purple year with vary show,
 tip the green gem, and make the blossom glow. 
she make the turgid bud receive the breeze,
 expand to leaf, and shade the naked tree. 
when gather damp the misty night diffuse,
 she sprinkle all the morn with balmy dew;
 bright tremble pearl depend at every spray,
 and keep from fall, seem to fall away. 
a glossy freshness hence the rose receive,
 and blush sweet through all her silken leaf;
 (the drop descend through the silent night,
 while star serene roll their golden light,)
 close until the morn, her humid veil she hold;
 then deck with virgin pomp the flower unsold. 
soon will the morning blush: you maid! prepare,
 in rosy garland bind your flow hair
 it be venus plant: the blood fair Venus shed,
 over the gay beauty pour immortal red;
 from love soft kiss a sweet ambrosial smell
 be teach for ever on the leaf to dwell;
 from gem, from flame, from orient ray of light
 the rich lustre make her purple bright;
 and she to morrow wed; the sport gale
 untie her zone, she burst the verdant veil;
 through all her sweet the rifle lover fly,
 and as he breathe, her glow fire arise. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

now fair Dione to the myrtle grove
 send the gay nymph, and send her tender love. 
and shall they venture? be it safe to go? 
while nymph have heart, and Cupid wear a bow? 
yes safe venture, it be his mother will;
 he walk unarmed and undesigning ill,
 his torch extinct, his quiver useless hang,
 his arrow idle, and his bow unstring. 
and yet, you nymph, beware, his eye have charm,
 and love that be naked, still be love in arm.
 let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

from Venus bower to delia lodge repair
 a virgin train complete with modest air:
 'chaste Delia! grant our suit! or shun the wood,
' nor stain this sacred lawn with savage blood. 
 'Venus, o Delia! if she can persuade,
' will ask thy presence, may she ask a maid. 
here cheerful quire for three auspicious night
 with song prolong the pleasurable rite:
 here croud in measure lightly-decent rove;
 or seek by pair the covert of the grove,
 where meeting green for arbour arch above,
 and mingle flowret strow the scene of love. 
here dance Ceres shake her golden sheaf:
 here Bacchus revel, deck with viny leaf:
 here wit enchant god in laurel crown
 wake all the ravish hour with silver sound. 
you field, you forest, own dione reign,
 and Delia, Huntress Delia, shun the plain. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

gay with the bloom of all her open year,
 the queen at Hybla bid her throne appear;
 and there preside; and there the favourite band
 (her smile grace) share the great command. 
now beauteous Hybla! dress thy flowery bed
 with all the pride the lavish season shed,
 now all thy colour, all thy fragrance yield,
 and rival enna aromatic field. 
to fill the presence of the gentle court
 from every quarter rural nymph resort,
 from wood, from mountain, from their humble vale,
 from Waters curl with the wanton gale. 
please with the joyful train, the laugh queen
 in circle seat they round the bank of green;
 and 'lovely girl, (she whisper) guard your heart;
' my boy, though strip of arm, abound in art.
 let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

let tender grass in shade ally spread,
 let early flower erect their paint head. 
to morrow glory be to morrow see,
 that day, old ether wed earth in green. 
the vernal father bid the spring appear,
 in cloud he couple to produce the year,
 the sap descend over her bosom run,
 and all the various sort of soul begin. 
by wheel unknown to sight, by secret vein
 distil life, the fruitful goddess reign,
 through all the lovely realm of native day,
 through all the circle land, and circle sea;
 with fertile seed she fill the pervious earth,
 and ever fix the mystic way of birth. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

it be she the parent, to the latian shore
 through various danger troy remainder bear. 
she win Lavinia for her warlike son,
 and win she, the latian empire win. 
she give to Mars the maid, who honour womb
 swell with the founder of immortal Rome. 
decoy by show the Sabin dame she lead,
 and teach our vigorous youth the mean to wed. 
hence spring the roman, hence the race divine
 through which great Caesar draw his Julian line. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

in rural seat the soul of pleasure reign;
 the life of beauty fill the rural scene;
 even love (if fame the truth of love declare)
 draw first the breathe of a rural air. 
some please meadow pregnant beauty press,
 she lay her infant on its flowery breast,
 from nature sweet he sip the fragrant dew,
 he smile, he kiss they, and by kiss grow. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 

now bull over stalk of broom extend their side,
 secure of favour from their low bride. 
now stately ram their fleecy consort lead,
 who bleat follow through the wander shade. 
and now the goddess bid the bird appear,
 raise all their music, and salute the year:
 then deep the swan begin, and deep the song
 run over the water where he sail along;
 while Philomela tune a triple strain,
 and from the poplar charm the listen plain. 
we fancy love express at every note,
 it melt, it warble, in her liquid throat. 
of barbarous Tereus she complain no more,
 but sing for pleasure as for grief before. 
and still her grace rise, her air extend,
 and all be silence until the siren end. 

how long in come be my lovely spring? 
and when shall i, and when the swallow sing? 
sweet Philomela cease, — or here i sit,
 and silent lose my rapturous hour of wit:
 it be go, the fit retire, the flame decay,
 my tuneful Phoebus fly averse away. 
his own amycle thus, as story run,
 but once be silent, and that once undo. 
let those love now, who never love before,
 let those who always love, now love the more. 
