a dedication to G**** H******* ESQ;

expect not, sir, in this narration,
 a fleechan, fleth'ran dedication,
 to roose you up, and call you guide,
 and spring of great and noble blood;
 because you be surname like his grace,
 perhaps relate to the race:
 then when i be tire — and so be you,
 with money a fulsome, sinful lie,
 set up a face, how i stop short,
 for fear your modesty be hurt. 

this may do — maun do, sir, with they who
 must please the great-folk for a wamefou;
 for i! so Iaigh i need not bow,
 for, lord be thanket, i can plough;
 and when i downa yoke a nag,
 then, lord be thanket, i can beg;
 sae i shall say, and that be no flatt'rin,
 it be just such poet and such patron. 

the poet, some guide angel help he,
 or else, i fear, some ill. one skelp he! 
he may do well for all he be do yet,
 but only — he be not just begin yet. 

the patron, (sir, you must forgie i,
 i will lie, come what will of i)
 on every hand it will allow be,
 he be just — nae better than he shall be. 

i ready and free grant,
 he downa see a poor man want;
 what be no his own, he will take it;
 what once he say, he will break it;
 ought he can lend he will not refuse,
 till aft his guidness be abuse;
 and rascal whiles that do he wrang,
 even that, he do not mind it long:
 as master, landlord, husband, father,
 he do not fail his part in either. 

but then, no thanks to he for all that;
 no godly symptom you can call that;
 it be nothing but a mild feature,
 of our poor, sinful, corrupt nature:
 you will get the best of moral work,
 among black gentoo, and pagan Turk,
 or hunter wild on Ponotaxi,
 who never hear of orth-d-xy. 
that he be the poor man friend in need,
 the gentleman in word and deed,
 it be no through terror of d-mn-t-n;
 it be just a carnal inclination,
 and och! that be no r-g-n-r-t-n! 

morality, thou deadly bane,
 thy ten of thousand thou have slay! 
vain be his hope, whase slay and trust be,
 in moral mercy, truth and justice! 
no — stretch a point to catch a plack;
 abuse a brother to his back;
 steal through the winnock from a where,
 but point the rake that take the door;
 be to the poor like any whunstane,
 and haud their nose to the grunstane;
 ply every art of legal thieve;
 no matter — stick to sound believe. 

learn three-mile prayer, and half-mile grace,
 with well spread love, and long, wry face;
 grunt up a solemn, lengthen groan,
 and damn all party but your own;
 i will warrant then, you be no deceiver,
 a steady, sturdy, staunch believer. 

o you who leave the spring of clun,
 for gumlie dub of your own delvin! 
you son of heresy and error,
 you will some day squeel in quake terror! 
when vengeance draw the sword in wrath,
 and in the fire throw the sheath;
 when ruin, with his sweep besom,
 just fret till heaven commission give he;
 while over the harp pale misery moan,
 and strike the ever-deep'ning tone,
 still loud shriek, and heavy groan! 

your pardon, sir, for this digression,
 i may forget my dedication;
 but when divinity come cross i,
 my reader then be sure to lose i. 

so sir, you see it be no daft vapour,
 but i mature think it proper,
 when all my work i do review,
 to dedicate they, sir, to you:
 because (you need not take it ill)
 i think they something like yourself. 

then patronize they wvi' your favour,
 and your petitioner shall ever —
 i have almost say, ever pray,
 but that be a word i need not say:
 for pray i have little skill of it;
 i be both dead-swee, and wretched ill. of it;
 but i shall repeat each poor man prayer,
 that ken or hear about you, sir —

 'may never misfortune gowl bark,
' howl through the dwelling of the clerk! 
 'may never his generous, honest heart,
' for that same generous spirit smart! 
 'may K******'s far-honored name
' long beet his hymeneal flame,
 'till H*******'s, at least a diz'n,
 'be from their nuptial labor rise:
' five bony lass round their table,
 'and seven brave fellow, stout and able,
 'to serve their king and country well,
' by word, or pen, or point steel! 
 'may health and peace, with mutual ray,
' shine on the evening of his day;
 'till his wee, curly John ier-oe,
 'when ebb life no more shall flow,
' the last, sad, mournful rite bestow! ' 

i will not wind a long conclusion,
 with complimentary effusion:
 but while your wish and endeavour,
 be bless with Fortune smile and favour,
 i be, dear sir, with zeal most fervent,
 your much indebt, humble servant. 

but if, which power above prevent,
 that iron-hearted carl, want,
 attend, in his grim advance,
 by sad mistake, and black mischance,
 while hope, and joy, and pleasure fly he;
 make you as poor a dog as i be,
 your humble servant then no more;
 for who will humble serve the poor? 
but by a poor man hope in heaven! 
while recollection power be give,
 if, in the vale of humble life,
 the victim sad of Fortune strife,
 i, through the tender-gushing tear,
 shall recognise my master dear,
 if friendless, low, we meet together,
 then, sir, your hand — my friend and brother. 
