a epistle to Fleetwood Shephard, ESQ

Burleigh, may 14, 1689. 

as once a twelvemonth to the priest,
 holy at Rome, here antichrist,
 the spanish king present a jennet,
 to show his love: — that be all that be in it:
 for if his holiness will thump
 his reverend bum against horse Rump;
 he may be equip from his own stable
 with one more white, and eke more able. 

or as with gondola and man, his
 good excellence the duke of Venice
 (i wish, for rhime, it have be the king)
 sail out, and give the gulph a ring;
 which trick of state, he wise maintain,
 keep kindness up betwixt old acquaintance:
 for else, in honest truth, the sea
 have much less need of gold than he. 

or, not to rove, and pump one fancy
 for popish simile beyond sea;
 as folk from mud-walled tenement
 bring landlord pepper-corn for rent;
 present a turkey, or a hen
 to those might better spare they ten:
 even so with all submission, i
 (for first man instance, then apply)
 send you each year a homely letter,
 who may return i much a better. 

then take it, sir, as it be write,
 to pay respect, and not show wit:
 nor look askew at what it say:
 there be no petition in it — 'faith. 

here some will scratch their head, and try
 what they shall write, and how, and why:
 but i conceive, such folk be quite in
 mistake, in theory of write. 
if once for principle it be lay,
 that thought be trouble to the head;
 i argue thus: the world agree,
 that he write well, who write with ease:
 then he, by sequel logical,
 write best, who never think at all. 

verse come from heaven, like inward light;
 mere human pain can never come by it:
 the god, not we, the poem make:
 we only tell folk what he speak. 
hence, when anatomist discourse,
 how like brute organ be to we;
 they grant, if high power think fit,
 a bear may soon be make a wit;
 and that, for any thing in nature,
 pig may squeak love-ode, dog bark satyr. 

Memnon, though stone, be count vocal;
 but it be the god, mean while, that speak all. 
Rome oft have hear a cross harangue,
 with prompt priest behind the hang:
 the wooden head resolve the question;
 while you and Pettis help the jest on. 

your crabbed rogue, that read Lucretius,
 be against god, you know; and teach we,
 the god make not the poet; but
 the thesis, vice-versa put,
 shall hebrew-wise be understand;
 and mean, the poet make the god. 

egyptian gardener thus be say to
 have set the leek they after pray to;
 and romish baker praise the deity
 they chip, while yet in it be paniety. 

that when you poet swear and cry,
 the god inspire! i rave! i die! 
if inward wind do true swell you,
 it must be the cholic in your belly:
 that write be but just like dice;
 and lucky main make people wise:
 that jumble word, if fortune throw they,
 shall, well as Dryden, form a poem;
 or make a speech, correct and witty,
 as you know who — at the committee. 

so atom dance round the center,
 they urge, make all thing at a venture. 

but grant matter shall be speak
 by method, rather than by luck;
 this may confine their young style,
 who dryden pedagogue at Will:
 but never can be mean to tie
 authentic wit, like you and i:
 for as young child, who be try in
 go-cart, to keep their step from slide;
 when member knit, and leg grow strong,
 make use of such machine no long;
 but leap pro libitu, and scout
 on horse call Hobby, or without:
 so when at school we first declaim,
 old Busbey walk we in a theme,
 who prop support our infant vein,
 and help the rickets in the brain:
 but when our soul their force dilate,
 and thought grow up to wit estate;
 in verse or prose, we write or chat,
 not six-pence matter upon what. 

it be not how well a author say;
 but it be how much, that gather praise. 
Tonson, who be himself a wit,
 count writer merit by the sheet. 
thus each shall down with all he think,
 as boy eat bread, to fill up chink. 

kind sir, i shall be glad to see you;
 i hope you be well; so god be with you;
 be all i think at first to write:
 but thing, since then, be alter quite;
 fancy flow in, and Muse fly high:
 so god know when my Clack will lie:
 i must, sir, prattle on, as afore,
 and beg your pardon yet this half hour. 

so at pure barn of loud non-con,
 where with my granam i have go,
 when lobb have sift all his text,
 and i well hope the pudding next;
 now to apply, have plague i more,
 than all his villain cant before. 

for your religion, first, of she
 your friend do savoury thing aver:
 they say, she be honest, as your claret,
 not sour with cant, nor stume with merit:
 your chamber be the sole retreat
 of chaplain every Sunday night:
 of grace, no doubt, a certain sign,
 when lay-man herd with man divine:
 for if their fame be just great,
 who will no popish nuncio treat;
 that his be great, we must grant,
 who will treat nuncio protestant. 
one single positive weigh more,
 you know, than negative a score. 

in politic, i hear, you be stanch,
 direct bend against the french;
 deny to have your free-born toe
 dragoon into a wooden shoe:
 be in no plot; but fair drive at
 the public welfare in your private:
 and will, for England glory, try
 Turk, Jew, and jesuit to defy,
 and keep your place until you die. 

for i, who wander fortune throw
 from what i love, the town and you;
 let i just tell you how my time be
 past in a country-life. — imprimis,
 as soon as phoebus ray inspect we,
 first, sir, i read; and then i breakfast;
 so on, until foresaid god do set,
 i sometime study, sometime eat. 
thus, of your hero and brave boy,
 with who old Homer make such noise,
 the great action i can find,
 be, that they do their work, and dine. 

the book of which I be chief fond,
 be such, as you have whilom con;
 that treat of china civil law,
 and subject right in Golconda;
 of highway-elephant at ceylan,
 that rob in clan, like man of the Highland;
 of apes that storm, or keep a town,
 as well almost, as count Lauzun;
 of unicorn and alligator,
 elk, mermaid, mummy, witch, satyr,
 and twenty other stranger matter;
 which, though they be thing I have no concern in,
 make all our groom admire my learning. 

critic i read on other man,
 and hyper upon they again;
 from who remark i give opinion
 on twenty book, yet never look in one. 

then all your wit, that flear and sham,
 down from don Quixote to Tom tram;
 from who i jest and punns purloin,
 and sly put they off for i:
 fond to be think a country wit:
 the rest, — when fate and you think fit. 

sometime i climb my mare, and kick she
 to bottle ale, and neighbour vicar;
 sometime at Stamford take a quart,
 esquire shepherd health — with all my heart. 

thus, without much delight, or grief,
 i fool away a idle life;
 until Shadwell from the town retire
 (choke up with fame and sea-coal fire)
 to bless the wood with peaceful lyric;
 then hey for praise and panegyric,
 justice restore, and nation free,
 and wreath round William glorious head. 
