morning, on the seashore.

what print of fairy foot be here
on neptune smooth and yellow sand?
what midnight revel' airy dance,
beneath the moon-beam's tremble glance
have bless these shore? — what sprightly band
have chace the wave unchecked by fear?
whoever they be they flee from morn,
for now, all silent and forlorn,
these tide-forsaken sand appear —
return, sweet sprite! the scene to cheer!

in vain the call! — until moonlight hour
again diffuse its soft power,
Titania, nor her fairy love,
emerge from india spicy grove.
then, when the shadowy hour return,
when silence reign over air and earth,
and every star in æther burn,
they come to celebrate their mirth;
in frolic ring light trip the ground,
bid music voice on silence win,
until magic echo answer round —
thus do their festive rite begin.

o fairy form so coy to mortal ken,
your mystic step to poet only show;
o! lead i to the brook, or hollow glen,
retire far, with wind wood overgrow!
wherever you best delight to rule;
if in some forest lone retreat,
thither conduct my will foot
to the light brink of fountain cool,
where, sleep in the midnight dew,
lie spring young bud of every hue,
yield their sweet breath to the air;
to fold their silken leaf from harm,
and their chill head in moonshine warm,
be bright titania tender care.

there, to the night-birds's plaintive chaunt
your carol sweet the love to raise,
with oaten reed and pastoral lay;
and guard with forceful spell her haunt,
who, when your antic sport be do,
oft lull you in the lily cell,
sweet flower! that suit your slumber well,
and shield you from the rise sun.
when not to india steep you fly
after twilight and the moon,
in honey bud you love to lie,
while reign supreme light be fervid noon;
nor quit the cell where peace pervade.
till night lead on the dew and shade.

even now your scene enchant meet my sight!
i see the earth unclose, the palace rise,
the high dome swell, and long arcade of light
glitter among the deep embower wood,
and glance reflect from the tremble flood!
while to soft lute the portal wide unfold,
and fairy form, of fine ætherial dye,
advance with frolic step and laugh eye,
their hair with pearl, their garment deck with gold;
pearl that in neptune briny wave they seek,
and gold from india deep cavern bring.
thus your light vision to my eye unveil,
you sportive pleasure, sweet illusion, hail!
but ah! at morn first blush again you fade!
so from youth ardent gaze life landscape gay,
and form in fancy summer hue array,
dissolve at once in air at truth be resplendent day!
