narva and Mored,

a african eclogue.

recite the love of narva and Mored
 the priest of chalma triple idol say. 
high from the ground the youthful warrior spring,
 loud on the concave shell the lance ring:
 in all the mystic maze of the dance,
 the youth of banny burn sand advance,
 while the soft virgin pant look behind,
 and ride upon the pinion of the wind:
 ascend the mountain brow, and measure round
 the steepy cliff of chalma sacred ground. 
chalma, the god who noisy thunder fly
 through the dark cover of the midnight sky. 
who arm direct the close-embattled host,
 and sink the labour vessel on the coast. 
chalma, who excellence be know from far;
 from Lupa rocky hill to calabar. 
the guardian god of Afric and the isle,
 where nature in her strong vigour smile;
 where the blue blosson of the forky thorn,
 bend with the nectar of the open morn:
 where ginger aromatic, mat root,
 creep through the mead, and up the mountain shoot. 

three time the virgin, swim on the breeze,
 dance in the shadow of the mystic tree:
 when, like a dark cloud spread to the view,
 the firstborn son of war and blood pursue;
 swift as the elk they pour along the plain;
 swift as the fly cloud distil rain. 
swift as the bound of the youthful roe,
 they course around, and lengthen as they go. 
like the long chain of rock, who summit rise,
 far in the sacred region of the sky;
 upon who top the blacken tempest lour,
 while down its side the gush torrent pour,
 like the long cliffy mountain which extend
 from lorbar cave, to where the nation end,
 which sink in darkness, thicken and obscure,
 impenetrable, mystic and impure;
 the fly terror of the war advance,
 and round the sacred oak, repeat the dance. 
furious they twist around the gloomy tree,
 like leaf in autumn, twirl with the breeze. 
so when the splendour of the die day
 dart the red lustre of the watery way;
 sudden beneath toddida whistle brink,
 the circle billow in wild eddy sink,
 whirl furious round, and the loud burst wave
 sink down to chalma sacerdotal cave,
 explore the palace on zira coast,
 where howl the war-song of the chieftain ghost;
 where the artificer in realm below,
 gild the rich lance, or beautify the bow;
 from the young palmtree spin the useful twine,
 or make the tooth of elephant divine. 
where the pale child of the feeble sun,
 in search of gold, through every climate run:
 from burn heat to freeze torment go,
 and live in all vicissitude of woe. 
like the loud eddy of toddida sea,
 the warrior circle the mysterious tree:
 until spend with exercise they spread around
 upon the open blossom of the ground. 
the priestess rise, sing the sacred tale,
 and the loud chorus echo through the dale. 

priestess.

far from the burn sand of calabar;
 far from the lustre of the morning star;
 far from the pleasure of the holy morn;
 far from the blessedness of chalma horn:
 now rest the soul of narva and Mored,
 lay in the dust, and number with the dead. 
dear be their memory to we, and long,
 long, shall their attribute be know in song. 
their life be transient as the meadow flower
 ripen in age, wither in a hour. 
chalma, reward they in his gloomy cave,
 and open all the prison of the grave. 
breed to the service of the godhead throne,
 and live but to serve his god alone,
 narva be beauteous as the open day
 when on the spangle wave the sunbeam play,
 when the mackaw ascend to the sky,
 view the bright splendour with a steady eye. 
tall, as the house of chalma dark retreat;
 compact and firm, as rhadal ynca fleet,
 complete beauteous as a summer sun,
 be narva, by his excellence undo. 
where the soft togla creep along the mead,
 through scent calamus and fragrant reed;
 where the sweet zinsa spread its mat bed
 live the still sweet flower, the young Mored;
 black be her face, as togla hide cell;
 soft as the moss where hiss adder dwell. 
as to the sacred court she bring a fawn,
 the sportive tenant of the spicy lawn,
 she see and love! and narva too forget
 his sacred vestment and his mystic lot. 
long have the mutual sigh, the mutual tear,
 burst from the breast and scorn confinement there,
 existence be a torment! o my breast! 
can i find accent to unfold the rest! 
lock in each other arm, from hyga cave,
 they plunge relentless to a watery grave;
 and fall murmur to the power above,
 "god! take our life, unless we live to love." 
