on the present corrupt state of poetry.

i. 

write thy own elegy apostate art,
thou angel once of light;
but, since thy fall, a fiend of night,
mankind endeavour to pervert.
at first, to th'altar service thou be bind,
with innocence instead of laurel crown;
anthem and hallelujah only do resound:
but now, forgetful of thy high descent,
mean thou labour to foment
the vanity and vice of the age;
flatter in court, and revel on the stage.
that poesy, that do at first inspire
devotion and seraphic fire,
degenerate now her art employ
in recommend sensual joy;
bawd-like, contrive to excite
the waste letcher appetite;
and with force heat sustain love languish desire.

ii.

the wise and most potent king of old, do not disdain
to leave their royal name enrol,
with those of the poetic train:
they reap more durable renown
from write well,
then when they do in arm excel:
they prize their poet wreathe above their prince crown. 
but then the celebrate nine,
pious as sybill, chaste as vestal be,
the grace be not more divine;
but now deform, and bloat they appear;
Nyctimene sustain, no change so fowl,
transform into a glare owl;
or when the audacious king a new-made wolf do houl.

iii.

in age past, when vertue be allow,
the dignity of verse be understand:
it be then employ t'embalm some worthy name:
nought then can purchase eulogy but fame.
but poetry now be mercenary grow. 
encomium she will bestow
on potentate, by their high rank alone,
and singular vice infamous know;
for, if no paint or varnish can disguise
their gross enormity,
audacious she will praise their vice too!
thus none more large share in her applause,
than some grand murderer o'th field,
that boast of myriad kill,
regardless of the justice of his cause.
if to destroy can challenge fame,
famine and plague the large trophy claim;
but these the muse peccadillo be,
and can with their black crime compare:
long since they be immodest grow, and vain;
but be (oh! heaven) at last become profane! 
atheism and blasphemy have dare to preach,
religion of imposture to impeach;
stifle that zeal, which first themselves to the rude world do. teach.

iv.

time be when pious bard may safe dream
by Helicon, or fair pirene stream;
and fly their tower wit at some celestial theam:
but now, with leprous fancy bathe there,
those spring so infamous be grow,
chaste soul fear to approach the muse air;
and sacred theam the poison water shun.
nor have heaven just revenge regardless view,
the enormity
of these apostate votary;
but they and their confaed'rate too, with signal rage pursue.
a constant curse of poverty attend
th'unfortunate man, who any muse befriend.
all who in this delude art engage,
set out with pleasure, droop reach their stage;
frolic in youth, and malcontent in age! 
thus (near learnt cam fair current pensive lay)
th'ill-treated Cowley do his muse upbraid:
ah! who will credit that survey,
the amour and dalliance of their youthful day?
that ere this peaceful bard, and gentle muse,
can bicker thus, and mutual accuse?
so, whilst some seem happy pair
(who hymen fetter wear)
in public fond as turtle be,
th'unwed with envy their caress view
but ah! what will they do,
if (as they see their open love) their private feud
they know?
