soliloquy.

nature! in all correct, thy hand we trace,
and over thy carpet hail a beauteous race;
each have their station, all their native home,
in adverse soil and clime they find a tomb:
some in the open lawn, delight seem
to look with vigour on the sun full beam:
while some retire, hide the modest head,
and screen their beauty in the shelter shade:
some dare the summit of the mountain brow,
and other humble seek the vale below:
some over the parch heath minute spread,
while some, best flourish in the watery mead;
deep in the soil other be firm strike,
some light flaunt upon the sedgy brook,
other on rock can independent thrive,
and in rich soil alone can other live.
the gardener mark the station they demand:
refine by cultivation skilful hand,
which mark their grace with a clear line,
and draw each forth more point to shine.

by providence to different lot assign,
a bent so various take the human mind,
and education mark the native worth,
and bold call the lead feature forth,
it fire the hero, or instruct the sage,
to save his country, or reform the age;
it lead the ambitious to the public eye,
or fit the humble for retirement joy;
refine the pleasure of the social scene,
or teach industry the art of gain;
open the depth of science unconfined,
research for the philosophic mind;
it give the gay, more graceful to be see,
swim on the surface of each trifle scene;
it can its proper view to fancy give,
and by the applause of age bid it live.

oh happy they! who lot through life design,
to suit what nature give, and be refine,
let glory radiant form the soldier shield,
and courage lead he to the hostile field;
give sensibility its social joy,
and for life trial arm cold apathy.
fortune and favour friend may genius see,
all feel the native power of fancy free;
oh! be the human lot dispose so,
this be a world of joy, scarce mix with woe;
but ah! full oft we see the torture mind,
destine to trial of ungenial kind,
where without arm to oppose, stern foe invade,
and all its native virtue seem to fade;
the feeling shed not still the tear of joy,
nor cold disdain meet careless apathy;
bright genius rove not still without restraint,
nor always free his favourite scene to paint;
but evil check the wing he light spread,
then warm imagination too must fade.
reflection in this solitary scene,
engrave for i the solemn truth within,
as on the moss-grown rock now seat here,
pain memory find the source of many a tear.
