to mrs. Siddons.

gift of heaven! who have, in day go by,
 move every heart delight every eye;
 while age and youth, of high and low degree,
 in sympathy be join, behold thou,
 as in the drama be ever change scene,
 thou held thy splendid state, our tragic queen! 
no barrier there thy fair domain confine,
 thy sovereign sway be over the human mind;
 and, in the triumph of that witch hour,
 thy lofty bear well become thy power. 

the impassion change of thy beauteous face,
 thy stately form, and high imperial grace;
 thy arm impetuous toss, thy robe wide flow,
 and the dark tempest gather on thy brow;
 what time thy flash eye and lip of scorn,
 down to the dust thy mimic foe have bear;
 remorseful muse, sink to deep dejection,
 the fix and yearn look of strong affection;
 the active turmoil of a bosom rend,
 when pity, love, and honour, be contend:
 they who behold all this, right well, i ween,
 a lovely, grand, and wondrous sight have see. 

thy vary accent, rapid, fitful, slow,
 loud rage, and fear snatch whisper, quick and low;
 the burst of stifle love, the wail of grief,
 and tone of high command, full, solemn, brief;
 the change of voice, and emphasis that throw
 light on obscurity, and bring to view
 distinction nice, when grave or comic mood,
 or mingle humour, terse and new, elude
 common perception, as earth small thing
 to size and form, the vest hoar-frost bring,
 that seem as if some secret voice, to clear
 the ravel meaning, whisper in thy ear,
 and thou have even with he communion keep,
 who have so long in stratford chancel sleep;
 who line, where nature bright trace shine,
 alone be worthy deem of power like thy:
 they who have hear all this, have prove full well
 of soul-exciting sound, the mighty spell. 

but though time be lengthen shadow over thou glide,
 and pomp of regal state be cast aside,
 think not the glory of thy course be spend,
 there be moonlight radiance to thy evening lend,
 that, to the mental world can never fade,
 till all who have see thou, in the grave be lay. 
thy graceful form still move in nightly dream,
 and what thou be, to the lull sleeper seem:
 while feverish fancy oft do fond trace
 within her curtain couch thy wondrous face. 
yea; and to many a wight, bereave and lone,
 in muse hour, though all to thou unknown,
 soothe his earthly course of good and ill,
 with all thy potent charm, thou act still. 

and now in crowd room or rich saloon,
 thy stately presence recognize, how soon
 on thou the glance of many a eye be cast,
 in grateful memory of pleasure past! 
please to behold thou, with become grace,
 take, as befit thou well, a honour place
 (where bless by many a heart, long may thou stand)
 among the virtuous matron of our land. 
