thought on the author own death.

write when very young.

thus, when the fatal stroke of death design,
 on oozy bank th'expiring swan recline,
 her own sad requiem sing in languid note,
 while over the stream the die echo float. 

but, ah! can youth dwell on the tragic part? 
can i describe the tremble, pant heart? 
in fancy frolic age can i relate
 the pang, the terror of a die state? 
yes — though unskilled, i will the grim shade pursue,
 and bring the distant terror to my view;
 dwell on the horror of that gloomy hour;
 death, make familiar, lose half his power. 
peace then, you passion of ungoverned youth,
 foe to reflection, enemy to truth! 
let i, unruffled by your clamorous voice,
 make the drear region of the tomb my choice;
 and while sad fancy paint the dismal scene,
 where restless ghost by midnight moon be see
 stalk over the gloomy grave, Muse! be it thy
 to rouse the vain, the giddy, and supine,
 who pleasure round pursue; while young desire
 wake the gay dream, and feed the dangerous fire:
 from these i fly — and now, my pensive soul,
 mark the harsh scream of yond death-boding owl;
 perhaps she call some linger, tardy ghost
 to smell the world, ere the dread hour be lose
 that part the night from morn. come, restless soul,
 relax from torture; you who fate control
 to purge your earthly crime in liquid fire,
 in anguish plunge, till age shall expire;
 (this, Rome grand tenet) sin thus wash away,
 pure, bright, and cleanse, you will wing to endless day. 
presumption, hold! lo, over yond misty tomb
 lean a sad spectre, and bemoan the doom
 of never-erring justice; heavenly power! 
support and guard i in this gloomy hour
 of dread inquiry! — "say, thou wretched soul,
 o teach a young, rash, inexperienced fool,
 what it be to die, and where thou wing'dst thy way,
 when turn a wanderer from thy house of clay? 
do tread soft lawn, or seek elysian grove,
 where poet feign the lover spirit rove? 
or, on light pinion cut the close air,
 and to each planetary world repair? 
or, guideless, stray where dismal groan resound,
 and fork lightning quiver on the ground? 
or do sad fiend thy unhoused spirit meet,
 and with shrill yell the poor trembler greet
 to the dark world? describe that scene of woe
 which thou have feel, and may i never know!"
 "thou will know, indeed," it answer with a groan,
 "the pang of death too sure shall be thy own;
 pain yet unfelt must seize thy every part,
 and death cold horror hover round thy heart;
 thy die eye fix on some darling friend,
 while strong convulsion their wild orb extend;
 one gasp, and deep eternity in view,
 the soul shoot forth, and groan a last adieu. 
i dare no more — but oh! too curious maid,
 seek not to pierce impenetrable shade
 which wrap futurity; thou be sure to die;
 rest there, nor farther search, nor question why;
 scan not omnipotence — of that beware;
 oft the too curious eye be dim by blank despair."

farewell, poor ghost! you horror of the night,
 begone, nor more my shudder soul affright;
 the question unresolved i soon shall know,
 then let i haste from this sad scene of woe. 

henceforth, vain pleasure, i renounce thy joy,
 enchant fair, who tempt but to destroy;
 you thoughtless maid who transient dream pursue,
 no more my moment must be lose with you;
 no more my soul in empty mirth shall share,
 or fond relish pleasure tinge with care. 

and thou, all-merciful! omniscient power! 
o teach i to redeem each mis-spent hour;
 in youth the mind best gift most strong shine,
 ah! let they not too sudden decline! 
in mercy add a few remain year,
 the grave shall lose its sting, my soul shall lose its fear. 
