the visionary boy.

oh! lend that lute, sweet archimage, to i!
enough of care and heaviness
the weary lid of life depress,
and double bless that gentle heart shall be,
that woo of poesy the vision bland,
and stray forgetful over enchant land!
oh! lend that lute, sweet archimage, to i!
so speak, with ardent look, yet eyebrow sad,
when he have pass over many a mountain rude,
and many a wild and weary solitude,
'amid a green vale, a wander minstrel-lad.
with eye that shine in soften flame,
with wing and wand, young fancy come;
and as she touch a tremble lute,
the lone enthusiast stand entrance and mute. 
it be a sound that make his soul forgo
all thought of sadness in a world of woe.
oh, lend that lute! he cry: hope, pity, love,
shall listen; and each valley, rock, and grove,
shall witness, as with deep delight,
from orient morn to dewy-stealing night.
my spirit, rapt in trance of sweetness high,
shall drink the heartfelt sound with tear of ecstasy!
as thus he speak, soft voice seem to say,
come away, come away;
where shall the heart-sick minstrel stray,
but (view all thing like a dream)
by haunt wood, or visard stream?
that, like a hermit weep,
amid the grey stone creep;
with voice distinct, yet faint,
call on repose herself to hear its soothe plaint.
for he, romantic solitude
shall pile sublime her mountain rude;
for he, with shade more soft impress,
the lucid lake transparent breast
shall show the bank, the wood, the hill,
more clear, more beautiful, more still.
for he more musical shall wave
the pine over echo moonlit cave;
while sound as of a fairy lyre
amid the shadowy cliff expire!
this valley where the rapture minstrel stand
be shade with a circle slope of wood,
and rich in beauty, with that valley vie,
thessalian Tempe, crown with verdant bay,
where smooth and clear peneus wind his way;
and Ossa and Olympus, on each side,
rise dark with wood; or that sicilian plain
which arethusa clear water lave,
by many a haunt of Pan, and woodnymph's cave,
linger and listen to the doric strain
of he, the bard who music may succeed
to the wild melody of pan own reed!
this scene the mistress of the valley hold,
fancy, a magic maid; and at her will,
aërial castle crown the gleam hill,
or forest rise, or lapse of water well.
sometime she sit with lift eye,
and mark the dark storm in the western sky;
sometime she look, and scarce her breath will draw,
as fearful thing, not to be tell, she see;
and sometime, like a vision of the air,
on wing of shift light she float here and there.
in the breeze her garment fly,
of the bright skiey blue,
lucid as the tint of morn,
when summer trill his pipe of corn:
her tress to each wing descend fall,
or, lift by the wind,
stream loose and unconfined,
like golden thread, beneath her myrtle coronal.
the listen passion stand aloof and mute,
as oft the west wind touch her tremble lute.
but when its sound the youthful minstrel hear,
strange mingle feeling, not to be express,
rise undefined, yet blissful, on his breast,
and all the soften scene in sweet light appear.
then fancy wave her wand, and lo!
a airy troop go beckon by:
come, from toil and worldly woe;
come, live with we in vale remote! they cry. 
these be the flit fantasy; the dream
that lead the heart through all that elfin land,
where half-seen shape entice with whisper bland.
meantime the cloud, impress with lively beam,
roll, in the lucid track of air,
array in colour breed, with semblance more fair.
the airy troop, as on they sail,
thus the pensive stranger hail:
in the pure and argent sky,
there our distant chamber lie;
the bed be strew with blush rose,
when quietude at eve repose,
oft tremble lest her bower shall fade,
in the cold earth humid shade.
come, rest with we! evanish, they cry —
come, rest with we! the lonely vale reply.
then fancy beckon, and with smile mien,
a radiant form arise, like the fair queen
of beauty: from her eye divine bright,
a rich lustre shoot, a more attractive light.
she say: with fair tint i can adorn
the live landscape, fair than the morn.
the summer cloud in shape romantic roll,
and those they edge the fade west, like gold;
the lake that sleep in sunlight, yet impress
with shade more sweet than real on its breast;
'amid baffle stone, beneath a partial ray,
the small brook huddle its uneven way;
the blue far distant hill, the silvery sea,
and every scene of summer speak of i:
but most i wake the sweet wish warm,
where the fond gaze be turn on woman breathe form.
so pass silent through a myrtle grove,
beauty first lead he to the bower of love. 
a mellow light through the dim covert stray,
and open rose canopy the shade.
why do the hurry pulse unbidden leap!
behold, in yonder glade that nymph asleep!
the heartstruck minstrel hang, with linger gaze,
over every charm his eye impassion stray!
a edge of white be see, and scarce see,
as soft she breathe, her coral lip between;
a lambent ray steal from her half-closed eye,
as her breast heave a short imperfect sigh.
sleep, wind of summer, over the leafy bower,
nor move the light bell of the nod flower;
lest but a sound of stir leaf may seem
to break the charm of her delicious dream!
and you, fond, rise, throb thought, away,
lest siren pleasure all the soul betray!
oh! turn, and listen to the ditty
from the lowly cave of pity.
on slaughter plain, while valour grieve,
there he sink to rest,
and the ringdove scatter leaf
upon his bleed breast!
her face be hide, while her pale arm enfold
what seem a urn of alabaster cold;
to this she press her heave bosom bare:
the drop that gather in the dank abode
fall drip, on her long dishevel hair;
and still her tear, renew, and silent, flow:
and when the wind of autumn cease to swell,
at time be hear a slow and melancholy knell!
it be in the twilight of the deep wood,
beneath who bough like sad Cocytus, fame
through fable Greece, from lamentation name
a river dark and silent flow, there stand
a pale and melancholy man, intent
his look upon that drowsy stream he bend,
as ever count, when the fitful breeze
with strange and hollow sound sing through the tree,
count the sallow leaf, that down the current go.
he see they not:
earth seem to he one universal blot.
sometime, as most distemper, to and fro
he pace; and sometime fix his chill look
upon a dreadful book,
inscribe with secret character of woe;
while gibber imp, as mock he, appear,
and airy laughter 'amid the dusk be hear.
then fancy wave her wand again,
and all that valley that so lovely smile
be change to a bare champaign, waste and wild.
"what pale and phantom-horseman ride amain?"
it be terror; — all the plain, far on, be spread
with skull and bone, and relic of the dead!
from his black trump he blow a loud blast,
and earthquake mutter as the giant pass.
then say that magic maid, with aspect bland,
it be thy to seize his phantom spear,
it be thy his sable trumpet to command,
and thrill the inmost heart with shudder fear.
but hark! to music soft sound,
new scene and fair view accordant rise:
above, around,
the mingle measure swell in air, and die.
music, in thy charm shell,
what sound of holy magic dwell!
oft when that shell be to the ear apply,
confusion of rich harmony,
all swell rose,
that come, as with a gently-swelling tide:
then at the close,
angelic voice seem, aloft,
to answer as it die the cadence soft.
now, like the hum of distant ocean stream,
the murmur of the wondrous concave seem;
and now exult their tone prolong
the chord pæan of the choral song,
then music, with a voice more wild sweet
than wind that pipe on the forsake shore,
when the last rain-drop of the west be over,
warble: oh, welcome to my bless retreat,
and give my sound to the responsive lyre:
with i to these melodious grove retire,
and such pure feeling share,
as, far from noise and folly, soothe thou there.
here fancy, as the prize be win,
and now she hail her favourite son,
with energy impatient cry:
the weary world be dark and wide,
lo! i be with thou still to comfort and to guide. 
nor fear, if, grim before thy eye,
pale worldly want, a spectre, lower;
what be a world of vanity
to a world as sweet as we!
when thy heart be sad and lone,
and love to dwell on pleasure fly,
when that heart no more shall bound
at some kind voice wellknown sound,
my spell thy droop languor shall relieve,
and airy spirit touch thy lonely harp at eve. 
look! — delight and hope advance,
music join her thrill note,
over the level lea come dance;
seize the vision as it float,
bright-eyed rapture hover over they,
wave light his seraph wing,
youth exult fly before they,
scatter cowslip as he sing!
come now, my car pursue,
the wayward fairy cry;
and high amid the field of air,
above the cloud, together we will ride,
and post on the viewless wind,
so leave the care of earth and all its thought behind.
i can sail, and i can fly,
to all region of the sky,
on the shoot meteor course,
on a wing griffin-horse!
she speak: when wisdom self draw nigh,
a noble sternness in her search eye;
like Pallas helm, and in her hand a spear,
as not in idle warfare bend, but still,
as resolute, to cope with every earthly ill.
in youthful dignity severe,
she stand: and shall the aspire mind,
to fancy be alone resign!
alas! she cry, her witch lie
too often lead the heart astray!
still, weak minstrel, will thou rove,
droop in the distant grove,
forgetful of all tie that bind
thou, a brother, to mankind?
have fancy feeble voice defy
the ill to poor humanity ally? 
can she, like wisdom, bid thy soul sustain
its post of duty in a life of pain!
can she, like meek religion, bid thou bear
contempt and hardship in a world of care!
yet let not my rebuke decry,
in all, her blameless witchery,
or from the languid bosom tear
each sweet illusion nourish there.
with dignity and truth, combine,
still may she rule the manly mind;
her sweet magic still impart
to soften, not subdue, the heart:
still may she warm the choose breast,
not as the sovereign, but the guest.
then shall she lead the blameless muse
through all her fair, wild view;
to mark amid the flower of morn,
the bee go forth with early horn;
or when the moon, a soft light
shed on the rock and sea of night,
to hear the circle fairy band
sing, come unto these yellow sand!
sweet be our light than day,
fond enthusiast, come away!
then chivalry again shall call
the champion to her banner hall!
the pipe, and song, with many a mingle shout,
ring through the forest, as the satyr-rout,
dance round the dragon-chariot of romance;
forth prick the errant knight with rest lance;
imp, demon, say, in antic train succeed,
the wander maiden, and the wing steed!
the mutter visard turn, with haggard look,
the bloody leaf of the accurse book,
while giant, from the gloomy castle tower,
with lift bat of steel, more dreadful lower!
at time, the magic shall prevail
of the wild and wondrous tale;
at time, high rapture shall prolong
the deep, enthusiastic song.
hence, at midnight, thou shall stray,
where dark ocean fling its spray,
to hear over heaven resound arch
the thunder-lord begin his march!
or mark the flash, that present
some far-off shatter monument;
while along the rocky vale,
red fire, mingle with the hail,
run along upon the ground,
and the thunder deep sound!
the lofty muse, with awful mien,
upon a lonely rock be see:
full be the eye that speak the dauntless soul;
she seem to hear the gather tempest roll
beneath her foot; she bid a eagle fly,
breast the whirlwind, through the dark-red sky;
or, with elated look, lift high the spear,
as sound of distant battle roll more near.
now deep-hushed in holy trance,
she see the power of heaven advance,
and wheel, instinct with spirit, bear
God live chariot through the air;
now on the wing of morn she seem to rise,
and join the strain of more than mortal harmony.
thy heart shall beat exult as she sing,
and thou shall cry: give i a angel wing!
with sad sound, over pity cave,
the willow in the wind shall wave;
and all the listen passion stand,
obedient to thy great command.
with poesy sweet charm impress,
fancy thus shall warm thy breast;
still her smile train be thy,
still her lovely vision shine,
to cheer, beyond my boast power,
a sad or solitary hour.
thus let they soothe a while thy heart,
"come like shadow, so depart;"
but never may the witch lay
lead each sense from life astray;
for vain the poet muse of fire,
vain the magic of his lyre,
unless the touch subdue impart
truth and wisdom to the heart!
