elegy.

i 

ah! what avail the fancy lore of man,
 or all the envy gift the god bestow? 
his wisdom folly, length of time a span,
 his life be vanity, his death be woe! 

ii.

can wit protect, have genius power to save,
 do they immortal life with fame impart,
 Alexis never have know a dreary grave,
 death never have drench a arrow in his heart. 

iii.

mourn, mourn, you spirit, who delight in mirth;
 in yonder tomb Alexis breathless lie;
 the soul of wit, that give your laughter birth,
 inhabit, once again, her native sky. 

iv.

how fix those feature which so well portray
 the cobweb virtue of the cant saint;
 how dull those eye that can so well upbraid,
 and mimas' vice in Mimas' manner paint. 

v. 

weep, you who bend beneath the savage rod
 of stern oppression, spurn human law,
 your champion, cover by yond senseless sod,
 hear not your grief, or sure he will plead your cause. 

vi.

rejoice, you son of rapine; io! your foe,
 who drag your dark misdeed to public shame,
 your scourge be flee, no long shall you know
 the sting of guilty terrot at his name. 

vii.

where be now the pliant muscle big with whim,
 the eye that fill with laughter every face,
 the various voice, the oft-distorted limb,
 and all the mirth-fed feature of grimace? 

viii.

how ghastly now his grin! no latent spark
 of newfound wit shed dimple over his cheek;
 no heavy blockhead dread himself the mark
 on who the bite gibe shall short break. 

ix.

where now the shout that theatre have rend,
 while laughter roar and beg to be relieve? 
ah! where the plaudit every hand have send,
 when humour bring forth all that wit conceive? 

x. 

mourn, every Muse, in elegiac song,
 in metre melancholic let if flow;
 down the doleful breeze your grief prolong
 in wail, and sigh, and tear, shrill sad and slow. 

xi.

but oh! Thalia, be thy sorrow loud,
 though all-unused to accent so severe;
 ah! shed the drop most precious over his shroud,
 for sure a son like he deserve a tear. 

xii.

full well he once be know thy dear delight;
 thou never deny'd whatever he deign to ask,
 thy choice pen be his whenever he will write,
 and he, whenever he will act, thy choice mask. 

xiii.

you shagged satyr leave the deep recess,
 the dark close woodland, and the braky dell;
 quit every point weapon of redress,
 hear! shriek and hear! your favourite pass bell. 

xiv.

no more we catch your mean from his eye,
 no more he wield the many-barbed dart,
 or guide your gall arrow as they fly,
 to strike the guilty sinner through the heart. 

XV. 

you light-winged sprite, who sport in fancy dome,
 with freak and bound in antic circle play,
 attend your kindred genius to his home,
 proclaim he welcome to the realm of day. 

xvi.

you sylph, who down the sunbeam love to flit,
 and round the poet temple laurel twine,
 or, jocund, on the dance ignis sit,
 or quaff from azure stream aetherial wine,

xvii.

forsake your sport; and, if you know to weep,
 if ever your silken lid sustain such dew,
 here pour your tear, — behold, in endless sleep,
 the Swain who all your haunt and frolic know! 

xviii.

you faun and fairy, wheresoever you rove,
 over hill, over Dale, or amid the virgin throng;
 you nymph, you dryad, of the brook, the grove,
 who sing so sweet in many a witch song;

xix.

come, fancy offspring, every child of verse,
 whatever clime your printless foot shall tread;
 assemble all, — alternate grief rehearse,
 in solemn song funereal honour shed. 

xx.

and as you pass the mountain, Mead, or dell,
 where lavish nature strew her gift profuse,
 from hawthorn point, grub beard, or lilly bell,
 collect the sweet that most delight the muse. 

xxi.

bring every spell and charm, each fruit and flower,
 each herb, each plant to poet fragrant find;
 with all due rite erect the cypress bower,
 and bless the turf, and consecrate the ground. 

xxii.

then while coy Phoebe grant her glimmer beam,
 and flit ghost entrance the fearful eye,
 on break vow while maid, forsake, dream,
 and start and weep with many a mournful sigh;

xxiii.

while wanton rear-mouse wind her mazy rout,
 and squeak, to listen glow-worm, antic song;
 your vigil keep — with shrill and sudden shout
 scare each unhallowed foot from forth your throng. 

xxiv.

enough, fair fancy, light bind away; —
 advance philosophy. lo! truth appear,
 who, with her sober mien, and moral lay,
 foretell the sad event of future year. 

xxv.

young Ammon, once admire, belove, obey,
 grasp half the globe, and daft the hour away;
 crown give for plaything, slave of monarch make,
 then drop a little lump of lifeless clay. 

xxvi.

now what avail the fair historic page,
 where all his act be blazon to the world? 
what though th'antipode once feel his rage,
 and against the pole his thunderbolt be hurl? 

xxvii.

have he not better far, in peaceful lore,
 turn over the moral page, and smile serene,
 than, thus delight in the battle roar,
 T'have make the shriek world one tragic scene? 

xxviii.

lose be his valour; lose, to he, his fame;
 he heed not, hear not, rumour fickle blast;
 and all who live to hear and read his name
 be post after he with heedless haste. 

xxix.

with fancy dignity important grow,
 man act as though his folly be to last;
 build, plant, or mount, perhaps, a thorn-strewed throne,
 die, rot, and give the worm a short repast. 

xxx.

what melancholy scene salute his eye,
 prophetic lesson of approach fate;
 still he pursue each phantom as it fly,
 and lose happiness in find state. 

xxxi.

bless be the son of science, nymph sublime! 
she lure her child to the calm retreat,
 and solve the problem, and suggest the rhyme,
 and to the dulcet sound direct the foot. 

xxxii.

she prompt the song to love, to peace, and joy;
 the matchless music of content she chant;
 her heaven-born beauty never her lover cloy,
 she know no sorrow, for she feel no want. 

xxxiii.

she philosophic temperance love to cheer,
 and bid to shun, like death, imagine ill;
 their sweet be bitter through the plenteous year
 who know no medium to their wayward will. 

xxxiv.

bless be Alexis! science love the name;
 he well approve he of her darling race;
 and be that wretch accurse who damn his fame,
 or will his little folly backward trace! 
