the empire save, and Europe deliver.

up, rouse your self, you nation, praise the lord,
sing, you deliver nation, to your god,
a lofty song of thankfulness and praise;
for his almighty arm overthrow the proud,
his be the triumph, as the conquest his.

and thou, o god, raise high above all god,
thou god of great revenge, true god of war,
who when the injure world to thou appeal,
descend bow the very heaven of heaven,
and with ten thousand terror arm come down
on bleinheim dreadful day, avenge the wrong,
upon their mighty and their proud oppressor:
thou give the victory, do thou inspire the praise,
if thou in sacred harmony delight;
or if thou love to pass eternal day
please with the song of the triumph just,
o animate my breast, inspire my voice,
invigorate my mind, inflame my song;
no wretehed, low, untuned, prosaic song,
but lofty, spirit, inspire, divine,
that the admire world may know it be thy.
from none but thou the lofty thought can spring.
from none but thou the immortal spirit flow,
transport, equal to the deathless theme;
o may it last whole age, last as long,
as the remembrance of the mighty day,
which now it celebrate in sound verse;
that it be never by human wrong oppress,
or be by ancientness of day deface:
that when our late posterity shall read,
our late posterity with melt eye,
with ravish heart, and with astonish soul,
may prostrate all adore thy wondrous power,
thy divine mercy to their bless forefather;
and that it may advance, whenever it be read,
thy glory, and victorious England fame.

such Moses and exult Israel sing,
(they be the sound, the inspiration thy)
when the red sea, the chariot and the horse
of haughty wretched pharoah overturn,
such the glad prophetess triumphant sing,
her head environ with her native palm,
when rise Kishon with victorious flood
the proud oppressor jabin arm overwhelm,
as hoary Danube, with indignant wave,
swallow the gallic and bavarian host,
and at thy word, o god, revenge his slaughter son.

begin my soul, and strike the live lyre,
o raise thy self, o rouse thy utmost power.
contemn the world, and every thing below,
and soar tower above mortality,
to meet and welcome thy descend god.
it be do! o rapture never feel before!
tempestuous whirlwind of transport flame!
o whither be i catch! o whither rapt,
to what immense unutterable Streights?

begin my soul, and strike the live lyre!
join you deliver nation in the song!
your voice you deliver nation join!
all your harmoneous instrument unite,
but you peculiar, you choose tribe,
professor of reform and spotless faith!
let for one happy hour the church below
triumph like that above, and you bless being,
you host of saint, you glorious host of martyr,
who now in the exult realm of light
sing your old triumph over the grizzly king
of terror in the noble cause of truth;
you harmonious host of angel, who your hour,
your blissful hour in tuneful shout of joy,
and in eternal hallelujah pass,
triumph for old conquest which you gain,
over the infernal tyrant dreadful host,
and still the fall of dire ambition sing
in lofty song with which all heaven be charm;
let your bright quire incline their listen ear,
and for one hour rehearse our numerous song;
the sacred subject be the same with you,
how be ambition fall, like you we sing;
we sing the wonder of our maker power,
his glory, and the triumph of the just.

now let thy tuneful joy, my soul, grow loud,
so loud, that all the listen world may hear,
and let the attend universe reply,
let earth and heaven rehearse the lofty song,
while the bright church triumphant in the sky,
and the bless church triumph here below,
join in one chorus of immortal praise.

and thou, great queen, the glory of thy sex,
the prop and glory of the noble isle;
on who even William look admire down,
and own thou a successor worthy he;
on who the gaze world look wonder up,
and its deliverance wait from heaven and thou,
who matchless piety and watchful care,
show all the wonder world that thou be send
from the bright church triumphant in the sky
to make the war church triumph below;
vouchsafe to patronize this sacred song,
great championess of liberty and faith,
great patroness of all the christian world!
lo first for thou, and thy auspicious reign,
the exult nation praise to heaven return!
be there a climate so remote on earth
where distress virtue be beyond the reach
of thy extensive charity? thy aid
through all his rapid course old Danube own,
and proud curl his imperial wave
to distant barbarous army transport thy fame;
thy wondrous virtue to his gladsome shore,
transport Tagus waft over golden sand;
(a thousand echo from his shore reply)
thy praise his nymph in tuneful note rehearse,
the darling theme of lusitanian song.
thy fame, great queen, the horrid Alps ascend,
and warm they, cover with eternal snow;
their native amid wintery horror place,
warm thy goodness and thy power extol;
those dreadful fortress by nature make
the bound of dire ambition, be too weak,
before thy generous aid new strength supply.
since then the christian world repair to thou
for patronage and shelter from their foe,
since right and truth from thou protection find
since pure faith, the darling child of heaven,
and every thing that be sacred fly to thou
for shelter under thy auspicious power,
vouchsafe, great queen, to grace this sacred song
with thy majestic pratronage, this song
begin at thy command so strict give,
to celebrate with pomp of holy praise
the memory of bleinheim glorious day,
a song compose express to advance
the glory of thy maker in thy fame.

now let thy tuneful joy, my soul, grow loud,
so loud that all the listen world may hear;
and let the attend universe reply,
let earth and heaven rehearse the lofty song,
while the bright church triumphant in the sky,
and the bless church triumph here below,
join in one chorus of immortal praise.

you nation raise your tuneful note on high,
and raise to the star your mighty arm,
your arm now mighty, now secure from bond
o lift above the star your joyful praise,
to he from who alone deliverance flow.

but be thy voice distinguish from the rest,
thou stately daughter of imperial Rome,
Germania! thou! can thou confine thy joy?
can thou the transport of thy praise restrain?
o no! thou sure will grow wild with joy!
for thou have pass at once beyond all hope,
to blissful rapture from extreme despair;
thou be deliver from a world of woe.
now nought but stormy shout of joy be hear
from rhaetian mountain to the northern main,
where late nought but doleful sigh be hear,
and pierce groan, and shriek, and rueful wail;
thou stately daughter of imperial Rome
be bind, alas, with most opprobrious bond,
and base threaten with impend rape.
thy tremble offspring helpless round thou run,
and some shriek pious aloud for aid,
while other wring their wretched arm in vain;
some fright into madness wild stare,
and some look on with stupid eye aghast,
some swoon, die, with their grief express
by their last groan their vast excess of woe.
one desperate villain help thy rage foe,
with execrable hand his mother bind,
and for her impious ravisher prepare.
thou Danube be confound at the sight,
and trouble, backward to thy fountain turnedst;
then lift thy sonorous voice on high,
calledst to thy brother Rhine aloud for aid.
thy brother Rhine soon hear thy sound voice,
but sad shake his majestic head,
and cast a compassionate look,
strait hide himself within his thick ooze.
what can thou do? but shrink thy inglorious head
within thy reed, and breath forth empty threat,
the windy birth of melancholy rage.
when in the dreary horror of the dark,
as oft as night return to embrown thy wave,
thou like a bittern through thy doleful reed
complaind in sullen and in moody groan,
express manly sorrow mix with rage;
while thy brown billow sound on thy shore,
and swing slow with hoarse and sullen roar,
keep murmur consort to thy threaten moan.
thou Danube to the euxin dare not run,
to which insult thou be wont to fly,
not to discharge the tribute of thy wave,
but carry terror to the astonish main,
and make the crescent wear a deadly pale.
now swift Danube to the euxin fly,
and in thy rapid flight thy maker praise:
sound, sound his praise at all thy extend mouth,
and let the attend euxin with a groan,
that may to Constantine proud tower resound,
reflect how heaven confound perfidious man.
then turn to the distant Rhine thy voice,
raise it that all the astonish Rhine may hear:
and lift up thy arm, now free from bond,
lift aloft thy now victorious arm;
let he with rapture see, with rapture hear,
the effect of bleinheim field: he hear, he hear,
and rouze up himself with generous rage,
prepare to shake off his ignoble bond,
and reap the fruit of bleinheim glorious day.

Germania, raise thy tuneful voice to heaven;
let thy fierce eagle tower to the sky,
in thunder bear thy maker praise to heaven,
who have for thou perform amaze thing,
which but to hope have be presumption thought,
and what have look like wildness even to wish.
the unconquered english from the northern main
march to thy aid, o vast surprise of joy!
hark! how thy ravish offspring shout for joy!
hark! how they fierce cry revenge, revenge,
o welcome, welcome to our longing soul,
for who dear sake a thousand time we will die.
see, see thy son in firm battalion stand,
deject now, despond now no more;
see great revenge inflame their martial eye,
and round their temple spread its warlike die?
but whence this spirit? whence this wondrous change?
the unconquered english from the northern main
march to thy aid; o vast surprise of joy!
they who thy wonder eye never see before,
nor they, nor their forefather since the time
thy rugged saxon leave their horrid clime,
for britain gentle shore, at last be come,
be unexpected and unhoped for come;
see to their ancient wretched mother aid
the pious nation march impetuous on.
Germania raise thy tuneful voice to heaven,
and praise return to heaven, and gracious Ann,
who send they to thy aid; she day and night
break her own rest to give the world repose,
to give it liberty and last peace.
for only gracious Ann can under heaven
give freedom to the world, and last peace;
for only she over will nation reign,
over free-born soul, who glory, and who pride
be to infranchize all the christian world.
and she can give the labour nation peace.
for as the dove that from the deluge flee
bring her mild olive to the shelter ark,
frame by great heaven command to save mankind,
and find protection there; so gentle peace,
now slaughter deluge the nation round,
to anna sacred breast for shelter fly,
and find sure refuge there, and will from thence
send its bless influence out to glad the world.
but the french tyrant breast have never peace,
there endless strife, there dire ambition reign,
he what he never have can never bestow.
peace without freedom be a empty name,
but he call miserable bondage peace,
as plunder, murder, rape he empire call.

Germania, praise return to heaven and Ann,
it be heaven and she that from the northern main
have send the noble nation to thy aid,
which the wide ocean from the world divide;
a nation round the which wise nature cast
the stormy main subject to her sway,
that no usurp tyrant may invade
the sacred refuge of fair liberty,
and the world champion people may annoy,
for wheresoever faithless Gallia send
her grim destroyer, there Britannia send
her glad deliverer to preserve mankind;
a nation which the lovely fame enjoy
still to have fight for liberty, for truth,
for all the injure nation common right,
which speak to dire ambition in the tone,
the thunder tone that heaven reprove the main,
here know thy bound, here stop thy aspire wave.)

she be the shine squadron that descend
aiong thy shore in terrible array,
their form not whole like, nor yet unlike thy son,
resemble just as far as brother shall,
as they who from the same brave sire descend.
how thou be ravish with their lofty meens,
the joy that in their look severe shine,
and all the dreadful spirit in their eye
dauntless, unparallelled, invincible,
secure of victory, secure of fame!
such spirit never do thy eye behold;
no, never, thy heroic Eugene cry,
such mighty Eugene never see before;
no, wondrous prince, thou such can never see,
though thou have long triumphant army lead,
though thou have conquer foe of every kind,
humble the pride of the perfidious east,
and the more faithless tyrant of the west;
though thou have be victorious in more land
than wander traveller have see, yet thou
can never before this hour such spirit see,
because thou never before this hour beheldst
a army from a free-born people choose:
for only briton of the race of man
their liberty entire have maintain,
noble maintain against the joint assault
of homebred treason, and external rage,
the pride of foreign tyrant, and their own.
know it be from liberty, thou wondrous man,
master of dare council yet of wise,
from godlike liberty this noble fire,
this dauntless, this immortal spirit flow.

Germania, raise thy tuneful voice on high,
this be the nation preordain by fate
to save thou daughter of imperial Rome,
just sink in the vast abyss of time,
like thy great mother under barbarous rage.
hear this, you aspire ruler of the earth,
you who for empty noise or transient power
oppress the weak, and undermine the strong,
you plague of god to scourge a guilty world
by vain pursuit of arbitrary sway!
who this magnanimous people will destroy,
that stand between your proud design and you;
hear this, and think that nothing last here,
empire like man insensible decay,
think that the time must come when you or you
must taste the sad vicissitude of fate,
and in your turn by proud oppression groan;
then hate so brave a people, if you can.
a people the sure hope of the distress,
the brave defender of the right of king,
and the just guardian of fair liberty,
europe immortal body of reserve
against the squadron of tyrannic power.

oh Austria, Austria, have thy Philip know
that time even then be harness the year,
when this brave people, object of his rage
and of his hate, shall prove thy noble friend'
shall rescue both thy bright imperial crown,
deliver Germany, recover Spain. 
raise up thy droop eagle from the dust,
and fix new thunder on his soar wing;
then deep reflection on the just return
of fate have dash his proud aspire thought.
the chief ambition of his soul have be
to be ally to such a generous race.
he great Eliza will have court then
for friendship, as Maria for desire,
that strict inviolable league which join
our interest now, even then have be begin.
and Philip then like Leopold or Charles
with great britannia awful queen have join
to establish right and peace, and from the proud
and strong oppressor vindicate mankind.

you nation, who profess the christian faith,
together raise your tuneful note on high,
so high that all the listen world may hear
and let the attend universe reply,
let earth and heaven repeat the lofty song,
while the bright church triumphant in the sky,
and the bless church triumph here below,
join in one chorus of immortal praise.

but let the sound of thy aspire song,
Britannia, be distinguish from they all,
as among all thy offspring anna fame
for pious praise and gratitude to heaven;
so over thy sister nation be thy song
renown, for heaven and nature have bestow
on thou, the talent of exalt song.
Britannia, thou can sing such lofty strain,
as heaven and nature may rejoice to hear;
and heaven superlative honour thou;
and over thy sister nation lift thy name;
thou they all bless, and thou they all admire,
among they like the morning star thou shine;
but to oppressor like the fiery star,
or like a comet that with sanguine blaze
denounce war and revolution dire,
to purple tyrant a portentous light.
such new unheard of fame thou have acquire,
as never old, nor modern nation know,
grecian indeed, and roman, persian, mede,
and modern Spaniard too, and modern gaul
have conquer fight for universal sway;
for universal freedom only thou,
by so much more illustrious than they all,
as it be more true glorious to redeem
than it be to damn the wretched race of man.
then stretch thy lofty voice to heaven, and sing
thy maker praise, that earth and heaven may hear.
by he thou freed the world at bleinheim field;
it be he supply thou with the godlike will,
his terror and his thunder arm thy power;
he thy great queen with sovereign wisdom bless,
instruct she to choose the glorious chief,
deserve to command her dare troop,
embattle for the freedom of the world.
a general worthy of heroic time,
for Marlborough now fill the breath of fame.
like grecian, or the godlike roman name,

but who shall paint thou wondrous chief, in who
repugnant quality be reconcile;
Secret thy soul as be the dead of night,
yet cheerful as the smile of open day,
that lofty, awful, and command brow
with sweet attractive majesty invite.
calm be his thought in his profound design,
yet swift though sure his execute may,
his breast supply with all the glorious fire
that burn with inextinguishable flame
in the aspire mind of those brave man,
who by great action court eternal fame.
yet he by a transcendent force of mind,
entire master of that tower fire,
which, like his slave, he absolute sway
with a control and a lordly power.
calm be his gesture, his majestic brow
compose, never dark with grief, nor rough with rage,
but always mild, attractive, bright, serene.
in who deep foresight dwell unknown to fear,
and intrepidity unknown to rage.
the love of fame that urge he away
the immortal action still severe curb,
always obedient to cool wisdom voice,
and guide like the chariot of the sun,
who animate fire preserve the world
far, far above the tempest stormy rage.

wise he manage the nerve of war,
yet a contemner of the vast sum
when glory and the general cause require,
though new to the command on danube shore
his essay a heroic masterpiece,
who brightness dazzle all spectator eye,
astonish our friend, confound our foe.
stupendous the design in every part
whether the vast conception we regard,
or the surprise secrecy with which
it be long conceal from penetrate eye,
or the amaze swiftness of his march
when from the maese his wonder troop he lead.
or the judicious boldness of his choice
when he begin with dreadful schellenbourgh,
which conquest open the bavarian plain,
and make they to victorious flame a prey.
that their perfidious chief impatient grow
under his country be irritate spoil
may force the backward french to engage as soon
as Marlborough the bright occasion find.

how great be he who in his ample thought
can comprehend and afterwards prepare
by the illustrious toil of two campagn,
(in which a large extent of ground he gain
a strengthen barrier for the cautious dutch)
the astonish design, which all at once,
like magic change all the face of war;
confound the gallic tyrant proud design,
dash he headlong from his tower thought
the mountain heap on mountain in his head,
from which his proud imagination think
to drive our reason, God vicegerent here,
and rule the earth with hell dispotick sway.

he like a hoary visard close immure
in his enchant castle sit retire,
and there unseen he mutter secret sound,
and there infernal character he draw
that muster up black cloud obscure the day,
and scare the nation with their dreadful gloom,
and then the tempest rage, the thunder roar,
threaten the world with universal wreck.
at length the time ordain by fate be come,
the conquer hero come who break the charm,
and now the old enchanter look aghast,
forlorn, forsake by the infernal power,
and tremble at the impend wrath of heaven

but of the talent of thy mighty mind
immortal Marlbro' what we most admire
be that rapidity by which to fame
through all the bar that art or nature cast,
through hard rock thou hew thy wondrous way,
dare yet wise thy conduct, and resolve
with all the judgement of discern thought,
for the great juncture call for all thy speed.
the insult french be overturn all,
and liberty in dire convulsion lie;
the empire founder like a vast galloon
that be by the tempest beat on every side,
when rage ocean in a general storm
send his sonorous billow to the assault:
Savoy be sink, and the cruel french,
climb the summit of the horrid Alps,
embrueed their murder hand in guiltless blood,
even in the dreadful region of the thunder.
the lusitanian grumble at the chance
of adverse war, and unexpected rout,
and fond sigh for ancient league again.
with terror more then cold Helvetia shake,
white than ambient snow her deadly hue,
and howl over her alpine rock she run,
though fence with alpine rock yet unsecure,
and tremble with pale fear, her hoary hair
that hang dishevel, and the sport of wind,
she tear, and will have wring her wretched arm,
but her own son for mercenary sum
have bind her wretched arm with chain of gold;
and her majestic robe have rude tear,
and naked leave she to the kill cold.
a giant over the neighbour mountain stalk,
with mad deportment and with savage mein.
and cruel eye that threaten instant fate.

Italia, ah how fall, how change from she,
who win the world with her victorious arm,
with the wide ocean circumscribe her sway,
and with the star her never die fame,
be base into vile submission brave.

Brittain in dreadful expectation lie
by two contend daughter to be tear,
both stubborn foe to union, and yet both
unless unite hopeless undo.

England be plague with a unnatural race,
a race expect but the blow of fate,
the cut off one slender royal thread,
that thread on which the christian world depend,
and then (but long avert that hour you heaven)
resolve infamous to betray
their country to a foreign tyrant power.

these be the potent reason for dispatch,
beside the undaunted spirit that appear
in the brave squadron and battalion join,
that flash victorious lightning from their eye;
which their great leader soon perceive with joy;
too wise their boil ardor to restrain,
and check their fire impatient to be free.
raise and inflame by that stupendious march,
such as their fame forefather never know,
and which attract the admire eye
of all the gaze world, and seem to cry
they have not time to cool, but must do thing
to satisfy the expect world, so great
as scarce their great forefather ever perform.

beside, it be not the valour of their troop
to which the french their boast conquest owe,
it be not their discipline which make they dreadful,
it be treason, subornation, dagger, poison,
beside a thousand other art obscene.
can they by discipline or force prevail,
it be manifest they brave will disdain
to have recourse to such inglorious way.
and wise the sagacious general think
the soon he compel they to decide
the contest by the last event of war,
the less occasion will the traitor find
to try detestable infernal art.

add that the exhaust empire can afford
no long supply to such a numerous host.

last, this war be a appeal to heaven
and this great cause the darling cause of heaven,
for it be for truth they appear in glorious arm

for justice, liberty, religion, god.
and show his brave troop that he repose
his confidence in heaven will fire their soul,
and will sustain they in the dreadful field
more than a thousand body of reserve.
and what can more convince the impatient troop
that he repose his confidence in heaven,
than sudden and determinate recourse
to the decisive vengeance of the field.

urge by these powerful motive to dispatch,
he his bold english lead to schellenbourgh,
where the bavarian and the gallic troop
lie with the utmost skill of art entrench,
to guard the important pass of donawert,
of donawert, bavaria fatal key;
upon possess which the great success,
of this illustrious enterprise depend:
there he the order for the fierce assault
issue, with cheerful majesty serene,
valour in human heart too oft proceed
from ardent temper, or from glow rage,
provoke by mortal wrong, or fear of shame.
but here remote from fear or rage behold
a valour worthy of the heroic chief,
who lead the squadron that appear in arm
for liberty at once, and spotless faith,
the two great cause of the earth and sky.
and here the french their maxim may recant
that no man can with fix regard survey
the dazzle front of death, or of the sun.
for as a eagle with a steadfast eye
stare on the effulgent fountain of the day,
which stream with impetuous flood of light
blind other gazer with its torrent fire;
so Marlbro' with a calm considerate soul
Undazle'd view the king of terror front,
that cruel front that with its ghastful glare,
without his adamantine mace can bill
expose to gallic and bavarian fire,
he all his cheerful majesty maintain,
his order to exact advantage give,
command all the movement of his soul
with independent and with lordly power.
he who himself thus absolute rule,
seem by wise nature frame for martial sway;
his shout troop exalt he to the sky,
he they all imitate, he all admire.
on point cannon they have run before,
here they do more, and hush and passive stand
while their invincible brigade be form,
await what command their wondrous chief
have to impose, while all the murd' fire
of the bavarian cannon tear their rank,
trouble whole squadron with the tyrant rage
of missionary thunder, they mean while
who by no rage, no fury be sustain,
the frenzy that on brutal courage wait,
but by true valour, by heroic mind
unmoved, unshaken keep the dangerous post
which be assign they by their dread commander.
the friend and dear companion of their toil,
those who they cherish equal to themselves
tear from their side without concern they see,
a noble care possess all their soul;
themselves too tear they from themselves behold
their mangle trunk divide from their limb,
yet all their dauntless spirit they retain,
even for themselves no grief no pity show;
they see the king of terror in their view,
they see he stalk near with hideous stride,
they see he frown with a ghastful scowl,
threaten to grasp their heart with iron gripe,
yet see it all untroubled, undismayed.
o greatness worthy Greece or ancient Rome! 
o valour worthy of eternal fame!
the great Epaminondas thus expire
for his dear Thebes, for his great cause concern,
regardless of his blood, regardless of his life.
and they, like he, will think themselves too bless
to see their party victor ever they expire;
if any show concern, it be only fear
least they shall fall before their general voice
allow they to discharge the impetuous fire,
that now pen inward choke their generous heart;
thrice happy if permit, even in death,
to be the instrument employ by fate
to bestow freedom on the christian world,
and on their country never die fame.

but what be they unable to perform,
who such extreme with godlike patience bear?
they who appear so calm, so meek before,
be now all rage, all storm fury grow.
now fate look frown from their wrathful brow,
now from their flame eye red lightning fly,
while in their arm the avenge thunder roar,
and now of die they can think no more,
their general fatal order be to kill.
his voice they as the voice of fate regard,
and as the minister of fate themselves.
rush like sound water they assault
the strong retrenchment, so with bellow sound,
old ocean rage attack some lofty digue,
which sturdy swain have raise to oppose his power.
he billow upon billow storm pour,
which rise, and swell, and rage, and foam, and roar;
till the victorious tenth at last come on,
overwhelm all with dismal inundation.
in vain the foe outrageous resist,
the trumpet kindle Mars with fierce sound,
and in their ear it clang its martial roar;
which to the english sound the voice of fame,
that to immortal glory call they on.
now all war godhead rage in their breast,
and to themselves they demy god appear,
oh the transport fury! have the world
a enemy that can resist they now?
in vain grim death in his most hideous shape;
with haughty stride along the intrenchment stalt,
who all his terror, all his plague sustain.
the undaunted english turn he on the foe,
he see britannia genius in their eye,
and in a dreadful tone cry out my friend;
these be my friend, my benefactor these,
lead on, you race of demy god, lead on,
i follow you, and all your step attend,
fortune and fate be on the conqueror side.

impetuous now they rush conduct fate,
to their resistless fury all thing bow,
for what must not submit to fate or they?
now every thing against the foe conspire,
and fire and water to confound they league.
behind they conquer death in fiery cart
drive on, and urge furious the chase,
discharge lightning and the volley thunder.
before they the revenge Danube swell,
and then he gape with a hideous yawn,
and roar swallow down his impious prey.

Britannia, let thy joy salute the sky,
and to thy maker tuneful praise return,
for he the valour of thy matchless son,
and thy great general conduct he inspire.
let the whole earth inquire of bleinheim field,
and that immortal field will cry aloud
to all inquire nation, all inquire time,
thy matchless son no mortal valour show,
and thy great general conduct be divine.

and thou too with thy maker praise resound,
thou field of bleinheim, once obscure accurse,
but now great bleinheim happy glorious field!
thou who be charm with the transport sight,
who see the godlike man, the godlike deed,
who see they thunder in the fierce pursuit,
while Danube rise with revenge flood,
swallow whole legion with a hideous roar;
immortal bleinheim, preordain by fate
to be the blissful spot that free the world;
raise to the ravish sky thy thunder voice,
and for thy mighty bliss thy maker praise,
for thou to all posterity art bless,
bless above all the beauteous field over which
the wind Danube curl his amorous arm,
no length of day thy glory shall deface,
nor ever darkness of the night obscure.
all time, all nation thou shall happy call,
by who all time, all nation shall be bless,
thou lovely field of happy bleinheim hail!
may thou be ever fortunate as fame!
thy son above the race of man be bless!
may proud oppression and revenge care,
as they their execute circuit go,
fly from thy blissful border far away!
o may thou still be happy, still be free,
thou who have make the happy nation free!
and pour you heaven into her lovely lap
your sweet and your most refresh dew!
that flow plenty all her day may crown,
and golden slumber all her blissful night;
and when from heaven the murder angel come
to visit with consume plague the earth;
may he behold upon thy blissful soil
the stain of gallic and bavarian blood,
and pass by revere the sacred ground!

and thou, o sacred, o majestic day,
who give to the great deed auspicious light,
o thou who brought to light the noble birth
that ever fate beget on fertile time;
still as thy light revolve o sacred day,
resound with thy maker praise return!
for high have thy maker honour thou
above all day of the revolve year!
his praise then in a thousand tongue resound,
let million of glad voice raise it high!
so may thou still be charm serene;
so may thy halcyon hour drive smooth on,
illustrious far above the rest of day!
on thou may thy bright sire profuse pour
a double portion of his flow gold!
o may thou still with sacred joy return
with all the rapture of transport song!
and let the world forget the sprightly may,
the day accomplish the joyful spring
to celebrate thy lovely festival.
for freedom be more joyful than the spring,
fair than light, and lovely than the morn.
let never any cloud thy lustre stain
and never any grief pollute thy joy!
may grief and care and pain at thy approach
as from descend angel disappear!
may thou auspicious prove to every deed,
accomplish every act begin on thou!
thou may great mind for mighty action choose!
by high foreknowledge, sure o sacred day,
thou be ordain to accomplish wondrous thing,
thy happy influence once before preserve
the labour world from universal sway,
at least a while delay its dismal fate.
it be upon thou the carthaginian chief,
make the world aspire tyrant yield,
vanquish proud Rome at canne fatal field.

but time be teem with a noble birth,
and bleinheim day surpass canne field;
at Cannae the contend rival strive
which of they shall enslave the vanquish world.
the great contention be at bleinheim field,
on one side to oppress immortal liberty,
to make her wing her flight from earth to heaven,
and there for ever with astrea dwell,
her divine sister, on the other side,
the intent be solid to fix she here
in last peace, and make of earth a heaven;
and never two more powerful army meet,
than that which strive to drive thou from below,
and that, o goddess, which maintain thy power.

on the oppressor side the hostile french
with the bavarian squadron now be join.
the fierce bavarian be by nature frame
HARDY and rough, and fit for bloody field,
and victory have raise their spirit high.
expert be their perfidious chief and brave,
and now the memory of past success,
and hope of future empire fire his soul,
and the wild prospect of his flame tower
sting he, till frantic with his rage he roar'
and call on heaven and hell for dire revenge.

the french be all of gallic troop the flower,
experience and victorious be their chief,
soldier and chief inure to vast success:
and claim right to conquest and renown
from long possession; with their dear blood
resolve their lofty title to defend.
by long success presumptious grow and vain,
aspire to the conquest of the world;
believe by all the nation and themselves
to be unequalled and invincible.
proud of their junction with bavarian power,
which they with so much hazard, so much toil,
inspight of all great eugene force achieve;
from which the empire sure destruction wait,
and all the christian world perpetual bond.
but o how vain be human hope and fear!
how blind be the poor providence of man,
and what a fool to the design of fate!
the dreadful moment come upon the wing,
when they who make this junction now their boast,
their pride, their hope, their joy, their ecstasy,
when they whole conquer province will give
that this accurse junction never have be,
when that which now delude their glorious mind,
with the vain hope of empire and of fame,
will prove the gawdy lure throw out by fate
to bring they down from their aspire flight,
and leave they in the dust.

for now the conquer english be in view,
inspirit the whole confederate power;
for what to they can be impossible,
after the glorious rout at schellenbourgh
a conquest gain, when scarce their march be over;
a march like what great philip great son,
or the first Caesar, take to win the world;
a march almost incredible to those,
who see at schellenbourgh its great effect;
a march so swift that it prevent fame,
for such dispatch transcend the german thought;
at which their listless nation look amaze.
they gaze seem the english to regard
as if descend to their aid from heaven;
and their illustrious chief on danube shore,
no less astonish the various power.
who squadron the confederate force compose,
than a bright star that all at once appear
with new effulge in the hemisphere,
amaze all the planatary world,
who gaze cry it be send express from heaven,
to change the fortune of the universe.
the nation in the british squadron eye
divine presage of victory behold.
full of their island noble pride they march,
full of their fierce forefather conquer fire,
and while they deathless vigour in they feel,
esteem themselves invincible alone;
believe firm that to conquer France
be but their old hereditary right,
which from remote progenitor descend;
who then be wont to triumph over France,
even when they be a people fierce and free;
when for their country and their friend they fight,
fight for their dear relation and themselves.
how must they then disdain to yield to those,
who to support a grizzly tyrant pride
against their country and their friend contend,
against their dear relation and themselves?
that for their part they fight for justice, truth,
for god, and for celestial liberty.
that fate the first occasion now present,
when they the foe may in the field surprise
without oppress number on their side;
who they resolve like Englishman to attack,
that be like man resolve to overcome or die.
that now the eye of all the christian world
be on this great decisive action bend;
that all the christian world expect from they
deed worthy of the champion of mankind
against oppress tyrant, beast more wild
than africk ever produce, and which proceed
to render Europe yet more waste than she;
that they must fight like hero who support
the glory of their conquer ancestor,
who great britannia liberty assert,
and those of other sink realm restore;
who vindicate their own undoubted right,
and those of all posterity defend.
with godlike sentiment like these inflame,
they under their heroic leader march
the attack the foe encamp on bleinheim field.
the rest to deathless lyre you angel sing!
to such a height no mortal force can soar,
and now the inspiration leave my soul.
or if i must with feeble wing essay
the aetherial flight, assist you aetherial power!
and thou the bright angel of the sky,
with who enchant beauty all the host
of heaven above, all heavenly mind below
be charm, with who the great creator charm!
eternal fame! thou goddess i invoke,
for nothing without thy aid be ever produce,
or great or fair in earth or heaven above,
(so the great maker will, and make it fate)
descend bright goddess to my aid, descend
the infuse a beam of thy celestial fire
into my soul, and raise my adventurous song.
if with thy beauty all my soul be fire,
if all that wretched mortal here call great,
i sacrifice to liberty and thou;
instruct i, goddess, for thou only know,
for thou with all thy hundred eye be by
when stoop on thy azure wing thou left
the field of light for bleinheim glorious field;
thou goddess with thy own celestial trump
do sound the charge through all the aetherial vault,
when at the immortal blast the power above,
look wonder from the battlement of heaven.
thou see how all the host of heaven look down,
and shout fill the eternal realm with joy,
to see bold man the cause of heaven maintain;
the soul of british hero from the sky
upon the glory of that field look down,
thither their eye the conquer Edwards bend,
on that magnanimous Henry wonder gaze.
all charm to see their time of gold return,
all charm to see bright victory descend.
and perch upon a english general plume.
there the bless patron of britannick knight,
the red cross champion look transport down
to see the honour of his order raise.
and there look down the blissful soul of those
who in the same immortal cause expire
at Fleury and at landen fatal plain.
and godlike William look with rapture down
to see great Marlborough do what he have do,
have but the false bavarian be his foe.
the pre-exist soul of future king
on that important field look down, on which
their future right and future power depend.
mean while the sun, the world great eye and soul,
with all his power seren the aetherial space,
that no invidious cloud may intercept
the eternal deed of bleinheim wondrous day;
which show a noble sight than all the world,
and all the space immense that with one Kenn
he view, can all afford he, when it show
so many myriad of heroic soul
resolve to conquer or devove themselves
in the great cause of liberty and truth.
the nation here below have all their eye
intent upon that field, on who event
depend all their freedom, all their peace.
the very element attend in truce
the dreadful issue, silent be the wind,
and hush the voice of danube angry roar.
all nature in all other part have peace,
discord have now no leisure to attend
inferior strife, for bleinheim claim she all;
for there be all her Stygian snake employ,
there be the fate and all the fury there;
who shape like falcon wait for their prey,
be perch on baleful eugh by danube shore:
so that both earth, and heaven, and hell below,
time present, past, and future, all appear
to be concern on that important day.

but hark! the goddess give the dreadful charge,
i hear the enchant sound, i feel its magic power,
that sound can like the last angelic trump,
from their eternal mansion rouse the dead;
that magic sound bring future time in view,
and make the past return, that mighty sound,
swift as the movement of quick thought, transport
the hearer to the world remote end.
i feel, i feel even now that i be rapt
over land and sea to bleinheim wondrous field!
do you see how the tempestuous squadron move,
like cloud with thunder charge along the plain!
oh the transport sight! the noble sound!
the sprightly neigh of the warlike steed,
and the impatient champion eager shout.
the trumpet roar! the thunder of the drum!
how Danube rear his hoary head aghast!
the adjacent Forrest frightful survey,
the adjacent forest dart a dreadful gloom,
and on his flood with double horror frown.
on to the attack the thunder squadron move,
the very heaven above they seem to smoke,
and the resound earth beneath they shake;
the noble rage of battle fire the plain:
i too the noble fury have inspire
of register in fame eternal roll
their action worthy the recording muse,
the daughter of celestial memory,
and the immortal mother of renown.
eternal fame, thy summons i obey,
like they thy charge, great goddess, i obey.
but while the verse which thou inspire i sing,
do thou, great goddess, thou my numerous song
accompany with that angelic trump,
who sound by all the listen globe be hear,
and to the world remote time descend.

but now the trumpet clangour hear no more,
no more the impatient warrior eager shout.
for now the cannon thunder through the plain,
and drown all dreadful noise in its own;
the move squadron be no long see,
the very earth and heaven be see no more.
for earth and heaven seem all involve in night,
a night of dust and of tumultuous smoke;
or hide in brightness of tempestuous flame,
too dazzle to be pierce by mortal eye.
but now the goddess with celestial light
dispel the mist that veil these mortal eye,
and now through cloud of stormy dust i see
through curl smoke, through dazzle flame i see;
say, goddess, what heroic form be those,
who the bold briton lead impetuous on;
who between they and danger interpose,
and shield they with their very breast from fate:
at once in danger foremost and renown;
esteem glory cheap buy with life,
and frank offer up their noble heart
a great unblemished sacrifice to thou.
how each look worthy of his high command,
each look as if on his heroic deed
the fate depend of this dreadful day.
ay, now their shape distinct i discern,
ay, now i know the herolck leader well!
and thou eternal goddess know they well,
and thou with all thy hundred tongue will spread
their deathless action, and extend their praise
wherever thou expand thy sound wing.
hail Race of hero! british worthy hail!
hail noble Churchill, Lumley, Villars, wood! 
and thou great ingolsby, great Orkney thou!
hail thou, the foremost in the dire assault,
brave cut, the lightning of the british thunder
great favourite of deathless fame, all hail!
those be the immortal hero who command
the free-born english joyful obey,
the pride and flower of britain godlike son.
upon their eye the fierce battalion gaze,
and from their beam derive a glorious fire,
and the remembrance of great Henry day.

now after they they move impatient on,
impatient for the horrid shock they earn;
now meet the french and we with hideous noise,
in thunder, lightning, and in iron hail.
you immortal power assist britannia cause!
Assist you bright spectator of the sky!
the cause of justice and of truth support!
the cause of all the christian world defend!
ah miserable i! the immortal power
either against their own great cause declare,
or else blind fortune govern all below.
for see the unconquered english be repel,
bright honour be repel and virtue lose,
and false ambition win, o dismal sight!
o dire calamity! surprzing fate! that such
as fight like these shall ever know repulse!
can they from such heroic chief retire!
o can they poor yield in such a cause!
no, see they rally with a noble fire,
and shame grow fury to the charge return,
but to the valour of the foe i hate,
i must do justice here, a brave foe
by britain godlike son be never charge,
the french undaunted all their fury meet,
and all with double fury they repel,
and drive the english horse like lightning back,
see how once more confound they retire!
o curse fate! o fortune! o despair!
aloud methinks i hear all nature groan,
aloud methinks i hear the immortal power
lament the honour of Britannia lose,
the wretched fate of liberty lament.
o fond imagination! vain conceit!
immortal be the date of liberty,
and britain honour never can be lose:
for see where now heroic Marlborough come!
come to maintain they, to revenge they come.
see where the dusty squadron he collect
as Homer Jove convene the threaten cloud
that with his dire artillery be fraught!
with what exalt air he lead they on,
terror before he march, fame behind,
and conquest like the austrian eagle shape,
over his head fly tower to the sky.
with such majestic air in ancient day
Phidias or great Euphranor form his Jove;
but war Jove prepare to discharge
vindictive thunder on the impious world.
death his august appearance see from far,
and see he worthy all his direful rage;
the attack he mount upon a fiery globe,
but as more near the grizzly monarch draw,
he know the hero doom to oercome by fate;
and then his fiery thunderbolt he shoot
into the earth, and all its entrails tear;
about the hero cast a mount of clay,
and bury he almost alive with have,
to shun he sacred to eternal fame. !
the squadron all with shudder horror shake,
and ruin from that dreadful moment wait,
he in that dreadful moment be alone,
fearless and calm of they all take care.

a intrepidity so like their own
charm all the bright spectator of the sky;
the squadron now redouble all their rage,
and catch heroic fortitude from he.
their flame rekindle rage in their breast,
and sparkle in their fatal eye it rowl,
unanimous they to the charge return,
with resolution never see before;
each champion with the fate of nation big,
all, all resolve to conquer or to die,
ay now, even now, the dreadful moment come
on which the destiny of man depend;
their rage blood like fiery torrent rowl,
their heart even burst with rage, their noble heart
that utter disdain, that utter abhor
the inglorious thought of flight or foul retreat.
again with dreadful shout rhey rend the sky,
and now their murder carabine they sling,
with matchless rage their flame sword they draw;
in missionary death they trust no more,
but in their hand they carry hideous fate.
now, now, with all their may, with all their soul
they rush on death and wound, their dismal way
with their portend bloody point they plough,
or brandish aloft the horrid edge,
like ripen corn the adverse squadron mow,
extend they in heap upon the plain,
the adverse squadron can no long bear
their fatal weapon or their fatal eye,
or their victorious cry, but slaughter some,
some pain and anguish seize, confusion all.
and now in heap they fall, in crowd they fly;
they fly, fair europe proud oppressor fly!
and godlike liberty for ever fix,
and to the star be England glory raise.
Victoria the transport briton cry,
with rapture bleinheim blissful plain resound,
to bleinheim field the ravish heaven reply;
and with victorious shout the welkin ring,
both heaven and earth, and god, and man be charm,
and phebus with redouble glory shine,
and on the bless event all ravish nature smile.
Danube transport drive his rapid flood
with double fury by his echo shore,
and to the euxin send the enchant sound;
down his shore the acclamation run,
that godlike liberty for ever fix,
and to the star be England glory raise.
oh joy! oh rapture never to be bear!
they fly! fair europe proud oppressor fly!
the victor rush tear their tremble rear;
shout they rage, and rage they pursue;
a dismal joy be on their rattle tongue,
fate in their arm and fury in their eye.
now discord stalk with gigantic stride
wade through a crimson stream of torrent gore,
and hideous be the face of slaughter now,
and yet even now when all the conquer troop,
soldier and chief be all even wild with joy,
all frantic with the transport of their rage.
their great commander calm, he who before
in his own danger dauntless be alone
lord of himself in universal joy,
serene doubt for all; yet his the praise,
the glory of the immortal day be he,
he to a pitch of human glory raise,
to which no subject ever rise before;
and by this great decide moment make
darling of nation, and mankind delight,
britannia second pride, batavia hope;
the roman empire ornament and fame,
the everlasting bless of the good,
and constant panegyric of the brave:
e'n in this great decide moment he
the impetuous movement of his soul command,
command himself with more imperious sway
than even the mean warrior of his troop;
to no unruly transport he give way,
to all attack remain invincible,
and stand the noble conqueror of himself;
for now his genius whisper he within
that while the day be doubtless on his side
heroic Eugene be severe press,
and by the false bavarian's power distress,
and want the succour of the conquer wing.
then as great virgil Neptune with his voice
Tames the wild horror of his frantic wave,
and flatten with a breath the refluent main,
so mighty Marlborough with a word, a nod
the fury of his conquer troop restrain,
e'n rage madness hear that awful voice,
and in a moment sink into a calm;
that voice the stormy king of terror hear,
he hear that voice, and in mid-way arrest
his furious arm descend to destroy.
and as the hero with a breath can calm
the rage storm in forty thousand breast,
so with a breath he reinflame they all.
again like stormy sea they wave roll,
and rise, and foam with far resound roar,
and tenfold joy, and tenfold rage succeed.
for on the spur the blissful news arrive,
that happy Eugene no support require;
that conquer Eugene make vast effort,
effort which never will be forget by fame,
a third time rally his disorder troop,
and turn confusion back upon the foe.

again great Marlborough give the fatal word,
again the goddess give the dreadful charge,
and the victorious squadron of the left
again fall on with terrify cry.
conquest before, now great revenge they seek,
the french astonish, all resistance loose,
all resolution, courage, order, thought.
their squadron now confound, all disband,
each for himself take sordid care alone,
sure ruin both to army and to state.
the victor with immortal rage pursue,
and smite the affect french, like wrath divine
that sweep whole people, and lay nation waste.
see this you proud aspire tyrant, see,
and let the face of bleinheim dreadful field
teach you to rremble at the wrath of heaven,
and the just judgment of the avenge god!
do you see that heap of abject wretch there,
that fall by hundred, and by thousand fly.
how be ambition fall! how in his turn
the insolent oppressor faint and die!
be these the brave, the invincible? be these
the royal household of the immortal king?
be these the band so proud of triumph past,
so vain upon the hope of those to come?
and with the spoil of conquer nation big?
be these the giant who their tyrant swell
with the fond hope of universal sway?
how they fly! how they fall! how they tremble! how they die!
a iron tempest gall they in the flank,
and the fierce victor with ten thousand sword
insult hang upon their break rear.
before they Danube rise on their flight,
and loud for revenge, revenge he roar,
arrest their precipitate flight,
he strike they backward with his stormy brow,
or with his angry voice their guilty soul he scare.
but tenfold horror drive they headlong on!
down, down ten thousand take the fatal leap,
and plunge among the wave; the Danube rave,
and call his stormy billow to the spoil,
his stormy billow to the mighty spoil
drive on, advance with a hideous roar.
ten thousand warrior roll in the flood,
horse and man reverse midst scatter arm,
and float ensign on each other plunge,
drive one another drown to the abyss,
and with tremendous prospect strike the eye.
the very victor grow with horror chill,
shake at the dire catastrophe they cause,
and tremble at the terror of a scene,
such as no no nation of the world, no age
since the great hebrew wondrous passage see.
here heavenly goddess can thou but impart
to my weak mind the force, the immortal force,
to paint with lively stroke the dismal scene,
to paint the cry, the shriek, the die groan,
the grief, the rage, the fury of their fear,
and all the horror of their baleful eye,
and all the astonishment, the amazement of their soul,
with every dreadful ghastful circumstance;
not Milton wondrous piece shall mine transcend
in which Messiah with his thunder arm
drive down the infernal tyrant war host
with terror and with fury through the abyss,
not Michael angelo stupendous work;
where the last dreadful doom send guilty soul
down to eternal punishment in hell;
hell seize they, hell meet they on the way,
for in their air and in their look be hell,
and endless torment in their baleful eye.

thus fall the french before the victor wrath,
they who have stand so many storm of war,
yet still unshaken keep their ground in all.
thus of tall oak i have know a goodly row,
that grace the wind margin of the flood,
defy the rage of many a wintery blast,
the tempest see their strength, and sigh, and past they by.
but when a hurrican by wrath divine
come late bellow over the western main,
that with immortal fury on they fall,
that make they tremble at impend fate;
and rent at once their sturdy trunk in twain,
or twist up their root, and whirl they in the air.
that tear their lofty branch down from heaven,
and bring to light theirserpent root fromhell.
down they come rush with a fatal groan,
and strew the river with their scatter limb,
and with their mangle trunk his channel pile,
till devastation choke the encumber stream.

o conquer death, like Samson, blind though strong,
have thou the glorious hecatomb foresee.
which noble Marlborough be ordain by fate
to offer up to thy insatiate power,
thou sure then have save one godlike youth,
and to the heroic father give the son.
but Blanford in his early bloom be snatch
to make the glory of the sire complete;
have noble Blandford still remain below,
he be good, so charm and so great,
so worthy all the father fond desire;
the invidious world may have pretend then
that Marlboro' have achieve his godlike deed,
for private end to make his offspring great;
now clear for his country and his queen,
for liberty, and for the world he act.

thou too great queen by who auspicious care
and wisdom these astonish event
be bring to light, thou for thy country act,
and for the world, for child thou have none,
too rigid fate have ravish all away.
oh royal Gloucester have but cruel death
permit thou to see this wondrous day,
how have great marlbro action raise thy blood,
and rouse the hero in thy bloom breast!
till grow impatient thou have call to arm,
have like young Edward cross the ambient main
attend with the flower of british youth,
display thy ensign in the galliek plain,
while France have tremble at thy conquer arm;
once more have France a english sovereign own,
once more have Spain its rightful monarch see,
place by a british hero on his throne.

but thou be go, britannia hope be go,
for thou Britannia mourn like royal Ann;
thy fate thy mother happiness impair,
but it have raise her glory to the star;
the wonder which she every day perform:
move by the noble motive she perform,
now for her country and the world she act,
for liberty the darling cause of earth,
for spotless faith the darling cause of heaven.
her child all be snatch away in thou,
o fond mistake! whatever the best of queen
perform, she do it for her child all,
her happy people be her child now.
and oh so good, so excellent be she
so tender of their happiness and fame,
so watchful over their right, so studious of their peace,
to all extend her impartial care;
so grateful and so dutiful be they,
such honour and such awful love return,
such love as heaven of human heart require;
that fame be doubtful which she most shall praise,
the children duty or the mother care.
the dutiful'st of child sure be they,
the very best of tender mother she.
and not the fancy mother of the god,
great queen, can boast a more heroic race;
and as that fancy mother of the god
be charm at sight of her immortal son.
with all my power i have rouse my genius up,
that thy victorious subject thou may see
make like to god at bleinheim deathless field.
what glorious sight can more delight thy soul
than conquest which thy subject bliss ensure
thy glory, and the world felicity?
yes bleinheim still can show a noble sight,
a sight that for thy zeal have strong charm
than all the world vain greatness can supply.
see there thy conquer hero who before
be like to god, now equal to the worm,
all low and prostrate as the vanquish now;
humble themselves before the god of host,
offer to he the glory and the praise,
the sacrifice most worthy of the god,
the almighty god of war, the god of great revenge.
