on mrs. Montagu.

why boast, o arrogant, imperious man,
 perfection so exclusive? be thy power
 near approach deity? can thou solve
 question which high infinity propound,
 soar noble flight, or dare immortal deed,
 unknown to woman, if she great dare
 to use the power assign she? active strength,
 the boast of animal, be clear thy;
 by this uphold, thou think the lesson rare
 that female virtue teach; and poor the height
 which female wit obtain. the theme unfold
 its ample maze, for Montagu befriend
 the puzzle thought, and, blaze in the eye
 of bold opposition, strait present
 the soul best energy, her keen power,
 clear, vigorous, enlighten; with firm wing
 swift she overtake his muse, which spread afar
 its bright glory in the day of yore;
 lo! where she, mount, spurn the steadfast earth,
 and, fail on the cloud of science, bear
 the banner of perfection. —
 ask gallia mimic son how strong her power,
 who, flush with plunder from her shakespeare page,
 she swift detect amid their dark retreat;
 (horrid as Cacus in their thievish den)
 regain the trophy, bear in triumph back
 the pilfer glory to a wonder world. 
so Stella boast, from she the tale i learn;
 with pride she tell it, i with rapture hear. 

o, Montagu! forgive i, if i sing
 thy wisdom tempere with the mild ray
 of soft humanity, and kindness bland:
 so wide its influence, that the bright beam
 reach the low vale where mist of ignorance lodge,
 strike on the innate spark which lie immerse,
 thick clog, and almost quench in total night —
 on i it fell, and cheere my joyless heart. 

unwelcome be the first bright dawn of light
 to the dark soul; impatient, she reject,
 and fain won push the heavenly stranger back;
 she loathe the cranny which admit the day;
 confuse, afraid of the intrude guest;
 disturb, unwilling to receive the beam,
 which to herself her native darkness show. 

the effort rude to quench the cheer flame
 be i, and even on Stella can i gaze
 with sullen envy, and admire pride,
 till, double rouse by Montagu, the pair
 conspire to clear my dull, imprison sense,
 and chase the mist which dim my visual beam. 

oft as i tread my native wild alone,
 strong gust of thought will rise, but rise to die;
 the portal of the swell soul, never open
 by liberal converse, rude idea strive
 awhile for vent, but find it not, and die. 
thus rust the mind best power. yond starry orb,
 majestic ocean, flowery vale, gay grove,
 eye-wasting lawn, and heaven-attempting hill,
 which bind the horizon, and which curb the view;
 all those, with beauteous imagery awake
 my ravish soul to ecstasy untaught,
 to all the transport the rapt sense can bear;
 but all expire, for want of power to speak;
 all perish in the mind as soon as bear,
 erase more quick than cipher on the shore,
 over which the cruel wave, unheedful, roll. 

such timid rapture as young Edwin seize,
 when his lone footstep on the sage obtrude,
 who noble precept charm his wonder ear,
 such rapture fill lactilla vacant soul,
 when the bright moralist, in softness dress,
 open all the glory of the mental world,
 deign to direct the infant think, to prune
 the bud sentiment, uprear the stalk
 of feeble fancy, bid idea live,
 woo the abstract spirit from its care,
 and gentle guide she to the scene of peace. 
i be that balm, and i the grateful heart,
 which breathe its thanks in rough, but timid strain. 
