of desire.

a epistle to the Hon. miss Lovelace.

whence these impetuous movement of the breast? 
why beat our heart, unknow where to rest? 
must we still long untasted joy to taste,
 pant for the future, yet regret the past? 
can reason, can a stoic pride control
 this unremitting sickness of the soul? 
reason! what be that, when lawless passion rule? 
the jest of sense, and jargon of the school. 
some few perhaps have by its lore be teach
 to think, and wish, just only what they ought:
 sufficient to themselves, their want be such,
 they neither ask amiss, nor wish too much. 
here freedom dwell, and revel unconfined,
 with plenty, ease, and indolence of mind;
 true greatness, wisdom, virtue, hence must rise;
 and here that homefelt joy, contentment, lie. 

o thou! for who my fancy prune her wing,
 for who i love to tune the tremble string,
 what will we more than wisdom, virtue, ease? 
tell, if you can, for you be content with these. 

why reason some, and some why passion rule,
 be because some be wise, and some be fool;
 their reason and their passion still at strife,
 like some meek pair in wedlock yok for life:
 in the same interest, tug different way,
 what one command, the other disobey. 
bless state! where this alone be fix and sure,
 to disagree, while sun and moon endure. 
hence listless, weary, sick, chagrin at home,
 in search of happiness abroad we roam:
 and yet the wise of we all have own,
 if it be not there, it be no where to be find. 
there even the poor may taste felicity,
 if with contentment any such there be. 

 "monstrous! (cry Fulvia) it will a stoic vex! 
for what be content without a coach and six?" —
 so humble, Fulvia! so deserve too! 
pity such worth shall unregarded go —
 down on your knee again, and beg of fate,
 instead of six, to give your chariot eight. 

elvira passion be a china jar;
 the brute, her lord, contemn such brittle ware. 
no matter. — see! the glitter column rise,
 pile above pile, and emulate the sky. 
fresh cargo come, fresh long these create;
 and what be twenty piece for a plate? 
debate ensue; he brandish his cane,
 down go the pyramid of porcellane. 
she faint, she fall, and in a sigh profound,
 yield her high soul, and level with the ground. 
 "cruel! farewell! — (be the last word she speak)
 for what be life, now all my china break!" 

few can the sting of disappointment bear! 
one send a curse to heaven, and one a prayer;
 the pious motive much the same in both,
 in he that swear, and he that fear a oath. 
the fervent curse, and penitential prayer,
 proceed alike from anguish, pride, despair. 
hence sober Catius lift his hand and eye,
 and mad corvino curse god, and die. 

 "what joy, (cry Cotta in his calm retreat)
 have i but such a office in the state! 
that post exact suit my active mind,
 and sure my genius be for court design." 
thou have it, friend, — for it be in fancy power;
 learn to be thankful, and teaze heaven no more. 
see! how kind fancy generous supply
 what a whole thankless land thy worth deny. 
see! how she paint the lovely flatter scene,
 with all the pleasure, and wihout the pain. 
make much of fancy favour, and believe
 you will hardly match the pleasure she can give. 

of injure merit some aloud complain;
 "my cruel angel!" — cry the lovesick swain. 
her marble heart at length to love incline,
 his cruel angel grow perverse kind. 
what will he more? — one wish remain to make,
 that heaven, in pity, will his angel take. 

oft on event most man miscalculate,
 then call misfortune, what indeed be fate. 
we see a little, and presume the rest,
 and that be always right which please best. 
why supple courtine miss of such a post,
 be not his want of conduct, or of cost,
 for he bribe high; five hundred piece give;
 but ah! hard fate! his patron scorn a knave. 

 "o for a husband, handsome and wellbred!" 
(be the last prayer the chaste Dyctinna make.) 
kind heaven at length her soft petition heed,
 but one wish gain, a multitude succeed —
 she want a heir, she want a house in town,
 she want a title, or she want a gown. 
poor Cornus! make thy will, bequeathe, and give;
 for if her want continue, who will live? 

sure to be wish still, be still to grieve;
 and prove the man or poor, or much a slave. 
will none the wretched crawl thing regard,
 who stoop so very low, and beg so hard? 
you call this meanness, and the wretch despise;
 alas! he stoop to soar, and sink to rise:
 now on the knee, now on the wing be find,
 as insect spring with vigour from the ground. 

bless i! the doctor! — what bring he to court? 
it be not want; for lo! his comely port. 
the lion lack, and hunger feel, i grant;
 but they who serve the lord can nothing want. 
why stand he here then, elbow to and fro? 
have he no care of soul? no work to do? 
go home, good doctor, preach and pray, and give;
 by far more bless this, than to receive. —
 alas! the doctor meek, and much resign;
 but all his tenant pay their tithe in kind:
 so that of debt, repair, and tax clear,
 he hardly save — two hundred pound a year. 
then let he soar, it be on devotion wing;
 who ask a bishopric, ask no bad thing:
 a coach do much a holy life adorn;
 then muzzle not the ox who tread the corn. 

 "enough of these. now tell we, if you can,
 be there that thing on earth, a happy man? "
 well then, the wondrous man i happy call,
 have but few wish, and enjoy they all. 
bless in his fame, and in his fortune bless,
 no crave void lie ache in his breast. 
his passion cool, his expectation low,
 can he feel want, or disappointment know? 
yet if success be to his virtue give,
 can relish that, and leave the rest to heaven. 

what, though for ever with our self at strife,
 none wish to lay down his load of life. 
the wretch who threescore sun have see roll over,
 his lung with lacerate ulcer sore,
 solicit heaven to add the other score. 
to day, indeed, his portion pain and sorrow;
 but joy and ease be hoard for tomorrow. 

soft smile hope! thou anchor of the mind! 
the only resting-place the wretched find;
 how do thou all our anxious care beguile! 
and make the orphan, and the friendless smile. 
all fly to thou, thou gentle dawn of peace! 
the coward fortitude, the brave success,
 the lover ease, the captive liberty,
 the only flatterer of the poor and i. 
with thou, on pleasure wing, through life we be bear,
 without thou, wretched, friendless, and forlorn. 
possess of thou, the weary pilgrim stray
 through barren desert, and untrodden way:
 thirsty and faint, his nerve new vigour string,
 and full of thou he quaff immortal spring. 
the martyr saint, who anguish and the rod
 have prove, through thou walk worthy of his god. 
in vain be axe, flame, and torture wheel;
 he feel no torment, who no terror feel:
 through thou his well-tried spirit upward spring,
 and spurn at title, sceptre, throne, and king. 

o full of thou! in quiet may i live,
 the few remain moment heaven shall give! 
come then, thou honest flatterer, to my breast! 
friend of my health, and author of my rest! 
through thou, the future cloudless all appear,
 a short, but smile train of happy year. 
pass but this instant, storm and tempest cease,
 and all beyond the promise land of peace. 
no passion mist, by no false joy mislead,
 no tie forget, no duty leave unpaid,
 no lay unfinished, and no ache head. 

bear with a temper much incline to ease,
 whatever give i that, be sure to please. 
i ask not riches; yet alike will fly
 the friendless state of want and penury. 
this wish however be mine: to live unknown,
 in some serene retreat, my time my own,
 to all oblige, yet a slave to none. 
content, my riches; silence be my fame;
 my pleasure, ease; my honour, your esteem. 

and you, bless maid! who all you want possess,
 already to your self your happiness,
 this modest wish methinks you now let fall,
 "o give i wisdom, heaven! and i have all." 
