to mrs. v—n.

sequester from the busy whirl of man,
 permit soft fancy in the vale to stray;
 in dark obscurity my life begin,
 where science scorn to cheer the dreary way. 

bright sentiment, if unimproved, must die,
 and great idea, unassisted, fall;
 on learning wing we pierce empyreal sky;
 but nature untaught effort be but small. 

pardon, bright fair! my hapless fate deplore,
 nor scorn the grateful, though unlettered line;
 the eastern slave permit to adore,
 when in bright Sol he see a godhead shine. 

heaven spurn he not, but spare the untaught mind,
 who never religion noble truth have prove;
 thus, in thy bosom, where each virtue join,
 let pity plead where reason can approve. 

to cheer the gloom of solitude lone hour,
 in this sad bosom desert make by woe,
 may busy memory ever please power,
 in grateful vision still your form bestow. 

belove idea, on my heart impress,
 which time or anguish never shall efface,
 till death shall stern bid its motion rest,
 and in its stead his barb dart shall place. 

not value less, with gratitude refine,
 shall my warm heart your honour partner share;
 with joy i will own how great, how good his mind,
 and hail each heavenly virtue plant there. 

o! have there step before offend heaven,
 but ten so perfect for a guilty race,
 the dread, tremendous word have never be give,
 nor stream fire have purge the blast place. 

how different those who waste the thoughtless hour,
 and, jocund, dance to folly trifle lay;
 death, mask, oft share the ball and festive bower,
 and beckon, unaware, the soul away. 

aghast she view the dark and dismal vale,
 where ghost of long-departed pleasure roam;
 sad comfort! where their poor expedient fail,
 say, what please guide shall waft the trembler home? 

o, misery! ready than the pity eye
 of heaven, why do thy terror round i wait? 
avaunt! my spirit mount with ecstasy,
 for V—'s bright virtue speak a happy fate. 

then may not i, with humble hope aspire,
 at distance follow where they bold stray? 
ah, no! i want that strong, celestial fire,
 which, eagle-like, dare the meridian ray. 

capacious virtue fill the extensive mind,
 that mind which this low world can never contain;
 over people orb it wander unconfined;
 yet sound of woe oft lure it back again:

and fix, like Niobe, over the rueful scene
 of human misery the mild spirit stand;
 no more the bosom boast a state serene,
 but melt, distress by pity soft command. 

dissolve in woe, it scorn the gay parade
 of dazzle pride, and with the mourner mourn;
 fly with pale misery to the dreary shade,
 and bring it back by soft, yet swift return. 

raise as i be to sweet domestic joy
 by bounteous v—n, will she the line refuse? 
you who, like heaven, will save and not destroy,
 say, will you scorn the poor unpolished muse? 

oft when the frugal meal salute my eye,
 big rapture heave my late despond breast;
 i see your form in every blessing rise,
 it smile content, and bid my sorrow rest. 

hope, lovely phantom! be, and shall be i,
 she hover round, amid this waste of woe;
 point my once cheerless soul to view sublime,
 from earth sad scene, and misery wreck below. 

pour down, great god! thy choice blessing here,
 such virtue merit thy peculiar love;
 o! make their beauteous progeny thy care,
 and lift they late to all thy joy above! 
