paraphrase.

heaven speak! o, nature, listen, and rejoice! 
o, spread from pole to pole this gracious voice:
 "say, every breast of human frame, that prove
 the boundless force with which a parent love;
 say, can a mother from her yearn heart
 bid the soft image of her child depart? 
she! who fond instinct arm with strength to bear
 all form of ill to shield that dear care? 
she! who with anguish sting, with madness wild,
 will rush on death to save her threaten child;
 all selfish feeling banish from her breast,
 her life one aim to make another bless? 
when her love infant to her bosom cling,
 when round her neck his eager arm he fling,
 breathe to her listen soul his melt sigh,
 and lift, suffuse with tear, his ask eye;
 will she, for all ambition can attain,
 the charm of pleasure, or the lure of gain,
 betray strong nature feeling, will she prove
 cold to the claim of duty and of love? 
but shall the mother from her yearn heart
 bid the soft image of her child depart;
 betray fond nature energy, and prove
 cold to the claim of duty and of love! 
yet never will the god, who word give birth
 to yond illumine orb and this fair earth;
 who, through the boundless depth of trackless space,
 bid new-waked beauty spread each perfect grace;
 yet, when he form the vast stupendous whole,
 shed his best bounty on the human soul;
 which reason light illume, which friendship warm,
 which pity soften, and which virtue charm;
 which feel the pure affection generous glow,
 share other joy, and bleed for other woe —
 o, never will the general father prove
 of man forgetful, man the child of love. " —
 when all those planet in their ample sphere
 have winge their course, and roll their destine year;
 when the vast sun shall veil his glow light
 deep in the gloom of everlasting night;
 when wild destructive flame shall wrap the sky,
 when chaos triumph, and when nature die,
 man shall alone the wreck of world survive,
 midst fall sphere immortal man shall live! 
that voice which bid the last dread thunder roll,
 shall whisper to the good, and cheer their soul;
 his favour creature god himself shall guide
 where live water pour their blissful tide;
 where the enlarge, exult, wonder mind
 shall soar, from weakness and from guilt refine;
 where perfect knowledge, bright with cloudless ray,
 shall gild eternity unmeasured day;
 where friendship, unembittered by distrust,
 shall in immortal band unite the just;
 devotion raise to rapture breathe her strain,
 and love in his eternal triumph reign. 
