a pindaric poem

upon the hurricane in November 1703, refer to this text in psalm 148. ver.  8.  wind and storm fulfil his word. 

with a hymn compose of the 148th psalm paraphrase.

you have obey, you wind, that must fulfil
 the great disposer righteous will;
 throughout the land, unlimited you fly,
 nor seek, as heretofore, with friendly aid
 only, new motion to bestow
 upon the sluggish vapour, breed below,
 condense into mist, and melancholy shade. 
no more such gentle method you pursue,
 but march now in terrible array,
 undistinguished be your prey:
 in vain the shrub, with lowly bent,
 seek their destruction to prevent;
 the beech in vain, with outstretched arm,
 deprecate the approach harm;
 in vain the oak (so often storm)
 rely upon that native force,
 by which already be perform
 so much of his appoint course,
 as make he, fearless of decay,
 wait but the accomplish time
 of his long-wished and useful prime,
 to be remove, with honour, to the sea. 
the strait and ornamental pine
 do in the like ambition join,
 and think his fame shall ever last,
 when in some royal ship he stand the plant mast. 
and shall again his length of timber rear
 and new engraft branch wear
 of fibrous cordage and impend shroud,
 still trim with human care, and water by the cloud
 but oh, you tree! who solitary stand;
 or you, who number form a wood;
 you, who on mountain choose to rise,
 and draw they near to the sky;
 or you, who valley late do hold
 in flexible and light mould;
 you numerous brother of the leafy kind,
 to whatsoever use design,
 now, vain you find it to contend
 with not, alas! one element; your friend
 your mother earth, through long precede rain,
 (which undermine sink below)
 no more her wonted strength retain;
 nor you so fix within her bosom grow,
 that for your sake she can resolve to bear
 these furious shock of hurry air;
 but find all you ruin do conspire,
 she soon her beauteous progeny resign
 to this destructive, this imperious wind,
 that check your noble aim, and give you to the fire. 

thus! have thy Cedars, Libanus, be strike
 as the lythe ozier twist round;
 thus! Cadez, have thy wilderness be shake,
 when the apall, and tremendous sound
 of rattl' tempest over you break,
 and make your stubborn glory bow,
 when in such whirlwind the almighty speak,
 warn Judea then, as our Britannia now. 
yet these be the remot harm,
 foreign the care, and distant the alarm:
 while but shelter tree alone,
 master soon, and soon overthrow,
 feel those gust, which since prevail,
 and lofty palace assail;
 who shake turret now give way,
 with vain inscription, which the freeze have bear;
 through age past, t'extol and to adorn,
 and to our latter time convey;
 who do the structure deep foundation lie,
 force his praise upon the gaze croud,
 and, while he moulder in a scanty shroud,
 tell both earth and sky, he when alive be proud
 now down at once come the superfluous load
 the costly fretwork with it yield,
 who imitate fruit and flower be strew
 like those of real growth over the autumn field. 
the present owner lift his eye,
 and the swift change with sad affrightment spy:
 the ceiling go, that late the roof conceal;
 the roof untyle, through which the heaven reveal,
 expose now his head, when all defence have fail. 

what alas, be to be do! 
those, who in city will from danger run,
 do but increase danger meet,
 and death, in various shape, attend in the street;
 while some, too tardy in their flight,
 overtake by a worse mischance,
 their upward part do scarce advance,
 when on their follow limb the extend ruin light,
 one half inter, the other yet survive,
 and for release with faint vigour strive;
 implore the aid of absent friend in vain;
 with falter speech, and die wish call,
 those, who perhaps, their own domestic wall,
 by parallel distress, or swift death retain. 

 o well! thy bishop mansion we lament,
 so tragical the fall, so dire the event! 
but let no dare thought presume
 to point a cause for that oppressive doom. 
yet strict pious ken! have thou be there. 
this fate, we think, have not become thy share,
 nor have that awful fabric bow,
 slide from its loosen band;
 nor yield timber be allow
 to crush thy ever-lifted hand,
 or interrupt thy prayer. 
those orison, that nightly watch keep,
 have call thou from thy bed, or there secure thy sleep. 
while you, bold wind and storm! his word obey,
 while you his scourge the great Jehova make,
 and into ruin heap our edifice lay. 
you south and west the tragedy begin,
 as, with disorder haste, you over the surface run;
 forget, that you be design
 (chief thou Zephyrus, thou soft wind!) 
only our heat, when sultry, to allay,
 and chafe the odorous gum by your disperse play. 
now, by new order and decree,
 for our chastisement issue forth,
 you on his confine the alarm north
 with equal fury see,
 and summons swift to his aid
 eurus, his confederate make,
 his eager second in the oppose fight,
 that even the wind may keep the balance right,
 nor yield increase of sway to arbitrary may. 
meet now, they all contend,
 those assail, while these defend;
 fierce and turbulent the war,
 and in the loud tumultuous jar
 wind their own fife, and clarion be. 
each cavity, which art or nature leave,
 their inspiration hasty receive;
 whence, from their various form and size,
 as various symphony arise,
 their trumpet every hollow tube be make,
 and, when more solid body they invade,
 enrage, they can no farther come,
 the beat flat, while it repel the noise,
 resemble but with more outrageous voice
 the soldier threaten drum:
 and when they compass thus our world around,
 when they our rock and mountain rend,
 when they our sacred pile to their foundation send,
 no wonder if our echo cave rebound;
 no wonder if our listen sense they wind,
 when arm with so much force, and usher with such sound. 
nor scarce, amid the terror of that night,
 when you, fierce wind, such desolation wrought,
 when you from out his store the great commander bring,
 can the most righteous stand upright;
 scarce the holy man perform
 the service, that become it best,
 by ardent vow, or solemn prayer address;
 nor find the calm, so usual to his breast,
 full proof against such storm. 
how shall the guilty then be find,
 the man in wine, or loose pleasure drown,
 to six a steadfast hope, or to maintain their ground! 
when at his glass the late companion feel,
 that giddy, like himself, the totter mansion reel! 
the miser, who with many a chest
 his gloomy tenement oppress,
 now fear the overburden floor,
 and tremble for his life, but for his treasure more. 
what shall he do, or to what power apply? 
to those, which threaten from on high,
 by he never call upon before,
 who also will suggest the impossible restore? 
no; Mammon, to thy law he will be true,
 and, rather than he wealth, will bid the world adieu. 
the rafter sink, and bury with his coin
 that fate do with his live thought combine;
 for still his heart be enclose within a golden i. 

contention with its angry brawl
 by storm over-clamoured, shrink and fall;
 nor Whig, nor Tory now the rash contender call. 
those, who but vanity allow,
 nor thought, it reach the name of sin,
 to be of their perfection proud,
 too much adorn without, or too much raise within,
 now find, that even the light thing,
 as the minute part of air,
 when number to their weight addition bring,
 can, like the small, but numerous insect sting,
 can, like the assemble wind, urge ruin and despair. 

thus you have obey, you wind, that must fulfil
 the great disposer righteous will:
 thus do your breath a strict enquiry make,
 thus do you our most secret sin awake,
 and thus chastise their ill. 

while vain those, of a rapacious mind,
 field to other field have lay,
 by force, or by injurious bargain join,
 with fence for their guard impenetrable make;
 the juster tempest mock the wrong,
 and sweep, in its direct flight,
 the enclosure of another right,
 drive at once the bound, and licence herd along. 
the earth again one general scene appear;
 no regular distinction now,
 betwixt the ground for pasture, or the plough,
 the face of nature wear. 

free as the man, who wild confusion love,
 and lawless liberty approve,
 their fellow-brute pursue their way,
 to their own loss, and disadvantage stray,
 as wretched in their choice, as unadvised as they. 
the timorous deer, while he forsake the park,
 and wander on, in the misguide dark,
 believe, a foe from every unknown bush
 will on his tremble body rush,
 take the wind, that vary in their note,
 for hot pursue hound with deep bellow throat. 
the awaken bird, shake from their nightly seat,
 their unavailing pinion ply,
 repulse, as they attempt to fly
 in hope they may attain to more secure retreat. 
but, where you wilder fowl will you repair? 
when this your happy portion give,
 your upward lot, your firmament of heaven,
 your unentailed, your undivided air,
 where no proprietor be ever know,
 where no litigious suit have ever grow,
 while none from star to star can call the space his own;
 when this no more your middle flight can bear,
 but some rough blast too far above convey,
 or to unquitted earth confine your weak essay. 
nor you, nor wise man can find repose,
 nor can our industry produce
 expedient of the small use,
 to ward our great care, or mitigate your woe. 

 you cloud! that pity our distress,
 and by your pacify shower
 (the soft and usual method of success)
 kind assay to make this tempest less;
 vain your aid be now alas! employ,
 in vain you weep over those destructive hour,
 in which the wind full tyranny enjoy,
 nor will allow you to prevail,
 but drive your scorn, and scatter tear to wail
 the land that lie destroy. 

while you obey, you wind! that must fulfil
 the just disposer righteous will;
 while not the earth alone, you disarray,
 but to more ruin sea winge your impetuous way. 

 which to foreshow, the still portentous sun
 beamless, and pale of late, his race begin,
 quench the ray, he have no joy to keep,
 in the obscure, and sad threaten deep. 
farther than we, that eye of heaven discern,
 and near place to our malignant star,
 our brood tempest, and approach war
 anticipate learn. 
when now, too soon the dark event
 show what that fade planet mean;
 while more the liquid empire undergo,
 more she resign of her entrust store,
 the wealth, the strength, the pride of different shore
 in one devote, one record night,
 than year have know destroy by generous fight,
 or privateer foe. 
all rule of conduct lay aside,
 no more the baffle pilot steer,
 or know a art, when it each moment veer,
 to vary with the wind, or stem unusual tide. 
disperse and loose, the shatter vessel stray,
 some perish within sight of shore,
 some, happy thought, obtain a wide sea,
 but never to return, or cast a anchor more! 
some on the northern coast be throw,
 and by congeal surge compass round,
 to fix and certain ruin bind,
 immoveable be grow:
 the fatal Goodwin swallow all that come
 within the limit of that dangerous sand,
 amphibious in its kind, nor sea nor land;
 yet kin to both, a false and faithless strand,
 know only to our cost for a devour tomb. 
nor seem the hurricane content,
 while only ship be wreck, and tackle rent;
 the sailor too must fall a prey,
 those that command, with those that do obey;
 the best supporter of thy pompous stile,
 thou far renown, thou powerful british isle! 
foremost in naval strength, and sovereign of the sea! 
these from thy aid that wrathful night divide,
 plunge in those wave, over which this title ride. 
what be thou, envy greatness, at the best,
 in thy delude splendor dress? 
what be thy glorious title, and thy form? 
which can give security, or rest
 to favour man, or kingdom that contest
 with popular assault, or providential storm! 
while on omnipotent our fate depend,
 and they be only safe, who he alone defend. 
then let to heaven our general praise be send,
 which do our farther loss, our total wreck prevent. 
and as our aspiration do ascend,
 let every thing be summon to attend;
 and let the poet after God own heart
 direct our skill in that sublime part,
 and our weak number mend! 

explanatory note.

