the triumph of melancholy.

by the same.

memory, be still! why throng upon the thought
 these scene so deep stain with sorrow die? 
be there in all thy store no cheerful draught,
 to brighten yet once more in fancy eye? 

yes — from afar a landscape seem to rise,
 embellish by the lavish hand of spring;
 thin gild cloud float light over the sky,
 and laugh love disport on flutter wing. 

how bless the youth in yonder valley lay! 
what smile in every conscious feature play! 
while to the murmur of the breezy glade
 his merry pipe attune the rural lay. 

hail innocence! who bosom all serene
 feel not as yet the internal tempest roll:
 o! never may care distract that placid mien! 
never may the shade of doubt overwhelm thy soul! 

vain wish! for lo, in gay attire conceal
 yonder she come! the heart-enflaming fiend! 
(will not kind power the helpless stripling shield!) 
swift to her destine prey see passion bend! 

o smile accurse, to hide the worst design! 
now with blithe eye she woo he to be bless;
 while round her arm unseen a serpent twine —
 and lo, she hurl it hiss at his breast! 

and instant, lo, his dizzy eye-ball swim
 ghastly, and redden dart a frantic glare;
 pain with strong grasp distort his writhe limb,
 and fear cold hand erect his freeze hair. 

be this, o life, be this thy boast prime! 
and do thy spring no happy prospect yield! 
why shall the sun-beam pain thy glitter clime,
 when the keen mildew desolate the field! 

how memory pain! let some gay theme beguile
 the muse mind, and soothe to soft delight:
 you image of woe, no more recoil;
 be life past scene wrap in oblivious night. 

now when fierce winter, arm with wasteful power,
 heave the wild deep that thunder from afar:
 how sweet to sit in the sequester bower,
 to hear, and but to hear, the mingle war! 

ambition here display no gild toy,
 that tempt on desperate wing the soul to rise;
 nor pleasure path to wild of woe decoy,
 nor anguish lurk in grandeur proud disguise. 

oft have contentment cheere this lone abode
 with the mild languish of her smile eye;
 here health in rosy bloom have often glow,
 while loose-robed quiet stand enamour by. 

even the storm lull to more profound repose;
 the storm these humble wall assail in vain:
 the shrub be shelter, when the whirlwind blow,
 while the oak mighty ruin strow the plain. 

blow on, you wind! thy, winter, be the sky,
 and toss the infuriate surge, and vale lie waste:
 nature thy temporary rage defy;
 to her relief the gentle season haste. 

throned in her emerald car, see spring appear! 
(as fancy will the landscape start to view)
 her emerald car the youthful zephyr bear,
 fan her bosom with their pinion blue. 

around the jocund hour be flutter see. 
and lo, her rod the rose-lipped power extend! 
and lo, the lawn be deck in live green,
 and beauty bright-eyed train from heaven descend! 

haste, happy day, and make all nature glad —
 but will all nature joy at your return? 
o can you cheer pale sickness gloomy bed,
 or dry the tear that bathe the untimely urn? 

will you one transient ray of gladness dart,
 where groan the dungeon to the captive wail? 
to ease tire disappointment bleed heart,
 will all your store of soften balm avail? 

when stern oppression, in his harpy-fang,
 from want weak grasp the last sad morsel bear,
 can you allay the die parent pang,
 who infant crave relief with fruitless tear? 

for ah! thy reign, oppression, be not past. 
who from the shiver limb the vestment rend? 
who lay the once rejoice village waste,
 burst the tie of lover and of friend? 

but hope not, Muse, vainglorious as thou be,
 with the weak impulse of thy humble strain,
 hope not to soften pride obdurate heart,
 when erroll bright example shine in vain. 

then cease the theme. turn, fancy, turn thy eye,
 thy weep eye, nor further urge thy flight;
 thy haunt, alas! no gleam of joy supply,
 or transient gleam that flash and sink in night. 

yet fain the mind its anguish will forgo. 
spread then, historic Muse, thy picture scroll;
 bid thy great scene in all their splendour glow,
 and rouse to thought sublime the exult soul. 

what mingle pomp rush on the enrapture gaze! 
lo, where the gallant navy ride the deep! 
here glitter town their spiry turret raise,
 there bulwark overhang the shaggy steep. 

bristle with spear, and bright with burnish shield. 
the embattle legion stretch their long array;
 discord red torch, as fierce she scour the field,
 with bloody tincture stain the face of day. 

and now the host in silence wait the sign:
 keen be their look who liberty inspire:
 quick as the goddess dart along the line,
 each breast impatient burn with noble fire. 

her form how graceful! in her lofty mien
 the smile of love stern wisdom frown control;
 her fearless eye, determine though serene,
 speak the great purpose, and the unconquered soul. 

Mark, where ambition lead the adverse band,
 each feature fierce and haggard, as with pain! 
with menace loud he cry, while from his hand
 he vain strive to wipe the crimson stain. 

lo, at his call, impetuous as the storm,
 headlong to deed of death the host be drive;
 hatred to madness wrought each face deform,
 mount the black whirlwind, and involve the heaven. 

now, virtue, now thy powerful succour lend,
 shield they for liberty who dare to die —
 ah! liberty, will none thy cause befriend! 
be those thy son, thy generous son that fly! 

not virtue self, when heaven its aid deny,
 can brace the loosen nerve, or warm the heart;
 not virtue self can still the burst of sigh,
 when fester in the soul misfortune dart. 

see, where by terror and despair dismay
 the scatter legion pour along the plain! 
ambition car, in bloody spoil array,
 hew its broad way, as vengeance guide the rein. 

but who be he, that, by yond lonely brook,
 with wood overhang, and precipice rude,
 lie all abandon, yet with dauntless look
 see stream from his breast the purple flood? 

ah, Brutus! ever thy be virtue tear! 
lo, his dim eye to liberty he turn,
 as scarce support on her break spear
 over her expire son the goddess mourn. 

loose to the wind her azure mantle fly,
 from her dishevel lock she rend the plume;
 no lustre lighten in her weep eye,
 and on her tearstained cheek no rose bloom. 

meanwhile the world, ambition, own thy sway,
 fame loud trumpet labour with thy name;
 for thou, the muse awake her sweet lie,
 and flattery bid for thou her altar flame. 

nor in life lofty bustle sphere alone,
 the sphere where monarch and where hero toil,
 sink virtue son beneath misfortune frown,
 while guilt thril bosom leap at pleasure smile. 

full oft where solitude and silence dwell,
 far, far remote amid the lowly plain,
 resound the voice of woe from virtue cell,
 such be man doom; and pity weep in vain. 

still grief recoil — how vain have i strive
 thy power, o melancholy, to withstand! 
tire, i submit; but yet, o yet remove,
 or ease the pressure of thy heavy hand! 

yet for a while let the bewilder soul
 find in society relief from woe;
 o yield a while to friendship soft controul! 
some respite, friendship, will thou not bestow! 

come then, Philander, who exalt mind
 look down from far on all that charm the great;
 for thou can bear, unshaken and resign,
 the bright smile, the black frown of fate:

come thou, who love unlimited, sincere,
 nor faction cool, nor injury destroy;
 who lend to misery moan a pity ear,
 and feel with ecstasy another joy:

who know man frailty, with a favour eye,
 and melt heart, behold a brother fall;
 who, unenslaved by fashion narrow tie,
 with manly freedom follow nature call. 

and bring thy Delia, sweetly-smiling fair,
 who spotless soul no rankle thought deform;
 her gentle accent calm each throb care,
 and harmonise the thunder of the storm. 

though bless with wisdom, and with wit refine,
 she court no homage, nor desire to shine;
 in her each sentiment sublime be join
 to female softness and a form divine. 

come, and disperse the involve shadow drear;
 let chasten mirth the social hour employ:
 o catch the swift-winged moment while it be near,
 on swift wing the moment fly of joy. 

even while the careless disencumber soul
 sink all dissolve into pleasure dream,
 even then to time tremendous verge we roll
 with headlong haste along life surgy stream. 

can gaiety the vanish year restore,
 or on the wither limb fresh beauty shed,
 or soothe the sad inevitable hour,
 or cheer the dark, dark mansion of the dead? 

still sound the solemn knell in fancy ear,
 that call Eliza to the silent tomb:
 with she how jocund roll the sprightly year! 
how shine the nymph in beauty bright bloom! 

ah! beauty bloom avail not in the grave,
 youth lofty mien, nor age awful grace:
 moulder alike unknown the prince and slave,
 whelm in the enormous wreck of human race:

the thought-fixed portraiture, the breathe bust,
 the arch with proud memorial array,
 the long-lived pyramid shall sink in dust,
 to dumb oblivion ever-desart shade. 

fancy from joy still wander far astray;
 ah! melancholy, how i feel thy power! 
long have i labour to elude thy sway —
 but it be enough; for i resist no more:

the traveller thus, that over the midnight waste
 through many a lonesome path be doom to roam,
 bewilder and weary sit he down at last
 for the long night, and distant far his home. 
