the tear of old May-day.

lead by the jocund train of vernal hour
and vernal air, uprise the gentle may;
blush she rise, and blush rise the flower
that spring spontaneous in the genial ray.

her lock with heaven ambrosial dew be bright,
and amorous zephyr flutter on her breast:
with every shift gleam of morning light
the colour shift of her rainbow vest.

imperial ensign grace her smile form,
a golden key, and golden wand she bear;
this charm to peace each sullen eastern storm,
and that unlock the summer copious store.

onward in conscious majesty she come,
the grateful honour of mankind to taste;
to gather fair wreath of future fame,
and blend fresh triumph with her glory past.

vain hope! no more in choral band unite
her virgin votary, and at early dawn,
sacred to may and love mysterious rite,
brush the light dew-drop from the spangle lawn.

to she no more augusta wealthy pride
pour the full tribute from potosi mine;
nor fresh-blow garland village maid provide,
a pure offer, at her rustic shrine.

no more the maypole verdant height around
to valour game the ambitious youth advance:
no merry bell and tabors sprightly sound
wake the loud carol, and the sportive dance.

sudden in pensive sadness droop her head,
faint on her cheek the blush crimson die —
"o! chaste victorious triumph, whither flee?
"my maiden honour, whither go? "she cry.

ah! once to fame and bright dominion bear,
the earth and smile ocean see i rise,
with time coeval and the star of morn,
the first, the fair daughter of the sky.

then, when at heaven prolific mandate spring
the radiant beam of new-creat day,
celestial harp, to air of triumph string,
hail the glad dawn, and angel call i may.

space in her empty region hear the sound,
and hill, and dale, and rock, and valley ring;
the sun exult in his glorious round,
and shout planet in their course sing.

for ever then i lead the constant year;
see youth, and joy, and love enchant wile;
see the mild grace in my train appear,
and infant beauty brighten in my smile.

no winter frown. in sweet embrace ally,
three sister season dance the eternal green;
and spring retire softness gentle vie
with autumn blush, and summer lofty mien.

too soon, when man profane the blessing give,
and vengeance arm to blot a guilty age,
with bright astrea to my native heaven
i flee, and fly see the deluge rage:

see burst cloud eclipse the noontide beam,
while sound billow from the mountain roll,
with bitter wave pollute all my stream,
my nectar stream, that flow on sand of gold.

then vanquish many a sea-girt isle and grove,
their forest float on the watery plain:
then, fame for art and law derive from Jove,
my atalantis sink beneath the main.

no long bloom primeval eden bower,
nor guardian dragon watch the hesperian steep:
with all their fountain, fragrant fruit and flower,
tear from the continent to glut the deep.

no more to dwell in sylvan scene i deign,
yet oft descend to the languid earth,
with quicken power the faint mass sustain,
and wake her slumber atom into birth.

and every echo catch my rapture name,
and every virgin breathe her amorous vow,
and precious wreath of rich immortal fame,
shower by the muse, crown my lofty brow.

but chief in Europe, and in europe pride,
my albion favour realm, i rise adore;
and pour my wealth to other clime deny,
from amalthea horn with plenty store.

ah i! for now a young rival claim
my ravish honour, and to her belong
my choral dance, and victorious game,
to she my garland and triumphal song.

o say what yet untasted bounty flow,
what pure joy await she gentle reign?
do lily fair, violet sweet blow?
and warble philomel a soft strain?

do morning sun in ruddy glory rise?
do evening fan she with serener gale?
do cloud drop fatness from the wealthy sky?
or wanton plenty in her happy vale?

ah! no: the blunt beam of dawn light
skirt the pale orient with uncertain day;
and Cynthia, ride on the car of night,
through cloud embattle faint win her way.

pale, immature, the blight verdure spring,
nor mount juice feed the swell flower;
mute all the grove, nor Philomela sing
when silence listen at the midnight hour.

nor wonder, man, that nature bashful face,
and open charm her rude embrace fear:
be she not spring of april wayward race,
the sickly daughter of the unripened year?

with shower and sunshine in her fickle eye,
with hollow smile proclaim treacherous peace;
with blush, harbour in their thin disguise
the blast that riot on the spring increase.

be this the fair invest with my spoil
by europe law, and senates stern command?
ungenerous Europe, let i fly thy soil,
and waft my treasure to a grateful land:

again revive on asia droop shore
my daphne grove, or lycia ancient plain:
again to afric sultry sand restore
embower shade, and lybian amnion fane:

or haste to northern zembla savage coast,
there hush to silence elemental strife;
brood over the region of eternal frost,
and swell her barren womb with heat and life.

then Britain — here she cease. indignant grief,
and part pang her falter tongue suppress:
veil in a amber cloud, she seek relief,
and tear, and silent anguish tell the rest.
