ode to a water nymph.

by mr. Mason.

you green-haired nymph! who Pan allow
to tend this sweetly-solemn wood,

to speed the shoot scion into bough,
and call the roseate blossom from the bud;
but chief, thou naid, will so long to lead
this fluid crystal sparkle as it flow;

whither, ah! whither be thou flee?
what shade be conscious to thy woe?
ah! it be yond poplar awful gloom;
poetic eye can pierce the scene,

can see thy drop head, thy wither bloom,
see grief diffuse over all thy languid mien.
well may thou wear misfortune faint air,
well rend those flowery honour from thy brow,

devolve that length of careless hair,
and give yond azure veil to flow
loose to the wind. for ah! thy pain
the pity muse can well relate:

ah! let she, plaintive, pour the tender strain,
to teach the echo thy disastrous fate.
it be where the alder close-knit shade entwine
(what time the dogstar fire intense burn,)

in gentle indolence recline,
beside your ever-trickling urn
you sleep serene; all free from fear,
no friendly dream foretell your harm,

when sudden, see! the tyrant art appear
to snatch the liquid treasure from thy arm.
art, gothic art, have seize thy darling vase,
that vase which silver-slippered Thetis give,

for some soft story tell with grace,
amid the associate of the wave;
when in sequester coral vale,
while world of water roll above,

the circle sea-nymph tell alternate tale
of fable change, and of slight love.
ah! loss too just mourn! for now the fiend
have on yond shell-wrought terras poise it high,

and thence he bid its stream descend,
with torture regularity;
from step to step with sullen sound
the force cascade indignant leap,

till pen they fill the basin measure round,
there in a dull stagnation doom to sleep.
lose be the vocal pebble gurgle song,
the rill soft-dripping from its rocky spring,

no free meander wind along,
or curl, when zephyr wave his wing,
these charm, alas! be now no more —
fortune, oh! give i to redeem

the ravish vase; oh! give i to restore
its pristine honour to this hapless stream!
then, nymph, again, with all their native ease,
thy wanton water, volatile and free,

shall wild warble, as they please,
their soft loquacious harmony.
whereve they vagrant choose to rove,
there will i lead, not force their way,

whether to gloom beneath the shady grove,
or in the mead reflect the sparkle ray.
not hagley various stream shall thy surpass,
though nature, and her Lyttelton ordain

that there the naid band shall grace
with every watery charm the plain;
that there the frequent rill shall roll,
and health to every flower dispense,

free as their master pour from all his soul
the generous tide of warm benevolence;
shall now glide sweet plaintive through the vale
in melt murmur querulous slow;

soft as that master love-lorn tale,
when LUCY call forth all his woe:
shall now from steepy height descend,
deep thunder the rough rock among,

loud as the praise applaud senate lend,
when England cause inspire his glow tongue.
