a monologue.

o Chatterton! for thou the pensive song i raise,
 thou object of my wonder, pity, envy, praise! 
bright star of genius! — tear from life and fame,
 my tear, my verse, shall consecrate thy name! 
you muse! who around his natal bed
 triumphant sing, and all your influence shed;
 Apollo! thou who rapt his infant breast,
 and, in his daedal number, shine confess,
 ah! why, in vain, such mighty gift bestow
 — why give fresh torture to the child of woe? 
why thus, with barbarous care, illume his mind,
 add new sense to all the ill behind? 

thou haggard! poverty! who cheerless eye
 transform young rapture to the ponderous sigh;
 in who drear cave no muse ever strike the lyre,
 nor bard ever madden with poetic fire;
 why all thy spell for Chatterton combine? 
his thought creative, why must thou confine? 
subdue by thou, his pen no more obey,
 no long give the song of ancient day;
 nor paint in glow tint from distant sky,
 nor bid wild scenery rush upon our eye —
 check in her flight, his rapid genius cower,
 drop her sad plume, and yield to thou her power. 

behold he, muse! see your favourite son
 the prey of want, ere manhood be begin! 
the bosom you have fill, with anguish tear —
 the mind you cherish, droop and forlorn! 

and now despair her sable form extend,
 creep to his couch, and over his pillow bend. 
ah, see! a deadly bowl the fiend conceal,
 which to his eye with caution be reveal —
 seize it, Apollo! — seize the liquid snare! 
dash it to earth, or dissipate in air! 
stay, hapless youth! refrain — abhor the draught,
 with pang, with rack, with deep repentance fraught! 
oh, hold! the cup with woe eternal flow,
 more — more than death the poisonous juice bestow! 
in vain! — he drink — and now the search fire
 rush through his vein, and writhe he expire! 
no sorrow friend, no sister, parent, nigh,
 to sooth his pang, or catch his part sigh;
 alone, unknown, the muses darling die,
 and with the vulgar dead unnoted lie! 
bright star of genius! — tear from life and fame,
 my tear, my verse, shall consecrate thy name! 
