the progress of love. 

in four eclogue. 

uncertainty. eclogue i  to mr. pope. 

pope, to who reed beneath the beechen shade,
the nymph of Thames a please attention pay;
while yet thy muse, content with humble praise,
warble in windsor grove her sylvan lay,
though now sublime bear on Homer wing,
of glorious war, and godlike chief she sing:
will thou with i revisit once again
the crystal fountain, and the flowery plain?
will thou, indulgent, hear my verse relate
the various change of a lover state;
and while each turn of passion i pursue,
ask thy own heart if what i tell be true?

to the green margin of a lonely wood,
who pendent shade overlook a silver flood,
young Damon come, unknow where he stray,
full of the image of his beauteous maid:
he flock far off, unfed, untended lay,
to every savage a defenceless prey;
no sense of interest can their master move,
and every care seem trifle now but love.
awhile in pensive silence he remain,
but though his voice be mute his look complain;
at length the thought within his bosom pen,
force his unwilling tongue to give they vent.

you nymph, he cry, you dryad, who so long
have favour Damon, and inspire his song;
for who, retire, i shun the gay resort
of sportful city, and of pompous court;
in vain i bid the restless world adieu,
to seek tranquillity and peace with you.
though wild ambition and destructive rage,
no faction here can form, no war can wage;
though envy frown not on your humble shade,
nor calumny your innocence invade,
yet cruel love, that troubler of the breast,
too often violate your boast rest;
with inbred storm disturb your calm retreat,
and taint with bitterness each rural sweet.

ah luckless day! when first with fond surprise
on delia face i fix my eager eye;
then in wild tumult all my soul be toss:
then reason, liberty, at once be lose:
and every wish, and think, and care be go,
but what my heart employ on she alone.
then too she smile: can smile our peace destroy,
those lovely child of content and joy?
how can soft pleasure and torment woe,
from the same spring at the same moment flow?
unhappy boy, these vain enquiry cease,
thought can not guard, nor will restore thy peace:
indulge the frenzy that thou must endure,
and sooth the pain thou know not how to cure.
come, flatter memory, and tell my heart
how kind she be, and with what please art
she strive its fond wish to obtain,
confirm her power, and fast bind my chain.
if on the green we dance, a mirthful band,
to i alone she give her will hand;
her partial taste, if ever i touch the lyre,
still in my song find something to admire.
by none but she my crook with flower be crown,
by none but she my brow with ivy bind:
the world that Damon be her choice believe,
the world, alas! like Damon, be deceive!
when last i see she, and declare my fire
in word as soft as passion can inspire,
cold she hear, and full of scorn withdraw,
without one pity glance, or sweet adieu.
the fright hind, who see his ripen corn
up from the root by sudden tempest tear,
who fair hope destroy and blast lie,
feel not so keen a pang of grief as i.
ah, how have i deserve, inhuman maid,
to have my faithful service thus repay?
be all the mark of kindness i receive,
but dream of joy, that charm i and deceive?
or do you only nurse my grow love,
that with more pain i may your hatred prove?
sure guilty treachery no place can find
in such a gentle, such a generous mind:
a maid bring up the wood and wild among,
can never have learn the art of court so young:
no; let i rather think her anger feign,
still let i hope my Delia may be gain;
it be only modesty that seem disdain,
and her heart suffer when she give i pain.

please with this flatter thought the lovesick boy
feel the faint dawn of a doubtful joy;
back to his flock more cheerful he return,
when now the set sun less fierce burn:
blue vapour rise along the mazy rill,
and light last blush tinge the distant hill.

hope. eclogue ii. to mr. Doddington. 

hear, Doddington, the note that shepherd sing,
note soft as those of nightingale in spring:
nor Pan, nor Phoebus tune the shepherd reed:
from love alone our tender lay proceed:
love warm our fancy with enliven fire,
refine our genius, and our verse inspire:
from he Theocritus, on enna plain,
learnt the wild sweetness of his doric strain;
Virgil by he be teach the move art,
that charm each ear, and soften every heart:
o will thou quit the pride of court, and deign
to dwell with we upon the vocal plain,
thou to his power shall reach, and every shade
resound the praise of thy favourite maid;
thy pipe our rural concert will improve,
and we shall learn of thou to please and love.

Damon no long seek the silent shade,
no more in unfrequented path he stray,
but call the nymph to hear his jocund song,
and tell his joy to all the rustic throng.

bless be the hour, he say, that happy hour
when first i own my delia gentle power;
then gloomy discontent and pine care
forsake my breast, and leave soft wish there:
soft wish there they leave, and gay desire,
delightful languor, and transport fire.
where yonder lime combine to form a shade,
these eye first gaze upon the charm maid;
there she appear, on that auspicious day,
when swain their sportive rite to Bacchus pay:
she lead the dance — heaven! with what grace she move!
who can have see she then, and not have love?
i strive not to resist so sweet a flame,
but glory in a happy captive name;
nor will i now, can love permit, be free,
but leave to brute their savage liberty.

and be thou then, fond swain, secure of joy?
can no reverse thy flatter bliss destroy?
have treacherous love no torment yet in store?
or have thou never prove his fatal power?
whence flow those tear that late bedew thy cheek?
why sigh thy heart as if it strive to break?
why be the desert rock invoke to hear
the plaintive accent of thy sad despair?
from delia rigour all those pain arise,
Delia, who now compassionate my woe,
who bid i hope; and in that charm word
have peace and transport to my soul restore.

begin, my pipe, begin the gladsome lay;
a kiss from Delia shall thy music pay;
a kiss obtain betwixt struggle and consent,
give with force anger, and disguise content:
no laureate wreath i ask to bind my brow,
such as the muse on lofy bard bestow;
let other swain to praise or fame aspire:
i from her lip my recompense require.

hark how the bee with murmur fill the plain,
while every flower of every sweet they drain:
see, how beneath yond hillock shady steep,
the shelter herd on flowery couch sleep;
nor bee, nor herd, be half so bless as i,
if with my fond desire my love comply:
from delia lip a sweet honey flow,
and on her bosom dwell more soft repose.

ah how, my dear, shall i deserve thy charm?
what gift can bribe thou to my longing arm?
a bird for thou in silken band i hold,
who yellow plumage shine like polish gold;
from distant isle the lovely stranger come,
and bear the fortunate canary name;
in all our wood none boast so sweet a note,
not even the nightingale melodious throat.
accept of this; and can i add beside
what wealth the rich Peruvian mountain hide;
if all the gem in eastern rock be i,
on thou alone their glitter pride shall shine.
but if thy mind no gift have power to move,
Phoebus himself shall leave the aonian grove;
the tuneful nine, who never sue in vain,
shall come sweet suppliant for their favourite swain.
for he each blue-eyed naiad of the flood,
for he each green-haired sister of the wood,
who oft beneath fair cynthia gentle ray
his music call to dance the night away.
and you, fair nymph, companion of my love;
with who she joy the cowslip mead to rove,
i beg you recommend my faithful flame,
and let she often hear her shepherd name;
shade all my fault from her inquire sight,
and show my merit in the fair light;
my pipe your kind assistance shall repay,
and every friend shall claim a different lay.

but see! in yonder glade the heavenly fair
enjoy the fragrance of the breezy air —
ah, thither let i fly with eager foot;
adieu, my pipe, i go my love to meet —
o may i find she as we part last,
and may each future hour be like the past!
so shall the white lamb these pasture feed,
propitious Venus, on thy altar bleed.

jealousy. eclogue iii. to mr. EDWARD Walpole. 

the god, o Walpole, give no bliss sincere:
wealth be disturb by care, and power by fear.
of all the passion that employ the mind,
in gentle love the sweet joy we find;
yet even those joy dire jealousy molest,
and blacken each fair image in our breast.
o may the warmth of thy too tender heart
never feel the sharpness of his venom dart;
for thy own quiet think thy mistress just,
and wise take thy happiness on trust.

begin, my muse, and damon woe rehearse,
in wild number and disorder verse.

on a romantic mountain airy head
(while browse goat at ease around he feed)
anxious he lie, with jealous care oppress;
distrust and anger labour in his breast —
the vale beneath a please prospect yield,
of verdant mead and cultivate field;
through these a river roll its wind flood,
adorn with various tuft of rise wood;
here half conceal in tree a cottage stand,
a castle there the open plain command,
beyond, a town with glitter spire be crown,
and distant hill the wide horizon bind:
so charm be the scene, awhile the swain
behold delight, and forget his pain;
but soon the sting infix within his heart,
with cruel force renew their rage smart:
he flowery wreath, which long with pride he wear,
the gift of Delia, from his brow he tear:
then cry; may all thy charm, ungrateful maid,
like these neglect rose droop and fade;
may angry heaven deform each guilty grace,
that triumph now in that delude face;
those alter look may every shepherd fly,
and even thy Daphnis hate thou worse than i.

say, thou inconstant, what have Damon do,
to lose the heart his tedious pain have win;
tell i what charm you in my rival find,
against who power no tie have strength to bind;
have he, like i, with long obedience strive
to conquer your disdain, and merit love?
have he with transport every smile adore,
and die with grief at each ungentle word?
ah, no! the conquest be obtain with ease:
he please you, by not study to please:
he careless indolence your pride alarm;
and have he love you more, he less have charm.

o pain to think, another shall possess
those balmy lip which i be wont to press:
another on her pant breast shall lie,
and catch sweet madness from her swim eye! —
i see their friendly flock together feed,
i see they hand in hand walk over the mead;
will my close eye have sink in endless night,
ere i be doom to bear that hateful sight!
whereve they pass, be blast every flower,
and hungry wolf their helpless flock devour. —
ah wretched swain, can no example move
thy heedless heart to shun the rage of love?
have thou not hear how poor menalcas die
a victim to parthenia fatal pride?
dear be the youth to all the tuneful plain,
love by the nymph, by Phoebus love in vain:
around his tomb their tear the muse pay,
and all thing mourn but the relentless maid.
will i can die like he and be at peace,
these torment in the quiet grave will cease;
there my vex thought a calm repose will find.
and rest as if my Delia still be kind.
no, let i live her falsehood to upbraid;
some god perhaps my just revenge will aid. —
alas what aid, fond swain, will thou receive?
can thy heart bear to see its Delia grieve?
protect she, heaven, and let she never know
the slight part of hapless damon woe:
i ask no vengeance from the power above;
all i implore be never more to love —
let i this fondness from my bosom tear,
let i forget that ever i think she fair.
come, cool indifference, and heal my breast;
weary, at length, i seek thy downy rest:
no turbulence of passion shall destroy
my future ease with flatter hope of joy.
hear, mighty Pan, and all you sylvan here,
what by your guardian deity i swear;
no more my eye shall view her fatal charm,
no more i will court the trayt'ress to my arm;
not all her art my steady soul shall move,
and she shall find that reason conquer love. —

scarce have he speak, when through the lawn below
alone he see the beauteous Delia go;
at once transport he forget his vow,
(such perjury the laugh god allow)
down the steep hill with ardent haste he fly;
he find her kind, and soon believe her true.

possession. eclogue iv. to the lord Cobham. 

Cobham, to thou this rural lie i bring,
who guide judgement give i skill to sing;
though far unequal to those polish strain,
with which thy Congreve charm the listen plain,
yet shall its music please the partial ear,
and sooth thy breast with thought that once be dear;
recall those year which time have throw behind,
when smile love with honour share thy mind:
the sweet remembrance shall thy youth restore,
fancy again shall run past pleasure over,
and while in Stowe enchant walk you stray,
this theme may help to cheat the summer day.

beneath the covert of a myrtle wood,
to Venus raise a rustic altar stand,
to Venus and to HYMEN, there combine,
in friendly league to favour humankind.
with wanton cupid in that happy shade,
the gentle virtue, and mild wisdom play.
nor there in sprightly pleasure genial train,
lurk sick disgust, or late repent pain,
nor force, nor interest, join unwilling hand,
but love consent tie the blissful band.
thither with glad devotion Damon come,
to thank the power who bless his faithful flame;
two milkwhite dove he on their altar lay,
and thus to both his grateful homage pay:
hail, bounteous god, before who hallow shrine
my Delia vow to be for ever mine,
while glow in her cheek, with tender love,
sweet virgin modesty reluctant strive:
and hail to thou, fair queen of young desire,
long shall my heart preserve thy please fire,
since Delia now can all its warmth return,
as fond languish, and as fierce burn.

o the dear gloom of last propitious night!
o shade more charm than the fair light!
then in my arm i clasp the melt maid,
then all my pain one moment overpay;
then first the sweet excess of bliss i prove,
which none can taste but who like i have love,
thou too, bright goddess, once in ida grove,
do not disdain to meet a shepherd love,
with he while frisk lamb around you play,
conceal you sport in the secret shade;
scarce can anchises rapture equal i,
and delia beauty only yield to thy.

what be you now, my once most value joy,
insipid trifle all, and childish toy —
friendship itself never know a charm like this,
nor colin talk can please like delia kiss.

you muse, skill in every win art,
teach i more deep to engage her heart;
you nymph, to she your fresh rose bring,
and crown she with the pride of all the spring;
on all her day let health and peace attend;
may she never want, nor ever lose a friend;
may some new pleasure every hour employ;
but let she Damon be her high joy.

with thou, my love, for ever will i stay,
all night caress thou, and admire all day;
in the same field our mingle flock we will feed,
to the same spring our thirsty heifer lead,
together will we share the harvest toil,
together press the vine autumnal spoil,
delightful state, where peace and love combine,
to bid our tranquil day unclouded shine!
here limpid fountain roll through flowery mead,
here rise forest lift their verdant head;
here let i wear my careless life away,
and in thy arm insensible decay.

when late old age our head shall silver over,
and our slow pulse dance with joy no more;
when time no long will thy beauty spare,
and only damon eye shall think thou fair;
then may the gentle hand of welcome death,
at one soft stroke deprive we both of breath;
may we beneath one common stone be lay,
and the same cypress both our ash shade.
perhaps some friendly muse, in tender verse,
shall deign our faithful passion to rehearse,
and future age with just envy move,
be tell how Damon and his Delia love.
