the progress of discontent.

a poem. write at Oxford in the year 1746. 

when now mature in classic knowledge,
the joyful youth be send to college,
his father come, a vicar plain,
at Oxford breed — in anna reign,
and thus in form of humble suitor
bow accost a reverend tutor.
"sir, i be a Glo'stershire divine,
"and this my old son of nine;
"my wife ambition and my own
"be that this child shall wear a gown:
"i will warrant that his good behaviour
"will justify your future favour:
"and for his part, to tell the truth,
"my son be a very forward youth;
"have Horace all by heart — you will wonder —
"and mouth out homer greek like thunder.
"if you will examine — and admit he,
"a scholarship will nice fit he:
"that he succeed it be ten to one;
"your vote and interest, sir! — it be do. "

our pupil hope, though twice defeat,
be with a scholarship complete:
a scholarship but half maintain,
and college rule be heavy chain:
in garret dark he smoke and pun,
a prey to discipline and dun;
and now intent on new design,
sigh for a fellowship — and fine.

when nine full tedious winter past,
that utmost wish be crown at last:
but the rich prize no soon get,
again he quarrel with his lot:
"these fellowship be pretty thing,
"we live indeed like petty king:
"but who can bear to waste his whole age
"amid the dullness of a college,
"debar the common joy of life,
"and that prime bliss — a love wife!
"o! what be a table rich spread
"without a woman at its head!
"will some snug benefice but fall,
"you feast, you dinner! farewell all!
"to office i will bid adieu,
"of dean, vice prae. — of bur
"come joy, that rural quiet yield,
"come, tithe, and house, and fruitful field! "

too fond of liberty and ease
a patriot vanity to please,
long time he watch, and by stealth,
each frail incumbent doubtful health;
at length — and in his fortieth year,
a live drop — two hundred clear!
with breast elate beyond expression,
he hurry down to take possession,
with rapture view the sweet retreat —
"what a convenient house! how neat!
"for fuel here be sufficient wood:
"pray god the cellar may be good!
"the garden — that must be new plan —
"shall these old-fashioned yew-tree stand?
"over yonder vacant plot shall rise
"the flowery shrub of thousand die: —
"yonder wall, that feel the southern ray,
"shall blush with ruddy fruitage gay;
"while thick beneath its aspect warm
"over well-ranged hive the bee shall swarm,
"from which, ere long, of golden gleam
"metheglin luscious juice shall stream:
"this awkward hut overgrow with ivy,
"we will alter to a modern privy:
"up yonder green slope, of hazel trim,
"a avenue so cool and dim,
"shall to a arbour, at the end,
"in spite of gout, entice a friend.
"my predecessor love devotion —
"but of a garden have no notion."

continue this fantastic farce on,
he now commence country parson.
to make his character entire,
he wed — a cousin of the esquire;
not over-weighty in the purse,
but many doctor have do worse:
and though she boast no charm divine,
yet she can carve, and make birch wine.

thus fix, content he tap his barrel,
exhort his neighbour not to quarrel:
find his churchwarden have discern
both in good liquour and good learning;
with tithe his barn replete he see,
and chuckle over his surplice see;
study to find out latent due,
and regulate the state of pew;
ride a sleek mare with purple house,
to share the monthly club carouse;
of Oxford prank facetious tell,
and — but on Sunday — hear no bell;
send present of his choice fruit,
and prune himself each sapless shoot,
plant colliflow'r, and boast to rear
the early melon of the year;
think alteration charm work be,
keep bantam cock, and feed his turkey;
build in his copse a favourite bench,
and store the pond with carp and tench. —

but ah! too soon his thoughtless breast
by care domestic be oppress;
and a third butcher bill, and brew,
threaten inevitable ruin:
for child fresh expense yet,
and Dicky now for school be fit.
"why do i sell my college life
"(he cry) for benefice and wife?
"return, you day! when endless pleasure
"i find in read, or in leisure!
"when calm around the common room
"i puff my daily pipe perfume!
"ride for a stomach, and inspect
"at annual bottling, cork select:
"and dine untaxed, untroubled, under
"the portrait of our pious founder!
"when imposition be supply
"to light my pipe — or sooth my pride —
"no care be then for forward pea
"a yearly-longing wife to please:
"my thought not christen dinner cross,
"no child cry for butter toast;
"and every night i go to bed,
"without a modus in my head! "

oh! trifle head, and fickle heart!
chagrined at whatsoever thou be;
a dupe to folly yet untried,
and sick of pleasure, scarce enjoy!
each prize possess, thy transport cease,
and in pursuit alone it please.
