american liberty,

a poem, etc. 

once more Bellona, force upon the stage,
inspire new fury, and awake her rage,
from north to south her thun'dr trumpet spread
tumult, and war and death, and dare deed,
what breast but kindle at the martial sound?
what heart but bleed to feel it be country wound?
for thou, bless freedom, to protect thy sway,
we rush undaunted to the bloody fray,
for thou, each province arm its vigorous host,
content to die, ever freedom shall be lose.
kind watchful power, on who supreme command
the fate of monarch, empire, world depend,
grant, in a cause thy wisdom must approve,
undaunted valour kindle from above,
let not our soul descend to dastard fear,
be valour, prudence both unite here,
now as of old thy mighty arm display,
relieve the oppress, and save power convey,
it be do, and see omnipotent befriend,
the sword of Gideon, and of god descend.
ah, see with grief fair Massuchusetts plain,
the seat of war, and death terrific scene,
where darling peace with smile aspect stand,
lo! the grim soldier stalk in quest of blood:
what madness heaven, have make Britannia frown?
who plan our scheme to pull Columbia down,
see BOSTON groan beneath the strong blockade,
her freedom vanish, and destroy her trade,
injure, oppress, no tyrant can exceed,
the cruel vengeance of so base a deed.
new albion son who honest freedom move
(my heart admire they, and my verse approve)
tire of oppression in a stuart reign,
a popish faction, ministerial train;
brave resolve to leave their native shore
and some new world they know not where explore,
far in the west, beyond where poet say,
the sun retire, and Cynthia go to bed,
few then have see the scarce discover Bourne,
from whence like death yet few do return:
dire truth from thence the wander sailor bring
enlarge by terror, and the poer of thought,
with all the form that pict'r fancy give,
with all the dread that in idea live,
fierce cannibal that seek the blood of man,
vast cruel tribe that through the desert run,
giant who height transcend the tower oak,
brute with who scream the tremble forest shake
all these and more they hold no cause of fear,
since nought but slavery, dreadful can appear.
ah see the day, distressful to the view,
wife, husband, father, bid a long adieu,
dear native land, how heave the heavy sigh,
when thy last mountain vanish on the eye,
then their frail bark, just enter on the sea,
pursue the long uncomfortable way:
but pity heaven the just design survey,
send prosperous gale, and waft they over the sea.
behold the shore; no rise city there,
to hail they welcome from the sea appear,
in the wild wood the exile host be spread,
the heaven their cover, and the earth their bed:
what expectation but a life of woe?
unnumbered myriad of the savage foe,
who brutal fury raise, at once may sweep
the adventurer all to death destructive sleep;
yet 'midst this scene of horror and despair,
stout industry begin his office here,
make forest bend beneath his sturdy stroke,
make ox groan beneath the sweaty yoke,
till half the desert smile and look as gay
as northern garden in the bloom of may.
but ah, review the sorrow interwove,
how the fierce native with the stranger strive; —
so heaven bright lamp the all-reviving sun,
just as his flame journey be begin,
mist, fog and vapour, spring from damp of night,
mount up and strive to dim the approach of light;
but he in triumph dart his pierce ray,
scatter their force and pursue his way.
oft when the husband do his labour leave
to meet his little family at eve,
Stretchd in their blood he see each well know face,
his dear companion and his youthful race;
perhaps the scalp with barbarous fury tear,
the visage mangle, and the babe unborn
rip from its dark abode, to view the sun,
ere nature finish half she have begin.
and shall we now when spread through every shore,
submit to that our father shun before?
shall we, just heaven, our blood and labour spend,
be slave and minion to a parliament?
perish the thought, nor may one wretch remain,
who dare not fight and in our cause be slay;
the cause of freedom daunt the hireling foe,
and give each Sampson strength towards the blow,
and each, like he, who fear nor force confine,
destroy a thousand modern Philistines.
who fight to take our liberty away,
dead-hearted fight and fall a easy prey;
the cause, the cause, most cruel to enslave,
dishearten thousand, and unman the brave:
who can have think that bri-ons bear a heart,
or british troop to act so base a part?
briton of old renown, can they descend,
the enslave their brother in a foreign land?
what oath, what oath, inform we if you can,
bind they to act below the worth of man?
can they who half the world admire, can they
be advocate for vile despotic sway?
shall they to every shore and clime renowned
enforce those act that tyranny do find?
'yet sure if this be their resolve design,
'conquer they shall wherever the sun do shine.
'no expedition prove unhappy yet,
'can we havanna bloody siege forget,
'where british cannon the strong fortress tear,
'and winge whole legion to its infernal shore
'or do the voice of fame so soon forgo
'gibraltar action, and the vanquish foe,
'where be and nature both at once combine
'to baffle all our hardy troop design? —
'yet there britannia arm successful speed,
'while haughty Spaniard tremble, feel and flee
so say the pension tool of slavery,
so say our traitor, but so say not i —
(Tory or traitor, call they which you choose,
Tory be rogue, and traitor imp break lose)
but know you few, the scandal of our land,
on who return the blood that we expend.
those troop who feat be tell on every shore,
here lose their spirit and be brave no more;
when army fight to gain some cruel cause,
establish tyrant or destructive law.
true courage scorn to inspire the hateful crew,
recall past fame, or spur they on to new;
dark bode thought the heavy soul possess,
and ancient valour turn to cowardice.
dark be the prospect, gloomy be the scene,
when traitor join to break our union chain:
but soon by heaven inspire arise the cry,
freedom or death, unite, unite or die.
now far and wide a manly spirit reign,
from Canada to georgia sun burn plain;
few now insult with falsehood, shameless pen,
monster from Tophet drive in shape of man:
few pension scribbler leave the dare head,
some have turn lunatic and some have flee —
some late convert, scarce their pension hold,
and from mere force disdain the charm of gold.
what deep offence have fire a monarch rage,
what moonstruck madness seize the brain of gage?
laugh not the soul, when a imprison few,
affect to pardon those they can subdue?
though twice repulse and hem up to their station,
yet issue pardon, oath and proclamation,
as if at sea some desperate madman crew
shall threat the tempest with what they can do,
and like proud Xerxes lash the angry wave,
at the same instant that they find their grave.
but not the pomp and favour of a crown,
a nation anger, or a statesman frown,
can draw the virtuous man from virtue way,
to chain by force what treachery can betray,
virtue disdain to own tyrannic law,
take part with freedom, and assume its cause,
no part have she, her fierce force own,
to bring so far this heavy vengeance on;
she stand with roman while their heart be true,
and so she shall, americans with you.
shall heaven in wrath decree some nation fall,
who crime from thence for sacred vengeance call,
a monarch first of vulgar soul shall rise,
a sure forerunner of its obsequy,
who heart shall glow with not one generous thought
bear to oppress, to propagate, and rot,
who lengthen reign no deed of worth shall grace
none trust but a servile pension race;
too dull to know what save course to take,
that heaven in time its purpose may forsake,
too obstinate will to bow his ear
to groan thousand or petition hear,
dare break all oath that bind the just like fate,
oath, that th'arch-devil will blush to violate,
and foe to truth both oath and honour sell,
to establish principle, the growth of hell,
stile those who aim to be his true friend,
traitor, insidious rebel, madman, fiend,
hoodwink and blind, deceive by secret foe,
who father once with exile tyrant rise,
bless with as little sense as god ever give,
slave to wrong scheme, dupe to a noble knave.
so odd a monarch heaven in wrath will plan,
and such will be the fury of a man.
see far and wide over long canadia plain,
old popish fraud and superstition reign;
the scarlet whore long have heaven withstand,
who cry for murder and who thirst for blood,
establish there, mark down each destine name,
and plant the stake impatient for the flame,
with sanguinary soul her trade begin,
to doom her foe to hell or pardon sin;
her crafty priest their impious rite maintain,
and crucify their saviour once again;
defend his right, who scatter lie abroad,
with shameless front usurp the seat of god:
those be, we fear, who his vile cause assert,
but half reform and papist at the heart.
bear i some power as far as wind can blow,
as ship can travel, or as wave can flow,
to some lone isle beyond the southern pole,
or land round which pacific water roll,
there shall oblivion stop the heave sigh,
there shall i live at least with liberty,
but honour check my speed and bid i stay,
to try the fortune of the well fight day,
resentment for my country fate i bear,
and mix with thousand for the will war;
see Washington new albion freedom own,
and move to war with half Virginia son,
bold in the fight, who action may have awe,
a roman hero, or a grecian god,
he, he, as first, his gallant troop shall lead
undaunted man a second Diomede,
as when he fight at wild ohio flood,
when savage thousand issue from the wood.
when braddock fall disgrace the mighty day,
and death himself stand weep over his prey,
when doubt victory change from side to side,
and indian soil with indian blood be die,
when the last charge repulse th'invenomed foe,
and lightning light they to the shade below.
see where from various distant clime unite,
a generous council to protect our right,
fix on a base too steadfast to be move,
love their country, by their country love,
great guardian of our freedom, we pursue
each patriot measure as inspire by you;
Columbia, nor shall fame deny it owe
past safety to the counsel you propose,
and if they do not keep Columbia free,
what will alas! become of liberty?
great soul grow bold in their country cause,
detest enslaver, and despise their law,
o congress fame, accept this humble lie,
the little tribute that the muse can pay,
on you depend columbia future fate
a free asylum or a wretched state,
fall on disastrous time we push our plea,
hear or not hear, and struggle to be free,
bear to contend, our life we place at stake,
and grow immortal by the stand we make,
o you, who far from liberty detain,
wear out existence in some slavish land,
fly thence from tyrant, and their flatter throng,
and bring the fiery free-born soul along,
Neptune for you shall smooth the hoary deep,
and awe the wild tumultuous wave to sleep;
here vernal wood, and flowery meadow blow,
luxuriant harvest in rich plenty grow,
commerce extend as far as wave can roll
and freedom, god-like freedom crown the whole.
and you brave man who scorn the dread of death,
resolve to conquer to the late breath,
soldier in act, and hero in renown
warm in the cause of Boston hapless town,
still guard each pass, like ancient roman, you
at once be soldier, and be farmer too;
still arm impatient for the vengeful blow,
and rush intrepid on the yield foe;
as when of late midst cloud of fire and smoke,
whole squadron fall, or to the centre shake,
when even the brave to your arm give way,
and death exult, eye the unhappy fray,
behold, your warren bleed, who both inspire,
to noble deed, and by his action fire
what pity heaven! — but you who yet remain
affect his spirit as you love the man:
once more, and yet once more for freedom strive,
to be a slave what wretch will dare to live?
we too to the last drop our blood will drain,
and not till then shall hate slavery reign,
when every effort, every hope be over,
and lose Columbia swell our breast no more.
o if that day, which heaven avert must come,
and father, husband, child meet their doom
let one brave onset yet that doom precede,
to show the world America can bleed,
one thunder raise the midnight cry,
and one last flame send BOSTON to the sky.
but cease, foreboding Muse, nor strive to see
dark time derive by fatal destiny;
if ever heaven befriend the distress,
if ever valour succour those oppress,
America rojoice, thy standard rear,
let the loud trumpet animate to war:
thy guardian genius haste thou on thy way,
to strike whole host with terror and dismay.
happy some land, which all for freedom give,
happy the man who their own virtue save;
thrice happy we who long attack have stand,
and swim to liberty through sea of blood;
the time shall come when stranger rule no more,
nor cruel mandate vex from britain shore;
when commerce shall extend her shorten wing,
and her free freight from every climate bring.
when mighty town shall flourish free and great,
vast their dominion, opulent their state;
when one vast cultivate region teem,
from ocean edge to Mississippi stream;
while each enjoy his vineyard peaceful shade,
and even the mean have not cause to dread;
such be the life our foe with envy see,
such be the godlike glory to be free.
