a epistle to moneses, in imitation of Ovid.

when urge by honour, from thy sight i fly,
 and scarce will breath one tender soft adieu,
 from thy dear face i turn my gaze eye,
 suppress the tear, and check the rise sigh. 
self-banished all despair worst pang i prove,
 i flee from you, but can not fly from love. 
oh do not then, my lovely Swain, accuse
 my want of truth, nor charge on i thy woe:
 for every pain which rack thy faithful breast,
 a thousand more my anxious soul oppress;
 sorrow for which description all too faint,
 and equal misery alone can paint. 
dear than light to these fond eye you be,
 my first, my last, and still my only care. 
my hapless flame nor time nor absence cure,
 still constant to the vow which make i you. 
ah! why then in that sadly-pleasing strain? 
why do moneses of his wrong complain? 
forbear to send i what thy muse inspire,
 by ill-requited love, and absence fire:
 deep in my soul thy soft reproach steal,
 and all thy grief redouble there i feel;
 still round my heart play the same lambient flame,
 each wish, and every fond desire the same. 
nor can thy pen one pierce woe reveal,
 which thy ardelia do not equal feel. 
ah, dear idea of my lovely Swain! 
ah, soft remembrance of my former pain! 
why to my anxious breast do you return? 
why wake a flame which must for ever burn? 
still shall that lovely image charm my view,
 and those dear accent all my grief renew:
 still must i love, though honour love deny,
 and bid i from the dangerous charmer fly. 
ah then how vain, how fruitless all my care? 
this welcome absence, this confirm despair? 
this cruel contest between love and fame? 
these endless pang for which i want a name? 
why do moneses still love on? why share
 in all those sorrow i alone shall bear? 
all tender as thou be, all soft and kind,
 i fly, and with thou leave my soul behind;
 i leave thou, fancy honour to pursue,
 just to myself, but more unjust to you. 
why then my image do thou still retain? 
why for a wretch unworthy thou complain? 
o rather hate i, drive i from your breast,
 by scorn and hate be all thy soul possess:
 let its fond heart thy once-loved chain resign,
 complete thy cure, and o assist in i. 
why do i love? why do my easy heart
 admit the dear, but ah too dangerous dart? 
why do i not the please torment shun? 
why fond listen to thy soothe tongue? 
quick to my heart the subtle poison steal,
 charm all my sense, and enslave my soul;
 and less the beauty of thy matchless form,
 then thy prevail eloquence can charm. 
oh come once more, moneses, and renew
 those tender vow, and i will believe they true:
 let i once more behold those melt eye,
 where love a thousand nameless charm supply:
 the soft enchantment shall my fear control,
 and love claim all his empire in my soul. 
ah! whether will my boundless wish rove? 
still, still be i enslave by guilty love! 
still shall its lawless fire my soul profane,
 and be my boast virtue but a name? 
no; i will forget thou, drive thou from my breast,
 thou dear undoer of my peace and rest. 
yet how forget, when every thought be thy? 
even life itself be easy to resign. 
to lonely shade in vain i fly for ease,
 there secret sigh, and feed the sweet disease. 
on thy dear name i call, and all around
 the whisper wind repeat the charm sound. 
it be thus i wear the anxious hour away,
 until night restore the sorrow of the day. 
then do thy image to my eye appear;
 but ah! with look averse, and frown severe;
 still as you seem to chide i with your eye,
 my own in stream tear to you reply,
 oh stay, i cry, thou charm phantom stay,
 or with thou take my fleet soul away! 
in vain i call, my clasp arm you shun,
 and wake find the dear delusion go. 
thus, do ardelia haunt thy bode dream;
 do she like thou all cold and cruel seem? 
or do the pensive shade soft sorrow wear,
 heave the faint sigh, and shed the mimic tear? 
on thy love breast her painful head recline,
 and tell thou that her torment equal thy. 
why can i not this fatal flame remove? 
or why, o why be it a crime to love? 
by turn my reason and my passion sway,
 as honour triumph, and as love betray;
 my torture breast conflict passion tear,
 and love and virtue wage unequal war:
 now all its sacred precept i pursue,
 lose for a while be every thought of you. 
but oh! again the guilty lover burn,
 and all the woman in my soul return;
 again my bosom glow with soft desire,
 and hope return fan the fatal fire. 
sea roll between we, but the active mind
 still spring to thou, and leave its load behind. 
oh shall some happy chance to we unknown,
 without a crime confirm i all thy own. 
bless be these tender grief, these anxious fear,
 these never-ceasing sigh and flow tear! 
oh! let my soul the please hope retain,
 one hour of joy repay whole year of pain! 
to suffering martyr thus such hope be give;
 such view of promise joy and future heaven. 
for this resign they calm meet their fate,
 conscious of blessing in a happy state. 
