a dialogue between Alexis and astrea.

Alexis.

come, fair astrea, let we for a while
beneath this pleasant shade our care beguile:
in kind discourse let we pass away
the tiresom heat, and trouble of the day:
the god no great bless can bestow
than mutual love, it be all our bliss below.

astrea.

but man, false man, take pleasure to deceive,
and laugh, when we their perjury believe;
their languishment, and all their other art,
their sigh, and vow, be only snare for heart.

Alexis.

think not, unjust astrea, all be so,
Alexis will a deathless passion show.
may the severe of all plague, your hate,
and all the rigour of a angry fate,
with all those curse that to guilt be due,
fall on my head, when i be false to you.
a love like i, can no decrease admit;
a love, inspire by virtue, and by wit,
like its immortal cause, will ever last,
and be the same, when youth, and beauty past:
nor need astrea blush to own my flame,
or think it will prove a blemish to her fame,
since it be as pure, as spotless as her mind,
bright as her eye, from all its dross refine.

astrea.

when humour be alike, and soul agree,
how sweet! how pleasant must that union be!
but oh! that bliss be but by few possess,
but few be with the joy of friendship bless.
marriage be but a fatal lottery make,
where some be gainer, but the most betray:
the mild and froward, cruel and the kind,
be in unequal chain by fate confine:
most be a sacrifice to interest make,
interest, and gold, now more than love persuade:
to conquer gold, the most themselves submit,
that have more charm, than beauty, youth, or wit:
unhappy they! who riches thus unite,
who wealth do to the sacred band invite:
the languid passion quick will expire,
wealth can never keep alive the die fire:
virtue the Hymenæan torch shall light,
it be that alone preserve its lustre bright:
the rich and great let the vain world admire,
neither their gold, nor grandeur, i desire;
virtue, and love, to i be a great estate,
i wish no more, but leave the rest to fate.

Alexis.

let king for empire, and for crown contend,
let they their arm to distant realm extend:
i envy none, no not the power above,
i have all i covet in astrea love.

astrea.

how bless be we! nothing our heart can sever,
not death it self, we will love, we will love for ever.

Alexis.

but we must part; hard fate will have it so,
Alexis must from his astrea go.
yes, we must part; o the afflict sound!
it shake my breast, my very soul do wound.
be there no way, this misery to shun,
you cruel god! what have Alexis do
to merit this severe, this rigurous fate?
have you no way, but this, to show your hate?

astrea.

cease these complaint; while you possess my heart,
while there you live, can we be say to part?
our thought shall meet, they never can be confine,
we will still be present to each other mind:
i will view you with my intellectual sight,
and in the endear object take delight:
my faithful memory shall your vow retain,
and in my breast you shall unrivalled reign.

Alexis.

and your dear image shall my solace prove,
on that i will gaze, to that i will sigh my love:
to that a thousand tender thing i will say,
and fancy that do every sigh repay:
each word approve by a oblige smile,
as if it kind will my grief beguile:
thus, will i languish out the tedious day,
thus, will i pass my sad hour away.

astrea.

what though by fate our body be confine,
nought can obstrust the journey of the mind:
a virtuous passion will at distance live,
absence to that will a new vigor give,
which still increase, and grow more intense,
the farther it be remove from the mean joy of sense.
