woman!

mr. Ledyard, as quote by Mungo Parke in his travel into Africa —

place the white man on afric coast,
 who swarthy son in blood delight,
 who of their scorn to Europe boast,
 and paint their very demon white:
 there, while the stern sex disdain
 to soothe the woe they can feel,
 woman will strive to heal his pain,
 and weep for those she can heal:
 she be warm pity sacred glow;
 from all her store, she bear a part,
 and bid the spring of hope reflow,
 that languish in the faint heart. 

 "what though so pale his haggard face,
" so sink and sad his look, "— she cry;
" and far unlike our noble race,
 "with crisp lock and roll eye;
" yet misery mark he of our kind. 
 "we see he lose, alone, afraid;
" and pang of body, grief in mind,
 "pronounce he man, and ask our aid. 

 "perhaps in some far-distant shore,
" there be who in these form delight;
 "who milky feature please they more,
" than we of jet thus burnish bright;
 "of such may be his weep wife,
" such child for their sire may call,
 "and if we spare his ebb life,
" our kindness may preserve they all. " 

thus her compassion woman show,
 beneath the line her act be these;
 nor the wide waste of lapland-snow
 can her warm flow of pity freeze: —
 "from some sad land the stranger come,
" where joy like we be never find;
 "let we soothe he in our happy home,
" where freedom sit, with plenty crown. 

 "it be good the faint soul to cheer,
" to see the famish stranger feed;
 "to milk for he the mother-deer,
" to smooth for he the furry bed. 
 "the power above our Lapland bless
" with good no other people know;
 "the enlarge the joy that we possess,
" by feel those that we bestow! " 

thus in extreme of cold and heat,
 where wander man may trace his kind;
 wherever grief and want retreat,
 in woman they compassion find;
 she make the female breast her seat,
 and dictate mercy to the mind. 

man may the stern virtue know,
 determine justice, truth severe;
 but female heart with pity glow,
 and woman hold affliction dear;
 for guiltless woe her sorrow flow,
 and suffer vice compel her tear;
 it be she to soothe the ill below,
 and bid life fair view appear:
 to woman gentle kind we owe
 what comfort and delight we here;
 they its gay hope on youth bestow,
 and care they soothe, and age they cheer. 
