a pastoral essay on the death of queen mary, anno, 1694. 

as gentle Strephon to his fold convey
 a wander lamb, which from the flock have stray,
 beneath a mournful cypress shade, he find
 cosmelia weep on the dewy ground. 
amaze, with eager haste, he run to know
 the fatal cause of her intemperate woe;
 and clasp she to his impatient breast,
 in these soft word his tender care express. 

Strephon.

why mourn my dear cosmelia, why appear
 my life, my soul, dissolve in briny tear? 
have some fierce tiger thy love heifer slay,
 while i be wander on the neighbour plain,
 or have some greedy wolf devour thy sheep;
 what sad misfortune make cosmelia weep? 
speak, that i may prevent thy grief increase;
 partake thy sorrow, or restore thy peace. 

cosmelia.

do you not hear from far that mournful bell? 
it be for — i can the sad tiding tell,
 o, whither be my faint spirit flee! 
it be for Cælestia — Strephon, o, — she be dead! 
the bright nymph, the princess of the plain,
 by a untimely dart, untimely slay. 

Strephon.

dead! it be impossible, she can die,
 she be too divine, too much a deity:
 it be a false rumour some ill swain have spread,
 who wish perhaps the good Cælestia dead. 

cosmelia.

ah! no, the truth in every face appear,
 for every face you meet overflow with tear,
 tremble, and pale, i run through all the plain,
 from flock to flock, and ask of every Swain,
 but each, scarce lift his deject head,
 cry, o, cosmelia! o, caelestia's dead! 

Strephon.

something be mean by that ill bode croak
 of the prophetic raven from the oak,
 which strait by lightning be in shiver break. 
but we our mischief feel, before we see,
 seize and overwhelm at once with misery. 

cosmelia.

since then we have no trophy to bestow,
 no pompous thing to make a glorious show,
 (for all the tribute a poor Swain can bring,
 in rural number, be to mourn and sing;)
 let we beneath the gloomy shade rehearse
 cælestia's sacred praise in no less sacred verse. 

Strephon.

caelestia dead! then it be in vain to live;
 what be all the comfort that these plain can give? 
since she, by who bright influence alone
 our flock increase, and we rejoice, be go. 
since she, who round such beam of goodness spread
 as give new life to every Swain, be dead. 

cosmelia.

in vain we wish for the delightful spring,
 what joy can flowery may, or April bring,
 when she, for who the spacious plain be spread
 with early flower, and cheerful green, be dead? 
in vain do courtly Damon warm the earth,
 to give to summer fruit, a winter birth. 
in vain we autumn wait, which crown the field
 with wealthy crop, and various plenty yield:
 since that fair nymph, for who the boundless store
 of nature be preserve, be now no more. 

Strephon.

farewell for ever then to all that be gay,
 you will forget to sing, and i to play. 
no more with cheerful song in cool bower,
 shall we consume the pleasurable hour. 
all joy be banish, all delight be flee,
 never to return, now fair caelestia's dead. 

cosmelia.

if ever i sing, they shall be mournful lay
 of great caelestia's name, caelestia's praise
 how good she be, how generous, how wise! 
how beautiful her shape, how bright her eye! 
how charm all, how much she be adore
 alive; when dead, how much her loss deplore! 
a noble theme, and able to inspire
 the humble muse with the sublime fire. 
and since we do of such a princess sing,
 let we ascend upon a strong wing;
 and while we do the lofty number join,
 her name will make their harmony divine. 
raise then thy tuneful voice, and be thy song
 sweet as her temper, as her virtue strong. 

Strephon.

when her great lord to foreign war be go,
 and leave caelestia here to rule alone,
 with how serene a brow, how void of fear
 when storm arise, do she the vessel steer? 
and, when the rage of the wave do cease,
 how gentle be her sway in time of peace? 
justice and mercy do their beam unite,
 and round her temple spread a glorious light. 
so quick she ease the wrong of every Swain,
 she hardly give they leisure to complain. 
impatient to reward, but slow to draw
 the avenge sword of necessary law. 
like heaven, she take no pleasure to destroy,
 with grief she punish, and she save with joy. 

cosmelia.

when god-like belleger from war alarm
 return in triumph to caelestia's arm,
 she meet her hero with a full desire,
 but chaste as light, and vigorous as fire
 such mutual flame, so equal divine,
 do in each breast with such a lustre shine,
 his can not seem the great, she the less:
 both be immense, for both be in excess. 

Strephon.

o, god-like princess! o, thrice happy swain! 
while she preside over the fruitful plain;
 while she for ever ravish from our eye,
 to mingle with her kindred of the sky,
 do for your peace her constant thought employ,
 the nymph good angel, and the shepherd joy. 

cosmelia.

all that be noble beautify her mind;
 there wisdom sit, with solid reason join;
 there too do piety, and greatness wait,
 meekness on grandeur, modesty on state:
 humble amid the splendor of a throne;
 place above all, and yet despise none. 
and when a crown be force on she by fate,
 she with some pain submit to be great,

Strephon.

her pious soul with emulation strive
 to gain the mighty pan important love:
 to who mysterious rite she always come,
 with such a active, so intense a flame,
 the duty of religion seem to be
 not more her care, than her felicity. 

cosmelia.

virtue unmixed, without the least allay,
 pure as the light of a celestial ray,
 command all the motion of the soul,
 with such a soft, but absolute controul,
 that as she know what best great Pan will please,
 she still perform it with the great ease. 
he for her high exemplar she design,
 like he, benevolent to all mankind. 
her foe she pity, not desire their blood,
 and to revenge their crime, she do they good:
 nay, all affront, so unconcerned she bear,
 (maugre that violent temptation, power,)
 as if she think it vulgar to resent,
 or wish forgiveness their worst punishment. 

Strephon.

next mighty Pan, be her illustrious lord,
 his high vicegerent, sacred adore:
 he with such piety and zeal she love,
 the noble passion every hour improve. 
till it ascend to that glorious height,
 it be next, (if only next) to infinite. 
this make she so entire a duty pay,
 she grow at last impatient to obey,
 and meet his wish with as prompt a zeal,
 as a archangel his creator will. 

cosmelia.

mature for heaven, the fatal mandate come,
 with it, a chariot of etherial flame,
 in which, Elijah like, she pass the sphere;
 bring joy to heaven, but leave the world in tear. 

Strephon.

methinks i see she on the plain of light,
 all glorious, all incomparable bright! 
while the immortal mind around her gaze
 on the excessive splendour of her ray,
 and scarce believe a human soul can be
 endow with such stupendous majesty. 

cosmelia.

who can lament too much? o, who can mourn
 enough over beautiful caelestia's urn? 
so great a loss as this deserve excess
 of sorrow, all be too little, that be less. 
but to supply the universal woe,
 tear from all eye, without cessation flow:
 all that have power to weep, or voice to groan,
 with throb breast caelestia's fate bemoan:
 while marble rock the common grief partake,
 and echo back those cry they can make. 

Strephon.

weep then (once fruitful) vale, and spring with yew;
 you thirsty barren mountain, weep with dew. 
let every flower on this extend plain
 not droop, but shrink into its womb again,
 never to receive anew its yearly birth;
 let every thing that be grateful leave the earth. 
let mournful cypress, with each noxious weed,
 and baneful venom in their place succeed. 
you purling querulous brook, overcharge with grief,
 haste swift to the sea for more relief;
 then tide back, each to his sacred head,
 tell your astonish spring, caelestia's dead. 

cosmelia.

well have you sing, in a exalt strain,
 the fair nymph ever grace the british plain,
 who know but some officious angel may
 your grateful number to her ear convey:
 that she may smile upon we, from above,
 and bless our mournful plain with peace and love. 

Strephon.

but see, our flock do to their fold repair,
 for night with sable cloud obscure the air,
 cold damp descend from the unwholesome sky,
 and safety bid we to our cottage fly. 
though with each morn our sorrow will return,
 each even, like nightingale, we will sing and mourn,
 till death convey we to the peaceful urn. 
