on the much lament death of the marquis of Tavistock.

by mr. A— L—.

— virtuous youth! 
thank heaven, i know thou not! i never shall feel
 the keen regret thy droop friend sustain;
 yet will i drop the sympathize tear,
 and this due tribute to thy memory bring;
 not that thy noble birth provoke my song,
 or claim such offer from the muse shrine;
 but that thy spotless undissembling heart,
 thy unaffected manner, all unstained
 with pride of power, and insolence of wealth;
 thy probity, benevolence, and truth,
 (best inmate of man soul!) for ever lose,
 crop like fair flower in life meridian bloom,
 fade undistinguished in the silent grave. 

o Bedford! — pardon, if a muse unknown,
 smite with thy heart-felt grief, direct her way
 to sorrow dark abode, where thou she view,
 thou, wretched fire, and pity, hear thou mourn
 thy russel fate. — "why be he thus belove? 
" why do he bless my life? "— fond parent, cease;
 count not his virtue over. — hard task! — call forth
 thy firm hereditary strength of mind. 
lo! where the shade of thy great ancestor,
 fame Russel, stand, and chide thy vain complaint;
 his philosophic soul, with patience arm
 and christian virtue brave the pang of death:
 admire, belove, he die; (if right i deem)
 not more lament than thy virtuous son. 
yet calm thy mind; so may the lenient hand
 of time, all soothe time, thy pang assuage,
 heal thy sad wound, and close thy day in peace. 
see where the object of his filial love,
 his mother, lose in tear, lament his doom! 
speak comfort to her soul. —
 o! from the sacred fount, where flow the stream
 of heavenly consolation, o! one drop,
 to sooth his hapless wife! sharp sorrow prey
 upon her tender frame. — alas! she faint —
 she fall! still grasp in her hand
 the picture of her lord. — all-gracious heaven! 
just be thy way, and righteous thy decree,
 but dark and intricate; else why this meed
 for tender faithful love? this sad return
 for innocence and truth? be it for this,
 by virtue and the smile grace lead,
 (fair type of long succeed year of joy)
 she twine the votive wreath at Hymen shrine,
 so soon to fade and die? yet o! reflect,
 chaste partner of his life! you never deplore
 his alienate heart; (distrous state! 
condition worse than death!) the sacred torch
 burn to the last its unremitted fire! 
no painful self-reproach have thou to feel;
 the conscious thought of every duty pay,
 this sweet reflection shall support thy mind:
 be this thy comfort. — turn thy eye awhile,
 nor with that lifeless picture feed thy woe;
 turn yet thy eye; see how they court thy smile;
 those infant pledge of connubial joy! 
dwell on their look; and trace his image there. 
and o! since heaven, in pity to thy loss,
 for thou one future blessing have in store,
 cherish that tender hope. — hear reason voice;
 hush be the storm that vex thy trouble breast,
 and angel guard thou in the hour of pain. 

accept this ardent prayer; a muse forgive,
 who for thy sorrow draw the pensive sigh,
 who feel thy grief. though erst in frolic hour,
 she tune her comic rhyme to mirth and joy,
 unskilled (i ween in lofty verse, unused
 to plaintive strain, yet by soft pity lead,
 tremble revisit the pierian vale;
 there cull each fragrant flower to deck the tomb
 where generous Russel lie. 
