February,

a elegy.

begin, my muse, the imitative lie,
 aonian doxy sound the thrum string;
 attempt no number of the plaintive gay,
 let i like midnight cat, or Collins sing. 

if in the trammel of the doleful line,
 the bound hail, or drill rain descend;
 come, brood melancholy, power divine,
 and every unformed mass of word amend. 

now the rough goat withdraw his curl horn,
 and the cold wat'rer twirl his circle mop:
 swift sudden anguish dart through alter corn,
 and the spruce mercer tremble in his shop. 

now infant author, madden for renown,
 extend the plume, and hum about the stage,
 procure a benefit, amuse the town,
 and proud glitter in a title page. 

now, wrap in ninefold fur, his squeamish grace
 defy the fury of the howl storm;
 and while the tempest whistle round his face,
 exult to find his mantle carcase warm. 

now rumble coach furious drive along,
 full of the majesty of city dame,
 who jewel sparkle in the gaudy throng,
 raise strange emotion and invidious flame. 

now merit, happy in the calm of place,
 to mortal as a Highlander appear,
 and conscious of the excellence of lace,
 with spread frog and gleam spangle glare:

while envy, on a tripod seat nigh,
 in form a shoeboy, daub the value fruit,
 and dart lightning from his vengeful eye,
 rave about Wilkes, and politics, and Bute,

now Barry, tall than a grenadier,
 dwindle into a stripling of eighteen;
 or sable in Othello break the ear,
 exert his voice, and totter to the scene. 

now Foote, a looking-glass for all mankind,
 apply his wax to personal defect;
 but leaf untouched the image of the mind,
 his art no mental quality reflect. 

now drury potent king extort applause,
 and pit, box, gallery, echo, "how divine!" 
while verse in all the drama mystic law,
 his graceful action save the wooden line. 

now — but what further can the muse sing? 
now drop particle of water fall;
 now vapour ride on the north wind wing,
 with transitory darkness shadow all. 

alas! how joyless the descriptive theme,
 when sorrow on the writer quiet prey;
 and like a mouse in Cheshire cheese supreme,
 devour the substance of the lessen bay. 

come, February, lend thy dark sky. 
there teach the winter muse with cloud to soar:
 come, February, lift the number high;
 let the sharp strain like wind through alley roar. 

you channel, wander through the spacious street,
 in hollow murmur roll the dirt along,
 with inundation wet the sable foot,
 while gout responsive, join th'elegiac song. 

you damsel fair, who silver voice shrill
 sound through meander fold of echo horn;
 let the sweet cry of liberty be still,
 no more let smoke cake awake the morn. 

o, winter! put away thy snowy pride;
 o, spring! neglect the cowslip and the bell;
 o, summer! throw thy pear and plum aside;
 o, autumn! bid the grape with poison swell. 

the pension muse of Johnson be no more! 
drown in a butt of wine his genius lie:
 earth! ocean! heaven! the wondrous loss deplore,
 the dregs of nature with her glory die. 

what iron stoic can suppress the tear;
 what sour reviewer read with vacant eye! 
what bard but deck his literary bier! 
alas! i can sing — i howl — i cry —
