a epistle.

by the same.

through the wild maze of life still vary plan,
bliss be alone the important task of man.
all else be trifle, whether grave or gay,
a Newton labour, or a infant play;
whether this vain waste the unheeded sun,
or those more vain mark the course it run;
for of the two, sure small be the fault,
to err unthinking, than to err with thought;
but if, like they, we still must trifle use,
harmless at least, like they, be those we choose.
enough it be that reason blame the choice,
join not to she the wretch plaintive voice;
be folly free from guilt: let fopling play,
or write, or talk, or dress, or die away.
let those, if such there be, who giant-mind
superior tower above their pigmy kind,
unaided and alone, the realm explore,
where hail and snow renew their treasure store. 
lo! heaven spread all its star; let those explain,
what balance power the roll orb sustain;
nor in more humble scale, pernicious weigh
sense, justice, truth, against seduce pay.
so distant region shall employ their thought,
and spotless senate here remain unbought.

well have great Charles, by early want inspire,
with war puppet, guiltless praise acquire;
so will that flame have mimic fight engage,
which fan by power, over waste nation rage.

curse be the wretch, shall all the mouth of fame
wide over the world his deathless deed proclaim,
who like a baneful comet spread his blaze,
while tremble crowd in stupid wonder gaze;
who potent talent serve his lawless will,
which turn each virtue to a public ill,
with direful rage pervert might employ,
and heaven great end with heaven best mean destroy.
the praise of power be he, who hand supply
fire to the bold, and prudence to the wise;
while man this only real merit know,
fit to use the gift which heaven bestow:
if savage valour be his vaunt fame,
the mountain-lion shall dispute his claim:
or, if perfidious wile deserve applause,
through slight vow, and violate law;
the subtle plotter title stand confess,
who dagger gore the trust tyrant breast.
and sure the villain less deserve his fate,
who stab one wretch, than he who stab a state.
now, mighty hero! boast thy dear delight,
the price of toilsome day and sleepless night;
say, can thou aught in purple grandeur find,
sweet as the slumber of the lowly hind?

better be you, the youthful and the gay,
who jocund rove through pleasure flowery way!
yet seek not there for bliss! your toil be vain,
(and disappoint toil be double pain)
though from the live fount your nectar-bowl
pour the soft balm upon your thirsty soul;
though pure the spring, though every draught sincere,
by pain unbitter, and unpal by fear;
though all be full as high as thought can soar,
till fancy fire, and wish crave no more:
let lovely woman artless charm display,
where truth and goodness bask in beauty ray;
let heavenly melody luxuriant float
in swell sound, and breathe the melt note;
let generous wine enliven thought inspire,
while social converse sooth the genial fire:
if aught can yet more potent charm dispense,
some strong rapture, some sublime sense;
be these enjoy. — then from the crowd arise
some chief, in life full pride mature wise.
even you, my lord, with title, honour grace,
and high still by native merit place;
by stint talent to no sphere confine,
free range every province of the mind:
equal fit, a nation weight to bear,
or shine in circle of the young and fair;
in grave debate instruct senate move,
or melt the glow dame to mutual love.
to heighten these, let conscious worth infuse
sweet ease, and smile mirth the inspire muse.
then answer, thou of every gift possess,
say, from thy soul, be thou sincere bless!
to various subject wherefore do thou range?
pleasure must cease, ere man can wish to change.
have thou not quit flaccus sacred lay,
to talk with Bavius, or with Flavia play;
when waste nature shun the large expense
of deep attention to exalt sense!
precarious bliss! which soon, which oft must cloy,
and which how few, how very few enjoy!

say, be there aught, on which, complete bless,
fearless and full the rapture mind may rest?
be there aught constant? or, if such there be,
can vary man be please with constancy?
Mark then what sense the blessing must employ!
the sense change, and loath accustom joy:
Eden in vain immortal sweet display,
if the taste sicken, or our frame decay.

the range of life contract limit bind;
yet more confine be pleasure faithless round:
fair open to the sight, when first we run,
but, ah! how alter, when again begin!
when tire we view the same know prospect over,
and lag, tread the step we tread before.
now clog with spleen, the lazy current flow,
through doubt, and fear, and self-augmenting woe;
till sate, loathe, hopeless here of bliss,
some plunge to seek it into death abyss.

of all superfluous wealth unnumbered sting,
the sharp be that knowledge which it bring;
enjoyment purchase make its object know,
and then, alas! each soft illusion fly:
love promise sweet, ambition lofty scheme,
the painter image, and the poet theme.

these, in perspective fair exalt high,
attract with seem charm the distant eye;
but when by envious fortune place too near,
mis-shapen form, and gross tint appear:
where lovely Venus lead her beauteous train,
some fiend gigantic hold her monstrous reign;
crown, sceptre, laurel be confuse strow,
a wild, deform, unmeaning, heavy load.

some pleasure here with spare hand be give,
that son of earth shall taste their promise heaven:
but what be mean to urge we to the chace,
now stop, or sideway turn our devious race:
though still to make the destine course more plain,
thick be our err path beset with pain;
nor have one object equal charm to prove
the fit centre of our restless love.
and when the great creator will have join,
unequal pair! the body and the mind,
lest the proud spirit shall neglect her clay,
he bad corporeal object think convey;
each strong sensation to the soul impart
ecstatic transport or afflict smart:
by that entice, the useful she enjoy;
by this deter, she fly whatever destroy:
hence from the dagger point sharp anguish flow,
and the soft couch be spread with sweet repose.

in something frail, though general this design,
for some exception every rule confine:
yet few be they, while nature genuine store
supply our want, nor man yet seek for more;
ere different mixture leave no form the same,
and vicious habit change our sickly frame.
now subtle art may gild the venom pill,
and bait with soothe sweet destructive ill.

to narrow self heaven impulse unconfined
diffusive reign, and take in all our kind.
the smile of joy reflect joy impart;
the wretch groan pierce sympathize heart.
yet not alike be all conjoin with all,
nor throng with rival heat to nature call:
by vary instinct different tie be know,
while love superior point to each his own;
those next the reach of our assist hand,
and those to who we be link by kindred band;
those who most want, and best deserve our care,
in warm stream the sacred influence share;
ambrosial sweet she infant lip distil,
while through the mother heart quick rapture thrill.
the social fire friend, servant, neighbour claim,
which blaze collect in the patriot flame:
hence Britain throb superior in thy soul,
nor idle wake thou for the distant pole.

yet farther still the save instinct move,
and to the future wide extend our love;
glow in our bosom for a unborn race,
and warm we mutual to the kind embrace,
for this, to man be give the graceful air;
for this, be woman form divine fair.

but now to pleasure sensual view confine,
reach not the use, for which it be design;
to this one point our hope, our wish tend,
and thus mistake the motive for the end.
whatever sensation from enjoyment flow,
our err thought to matter force will owe;
to that ascribe our pleasure and our pain,
and blind for the cause mistake the mean;
in odorous mead the vernal gale we praise,
or dread the storm, that blow the wintery sea;
while he be unheeded, who alone can move,
claim all our fear, and merit all our love;
alone to soul can sense and thought convey,
through the dark mansion of surround clay.

man, part from heaven, and part from humble earth,
a motley substance, take his various birth;
close link to both, he hang in different chain,
the pliant fetter lengthen as he strain.
if, brave conscious of her native fire,
to the bold height his noble frame aspire;
near as she soar to join the approach sky,
our earth still lessen to her distant eye.
but if o'erpoise she sink, her downward course
each moment weigh, with still augment force;
low and more low, the burden spirit bend,
while weak still each heavenly link extend;
till prostrate, grovel, fetter to the ground,
she lie in matter heap overwhelm and bind.
wrap in the toil of sin, just heaven employ
what cause her guilt, to blast her lawless joy:
love, potent guardian of our lengthen race,
unnerve the feeble lecher cold embrace;
and appetite, by nature give to save,
sink the gorge glutton in his early grave.

what send yond fleet over boisterous sea to roll,
beneath the burn line, and freeze pole?
why ravage man the hill, the plain, the wood?
why spoil all nature, earth, and air, and flood?
seek they some prize to help a sink state,
no! — this must all be do, ere Bernard eat.
tell it some untaught savage! with surprise
he ask, "how vast must be that giant size!
"how great his power, who thousand can employ?
"how great his force, who million can destroy?"
but if the savage will, more curious, know
what potent virtue from such viand flow,
what bless effect they cause — consult with Sloane,
let he explain the colic, gout, and stone!

pleasure for use; it differ in degree,
proportion to the thing necessity.
hence various object various excite,
and different be the date of each delight;
but when the allot end we once attain,
each step beyond it, be a step to pain.
nor let we murmur. — have not earth a store
for every want? it be not mean for more.

bless be the man, as far as earth can bless,
who measure passion reach no wild excess;
who, urge by nature voice, her gift enjoy,
nor other mean, than nature force, employ.
while warm with youth the sprightly current flow,
each vivid sense with vigorous rapture glow;
and when he droop beneath the hand of age,
no vicious habit sting with fruitless rage;
gradual, his strength, and gay sensation cease,
while joy tumultuous sink in silent peace.

far other be his lot, who, not content
with what the bounteous care of nature mean,
with labour skill will all her joy dilate,
sublime their sense, and lengthen out their date;
add, blend, compose, each various mixture try,
and wind up appetite to luxury.
thus guilty art unknown desire implant,
and vile art must satisfy their want;
when to corruption by himself betray,
gold blind the slave, who luxury have make.

the hand, that form we, must some use intend,
it give we power proportion to that end;
and happiness may just be define,
a full attainment of the end design.
virtue and wisdom this alike imply,
and bless must be the virtuous and the wise.

bliss be ordain for all, since heaven intend
all being shall attain their destine end:
for this the fair idea shine confess
to every mind, and glow in every breast.
compare with this, all mortal joy be vain;
inspire by this, we restless onward strain.
high though we mount, the object mount more high,
elude our grasp, and mingle with the sky.
with nothing less the aspire soul content,
for nothing less her generous flame be mean;
the unerring rule, which all our step shall guide,
the certain test, by which true good be try.
bless when we reach it, wretched while we miss,
our joy, our sorrow prove, there must be bliss.
nor can this be some visionary dream,
where heat fancy form the flatter scheme.
there sure be bliss — else, why by all desire?
what guileful power have the mad search inspire?
can accident produce in all the same,
or a vain shadow raise a real flame?
when nature in the world distend space,
or fill, or almost fill each small place;
careful in mean matter to produce
each single motion for some certain use;
hard be the lot of her first favourite, man,
faulty the scheme of his contract span,
if that alone must know a useless void,
and he feel long never to be enjoy.

that only can produce consummate joy,
which equal all the power it will employ;
such fit object to each talent give,
earth can fit what be design for heaven.
why then be man with gift sublime fraught,
and active will and comprehensive thought?
for what be all this waste of mental force?
what! for a house, a coach, a dog, a horse?
have nature lord invert nature plan?
be man now make for what be make for man?

there must be pleasure past the reach of sense,
some noble source must happiness dispense:
reason, arise! and vindicate thy claim,
flash on our mind the joy-infusing flame;
pour forth the fount of light, who endless store
thought drink insatiate, while it thirst for more.
and thou, seraphic flame! who will inspire
the prophet voice, and wrap his soul in fire;
ray of the eternal beam! who can pervade
the distant past, and future gloomy shade;
while tremble reason tempt heaven dazzle height,
sublime her force, and guide her dubious flight;
strengthen by thou, she bear the stream blaze,
and drink new light from truth immortal ray.
great, only evidence of thing divine!
by thou reveal, the mystic wonder shine!
what puzzle sophist vain will explore,
what humble pride in silence must adore,
what plain mark in heaven deliver page,
make the teach hind more wise than greece sage.
yet reason prove thou in her low degree,
and own thy truth, from their necessity.

conspicuous now be happiness display,
possess he for who alone we be make.
for he alone all human bliss complete,
to he alone the expand bosom beat;
who fill each faculty, each power can move,
exert all thought, and deep absorb all love;
who ceaseless being year will tell in vain,
who attribute immense all bound disdain.
no sickly taste the heavenly rapture cloy,
nor weary sense sink in whelm joy
while, raise above low matter gross frame,
pure spirit blaze in his pure flame.
such be the immortal blessing that attend
the just and good, the patriot and the friend.
nor such alone in distant prospect cheer,
they taste heaven joy anticipate here.
these in the smile cup of pleasure flow,
or, mingle, sooth the bitter stream of woe;
these pay the loss of honour, and of place,
and teach that guilt alone be true disgrace;
these with the glorious exile cheerful rove,
and, far from court, fresh bloom in curio grove.

long may such bliss, by such enjoy, attest,
the great virtuous be the great bless!
enough there be amid yond gorgeous train,
who, wretched, prove all other joy be vain.

so shine the truth these humble line unfold,
"fair virtue ever be unwise sell."
too mean a price sublime fortune bring,
too mean the wealth, the smile, the crown of king
for raise over these, she make our bliss secure,
the present please, and the future sure.
while prosperous guilt a sad reverse appear,
and in the tasteless now, the future fear.
