on the prospect of peace,

a poem. 

to the lord privy-seal .

by mr. tickel.

contend king, and field of death, too long
have be the subject of the british song,
who have not read of fame ramilia plain,
bavaria fall, and Danube choke with slay?
exhaust theme! a gentle note i raise,
and sing return peace in soft lay.
their fury quell, and martial rage allay,
i wait our hero in the sylvan shade:
disband host be image to my mind,
and war power in friendly league combine;
while ease and pleasure make the nation smile,
and heaven and Anna bless britannia isle.

well send our queen her mitred Bristol forth,
for early counsel fame, and long-tried worth,
who, thirty roll year, have oft withhold
the suede and saxon from the dusty field;
complete form, to heal the christian wound,
to name the king, and give each kingdom bound;
the face of ravage nature to repair,
by league to soften earth, and heaven by prayer;
to gain by love, where rage and slaughter fail,
and make the crosier over the sword prevail.

so when great Moses, with jehovah wand,
have scatter plague over stubborn Pharaoh land,
now spread a host of locust round the shore,
now turn nile fatten stream to putrid gore;
plenty and gladness mark the priest of god,
and sudden almond shoot from aaron rod.

o thou, from who these bounteous blessing flow,
to who, as chief, the hope of peace we owe,
(for next to thou, the man who king contend
to stile companion, and to make their friend,
great Strafford, rich in every courtly grace,
with joyful pride accept the second place)
from britain isle, and isis sacred spring
one hour, oh! listen while the muse sing.
though minister of mighty monarch wait,
with beat heart, to learn their master fate,
one hour forbear to speak thy queen command,
nor think the world, thy charge, neglect stand;
the blissful prospect, in my verse display,
may lure the stubborn, the deceive persuade,
even thou to peace shall speedy urge the way,
and more be hasten by this short delay.

the haughty Gaul, in ten campaign overthrow,
now cease to think the western world his own.
oft have he mourn his boast leader bind,
and his proud bulwark smoke on the ground;
in vain with power renew he fill the plain,
make timorous vow, and bribe the saint in vain;
as oft his legion do the fight decline,
lurk in the trench, and skulk behind the line.
before his eye the fancy javelin gleam;
at feast he start, and seem dethrone in dream;
on glory past reflect with secret pain,
on mine exhaust, and on million slay.

to britain queen the sceptre suppliant bend,
to she his crown and infant race commend,
who grieve her fame with christian blood to buy,
nor ask for glory at a price so high.
at her decree the war suspend stand,
and britain hero hold their lift hand:
their open brow not threaten frown disguise,
but gentle passion sparkle in their eye.
the gaul, who never in their court can find
such tempere fire with manly beauty join,
doubt if they be those, who dreadful to the view
in form so fierce their fearful fancy draw,
at who dire name ten thousand widow press
their helpless orphan cling to the breast.
in silent rapture each his foe survey,
they vow firm friendship, and give mutual praise.
brave mind, however at war, be secret friend,
their generous discord with the battle end;
in peace they wonder whence dissension rise,
and ask how soul so like can ever be foe.

methinks i hear more friendly shout rebound,
and social clarion mix their sprightly sound;
the british flag be furl, her troop disband,
and scatter army seek their native land.
the hardy veteran, proud of many a scar,
the manly charm and honour of the war,
who hope to share his friend illustrious doom,
and in the battle find a soldier tomb,
lean on his spear to take his farewell view,
and sigh bid the glorious camp adieu.

you generous fair, receive the brave with smile,
overpay their sleepless night, and crown their toil;
soft beauty be the gallant soldier due,
for you they conquer, and they bleed for you.
in vain proud Gaul with boastul Spain conspire,
when english valour english beauty fire;
the nation dread your eye, and king despair
of chief so brave, till they have nymph so fair.

see the fond wife, in tear of transport drown,
hug her rough lord, and weep over every wound;
hang on the lip, that field of blood relate,
and smile and tremble, at his various fate.
near the full bowl he draw the fancy line,
and mark feign trench in the flow wine,
then set the invest fort before her eye,
and mine that whirl battalion to the sky;
his little listen progeny turn pale,
and beg again to hear the dreadful tale.

such dire achievement sing the bard that tell
of palfrey dame, bold knight, and magic spell;
where whole brigade one champion arm overthrow,
and cleave a giant at a random blow;
slay painim vile, that force the fair; and tame
the goblin fury, and the dragon flame.

our eager youth to distant nation run,
to visit field their valiant father win;
from flandria shore their country fame they trace,
till far Germania show her blast face.
the exult briton ask his mournful guide,
where his hard fate the lose Bavaria try;
where Stepney grave the stone to anna fame:
he point to Blenheim, once a vulgar name;
here flee the household, there do Tallard yield,
here malb'rough turn the fortune of the field;
on those steep bank, near danube rage flood,
the gaul thrice start back, and tremble stand;
when, Churchill arm perceive, they stand not long,
but plunge amid the wave, a desperate throng;
crowd whelm on crowd dash wide the watery bed,
and drive the current to its distant head.

as when by raphael, or by kneller hand
a warlike courser on the canvas stand,
such as on Landen bleed Ormond bear,
or set young Ammon on the granic shore;
if chance a generous steed the work behold,
he snort, he neigh, he champ the foamy gold:
so, hocstet see, tumultuous passion roll,
and hint of glory fire the briton soul;
in fancy fight he see the troop engage,
and all the tempest of the battle rage.

charm i, you power, with scene less noble bright,
far humble thought the inglorious muse delight,
content to see the horror of the field
by ploughshare level, or in flower conceal.
over shatter wall may creep ivy twine,
and grass luxuriant cloth the harmless mine,
tame flock ascend the breach without a wound,
or crop the bastion, now a fruitful ground;
while shepherd sleep, along the rampart lay,
or pipe beneath the formidable shade,

who be the man? (oblivion blast his name,
tear out and blot from the list of fame!)
who, fond of lawless rule, and proud brave,
first sink the filial subject to a slave;
his neighbour realm by fraud unkingly gain,
in guiltless blood the sacred ermine stain;
lay scheme for death, to slaughter turn his heart,
and fit murder to the rule of art.

ah! curse ambition, to thy lure we owe
all the great ill that mortal bear below.
curse by the hind, when to the spoil he yield
his year whole sweat and vainly-ripened field;
curse by the maid, tear from her lover side,
when left a widow, though not yet a bride:
by mother curse, when flood of tear they shed,
and scatter useless rose on the dead.
oh sacred Bristol! then what danger prove
the art, thou smile on with paternal love?
then, mix with rubbish by the brutal foe,
in vain the marble breathe, the canvas glow;
to shade obscure the glitter sword pursue
the gentle poet and defenceless muse.
a voice, like thy alone, may then assuage
the warrior fury, and control his rage;
to hear thou speak may the fierce vandal stand,
and fling the brandish sabre from his hand.

far hence be drive to scythia stormy shore
the drum harsh music, and the cannon roar;
let grim Bellona haunt the lawless plain,
where tartar-clan and grisly Cossacks reign;
let the steel Turk be deaf to matrons cry,
see virgin ravish with relentless eye;
to death grey head and smile infant doom,
nor spare the promise of the pregnant womb;
over waste kingdom spread his wide command,
the savage lord of a unpeopled land.

her guiltless glory just Britannia draw
from pure religion, and impartial law:
to europe wound a mother aid she bring,
and hold in equal scale the rival king:
her generous son in choice gift abound,
alike in arm, alike in art renowned.

as when sweet Venus, (so the fable sing)
awake by nereid from the ocean spring;
with smile she see the threaten billow rise,
spread smooth the surge, and clear the lour sky;
light, over the deep, with flutter cupid crown,
the pearly couch and silver turtle bind;
her tress shed ambrosial odour round.

amid the world of wave so stand serene
britannia isle, the ocean stately queen;
in vain the nation have conspire she fall,
her trench the sea, and fleet her float wall;
defenceless bark, her powerful navy near,
have only wave and hurricane to fear.
what bold invader, or what land oppress
have not her anger quell, her aid redress?
say, where have ever her union-cross sail,
but much her arm, her justice more prevail?
her labour be to plead the almighty cause,
her pride to teach the untamed barbarian law:
who conquer, win by brutal strength the prize;
but it be a godlike work to civilise.

have we forget how from great russia throne,
the king, who power half europe region own,
who sceptre wave, with one shout rush forth
in swarm the harness million of the north;
through realm of ice pursue his tedious way,
to court our friendship, and our fame survey!
hence the rich prize of useful art he bear,
and round his empire spread the learned store,
(the adorn old realm be more than new to raise,
his country parent be a monarch praise.)
his band now march in just array to war,
and caspian gulf unusual navy bear;
with runic lay smolensko forest ring,
and wonder volga hear the muse sing.
do not the paint king of India greet
our queen, and lie their sceptre at her foot?
chief who full bowl of hostile blood have quaff,
fame for the javelin, and envenom shaft;
who haughty brow make savage adore,
nor bow to less than star, or sun before:
her pity smile accept their suppliant claim,
and add four monarch to the christian name.

bless use of power! o virtuous pride in king!
and like his bounty, whence dominion spring!
which over new world make heaven indulgence shine,
and range myriad under law divine!
well buy with all that those sweet region hold,
with grove of spice, and with mine of gold.

fearless our merchant now pursue his gain,
and roam secure over the boundless main.
now over his head the polar bear he spy,
and freeze spangle of the Lapland sky;
now swell his canvas to the sultry line,
with glitter spoil where indian grotto shine;
where fume of incense glad the southern sea,
and waft citron scent the balmy breeze.
here near sun prepare the ripen gem,
to grace great Anne imperial diadem;
and here the over, who melt mass shall yield
on faithful coin each memorable field;
which mix with medal of immortal Rome,
may clear dispute, and teach the time to come.

in circle beam shall godlike Anna glow,
and Churchill sword hang over the prostrate foe;
in comely wound shall bleed worthy stand,
webb firm platoon, and lumly faithful band!
bold Mordaunt in iberian trophy dress,
and Campbell dragon on his dauntless breast;
great ormond deed on vigo spoil enrol,
and guiscard knife on harley chili gold.
and if the muse, o Bristol, may decree,
here Granville note by the lyre shall be,
the lyre for Granville, and the cross for thou.

such be the honour grateful Britain pay,
so patriot merit, and so monarch praise.
over distant time such record shall prevail,
when english number, antiquate, fail:
a trifle song the muse can only yield,
and sooth her soldier pant from the field;
to sweet retirement see they safe convey,
and raise their battle in the rural shade.
from field of death to woodstock peaceful gloom
(the poet haunt) britannia hero come —
begin, my muse, and soft touch the string:
here Henry love; and Chaucer learn to sing.
hail fable grotto! hail elysian soil;
thou fair spot of fair britannia isle!
where king of old conceal forget the throne,
and beauty be content to shine unknown;
where love and war by turn pavilion rear,
and Henry bower near blenheim dome appear;
the weary champion lull in soft alcove,
the noble boast of thy romantic grove.
oft, if the muse presage, shall he be see
by rosamonda fleet over the green,
in dream be hail by heroes mighty shade;
and hear old Chaucer warble through the glade:
over the fame echo vault his name shall bound;
and hill to hill reflect the favourite sound.

here, here at least thy love for arm give over,
nor, one world conquer, fond wish for more.
vice of great soul alone! o thirst of fame!
the muse admire it, while she strive to blame;
thy toil be now to chase the bound deer,
or view the courser stretch in wild career;
this lovely scene shall sooth thy soul to rest,
and wear each dreadful image from thy breast;
with pleasure, by thy conquest shall thou see
thy queen triumphant, and all Europe free;
no care henceforth shall thy repose destroy,
but what thou give the world, thyself enjoy.

sweet solitude! when life be gay hour be past,
however we range, in thou we six at last;
toss through tempestuous sea (the voyage over)
pale we look back, and bless the friendly shore.
our own strict judge, our past life we scan,
and ask if glory have enlarge the span;
if bright the prospect, we the grave defy,
trust future age, and content die.

when stranger from far-distant clime shall come;
to view the pomp of this triumphant dome;
where rear aloft dissemble trophy stand,
and breathe labour of the sculptor hand,
where kneller art shall paint the fly Gaul,
and bourbon woe shall fill the story wall;
heir of thy blood shall over their bounteous board
fix europe guard, thy monumental sword;
banner that oft have wave on conquer wall,
and trump, that drown the groan of gasp Gauls.
fair dame shall oft, with curious eye, explore
the costly robe that slaughter general wear,
rich trappings from the danube whirlpool bring,
(hesperian nun the gorgeous broidery wrought)
belt stiff with gold, the boian horseman pride,
and gaul fair flower, in human crimson die.
of Churchill race perhaps some lovely boy
shall mark the burnish steel that hang on high;
shall gaze transport on its glitter charm,
and reach it struggle with unequal arm;
by sign the drum tumultuous sound request,
then seek, in start, the hush mother breast.

so, in the painter animate frame,
where Mars embrace the soft paphian dame,
the little love in sport the falchion wield,
or join their strength to heave his ponderous shield;
one stroke the plume in tityon gore embrue,
and one the spear, that reek in typhon blood;
another infant brow the helm sustain,
he nod his crest, and fright the shriek train.
thus, the rude tempest of the field overblow,
shall white round of smile year roll on:
our victor, bless in peace, forget their war,
enjoy past danger, and absolve the star.
but oh! what sorrow shall bedew your urn,
you honour shade, who widow Albion mourn?
if your thin form yet discontent moan,
and haunt the mangle mansion once your own;
behold what flower the pious muse strow,
and tear, which in the midst of triumph flow;
cypress and bay your envy brow surround,
your name the tender matron heart shall wound,
and the soft maid grow pensive at the sound.

accept, great Anne, the tear their memory draw,
who noble perish in their sovereign cause:
for thou in pity bid the war give over,
mourn thy slay hero, nor will venture more.
vast price of blood on each victorious day!
(but europe freedom do that price repay.)
lament triumph! when one breath must tell
that Marlborough conquer, and that dormer fall.

great queen! who name strike haughty monarch pale,
on who just sceptre hang europa scale;
who arm like mercy wound, decide like fate,
on who decree the nation anxious wait;
from albion cliff thy wide extend hand
shall over the main to far Peru command,
so vast a tract who wide domain shall run,
its circle sky shall see no set sun.
thou, thou a hundred language shall claim,
and savage indian swear by anna name;
the line and pole shall own thy rightful sway,
and thy command the sever globe obey.

round the vast ball thy new dominion chain
the watery kingdom, and control the main;
magellan straight to Gibraltar they join,
across the sea a formidable line;
the sight of adverse Gaul we fear no more,
but please see Dunkirk, now a guiltless shore.
in vain great Neptune tear the narrow ground,
and mean his water for britannia bound;
her giant genius take a mighty stride,
and set his foot beyond the encroach tide;
on either bank the land its master know,
and in the midst the subject ocean flow.

so near proud Rhodes, across the rage flood,
stupendous form! the vast colossus stand,
(while at one foot their throng galley ride,
a whole hour sail scarce reach the farther side)
betwixt his brazen thigh, in loose array,
ten thousand streamer on the billow play.

by harley counsel Dunkirk now restore
to britain empire, own her ancient lord.
in he transfuse his godlike father reign,
rich in the blood which swell that patriot vein,
who bold faithful meet his sovereign frown,
and scorn for gold to yield the important town.
his son be bear the ravish prey to claim,
and France still tremble at a harley name.
a fort so dreadful to our english shore,
our fleet scarce fear the sand or tempest more,
who vast expense to such sum amount,
that the tax Gaul scarce furnish out the account:
who wall such bulwark, such vast tower restrain,
its weak rampart be the rock and main;
his boast great louis yield, and cheap buy
thy friendship, Anna, with the mighty prize.
holland repine and in grief cast down,
see the new glory of the british crown:
ah! may they never provoke thou to the fight,
nor foe more dreadful than the gaul invite,
soon may they hold the olive, soon assuage
their secret murmur, nor call forth thy rage
to rend their bank, and pour, at one command
thy realm the sea over their precarious land.

henceforth be thy, vicegerent of the sky,
scorn worth to raise, and vice in robe chastise;
to dry the orphan tear, and from the bar
chase the bribe judge, and hush the wordy war;
deny the curse blasphemer tongue to rage,
and turn God fury from a impious age.
bless change! the soldier late destroy hand
shall rear new temple in his native land;
mistake zealot shall with fear behold,
and beg admittance in our sacred fold;
on her own work the pious queen shall smile,
and turn her care upon her favourite isle.

so the keen bolt a warrior angel aim,
array in cloud, and wrap in mantl flame,
he bear a tempest on his sound wing,
and his red arm the forky vengeance fling;
at length, heaven wrath appease, he quit the war,
to roll his orb, and guide his destine star,
to shed kind fate, and lucky hour bestow,
and smile propitious on the world below.
around thy throne shall faithful noble wait,
these guard the church, and those direct the state,
to Bristol, graceful in maternal tear,
the church her towery forehead gentle rear,
she beg her pious son to assert her cause,
defend her right, and reinforce her law,
with holy zeal the sacred work begin,
to bend the stubborn and the meek to win.

our oxford earl in careful thought shall stand,
to raise his queen, and save a sink land,
the wealthy glebe to ravenous Spaniard know
he mark, and make the golden world our own:
content with hand unsoiled to guard the prize,
and keep the store with undesiring eye.

so round the tree, that bear Hesperian gold,
the sacred watch lie curl in many a fold,
his eye uprear to the untasted prey,
the sleepless guardian waste life away.

beneath the peaceful olive, raise by you,
her ancient pride shall every art renew;
(the art with you, fame Harcourt, shall defend,
and courtly Bolingbroke, the muse friend)
with pierce eye some search where nature play,
and trace the wanton through her darksome maze;
whence health from herb; from seed how grove begin,
how vital stream in circle eddy run.
some teach, why round the sun the sphere advance,
in the fix measure of their mystic dance:
how tide, when heave by press moon, overflow,
and sun-born Iris paint her flowery bow.
in happy chain our dare language bind,
shall sport no more in arbitrary sound,
but buskin bard henceforth shall wise rage,
and grecian plan reform britannia stage:
until Congreve bid her smile, Augusta stand,
and long to weep when flow Rowe command:
britain spectator shall their strength combine
to mend our moral, and our taste refine,
fight virtue cause, stand up in wit defence,
win we from vice, and laugh we into sense.
nor, prior, have thou hush the trump in vain,
thy lyre shall now revive her mirthful strain,
new tale shall now be tell; if right i see,
the soul of Chaucer be restore in thou.
Garth, in majestic number, to the star
shall raise mock-heroe, and fantastic war;
like the young spread laurel, pope, thy name
shoot up with strength, and rise into fame;
with Phillips shall the peaceful valley ring,
and Britain hear a second Spenser sing;
that much-loved youth, who utrecht wall confine,
to bristol praise shall his strafford join:
he too, from who attentive Oxford draw
rule for just think, and poetic law,
to grow bard his learned aid shall send,
the strict critic, and the kind friend.
even mine, a bashful muse, who rude essay
scarce hope for pardon, not aspire to praise,
cherish by you in time may grow to fame,
and my survive with bristol glorious name.

fire with the view this glitter scene display,
and smite with passion for my country praise,
my artless reed attempt this lofty theme,
where sacred Isis roll her ancient stream;
in cloister dome, the great philippa pride,
where learning bloom, while fame and worth preside,
where the five Henry art and arm be teach,
and Edward form his Cressy, yet unsought;
where laureled bard have strike the warble string,
the seat of sage, and the nurse of king.
here thy command, o Lancaster, inflame
my eager breast to raise the british name;
urge on my soul, with no ignoble pride,
to woo the muse who ADDISON enjoy;
see that bold swan to heaven sublime soar,
pursue at distance, and his step adore.
