elegy ii. on the mausoleum of AUGUSTUS. to the right honourable George Bussy Villiers, viscount Villiers. write at Rome, 1756. 

amid these moulder wall, this marble round,
where sleep the hero of the Julian name,
say, shall we linger still in thought profound,
and meditate the mournful path to fame?

what though no cypress shade, in funeral row,
no sculpture urn, the last record of fate,
over the shrink terrace wave their baleful bough,
or breathe in story emblem of the great;

yet not with heedless eye will we survey
the scene though change, nor negligent tread;
these variegate walk, however gay,
be once the silent mansion of the dead.

in every shrub, in every floweret bloom
that paint with different hue yond smile plain,
some hero ash issue from the tomb,
and live a vegetative life again.

for matter die not, as the sage say,
but shift to other form the pliant mass,
when the free spirit quit its cumbrous clay,
and see, beneath, the roll planet pass.

perhaps, my Villiers, for i sing to thou,
perhaps, unknowing of the bloom it give,
in yond fair scyon of apollo tree
the sacred dust of young Marcellus live.

pluck not the leaf — it be sacrilege to wound
the ideal memory of so sweet a shade;
in these sad seat a early grave he find,
and the first rite to gloomy this convey.

witness thou field of Mars, that oft have know
his youthful triumph in the mimic war,
thou hear the heart-felt universal groan
when over thy bosom roll the funeral car.

witness thou Tuscan stream, where oft he glow
in sportive struggle with the oppose wave,
fast by the recent tomb thy water flow
while weep the wise, the virtuous, and the brave.

o lose too soon! — yet why lament a fate
by thousand envy, and by heaven approve.
rare be the boon to those of long date
to live, to die, admire, esteem, belove.

weak be our judgment, and our passion warm,
and slow dawn the radiant morn of truth,
our expectation hasty we form,
and much we pardon to ingenuous youth.

too oft we satiate on the applause we pay
to rise merit, and resume the crown;
full many a bloom genius, snatch away,
have fall lament who have live unknown.

for hard the task, o Villiers, to sustain
the important burden of a early fame;
each add day some add worth to gain,
prevent each wish, and answer every claim.

be thou Marcellus, with a length of day!
but o remember, whatsoever thou be,
the most exalt breath of human praise
to please indeed must echo from the heart.

though thou be brave, be virtuous, and be wise,
by all, like he, admire, esteem, belove,
it be from within alone true fame can rise,
the only happy, be the self-approved.
