Musaeus: a monody to the memory of mr. pope.

in imitation of Milton Lycidas.

by the same.

sorrow i catch the reed, and call the muse;
if yet a muse on britain plain abide,
since rapt Musaeus tune his part strain:
with he they live, with he perchance they die.
for who ever since their virgin train espy,
or on the bank of Thames, or that mild plain,
where Isis sparkle to the sunny ray?
or have they deign to play,
where Camus wind along his broider vale,
feed each white pink, and each daisy pied,
that mingle paint his rushy-fringed side?

yet ah! celestial maid, you be not dead;
immortal as you be, you may not die:
and well i ween, you can quite be flee,
ere you entune his mournful elegy.
stay then awhile, o stay, you fleet fair;
revisit yet, nor hallow Hippocrene,
nor thespia shade; till your harmonious teen
be grateful pour on some slow-ditted air,
such tribute pay, again you may repair
to what love haunt you whilom do erect;
whether Lycaeus, or that mountain fair
trim maenelaus, with piny verdure deck.
but now it boot you not in these to stray,
or yet cyllene hoary shade to choose,
or where mild ladon swell water play.
forgo each vain excuse,
and haste to thames shore; for Thames shall join
our sad society, and pass mourn,
let cold tear bedew his silver urn.
and, when the poet wither grot he lave,
his reed-crowned lock shall shake, his head shall bow,
his tide no more in eddy blithe shall rove,
but creep soft by with long-drawn murmur slow.
for oft the poet rouse his charm wave
with martial note, or lull with strain of love.
he must not now in brisk meander flow
gamesome, and kiss the sadly-silent shore,
without the loan of some poetic woe.

can i forget, how erst his osier make
sad sullen music, as bleak eurus fan?
can i forget, how gloom yond laureate shade,
ere death remorseless wave his ebon wand?
how, midst yond grot, each silver-trickling spring
wander the shelly channel all among;
while as the coral roof do soft ring
reponsive to their sweetly-doleful song?
meanwhile all pale the expire poet lay,
and sink his awful head,
while vocal shadow please dream prolong:
for so, his sicken spirit to release,
they pour the balm of visionary peace.

first, send from cam fair bank, like Palmer old,
come Tityrus slow, with head all silvered over,
and in his hand a oaken crook he bear,
and thus in antique guise short talk do hold.
"great clerk of fame be house, who excellence
"may weal befit thilk place of eminence,
"much of weal betide thy hour last,
"for mich good wirkè to i don and past.
"for sin the day whereas my lyre ben strongen,
"and deft many a merry lie i songen,
"old time, which allé thing don malicious,
"gnawen with rusty tooth continual,
"gnattrid my line, that they all canker be,
"till at the last thou smoothen they have again;
"since full seemly gliden my rhyme rude,
"as, (if sit thilk similitude)
"whannè shallow brook run hobble on,
"Ovir rough stone it maken full rough song:
"but, they stone remove, this lite river
"stealen forth by, make pleasant murmere:
"so my se rhyme, whoso may they note,
"thou maken everichone to ren right sote;
"and in my verse entune so fetisely,
"that man sayen i make true melody,
"and speak every deal to mine honour,
"Mich weal, great clerk, betide thy part hour! "

he cease his homely rhyme.
when Colin clout, Eliza shepherd swain,
the blithe lad that ever pipe on plain,
come with his reed soft-warbling on the way,
and thrice he bow his head with motion mild,
and thus his glide number begin essay.

i 

 "ah! luckless swain, alas! how be thou lorn,
"who once like i can frame thy pipe to play
"shepherd devise, and cheer the linger morn:
"ne bush, ne breere, but learn thy roundelay.
"ah plight too sore such worth to equal right!
"ah worth too high to meet such piteous plight!

ii.

"but i nought strive, poor Colin, to compare
"my hobbin, or my thenot rustic skill
"to thy deft swain, who dapper ditty rare
"surpass ought else of quaint shepherd quill.
"even roman Tityrus, that peerless wight,
"mote yield to thou for dainty of delight.

iii.

"eke when in fable flowery path you stray,
"mask in cunning feint truth be splendent face;
"ne sylph, ne sylphid, but due tendence pay,
"to shield Belinda lock from felon base,
"but all mote nought avail such harm to chase,
"than Una fair begin droop her princely mein,
"eke florimel, and all my fairy race:
"Belinda far surpass by beauty sheen,
"Belinda, subject meet for such soft lie i ween.

iv.

"like as in villaged troop of birdling trim,
"where chanticleer his red crest high do hold,
"and quake duck, that wont in lake to swim,
"and turkey proud, and pigeon nothing bold;
"if chance the peacock do his plume unfold
"eftsoon their mean beauty all decay,
"he glisten purple, and he glisten gold,
"now with bright green, now blue himself array.
"such be thy beauty bright, all other beauty sway.

v. 

"but why do i descant this toyish rhyme,
"and fancy light in simple guise portray?
"list to cheer thou at this rueful time,
"while as black death do on thy heartstring prey.
"yet rede aright, and if this friendly lie
"thou nevertheless judge all too slight and vain,
"let my well-meaning mend my ill essay:
"so may i greet thou with a noble strain,
"when soon we meet for aye, in yond star-sprinkled plain."

last come a bard of more exalt tread,
and thyrsis hight by dryad, fawn, or Swain,
whenever he mingle with the sylvan train;
but seldom that; for high thought he feed;
for he full oft the heavenly muse lead
to clear Euphrates, and the secret mount,
to Araby, and Eden, fragrant clime;
all which the sacred bard will oft recount:
and thus in strain, unused in grove or shade,
to sad Musaeus rightful homage pay.

"thrice hail, thou heaven-taught warbler, last and best
"of all the train! poet, in who conjoin
"all that to ear, or heart, or head, can yield
"rapture; harmonious, manly, clear, sublime!
"accept this gratulation: may it cheer
"thy sink soul; nor these corporeal ill
"ought daunt thou, or appall. know, in high heaven
"fame bloom eternal over that spirit divine,
"who build immortal verse. there thy bold muse,
"which while on earth can breathe maeonian fire,
"shall soar seraphic height; while to her voice
"ten thousand hierarchy of angel harp
"symphonious, and with dulcet harmony
"usher the song rejoice. i meanwhile,
"to sooth thou in these irksome hour of pain,
"approach thy visitant, with mortal laud
"to praise thou mortal. first, (as first beseem)
"for rhyme subdue; rhyme, erst the minstrel rude
"of chaos, anarch old: she near his throne
"oft teach the rattle element to chime
"with tenfold din; till late to earth upbear
"on strident wing, what time fair poesy
"emerge from gothic cloud, and faint shoot
"rekindle gleam of lustre. her the fiend
"oppress; force to utter uncouth dirge,
"runick, or leonine; and with dire chain
"fetter she scarce-fledged pinion. i such bond
"aim to destroy, mistake: bond like these
"it be great art to ennoble, and refine.
"for this superior part Musaeus come:
"thou come, and at thy magic touch the chain
"off drop, and (pass strange!) soft-wreathed band
"of flower their place supply! which well the muse
"may wear for choice, not force; obstruction none,
"but lovely ornament. wondrous this, yet here
"the wonder rest not; various argument
"remain for i, all doubt, where to cull
"the primal grace, where countless grace charm.
"various this peaceful scene, this mineral roof;
"this semblance meet of coral, over, and shell;
"these point crystal fair, amid each obscure
"bright glister; all these slowly-dripping rill,
"that tinkle stray amid the cooly cave.
"yet not this various peaceful scene; with this
"its mineral roof; nor this assemblage meet
"of coral, over, and shell; nor amid the obscure
"these point crystal, glister fair; nor rill,
"that stray tinkle through the cooly cave;
"deal charm more various to each rapture sense,
"than thy mellifluous lay —"

"cease, friendly swain;
(Musaeus cry, and raise his ache head)
"all praise be foreign, but of true desert;
"play round the head, but come not to the heart.
"ah! why recall the toy of thoughtless youth?
"when flowery fiction hold the place of truth:
"when fancy rule; when trill each trivial strain,
"but idle sweet, and elegant vain.
"o! in that strain, if all of wit have flow,
"all music warble, and all beauty glow;
"have lively nature, happy art combine,
"that lend each grace, and this each grace refine;
"alas! how little be my proud boast!
"the sweet trifler of my tribe at most.

"to sway the judgement, while he charm the ear;
"to curb mad passion in its wild career;
"to blend with skill, as lofty theme inspire,
"all reason rigour, and all fancy fire;
"be this the poet praise; with this uncrowned,
"wit die a jest, and poetry a sound.

"come then that honest fame; who sober ray
"or gild the satire, or the moral lay,
"which dawn, though thou, rough Donne! hew out the line,
"but beam, sage Horace, from each strain of thy.
"o! if, like these, one poet more can brave
"the venal statesman, or the title slave;
"brand frontless vice, strip all her star and string,
"nor spare her bask in the smile of king:
"yet stoop to virtue, though the prostrate maid
"lay sad pale in bleak misfortune shade:
"if grave, yet lively; rational, yet warm;
"clear to convince, and eloquent to charm;
"he pour, for her love cause, serene along
"the pure precept, in the sweet song:
"for her love cause, he trace his moral plan,
"yond various region of bewilder man;
"explore alike each scene, that frown or smile,
"the flowery garden, or the weedy wild;
"unmoved by sophistry, unawed by name,
"no dupe to doctrine, and no fool to fame;
"lead by no system devious glare astray,
"as earth-born meteor glitter to betray:
"but all his soul to reason rule resign,
"and heaven own view fair open on his mind,
"catch from bright nature flame the live ray,
"through passion cloud pour in resistless day;
"and this great truth in all its lustre show,
"that god be wise, and all creation good:
"if this his boast, pour here the welcome lay:
"praise less than this, be impotence of praise. "

"to pour that praise be i," fair virtue cry,
and shoot all radiant, through a open cloud.
but ah! my muse, how will thy voice express
the immortal strain, harmonious, as it flow?
ill suit immortal strain a doric dress:
and far too high already have thou soar.
enough for thou, that, when the lay be over,
the goddess clasp he to her throb breast.
but what may that avail? blind fate before
have open her shears, to slit his vital thread;
and who may hope gainsay her stern behest?
then thrice he wave the hand, thrice bow the head,
and sigh his soul to rest.

then weep the nymph; witness, you wave shade!
witness, you wind stream! the nymph do weep;
the heavenly goddess too with tear do steep
her plaintive voice, that echo through the glade;
and, "cruel god," and "cruel star," she cry:
nor do the shepherd, through the woodland wide,
on that sad day, or to the pensive brook,
or stagnant river, drive their thirsty flock;
nor do the wild-goat bronze the steepy rock;
and philomel her custom oak forsake;
and rose wan be wave by zephyr weak,
as nature self be sick;
and every lily droop its velvet head;
and groan each fade lawn, and leafless grove;
sad sympathy! yet sure his rightful meed,
who charm all nature: well may nature mourn
through all her sweet; and flower, and lawn, and shade,
all vocal grow, all weep Musaeus dead.

here end we, goddess: this your shepherd sing,
all as his hand a ivy chaplet weave.
o! make it worthy of the sacred bard,
and make it equal to the shepherd love.
nor thou, Musaeus, from thy ear discard,
for well i ween thou hear my doleful song;
whether amid angel troop, the star among,
from golden harp thou call seraphic lay;
or, anxious for thy dear virtue fare,
thou still art hover over her tuneless sphere,
and move some hide spring her weal to raise.

thus the fond swain on doric oat essay,
manhood prime honour down on his cheek:
tremble he strive to court the tuneful maid
with stripling art, and dalliance all too weak;
unseen, unheard, beneath a hawthorn shade.
but now dun cloud the welkin begin to streak;
and now down-drop the lark, and cease their strain:
they cease, and with they cease the shepherd swain.
