the king and the shepherd. 

imitate from the french. 

through every age some tyrant passion reign:
 now love prevail, and now ambition gain
 reason lose throne, and sovereign rule maintain. 
though beyond love, ambition empire go;
 for who feel love, ambition also know,
 and proud still aspire to be possess
 of she, he think superior to the rest. 
as can be prove, but that our plain task
 do no such toil, or definition ask;
 but to be so rehearse, as first it be tell,
 when such old story please in day of old. 

a king, observe how a shepherd skill
 improve his flock, and do the pasture fill,
 that equal careth assault do defend,
 and the secure and graze part attend,
 approve the conduct, and from sheep and cur
 transfer the sway, and change his wool to fur. 
lord-keeper now, as right he divide
 his just decree, and speedy decide;
 when his sole neighbour, while he watch the fold,
 a hermit poor, in contemplation old,
 Hastes to his ear, with safe, but lose advice,
 tell he such height be level in a trice,
 preferment treacherous, and her path of ice:
 and that already sure it have turn his brain,
 who think a prince favour to retain. 
nor seem unlike, in this mistaken rank,
 the sightless wretch, who freeze upon a bank
 a serpent find, which for a staff he take,
 and use as such (his own but late break)
 thank the fate, who thus his loss supply,
 nor mark one, that with amazement cry,
 throw quick from thy hand that sleep ill
 a serpent it be, that when awake will kill. 
a serpent this! the uncautioned fool reply:
 a staff it feel, nor shall my want of eye,
 make i believe, i have no sense leave,
 and through thy malice be of this bereave;
 which fortune to my hand have kind send
 to guide my step, and stumble to prevent. 
no staff, the man proceed; but to thy harm
 a snake it will prove: the viper, now grow warm
 confirm it soon, and fasten on his arm. 

thus will thou find, shepherd believe it true,
 some ill, that shall this seem good ensue;
 thousand distaste, t'allay thy envy gain,
 unthought of, on the parsimonious plain. 
so prove the event, and whisperer now defame
 the candid judge, and his proceed blame. 
by wrong, they say, a palace he erect,
 the good oppress, and the bad protect. 
to view this seat the king himself prepare,
 where no magnificence or pomp appear,
 but moderation, free from each extreme,
 while moderation be the builder theme. 
ashamed yet still the sycophant persist,
 that wealth he have conceal within a chest,
 which but attend some convenient day,
 to face the sun, and bright beam display. 
the chest unbar, no radiant gem they find,
 no secret sum to foreign bank design,
 but humble mark of a obscure recess,
 emblem of care, and instrument of peace;
 the hook, the Scrip, and for unblamed delight
 the merry bagpipe, which, ere fall of night,
 can sympathize bird to tuneful note invite. 
welcome you monument of former joy! 
welcome! to bless again your master eye,
 and draw from court, the instruct shepherd cry. 
no more dear relic! we no more will part,
 you shall my hand employ, who now revive my heart. 
no emulation, or corrupt time
 shall false blacken, or seduce to crime
 he, who your honest industry can please,
 who on the barren down can sing from inward ease. 

how be this! the monarch something move rejoin. 
with such low thought, and freedom from design,
 what make thou leave a life so fond prize,
 to be in croud, or envy, or despise? 

forgive i, sir, and humane frailty see,
 the Swain reply, in my past state and i;
 all peaceful that, to which i vow return. 
but who alas! (though mine at length i mourn)
 be ever without the curse of some ambition bear. 
