thunder.

spirit of strength! to who in wrath it be give,
 to mar the earth and shake its vasty dome,
 behold the somber robe who gather fold,
 thy secret majesty conceal. their skirt
 spread on mid air move slow and silent,
 over noonday beam thy sultry shroud be cast,
 advance cloud from every point of heaven,
 like host of gather foe in pitchy volume,
 grand dilate, clothe the field of air,
 and brood aloft over the empurple earth. 
spirit of strength! it be thy awful hour;
 the wind of every hill be lay to rest,
 and far over sea and land deep silence reign. 

wild creature of the forest homeward hie,
 and in their den with fear unwonted cower;
 pride in the lordly palace be put down,
 while in his humble cot the poor man sit
 with all his family round he hush and still,
 in awful expectation. on his way
 the traveller stand aghast and look to heaven. 
on the horizon verge thy lightning gleam,
 and the first utterance of thy deep voice
 be hear in reverence and holy fear. 

from near cloud bright burst more vivid gleam,
 as instant in close darkness lose;
 pale sheet flash cross the wide expanse
 while over boggy moor or swampy plain,
 a stream cataract of flame appear,
 to meet a nether fire from earth cast up,
 commingle terrible; appal gloom
 succeed, and lo! the rift centre pour
 a general blaze, and from the war of cloud,
 red, writhe fall the embody bolt of heaven. 
then swell the roil peal, full, deepen, grand,
 and in its strength lift the tremendous roar,
 with mingle discord, rattle, hiss, growl;
 crash like rocky fragment downward hurl,
 like the upbreaking of a ruin world,
 in awful majesty the explosion burst
 wide and astound over the tremble land. 
mountain, and cliff, repeat the dread turmoil,
 and all to man distinctive sense know,
 be lose in the immensity of sound. 
peal after peal, succeed with wane strength,
 and hush and deep each solemn pause between. 

upon the lofty mountain side
 the kindle forest blaze wide;
 huge fragment of the rugged steep
 be tumble to the lash deep;
 firm root in his cleave rock,
 crash fall the stubborn oak. 
the lightning keen in wasteful ire
 dart fierce on the point spire,
 rend in twain the iron-knit stone,
 and stately tower to earth be throw. 
no human strength may brave the storm,
 nor shelter skreen the shrink form,
 nor castle wall its fury stay,
 nor massy gate impede its way:
 it visit those of low estate,
 it shake the dwelling of the great,
 it look athwart the vault tomb,
 and glare upon the prison gloom. 
then dungeon black in unknown light,
 flash hideous on the wretches sight,
 and strange groan the downward cell,
 where silence deep be wont to dwell. 

now eye, to heaven upcast, adore,
 knee bend that never bend before,
 the stout heart begin to fail,
 and many a manly face be pale;
 benumb fear awhile up-binds,
 the palsy action of their mind,
 till wake to dreadful sense they lift their eye,
 and round the strike corpse shrill shriek of horror rise. 

now rattle hailstone, bound as they fall
 to earth, spread motley winter over the plain,
 recede peal sound faint on the ear,
 and roll their distant grumble far away:
 the lightning do in pale flash gleam,
 and through the rent cloud, silver with his ray,
 the sun on all this wild affray look down,
 as, high enthrone above all mortal ken,
 a high power behold the strife of man. 
