[translation from Statius, Thebaid vi 646-88, 704-24]

then thus the king: 'whoever the quoit can wield,
and further send its weight athwart the field,
let he stand forth his brawny arm to boast.'
swift at the word, from out the gaze host
young pterelas with strength unequal draw,
labour the disc, and to small distance throw.
the band around admire the mighty mass,
a slippery weight and form of polish brass.
the love of honour bid two youth advance,
achaian bear, to try the glorious chance;
a third arise, of Acarnania he,
of Pisa one and three from ephyre.
nor more; for now nesimachus son,
by acclamation rouse, come tower on.
another orb upheave his strong right hand,
then thus: 'you argive flower, you warlike band,
who trust your arm shall raze the Tyrian tower,
and batter cadmus wall with stony shower,
receive a worthy load; yond puny ball
let youngster toss.'
he say, and scornful fling the unheeded weight
aloof: the champion tremble at the sight
prevent disgrace, the palm despair resign.
all but two youth the enormous orb decline:
these conscious shame withhold and pride of noble line.
as bright and huge the spacious circle lie,
with double light it beam against the day:
so glitter show the thracian godhead shield,
with such a gleam affright pangaea field,
when blaze against the sun it shine from far,
and, clash, rebellow with the din of war.

Phlegyas the long-expected play begin,
summon his strength and call forth all the man.
all eye be bend on his experience hand,
for oft in pisa sport his native land
admire that arm; oft on alpheus shore
the ponderous brass in exercise he bear:
where flow the wide stream he take his stand;
sure fly the disc from his unerring hand,
nor stop till it have cut the further strand.
and now in dust the polish ball he roll,
then grasp its weight, elusive of his hold;
now fit to his grip and nervous arm,
suspend the crowd with animation warm,
nor tempt he yet the plain but, hurl upright,
emit the mass, a prelude of his might.
firm he plant each knee and over his head,
collect all his force, the circle speed.
it tower to cut the cloud; now through the sky
sing in its rapid way and strengthen as it fly;
anon with slacken rage come quiver down,
heavy and huge, and cleave the solid ground.

so from the astonish star, her nightly train,
the sun be pale sister, draw by magic strain,
desert precipitant she darken sphere.
in vain the nation with officious fear
their cymbal toss and sound brass explore:
the æmonian hag enjoy her dreadful hour,
and smile malignant on the labour power.

third in the labour of the disc come on,
with sturdy step and slow, Hippomedon.
artful and strong he poise the wellknown weight,
by Phlegyas warn and fire by mnestheus fate,
that to avoid and this to emulate.
his vigorous arm he try before he fling,
brace all his nerve and every sinew string;
then, with a tempest whirl and wary eye,
pursue his cast and hurl the orb on high;
the orb on high tenacious of its course,
true to the mighty arm that give it force,
far overleap all bind and joy to see
its ancient lord secure of victory.
the theatre green height and woody wall
tremble ere it precipitate its fall;
the ponderous mass sink in the cleave ground,
while vale and wood and echo hill rebound.
as when from aetna smoke summit break,
the eyeless Cyclops heave the craggy rock:
where ocean fret beneath the dash oar,
and part surge round the vessel roar,
it be there he aim the meditate harm,
and scarce Ulysses escape his giant arm.
a tiger pride the victor bear away,
with native spot and artful labour gay:
a shine border round the margin roll,
and calm the terror of his claw in gold.
