the vartree.

sweet be thy bank, o vartree! when at morn
 their velvet verdure glisten with the dew;
 when fragrant gale by soft zephyr bear
 unfold the flower, and open their petal new. 

how bright the lustre of thy silver tide,
 which wind, reluctant to forsake the vale! 
how play the quiver branch on thy side,
 and lucid catch the sun-beam in the gale! 

and sweet thy shade at noon more fervid hour,
 when faint we quit the upland gay lawn
 to seek the freshness of thy shelter bower,
 thy chesnut gloom, where day can scarce dawn. 

how soothe in the dark sequester grove
 to see thy placid water seem to sleep;
 please they reflect the somber tint they love,
 as unperceived in silent peace they creep. 

the deep foliage bend over thy wave
 taste thy pure kiss with embrace arm,
 while each charm dryad stoop her limb to lave
 thy smile Naïad meet her sister charm. 

beneath the fragrant lime, or spread beech,
 the bleat flock in pant crowd repose:
 their voice alone my dark retreat can reach,
 while peace and silence all my soul compose. 

here, mary, rest! the dangerous path forsake
 where folly lure thou, and where vice ensnare,
 thy innocence and peace no long stake,
 nor barter solid good for brilliant care. 

shun the vain bustle of the senseless crowd,
 where all be hollow that appear like joy;
 where, the soft claim of feeling disallow,
 fallacious hope the baffle soul annoy. 

have thou not tread each vain and giddy maze,
 by flattery lead over pleasure gay field? 
bask in the sunshine of her bright blaze,
 and prove whatever she can her votary yield? 

that full completion of each glow hope,
 which youth and novelty can scarce bestow,
 from the last dregs of joy exhaust cup
 can thou expect thy year mature shall know? 

have thou not try the vanity of life,
 and all the poor, mean joy of fashion know? 
blush then to hold with wisdom long strife,
 submit at length a better guide to own. 

here woo the muse in the scene they love;
 let science near thou take her patient stand:
 each weak regret for gay hour reprove,
 and yield thy soul to reason calm command. 
