LINES

ON HEARING, THREE OR FOUR YEARS AGO, THAT CONSTANTINOPLE WAS SWALLOWED UP BY AN EARTHQUAKE;

FALLEN are thy towers, Byzantium! towers that stood
 Before the Turk's dread fury, when he came,
 The crescent sparkling amidst Christian blood,
 And to the reeking den of Moloch turned
 Sophia's holy fane! Where, where are now,
 Imperial city, the late proud remains
 Of thy brave founder's greatness, when he clothed
 In worldly grandeur pure Religion's form;
 Then placed beside him, placed upon a throne,
 The lowly Nazarene's meek simple child! .... 
He, wandering then upon a Christian land,
 Stranger at home had been, nor known again
 His artless rites, his followers, in the domes
 Filled with the sparkling shrine, the rich-robed priests,
 And pomp of earthly greatness ........ But not long
 Lived there his name .... Science and art, farewell! 
The foe of light and love, Mohammed, comes,
 And Constantine's proud race exists no more. 
But, sons of Mahomet, the towers he built,
 Though by your anger spared, have fallen now,
 And crushed your bloody race! A mightier arm
 Than his who raised, or spared, yon domes came forth;
 From the hot sable rolling cloud it came,
 And crumbled them to dust! .... The wind, the air,
 Seem in strict silence bound, but smiling still
 Appears the face of day; assassin-like,
 Smiling, though conscious of intended death. 
But Nature trembles at her own repose;
 The brute creation dread forebodings shake;
 While man alone is bold ..... But see where now
 The labouring ocean, in fantastic shapes
 And sudden swells, her heaving bosom rears;
 Like the mad Pythia, when the Delphian god
 Spoke by her fraudful lips .... But here, alas! 
A real God that world of waters moves
 To do his dreadful bidding! .... 
Hark! he comes! 
The thunder's roar, the rush of winds proclaim
 The Mighty One is near .... But oh! when past
 His power, and those he spared raised up their heads,
 Where was the eye could bear upon the waste
 To gaze, and mark the ruin stretching wide! 
Oh! ye were blest, ye victims, ye who fell
 Deep in the yawning chasm! .... " Where are now,"
 The sad survivor cries, "my peaceful home,
 The sacred mosque I loved, the child, the wife
 I clasped but now; the city towering high,
 Proud in its strength? .... Disperse, thou gloomy cloud,
 And let me gaze on them!" The cloud's dispersed;
 But he beholds no city, he can trace
 No vestige of his home: a putrid lake
 Or barren ground replace them, and proclaim,
 Devouring earthquake, thy resistless power. 

ENGLAND! blest country, from such woes as these
 Thy temperate clime preserves thee; lightly felt,
 If ever, by thy comfort-breathing shores,
 The earthquake desolating distant lands:
 And .... thou hast cause to lift thy voice most high,
 In the great choir of nations hymning praise. 
But ye, who wander from your native shores,
 While haply such calamity draws near
 As sunk Byzantium; ye, whose eager hearts
 Anticipate a glad return to scenes
 Ye shall behold no more, for ever swept
 From off the earth, unconscious heirs of woe;
 For you I mourn! .... Methinks I see the cheek
 Flushed with delight, chastized perhaps by fear,
 When your own land approaches .... See the eye
 Misty with tears ope wide its eager lid
 To catch the well-known objects! Horrid change! 
Fear pales that glowing cheek, and dries that eye,
 "It is our native shore, .... but where are gone
 The fanes, the spires, erewhile our city's pride?" 
I hear you cry.  "The pilot is deceived,
 And hope deceived us too .... 'Tis not our land!" 
But soon the mournful certainty ye guess,
 And leap to shore; and there ye call in vain
 On all ye loved .... Throughout the silent streets
 That yet remain, perhaps some meagre form
 May trembling steal along, and tell the tale;
 While on the ruins some lone maniac sits,
 And, as he points to where the chasm yawned,
 Boasts of the treasures earth preserves for him;
 Or, while a sudden beam of reason darts,
 Screams his discordant anguish, and commands
 Earth to give back his children! .... 
Angel of woe, that from the eternal hand
 Receivest thy dread commission, going forth
 To flap thy sable pinions o'er the world,
 And shed unnumbered evils, which appear
 To piety's uplifted eye as good
 Concealed in evil's garb; .... angel of woe,
 Upon thy awful power I've pondered oft,
 In all its dark varieties, I've sought
 The horrid path where Madness stalks along
 In fancied majesty, or from his cell
 Sends the loud shriek, or more afflicting laugh;
 And, as I hurried from the o'erwhelming scene,
 Have shuddering owned thy awful presence there, .... 
I've seen thee by the death-bed sit, and bid
 The silent corse to speak again, and urge
 The eyes for ever closed to ope once more
 And beam as they were wont: .... and I have walked
 In slow procession to the opening grave,
 And seen thee triumph when the earth received
 The form beloved, and the deep bursting groan
 Bespoke affliction's forced composure o'er,
 And agony victorious! I have gazed
 Upon the guilty wretch, when, doomed to die,
 Terror has vanquished him, and his pale cheek
 Has proved the falsehood of his vaunting tongue,
 While, to his startled fancy, in the rear
 Of Death came judgement, and the world to come
 Unfolded all its horrors! There, O there,
 Thee I beheld, and fled from! .... and I've heard
 How on the sultry suffocating breath
 Of livid pestilence, thou, floating wide,
 Hast done thy master's bidding! Vain were then
 The ties of nature! from the parent's grasp
 The child has forced its once sustaining hand,
 And, horror-struck, has from contagion fled! 
While the fond parent, from his dying child
 Vainly his aid imploring, terror-winged,
 Has urged his selfish flight! And there thou wert .... 
But when the earthquake's varied horrors come,
 All, all thy ministers are waiting round,
 Fear, Madness, Pestilence, Pain, Famine, Death,
 And all the AGONIES COMBINED are there! 
