line

on hear, three or four year ago, that Constantinople be swallow up by a earthquake;

fall be thy tower, Byzantium! tower that stand
 before the Turk dread fury, when he come,
 the crescent sparkle amid christian blood,
 and to the reek den of Moloch turn
 sophia holy fane! where, where be now,
 imperial city, the late proud remains
 of thy brave founder greatness, when he clothe
 in worldly grandeur pure religion form;
 then place beside he, place upon a throne,
 the lowly nazarene meek simple child! .... 
he, wander then upon a christian land,
 stranger at home have be, nor know again
 his artless rite, his follower, in the dome
 fill with the sparkle shrine, the rich-robbed priest,
 and pomp of earthly greatness ........ but not long
 live there his name .... science and art, farewell! 
the foe of light and love, Mohammed, come,
 and Constantine proud race exist no more. 
but, son of Mahomet, the tower he build,
 though by your anger spare, have fall now,
 and crush your bloody race! a mighty arm
 than his who raise, or spare, yond dome come forth;
 from the hot sable roll cloud it come,
 and crumble they to dust! .... the wind, the air,
 seem in strict silence bind, but smile still
 appear the face of day; assassin-like,
 smile, though conscious of intend death. 
but nature tremble at her own repose;
 the brute creation dread forebode shake;
 while man alone be bold ..... but see where now
 the labour ocean, in fantastic shape
 and sudden swell, her heave bosom rear;
 like the mad pythia, when the delphian god
 speak by her fraudful lip .... but here, alas! 
a real god that world of water move
 to do his dreadful bid! .... 
hark! he come! 
the thunder roar, the rush of wind proclaim
 the mighty one be near .... but oh! when past
 his power, and those he spare raise up their head,
 where be the eye can bear upon the waste
 to gaze, and mark the ruin stretch wide! 
oh! you be bless, you victim, you who fall
 deep in the yawn chasm! .... " where be now,"
 the sad survivor cry, "my peaceful home,
 the sacred mosque i love, the child, the wife
 i clasp but now; the city tower high,
 proud in its strength? .... disperse, thou gloomy cloud,
 and let i gaze on they!" the cloud disperse;
 but he behold no city, he can trace
 no vestige of his home: a putrid lake
 or barren ground replace they, and proclaim,
 devour earthquake, thy resistless power. 

ENGLAND! bless country, from such woe as these
 thy temperate clime preserve thou; light feel,
 if ever, by thy comfort-breathing shore,
 the earthquake desolate distant land:
 and .... thou have cause to lift thy voice most high,
 in the great choir of nation hymn praise. 
but you, who wander from your native shore,
 while haply such calamity draw near
 as sink Byzantium; you, who eager heart
 anticipate a glad return to scene
 you shall behold no more, for ever sweep
 from off the earth, unconscious heir of woe;
 for you i mourn! .... methinks i see the cheek
 flush with delight, chastize perhaps by fear,
 when your own land approach .... see the eye
 misty with tear open wide its eager lid
 to catch the wellknown object! horrid change! 
fear pale that glow cheek, and dry that eye,
 "it be our native shore, .... but where be go
 the fane, the spire, erewhile our city pride?" 
i hear you cry.  "the pilot be deceive,
 and hope deceive we too .... it be not our land!" 
but soon the mournful certainty you guess,
 and leap to shore; and there you call in vain
 on all you love .... throughout the silent street
 that yet remain, perhaps some meager form
 may tremble steal along, and tell the tale;
 while on the ruin some lone maniac sit,
 and, as he point to where the chasm yawn,
 boast of the treasure earth preserve for he;
 or, while a sudden beam of reason dart,
 scream his discordant anguish, and command
 earth to give back his child! .... 
angel of woe, that from the eternal hand
 receive thy dread commission, go forth
 to flap thy sable pinion over the world,
 and shed unnumbered evil, which appear
 to piety uplift eye as good
 conceal in evil be garb; .... angel of woe,
 upon thy awful power i have ponder oft,
 in all its dark variety, i have seek
 the horrid path where madness stalk along
 in fancy majesty, or from his cell
 send the loud shriek, or more afflict laugh;
 and, as i hurry from the overwhelm scene,
 have shudder own thy awful presence there, .... 
i have see thou by the death-bed sit, and bid
 the silent corpse to speak again, and urge
 the eye for ever close to open once more
 and beam as they be wont: .... and i have walk
 in slow procession to the open grave,
 and see thou triumph when the earth receive
 the form belove, and the deep burst groan
 bespeak affliction force composure over,
 and agony victorious! i have gaze
 upon the guilty wretch, when, doom to die,
 terror have vanquish he, and his pale cheek
 have prove the falsehood of his vaunt tongue,
 while, to his startle fancy, in the rear
 of death come judgement, and the world to come
 unfold all its horror! there, o there,
 thou i behold, and flee from! .... and i have hear
 how on the sultry suffocate breath
 of livid pestilence, thou, float wide,
 have do thy master bid! vain be then
 the tie of nature! from the parent grasp
 the child have force its once sustain hand,
 and, horror-struck, have from contagion flee! 
while the fond parent, from his die child
 vain his aid implore, terror-winged,
 have urge his selfish flight! and there thou be .... 
but when the earthquake vary horror come,
 all, all thy minister be wait round,
 fear, madness, pestilence, pain, famine, death,
 and all the agony combine be there! 
