a lamentation.

where ancient break wall enclose round,
 from tread of lawless foot, the hallow ground,
 and somber yew their dewy branch wave,
 over many a grave stone and mound grave;
 where parish church, confuse to the sight,
 with deep darkness print the shade of night,
 in garb derange and loose, with scatter hair,
 his bosom open to the nightly air,
 lone, over a new-heaped grave poor Basil bend,
 and to himself begin his simple plaint. 
 "alas, how cold thy home, how low thou be,
 who be the pride and mistress of my heart! 
the fall leaf now rustle over thou pass,
 and over thou wave the dank and dewy grass,
 the new-laid sod and twist osier tell,
 how narrow be the space where thou must dwell. 
now rough and wintery wind may on thou beat,
 chill rain, and drift snow, and summer heat;
 each pass season rub, for woe be i! 
or gloom or sunshine be the same to thou. 
ah mary! lovely be thy slender form,
 and bright thy cheerful brow that know no storm. 
thy step be graceful on the village green,
 as though thou have some courtly lady be. 
at church or market still the gay lass,
 each youngster slack his speed to see thou pass. 
at early milk tuneful be thy lay,
 and sweet thy homeward song at close of day;
 but sweet far, and every youth desire,
 thy cheerful converse by the evening fire. 
alas! no more thou will foot the village sward,
 no song of thy shall ever more be hear,
 and they full soon will trip it on the green,
 as blythe and gay as thou have never be. 
around the evening fire with little care,
 will neighbour sit and scarce miss thou there;
 and when the sober part hour come round,
 will to their rest retire, and slumber sound. 
but Basil can rest; his day be sad,
 and long his night upon the weary bed. 
yet still in break dream thy form appear,
 and still my bosom prove a lover fear. 
i guide thy footstep through the tangle wood;
 i catch thou sink in the boisterous flood;
 i shield thy bosom from the threaten stroke;
 i clasp thou fall from the headlong rock;
 but ere we reach the dark and dreadful deep,
 high heave my trouble breast, i wake and weep. 
at every wail of the midnight wind,
 thy lowly dwelling come into my mind. 
when rain beat on my roof, wild storm abroad,
 i think upon thy bare and beat sod;
 i hate the comfort of a shelter home,
 and hie i forth, over pathless field to roam. 
" o mary! loss of thou have fix my doom,
 this world around i be a weary gloom,
 dull heavy muse lead my mind astray,
 i can sleep by night, nor work by day. 
or wealth or pleasure dull hind inspire,
 but cheerless be their toil who nought desire;
 let happy friend divide my farmer stock,
 cut down my grain, and shear my little flock;
 for now my only care on earth will be
 here every Sunday morn to visit thou,
 and in the holy church with heart sincere
 and humble mind our worthy curate hear;
 he best can tell, when earthly woe be past,
 the sure way to meet with thou at last. 
i will thus a while a weary life abide,
 till waste time have lay i by thy side;
 for now on earth there be no place for i,
 nor peace nor slumber till i rest with thou. " 

loud from the lofty spire, with pierce knell,
 solemn and awful, toll the parish bell,
 a late hour than rustic deem it meet
 that churchyard ground be tread by mortal foot. 
the wail lover start at the sound,
 and raise his head and cast his eye around. 
the gloomy pile in strengthen horror lower,
 large and majestic every object tower;
 do through the gloom, they show like form unknown,
 and tall and ghastly, rise each whiten stone;
 aloft the dismal screech-owl begin to sing,
 and past he skim the bat with flap wing. 
the fear of nature wake within his breast,
 he leave the hallow spot of Mary rest,
 and speed his way the churchyard wall to gain,
 then check his fear and stop and will remain. 
but shadow round a deep horror wear;
 a deep silence fall upon his ear;
 a awful stillness brood upon the scene,
 his flutter heart recoil, he turn again. 
with hasty step he measure back the ground,
 and leap with summon force the churchyard bind;
 then home, with shake limb and quicken breath,
 his footstep urge from the place of death. 
