a epistle to sir Richard Blackmore.

not that you need assistance in your war,
 or have receive dishonourable scar,
 by critic worry, as by beast of prey,
 man void of sense, and full as wild as they;
 who against wit infernal battery raise,
 and tear with envy what they ought to praise. 
yet though undaunted you maintain the fight,
 and force your foe within the shade of night,
 grovel far distant from the realm of light,
 suffer a humble unexperienced muse
 your sacred harp and tremble string to use
 (a muse be only by your self inspire,
 and only by the heat you give she, fire)
 who own what merit may to she belong,
 be always due to your immortal song. 

how bless, how happy be the infant day,
 when poet only sing their maker praise? 
when in unite note they do rehearse
 the mighty founder of the universe,
 who force out light from the abyss of shade,
 and this vast orb of slender nothing make;
 who surface, water with celestial dew,
 unto our sight most please object throw;
 of flower and herb a treasure do unfold,
 wondrous in shape, and beauteous to behold;
 who fertile womb do every thing produce,
 which may suffice for ornament or use? 
they see with wonder the amaze sea,
 how near the earth it keep its rapid sway,
 and yet eternal order do obey;
 how its vast wave in watery mountain rise,
 who foam pyramid do threat the sky;
 lash by the wind, how bulky billow roar,
 yet know their bound, and break upon the shore:
 they see the rack divide from afar
 with weighty cloud the thin space of air;
 thunder they hear, which through the Aether ring;
 they see God work, and what they see, they sing. 

the self-same god in ancient time do raise
 the heathen bard to celebrate his praise. 
though by eternal wisdom he be see
 only to they with a thick veil between;
 yet such their knowledge, that their harp they string,
 and a eternal deity they sing;
 they teach the nation its indulgent sway,
 and by example draw they to obey:
 they keep their passion in severe awe,
 and make lust stoop unto impartial law;
 when man grow vicious, and incline to hell,
 they do the lash of point satyr feel. 
both for their counsel and their justice fear,
 no vicious king or potentate they spare:
 to future time they do the truth declare,
 which be the lewd, and which the virtuous be. 

so much we now decline from virtue way,
 the poet work his labour into play;
 each bard be grow a mimic or buffoon,
 and what be satyr once, be now lampoon:
 they mean flatter for the bread they eat,
 and not by virtue, but by crime grow great. 

it be true, your genius be by fate design
 to show we virtue and exalt mind;
 and those bless path, alas! we seldom find. 
like Daedalus, a equal distance show,
 you neither soar too high, nor creep too low;
 it be natural all, and not attain by force,
 you guide with steady reins the unruly horse;
 while those who neither rule nor distance keep,
 like Icarus descend into the deep. 
to move their rubbish you your self demean,
 yet can this augean stable clean;
 the nest of viper-critick there you find,
 their snaky head erect, and hiss round;
 like the old serpent, never will they grow wise,
 nor quit their venom, but retain their vice. 

of all your foe, the Rhymer of most note
 be he who the new session late write,
 who, that his line may better pass for wit,
 have stamp with honour all the stuff he write. 
if we mistrust he, we be not to blame,
 who show his honour, but conceal his name;
 no suit of scandal can we undergo,
 his mighty honour be incognito. 
and can we see this wondrous son of wit,
 who late as scribe do to Apollo sit,
 i dare believe his title he will disown,
 nor call himself apollo hopeful son:
 in threadbare verse, perhaps in threadbare clothes,
 he do his honourable wit impose;
 who show of honour signify as much
 as citt confine within a booby-hutch. 
though he attempt the region of the sky,
 flutter over earth, nor can ascend on high;
 his pinion break, and his lute unstring,
 he sing a horrid and confound song. 

his mighty dr—n to the shade be go,
 and con—ve leave successor of his throne:
 though long before his final exit hence
 he be himself and abdicate prince,
 disrobe of all regality of state,
 draw by a hind and panther from his seat:
 heir to his play, his fable and his tale,
 Con— be the poetic prince of Wales;
 not at saint Germains, but at will his court,
 whither the subject of his dad resort;
 where plot be hatch, and council yet unknown,
 how young Ascanius may ascend the throne,
 that in despite of all the muse law
 he may revenge his injure father cause. 

go nauseous rhymer, into darkness go,
 and view your monarch in the shade below,
 who take not now from Helicon his drink,
 but sip from Styx a liquour black as ink;
 like Sisyphus a restless stone he turn,
 and in a pile of his own labour burn;
 who curl flame most ghastly fiend do raise,
 supply with fuel from his impious play;
 and when he fain will puff away the flame,
 one stop his mouth with bawdy Limberham:
 there, to augment the terror of the place,
 his hind and panther stare he in the face;
 they grin like devil at the curse toad,
 who make they draw on earth so vile a load. 
can some infernal painter draw the sight,
 and once transmit it to the realm of light,
 it may our poet from their sin affright:
 or can they hear how there the son of verse
 in dismal yell their torture do express;
 how scorch with ballad on the Stygian shore,
 they horror in a dismal chorus roar;
 or see how the lawreat do his grandeur bear,
 crown with a wreathe of flame sulphur there. 

though Con— may in time, when he have merit,
 the prophet throne in peaceful sway inherit,
 the poet all with one consent agree
 his mantle fall to G— by destiny,
 who do while live wear his livery;
 who never do a hero form in verse,
 but what he fashion still in dr—n's dress;
 like he be ill-natured, and abound in spleen,
 as if his natural issue he have be;
 like he be malicious, envious, and uncivil,
 the three good property of mr. devil,
 which dr—n hold unto the very last,
 improve in malice as his life do waste:
 his die epilogue with curse cram,
 have both the arthur, and their author damn. 
no one so fit as G— in all the nation
 the harangue the crowd in funeral oration:
 that nauseous crowd of mourner, void of brain,
 stand more in need of ty—ns bedlam pain. 

the former time produce prodigious man
 during the reign of Chaucer and of ben,
 who show a virtuous and exalt mind,
 which from that time have ever since decline. 
Cowley indeed endeavour to retrieve
 the fame of verse, and life to virtue give;
 but that vile age be in a league with hell,
 and he in the attempt successless fall. 
a court debauch, a theatre profane,
 be all the blessing of that virtuous reign:
 poet themselves by lewdness then do raise,
 by servile flattery, and by fulsome praise;
 he then write best, that make the lewd play. 

the poet now the self-same method take,
 his reason, virtue, and his god forsake,
 decline instruction of the good and wise,
 by vanity and vice attempt to rise;
 some packhorse for a Pegasus he stride,
 and stumble on preferment as he ride. 
no matter how unfurnished be his Scull,
 be he a sot, incorrigible dull:
 if some lewd courtier he can mean praise,
 he never fail of honour and the bay. 
thus St—ey rise to be a chit of state,
 and pr—r grow magnificent great;
 p—r, who be with m—ue ally,
 for by their hand the hind and panther die;
 they both in partnership the monster shoot,
 but m—ue the praise of conquest get. 

great m—ue, the wonder of the nation,
 only a poet be by imputation,
 and other work of supererogation. 
haughty and proud, he high do disdain
 to bless we with the labour of his brain. 
when ever we see a comet in the sky,
 we strait conclude some potentate will die;
 so when the stormy wind come puff on,
 disturb the water of smooth Helicon,
 this mountain poet do bring forth a mouse,
 large and big than a soldier louse. 
what need he write to make mankind abhor he,
 who have so many bard to scribble for he? 
not one dare boggle, or his patron lash,
 who have the hap to keep the muse cash,
 which bribe into his service all the rhymer,
 the sonneteer and little doggerel Chimers;
 yet always cull amid the multitude
 such as be very dull, or very lewd. 
he plant fresh laurel for each impious head,
 and build fine tomb and statue for the dead. 
but what vile bard will ever lament his fall,
 or write a poem on his funeral? 
he like a tyrant on the earth will drop,
 and no one deign to take the monster up. 

some fume of claret do from hogshead drown,
 such as Ned w—d, or libel Tom br—n;
 other be make of different sort of metal,
 be lewd as De—is, or as dull as sc—le;
 yet all in council do together sit
 how to dethrone the beamy god of wit;
 how to defame all virtuous man that write,
 they rally force, and their strength unite. 

this, sir your fate, curse critic you oppose,
 the most tyrannical and cruel foe:
 dr—n their huntsman dead, no more he wound,
 but now you must engage his pack of hound. 
so have i see a english mastiff pass
 along the street with a majestic grace;
 the little dog come bark from their cell,
 and whine and growl with a confound yell;
 the numerous crowd on the bold mastiff stare,
 and think each minute he the cur will tear,
 when he who with his jaw may have undo they,
 lift up his leg, and only piss upon they. 

you need not value what the critic say,
 keep on your course, and lead in virtue way:
 col—r already have undo the stage;
 but if you strive to mend this vicious age,
 you must with ty—n, sir, employ your pain,
 and try if you can cure their want of brain. 
