PAPLET:

or, love and innocence.

pastoral the i. 

a gentle Swain feed in kentish Mead,
 the gentle Swain that ever
 flock do feed. 
soft he beside the stream of
 Eden lie,
 and graze aby the bank of fair Medway. 
up with the morn, as lith as lark, he will rise;
 and Cubbin he, so say he shepherd boy. 

so as he sit, with lass or toy the youth;
 or soft he sooth, for soft can Cubbin sooth. 
there sweet open each flower the little lip,
 fresh honey-dew and evening air to sip. 
be, when his cade he will kiss, and pretty play:
 or bath in brook, then roll on tender lea. 

sooth! will too rhime go make as loose he lie,
 (though god-wot, to make rhime small wit have he.) 
and wont out-scrawl and print they on the sand,
 all as he lie along with Crook in hand. 
poor pen, you will say: — ay and poor poet too! 
but alack, must do what heaven will have we do. 

yet happy he, in time, find mean to mark
 his witless tattle on a maple bark. 
but ah, how shall he, poor boy, here find out,
 line near enough to deck his tree about. 
force be he swain o'rehear behind some balk,
 then on his tree go print the tender talk. 

late he aby a place of pleasure lie,
 all fair deck in sweet of fair may. 
where silky thigh in dew grasshoppers bathe;
 and merry cherrupe, so rosy breathe. 
you Surrey swain! and Surrey swain have bliss;
 i dare you show so soft a shade as this! 
atween the dewy leaf as air be blow,
 the dewy leaf yquiver every one. 

the why he come here be all for two maid,
 he think, be chat nigh, of love and lad. 
he come the one to warn, that youngling-breast
 the less do know of love, do love the less. 
pity she the soft Swain: to warn he strive,
 lest the young heart may hap to fall in love. 

Foreby he sit these maid in loose array,
 as fair and fresh as summer eve may see. 
sweet gay-green flower, so pretty put anear,
 the pink and pancet pretty put anear. 
Soflin and Paplet they; (ah dainty they!) 
that ripe as rose, this a soft-aged mey. 
both lith as youngling Roe, all-tend too
 as Ladybird that live on twinkle dew. 

Paplet, a christian and a jewes child,
 scarce five year old, be lay, to starve in field;
 for that the babe they can no long hide:
 but all by hap a anciant sire it spy;
 just starve; for the tender tooth be break,
 as twould crack Nutt: it smile when up he take
 oh sweet my father reach that bough of hip! 
what must i do, ah how i have scratch my lip! 
he tookt to his cave; and pull the thorn all out
 her pretty foot; they bleed with walk about. 
there bring she up with Florey fresh his son,
 who hunt wild beast, it be what they live epon. 
now sick if sire or son, she moan he meet,
 soft tend, with cheery chat, and soothe sweet

these gentle heart small thought be Cubbin lay;
 in sooth some halfendeal undecked they be. 
honey-lip gale soft breathe on their hair,
 wave their clothes, and do their bosom bare
 and well Iwis, as bare their bosom, all
 the floweret out that deck they do fall. 

a willow on the bank uphold their head,
 (oh happy tree, to hold such lovely maid!) 
a soothe shade the rosy sweetbreer give;
 where sing the bird that sing so soft at eve. 

believe i now, thus show they; by my say
 as lovely show, as Lilly on the lea! 
but sure that Paplet be the tender lass! 
well ween i Cubbin lay at little ease. 
so soft she seem! by heaven seem more
 than soft! 
her lip to touch he wish he, o how oft! 
now sooth Paplet be the tender mey! 
ah god! i small ween can so tender be! 
somedeal her pap be puff, that sooth may
 seem
 the little life now just of love gin dream? 

now say i, shepherd, who can help have
 strive,
 to save so sweet a heart from pain of love? 
love be a gentle pain, a pretty pain:
 he come to keep from love soltie Swain. 
Soflin be fair as morning drop be fair,
 and paplet tender as the evening air. 

when chat they, so sweet their chat be! 
oh i can hear, methinks, for ever hear! 
on fellow first, then tree, they pretty loll,
 quiver their little lip, their eye roll. 

sooth, ever and anon, as Soflin speak,
 paplet in ecstasy will hide she look. 
then asken more; yet shame to asken more,
 (of man and love) but long to know so sore. 
sometime she will fling her self epon the grass:
 then up, and catch in arm her fellow-lass. 
why may we man, yquoth the youngling mey,
 and why may we grasp they? we graspen they
 so please she be, and eager still to know,
 in sooth so please, she know not what to do. 

but ill i say how sweet the lass sit,
 oh that you will see they,, i will give any what! 
this sooth i say (for sooth the shepherd say)
 soft simper thus say the youngling mey. 
the meaning of the mey no whit i ween. 
i be sure, when near i come, just thus she fain. 

Paplet.

now much i marl: it be pretty; if tell truth! 
but say; ha, ha! be he so soft in sooth? 

Soflin.

my gentle mey, he be of gentle mood. 
oh that he be my brother! sure i will
 take his hand and tender lead he in,
 whenso he to the distant field have be. 
there pretty stroke his hand, ne have it say
 see Soflin there, o see! a fawn maid! 
in his soft bosom i my hand will slip,
 and hang epon the sweetness of his lip. 

Paplet.

do, Soflin, do! how can talk so? lip sweet;
 how mean sweet? how do know be sweet? 

Soflin.

all as a-green i walk with Collikin,
 the lovely lad that ever walk a-green. 
if be I be fray by flood, by boar or Bull,
 he sooth metaphor soft, and call i soft soul. 
be it not pretty? believe i, pap, he do! 
and hold i beneath his lily arm now sooth! 
and sweet the Swain my hand in his will nip,
 then kiss i with the kiss of his lip. 
so save i, sweet, as truth i tell, when say
 (why tare the flower so fierce, my pretty mey?) 
but hear i, Chick! i seem oft be fray,
 when i be not: but maid shall seem they say. 

Paplet.

and so; why but — and pretty be it then maid,
 be lip when fray art? i will be afraid! 

Soflin.

pretty? oh pretty, child, than may be think,
 you may hug man. if be you fearen nought:
 but sure, so sweet it be, so hug in arm! 
skuttle to dear, and have he hide from harm! 

Paplet.

no more, but then? yet kind be swain, you say;
 how kind? may kiss, will kiss kill they, maid? 
but soft! meseem — oh i will have hear for nought
 our simple chat, for we be simple chat! 

Soflin.

set still sweet! wind may wag: or leverit rush,
 with cock-up ear: do go! or bird from bush. 

Paplet.

that cubbinet i fear, for who the mey
 late join, and buy a pipeit; all i guess
 to busy he, and keep from kiss so. 
the Swain that whisper we in ear, you know,
 that he can sing, then snatch a quick kiss;
 sooth, as the mey suspect nought amiss. 
now the poor heart be so please with his pipe! 
fore great one he can hold, but lay'th to his lip. 

Soflin.

i know the Swain, a tender Swain be he! 
fear he not paplet, fear he not sweet mey. 
i know the Swain, who sooth so soft as he! 
believe i lass, he will never harm sweet mey. 

Paplet.

oh, but he often skulk a-hind a balk,
 to hear the harmless shepherdess in talk. 
then tell the chat to spark at the great-town,
 who maken mock at speech of simple clown. 
ne strange, i trow; for say i. sweet, be it fit
 our weetless tittletattle weren write? 
unkind cubbinet! untoward boy! 
else, by my say! he be a gentle boy. 

Soflin.

sooth be he, but to kiss he be so give! 
he will kiss till he be odd, and then kiss to come even. 
he will kiss at the hedge, and he will kiss at the gate;
 he will kiss if the chatter magpie but prate! 

Paplet.

but how must do if Swain shall ere kiss i? 
he will put my arm around he, do not say:
 oh! — if to put my hand a-hind he go:
 may strive pull away, and that will pull he close! 

Soflin.

be sure look tender, when to lip he go:
 but, sooth if say, thou can not help look so. 
that dainty dimple in thy little cheek,
 so soft thou show's, so modest, and so meek! 

Paplet.

worst be, if ever youngling cast to lay
 my hand in his bosom, it will so pretty be,
 not i know how, o i shall help the fault,
 but blush, poor son! how soflie must i not? 

so paplet, soft paplet, as she say,
 her sweet-dew lip on sofly bosom lay. 

Soflin.

no help, i ween; what will be, best let be. 
but bad in thou, my Chick, more bad in i. 

Paplet.

yet STRIPLIN cheek look pretty so, meweet;
 (all as the rose in bed of lilly set.) 
for florrey late to the great-town have be;
 but oh, when first metaphor see, how blush the Swain! 
cause why; the sweetlip boy then cast to kiss;
 yet say i soft, be that so much amiss? 

Soflin.

if be but why, small harm ybe i weet. 
Colly and i late rove, nut to get. 
i witless be so bonny and so brag,
 (paplet beware not be with love so wag)
 i scratchen chin; ah luckless lass the when! 
see here but, paplet! i all scratch my chin! 
the wound he wipe, and kiss it over and over;
 why sooth now, paplet, else it will be a sore. 

whatso i can to bar my blush, i do;
 yet ween not whether somedeal look not red. 
but it be allfor his eye so soft do seem:
 while Honeybreath epon my neck will steam. 
and oh, his ringlet-lock too, where they fall
 tittle my breast! and i be ashamed to tell. 

Paplet.

why ashamed? i will have stroke they off his face:
 and sooth now so, have feel how soft it be! 
oh pleasant! how you have live! do not though
 out bosom take his lock, when in do blow? 
do let i lie a-lea with you, now wilt? 
for oft you set so, lass, do you not. 

Soflin.

this morn sweet sit we beneath this sweet maybough;
 you kentish swain, no soft seat you know! 
the flower suck honey-dew (o dainty draught!) 
soft for the bee to sip that sip so soft. 
under my head a hand fair lay the boy;
 then sink down yclosen sleepy eye. 

Paplet.

ay? say in sooth? and then — why do not say? 
be it not lovely, when so loose he lie? 
meseem i shall have please with tender tongue
 or soothe, the while, with softness of a song. 

so as she say (and who so sweet can fain)
 her little leg will in her fellow twine. 
then dainty droppen hand in soflie breast:
 ah dainty hand! how Cubbin yearn to kiss! 

Soflin.

oh soft i lull he, soft as i can lull;
 and in my bosom put his head to loll! 
sweet glow the while, his pretty rosy cheek;
 smooth lay elong his limb, so slim and slieke. 
fair feed i on the fairness of his face;
 o paplet, do but ween how pleasant it be! 

Paplet.

i have hear it be dainty lie along with ene
 we love; say soflie, be it so dainty then? 

Soflin.

dainty? ay dainty more than heart may weet
 do look at i, pap, and i will tell thou what. 
i putten hand in his bosom now that be his,
 so silky soft! then gentle gavee a kiss! 

soft simper saiden this the lovely maid. 
while paplet between her twey her hand fair have;
 who oft will turn and shift, as ill at ease:
 Cubbin do too to see. ah careful case! 

Paplet.

stay, Soflin, list! hear i not some one sneeze
 it be among the sedge; fast by those murmur bee! 

Soflin.

poor Chick, how thou do quake! prithee leave quake. 
sooth it be some bird but chirp in th'bushie break

paplet.

much wonder give it i, my gentle dear! 
thou nought, ne any one, suspect here. 

Soflin.

why will have fear? i wonder why do warn!. 
when i have wrong, then i to fear will learn. 
sure Soflin none will harm; if Soflin none;
 and well i ween, i never any one. 
but look, ah i! how flower be blow out hair;
 and bosom too! — but LOVIE like it bare. 

Paplet.

then do lad like in sooth, or seem they? 
i have hear say, youngling Swain will harm young mey. 
yet florrey look so pretty and so pert,
 nought i know how, fancy he can not hurt. 
and Collikin, o i! but Collikin,
 of all the swain, for i — he be the Swain! 

Soflin.

o simple he be of cheer, and meek of mein;
 all-fine his flesh, and sooth as soft his skin! 
so pretty his word slip off his tongue,
 with a little waggish lisp among! 
but when he sooth too pleasant it be to bear! 
he kiss, i ask if a rosy be near! 

but see there! lallet cade! how that come there? 
sure by the lamb the lassie shall be near! 
oh! well beween! we bath in brook this eve
 you see where spray so sweet a shadow give. 
you be one; and lallet lass so heavenly hew;
 and Poppit maiden ripe as rose in June. 
this Florey love; and Fauney fresh love that;
 Cuddleit say some. up lass! mayhap they wait. 

they go: their bosom open to the evening air:
 and dip their bloom beauty fresh and fair:
 they pretty play and paddle in the wet:
 and strow with fair flower the streamulet

but paplet wistful be; on bank she set,
 sipe the honeysukle juicy sweet. 
but ah, her mind elsewhere! alas on love! 
oh Soflin, thou have wrong a tender dove! 

when part all; and all hie home; she make
 as if she too; but silent by moonshade,
 steal back to the bush; with hand in bosom lay,
 (those hand all fair as flower) and hang head. 
mayhap (soft say she) now he go to bed. 
i wonder how he lie when there he be lay! 
Besure he mind not metaphor when among the swain. 
o can i touch he but, just touch meseem! 

yet look she at moonshine on the stream;
 that twinkle fair, and strive not think on he. 
muse too on the vary figure make on grass,
 by the light, that between the wave tree do pass. 
where fancy she depainten this and that,
 (but all of love) atill to the bush do get. 

there blush when first it see to think that she
 shall so steal back to the place where Colly lie. 
and be i then? and be i grow, she say,
 (with that gin pretty finger put in eye). 
so sly and false? oh heaven! do see! or do,
 forgive! — small ween Soflin where i now. 

so say on the bank down she lay. 
just where the swainet lean, as Soflin say. 
then, smile, thus: mayhap his head be put
 where i be now: who know? o happy root! 

this gentle cubbinet do see and hear,
 wait aby, the pretty heart to cheer. 
he go to sooth her soft, and warn she how
 she think on Collikin. all will not do. 
soon as she see, she start from her seat:
 ne will she hear he pipe, ne talk awhit. 
so that he make as if go strait away;
 but go no farther then afore he lie. 

the dainty-limbed lass, as soft to see,
 as spring flowret in the month of may,
 smooth lay her slender feature down again,
 all on the sweetness of the flowery plain. 
ah gentle heart! ah heart of prettiness! 
where be the dalliance, and the tender kiss? 

then sigh out this the rosie-liped lass,
 soft as her eye on heaven yfixen be. 
what ail, o what ail thou, my heart;
 now sooth meseem's thou be not as thou be it. 
be Collikin (ah will he other be!) 
far fair than the fair lad or lass,
 yet what have i to do with Collikin? 
let i not be, ever be for soflie pain! 
though, methinks, be he not she, i can well
 wish he be i, oh i, how wish he well! 

thus sit the youngling mey, till far the night
 be spend, and sooth the moon nigh lose her light. 
then up gin rise; but here she begin up rise,
 tuck up her hair, and wipe her dewy eye. 
the softheart Swain (for swainet all be so)
 stay till he weep, and when he weep do go. 
unhappy Soflin! now there love be with thou,
 the sweet mey that ever sun do see. 

all he have see or hear, in head keep he,
 to cut on Crook, or mark upon his tree. 
for sure there be not who can envy that;
 not one, i ween, can envy lasse chat. 
but why so fond of lass chat, say you. 
oh, have you see they, you will have be so too! 

you gentle youth! who rove where lead by chance
 if be on paplet grief your eye shall glance,
 think the poor lass mishap enough have have;
 ah do you add, by hate what she say! 
ween, if you maken mock at it, you make
 at paplet mock; do so, for pappie sake! 
