the speech of Cupid, upon see he self paint by the honourable miss Carteret, (now countess of desert) on a fan.

write by mrs. Grierson.

in various form have i be show,
 though little yet to mortal know;
 in ancient temple paint blind,
 nor less imperfect in my mind:
 abroad i throw my random dart,
 and, spiteful, pierce ill-suited heart:
 the steady patriot, wise and brave,
 be to some giddy jilt a slave;
 the thoughtful sage oft wed a shrew;
 and vestal languish for a beau:
 the fiery youth unguided rage;
 the childish dotage of age;
 these, and ten thousand folly more,
 be place to injure Cupid score. 
as such, be love by realm adore,
 as such, his giddy aid implore:
 though oft the thoughtless nymph, and Swain,
 that sue i thus, have sue in vain. 

yet, long insult by mankind,
 who from false figure judge my mind;
 and on i all the fault have throw,
 they be themselves ashamed to own;
 i from this picture plain see,
 a mortal can be just to i;
 that awful sweetness can display,
 with which angelic mind i sway;
 with which i rule the good on earth,
 and give exalt passion birth:
 the form of love, so long unknown,
 at last by bright charissa show:
 her hand do every beauty trace,
 that can adorn a heavenly face;
 and of my grace more unfold,
 than ever paint, or verse, of old. 

now hear the god, who world revere,
 what he decree for she, declare. 

thou, lovely nymph! shall short prove
 those sweet, thou paint so well in love:
 thou soon that charm Swain shall see,
 who fate and i design for thou;
 his head adorn with every art;
 with every grace his glow heart,
 that throb with every fond desire,
 thy charm can raise, or love inspire. 
you from each other shall receive
 the high joy i know to give:
 (though to thy parent, long before,
 i think i empty all my store)
 while your exalt live shall show
 a sketch of heavenly bliss below;
 the bliss of every god-like mind,
 beneficent to human kind;
 and i to mortal shine confess,
 both in your paint, and in your breast. 
