elegy i 

ah stay! — thy wand oblivious over my eye
 yet wave, mild power of sleep! — my prayer be vain;
 she fly, the partial nurse of nature fly,
 with all her soothe visionary train. 

then let i forth; and near yond flower thorn
 taste heaven pure breath; while rob in amber vest,
 fresh from her watery couch, the youthful morn
 steal on the slumber of the drowsy east. 

lo, at her presence, the strong arm of toil,
 with glitter sickle, mow the prime of may;
 while yond poor hireling, for the i be rude soil,
 leave to their sleep babe their cot of clay. 

with sturdy step, they cheerly whistle over
 the path that fling across the reedy plain;
 to the deep cavern of that yawn moor,
 who shaggy breast abhor the golden grain. 

there, in her green dress, nature never rove,
 spread the gay lawn, nor lift the lordly pine,
 they see no melt cloud refresh the grove,
 no live landscape draw by hand divine. 

but many a fathom from the sunny breeze,
 their painful way in central night they wear;
 heave the pike axe on their bend knee,
 or sidelong the rough quarry slow tear. 

yet while damp vapour chill each reek brow,
 how loud laugh the jovial voice of mirth;
 please that the wage of the day allow
 a social blaze to cheer their evening hearth. 

there the chaste housewife, with maternal care,
 her thrifty distaff ply, in grave attire;
 bless to behold her ruddy offspring wear
 the full resemblance of their sturdy fire. 

to spread with such coarse fare their homely board
 as fit the genius of their little fate,
 free from those ill that haunt their pamper lord;
 to be unhappy we must first be great. 

in these dark cave, where heaven paternal hand,
 far from the world, their private cradle lay,
 they toil secure; the storm that strike the land
 with wild dismay roll harmless over their head. 

for who, the load of weary life to bear,
 will from these murky mansion chace the slave? 
who cease to breathe heaven pure and cheerful air,
 to be but live tenant of the grave? 

yet harrass as they be, their face still wear
 the reverend comeliness of green old age;
 no stain their mind from worldly science bear;
 their ray of knowledge gleam from nature page. 

the few plain rule her simple lesson give,
 they still through life with please attention ply;
 their helpless offspring bid they wish to live,
 their breathless parent bid they learn to die. 

and sure heaven who penetrate sight
 pierce the soul, and read its inmost groan,
 must see content, with more sincere delight,
 toil in the mine, than triumph on the throne;

see Charles, more please, within the convent gloom,
 seek the slave calm night, their temperate day,
 and peaceful passage to the private tomb,
 than diadem with glory crimson ray. 

even the proud sage, who deep mysterious brain
 have reason all the balm of hope away,
 convince that learning but ingenious pain,
 may hail their happy lot, and sigh say,

 "oh have i thus, within the dark profound,
" by daily labour earn my daily food;
 "or with yond seedman sow the quicken ground,
" or cleave with ponderous axe the groan wood. 

 "full many a hour that now, though speed with art,
" on slow and dusky pinion sullen fly,
 "full many a anxious wish, or pang of heart,
" that reason boast anodyne defy,

 "have never be bear. nor have the uneasy mind,
" pent in the prison of this mortal mould,
 "feel its etherial energy confine,
" its bright sunshine in dark cloud enrol,

 "but native sense her modest course have run;
" her saint lustre untaught virtue spread;
 "health crown my toil, and ever the day be do,
" sound sleep beneath some alder rustle shade. 

 "then, as i steal down life decline hill,
" here nature gift have furnish nature need,
 "the brook cold beverage every latent ill
" have starve, that cloister contemplation feed. 

 "till, in the peaceful shade of this lone bower,
" or near yond shatter tower in silence lay,
 "the orient orb, that watch my natal hour,
" have bright glitter over my moulder head. " 
