[Psyche] Canto ii.

Canto ii.

on happy you! who bless with present bliss
 see not with fatal prescience future tear,
 nor the dear moment of enjoyment miss
 through gloomy discontent, or sullen fear
 foreboding many a storm for come year;
 change be the lot of all. ourselves with scorn
 perhaps shall view what now so fair appear;
 and wonder whence the fancy charm be bear
 which now with vain despair from our fond grasp be tear! 

vain schemer, think not to prolong thy joy! 
but cherish while it last the heavenly boon;
 expand thy sail! thy little bark shall fly
 with the full tide of pleasure! though it soon
 may feel the influence of the changeful moon,
 it yet be thy! then let not doubt obscure
 with cloudy vapour veil thy brilliant noon,
 nor let suspicion taint breath impure
 poison the favour gale which speed thy course secure! 

oh, Psyche, happy in thy ignorance! 
can thou but shun this heart torment bane;
 be but content, nor dare advance
 to meet the bitter hour of threaten pain;
 pure spotless dove! seek thy safe nest again;
 let true affection shun the public eye,
 and quit the busy circle of the vain,
 for there the treacherous snare conceal lie;
 oh timely warn escape! to safe retirement fly! 

bright shine the morn! and now its golden ray
 dispel the slumber from her radiant eye,
 yet still in dream her fancy seem to play,
 for lo! she see with rapture and surprise
 full in her view the wellknown mansion rise,
 and each love scene of first endearment hail;
 the air that first receive her infant sigh
 with wonder ecstasy she now inhale,
 while every tremble nerve soft tenderness assail. 

see from the dear pavilion, where she lie,
 breathless, she fly with scarce assure foot,
 swift through the garden wing her eager way,
 her mourn parent ravish eye to greet
 with lovely apparition strange and sweet:
 their day of anguish all overpay they deem
 by: one bless hour of ecstasy so great:
 yet doubt they gaze, and anxious seem
 to ask their rapture soul, "oh, be this all a dream?" 

the wondrous tale attentive they hear,
 repeat oft in break word of joy,
 she in their arm embrace, while every ear
 hang on their psyche lip, and earnest
 on she be fix each wonder speak eye;
 till the sad hour arrive which bid they part,
 and twilight darken over the ruddy sky;
 divine urge they let their child depart,
 press with a fond embrace to each adore heart. 

trust that wed to a spouse divine
 secure be now their daughter happiness,
 they half content their child resign,
 check the complaint, the rise sigh suppress,
 and wipe the silent drop of bitterness. 
nor must she her departure more delay,
 but bid they now their weep Psyche bless;
 then back to the pavilion bend her way
 ere in the fade west quite sink expire day. 

but, while her parent listen with delight,
 her sister heart the fury agitate:
 they look with envy on a lot so bright,
 and all the honour of her splendid fate,
 scorn the meanness of their humble state;
 and how they best her ruin may devise
 with hide rancour much they meditate,
 yet still they bear themselves in artful guise,
 while amid the feign caress, conceal the venom lie. 

by malice urge, by ruthless envy sting,
 with secret haste to seize their prey they fly,
 around her neck as in despair they cling;
 her soft comply nature well they know,
 and trust by delay to undo;
 but when they find her resolute to go,
 their well lay stratagem they then pursue,
 and, while they bid their treacherous sorrow flow,
 thus fright her simple heart with image of woe. 

 "oh, hapless Psyche! thoughtless of thy doom! 
yet hear thy sister who have weep for thou,
 since first a victim to thy live tomb,
 obedient to the oracle decree,
 constrain we leave thou to thy destiny. 
since then no comfort can our woe abate;
 while thou be lull in false security
 we learn the secret horror of thy fate,
 and hear prophetic lip thy future ill relate. 

yet fear never to behold thou more,
 our filial care will fain the truth conceal;
 but from the sage cell this ring we bear,
 with power each latent magic to reveal:
 some hope from hence our anxious bosom feel
 that we from ruin may our Psyche save,
 since heaven propitious to our pious zeal,
 thou to our frequent prayer in pity give,
 that warn thou yet may shun thy sad untimely grave. 

oh! how shall we declare the fatal truth? 
how wound thy tender bosom with alarm? 
tell how the grace of thy bloom youth,
 thy more than mortal, all-adored charm
 have lie enamour in a sorcerer arm? 
oh, Psyche! seize on this decisive hour,
 escape the mischief of impend harm! 
return no more to that enchant bower,
 fly the magician art, and dread his cruel power

if, yet reluctant to forgo thy love,
 thy furtive joy and solitary state,
 our fond officious care thy doubt reprove,
 at least let some precaution guard thy fate,
 nor may our warn love be prize too late;
 this night thyself thou may convince thy eye,
 hide but a lamp, and cautious await
 till in deep slumber thy magician lie,
 this ring shall then disclose his foul deformity. 

that monster by the oracle foretell,
 who curse spell both god and man must fear,
 in his own image thou shall then behold,
 and shudder hate what now be prize so dear;
 yet fly not then, though loathsome he appear,
 but let this dagger to his breast strike deep;
 thy coward terror then thou must not hear,
 for if with life he rouse from that sleep
 nought then for thou remain, and we must hopeless weep. " 

oh! have you see, when in the northern sky
 the transient flame of lambent lightning play,
 in quick succession lucid streamer fly,
 now flash roseate, and now milky ray,
 while strike with awe the astonish rustic gaze? 
thus over her cheek the fleet signal move,
 now pale with fear, now glow with the blaze
 of much indignant, still confide love,
 now horror lurid hue with shame deep blush strive

on her cold, passive hand the ring they place,
 and hide the dagger in she fold vest;
 please the effect of their dire art to trace
 in the mute agony that swell her breast,
 already in her future ruin bless:
 conscious that now their poor delude prey
 shall never taste again delight or rest,
 but sicken in suspicion gloom decay,
 or urge by terror rash their treacherous will obey. 

while yet irresolute with sad surprise,
 mid doubt and love she stand in strange suspense,
 lo! glide from her sister wonder eye
 return zephyr gentle bear she thence;
 lose all her hope, her joy, her confidence,
 back to the earth her mournful eye she throw,
 as if implore pity and defence;
 while bathe in tear her golden tress fly,
 as in the breeze disperse they catch the precious dew. 

illumine bright now shine the splendid dome,
 melodious accent her arrival hail:
 but not the torches blaze can chase the gloom,
 and all the soothe power of music fail;
 tremble she seek her couch with horror pale,
 but first a lamp conceal in secret shade,
 while unknown terror all her soul assail. 
thus half their treacherous counsel be obey,
 for still her gentle soul abhor the murderous blade. 

and now, with soft whisper of delight,
 love welcome Psyche still more fond dear;
 not unobserved, though hide in deep night,
 the silent anguish of her secret fear. 
he think that tenderness excite the tear
 by the late image of her parent grief,
 and half offend seek in vain to cheer,
 yet, while he speak, her sorrow feel relief,
 too soon more keen to sting from this suspension brief! 

allow to settle on celestial eye
 soft sleep exult now exert his sway,
 from psyche anxious pillow glad fly
 to veil those orb, who pure and lambent ray
 the power of heaven submissive obey. 
tremble and breathless then she soft rise
 and seize the lamp, where it obscure lie,
 with hand too rash dare to disclose
 the sacred veil which hang mysterious over her woe. 

twice, as with agitate step she go,
 the lamp expire shine with doubtful gleam,
 as though it warn she from her rash intent:
 and twice she pause, and on its tremble beam
 gaze with suspend breath, while voice seem
 with murmur sound along the roof to sigh;
 as one just wake from a troublous dream,
 with palpitate heart and strain eye,
 still fix with fear remain, still think the danger nigh

oh, dare Muse! will thou indeed essay
 to paint the wonder which that lamp can show? 
and can thou hope in live word to say
 the dazzle glory of that heavenly view? 
ah! well i ween, that if with pencil true
 that splendid vision can be well express,
 the fearful awe imprudent Psyche know
 will seize with rapture every wonder breast,
 when love all potent charm divine stand confess. 

all imperceptible to human touch,
 his wing display celestial essence light,
 the clear effulgence of the blaze be such,
 the brilliant plumage shine so heavenly bright
 that mortal eye turn dazzle from the sight;
 a youth he seem in manhood fresh year;
 round his fair neck, as cling with delight,
 each golden curl resplendent appear,
 or shade his dark brow, which grace majestic wear. 

or over his guileless front the ringlet bright
 their ray of sunny lustre seem to throw,
 that front than polish ivory more white! 
his bloom cheek with deep blush glow
 than rose scatter over a bed of snow:
 while on his lip, distil in balmy dew,
 (those lip divine that even in silence know
 the heart to touch) persuasion to infuse
 still hang a rosy charm that never vain sue. 

the friendly curtain of indulgent sleep
 disclose not yet his eyes resistless sway,
 but from their silky veil there seem to peep
 some brilliant glance with a soften ray,
 which over his feature exquisite play,
 and all his polish limb suffuse with light. 
thus through some narrow space the azure day
 sudden its cheerful ray diffuse bright,
 wide dart its lucid beam, to gild the brow of night. 

his fatal arrow and celestial bow
 beside the couch be negligent throw,
 nor need the god his dazzle arm, to show
 his glorious birth, such beauty round he shine
 as sure can spring from beauty self alone;
 the gloom which glow over all of soft desire,
 can well proclaim he beauty cherish son;
 and beauty self will oft these charm admire,
 and steal his witch smile, his glance living fire. 

speechless with awe, in transport strange lose
 long Psyche stand with fix adore eye;
 her limb immoveable, her sense toss
 between amazement, fear, and ecstasy,
 she hang enamour over the deity. 
till from her tremble hand extinguish fall
 the fatal lamp — he start — and sudden
 tremendous thunder echo through the hall,
 while ruin hideous crash burst over the affright wall. 

dread horror seize on her sink heart,
 a mortal chillness shudder at her breast,
 her soul shrink faint from death icy dart,
 the groan scarce utter die but half express,
 and down she sink in deadly swoon oppress:
 but when at length, awake from her trance,
 the terror of her fate stand all confess,
 in vain she cast around her timid glance,
 the rude frown scene her former joy enhance. 

no trace of those joy, alas, remain! 
a desert solitude alone appear. 
no verdant shade relieve the sandy plain,
 the wide spread waste no gentle fountain cheer,
 one barren face the dreary prospect wear;
 nought through the vast horizon meet her eye
 to calm the dismal tumult of her fear,
 no trace of human habitation nigh,
 a sandy wild beneath, above a threaten sky. 

the mist of morn yet chill the gloomy air,
 and heavy obscure the cloud sky;
 in the mute anguish of a fix despair
 still on the ground immoveable she lie;
 at length, with lift hand and stream eye,
 her mournful prayer invoke offend love,
 oh, let i hear thy voice once more, "she cry,
 in death at least thy pity let i move,
 and death, if but forgive, a kind relief will prove. 

for what can life to thy lose Psyche give,
 what can it offer but a gloomy void? 
why thus abandon shall i wish to live? 
to mourn the pleasure which i once enjoy,
 the bliss my own rash folly have destroy;
 of all my soul most prize, or hold most dear,
 nought but the sad remembrance do abide,
 and late repentance of my impious fear;
 remorse and vain regret what live soul can bear! 

oh, be thou then indeed for ever go! 
and be thou heedless of thy psyche woe! 
from these fond arm for ever be thou fly,
 and unregarded must my sorrow flow! 
ah! why too happy do i ever know
 the rapturous charm thy tenderness inspire? 
ah! why do thy affection stoop so low? 
why kindle in a mortal breast such fire,
 or with celestial love inflame such rash desire? 

 "abandon thus for ever by thy love,
 no great punishment i now can bear,
 from fate no farther malice can i prove;
 not all the horror of this desert, drear,
 nor death itself can now excite a fear;
 the people earth a solitude as vast
 to this despair heart will now appear;
 here then, my transient joy for ever past,
 let thy expire bride thy pardon gain at last!" 

now prostrate on the bare unfriendly ground,
 she wait her doom in silent agony;
 when lo! the well know soft celestial sound
 she hear once more with breathless ecstasy,
 oh! yet too dear love! lose Psyche!  "why
 with cruel fate will thou unite thy power,
 and force i thus thy arm adore to fly? 
yet cheer thy droop soul, some happy hour
 thy banish step may lead back to thy lover bower. 

though angry Venus we no more can shun,
 appease that anger and i yet be thy! 
lo! where her temple glitter to the sun;
 with humble penitence approach her shrine,
 perhaps to pity she may yet incline;
 but shall her cruel wrath these hope deceive,
 and thou, alas! must never more be i,
 yet shall thy lover never his Psyche leave,
 but, if the fate allow, unseen thy woe relieve. 

 "strong than i, they now forbid my stay;
 Psyche belove, adieu!" scarce can she hear
 the last faint word, which gentle melt away;
 and now more faint the die sound appear,
 bear to a distance from her longing ear;
 yet still attentive she stand unmoved,
 to catch those accent which her soul can cheer,
 that soothe voice which have so sweet prove
 that still his tender heart offend Psyche love! 

and now the joyous sun have clear the sky,
 the mist dispel reveal the splendid fane;
 a palmy grove majestical high
 screen the fair building from the desert plain;
 of alabaster white and free from stain
 amid the tall tree the taper column rise;
 thither, with faint step, and weary pain,
 obedient to the voice at length she go,
 and at the threshold seek protection and repose. 

round the soft scene immortal rose bloom,
 while lucid myrtle in the breeze play;
 no savage beast do ever yet presume
 with foot impure within the grove to stray,
 and far from hence fly every bird of prey;
 thus, amid the sandy garamantian wild,
 when macedonia lord pursue his way,
 the sacred temple of great Ammon smile,
 and green encircle shade the long fatigue beguile:

with awe that fearful her doom await
 still at the portal Psyche timid lie,
 when lo! advance from the hallow gate
 tremble she view with reverential eye
 a age priest. a myrtle bough supply
 a wand, and rose bind his snowy brow:
 bear hence thy foot profane (he stern cry)
 thy long stay the goddess disallow,
 fly, nor her fierce wrath too dare arouse! " 

his pure white robe implore she hold,
 and, bathe in tear, embrace his sacred knee;
 her mournful charm relent he behold,
 and melt pity in his eye she see;
 "hope not (he cry) the goddess to appease,
 retire at awful distance from her shrine,
 but seek the refuge of those shelter tree,
 and now thy soul with humble awe incline
 to hear her sacred will, and mark the word divine." 

presumptuous Psyche! who aspire soul
 the god of love have dare to arrogate;
 rival of Venus! who supreme control
 be now assert by all rule fate,
 no suppliant tear her vengeance shall abate
 till thou have raise a altar to her power,
 where perfect happiness, in lonely state,
 have fix her temple in seclude bower,
 by foot impure of man untrodden to this hour! 

and on the altar must thou place a urn
 fill from immortal beauty sacred spring,
 which foul deformity to grace can turn,
 and hack to fond affection eye can bring
 the charm which fleet flee on transient wing;
 snatch from the rugged steep where first they rise,
 dark rock their crystal source overshadow,
 let their clear water sparkle to the sky
 where cloudless lustre beam which happiness supply! 

 "to Venus thus for ever reconcile,
 (this one atonement all her wrath disarm,)
 from thy love Cupid then no more exile
 there shall thou, free from sorrow and alarm,
 enjoy for ever his celestial charm. 
but never shall thou taste a pure repose;
 nor ever meet thy lover circle arm,
 till, all subdue that shall thy step oppose,
 thy peril there shall end, escape from all thy foe." 

with meek submissive woe she hear her doom,
 nor to the holy minister reply;
 but in the myrtle grove mysterious gloom
 she silent retire her grief to hide. 
hopeless to tread the waste without a guide,
 all unrefreshed and faint from toil she lie:
 when lo! her present want be all supply,
 send by the hand of love a turtle fly,
 and set delicious food before her wonder eye. 

cheer by the favour omen, soft tear
 relieve her bosom from its cruel weight:
 she blame the sad despondence of her fear,
 when still protect by a power so great,
 his tenderness her toil will mitigate. 
then with renew strength at length she go,
 hope to find some skill in secret fate,
 some learned sage who haply may disclose
 where lie that blissful bower the end of all her woe. 

and as she go, behold, with hover flight
 the dove precede still her doubtful way;
 its spotless plumage of the pure white,
 which shine resplendent in the blaze of day,
 can even in dark gloom a light display;
 of heavenly birth, when first to mortal give
 name innocence. but ah! too short its stay;
 by ravenous bird it fearful be drive
 back to reside with love, a denizen of heaven. 

now through the trackless wild, over many a mile. 
the messenger of Cupid lead the fair,
 and cheer with hope her solitary toil,
 till now a bright face the prospect wear,
 past be the sandy waste and desert bare,
 and many a verdant hill, and grassy dale,
 and trace, that mortal culture may declare,
 and many a wild wood dark, and joyous vale
 appear her soul to sooth, can soothe scene avail. 

but other fear her timid soul distress,
 mid stranger unprotected and alone,
 the desert wilderness alarm she less
 than city, thus unfriended and unknown;
 but where the path be all by moss overgrow,
 there still she choose her solitary way,
 wherever her faithful dove before have fly
 fearful of nought she may secure stray,
 for still his care supply the want of every day. 

and still she enter every sacred grove
 and homage pay to each divinity,
 but chief the altar of almighty love
 weep embrace with fond implore eye;
 to every oracle her hope apply,
 instruction for her dangerous path to gain:
 exclaim oft, with a despond sigh,
 "ah! how through all such danger, toil and pain,
 shall psyche helpless step their object ever attain!" 

and now remote from every people town
 one sultry day a cool bower she find:
 there, as i whilom sing, she lay she down,
 where rich profusion of gay flower around
 have deck with artless show the slope ground;
 there the wild rose and modest violet grow,
 there all thy charm, Narcissus! still abound:
 there wrap in verdure fragrant lily blow,
 lily that love the vale, and hide their bell of snow. 

thy flower, Adonis! bright vermilion show;
 still for his love the yellow Crocus pine;
 there, while indignant blush seem to glow,
 belove by Phoebus his Acanthus shine;
 reseda still her droop head recline
 with faithful homage to his golden ray,
 and, though mid cloud their lustre he resign,
 a image of the constant heart display,
 while silent still she turn her fond pursue gaze. 

and every sweet that spring with fairy hand
 scatter in thy green path, enchant may! 
and every flower shrub there cluster stand
 as though they woo she to a short delay,
 yield a charm to sooth her weary way;
 soft be the tuft moss, and sweet the breeze,
 with lull sound the murmur water play,
 with lull sound from all the rustle tree
 the fragrant gale invite to cool refresh ease. 

there as she seek repose, her sorrow heart
 recall her absent love with bitter sigh;
 regret have deep fix the poison dart,
 which ever rankle in her bosom lie;
 in vain she seek to close her weary eye,
 those eye still swim incessant in tear,
 hope in her cheerless bosom fade die,
 distract by a thousand cruel fear,
 while banish from his love for ever she appear. 

oh! thou best comforter of that sad heart
 who fortune spite assail; come, gentle sleep,
 the weary mourner sooth! for well the be
 thou know in soft forgetfulness to steep
 the eye which sorrow teach to watch and weep;
 let blissful vision now her spirit cheer,
 or lull her care to peace in slumber deep,
 till from fatigue refresh and anxious fear
 hope like the morning star once more shall reappear. 
