may not the love of praise be a incentive to virtue?

 "all praise be foreign, but of true desert,
 play round the head, but come not near the heart;" 
yet may a maid for love of praise contend,
 though pleasure votary, not less virtue friend. 
may not she strive around her sacred shrine
 the wreath of pleasure gay to entwine? 
to strew the path with many a fragrant flower,
 and sweet decorate the playful hour? 
to tempt even time to loiter on his way,
 and feel a wish to lengthen out the day? 
can we not worth and pleasure reconcile,
 why wear the sun that universal smile? 
fountain of life! to he all power be give
 to gild and ornament the work of heaven;
 its various gem to tinge with vary dye,
 and with new beauty strike the admire eye,
 while deep shadow gentle fall behind
 to heighten object that draw near the mind. 
those let we grasp, nor send the inquire eye
 to draw the curtain of a future sky;
 nor see the cloud that some sad hour may shed
 in flood of sorrow over the droop head;
 the present hour be all that man can boast,
 and happy they who love the stranger most. 

in future prospect let fond heart rejoice,
 hear then the present hour small whisper voice. 
low be the note, and silvered be the sound,
 when soft persuasion wind the ear around;
 hark! how she sing: — trust not the come day;
 the flower of autumn meet not those of may;
 the present hour in present mirth employ,
 and bribe the future with the hope of joy! 

hope still can please midst scene of deep distress,
 can change the mourning to a fancy dress,
 can tread through brake, through thicket, and through thorn,
 without a mantle, or a garment tear. 
what though the palace in our distant view
 the err guide may never conduct we to;
 the potent spell shall shed its mist around
 and mimic view swim over the fairy ground;
 steal from thought the disappointment past,
 by prospect open fair than the last;
 o kind deceiver! do thou still deceive,
 and teach this heart most firm to believe! 

the ill of life spring up wherever we tread,
 wherever we walk the Gorgon rear her head;
 with spell surround shall the traveller go,
 and wear a charm for every sting of woe;
 hope, love, and friendship furnish not a few,
 guard by these what heartache dare pursue! 
friendship, with cordial in her hand and eye,
 the want of health, the want of ease supply;
 the want of all thing firm may be bear,
 if from the foot she draw the rankle thorn;
 if she supply the balm the wound shall close,
 and weary eyelid sink in calm repose. 
sacred to she the ill of life bow down,
 kneel at her shrine and her mild empire own;
 then to the heart in different form be send,
 first seem submission, and next grow content,
 advice, reproof, with gentle pity join;
 all tend to strengthen and restore the mind:
 the mind restore can see the change of thing,
 in equal fetter bind the throne of king;
 all nature find submit to one law, —
 a certain portion of predestine woe. 

but to give ease to man distract frame,
 the heal goddess watchful friendship come;
 to feel the sudden downcast of a eye,
 and long before anticipate a sigh;
 to see what will the present calm destroy,
 when fond remembrance paint some long lose joy. 
the long lose joy, if never to return,
 ask the sad heart to cling around its urn;
 but listen friendship hear the low request,
 and silent guard the inroad of the breast;
 by slow degree draw back the present scene,
 till gay thought come glide in between,
 till hope again her flatter tint let fall,
 that lend some comfort, and that promise all. 

such be the cordial that kind heaven bestow
 when the dire cup with every ill overflow,
 one drop of hope cling to the poison side,
 or man have bow his languid head, and die. 
if then we have leave we by divine command
 those cordial drop to stay the tremble hand,
 shall we against heaven essay a impious skill,
 if by some other mean we cure the ill? 
if love of praise shall tempt we to endure
 with patient calm those ill we can cure; —
 shall prove the stimulus, and lead the way
 to noble action, — shall the censor say
 no merit follow — though great good ensue? 
if you be serve, sure it be good to you! 
and action guard by the sense of shame,
 will struggle hard to bear a honest name. 
for i, i own, that hope of praise can charm
 this little heart, and all its feeling warm;
 can bid i throw the selfish wish aside,
 and for a weak frame than mine provide:
 not but compassion may, to i unknown,
 give praise that merit which be all her own. 
if custom be to man the foster nurse,
 strengthen good habit, and make bad man worse,
 may i not hope, whatever be the cause,
 custom may teach i to deserve applause! 
graft on stock inferior to the fruit,
 the apple taste we forget the root. 

the love of praise this privilege may claim,
 and rank as equal with the fear of shame. 
both have their use; — the one be to impel,
 the other to restrain, or check, or quell,
 the rise passion as they grow too loud,
 to raise the humble, and depress the proud. 
if then to good or ill our passion tend,
 why not conduct they to their proper end? 
virtue, too plain to strike voluptuous sight,
 bare can touch the heart with true delight,
 till dress in garb more flatter to the sense,
 the eye grow please and sanctify expense:
 not but her native loveliness will do,
 be man but perfect, and his judgement true;
 but as it be, even she herself must bend,
 and ask assistance from a humble friend. 
if man, proud man! although the lord of all,
 now on his fellow, now his creature call, —
 assistance want, however high his sphere,
 it be to prove nought independent here. 
so virtue find, when she forsake the sky,
 passion must oft her better aid supply;
 and love of praise the foremost passion come,
 and claim, and win, the loud trump of fame;
 if not for this our virtuous deed may tire, —
 praise fan the flame of the celestial fire;
 and watchful keep it glow in the breast,
 at once to melt and purify the rest. 

if over the mind meek diffidence have spread
 her everlasting glow of blush red,
 the conscious tinge steal over the crimson cheek,
 and leave a blush for every wish to speak;
 the mind thus check grow dubious of its power,
 and careless waste the all-important hour:
 if cold despair the rise genius quell,
 and chain the trembler in her icy cell,
 the wish to please will soon forsake the heart,
 and one by one the talent all depart;
 have this bless wish stand foremost of the throng,
 the heart enrapture have not tarry long;
 o! have sweet praise but meet they on their way,
 her smile have soothe the labour of the day, —
 each thorny path reveal the blush rose,
 and prove midst tangle brake the destine floweret blow. 

pride be a phantom self-conceit have rear,
 by reason hate, and by fancy fear;
 a flatter painter, that with nice art
 hide each defect of judgement and of heart;
 see little virtue swell before his eye,
 as man through glass see the small fly! 

yet the two evil, diffidence and pride,
 as foe to virtue, near be ally;
 i mean, when each extreme affect our end,
 and to one purpose both the feeling tend. 
what matter it, if virtue droop her head,
 from what contagion the dire sickness spread;
 whether from pride the malady first spring,
 or round humility the languor cling! 
for i, may fate, propitious to my prayer,
 still give a friend to see thing as they be,
 to chide my error, and my worth approve,
 with all the encouragement of partial love;
 so shall this wish rise warm in my breast,
 to bless another as myself be bless, —
 to please — to serve — to animate, and cheer,
 and prove that praise can turn reformer here! 
