a fit of the spleen.

in imitation of shakesphear.

by dr. ibbot.

farewel, vain world! and thou its vain part,
o lovely woman! frame for man destruction!
beauty, like nightshade to the teem wife,
if see, give wish restless, endless long;
if taste, death. too hard decree of fate,
that life must be a burden, or must end!

farewell, vain world! dwelling of ill and fear,
full of fond hope, false joy, and sad repentance;
for though sometime warm fancy light a fire,
that mount upward dart its point head
up, through the unopposing air, to heaven,
yet then come thought, and cold consideration,
lame afterthought with endless scruple fraught,
benumb with fear, to damp the goodly blaze.

farewell, vain world! — yet, ere i die, i will find
contentment seat, unknown to guilt or sorrow;
haste then, for nimble death pursue i close,
methinks i hear his step, though tread in air;
my flutter soul seem like a bird entrap,
that beat his wing against the prison wall,
and fain will be at liberty again;
and oft the death-watch with ill-boding beat
have warn i that my time will soon expire,
and that life thread, never to be wind up more,
will by the spring of fate be quick draw
to its full stretch — haste then, and let i find
a shelter, that may shut out noise and light,
save one dim taper, who neglect snuff,
grow high than the flame, shall with its bulk
almost extinguish it; no noise be there,
but that of water, ever friend to thought.

hail, gloomy shade! the abode of modesty
void of deceit; no glitter object here
dazzle the eye; and thou, delightful silence,
silence, the great divinity discourse!
the angel language, and the hermits pride,
the help of wake wisdom, and its food;
in thou philosopher have just place
the sovereign good; free from the break vow,
the calumny, reproach, and the lie
of which the noisy babble world complain.

so the strike deer, with some deep wound oppress,
lie down to die, the arrow in his breast;
there hide in shade, and waste day by day,
inly he bleed, and pant his life away.
