the critic and the writer of fable

weary, at last, of the pindaric way,
 through which advent'rous the muse will stray;
 to fable i descend with soft delight,
 please to translate, or easy endite:
 while aery fiction hasty repair
 to fill my page, and rid my thought of care,
 as they to bird and beast new gift impart,
 and teach, as poet shall, while they divert. 

but here, the critic bid i check this vein. 
fable, he cry, though grow the affect strain,
 but die, as it be bear, without regard or pain. 
while of his aim the lazy trifler fail,
 who seek to purchase fame by childish tale. 

then, let my verse, once more, attempt the sky,
 the easy persuade poet cry,
 since mean work you man of taste despise. 
the wall of Troy shall be our lofty stage,
 our mighty theme the fierce Achilles rage. 
the strength of Hector, and Ulysses art
 shall boast such language, to adorn their part,
 as neither Hobbes, nor Chapman can bestow
 or do from Congreve, or from dryden flow. 
amid her tower, the dedicate horse
 shall be receive, big with destructive force;
 till man shall say, when flame have bring she down. 
 "Troy be no more, and Ilium be a town. 

be this the way to please the man of taste,
 the interrupter cry, this old bombast? 
i be sick of Troy, and in as great a fright,
 when some dull pedant will her war recite,
 as be soft Paris, when compel to fight. 

to shade and spring shall we awhile repair,
 the muse demand, and in that mild air
 describe some gentle swain unhappy smart
 who fold arm still press upon his heart,
 and deep drive the too far enter dart? 
while Phillis with a careless pleasure reign
 the joy, the grief, the envy of the plain;
 heighten the beauty of the verdant wood,
 and soften all the murmur of the flood. 

oh! stun i not with these insipid dream,
 the eternal hush, the lullaby of stream. 
which still, he cry, their even measure keep,
 till both the writer, and the reader sleep. 
but urge thy pen, if thou will move our thought,
 to show we private, or the public fault. 
display the time, high-church or low provoke;
 we will praise the weapon, as we like the stroke,
 and warm sympathize with the spite
 apply to thousand, what of one you write. 

then, must that single stream the town supply,
 the harmless fable-writer do his reply,
 and all the rest of Helicon be dry? 
and when so many choice production swarm,
 must only satire keep your fancy warm? 
while even there, you praise with such reserve,
 as if you will in the midst of plenty starve,
 though never so liberal we author carve. 

happy the man, who we divert with ease,
 who opera and panegyric please. 
