chiron to Achilles,

a poem. 

by Hildebrand Jacob, esq.  

old chiron to his pupil thus begin,
when he behold he ripen into man.
"accomplish youth! well worthy of my pain,
"you now be free, and guide yourself the reins:
"yet hear, Achilles, hear, before we part,
"a few short precept from a faithful heart.

"what though the god a nestor age deny!
"let management a long life supply,
"and learn, at least, to live, before you die.
"a little tract, well till, more profit yield
"than realm of wild, uncultivated field.
"it be not from length of year our pleasure flow,
"nor to the god alone our bliss we owe.
"our happiness, and pain depend on we:
"man he own good, or evil genius.
"great ill by art we lighten, or remove,
"and art our mean pleasure may improve:
"much to ourselves be due, though much to Jove.

"think not, young prince, your elevate state,
"birth, honour, or the empty name of great,
"can fix your joy; they be ill secure, unless
"you know yourself to form your happiness,
"which in the shepherd humble hut be find,
"while palace with discord still resound.
"fortune to industry be ever kind,
"and, though by the blind vulgar paint blind,
"be still more equal than the crowd suppose,
"who judge of happiness by outward show;
"she smile on all condition, each may be
"a man of pleasure in his own degree.

"yet few with art their happiness pursue,
"though all mankind have happiness in view,
"and every sense seem make by nature skill
"for give pleasure and avoid ill.
"nature our common mother have be kind,
"and for a race of joy her son design,
"who long to reach the goal, yet lazy, lag behind,
"or whole blind, or doubtful how to advance,
"they leave the work of industry to chance.
"and of those few who with more active strife
"pursue this great, important end of life,
"some, too impatient, know not how to wait;
"or aim at thing beyond their human state:
"these last through too much delicacy fall,
"and by refine rob themselves of all.

"shun then, Achilles, shun the fault of such,
"who still propose too little, or too much.
"stretch not your hope too far, nor yet despair,
"but above all, of indolence beware.
"attend to what you do, or life will seem
"but a mere vision, or fantastic dream,
"pass in idea of delight, at best:
"while real pleasure lose in doubtful rest.
"in short, learn when, and how to bear; in vain
"he pleasure seek, who be afraid of pain;
"pleasure a serious thing, and cheap buy
"by labour, patience, management, and think.

"but you, aspire youth, by nature seem
"addict to a opposite extreme;
"impetuous, and restless, soon inflame,
"and, like a generous courser, hardly tame;
"in all thing violent: but, o! disdain,
"brave prince, to let usurp passion reign,
"in one rash moment sacrifice more
"than year of sad repentance may restore.

"as thracian wind the euxine sea molest,
"so wrath, and envy, from a human breast
"drive halcyon peace, and banish kindly rest.
"and no security for joy be find,
"but in a mind that be tractable and sound.

"suppress the first emotion of your ire,
"and smother in its birth the kindle fire.
"ere anger yet possess all your soul,
"ere yet your bosom heave, and eyeball roll,
"think on the useful precept, i have teach,
"and meet the rise heat with wholesome thought.

"or seek the sacred muse with your lyre,
"who with sweet peace to lonely shade retire;
"god, and the son of god, the hero, sing,
"while hill and valley with their praise ring;
"these learn to imitate, and those adore,
"and sweet to yourself, yourself restore;
"music, and verse, and solitude control
"impetuous fury, and compose the soul.

"for this, i early teach you how to sing,
"and form your finger to the tremble string;
"for it be not all sweet pleasure path to show:
"the art of consolation man shall know:
"our joy be short, and break; and in vain
"to constant bliss will human race attain:
"be oft content to be free from pain.

"there be a deity ordain by fate,
"to damp our joy immoderate great,
"that none on earth from sorrow shall be free,
"but even our blessing taste of misery.
"if fortune give, what rare we obtain,
"a equal share of pleasure, and of pain,
"our portion be overpay, the rest you will find
"but fond idea of the wanton mind;
"which now vain scene of godlike pleasure show,
"and now create imaginary woe.

"when sad, your ill examine and compare,
"judge of your own by what another be.
"consider great wretch, and the fate
"of mighty hero, and of mighty state:
"thus real evil in their proper light
"appear, the false thus vanish out of sight.

"nor aim at pleasure difficult to gain,
"choose rather what you may with ease obtain.
"who scorn to trifle, be by pride abuse:
"i pity he who never can be amuse;
"but slight pleasure moderate and small,
"must live in rapture, or not live at all,
"great pleasure still be near ally to pain:
"who quit the peaceful shore, and plough the main,
"big wave and mighty tempest must sustain.

"let not such fond ambition to be bless,
"the humble pleasure in your power molest;
"yet cherish hope; for without hope there be none:
"taste hope; but be not feed with that alone.

"some their whole life in expectation spend,
"as life be not begin, or never will end;
"fond from day to day themselves deceive,
"not living, but intend still to live;
"while they neglect the joy they may possess,
"for empty dream of future happiness.

"let nature in your pleasure be your guide,
"nor suffer art her genuine charm to hide:
"her beauty with unwearied eye we see;
"the truth of beauty be simplicity.

"live not by imitation, servile state!
"nor on the fashion for your pleasure wait.
"man, otherwise so selfish, or so proud,
"submit his taste to the fantastic crowd,
"and live not for himself; do you pursue
"your own desire, and to yourself be true.

"as bee extract their sweet from every flower,
"so you your joy from all thing in your power,
"with industry and management produce;
"the mean trifle be sometime of use.

"yet know well what you do, and when it be do,
"nor at all hour to every pleasure run;
"but mix with art your pleasure, and your toil;
"for pleasure have their season, and their soil.

"thus when the early dawn of eastern light
"proclaim the finish empire of the night,
"haste to the field, Achilles, nor disdain
"to chace the foam monster over the plain,
"or teach the untamed steed to feel the rein;
"or let your car and arm your nerve prepare,
"or for olympick game or future war:
"then, whether art or glory fire your mind,
"will thought more generous rise, or more refine;
"Aurora to the muse still be kind.

"at noon, a simple short repast be make;
"a short slumber in the cool shade;
"what be gay and light the unbend mind employ,
"or sport, or past delight, or future joy.

"but when the evening-star begin to rise,
"when phoebus faint steed forsake the sky,
"still cheerful at the well-spread board be find,
"amid bright friend, and with fresh garland crown,
"while wine, and Thais with her voice and lyre,
"banish old sorrow, and new joy inspire.

"thus when from toil of empire you be free,
"nor camp, nor council claim your liberty,
"the morn to labour and the muse give;
"at noon with temperance and quiet live;
"ceres and bacchus gift at evening prove;
"divide the night with Somnus and with love.

"thus, thus, Pelides, drive your care away,
"nor fear the evil, till the evil day.
"what though on simois' or scamander shore,
"far off from home the greek your death deplore?
"no matter where, or when; it once must be,
"and nothing can revoke the firm decree.
"though thetis' son, though third from mighty Jove,
"eternal monarch of the realm above,
"nor Jove, nor Thetis, can your day recall,
"or for a hour defer you destine fall.

"mean while a loose rein to pleasure give:
"time fly in haste, be you in haste to live:
"seize on the precious minute, as they fleet;
"your life, however short, will be complete,
"if at the fatal moment you can say,
"I have live, and make the most of every day!

"one precept more i fain will recommend,
"and then old chiron tedious lesson end.

"learn, generous prince, what be little understand,
"the godlike happiness of do good.
"how glorious to defend, and to bestow!
"from noble spring can human pleasure flow?
"a solid good which nothing can destroy,
"the best prerogative the great enjoy.
"for this, remember, monarch first be make,
"for this, young prince, be love, and be obey,
"at once your self, and mighty nation bless,
"and make humanity your happiness.

"but now Aurora usher in the day,
"and fond, expect Peleus chide your stay.
"go then, brave youth, wherever the fate may call;
"live with design, and fearless wait thy fall,
"whatever space of life the god decree,
"thy name be still immortal; for i see
"more than another Peleus rise in thou.
"thy fame the prince of sacred bard shall fire,
"thy deed the conquest of the world inspire.
