on the Dutchess of mazarin retire into a convent.

by the same.

you holy care that haunt these lonely cell,
 these scene where salutary sadness dwell;
 you sigh that minute the slow waste day,
 you pale regret that wear my life away;
 o bid these passion for the world depart,
 these wild desire, and vanity of heart! 
hide every trace of vice, of folly past,
 and yield to heaven the victory at last. 

to that the poor remains of life be due,
 it be heaven that call, and i the call pursue. 
lord of my life, my future care be thy,
 my love, my duty greet thy holy shrine:
 no more my heart to vain hope i give,
 but live for thou, who bounty bid i live. 

the power that give these little charm their grace,
 his favour bound, and confine their space;
 spite of those charm shall time, with rude essay,
 tear from the cheek the transient rose away;
 but the free mind, ten thousand age past,
 its maker form, shall with its maker last. 

uncertain object still our hope employ;
 uncertain all that bear the name of joy! 
of all that feel the injury of fate
 uncertain be the search, and short the date:
 yet even that boon-what thousand wish to gain? 
that boon of death, the sad resource of pain! 

once on my path all fortune glory fall,
 her vain magnificence, and courtly swell:
 love touch my soul at least with soft desire,
 and vanity there feed her meteor fire. 
this truth at last the mighty scene let fall,
 a hour of innocence be worth they all. 

lord of my life! o let thy sacred ray
 shine over my heart, and break its cloud away! 
delude, flatter, faithless world adieu! 
long have thou teach i god be only true. 
that god alone i trust, alone adore,
 no more delude, and mislead no more. 

come, sacred hour, when waver doubt shall cease! 
come, holy scene of long repose and peace! 
yet shall my heart, to other interest true,
 a moment balance betwixt the world and you? 
of pensive night, of long-reflecting day,
 be you, at last, the triumph and the praise! 

great, gracious master! who unbounded sway,
 feel through ten thousand world, those world obey,
 will thou for once thy awful glory shade,
 and deign to espouse the creature thou have make? 
all other tie indignant i disclaim,
 dishonour those, and infamous to name! 

o fatal tie, for which such tear i have shed,
 for which the pleasure of the world lie dead! 
that world be soft pleasure you alone disarm;
 that world without you still may have its charm. 
but now those scene of tempt hope i close,
 and seek the peaceful study of repose;
 look on the past as time that steal away,
 and beg the blessing of a happy day. 

you gay saloon, you golden-vested hall,
 scene of high treat, and heart-bewitching ball! 
dress, figure, splendour, charm of play, farewell,
 and all the toilet science to excel! 
even love, that ambush in this beauteous hair,
 no more shall lie, like indian archer, there. 
go, err love! for noble object give! 
go, beauteous hair, a sacrifice to heaven! 

soon shall the veil these glow feature hide,
 at once the period of their power and pride! 
the hapless lover shall no more complain
 of vow unheard, or unrewarded pain;
 while calm sleep in each untortured breast
 my secret sorrow, and his sigh profess. 

go, fiatter train! and, slave to i no more,
 with the same sigh some happy fair adore! 
your alter faith i blame not, nor bewail —
 and haply yet (what woman be not frail?) 
yet, haply, may i calm minute prove,
 if he that love i know no other love! 

yet be that ardor, which his breast inspire,
 by charm of more than mortal beauty fire,
 what noble pride! can i to heaven resign
 the zeal, the service that i boast mine! 
o change your false desire, you flatter train! 
and love i pious, who you love profane! 

these long adieu with lover doom to go,
 or prove their merit, or my weakness show;
 but heaven, to such soft frailty less severe,
 may spare the tribute of a female tear,
 may yield one tender moment to deplore
 those gentle heart that i must hold no more. 
