hymn i 

Jehovah reign, let every nation hear,
 and at his footstool bow with holy fear;
 let heaven high arch echo with his name,
 and the wide people earth his praise proclaim;
 then send it down to hell deep gloom resound,
 through all her cave in dreadful murmur sound. 

he rule with wide and absolute command
 over the broad ocean and the steadfast land;
 Jehovah reign, unbounded, and alone,
 and all creation hang beneath his throne:
 he reign alone; let no inferior nature
 usurp, or share the throne of the creator. 

he see the struggle beam of infant light
 shoot through the massy gloom of ancient night;
 his spirit hush the elemental strife,
 and brood over the kindle seed of life;
 season and month begin the long procession
 and measure over the year in bright succession. 

the joyful sun spring up the etherial way
 strong as a giant, as a bridegroom gay;
 and the pale moon diffuse her shadowy light
 superior over the dusky brow of night;
 ten thousand glitter lamp the sky adorn,
 numerous as dew drop from the womb of morning. 

earth bloom face with rise flower he dress,
 and spread a verdant mantle over her breast;
 then from the hollow of his hand he pour
 the circle water round her wind shore,
 the new-born world in their cool arm embrace,
 and with soft murmur still her bank caress. 

at length she rise complete in finish pride,
 all fair and spotless like a virgin bride;
 fresh with untarnished lustre as she stand
 her maker bless his work, and call it good;
 the morning star with joyful acclamation
 exult sing, and hail the new creation. 

yet this fair world, the creature of a day,
 though build by god right hand, must pass away,
 and long oblivion creep over mortal thing,
 the fate of empire, and the pride of king:
 eternal night shall veil their proud story,
 and drop the curtain over all human glory. 

the sun himself, with weary cloud oppress,
 shall in his silent, dark pavilion rest;
 his golden urn shall break and useless lie,
 amid the common ruin of the sky:
 the star rush headlong in the wild commotion
 and bathe their glitter forehead in the ocean. 

but fix, o god, for ever stand thy throne;
 Jehovah reign, a universe alone;
 the eternal fire that feed each vital flame,
 collect, or diffuse be still the same. 
he dwell within his own unfathomed essence,
 and fill all space with his unbounded presence. 

but oh! our high note the theme debase,
 and silence be our least injurious praise;
 cease, cease your song, the dare flight controul,
 revere he in the stillness of the soul:
 with silent duty meek bend before he,
 and deep within your inmost heart adore he. 
