prologue speak by mr. Garrick,

at the open of the theatre in Drury-lane 1747. 

by the same.

when learning triumph over her barbarous foe
first rear the stage, immortal Shakespear rise;
each change of many-coloured life he draw,
exhaust world, and then imagine new:
existence see he spurn her bound reign,
and pant time toil after he in vain:
he powerful stroke preside truth impress,
and unresisted passion storm the breast.

then Johnson come, instruct from the school,
to please in method, and invent by rule;
his studious patience, and laborious art,
by regular approach assail the heart;
cold approbation give the linger bay,
for those who dare not censure, scarce can praise.
a mortal bear, he meet the general doom,
but leave, like egypt king, a last tomb.

the wit of Charles find easy way to fame,
nor wish for Johnson art, or shakespeare flame;
themselves they study, as they feel they write;
intrigue be plot, obscenity be wit.
vice always find a sympathetic friend,
they please their age, and do not aim to mend.
yet bard like these aspire to last praise,
and proud hope to pimp in future day.
their cause be general, their support be strong,
their slave be will, and their reign be long;
till shame regain the post that sense betray,
and virtue call oblivion to her aid.

then crush by rule, and weaken as refine,
for year the power of tragedy decline;
from bard to bard the frigid caution creep,
till declamation roar, while passion sleep.
yet still do virtue deign the stage to tread,
philosophy remain, though nature flee.
but force at length her ancient reign to quit,
she see great Faustus lie the ghost of wit:
exult folly hail the joyful day,
and pantomime and song confirm she sway.

but who the come change can presage,
and mark the future period of the stage?
perhaps if skill can distant time explore,
new behn, new Durfeys, yet remain in store.
perhaps, where Lear have rave, and hamlet die,
on fly car new sorcerer may ride.
perhaps (for who can guess the effect of chance?)
here hunt may box, or Mahomet may dance.

hard be his lot, that here by fortune place,
must watch the wild vicissitude of taste;
with every meteor of caprice must play,
and chace the new-blown bubble of the day.
ah! let not censure term our fate our choice;
the stage but echo back the public voice,
the drama law the drama patron give,
for we that live to please, must please, to live.

then prompt no more the folly you decry,
as tyrant doom their tool of guilt to die;
it be you this night to bid the reign commence
of rescue nature, and revive sense;
to chace the charm of sound, the pomp of show,
for useful mirth, and salutary woe;
bid scenic virtue form the rise age,
and truth diffuse her radiance from the stage.
