on barclay apology for the Quakers.

by the same.

these sheet primaeval doctrine yield,
where revelation be reveal:
soul-phlegm from literal feed breed,
system lethargic to the head
they purge, and yield a diet thin,
that turn to gospel-chyle within.
truth sublimate may here be see
extract from the part terrene.
in these be show, how man obtain
what of Prometheus poet feign:
to scripture-plainness dress be bring,
and speech, apparel to the thought.
they hiss from instinct at red coat,
and war, who work be cut throat,
forbid, and press the law of love:
breathe the spirit of the dove.
lucrative doctrine they detest,
as manufacture by the priest;
and throw down turnpike, where we pay
for stuff, which never mend the way;
and tithe, a Jewish tax, reduce,
and frank the gospel for our use.
they sable stand army break;
but the militia useful make:
since all unhired may preach and pray,
teach by these rule as well as they;
rule, which, when truth themselves reveal,
bid we to follow what we feel.

the world can hear the small still voice,
such be its bustle and its noise;
reason the proclamation read,
but not one riot passion heed.
wealth, honour, power the grace be,
which here below our homage share:
they, if one votary they find
to mistress more divine incline,
in truth pursuit to cause delay
throw golden apple in his way.

place i, o heaven, in some retreat
there let the serious death-watch beat,
there let i self in silence shun,
to feel thy will, which shall be do.

then come the spirit to our hut,
when fast the senses door be shut;
for so divine and pure a guest
the empty room be furnish best.

o contemplation! air serene
from damp of sense, and fog of spleen!
pure mount of thought! thrice holy ground,
where grace, when wait for, be find.

here it be the soul feel sudden youth,
and meet exult, virgin truth;
here, like a breeze of gentle kind,
impulse rustle through the mind;
here shine that light with glow face,
the fuse divine, that kindle grace;
which, if we trim our lamp, will last,
till darkness be by die past,
and then go out at end of night,
extinguish by superior light.

ah i! the heat and cold of life,
pleasure and pain eternal strife,
breed stormy passion, which confine,
shake, like the aeolian cave, the mind;
and raise despair, my lamp can last,
place where they drive the furious blast.

false eloquence, big empty sound,
like shower, that rush upon the ground,
little beneath the surface go,
all stream along and muddy flow.
this sink, and swell the bury grain,
and fructify like southern rain.

his art, well hide in mild discourse,
exert persuasion win force,
and nervate so the good design,
that king agrippa case be i.

well-natured, happy shade, forgive!
like you i think, but can live.
thy scheme require the world contempt,
that, from dependence life exempt;
and constitution frame so strong,
this world worst climate can wrong.
not such my lot, not Fortune brat,
i live by pull off the hat;
compel by station every hour
to bow to image of power;
and, in life busy scene immerse,
see better thing, and do the worst.

eloquent want, who reason sway,
and make ten thousand truth give way,
while i your scheme with pleasure trace,
draw near, and stare i in the face.
consider well your state, she cry,
like other kneel, that you may rise;
hold doctrine, by no scruple vex,
to which preferment be annex,
nor mad prove, where all depend,
idolatry upon your friend.
see, how you like my rueful face,
such you must wear, if out of place.
crack be your brain to turn recluse
without one farthing out at use.
they, who have land, and safe bank-stock,
with faith so found on a rock,
may give a rich invention ease,
and construe scripture how they please.

the honour prophet, that of old
use heaven high counsel to unfold,
do, more than courier angel, greet
the crow, that bring he bread and meat.
