life burdensome, because we know not how to use it.

a epistle.

what, sir, a month, and not one line afford?
it be well: — how fine some folk keep their word!
i own my promise. — but to steal a hour,
'midst all this hurry — it be not in my power,
where life each day do one fix order keep,
successive journey, weariness and sleep.
or if our scheme some interval allow,
some hour design for thought and for repose;
soon as the scatter image begin
in the mind to rally — company come in:
reason, adieu! there be no more room to think;
for all the day behind be noise and drink.
thus life roll on, but not without regret;
whenever at morning, in some cool retreat,
i walk alone: — it be then in thought i view
some sage of old; it be then i think of you:
who breast no tyrant passion ever seize,
no pulse that riot, blood that disobey;
who follow but where judgement point the way,
and who too busy sense never lead astray.
not that you joy with moderation shun,
you taste all pleasure, but indulge in none.
fire by this image, i resolve anew:
it be reason call, and peace and joy in view.
how bless a change! a long adieu to sense:
o shield i, sapience! virtue reign commence!
alas, how short a reign? — the walk be over,
the dinner wait, and friend some half a score:
at first to virtue firm, the glass i fly;
until some sly sot, — "not drink the family!"
thus gratitude be make to plead for sin;
my traitorous breast a party form within:
and inclination bribe, we never want
excuse — "it be hot, and walk make one faint."
now sense get strength; my bright resolve decay,
like star that melt at the approach of day:
thought die, and even, at last, your image fade away.
my head grow warm; all reason i despise:
"today be happy, and tomorrow wise!"
betray so oft, i be half persuade now,
sure to fail, the first step be to vow.

the country late, it be my wish: oh there!
garden, diversion, friend, relation, air:
for London now, dear London, how i burn!
i must be happy, sure, when i return.
whoever hope true happiness to see,
hope for what never be, nor ever will be:
the near ease, since we must suffer still,
be they, who dare be patient under ill.

whilom a fool see where a fiddle lie;
and after pour round it, strive to play:
above, below, across, all way he try;
he try in vain, it be discord all and noise:
fret he throw it by: then thus the lout;
"there be music in it, can i fetch it out."
if life do not its harmony impart,
we want not instrument, but have not art.
it be endless to defer our hope of ease,
till cross end, and disappointment cease.
the sage be happy, not that all go right,
his cattle feel no rot, his corn no blight;
the mind for ease be fit to the wise,
not so the fool; — it be here the difference lie:
their prospect be the same, but various be their eye.
