Harriot to Caroline. 

a poem.

to thou thy Harriot, exercise in care,
 school in the discipline of black despair,
 Harriot, to thou, her sister and her friend,
 dare the vast treasure of her woe commend;
 now fear forbid — then hope persuade again,
 both love and horror guide my tremble pen,
 horror — that know not where it shall begin,
 to wail the lover lose, or weep the sin;
 while love present his beauty to my eye,
 then in my droop fancy sight he die. 
a dire report have late reach my ear,
 (the source of these complaint and fall tear)
 it be say — i hear and faint at the sound,
 it be say — the poor fond Caledon be drown:
 hope it be false — yet dread more it be true,
 a certain answer i request from you;
 i will fain believe some busy meddle friend
 may, through kind policy, his death pretend,
 think (how vain) when i believe he lose,
 my heart will then by care no more be toss,
 and when his death have well possess my mind,
 ''twould banish all that love have leave behind. 
alas! how weak such artifice must prove,
 how little do they know the force of love;
 be he but live, my poor heart no more
 the loss of friend or fortune will deplore;
 perhaps in time too i will content be
 never to have see the dear-loved youth again. 
but, oh! his death be agony to bear,
 to think on it only be extreme despair. 
 "then true tell i, nor with flatter gloss,
 varnish or hide the greatness of my loss,
 tell the sad truth, by doubt I be double curse,
 to doubt be ever to believe the worst. 
be thou then go, my daily, nightly care,
 my all that parent, friend or husband be,
 my Caledon — oh hide i from my shame! 
still must i kiss his dear unhappy name." 
dear,
 join not the world, o be not you severe;
 by all those joy, you be destine to afford,
 (with heaven permission) to some worthy lord:
 mock not, oh blame not my unhappy love,
 pity that weakness which you can approve. 
be there no cliff, no rock, no island near,
 do no kind plank his faint body bear? 
thus do i strive, thus argument invent,
 thus be my day in fruitless wish spend:
 he be lose, he be go, on the rough wave he be bear,
 for ever from his faithful Harriot tear,
 por ever go — the sea, with sullen roar,
 deny my treasure — to the friendly shore,
 to i deny to kiss his clay-cold face,
 or clasp his body in a last embrace. 
oh cruel parent! ruffian to employ,
 to seize my soul delight, my heart be sole joy;
 ah cruel parent! but more cruel they
 to tear he from his native home away,
 far, far away — to join a horrid crew,
 and, die, pay the debt to vengeance due. 
dear hapless youth, belove, bemoan in vain,
 there end thy hope, there end thy every pain,
 a end to every grief, and every care,
 no love, or Harriot more remember there. 
peace to thy soul, no time my grief shall 'suage,
 in youth neglect, or despise in age,
 no change of place to i bring change of mind,
 no joy in sweet variety i find;
 to i all light or darkness be the same,
 my night be horror, and my day all shame. 
say, sister, must my tear for ever flow,
 while heaven forgive, yet unforgve below. 
young as i be, ever reason teach to tame
 the unruly passion that destroy my fame;
 unheedful of the event my heart be win,
 before i know what it be to be undo,
 by slow degree i draw the spread fire,
 i see the youth, and see must admire,
 in his sad eye the languid tale he bear,
 he ask my pity — then he hope no more:
 oh little do i think how soon to prove
 how near akin compassion be to love;
 i love he, sister, what can weakness do? 
have thou but know he, thou have love he too;
 though mean his state, though humble his degree,
 his soul be noble, and his heart be free,
 fond foolish heart, by i to ruin lead,
 i, i alone, the fatal passion say. 
weep, Harriot, weep, heaven claim each gush tear,
 but reap, alas! the glean of despair,
 oh, Caroline! if the kind tender name
 of friend and sister
 come to thy Harriot, and with generous care
 teach my poor suffer heart its woe to bear,
 teach i, though humble, to look up to heaven,
 to sue for grace, and hope to be forgive,
 and when my task of penitence be over,
 and injure heaven of i require no more,
 when every grief sink with i to the grave,
 from blast tongue my hapless memory save;
 but ah! be careful, let there not be know
 a name so wretched on the wound stone. 
