[fragment] xi.

sad! i be sad indeed: nor small my cause of woe! — kirmor, thou have lose no son; thou have lose no daughter of beauty. connar the valiant life; and annir the fair of maid. the bough of thy family flourish, o kirmor! but armyn be the last of his race.

rise, wind of autumn, rise; blow upon the dark heath! stream of the mountain, roar! howl, you tempest, in the tree! walk through break cloud, o moon! show by interval thy pale face! bring to my mind that sad night, when all my child fall; when arindel the mighty fall; when daura the lovely die.

daura, my daughter! thou be fair; fair as the moon on the hill of Jura; white as the drive snow; sweet as the breathe gale. armor renown in war come, and seek daura love; he be not long deny; fair be the hope of their friend.

earch son of odgal repine; for his brother be slay by armor. he come disguise like a son of the sea: fair be his skiff on the wave; white his lock of age; calm his serious brow. fair of woman, he say, lovely daughter of armyn! a rock not distant in the sea, bear a tree on its side; red shine the fruit afar. there armor wait for daura. i come to fetch his love. come, fair daughter of armyn!

she go; and she call on armor. nought answer, but the son of the rock. armor, my love! my love! why torment thou i with fear? come, graceful son of ardnart, come; it be daura who call thou! — earch the traitor flee laugh to the land. she lift up her voice, and cry for her brother and her father. arindel! armyn! none to relieve your daura?

her voice come over the sea. arindel my son descend from the hill; rough in the spoil of the chace. his arrow rattle by his side; his bow be in his hand; five grey dog attend his step. he see fierce earch on the shore; he seize and bind he to a oak. thick fly the thong of the hide around his limb; he load the wind with his groan.

arindel ascend the surgy deep in his boat, to bring daura to the land. armor come in his wrath, and let fly the grey-feathered shaft. it sing; it sink in thy heart, o arindel my son! for earch the traitor thou died. what be thy grief, o daura, when round thy foot be pour thy brother blood!

the boat be break in twain by the wave. armor plunge into the sea, to rescue his daura or die. sudden a blast from the hill come over the wave. he sink, and he rise no more.

alone, on the sea-beat rock, my daughter be hear to complain. frequent and loud be her cry; nor can her father relieve she. all night i stand on the shore. all night i hear her cry. loud be the wind; and the rain beat hard on the side of the mountain. before morning appear, her voice be weak. it die away, like the evening-breeze among the grass of the rock. spend with grief she expire. o lay i soon by her side.

when the storm of the mountain come; when the north lift the wave on high; i sit by the found shore, and look on the fatal rock. often by the set moon i see the ghost of my child. indistinct, they walk in mournful conference together. will none of you speak to i? — but they do not regard their father.

