the village.

in two book.

book i 

the village life, and every care that reign
 over youthful peasant and decline swain;
 what labour yield, and what, that labour past,
 age, in its hour of languor, find at last;
 what form the real picture of the poor,
 demand a song — the muse can give no more. 

flee be those time, when, in harmonious strain,
 the rustic poet praise his native plain:
 no shepherd now, in smooth alternate verse,
 their country beauty or their nymph 'rehearse;
 yet still for these we frame the tender strain,
 still in our lay fond corydon complain,
 and shepherd' boy their amorous pain reveal,
 the only pain, alas! they never feel. 

on mincio bank, in Cæsar bounteous reign,
 if Tityrus find the golden age again,
 must sleepy bard the flatter dream prolong,
 mechanic echo of the mantuan song? 
from truth and nature shall we wide stray,
 where Virgil, not where fancy, lead the way? 

yes, thus the muse sing of happy swain,
 because the muse never know their pain:
 they boast their peasant 'pipe; but peasant now
 resign their pipe and plod behind the plough;
 and few, amid the rural-tribe, have time
 to number syllable, and play with rhyme;
 save honest duck, what son of verse can share
 the poet rapture and the peasant care? 
or the great labour of the field degrade,
 with the new peril of a poor trade? 

from this chief cause these idle praise spring,
 that theme so easy few forbear to sing;
 for no deep thought the trifle subject ask;
 to sing of shepherd be a easy task:
 the happy youth assume the common strain,
 a nymph his mistress, and himself a swain;
 with no sad scene he cloud his tuneful prayer,
 but all, to look like she, be paint fair. 

i grant indeed that field and flock have charm
 for he that graze or for he that farm;
 but when amid such please scene i trace
 the poor laborious native of the place,
 and see the midday sun, with fervid ray,
 on their bare head and dewy temple play;
 while some, with feeble head and faint heart,
 deplore their fortune, yet sustain their part —
 then shall i dare these real ill to hide
 in tinsel trappings of poetic pride? 

no; cast by fortune on a frown coast,
 which neither grove nor happy valley boast;
 where other care than those the muse relate,
 and other shepherd dwell with other mate;
 by such example teach, i paint the cot,
 as truth will paint it, and as bard will not. 
nor you, you poor, of letter scorn complain,
 to you the smoothe song be smooth in vain;
 overcome by labour, and bow down by time,
 feel you the barren flattery of a rhyme? 
can poet soothe you, when you pine for bread,
 by wind myrtle round your ruin shed? 
can their light tale your weighty grief overpower,
 or glad with airy mirth the toilsome hour? 

lo! where the heath, with wither brake grow over,
 lend the light turf that warm the neighbour poor;
 from thence a length of burn sand appear,
 where the thin harvest wave its wither ear;
 rank weed, that every art and care defy,
 reign over the land, and rob the blight rye:
 there thistle stretch their prickly arm afar,
 and to the ragged infant threaten war;
 there poppy nod, mock the hope of toil;
 there the blue bugloss paint the sterile soil;
 HARDY and high, above the slender sheaf,
 the slimy mallow wave her silky leaf;
 over the young shoot the charlock throw a shade,
 and clasp tares cling round the sickly blade;
 with mingle tint the rocky coast abound,
 and a sad splendour vain shine around. 
so look the nymph who wretched art adorn,
 betray by man, then leave for man to scorn;
 who cheek in vain assume the mimic rise,
 while her sad eye the trouble breast disclose;
 who outward splendour be but folly dress,
 expose most, when most it gild distress. 

here joyless roam a wild amphibious race,
 with sullen woe display in every face;
 who, far from civil art and social fly,
 and scowl at stranger with suspicious eye. 

here too the lawless merchant of the main
 draw from his plough the intoxicate swain;
 want only claim the labour of the day,
 but vice now steal his nightly rest away. 

where be the swain, who, daily labour do,
 with rural game play down the set sun;
 who strike with matchless force the bound ball,
 or make the ponderous quoit oblique fall;
 while some huge Ajax, terrible and strong,
 engage some artful stripling of the throng,
 and fall beneath he, foil, while far around
 hoarse triumph rise, and rock return the sound? 
where now be these? — beneath yond cliff they stand,
 to show the freight pinnace where to land;
 to load the ready steed with guilty haste,
 to fly in terror over the pathless waste,
 or, when detect, in their straggle course,
 to foil their foe by cunning or by force;
 or, yield part (which equal knave demand),
 to gain a lawless passport through the land. 

here, wander long, amid these frown field,
 i seek the simple life that nature yield;
 rapine and wrong and fear usurp her place,
 and a bold, artful, surly, savage race;
 who, only skill to take the finny tribe,
 the yearly dinner, or septennial bribe,
 wait on the shore, and, as the wave run high,
 on the toss vessel bend their eager eye,
 which to their coast direct its venturous way;
 they, or the ocean, miserable prey. 

as on their neighbour beach yond swallow stand,
 and wait for favour wind to leave the land;
 while still for flight the ready wing be spread:
 so wait i the favour hour, and flee;
 flee from these shore where guilt and famine reign,
 and cry, Ah! hapless they who still remain;
 who still remain to hear the ocean roar,
 who greedy wave devour the lessen shore;
 till some fierce tide, with more imperious sway,
 sweep the low hut and all it hold away;
 when the sad tenant weep from door to door;
 and beg a poor protection from the poor! 

but these be scene where nature niggard hand
 give a spare portion to the famish land;
 she be the fault, if here mankind complain
 of fruitless toil and labour spend in vain;
 but yet in other scene more fair in view,
 when plenty smile — alas! she smile for few —
 and those who taste not, yet behold her store,
 be as the slave that dig the golden over —
 the wealth around they make they double poor. 

or will you deem they ample pay in health,
 labour fair child, that languish with wealth? 
go then! and see they rise with the sun,
 through a long course of daily toil to run;
 see they beneath the dogstar rage heat,
 when the knee tremble and the temple beat;
 behold they, lean on their scythe, look over
 the labour past, and toil to come explore;
 see they alternate sun and shower engage,
 and hoard up ache and anguish for their age;
 through fen and marshy moor their step pursue,
 when their warm pore imbibe the evening dew;
 then own that labour may as fatal be
 to these thy slave, as thy excess to thou. 

amid this tribe too oft a manly pride
 strive in strong toil the faint heart to hide;
 there may you see the youth of slender frame
 contend with weakness, weariness, and shame;
 yet, urge along, and proud loath to yield,
 he strive to join his fellow of the field:
 till long-contending nature droop at last,
 decline health reject his poor repast,
 his cheerless spouse the come danger see,
 and mutual murmur urge the slow disease. 

yet grant they health, it be not for we to tell,
 though the head droop not, that the heart be well;
 or will you praise that homely, healthy fare,
 plenteous and plain, that happy peasant share! 
Oh! trifle not with want you can feel,
 nor mock the misery of a stint meal;
 homely, not wholesome, plain, not plenteous, such
 as you who praise will never deign to touch. 

you gentle soul, who dream of rural ease,
 who the smooth stream and smooth sonnet please;
 go! if the peaceful cot your praise share,
 go look within, and ask if peace be there;
 if peace be his — that droop weary sire,
 or they, that offspring round their feeble fire;
 or she, that matron pale, who tremble hand
 turn on the wretched hearth the expire brand! 

nor yet can time itself obtain for these
 life late comfort, due respect and ease;
 for yonder see that hoary swain, who age
 can with no care except its own engage;
 who, prop on that rude staff, look up to see
 the bare arm break from the wither tree,
 on which, a boy, he climb the lofty bough,
 then his first joy, but his sad emblem now. 

he once be chief in all the rustic trade;
 his steady hand the straight furrow make;
 full many a prize he win, and still be proud
 to find the triumph of his youth allow;
 a transient pleasure sparkle in his eye,
 he hear and smile, then think again and sigh:
 for now he journey to his grave in pain;
 the rich disdain he; nay, the poor disdain:
 alternate master now their slave command,
 urge the weak effort of his feeble hand,
 and, when his age attempt its task in vain,
 with ruthless taunt, of lazy poor complain. 

oft may you see he, when he tend the sheep,
 his winter charge, beneath the hillock weep;
 oft hear he murmur to the wind that blow
 over his white lock and bury they in snow,
 when, rouse by rage and mutter in the morn,
 he mend the break hedge with icy thorn: —

 "why do i live, when i desire to be
" at once from life and life long labour free? 
 "like leaf in spring, the young be blow away,
" without the sorrow of a slow decay;
 "i, like yond wither leaf, remain behind,
" nip by the frost, and shiver in the wind;
 "there it abide till young bud come on,
" as i, now all my fellow-swain be go;
 "then, from the rise generation thrust,
" it fall, like i, unnoticed to the dust. 

 "these fruitful field, these numerous flock i see,
" be other 'gain, but kill care to i;
 "to i the child of my youth be lord,
" cool in their look, but hasty in their word:
 "want of their own demand their care; and who
" feel his own want and succour other too? 
 "a lonely, wretched man, in pain i go,
" none need my help, and none relieve my woe;
 "then let my bone beneath the turf be lay,
" and man forget the wretch they will not aid. " 

thus, groan the old, till, by disease oppress,
 they taste a final woe, and then they rest. 

they be yond house that hold the parish poor,
 who wall of mud scarce bear the break door;
 there, where the putrid vapour, flag, play,
 and the dull wheel hum doleful through the day; —
 there child dwell who know no parent 'care;
 parent, who know no child love, dwell there! 
heart-broken matron on their joyless bed,
 forsake wife, and mother never wed;
 deject widow with unheeded tear,
 and cripple age with more than childhood fear;
 the lame, the blind, and, far the happy they! 
the mope idiot, and the madman gay. 

here too the sick their final doom receive,
 here bring, amid the scene of grief, to grieve,
 where the loud groan from some sad chamber flow,
 mix with the clamour of the crowd below;
 here, sorrow, they each kindred sorrow scan,
 and the cold charity of man to man:
 who law indeed for ruin age provide,
 and strong compulsion pluck the scrap from pride;
 but still that scrap be buy with many a sigh,
 and pride embitter what it can deny. 

say, you, oppress by some fantastic woe,
 some jar nerve that baffle your repose;
 who press the downy couch, while slave advance
 with timid eye to read the distant glance;
 who with sad prayer the weary doctor tease,
 to name the nameless ever-new disease;
 who with mock patience dire complaint endure,
 which real pain and that alone can cure;
 how will you bear in real pain to lie,
 despise, neglect, leave alone to die? 
how will you bear to draw your late breath,
 where all that be wretched pave the way for death? 

such be that room which one rude beam divide,
 and naked rafter form the slope side;
 where the vile band that bind the thatch be see,
 and lath and mud be all that lie between;
 save one dull pane, that, coarse patch, give way
 to the rude tempest, yet exclude the day:
 here, on a mat flock, with dust overspread,
 the droop wretch recline his languid head;
 for he no hand the cordial cup apply,
 or wipe the tear that stagnate in his eye;
 no friend with soft discourse his pain beguile,
 or promise hope, till sickness wear a smile. 

but soon a loud and hasty summons call,
 shake the thin roof, and echo round the wall;
 anon, a figure enter, quaint neat,
 all pride and business, bustle and conceit;
 with look unaltered by these scene of woe,
 with speed that, enter, speak his haste to go,
 he bid the gaze throng around he fly,
 and carry fate and physic in his eye:
 a potent quack, long verse in human ill,
 who first insult the victim who he kill;
 who murderous hand a drowsy bench protect,
 and who most tender mercy be neglect. 

Paid by the parish for attendance here,
 he wear contempt upon his sapient sneer;
 in haste he seek the bed where misery lie,
 impatience mark in his avert eye;
 and, some habitual query hurry over,
 without reply, he rush on the door:
 his droop patient, long inure to pain,
 and long unheeded, know remonstrance vain;
 he cease now the feeble help to crave
 of man; and silent sink into the grave. 

but ere his death some pious doubt arise,
 some simple fear, which "bold bid" man despise;
 fain will he ask the parish priest to prove
 his title certain to the joy above:
 for this he send the murmur nurse, who call
 the holy stranger to these dismal wall:
 and do not he, the pious man, appear,
 he, "pass rich with forty pound a year?" 
Ah! no; a shepherd of a different stock,
 and far unlike he, feed this little flock:
 a jovial youth, who think his Sunday task
 as much as god or man can fair ask;
 the rest he give to love and labour light,
 to field the morning, and to feast the night;
 none better skill the noisy pack to guide,
 to urge their chase, to cheer they or to chide;
 a sportsman keen, he shoot through half the day,
 and, skill at whist, devote the night to play:
 then, while such honour bloom around his head,
 shall he sit sad by the sick man bed,
 to raise the hope he feel not, or with zeal
 to combat fear that even the pious feel? 

now once again the gloomy scene explore,
 less gloomy now; the bitter hour be over,
 the man of many sorrow sigh no more. —
 up yonder hill, behold how sad slow
 the bier move wind from the vale below:
 there lie the happy dead, from trouble free,
 and the glad parish pay the frugal fee:
 no more, o death! thy victim start to hear
 church-warden stern, or kingly overseer;
 no more the farmer claim his humble bow,
 thou be his lord, the best of tyrant thou! 

now to the church behold the mourner come,
 sedate torpid and devout dumb;
 the village child now their game suspend,
 to see the bier that bear their ancient friend:
 for he be one in all their idle sport,
 and like a monarch rule their little court;
 the pliant bow he form, the fly ball,
 the bat, the wicket, be his labour all;
 he now they follow to his grave, and stand,
 silent and sad, and gaze, hand in hand;
 while bend low, their eager eye explore
 the mingle relic of the parish poor. 
the bell toll late, the mope owl fly round,
 fear mark the flight and magnify the sound;
 the busy priest, detain by weighty care,
 defer his duty till the day of prayer;
 and, wait long, the crowd retire distress,
 to think a poor man bone shall lie unblest. 

book ii.

no long truth, though show in verse, disdain,
 but own the village life a life of pain:
 i too must yield, that oft amid these woe
 be gleam of transient mirth and hour of sweet repose,
 such as you find on yonder sportive green,
 the 'squire tall gate and churchway-walk between;
 where loiter stray a little tribe of friend,
 on a fair Sunday when the sermon end:
 then rural beaux their best attire put on,
 to win their nymph, as other nymph be win;
 while those long wed go plain, and by degree,
 like other husband, quit their care to please. 
some of the sermon talk, a sober crowd,
 and loud praise, if it be preach aloud;
 some on the labour of the week look round,
 feel their own worth, and think their toil renowned;
 while some, who hope to no renown extend,
 be only please to find their labour end. 

thus, as their hour glide on, with pleasure fraught
 their careful master brood the painful thought;
 much in their mind they murmur and lament,
 that one fair day shall be so idle spend;
 and think that heaven deal hard, to tithe their store
 and tax their time for preacher and the poor. 

yet still, you humble friend, enjoy your hour,
 this be your portion, yet unclaimed of power;
 this be heaven gift to weary man oppress,
 and seem the type of their expect rest:
 but you, alas! be joy that soon decay;
 frail joy, begin and end with the day;
 or yet, while day permit those joy to reign,
 the village vice drive they from the plain. 

see the stout churl, in drunken fury great,
 strike the bare bosom of his teem mate! 
his naked vice, rude and unrefined,
 exert their open empire over the mind;
 but can we less the senseless rage despise,
 because the savage act without disguise? 

yet here disguise, the city vice, be see,
 and slander steal along and taint the green:
 at her approach domestic peace be go,
 domestic broil at her approach come on;
 she to the wife the husband crime convey,
 she tell the husband when his consort stray;
 her busy tongue, through all the little state,
 diffuse doubt, suspicion, and debate;
 peace, timorous goddess! quit her old domain,
 in sentiment and song content to reign. 

nor be the nymph that breathe the rural air
 so fair as cynthia, nor so chaste as fair:
 these to the town afford each fresh face,
 and the clown trull receive the peer embrace;
 from who, shall chance again convey she down,
 the peer disease in turn attack the clown. 

here too the 'squire, or' squire-like farmer, talk,
 how round their region nightly pilferer walk;
 how from their pond the fish be bear, and all
 the ripen treasure from their lofty wall;
 how mean rival in their sport delight,
 just right enough to claim a doubtful right;
 who take a licence round their field to stray,
 a mongrel race! the poacher of the day. 

and hark! the riot of the green begin,
 that spring at first from yonder noisy inn;
 what time the weekly pay be vanish all,
 and the slow hostess score the threaten wall;
 what time they ask, their friendly feast to close,
 a final cup, and that will make they foe;
 when blow ensue that break the arm of toil,
 and rustic battle end the booby 'broil. 

save when to yonder hall they bend their way,
 where the grave justice end the grievous fray;
 he who recite, to keep the poor in awe,
 the law vast volume — for he know the law: —
 to he with anger or with shame repair
 the injure peasant and delude fair. 

lo! at his throne the silent nymph appear,
 frail by her shape, but modest in her tear;
 and while she stand abash, with conscious eye,
 some favourite female of her judge glide by,
 who view with scornful glance the strumpet fate,
 and thank the star that make her keeper great:
 near her the swain, about to bear for life
 one certain evil, doubt betwixt war and wife;
 but, while the falter damsel take her oath,
 consent to wed, and so secure they both. 

yet why, you ask, these humble crime relate,
 why make the poor as guilty as the great? 
to show the great, those mighty son of pride,
 how near in vice the low be ally;
 such be their nature and their passion such,
 but these disguise too little, those too much:
 so shall the man of power and pleasure see
 in his own slave as vile a wretch as he;
 in his luxurious lord the servant find
 his own low pleasure and degenerate mind:
 and each in all the kindred vice trace,
 of a poor, blind, bewilder, err race,
 who, a short time in vary fortune past,
 die, and be equal in the dust at last. 

and you, you poor, who still lament your fate,
 forbear to envy those you call the great;
 and know, amid those blessing they possess,
 they be, like you, the victim of distress;
 while sloth with many a pang torment her slave,
 fear wait on guilt, and danger shake the brave. 

Oh! if in life one noble chief appear,
 great in his name, while bloom in his year;
 bear to enjoy whatever delight mankind,
 and yet to all you feel or fear resign;
 who give up joy and hope to you unknown,
 for pain and danger great than your own:
 if such there be, then let your murmur cease,
 think, think of he, and take your lot in peace. 

and such there be: — Oh! grief, that cheek our pride,
 weep we say there be, — for manner die:
 belove of heaven, these humble line forgive,
 that sing of thou, and thus aspire to live. 

as the tall oak, who vigorous branch form
 a ample shade and brave the wild storm,
 high over the subject wood be see to grow,
 the guard and glory of the tree below;
 till on its head the fiery bolt descend,
 and over the plain the shatter trunk extend;
 yet then it lie, all wondrous as before,
 and still the glory, though the guard no more:

so thou, when every virtue, every grace,
 rise in thy soul, or shine within thy face;
 when, though the son of Granby, thou be know
 less by thy father glory than thy own;
 when honour love and give thou every charm,
 fire to thy eye and vigour to thy arm;
 then from our lofty hope and long eye,
 fate and thy virtue call thou to the sky;
 yet still we wonder at thy tower fame,
 and, lose thou, still dwell upon thy name. 

Oh! ever honour, ever value! say,
 what verse can praise thou, or what work repay? 
yet verse (in all we can) thy worth repay,
 nor trust the tardy zeal of future day; —
 honour for thou thy country shall prepare,
 thou in their heart, the good, the brave shall bear;
 to deed like thy shall noble chief aspire,
 the muse shall mourn thou, and the world admire. 

in future time, when smite with glory charm,
 the untried youth first quit a father arm; —
 "Oh! be like he," the weep sire shall say;
 "like manner walk, who walk in honour way;
" in danger foremost, yet in death sedate,
 "Oh! be like he in all thing, but his fate!" 

if for that fate such public tear be shed,
 that victory seem to die now thou be dead;
 how shall a friend his near hope resign,
 that friend a brother, and who soul be thy? 
by what bold line shall we his grief express,
 or by what soothe number make it less? 

it be not, i know, the chime of a song,
 nor all the power that to the muse belong,
 word apt cull, and meaning well express,
 can calm the sorrow of a wound breast;
 but virtue, sooth of the fierce pain,
 shall heal that bosom, Rutland, where she reign. 

yet hard the task to heal the bleed heart,
 to bid the still-recurring thought depart,
 tame the fierce grief and stem the rise sigh,
 and curb rebellious passion, with reply;
 calm to dwell on all that please before,
 and yet to know that all shall please no more; —
 Oh! glorious labour of the soul, to save
 her captive power, and brave mourn the brave

to such these thought will last comfort give —
 life be not measure by the time we live:
 it be not a even course of threescore year, —
 a life of narrow view and paltry fear,
 grey hair and wrinkle and the care they bring,
 that take from death the terror or the sting;
 but it be the generous spirit, mount high
 above the world, that native of the sky;
 the noble spirit, that, in danger brave,
 calm look on, or look beyond the grave: —
 such manner be, so he resign his breath,
 if in a glorious, then a timely death. 

cease then that grief, and let those tear subside;
 if passion rule we, be that passion pride;
 if reason, reason bid we strive to raise
 our fall heart, and be like he we praise;
 or if affection still the soul subdue,
 bring all his virtue, all his worth in view,
 and let affection find its comfort too:
 for how can grief so deep wind the heart,
 when admiration claim so large a part? 

grief be a foe — expel he then thy soul;
 let noble thought the near view control! 
Oh! make the age to come thy better care,
 see other rutland have, other granby there! 
and, as thy thought through stream age glide,
 see other hero die as manner die:
 and from their fate, thy race shall noble grow
 as tree shoot upward that be prune below;
 or as old Thames, bear down with decent pride,
 see his young stream run warble at his side;
 though some, by art cut off, no long run,
 and some be lose beneath the summer sun —
 yet the pure stream move on, and, as it move,
 its power increase and its use improve;
 while plenty round its spacious wave bestow,
 still it flow on, and shall for ever flow. 
