on the omniscience of the supreme be.

by the same.

arise, divine Urania, with new strain
 to hymn thy god, and thou, immortal fame,
 arise, and blow thy everlasting trump. 
all glory to the omniscient, and praise,
 and power, and domination in the height! 
and thou, cherubic gratitude, who voice
 to pious ear sound silver so sweet,
 come with thy precious incense, bring thy gift,
 and with thy choice store the altar crown. 
thou too, my heart, who he, and he alone
 who all thing know, can know, with love replete,
 regenerate, and pure, pour all thyself
 a live sacrifice before his throne:
 and may the eternal, high mysterious tree,
 that in the centre of the arcehd heaven
 bear the rich fruit of knowledge, with some branch
 stoop to my humble reach, and bless my toil! 

when in my mother womb conceal i lie
 a senseless embryo, then my soul thou know,
 know all her future work, every thought,
 and every faint idea yet unformed. 
when up the imperceptible ascent
 of grow year, lead by thy hand, i rise,
 perception gradual light, that ever dawn
 insensible to day, thou do vouchsafe,
 and teach i by that reason thou inspir'dst,
 that what of knowledge in my mind be low,
 imperfect, incorrect — in thou be wondrous,
 uncircumscribed, unsearchable profound,
 and estimable sole by itself. 

what be that secret power, that guide the brute,
 which ignorance call instinct? it be from thou,
 it be the operation of thy hand
 immediate, instantaneous; it be thy wisdom,
 that glorious shine transparent through thy work. 
who teach the pie, or who forewarn the Jay
 to shun the deadly nightshade? though the cherry
 boast not a glossy hue, nor do the plumb
 lure with more seem sweet the amorous eye,
 yet will not the sagacious bird, decoy
 by fair appearance, touch the noxious fruit. 
they know to touch be fatal, whence alarm
 swift on the winnow wind they work their way. 
go to, proud reasoner philosophic man,
 have thou such prudence, thou such knowledge? — no.
 full many a race have fall into the snare
 of meretricious look, of please surface. 
and oft in desert isle the famish pilgrim
 by form of fruit, and luscious taste beguile;
 like his forefather Adam, eat and die. 
for why? his wisdom on the leaden sect
 of slow experience, dull tedious, creep,
 and come, like vengeance, after long delay. 

the venerable sage, that nightly trim
 the learned lamp, to investigate the power
 of plant medicinal, the earth, the air,
 and the dark region of the fossil world,
 grow old in follow, what he never shall find;
 studious in vain! till haply, at the last
 he spy a mist, then shape it into mountain,
 and baseless fabric from conjecture build:
 while the domestic animal, that guard
 at midnight hour his threshold, if oppress
 by sudden sickness, at his master foot
 beg not that aid his service may claim,
 but be his own physician, know the case,
 and from the emetic herbage work his cure. 
hark, far, from afar the feather matron scream. 
and all her brood alarm, the docile crew
 accept the signal one and all, expert
 in the art of nature and unlearned deceit;
 along the sod, in counterfeit death,
 mute, motionless they lie; full well apprize,
 that the rapacious adversary near. 
but who inform she of the approach danger,
 who teach the cautious mother, that the hawk
 be hatch her foe, and live by her destruction? 
her own prophetic soul be active in she,
 and more than human providence her guard. 

when Philomela, ever the cold domain
 of cripple winter begin to advance, prepare
 her annual flight, and in some poplar shade
 take her melodious leave, who then be her pilot? 
who point her passage through the pathless void
 to realm from we remote, to we unknown? 
her science be the science of her god. 
not the magnetic index to the north
 ever ascertain her course, nor buoy, nor beacon:
 she, heaven-taught voyager, that sail in air,
 court nor coy west nor east, but instant know
 what Newton, or not seek, or seek in vain. 

illustrious name, irrefragable proof
 of man vast genius, and the soar soul! 
yet what be thou to he, who know his work,
 before creation form they, long before
 he measure in the hollow of his hand
 the exult ocean, and the high heaven
 he comprehend with a span, and weigh
 the mighty mountain in his golden scale:
 who shine supreme, who be himself the light,
 ever yet refraction learn her skill to paint,
 and bend athwart the cloud her beauteous bow. 

when knowledge at her father dread command
 resign to israel king her golden key,
 o! to have join the frequent auditor
 in wonder and delight, that whilom hear
 great Solomon descant on the brute. 
o! how sublime glorious to apply
 to God own honour, and good will to man,
 that wisdom he alone of man possess
 in plenitude so rich, and scope so rare. 
how do he rouse the pamper silken son
 of bloat ease, by place to their view
 the sage industrious ant, the wise insect,
 and best oeconomist of all the field! 
though she presume not by the solar orb
 to measure time and season, nor consult
 chaldean calculation, for a guide;
 yet conscious that December on the march,
 point with icy hand to want and woe,
 she wait his dire approach, and undismayed
 receive he as a welcome guest, prepare
 against the churlish winter fierce blow. 
for when, as yet the favourable sun
 give to the genial earth the enliven ray,
 not the poor suffer slave, that hourly toil
 to rive the groan earth for ill-sought gold,
 endure such trouble, such fatigue, as she;
 while all her subterraneous avenue. 
and siorm-proof cell with management most meet
 and unexampled housewifry she form:
 then to the field she hie, and on her back,
 burden immense! she bear the cumbrous corn. 
then many a weary step, and many a strain,
 and many a grievous groan subdue, at length
 up the huge hill she hardly heave it home:
 nor rest she here her providence, but nip
 with subtle tooth the grain, lest from her garner
 in mischievous fertility it steal,
 and back to day-light vegetate its way. 
go to the ant, thou sluggard, learn to live,
 and by her wary way reform thy own. 
but, if thy deaden sense, and listless thought
 more glare evidence demand; behold,
 where yond pellucid populous hive present
 a yet uncopy model to the world! 
there Machiavelli in the reflect glass
 may read himself a fool. the chemist there
 may with astonishment invidious view
 his toil outdo by each plebeian bee,
 who, at the royal mandate, on the wing
 from various herb, and from discordant flower,
 a perfect harmony of sweet compound. 

avaunt conceit, ambition take thy flight
 back to the prince of vanity and air! 
o! it be a thought of energy most pierce;
 form to make pride grow humble; form to force
 its weight on the reluctant mind, and give she
 a true but irksome image of herself. 
woeful vicissitude! when man, fall man,
 who first from heaven, from gracious god himself
 learnt knowledge of the brute, must know, by brute
 instruct and reproach, the scale of be;
 by slow degree from lowly step ascend,
 and trace omniscience upward to its spring! 
yet murmur not, but praise — for though we stand
 of many a godlike privilege amere
 by Adam dire transgression, though no more
 be paradise our home, but over the portal
 hang in terrific pomp the burn blade;
 still with ten thousand beauty bloom the earth
 with pleasure populous, and with riches crown. 
still be there scope for wonder and for love
 even to their last exertion — shower of blessing
 far more than human virtue can deserve,
 or hope expect, or gratitude return. 
then, o you people, o you son of man,
 whatever be the colour of your life,
 whatever portion of itself his wisdom
 shall deign to allow, still patient abide
 and praise he more and more; nor cease to chant
 all glory to the omniscient and praise,
 and power and domination in the height! 
and thou, cherubic gratitude, who voice
 to pious ear sound silver so sweet,
 come with thy precious incense, bring thy gift,
 and with thy choice store the altar crown. 
