the castle of indolence.

i 

o mortal man, who live here by toil,
 do not complain of this thy hard estate;
 that like a Emmet thou must ever moil,
 be a sad sentence of a ancient date:
 and, certes, there be for it reason great;
 for, though sometime it make thou weep and wail,
 and curse thy star, and early drudge and late,
 without that will come a heavy bale,
 loose life, unruly passion, and disease pale. 

ii.

in lowly Dale, fast by a river side,
 with woody hill over hill encompass round,
 a most enchant visard do abide,
 than who a fiend more fell be no where find. 
it be, i ween, a lovely spot of ground;
 and there a season atween June and may,
 half pranked with spring, with summer half embrown,
 a listless climate make, where, sooth to say,
 no live wight can work, ne care even for play. 

iii.

be nought around but image of rest:
 sleep-soothing groves, and quiet lawn between;
 and flowery bed that slumberous influence cast,
 from poppy breathe; and bed of pleasant green,
 where never yet be creep creature see. 
mean time unnumbered glitter streamlet play,
 and hurl everywhere their water sheen;
 that, as they bicker through the sunny glade,
 though restless still themselves, a lull murmur make. 

iv.

join to the prattle of the purling rill,
 be hear the low herd along the vale,
 and flock loud-bleating from the distant hill,
 and vacant shepherd pipe in the Dale;
 and now and then sweet philomel will wail,
 or stock-dove plain amid the forest deep,
 that drowsy rustle to the sigh gale;
 and still a coil the grasshopper do keep:
 yet all these sound blind incline all to sleep. 

v. 

full in the passage of the vale, above,
 a sable, silent, solemn forest stand;
 where nought but shadowy form be see to move,
 as idless fancy in her dream mood. 
and up the hill, on either side, a wood
 of blacken pine, ay wave to and fro,
 send forth a sleepy horror through the blood;
 and where this valley wind out, below,
 the murmur main be hear, and scarce hear, to flow. 

vi.

a please land of drowsy-hed it be:
 of dream that wave before the half-shut eye;
 and of gay castle in the cloud that pass,
 for ever flush round a summer-sky:
 there eke the soft delight, that witch
 instil a wanton sweetness through the breast,
 and the calm pleasure always hover nigh;
 but whatever smack of noyance, or unrest,
 be far far off expel from this delicious nest. 

vii.

the landskip such, inspire perfect ease,
 where indolence (for so the visard hight)
 close-hid his castle amid embower tree,
 that half shut out the beam of Phoebus bright,
 and make a kind of chequer day and night. 
mean while, unceasing at the massy gate,
 beneath a spacious palm, the wicked wight
 be place; and to his lute, of cruel fate,
 and labour harsh, complain, lament man estate. 

viii.

thither continual pilgrim crowd still,
 from all the road of earth that pass there by:
 for, as they chance to breathe on neighbour hill,
 the freshness of this valley smite their eye,
 and draw they ever and anon more nigh,
 until cluster round th'enchanter false they hang,
 ymolten with his siren melody;
 while over the enfeeble lute his hand he fling,
 and to the tremble chord these tempt verse sing:

ix.

 "behold! you pilgrim of this earth, behold! 
" see all but man with unearned pleasure gay. 
 "see she bright robe the butterfly unfold,
" break from her wintery tomb in prime of may. 
 "what youthful bride can equal her array? 
" who can with she for easy pleasure vie? 
 "from Mead to Mead with gentle wing to stray,
" from flower to flower on balmy gale to fly,
 "be all she have to do beneath the radiant sky. 

x. 

 "behold the merry minstrel of the morn,
" the swarm songster of the careless grove,
 "ten thousand throat! that, from the flower thorn,
" hymn their good god, and carol sweet of love,
 "such grateful kindly rapture they emove:
" they neither plough, nor sow; ne, fit for flail,
 "ever to the barn the nod sheaf they drive;
" yet they each harvest dance in the gale,
 "whatever crown the hill, or smile along the vale. 

xi.

 "outcast of nature, man! the wretched thrall
" of bitter-dropping sweat, of sweltry pain,
 "of care that eat away thy heart with Gall,
" and of the vice, a inhuman train,
 "that all proceed from savage thirst of gain:
" for when hard-hearted interest first begin
 "to poison earth, Astraea leave the plain;
" guile, violence, and murder seize on man;
 "and, for soft milky stream, with blood the river run. 

xii.

 "come, you, who still the cumbrous load of life
" push hard up hill; but as the farther steep
 "you trust to gain, and put a end to strife,
" down thunder back the stone with mighty sweep,
 "and hurl your labour to the valley deep,
" foreve vain: come, and, without fee,
 "i in oblivion will your sorrow steep,
" your care, your toil, will steep you in a sea
 "of full delight: o come, you weary wight, to i! 

xiii.

 "with i, you need not rise at early dawn,
" to pass the joyless day in various stound:
 "or, lout low, on upstart fortune fawn,
" and sell fair honour for some paltry pound;
 "or through the city take your dirty round,
" to cheat, and dun, and lie, and visit pay,
 "now flatter base, now give secret wound;
" or proul in court of law for human prey,
 "in venal senate thieve, or rob on broad highway. 

xiv.

 "no cock, with i, to rustic labour call,
" from village on to village sound clear;
 "to tardy Swain not shrill-voiced matron squall;
" no dog, no babe, no wife, to stun your ear;
 "no hammer thump; no horrid blacksmith sear,
" ne noisy tradesman your sweet slumber start,
 "with sound that be a misery to hear:
" but all be calm, as will delight the heart
 "of sybarite of old, all nature, and all art. 

XV. 

 "here nought but candour reign, indulgent ease,
" good-natured lounge, saunter up and down:
 "they who be please themselves must always please;
" on other way they never squint a frown,
 "nor heed what haps in hamlet or in town. 
" thus, from the source of tender indolence,
 "with milky blood the heart be overflown,
" be soothe and sweeten by the social sense;
 "for interest, envy, pride, and strife be banish hence. 

xvi.

 "what, what, be virtue, but repose of mind? 
" a pure ethereal calm! that know no storm;
 "above the reach of wild ambition wind,
" above those passion that this world deform,
 "and torture man, a proud malignant worm! 
" but here, instead, soft gale of passion play,
 "and gentle stir the heart, thereby to form
" a quick sense of joy; as breeze stray
 "across the enliven sky, and make they still more gay. 

xvii.

 "the best of man have ever love repose:
" they hate to mingle in the filthy fray;
 "where the soul sowr, and gradual rancour grow,
" embitter more from peevish day to day. 
 "even those who fame have lend her fair ray,
" the most renowned of worthy wight of yore,
 "from a base world at last have steal away:
" so Scipio, to the soft cumaean shore
 "retire, taste joy he never know before. 

xviii.

 "but if a little exercise you choose,
" some zest for ease, it be not forbid here. 
 "amid the groves you may indulge the muse,
" or tend the bloom, and deck the vernal year;
 "or soft steal, with your watery gear,
" along the brook, the crimson-spoted fry
 "you may delude: the while, amuse, you hear
" now the hoarse stream, and now the zephir sigh,
 "attune to the bird, and woodland melody. 

xix.

 "o grievous folly! to heap up estate,
" lose the day you see beneath the sun;
 "when, sudden, come blind unrelenting fate,
" and give the untasted portion you have win,
 "with ruthless toil, and many a wretch undo,
" to those who mock you go to Pluto reign,
 "there with sad ghost to pine, and shadow dun:
" but sure it be of vanity most vain,
 "to toil for what you here untoiling may obtain." 

xx.

he cease. but still their tremble ear retain
 the deep vibration of his witch song;
 that, by a kind of magic power, constrain
 to enter in, pellmell, the listen throng. 
heap pour on heap, and yet they slip along
 in silent ease: as when beneath the beam
 of summer-moon, the distant wood among,
 or by some flood all silvered with the gleam,
 the soft-embodied Fays through airy portal stream. 

xxi.

by the smooth demon so it order be,
 and here his baneful bounty first begin:
 though some there be who will not further pass,
 and his allure bait suspect have. 
the wise distrust the too fair-spoken man. 
yet through the gate they cast a wishful eye:
 not to move on, perdie, be all they can;
 for do their very best they can fly,
 but often each way look, and often sore sigh. 

xxii.

when this the watchful wicked visard see,
 with sudden spring he leap upon they strait;
 and soon as touch by his unhallowed paw,
 they find themselves within the curse gate;
 full hard to be repass, like that of fate. 
not strong be of old the giant-crew,
 who seek to pull high Jove from regal state;
 though feeble wretch he seem, of sallow hue:
 certes, who bide his grasp, will that encounter rue. 

xxiii.

for whomsoever the villain take in hand,
 their joint unknit, their sinew melt apace;
 as lithe they grow as any willow-wand,
 and of their vanish force remain no trace:
 so when a maiden fair, of modest grace,
 in all her buxom bloom may of charm,
 be seize in some losel hot embrace,
 she wax very weak as she warm,
 then sigh yield she up to love delicious harm. 

xxiv.

wake by the croud, slow from his bench arise
 a comely full-spred porter, swell with sleep:
 he calm, broad, thoughtless aspect breathe repose;
 and in sweet torpor he be plunge deep,
 ne can himself from ceaseless yawn keep;
 while over his eye the drowsy liquour run,
 through which his half-waked soul will faint peep. 
then take his black staff he call his man,
 and rouse himself as much as rouse himself he can. 

xxv.

the lad leap light at his master call. 
he be, to weet, a little roguish page,
 save sleep and play who mind nought at all,
 like most the untaught stripling of his age. 
this boy he keep each band to disengage,
 garter and Buckles, task for he unfit,
 but ill-becoming his grave personage,
 and which his portly paunch will not permit,
 so this same limber page to all perform it. 

xxvi.

mean time the master-porter wide display
 great store of cap, of slipper, and of gown;
 wherewith he those who enter in, array;
 loose, as the breeze that play along the down,
 and wave the summer-wood when evening frown. 
o fair undress, best dress! it check no vein,
 but every flow limb in pleasure drown,
 and heighten ease with grace. this do, right fain,
 sir porter sit he down, and turn to sleep again. 

xxvii.

thus easy-robed, they to the fountain speed,
 that in the middle of the court up-threw
 a stream, high-spouting from its liquid bed,
 and fall back again in drizzly dew:
 there each deep draught, as deep he thirst, draw. 
it be a fountain of Nepenthe rare:
 whence, as than Homer sing, huge Pleasaunce grow,
 and sweet oblivion of vile earthly care;
 fair gladsome wake thought, and joyous dream more fair. 

xxviii.

this rite perform, all inly please and still,
 without Tromp, be proclamation make. 
 "you son of indolence, do what you will;
" and wander where you list, through hall or glade:
 "be no man pleasure for another stay;
" let each as like he best his hour employ,
 "and curse be he who mind his neighbour trade! 
" here dwell kind ease and unreproving joy:
 "he little merit bliss who other can annoy. 

xxix.

strait of these endless number, swarm round,
 as thick as idle mote in sunny ray,
 not one eftsoon in view be to be find,
 but every man strol off his own glad way. 
wide over this ample court blank area,
 with all the lodge that thereto pertain,
 no live creature can be see to stray;
 while solitude, and perfect silence reign:
 so that to think you dream you almost be constrain. 

xxx.

as when a shepherd of the hebrid-isle,
 place far amid the melancholy main,
 (whether it be lone fancy he beguile;
 or that aerial being sometime deign
 to stand, embody, to our sense plain)
 see on the naked hill, or valley low,
 the while in ocean Phoebus dip his wain,
 a vast assembly move to and fro:
 then all at once in air dissolve the wondrous show. 

xxxi.

you god of quiet, and of sleep profound! 
who soft dominion over this castle sway,
 and all the widely-silent place round,
 forgive i, if my tremble pen display
 what never yet be sing in mortal lay. 
but how shall i attempt such arduous string? 
i who have spend my night and nightly day,
 in this soul-deadening place, loose-loitering? 
ah! how shall i for this uprear my moult wing? 

xxxii.

come on, my muse, nor stoop to low despair,
 thou imp of Jove, touch by celestial fire! 
thou yet shall sing of war, and action fair,
 which the bold son of Britain will inspire;
 of ancient bard thou yet shall sweep the lyre;
 thou yet shall tread in tragic pall the stage,
 paint love enchant woe, the hero ire,
 the sage calm, the patriot noble rage,
 dash corruption down through every worthless age. 

xxxiii.

the door, that know no shrill alarm bell,
 ne curse knocker ply by villain hand,
 self-opened into hall, where, who can tell
 what elegance and grandeur wide expand
 the pride of turkey and of Persia land? 
soft quilt on quilt, on carpet carpet spread,
 and couch stretch around in seemly band;
 and endless pillow rise to prop the head;
 so that each spacious room be one full-swelling bed. 

xxxiv.

and every where huge cover table stand,
 with wine high-flavoured and rich viand crown;
 whatever sprightly juice or tasteful food
 on the green bosom of this earth be find,
 and all old ocean gender in his round:
 some hand unseen these silent display,
 even undemanded, by a sign or sound;
 you need but wish, and, instant obey,
 fair-ranged the dish rise, and thick the glass play. 

XXXV. 

here freedom reign, without the least alloy;
 nor gossip tale, nor ancient maiden Gall,
 nor saint spleen dare murmur at our joy,
 and with envenom tongue our pleasure pall. 
for why? there be but one great rule for all;
 to wit, that each shall work his own desire,
 and eat, drink, study, sleep, as it may fall,
 or melt the time in love, or wake the lyre,
 and carol what, unbid, the muse may inspire. 

xxxvi 

the room with costly tapestry be hang,
 where be inweave many a gentle tale;
 such as of old the rural poet sing,
 or of arcadian or sicilian vale:
 recline lover, in the lonely Dale,
 pour forth at large the sweetly-tortured heart;
 or, look tender passion, swell the gale,
 and teach charm echo to resound their smart;
 while flock, wood, stream, around, repose and peace impart. 

xxxvii.

those please the most, where, by a cunning hand,
 depaint be the patriarchal age;
 what time than Abraham leave the chaldee land,
 and pasture on from verdant stage to stage,
 where field and fountain fresh can best engage. 
toil be not then. of nothing take they heed,
 but with wild beast the silvan war to wage,
 and over vast plain their herd and flock to feed:
 bless son of nature they! true golden age indeed! 

xxxviii.

sometime the pencil, in cool airy hall,
 bid the gay bloom of vernal landscape rise,
 or autumn vary shade embrown the wall:
 now the black tempest strike the astonish eye;
 now down the steep the flash torrent fly;
 the tremble sun now play over ocean blue,
 and now rude mountain frown amid the sky;
 whatever Lorrain light-touched with soften hue,
 or savage Rosa dash, or learn Poussin draw. 

xxxix.

each sound too here to languishment incline,
 lull the weak bosom, and induce ease. 
aerial music in the warble wind,
 at distance rise oft, by small degree,
 near and near come, till over the tree
 it hang, and breathe such soul-dissolving air,
 as do, alas! with soft perdition please:
 entangle deep in its enchant snare,
 the listen heart forget all duty and all care. 

XL. 

a certain music, never know before,
 here lull the pensive melancholy mind;
 full easy obtain. behove not more,
 but sidelong, to the gently-waving wind,
 to lay the well-tuned instrument recline;
 from which, with airy fly finger light,
 beyond each mortal touch the most refine,
 the god of wind draw sound of deep delight:
 whence, with just cause, the harp of Aeolus it hight. 

xli 

ah i! what hand can touch the string so fine? 
who up the lofty diapasan roll
 such sweet, such sad, such solemn air divine,
 then let they down again into the soul? 
now rise love they fan; now please Dole
 they breathe, in tender muse, through the heart;
 and now a grave sacred strain they steal,
 as when seraphic hand a hymn impart:
 wild warble nature all, above the reach of art! 

xlii 

such the gay splendour, the luxurious state,
 of caliph old, who on the tygris' shore,
 in mighty bagdat, populous and great,
 hold their bright court, where be of lady store;
 and verse, love, music still the garland wear:
 when sleep be coy, the bard, in wait there,
 cheere the lone midnight with the muse lore;
 compose music bid his dream be fair,
 and music lend new gladness to the morning air. 

xliii.

near the pavilion where we sleep, still run
 soft-tinkling stream, and dash water fall,
 and sob breeze sigh, and oft begin
 (so work the visard) wintery storm to swell,
 as heaven and earth they will together mell:
 at door and window, threaten, seem to call
 the demon of the tempest, growl fell,
 yet the least entrance find they none at all;
 whence sweet grow our sleep, secure in massy hall. 

xliv 

and hither Morpheus send his kind dream,
 raise a world of gay tinct and grace;
 over which be shadowy cast elysian gleam,
 that play, in wave light, from place to place,
 and shed a roseate smile on nature face. 
not titian pencil ever can so array,
 so fleece with cloud the pure etherial space;
 ne can it ever such melt form display,
 as loose on flowery bed all languish lie. 

XLV. 

no, fair illusion! artful phantom, no!
 my muse will not attempt your fairyland:
 she have no colour that like you can glow;
 to catch your vivid scene too gross her hand. 
but sure it be, be never a subtle band
 than these same guileful angel-seeming spright,
 who thus in dream, voluptuous, soft, and bland,
 pour all the arabian heaven upon our night,
 and bless they oft beside with more refine delight. 

xlvi 

they be in sooth a most enchant train,
 even feign virtue; skilful to unite
 with evil good, and strew with pleasure pain. 
but for those fiend, who blood and broil delight;
 who hurl the wretch, as if to hell outright,
 down down black gulf, where sullen Waters sleep,
 or hold he clamber all the fearful night
 on beetling cliff, or pen in ruin deep:
 they, till due time shall serve, be bid far hence to keep. 

xlvii 

you guardian spirit, to who man in dear,
 from these foul demon shield the midnight gloom! 
angel of fancy and of love, be near,
 and over the blank of sleep diffuse a bloom! 
evoke the sacred shade of Greece and Rome,
 and let they virtue with a look impart! 
but chief, a while o lend we from the tomb
 those long-lost friend for who in love we smart,
 and fill with pious awe and joy-mixt woe the heart. 

xlviii.

or be you sportive — bid the morn of youth
 rise to new light, and beam afresh the day
 of innocence, simplicity, and truth;
 to care estrange, and manhood thorny way. 
what transport! to retrace our boyish play,
 our easy bliss, when each thing joy supply:
 the wood, the mountain, and the warble maze
 of the wild brook — but, fond wander wide,
 my muse, resume the task that yet do thou abide. 

xlix 

one great amusement of our household be,
 in a huge crystal magic globe to spy,
 still as you turn it, all thing that do pass
 upon this ant-hill earth; where constant
 of idly-busy man the restless fry
 run bustle too and fro with foolish haste,
 in search of pleasure vain that from they fly,
 or which obtain the caitiff dare not taste:
 when nothing be enjoy, can there be great waste? 

l. 

of vanity the mirror this be call. 
here you a muckworm of the town may see,
 at his dull desk, amid his legers stall,
 eat up with cark care and penury;
 most like to carcase parch on gallow tree. 
a penny save be a penny get:
 firm to this scoundrel maxim keep he,
 ne of its rigour will he bate a jot,
 till it have quench his fire, and banish his pot. 

li.

strait from the filth of this low grub, behold! 
come flutter forth a gaudy spendthrift heir,
 all glossy gay, enamel all with gold,
 the silly tenant of the summer-air. 
in folly lose, of nothing take he care;
 pimp, lawyer, steward, harlot, flatterer vile,
 and thieve tradesman he among they share:
 his father ghost from limbo-lake, the while,
 see this, which more damnation do upon he pile. 

lii 

this globe portray the race of learned man,
 still at their book, and turn over the page,
 backward and forward: oft they snatch the pen,
 as if inspire, and in a thespian rage;
 then write, and blot, as will your Ruth engage. 
why, auhor, all this scrawl and scribble sore? 
to lose the present, gain the future age,
 praise to be when you can hear no more,
 and much enrich with fame when useless worldly store. 

liii 

then will a splendid city rise to view,
 with cart, and car, and coach roar all:
 wide-poured abroad behold the prowl crew;
 see! how they dash along from wall to wall;
 at every door, hark! how they thunder call. 
good lord! what can this giddy rout excite? 
why? on each other with fell tooth to fall;
 a neighbour fortune, fame, or peace, to blight,
 and make new tiresome party for the come night. 

LIV. 

the puzzle son of party next appear,
 in dark cabal and nightly juntos meet;
 and now they whisper close, new shrug rear
 the important shoulder; then, as if to get
 new light, their twinkle eye be inward set. 
no soon Lucifer recall affair,
 than forth they various rush in mighty fret;
 when lo! push up to power, and crown their care,
 in come another set, and kick they down stair. 

LV. 

but what most show the vanity of life,
 be to behold the nation all on fire,
 in cruel broil engage, and deadly strife;
 most christian king, inflame by black desire,
 with honourable russian in their hire,
 cause war to rage, and blood around to pour:
 of this sad work when each begin to tire,
 they sit they down just where they be before,
 till for new scene of woe peace shall their force restore. 

lvi 

to number up the thousand dwelling here,
 a useless be, and eke a endless task:
 from king, and those who at the helm appear,
 to gipsy brown in summer-glade who bask. 
yea many a man perdie i can unmask,
 who desk and table make a solemn show,
 with tape-tied trash, and suit of fool that ask
 for place or pension, lay in decent row;
 but these i pass by, with nameless number more. 

lvii 

of all the gentle tenant of the place,
 there be a man of special grave remark:
 a certain tender gloom overspread his face,
 pensive not sad, in thought involve not dark,
 as soot this man can sing as morning-lark,
 and teach the noble moral of the heart:
 but these his talent be bury stark;
 of the fine store he nothing will impart,
 which or boon nature give, or nature-painting art. 

lviii 

to noontide shade incontinent he run,
 where purl the brook with sleep-inviting sound;
 or when dan Sol to slope his wheel begin,
 amid the broom he bask he on the ground,
 where the wild thyme and camomile be find:
 there will he linger, till the late ray
 of light sit tremble on the welkin bind:
 then homeward through the twilight shadow stray,
 saunter and slow. so have he pass many a day. 

lix 

yet not in thoughtless slumber be they pass:
 for oft the heavenly fire, that lie conceal
 beneath the sleep ember, mount fast,
 and all its native light anew reveal;
 oft as he traverse the cerulean field,
 and mark the cloud that drive before the wind,
 ten thousand glorious system will he build,
 ten thousand great idea fill his mind;
 but with the cloud they flee, and leave no tract behind. 

LX. 

with he be sometime join, in silent walk,
 (profound silent, for they never speak)
 one shy still, who quite detest talk:
 oft, sting by spleen, at once away he break,
 to groves of pine, and broad overshadow oak;
 there, inly thril, he wander all alone,
 and on himself his pensive fury wreak,
 ne ever utter word, save when first shine
 the glitter star of eve — "thank heaven! the day be do." 

lxi 

here lurk a wretch, who have not creep abroad
 for forty year, ne face of mortal see;
 in chamber brood like a loath toad,
 and sure his linen be not very clean;
 through secret loop-hole, that have practise be
 near to his bed, his dinner vile he take;
 unkempt, and rough, of squalid face and mein,
 our castle shame! whence, from his filthy nook,
 we drive the villain out for fit lair to look. 

lxii 

one day there chance into these hall to rove
 a joyous youth, who take you at first sight;
 he the wild wave of pleasure hither drive,
 before the sprightly tempest toss light:
 certes, he be a most engage wight,
 of social glee, and wit humane though keen,
 turn the night to day and day to night;
 for he the merry bell have ring, i ween,
 if in this nook of quiet bell have ever be. 

lxiii.

but not even pleasure to excess be good,
 what most elate then sink the soul as low;
 when spring-tide joy pour in with copious flood,
 the high still the exult billow flow,
 the farther back again they flag go,
 and leave we grovel on the dreary shore:
 teach by this son of joy, we find it so;
 who, while he stay, keep in a gay uproar
 our madden castle all, the abode of sleep no more. 

lxiv.

as when in prime of June a burnish fly,
 spring from the mead, over which he sweep along,
 cheere by the breathe bloom and vital sky,
 tune up amid these airy hall his song,
 soothe at first the gay repose throng:
 and oft he sip their bowl; or near drown,
 he, thence recover, drive their bed among,
 and scare their tender sleep, with trump profound;
 then out again he fly, to wing his mazy round. 

LXV. 

another guest there be, of sense refine,
 who feel each worth, for every worth he have;
 serene yet warm, humane yet firm his mind,
 as little touch as any man with bad:
 he through their inmost walk the muse lad,
 to he the sacred love of nature lend,
 and sometime will he make our valley glad;
 whenas we find he will not here be pen,
 to he the better sort this friendly message send. 

lxvi.

 "come, dwell with we! true son of virtue, come! 
" but if, alas! we can thou persuade,
 "to lie content beneath our peaceful dome,
" ne ever more to quit our quiet glade;
 "yet when at last thy toil, but ill pay,
" shall dead thy fire, and damp its heavenly spark,
 "thou will be glad to seek the rural shade,
" there to indulge the muse, and nature mark:
 "we then a lodge for thou will rear in hagley-park." 

lxvii 

here whilom lig the Esopus of the age;
 but call by fame, in soul yprick deep,
 a noble pride restore he to the stage,
 and rouse he like a giant from his sleep. 
even from his slumber we advantage reap:
 with double force the enliven scene he wake,
 yet quit not nature bound. he know to keep
 each due decorum: now the heart he shake,
 and now with well-urged sense the enlighten judgement take. 

lxviii 

a bard here dwell, more fat than bard beseem;
 who void of envy, guile, and lust of gain,
 on virtue still, and nature please theme,
 pour forth his unpremeditated strain,
 the world forsake with a calm disdain:
 here laugh he careless in his easy seat,
 here quaff encircle with the joyous train;
 oft moralize sage; his ditty sweet
 he loathe much to write, ne care to repeat. 

lxix 

full oft by holy foot our ground be tread,
 of clerk good plenty here you mote espy. 
a little, round, fat, oily man of god,
 be one i chief mark among the fry:
 he have a roguish twinkle in his eye,
 and shine all glitter with ungodly dew,
 if a tight damsel chance to trippen by;
 which when observe, he shrink into his mew,
 and strait will recollect his piety anew. 

lxx.

nor be forget a tribe, who mind nought
 (old inmate of the place) but state-affair:
 they look, perdie, as if they deep think;
 and on their brow sit every nation care. 
the world by they be parcel out in share,
 when in the hall of smoke they congress hold,
 and the sage berry sun-burnt mocha bear
 have clear their inward eye: then, smoak-enrolled,
 their oracle break forth mysterious as of old. 

lxxi 

here languid beauty keep her pale-faced court:
 bevy of dainty dame, of high degree,
 from every quarter hither make resort;
 where, from gross mortal care and business free,
 they lie, pour out in ease and luxury. 
or shall they a vain shew of work assume,
 alas! and welladay! what can it be? 
to knot, to twist, to range the vernal bloom;
 but far be cast the distaff, spinning-wheel, and loom. 

lxxii.

their only labour be to kill the time;
 and labour dire it be, and weary woe. 
they sit, they loll, turn over some idle rhyme;
 then, rise sudden, to the glass they go,
 or saunter forth, with totter step and slow:
 this soon too rude a exercise they find;
 strait on the couch their limb again they throw,
 where hour on hour they sigh lie recline,
 and court the vapoury god soft-breathing in the wind. 

lxxiii 

now must i mark the villainy we find,
 but ah! too late, as shall eftsoon be show. 
a place here be, deep, dreary, under ground;
 where still our inmate, when unpleasing grow,
 disease, and loathsome, privy be throw. 
far from the light of heaven, they languish there,
 unpitied utter many a bitter groan;
 for of these wretch take be no care:
 fierce fiend, and hag of hell, their only nurse be. 

lxxiv 

alas! the change! from scene of joy and rest,
 to this dark den, where sickness toss always. 
here lethargy, with deadly sleep oppress,
 stretch on his back a mighty lubbard lie,
 heave his side, and snore night and day;
 to stir he from his trance it be not eath,
 and his half-opened eye he shut strait way:
 he lead, i wot, the soft way to death,
 and teach without pain and strife to yield the breath. 

LXXV. 

of limb enormous, but withal unsound,
 soft-swoln and pale, here lie the hydropsy:
 unwieldy man! with belly monstrous round,
 for ever feed with watery supply;
 for still he drink, and yet he still be dry. 
and here a mope mystery do sit,
 mother of spleen, in robe of various dye,
 who vex be full oft with ugly fit;
 and some her frantic deem, and some her deem a wit. 

lxxvi 

a lady proud she be, of ancient blood,
 yet oft she fear her pride make crouchen low:
 she feel, or fancy in her flutter mood,
 all the disease which the spittle know,
 and seek all Physick which the shop bestow,
 and still new Leaches and new drug will try,
 her humour ever waver to and fro;
 for sometime she will laugh, and sometime cry,
 then sudden wax wroth, and all she know not why. 

lxxvii 

fast by her side a listless maiden pine,
 with ache head, and squeamish heartburnings;
 pale, bloat, cold, she seem to hate mankind,
 yet love in secret all forbid thing. 
and here the tertian shake his chill wing;
 the sleepless gout here count the crow cock,
 a wolf now gnaw he, now a serpent sting;
 while apoplexy cram intemperance knock
 down to the ground at once, as butcher feel ox. 

Canto ii.

i 

escape the castle of the sire of sin,
 ah! where shall i so sweet a dwelling find? 
for all around without, and all within,
 nothing save what delightful be and kind,
 of goodness savour and a tender mind,
 ever rise to view. but now another strain,
 of doleful note, alas! remains behind:
 i now must sing of pleasure turn to pain,
 and of the false enchanter indolence complain. 

ii.

be there no patron to protect the muse,
 and fence for her parnassus barren soil? 
to every labour its reward accrue,
 and they be sure of bread who swink and moil;
 but a fell tribe the aonian hive despoil,
 as ruthless wasp oft rob the painful bee:
 thus while the law not guard that noble toil,
 ne for the muse other meed decree,
 they praise be alone, and starve right merry. 

iii.

i care not, fortune, what you i deny:
 you can rob i of free nature grace;
 you can shut the window of the sky,
 through which Aurora show her brighten face;
 you can bar my constant foot to trace
 the wood and lawn, by live stream, at eve:
 let health my nerve and fine fibre brace,
 and i their toy to the great child leave;
 of fancy, reason, virtue, nought can i bereave. 

iv.

come then, my muse, and raise a bold song;
 come, lig no more upon the bed of sloth,
 drag the lazy languid line along,
 fond to begin but still to finish loath,
 thy half-writ scroll all eat by the moth:
 arise, and sing that generous imp of fame,
 who with the son of softness noble wroth,
 to sweep away this human lumber come,
 or in a choose few to rouse the slumber flame. 

v. 

in fairyland there live a knight of old,
 of feature stern, selvaggio well clepe,
 a rough unpolished man, robust and bold,
 but wondrous poor: he neither sow nor reap,
 ne store in summer for cold winter heap;
 in hunt all his day away he wear;
 now scorch by June, now in November steep,
 now pinch by bite January sore,
 he still in wood pursue the libbard and the boar. 

vi.

as he one morning, long before the dawn,
 prick through the forest to dislodge his prey,
 deep in the wind bosom of a lawn,
 with wood wild-fringed, he mark a taper ray,
 that from the beat rain, and wintery fray,
 do to a lonely Cott his step decoy;
 there, up to earn the needment of the day,
 he find dame poverty, nor fair nor coy:
 she he compress, and fill she with a lusty boy. 

vii.

amid the green-wood shade this boy be breed,
 and grow at last a knight of muchel fame,
 of active mind and vigorous lustihood,
 the knight of art and industry by name. 
earth be his bed, the bough his roof do frame;
 he know no beverage but the flow stream;
 his tasteful well-earned food the silvan game,
 or the brown fruit with which the wood-land teem:
 the same to he glad summer or the winter breme. 

viii.

so pass his youthly morning, void of care,
 wild as the colt that through the commons run:
 for he no tender parent trouble be,
 he of the forest seem to be the son,
 and certes have be utter undo;
 but that Minerva pity of he take,
 with all the god that love the rural win,
 that teach to tame the soil and rule the Crook;
 ne do the sacred nine disdain a gentle look. 

ix.

of fertile genius he they nurture well,
 in every science and in every art,
 by which mankind the thoughtless brute excel,
 that can or use, or joy, or grace impart,
 disclose all the power of head and heart. 
ne be the goodly exercise spare,
 that brace the nerve, or make the limb alert,
 and mix elastic force with firmness hard:
 be never knight on ground mote be with he compare. 

x. 

sometime, with early morn, he mount gay
 the hunter-steed, exult over the Dale,
 and draw the roseate breath of orient day;
 sometime, retire to the secret vale,
 clothe in steel and bright with burnish mail,
 he strain the bow, or toss the sound spear,
 or dart on the goal outstrip the gale,
 or wheel the chariot in its mid-career,
 or strenuous wrestle hard with many a tough compeer. 

xi.

at other time he pry through nature store,
 whatever she in the etherial round contain,
 whatever she hide beneath her verdant floor,
 the vegetable and the mineral reign;
 or else he scan the globe, those small domain,
 where restless mortal such a turmoil keep,
 its sea, its flood, its mountain, and its plain;
 but more he search the mind, and rouse from sleep
 those moral seed whence we heroic action reap. 

xii.

nor will he scorn to stoop from high pursuit
 of heavenly truth, and practise what she teach. 
vain be the tree of knowledge without fruit. 
sometime in hand the spade or plough he catch,
 forth-calling all with which boon earth be fraught;
 sometime he ply the strong mechanic tool,
 or rear the fabric from the fine draught;
 and oft he put himself to neptune school,
 fight with wind and wave on the vex ocean pool. 

xiii.

to solace then these rough toil, he try
 to touch the kindle canvas into life;
 with nature his create pencil vie,
 with nature joyous at the mimic strife:
 or, to such shape as grace pygmalion wife,
 he hew the marble; or, with vary fire,
 he rouse the trumpet and the martial fife,
 or bad the lute sweet tenderness inspire,
 or verse frame that well may wake apollo lyre. 

xiv.

accomplish thus he from the wood issue,
 full of great aim, and bend on bold emprise;
 the work, which long he in his breast have brew,
 now to perform he ardent do devise;
 to-wit, a barbarous world to civilise. 
earth be till then a boundless forest wild;
 nought to be see but savage wood, and sky;
 no city nourish art, no culture smile,
 no government, no law, no gentle manner mild. 

XV. 

a rugged wight, the worst of brute, be man:
 on his own wretched kind he, ruthless, prey;
 the strong still the weak overrun;
 in every country mighty robber sway,
 and guile and ruffian force be all their trade.
 life be not life, but rapine, want, and woe;
 which this brave knight, in noble anger, make
 to swear, he will the rascal rout overthrow,
 for, by the power divine, it shall no more be so! 

xvi.

it will exceed the purport of my song,
 to say how this best sun, from orient clime,
 come beam life and beauty all along,
 before he chase indolence and crime. 
still as he pass, the nation he sublime,
 and call forth art and virtue with his ray:
 then Egypt, Greece and Rome their golden time,
 successive, have; but now in ruin grey
 they lie, to slavish sloth and tyranny a prey. 

xvii.

to crown his toil, sir industry then spread
 the swell sail, and make for britain coast. 
a sylvan life till then the native lead,
 in the brown shade and green-wood forest lose,
 all careless ramble where it like they most:
 their wealth the wild-deer bounce through the glade;
 they lodge at large, and live at nature cost;
 save spear, and bow, without other aid,
 yet not the roman steel their naked breast dismay. 

xviii.

he like the soil, he like the clement sky,
 he like the verdant hill and flowery plain. 
be this my great my choose isle (he cry)
 this, while my labour liberty sustain,
 this queen of ocean all assault disdain. 
nor like he less the genius of the land,
 to freedom apt and persevere pain,
 mild to obey, and generous to command,
 tempere by form heaven with kind firm hand. 

xix.

here, by degree, his masterwork arise,
 whatever art and industry can frame:
 whatever finish agriculture know,
 fair queen of art! from heaven itself who come,
 when Eden flourish in unspotted fame:
 and still with her sweet innocence we find,
 and tender peace, and joy without a name,
 that, while they rapture, tranquillize the mind;
 nature and art at once, delight and use combine. 

xx.

then town he quicken by mechanic art,
 and bid the fervent city glow with toil;
 bid social commerce raise renown mart,
 join land to land, and marry soil to soil,
 unite the pole, and without bloody spoil
 bring home of either ind the gorgeous store;
 or, shall despotic rage the world embroil,
 bid tyrant tremble on remote shore,
 while over encircle deep britannia thunder roar. 

xxi.

the droop muse then he westward call,
 from the fame city by Propontis sea,
 what time the Turk enfeeble grecian thral;
 thence from their cloister walk he set they free,
 and bring they to another castalie:
 where Isis many a famous noursling breed;
 or where old cam soft-pace over the lea,
 in pensive mood, and tune his doric reed,
 the while his flock at large the lonely shepherd feed. 

xxii.

yet the fine art be what he finish least. 
for why? they be the quintessence of all,
 the growth of labour time, and slow increase;
 unless, as seldom chance, it shall fall,
 that mighty patron the coy sister call
 up to the sunshine of uncumbered ease,
 where no rude care the mount thought may thrall,
 and where they nothing have to do but please:
 ah, gracious god! thou know they ask no other fee. 

xxiii.

but now, alas! we live too late in time:
 our patron now even grudge that little claim,
 except to such as sleek the soothe rhyme;
 and yet, forsooth, they wear MAECENAS' name,
 poor son of puffed-up vanity, not fame! 
unbroken spirit, cheer! still, still remain
 the eternal patron, liberty; who flame,
 while she protect, inspire the noble strain. 
the best, and sweet far, be toil-created gain. 

xxiv.

whenas the knight have frame, in britain-land,
 a matchless form of glorious government;
 in which the sovereign law alone command,
 law establish by the public free consent,
 who majesty be to the sceptre lend:
 when this great plan, with each dependent art,
 be settle firm, and to his heart content,
 then seek he from the toilsome scene to part,
 and let life vacant eve breathe quiet through the heart. 

xxv.

for this he choose a farm in deva vale,
 where his long alley peep upon the main. 
in this calm seat he draw the healthful gale,
 commix the chief, the patriot, and the Swain,
 the happy monarch of his sylvan train! 
here, side by the guardian of the fold,
 he walk his round, and cheere his bless domain;
 his day, the day of unstained nature, roll,
 replete with peace and joy, like patriarch of old. 

xxvi.

witness, you low herd, who lend he milk;
 witness, you flock, who woolly vestment far
 exceed soft india cotton, or her silk;
 witness, with autumn charge, the nod car,
 that homeward come beneath sweet evening star,
 or of september-moon the radiance mild. 
o hide thy head, abominable war! 
of crime and ruffian idleness the child! 
from heaven this life ysprung, from hell thy glory vild! 

xxvii.

nor, from his deep retirement, banish be
 the amuse care of rural industry. 
still, as with grateful change the season pass,
 new scene arise, new landscape strike the eye,
 and all the enliven country beautify:
 gay plain extend where marsh sleep before;
 over recent mead the exult streamlet fly;
 dark frown heath grow bright with ceres store,
 and wood embrown the steep, or wave along the shore. 

xxviii.

as near to his farm you make approach,
 he polish nature with a fine hand:
 yet on her beauty dare not art encroach;
 it be art alone these beauty to expand. 
in graceful dance immingle, over the land,
 Pan, pale, Flora, and Pomona play:
 even here, sometime, the rude wild common sand
 a happy place; where free, and unafraid,
 amid the flower brake each coyer creature stray. 

xxix.

but in prime vigour what can last for ay? 
that soul-enfeebling visard indolence,
 i whilom sing, wrought in his work decay:
 spread far and wide be his curse influence;
 of public virtue much he dull the sense,
 even much of private; eat our spirit out,
 and feed our rank luxurious vice: whence
 the land be overlay with many a lout;
 not, as old fame report, wise, generous, bold, and stout. 

xxx.

a rage of pleasure madden every breast,
 down to the low lees the ferment run:
 to his licentious wish each must be bless,
 with joy be severe; snatch it as he can. 
thus vice the standard rear; her arrier-ban
 corruption call, and loud she give the word. 
 "mind, mind yourself! why shall the vulgar man,
" the lackey be more virtuous than his lord? 
 "enjoy this span of life! it be all the god afford." 

xxxi.

the tiding reach to where in quiet hall,
 the good old knight enjoy well-earned repose. 
 "come, come, sir knight! thy child on thou call;
" come, save we yet, ere ruin round we close! 
 "the demon indolence thy toil overthrow." 
on this the noble colour stain his cheek,
 indignant, glow through the whiten snow
 of venerable eld; his eye full speak
 his ardent soul, and from his couch at once he break. 

xxxii.

i will, (he cry) so help i, god! destroy
 that villain archimage! — his page then strait
 he to he call, a fiery-footed boy,
 benempt dispatch.  "my steed be at the gate;
" my bard attend; quick, bring the net of fate. " 
this net be twist by the sister three;
 which when once cast over harden wretch, too late
 repentance come: Replevy can be
 from the strong iron grasp of vengeful destiny. 

xxxiii.

he come, the bard, a little druid-wight,
 of wither aspect; but his eye be keen,
 with sweetness mix. in russet brown bedight,
 as be his sister of the copse green,
 he creep along, unpromising of mien. 
gross he who judge so. his soul be fair,
 bright as the child of yond azure sheen. 
true comeliness, which nothing can impair,
 dwell in the mind: all else be vanity and glare. 

xxxiv.

come! (quoth the knight) a voice have reach my ear,
 the demon indolence threat overthrow
 to all that to mankind be good and dear:
 come, Philomelus! let we instant go,
 overturn his bower, and lie his castle low! 
those man, those wretched man! who will be slave,
 must drink a bitter wrathful cup of woe:
 but some there be, thy song, as from their grave,
 shall raise. thrice happy he! who without rigour save. 

XXXV. 

issue forth, the knight bestride his steed,
 of ardent bay, and on who front a star
 shine blaze bright: spring from the generous breed
 that whirl of active day the rapid car,
 he prance along, disdain gate or bar. 
meantime, the bard on milkwhite palfrey ride;
 a honest sober beast, that do not mar
 his meditation, but full soft tread:
 and much they moralise as thus yfere they yode. 

xxxvi 

they talk of virtue, and of human bliss. 
what else so fit for man to settle well? 
and still their long research meet in this,
 this truth of truth, which nothing can refel:
 "from virtue fount the pure joy out-well,
" sweet rill of thought that cheer the conscious soul;
 "while vice pour forth the trouble stream of hell,
" the which, however disguise, at last with Dole
 "will through the torture breast their fiery torrent roll." 

xxxvii.

at length it dawn, that fatal valley gay,
 over which high wood-crowned hill their summit rear. 
on the cool height awhile our palmer stay,
 and spite even of themselves their sense cheer;
 then to the wizard win their step they steer. 
like a green isle, it broad beneath they spread,
 with garden round, and wander current clear,
 and tuft groves to shade the meadow-bed,
 sweet air and song; and without hurry all seem glad. 

xxxviii.

 "as god shall judge i, knight, we must forgive
 (the half-enraptured Philomelus cry)
" the frail good man delude here to live,
 "and in these groves his muse fancy hide. 
" ah, nought be pure! it can be deny,
 "that virtue still some tincture have of vice,
" and vice of virtue. what shall then betide,
 "but that our charity be not too nice? 
" come, let we those we can to real bliss entice. 

xxxix.

 "ay, sick, (quoth the knight) all flesh be frail,
" to pleasant sin and joyous dalliance bend;
 "but let not brutish vice of this avail,
" and think to scape deserve punishment. 
 "justice be cruel weak to relent;
" from mercy self she get her sacred glaive:
 "grace be to those who can, and will, repent;
" but penance long, and dreary, to the slave,
 "who must in flood of fire his gross foul spirit lave. 

XL. 

thus, hold high discourse, they come to where
 the curse carl be at his wonted trade;
 still tempt heedless man into his snare,
 in witch wise, as i before have say. 
but when he see, in goodly Geer array,
 the grave majestic knight approach nigh,
 and by his side the bard so sage and stay,
 his countenance fall; yet oft his anxious eye
 mark they, like wily fox who roost cock do spy. 

xli 

nevertheless, with feign respect, he bid give back
 the rabble-rout, and welcome they full kind;
 strike with the noble twain, they be not slack
 his order to obey, and fall behind. 
then he resume his song; and, unconfined,
 pour all his music, run through all his string:
 with magic dust their eye he try to blind,
 and virtue tender air over weakness fling. 
what pity base his song who so divine sing.

xlii 

elate in thought, he count they his own,
 they listen so intent with fix delight:
 but they instead, as if transmew to stone,
 marvel he can, with such sweet art, unite
 the light and shade of manner, wrong and right. 
mean time, the silly croud the charm devour,
 wide-pressing to the gate. swift, on the knight
 he dart fierce, to drag he to his bower,
 who backn shun his touch, for well he know its power. 

xliii.

as in throng amphitheatre, of old,
 the wary retiarius trap his foe;
 even so the knight, return on he bold,
 at once involve he in the net of woe,
 whereof i mention make not long ago. 
enrage at first, he scorn so weak a jail,
 and leap, and fly, and flounce to and fro;
 but when he find that nothing can avail,
 he sit he fel down and gnaw his bitter nail. 

xliv 

alarm, the inferior demon of the place
 raise rueful shriek and hideous yell around;
 black rupture cloud deform the welkin face,
 and from beneath be hear a wail sound,
 as of infernal spright in cavern bind;
 a solemn sadness every creature strook,
 and lightning flash, and horror rock the ground:
 huge croud on croud out-poured, with blemish look,
 as if on time be last verge this frame of thing have shake. 

XLV. 

soon as the short-lived tempest be spend,
 steam from the jaw of vex avernus hole,
 and hush the hubbub of the rabblement,
 sir industry the first calm moment steal. 
 "there must, (he cry) amid so vast a shoal,
" be some who be not taint at the heart,
 "not poison quite by this same villain bowl:
" come then, my bard, thy heavenly fire impart;
 "touch soul with soul, till forth the latent spirit start. 

xlvi 

the bard obey; and take from his side,
 where it in seemly sort depend hang,
 his british harp, its speak string he try,
 the which with skilful touch he deff string,
 till tinkle in clear symphony they ring. 
then, as he feel the muse come along,
 light over the chord his rapture hand he fling,
 and play a prelude to his rise song:
 the while, like midnight mute, ten thousand round he throng. 

xlvii 

thus, ardent, burst his strain. 
 "you hapless race,
" dire-labouring here to smother reason ray,
 "that light our maker image in our face,
" and give we wide over earth unquestioned sway;
 "what be the adore supreme perfection, say? 
" what, but eternal never-resting soul,
 "almighty power, and all-directing day;
" by who each atom stir, the planet roll;
 "who fill, surround, inform, and agitate the whole? 

xlviii.

 "come, to the beam god your heart unfold! 
" draw from its fountain life! it be thence, alone,
 "we can excel. up from unfeeling mould,
" to seraph burn round th'almighty's throne,
 "life rise still on life, in high tone,
" perfection form, and with perfection bliss. 
 "in universal nature this clear show,
" not need proof: to prove it be, i wis,
 "to prove the beauteous world excel the brute abyss. 

xlix 

 "be not the field, with lively culture green,
" a sight more joyous than the dead morass? 
 "do not the sky, with active ether clean,
" and fan by sprightly zephir, far surpass
 "the foul november-fog, and slumberous mass,
" with which sad nature veil her droop face? 
 "do not the mountain-stream, as clear as glass,
" gay-dancing on, the putrid pool disgrace? 
 "the same in all hold true, but chief in human race. 

l. 

 "it be not by vile loiter in ease,
" that Greece obtain the bright palm of art,
 "that soft yet ardent Athens learn to please,
" to keen the wit, and to sublime the heart,
 "in all supreme! complete in every part! 
" it be not thence majestic Rome arise,
 "and over the nation shake her conquer dart:
" for sluggard brow the laurel never grow;
 "renown be not the child of indolent repose. 

li.

 "have unambitious mortal mind nought,
" but in loose joy their time to wear away;
 "have they alone the lap of dalliance seek,
" please on her pillow their dull head to lay:
 "rude nature state have be our state today;
" no city ever their towery front have raise,
 "no art have make we opulent and gay;
" with brother-brute the human race have graze;
 "none ever have soar to fame, none honour be, none praise. 

lii 

 "great Homer song have never fire the breast,
" to thirst of glory, and heroic deed;
 "sweet maro muse, sink in inglorious rest,
" have silent sleep amid the mincian reed:
 "the wit of modern time have tell their bead,
" and monkish legend be their only strain;
 "our milton Eden have lie wrap in weed,
" our Shakespear strol and laugh with Warwick swain,
 "ne have my master SPENSER charm his mulla plain. 

liii 

 "dumb too have be the sage historic Muse,
" and perish all the son of ancient fame;
 "those starry light of virtue, that diffuse
" through the dark depth of time their vivid flame,
 "have all be lose with such as have no name. 
" who then have scorn his ease for other good? 
 "who then have toil rapacious man to tame? 
" who in the public breach devote stand,
 "and for his country be cause be prodigal of blood? 

LIV. 

 "but shall to fame your heart impervious be,
" if right i read, you pleasure all require:
 "then hear how best may be obtain this fee,
" how best enjoy this nature wide desire. 
 "toil, and be glad! let industry inspire
" into your quicken limb her buoyant breath! 
 "who do not act be dead; absorb entire
" in miry sloth, no pride no joy he have:
 "o leaden-hearted man, to be in love with death! 

LV. 

 "better the toil Swain, oh happy far! 
" perhaps the happy of the son of man! 
 "who vigorous ply the plough, the team, or car;
" who hough the field, or ditch in the glen,
 "Delves in his garden, or secure his pen:
" the tooth of avarice poison not his peace;
 "he toss not in sloth abhor den;
" from vanity he have a full release;
 "and, rich in nature wealth, he think not of increase. 

lvi 

 "good lord! how keen be his sensation all! 
" his bread be sweet than the glutton cate;
 "the wine of France upon the palate pall,
" compare with what his simple soul elate,
 "the native cup who flavour thirst create;
" at one deep draught of sleep he take the night;
 "and for that heart-felt joy which nothing mate,
" of the pure nuptial bed the chaste delight,
 "the losel be to he a miserable wight. 

lvii 

 "but what avail the large gift of heaven,
" when sicken health and spirit go amiss? 
 "how tasteless then whatever can be give? 
" health be the vital principle of bliss,
 "and exercise of health. in proof of this,
" behold the wretch, who slug his life away,
 "soon swallow in disease sad abyss;
" while he who toil have brace, or manly play,
 "have light as air each limb, each thought as clear as day. 

lviii 

 "o who can speak the vigorous joy of health! 
" unclogged the body, unobscured the mind:
 "the morning raise gay; with please stealth,
" the temperate evening fall serene and kind. 
 "in health the wise brute true gladness find. 
" see! how the youngling frisk along the mead,
 "as may come on, and wake the balmy wind;
" rampant with life, their joy all joy exceed:
 "yet what save high-strung health this dance Pleasaunce breed? 

lix 

 "but here, instead, be foster every ill,
" which or distemper mind or body know. 
 "come then, my kindred spirit! do not spill
" your talent here. this place be but a shew,
 "who charm delude you to the den of woe:
" come, follow i, i will direct you right,
 "where pleasure rose, void of serpent, grow,
" sincere as sweet; come, follow this good knight,
 "and you will bless the day that bring he to your sight. 

LX. 

 "some he will lead to court, and some to camp;
" to senate some, and public sage debate,
 "where, by the solemn gleam of midnight-lamp,
" the world be poise, and manage mighty state;
 "to high discovery some, that new-creates
" the face of earth; some to the thrive mart;
 "some to the rural reign, and soft fate;
" to the sweet muse some, who raise the heart:
 "all glory shall be you, all nature, and all art! 

lxi 

 "there be, i see, who listen to my lay,
" who wretched sigh for virtue, but despair. 
 "all may be do, (methinks i hear they say)
" even death despise by generous action fair;
 "all, but for those who to these bower repair,
" their every power dissolve in luxury,
 "to quit of torpid sluggishness the lair,
" and from the powerful arm of sloth get free. 
 "it be rise from the dead — alas! — it can be! 

lxii 

 "will you then learn to dissipate the band
" of these huge threaten difficulty dire,
 "that in the weak man way like lion stand,
" his soul appall, and damp his rise fire? 
 "resolve! resolve! and to be man aspire! 
" exert that noble privilege, alone,
 "here to mankind indulge: control desire;
" let godlike reason, from her sovereign throne,
 "speak the command word — i will! — and it be do. 

lxiii.

 "heaven! can you then thus waste, in shameful wise,
" your few important day of trial here? 
 "heir of eternity! bear to rise
" through endless state of be, still more near
 "to bliss approach, and perfection clear,
" can you renounce a fortune so sublime,
 "such glorious hope, your backward step to steer,
" and roll, with vile brute, through mud and slime? 
 "no! no! — your heaven-touched heart disdain the piteous crime!" 

lxiv.

 "enough! enough! they cry" — strait, from the croud,
 the better sort on wing of transport fly. 
as when amid the lifeless summit proud
 of alpine cliff, where to the gelid sky
 snow pile on snow in wintery torpor lie,
 the ray divine of vernal phaebus play;
 the awaken heap, in streamlet from on high,
 rouse into action, lively leap away,
 glad-warbling through the vale, in their new be gay. 

LXV. 

not less the life, the vivid joy serene,
 that light up these new-creat man,
 than that which wing the exult spirit clean,
 when, just deliver from this fleshly den,
 it soar seek its native sky again. 
how light its essence! how unclog its power! 
beyond the blazon of my mortal pen:
 even so we glad forsake these sinful bower,
 even such enrapture life, such energy be we. 

lxvi.

but far the great part, with rage inflame,
 dire-muttered curse, and blaspheme high Jove. 
 "you son of hate! (they bitter exclaim)
" what bring you to this seat of peace and love? 
 "while with kind nature, here amid the grove,
" we pass the harmless sabbath of our time,
 "what to disturb it can, fall man, emove
" your barbarous heart? be happiness a crime? 
 "then do the fiend of hell rule in yond heaven sublime. 

lxvii 

 "you impious wretch! (quoth the knight in wrath)
" your happiness behold! "— then strait a wand
 he wave, a anti-magic power that have,
 truth from illusive falsehood to command. 
sudden, the landskip sink on every hand;
 the pure quick stream be marshy puddle find;
 on baleful heath the groves all blacken stand;
 and, over the weedy foul abhor ground,
 snake, adder, toad, each loath creature crawl around. 

lxviii 

and here and there, on tree by lightning scathe,
 unhappy wight who loathe life yhung;
 or, in fresh gore and recent murder bathe,
 they welter lie; or else, infuriate fling
 into the gloomy flood, while raven sing
 the funeral dirge, they down the torrent roll:
 these, by distemper blood to madness sting,
 have doom themselves; whence oft, when night control
 the world, return hither their sad spirit howl. 

lxix 

meantime a move scene be open lay. 
that lazar-house, i whilom in my lay
 depaint have, its horror deep-displayed,
 and give unnumbered wretch to the day,
 who toss there in squalid misery lay. 
soon as of sacred light the unwonted smile
 pour on these live catacomb its ray,
 through the drear cavern stretch many a mile,
 the sick upraise their head, and drop their woe awhile. 

lxx.

 "o heaven! (they cry) and do we once more see
" yond bless sun, and this green earth so fair? 
 "be we from noisome damp of pesthouse free? 
" and drink our soul the sweet ethereal air? 
 "o thou! or knight, or god! who hold there
" that fiend, oh keep he in eternal chain! 
 "but what for we, the child of despair,
" bring to the brink of hell, what hope remain? 
 "repentance do itself but aggravate our pain." 

lxxi 

the gentle knight, who see their rueful case,
 let fall down his silver beard some tear. 
 "certes (quoth he) it be not even in grace,
" the undo the past, and eke your break year:
 "nevertheless, to noble world repentance rear,
" with humble hope, her eye; to she be give
 "a power the true contrite heart that cheer;
" she quell the brand by which the rock be rive;
 "she more than mere soften, she rejoice heaven. 

lxxii.

 "then patient bear the suffering you have earn,
" and by these suffering purify the mind;
 "let wisdom be by past misconduct learn:
" or pious die, with penitence resign;
 "and to a life more happy and refine,
" doubt not, you shall, new creature, yet arise. 
 "till then, you may expect in i to find
" one who will wipe your sorrow from your eye,
 "one who will soothe your pang, and wing you to the sky." 

lxxiii 

they silent hear, and pour their thanks in tear. 
 "for you (resume the knight with stern tone)
" who hard dry heart the obdurate demon fear,
 "that villain gift will cost you many a groan;
" in dolorous mansion long you must bemoan
 "he fatal charm, and weep your stain away;
" till, soft and pure as infant-goodness grow,
 "you feel a perfect change: then, who can say,
" what grace may yet shine forth in heaven eternal day? " 

lxxiv 

this say, his powerful wand he wave anew:
 instant, a glorious angel-train descend,
 the charity, to-wit, of rosy hue;
 sweet love their look a gentle radiance lend,
 and with seraphic flame compassion blend. 
at once, delight, to their charge they fly:
 when lo! a goodly hospital ascend;
 in which they bid each human aid be nigh,
 that can the sick-bed smoothe of that unhappy fry. 

LXXV. 

it be a worthy edify sight,
 and give to humankind peculiar grace,
 to see kind hand attend day and night,
 with tender ministry, from place to place. 
some prop the head; some, from the pallid face,
 wipe off the faint cold dew weak nature shed;
 some reach the heal draught: the while, to chase
 the fear supreme, around their soften bed,
 some holy man by prayer all open heaven dispread. 

lxxvi 

attend by a glad acclaim train,
 of those he rescue have from gape hell,
 then turn the knight; and, to his hall again
 soft-pacing, seek of peace the mossy cell:
 yet down his cheek the gem of pity fall,
 to see the helpless wretch that remain,
 there leave through Delves and desert dire to yell;
 amaze, their look with pale dismay be stain,
 and spread wide their hand they meek repentance feign. 

lxxvii 

but ah! their scorn day of grace be past:
 for (horrible to tell!) a desert wild
 before they stretch, bare, comfortless, and vast;
 with gibbet, bone, and carcase defile. 
there nor trim field, nor lively culture smile;
 nor wave shade be see, nor fountain fair;
 but sand abrupt on sand lie loose pile,
 through which they flounder toil with painful care,
 while phaebus smite they sore, and fire the cloudless air. 

lxxviii.

then, vary to a joyless land of bog,
 the sadden country a grey waste appear;
 where nought but putrid steam and noisome fog
 for ever hang on drizzly auster beard;
 or else the ground by pierce caurus fear,
 be jagged with frost, or heap with glaze snow:
 through these extreme a ceaseless round they steer,
 by cruel fiend still hurry to and fro,
 gaunt beggary, and scorn, with many hellhound more. 

lxxix.

the first be with base dunghill rag clothe,
 taint the gale, in which they flutter light;
 of morbid hue his feature, sink, and sad;
 his hollow eye shake forth a sickly light;
 and over his lank jawbone, in piteous plight,
 his black rough beard be mat rank and vile;
 direful to see! a heart-appalling sight! 
meantime foul scurf and blotch he defile;
 and dog, wherever he go, still bark all the while. 

lxxx.

the other be a fell despightful fiend:
 hell hold none worse in baleful bower below;
 by pride, and wit, and rage, and rancour, keen;
 of man alike, if good or bad, the foe:
 with nose upturned, he always make a shew
 as if he smell some nauseous scent; his eye
 be cold, and keen, like blast from boreal snow;
 and taunt he casten forth most bitter. 
such be the twain that off drive this ungodly fry. 

lxxxi 

even so through Brentford town, a town of mud,
 a herd of brisly swine be prick along;
 the filthy beast, that never chew the cud,
 still grunt, and squeak, and sing their troublous song,
 and oft they plunge themselves the mire among:
 but ay the ruthless Driver goad they on,
 and ay of bark dog the bitter throng
 make they renew their unmelodious moan;
 ne ever find they rest from their unrest foe. 
