the resurrection a poem.

the pencil glow line and vast command,
 and mankind rise from the painter hand,
 the awful judge array in beamy light,
 and spectre tremble at the dreadful sight,
 to sing, o! Muse, the pious bard inspire,
 and waken in his breast the sacred fire. 

the hallow field, a bare white wall of late,
 now clothe in gaudy colour, shine in state;
 and lest some little interval confess
 it be ancient simple form, and homely dress,
 the skilful artist lay over every part,
 the first foundation of his future art,
 over the wide frame his ductile colour lead,
 and with thick daub all the wall overspread. 

as ever you spangle orb be hang on high,
 lest one great blank shall yawn through boundless sky,
 through the wide heavenly arch, and trackless road
 in azure volume the pure Aether flow;
 the sun at length burn out, intense bright,
 and the pale crescent shed her borrow light;
 with thick-sown star the radiant pole be crown,
 of milky glory a long tract be find,
 overflow, and whiten all the heaven around. 

so when the groundwork of the piece be lay,
 nor yet the painter have his art display,
 with slow hand, and pencil more divine
 he blend each colour, heighten every line,
 till various form the breathe picture wear,
 and a mute Groupè of image appear. 

celestial guard the topmost height attend,
 and croud of angel over the wall descend;
 with their big cheek the deafen clarion wind,
 who dreadful clangour startle all mankind;
 even the dead hear; the labour grave conceive,
 and the swell clod in picture seem to heave:
 ten thousand world revive to better sky,
 and from their tomb the throng coarse rise. 

so when fame Cadmus sow the fruitful field,
 with pregnant throw the quicken furrow swell;
 from the warm soil spring up a warlike train,
 and human harvest cover all the plain. 

and now from every corner of the earth
 the scatter dust be call to second birth;
 whether in mine it form the ripen mass,
 or humble mix, and flourish in the grass:
 the sever body now unite again,
 and kindred atom rally into man;
 the various joint resume their ancient seat,
 and every limb its former task repeat. 
here a imperfect form return to light,
 not half renew, dishonest to the sight;
 maim of his nose appear his blot face,
 and scarce the image of a man we trace:
 here by degree infuse, the vital ray
 give the first motion to the pant clay:
 here on the guilty brow pale horror glare,
 and all the figure labour with despair. 

from scene like these now turn thy wonder sight,
 and, if thou can withstand such flood of light,
 look! where thy saviour fill the middle space;
 the godhead open in his awful face;
 see! what mild beam their gracious influence shed,
 and how the point radiance crown his head! 
around his temple lambent glory shine,
 and on his brow sit majesty divine;
 his eye-ball lighten the celestial fire,
 and every grace to speak the god conspire. 

how change from he, who come to be betray,
 and who for man the precious ransom pay! 
who do on earth such arduous toil sustain,
 and patient bear a irksome life of pain:
 but death and hell subdue, the deity
 ascend triumphant to his native sky;
 and rise far above the aethereal height,
 the sun and moon diminish to his sight. 

and now to view he bare his bleed side,
 and his pierce hand and foot, in crimson die;
 still do the nail the recent scar reveal,
 and bloody track of the transfix steel. 
hither in croud the bless shape their flight,
 and throng the mansion of immortal light;
 the fruitful matron and the spotless maid,
 and infant, with a long life repay,
 stand round; and drink in celestial ray,
 on their redeemer fix with ardent gaze,
 and all the heaven resound with hymn of praise. 
each bosom kindle with seraphic joy,
 and conscious rapture all the soul employ. 
not equal rapture swell the sybil breast,
 when by the inmate deity possess;
 when Phoebus the prophetic maid inspire,
 and her limb tremble with convulsive fire. 

but whence this sudden blaze of dazzle light! 
what mitred brow be that, which greet my sight? 
forth from a stately tomb he lift his head,
 and to the sky on angel wing be speed. 
i know the form — alike the look and mien,
 another wainflet in his face be see:
 when will, alas! such spotless worth be find? 
when will a mind with equal virtue crown? 
fearless he see almighty vengeance rise,
 and fix on his god his guiltless eye. 

but now far different scene our wonder claim,
 horrent with darkness and malignant flame;
 the labour wall delusive picture hide
 and liquid sulphur roll in burn tide;
 so strong, so fierce, the paint flame arise,
 the pale spectator view they with surprise;
 believe the blaze wall indeed to burn,
 and fear the frame shall into ash turn. 
hither in ghastly croud the guilty haste,
 obscene with horror and with shame deface;
 with haggard look the gloomy fiend appear,
 they gnash their foamy tooth, and frown severe. 
a stern avenger, with relentless mind,
 wave a flamy falchion, stalk behind;
 with which, as once from paradise he drive,
 he drive the sinner from the joy above. 
what shall he do forlorn? or whither fly,
 to shun the ken of a all-seeing eye? 
what will he give among the just to shine,
 and fall before omnipotence divine? 
but oh! too late in sigh he vent his woe,
 too late his eye with gush tear overflow! 
vain be his sigh and fruitless be his tear,
 vengeance and justice stop the almighty ear. 

see! with what various charm the piece be fraught,
 and with what pregnant mark of judgement wrought! 
with how much grace the live colour glow! 
not bright colour paint the watery bow;
 when the fresh shower her various lustre share,
 and every drop with spangle deck the air. 

o! may the painter labour never fade,
 nor wasteful time their shine charm invade,
 until the first dawn of that eternal light,
 which by his fruitful pencil shine so bright. 
