the xxiiidxxiiid psalm.

the lord be my shepherd, my guardian and guide,
 for the want of his creature the lord do provide;
 ever since i be bear it be he that have crown
 the life that he give i with blessing around. 
while yet on the breast a poor infant i hang,
 ere time have unloosened the string of my tongue,
 he give i the help which i can not then ask,
 and now, oh my tongue, let his praise be thy task! 

through my tender year, with as tender a care,
 my soul like a lamb in his bosom he bear;
 to the brook he will lead i whenever i have need,
 and point out the pasture where best i may feed;
 no harm will approach i, for he be my shield
 from the bird of the air and the beast of the field;
 the wolf to devour i will often time prowl,
 but the lord be my shepherd, and guard my soul. 

how oft in my youth have i wander astray,
 and still he have set i again on the way;
 when lose in dark error no path i can meet,
 his word like a lantern have guide my foot;
 what wondrous escape to his kindness i owe,
 when rash and unthinking i seek my own woe;
 my soul have long since be go down to the deep,
 if the lord have not watch when i be asleep. 

whenever at a distance he see i afraid,
 over the hill and high mountain he come to my aid,
 then lead i back gentle, and bid i abide
 in the midst of his flock, and feed close by his side;
 how happy if there i can ever remain
 all the day of my life, and not wander again;
 yea, bless be the people, and happy thrice tell,
 who obey the lord voice and abide in his fold. 

the fold it be full, and the pasture be green,
 all be friendship and love, and no enemy see;
 there the lord dwell among we upon his own hill,
 and the mountain all round with his presence do fill,
 himself in the midst with a provident eye,
 regard our want and procure supply;
 he prepare all thing for our safety and food,
 we gather his gift, and be fill with good. 

when he lead forth the flock we all glad obey
 for the lord be himself both our leader and way,
 the hill smoke with incense where ever he have tread,
 and a sacred perfume show the footstep of god,
 while bless with his presence the valley beneath
 a sweet smell savour do constant breathe;
 he renew the face of each live thing,
 and the glad earth enjoy a perpetual spring. 

or if a far different scene he prepare,
 and we march through the wilderness barren and bare,
 by his wonderful work we see plain enough
 that the earth be the lord and the fullness thereof;
 when hungry and thirsty we be ready to faint,
 he see our need and prevent our complaint;
 the rain at his word bring we bread from the sky,
 and rock become river when nature be dry. 

from the fruitfull hill to the barren rock
 the lord have make all for the sake of his flock,
 and the flock in return the lord always confess,
 their joy in abundance, their hope in distress;
 he behold in our welfare his glory display,
 and we deem ourselves happy when he be obey;
 with a cheerful regard we attend to his way,
 our attention be prayer, and our cheerfulness praise. 
