on the vanity of this life: a pindaric ode. 

1. 

what make fond man the trifle life desire,
and with such ardor court his pain?
it be madness, worse than madness, to admire
what bring ten thousand misery in its train:
to each soft moment, hour of care succeed,
and for the pleasure of a day,
with year of grief we pay;
so much our last sorrow, our fleet joy exceed.
in vain, in vain, we happiness pursue,
that mighty bless be not here;
that, like the false misguide fire,
be farther off, when we believe it near:
yet still we follow till we tire,
and in the fatal chase expire:
each gaudy nothing which we view,
we fancy be the wish for prize,
its paint glory captivate our eye;
blind by pride, we hug our own mistake,
and foolish adore that idol which we make.

2. 

some hope to find it on the coast of fame,
and hazard all to gain a glorious name;
proud of deformity and scar,
they seek for honour in the bloody war;
on danger, unconcerned, they run,
and death it self disdain to shun:
this, the rich with wonder see,
and fancy they be happy far
than those delude hero be:
but this, alas! be their mistake;
they only dream that they be bless,
for when they from their please slumber wake,
they will find their mind with swarm of care oppress,
so crowd, that no part be free
to entertain felicity:
the pain to get, and fear to lose,
like harpy, all their joy devour:
who such a wretched life will choose?
or think those happy who must fortune trust?
that fickle goddess be but seldom just.
exterior thing can never be true good,
because within her power;
this the wise ancient understand,
and only wish for what will life sustain;
esteem all beyond superfluous and vain.

3. 

some think the great be only bless,
those god-like man who shine above the rest:
in who unite glory meet,
and all the low world pay homage at their foot:
on their exalt height they sit in state,
and their command bind like the law of fate:
their regal sceptre, and their glitter crown,
imprint a awful fear in every breast:
death shoot his kill arrow through their frown;
their smile be welcome, as the beam of light
be to the infant world, when first it rise from night.
thus, in the firmament of power above,
each in his radiant sphere do move,
remote from common view;
the admire croud with wonder gaze,
the distant glory their weak eye amaze:
but can they search into the truth of thing,
can they but look into the thought of king;
if all their hide care they know,
their jealousy, their fear, their pain,
and all the trouble of their reign,
they then will pity those they now admire;
and with their humble state content, will nothing more desire.

4. 

if any thing like happiness be here,
if any thing deserve our care,
it be only by the good possess;
by those who virtue law obey,
and cheerful proceed in her unerring way;
who soul be cleanse from all the dregs of sin,
from all the base alloy of their inferior part,
and fit to harbour that celestial guest,
who never will be confine
but to a holy breast.
the pure and spotless mind,
have all within
that the most boundless wish can crave;
the most aspire temper hope to have:
nor need the help of art,
nor vain supply of sense,
assure of all in only innocence.

5. 

malice and envy, discontent, and pride,
those fatal inmate of the vicious mind,
which into dangerous path the unthinking guide,
never to the pious breast admittance find.
as the upper region be serene and clear,
no wind, no cloud be there,
so with perpetual calm the virtuous soul be bless,
those antepast of everlasting rest:
like some firm rock amid the rage wave
she stand, and their unite force outbrave;
contend, till from her earthly shackle free,
she take her flight
into immense eternity,
and in those realm of unexhausted light,
forget the pressure of her former state.
overjoyed to find her self beyond the reach of fate.

6. 

o happy place! where every thing will please,
where neither sickness, fear, nor strife,
nor any of the painful care of life,
will interrupt her ease:
where every object charm the sight,
and yield fresh wonder and delight,
where nothing hear but song of joy,
full of ecstasy divine,
seraphic hymn! which love inspire,
and fill the breast with sacred fire:
love refine from drossy heat,
raise to a flame sublime and great,
in every heavenly face do his shine,
and each celestial tongue employ:
what ever we can of friendship know,
what ever we passion call below,
do but a weak resemblance bear,
to that bless union which be ever there,
where love, like life, do his animate the whole,
as if it be but one bless individual soul.

7. 

such as a last happiness will have,
must seek it in the peaceful grave,
where free from wrong the dead remain.
life be a long continue pain,
a linger slow disease.
which remedy a while may ease,
but can work a perfect cure:
music with its enchant lay,
may for a while our spirit raise,
honour and wealth may charm the sense,
and by their powerful influence
may gentle lull our care asleep;
but when we think our self secure,
and fond hope we shall no future ill endure,
our grief awake again,
and with redouble rage augment our pain:
in vain we stand on our defence,
in vain a constant watch we keep,
in vain each path we guard;
unseen into our soul they creep,
and when they once be there, it be very hard
with all our strength to force they thence;
like bold intruder on the whole they seize,
a part will not the insatiate victor please.

8. 

in vain, alas! in vain,
we reason aid implore,
that will but add a quick sense of pain,
but not our former joy restore:
those few who by strict rule their live have lead,
who reason law attentive have read;
who to its dictate glad submission pay,
and by their passion never lead astray,
go resolute on in its severe way,
can never solid satisfaction find:
the most that reason can, be to persuade the mind,
its trouble decent to bear,
and not permit a murmur, or a tear,
to tell the inquire world that any such be there:
but while we strive our suffering to disown,
and blush to have our frailty know;
while from the public view our grief we hide,
and keep they prisoner in our breast,
we seem to be, but be not true bless;
what like contentment look, be but the effect of pride:
from it we no advantage win,
but be the same we be before,
the smart pain corrode we still within;
confinement do but make they rage the more:
upon the vital stock they prey,
and by insensible degree they waste our life away.

9. 

in vain from book we hope to gain relief,
knowledge do but increase our grief:
the more we read, the more we find
of the unexhausted store still leave behind:
to dig the wealthy i we try,
no pain, no labour spare;
but the love treasure too profound do lie,
and mock our utmost industry:
like some enchant isle it do appear;
the please spectator think it near;
but when with wide spread sail he make to shore,
his hope be lose, the phantom see no more:
ashamed, and tire, we of success despair,
our fruitless study we repent,
and blush to see, that after all our care,
after whole year on tedious volume spend,
we only dark understand
that which we think we full know;
through labyrinth we go without a clue,
till in the dangerous maze our self we lose,
and neither know which path avoid, or which to choose.
from thought to thought, our restless mind be toss,
like shipwrecked mariner we seek the land,
and in a sea of doubt be almost lose.
the phoenix truth wrap up in mist do lie,
not to be clear see before we die;
not till our soul free from confine clay,
open their eye in everlasting day.
