the spanish descent.

a poem.

long have this nation be amuse in vain
 with post from Portugal, and news from Spain,
 with Or—d's conquest, and the fleet success,
 and favour from the moor at maccaness. 
the learned mob buy compass and scale,
 and every barber know the bay of Cales,
 show we the army here, and there the fleet,
 here the troop land, and there the foe retreat.
there at saint maries how the Spaniard run,
and listen close as if they hear the gun,
and some pretend they see they — the nun.

other describe the castle and puntall,
 and tell how easy it be to conquer Cales;
 wise propose to let the silver come,
 and help to pay the nation debt at home.
but still they count the spoil without the cost,
 and still the news come fast than the post.

the grave head, like mountebank of state,
 of abdication and revolt debate,
 expect a revolution shall appear
 as cheap and easy as it have do here.
bring the revolt grandee to the coast,
 and give the duke do Anjou up for lose.
doom he to France to seek relief in vain,
 and send the duke of Austria to Spain. 
canvas the council at Madrid, and find
 how all the spanish courtier stand incline.
describe the strange convulsion of the state,
 and old carreroe sacrifice to fate.
then all the stage of action they survey,
 and wish our general know as much as they.

some have their fancy so exceed bold,
 they see the queen fall out, and hear they scold:
 nor be the thing so strange, for if they do,
 it be talk from Toledo to Madrid. 

and now the farce be act over again,
 the meaning of our mischief to explain.
the learned mob c'er-read in arm and law,
 the cause of their miscarriage foresee.
tell we the loiter minute be mis-spent,
 too long a go, and too few that go.
exalt the catalonian garrison,
 the new make work, the platform, and the town. 
tell we it be impossible to land,
 and all their battery sink into the sand.

some be all banter, and the voyage despise;
 for fruitless action seldom pass for wise.
tell we it be like our english politic,
 to think to wheedle Spain with heretic. 
the disproportioned force they banter too;
 the ship too many, and the man too few.

then they find fault with conduct, and condemn
 sometime the officer, sometime the man:
 nor escape his grace the satyr of the town;
 whoever fail success, shall fail renown.
sir George come in among the indiscreet;
 sometime the army censure, then the fleet;
 how the abandon country they destroy,
 and make their early declaration void;
 too hasty proof of their protection give,
 plunder the people they come there to save.
as if the Spaniard be so plague with France,
 to fly to thief for their deliverance.

but among all the wisdom of the town,
 the vast design of fate remain unknown,
 unguest at, unexpected, hide from thought,
 for no man look for blessing in our fault.
mischance sometime be a nation good,
 right improve, and nice understand.

ten year we feel the die pang of war,
 and fetch our grief and misery from far.
our english million foreign war maintain,
 and english blood have drench the neighbour plain.
nor shall we blush to boast what all man own,
 uncommon english valour have be show;
 the forward courage of our ill pay man,
 deserve more praise than nature spare my pen.
what can they not perform, or what endure?
witness the mighty bastion of namure. 
we fast much, and we attempt more,
but never can come to give thanks before,
unless it be when the fatal strife be over.
some secret Achan curse our enterprise,
 and Israel flee before her enemy.

whether the poisonous particle be hide
 in we that follow, or in they that lead:
 what fatal charm benumb the nation sense,
 to struggle with eternal providence:
 whether some curse, or else some perjure vow,
 or some strange guilt that be expiate now:
 be it the pilot who ill steer the state;
 or be it the decisive will of fate;
 it be hard to tell; but this too well we know,
 all thing go backward, or go on too slow;
 small be the glory of our high success,
 a tedious war, and a imperfect peace;
 peace dear purchase, and which cost we more
 great kingdom than we conquer town before.

action may miss of their deserve applause,
 when heaven approve the man, and not the cause;
 and well contrive design miscarry when
 heaven may approve the cause, but not the man;
 here then be the ground of our expense of blood,
 the sword of gideon, not the sword of god. 
the mighty and the wise be lay aside,
 and victory the sex have dignify;
 we have bin use to female conquest here,
 and queen have bin the glory of the war,
 the scene revive with smile of providence,
 all thing decline before, and prosper since;
 and as if ill success have be entail,
 the posthume project be the last that fail;
 as heaven, who work be hide from humane view,
 will blast our old design, and bless our new.

and now the baffle enterprise grow stale,
 their hope decrease, and juster doubt prevail:
 the unattempted town sing victory,
 and scar with wall, and not with man, we fly;
 great conduct in our safe retreat we show,
 and brave reimbark when none pursue;
 the gun, the ammunition, put on board,
 and what we can not plunder, we restore.
and thus we quit the andalusion shore,
 drench with the spanish wine, and spanish us.
with song of scorn the arragonian sing,
 and loud te deum make the valley ring.

uncommon joy now raise the hope of Spain,
 and Vigo do their plate-fleet entertain;
 the vast galleon deep-balasted with over,
 safe reach home to the galitian shore.
the double joy spread from Madrid to Rome,
 the english flee, the silver fleet come home:
 from thence it reach to the bank of po,
 and the loud cannon let the german know.
the rattle volley tell their short-lived joy,
 and roar te deum out in smoke and noise.
to Milan next it fly on wing of fame,
 there the young monarch and his hero come,
 from sad luzara, and the mantuan wall,
 to seek new danger, and to rescue Cales. 
his joy for welcome treasure he express,
 but grieve at his good fortune in the rest:
 the fly english he have wish to stay,
 to crown with conquest one victorious day.

the priest, in high procession show their joy,
 and all the art of eloquence employ,
 to feed his pride of fancy victory,
 and raise his untried valour to the sky.
the flatter courtier his vain mind possess
 with airy hope of conquest and success.
prompt his young thought to run on new extreme,
 and sycophantic pride his heart enflame;
 his native crime spring up, his pulse beat high,
 with thought of universal monarchy;
 fancy his foreign enemy suppress,
 and boast too soon how he will subdue the rest.
prince, like other man, be blind to fate,
 he only see the event who do the cause create.

from hence through France the welcome tiding fly,
 to mock his ancient sire with mushroom joy.
rapture possess the ambitious head of France,
 and golden hope their new design advance.
now they consult to crush the world again,
 and talk of rifle Christendom for man.

new fleet, new army, and new league contrive,
 and swallow man and nation up alive;
 prescribe no bound to their ambitious pride,
 but first the wealth, and then the world, divide.
excess of pride to airy madness grow,
 and make man strange romantic thing propose:
 the head turn round, and all the fancy vain,
 and make the world as giddy as the brain.
man that consult such weighty thing as those,
 all possible disaster shall suppose:
 in vain great prince mighty thing invent,
 while heaven retain the power to prevent:
 he that to general mischief make pretence,
 shall first know how to conquer providence.
such strive in vain, and only show mankind,
 how tyrant clothe with power be all incline.

mean while our melancholy fleet steer home,
 some grieve for past, for future mischief some:
 disaster swell the blood, and spleen the face,
 and ripen they for glorious thing apace.
with deep regret they turn their eye to Spain,
 and wish they once might visit they again.
little they dream that good which heaven prepare;
 no merit from below, no sign from heaven appear;
 no hint, unless from their high-ripened spleen,
 and strange ungrounded sympathy within.

the silent duke, from all misconduct free,
 alone enjoy the calm of honesty:
 fear not his journal shall be fair show,
 and sigh for England error, not his own.
his constant temper all serene and clear;
 first free from guilt, and therefore free from fear.

not so the rest, for conscious thought become
 more restless now the near they come home.
the party-making feud on board begin:
 for people always quarrel when they sin.
reflect with shame upon the thing misdo,
 and shift their fault about from one to one,
 prepare excuse, and compute their friend,
 and dread the fate which their desert attend.
some wish for storm, and curse the wind and sail,
 and dream, no doubt, of gibbet, and of jail;
 imaginary punishment appear,
 and suit to their secret guilt, their fear,
 their hasten fate in their own fancy read,
 and few, it be fear, their innocence can plead.
then their sweet spoil to trusty hand convey,
 and throw the rifle god of Spain away:
 disgorge that wealth they dare not entertain,
 and wish the nun their maiden-head again. 
dismiss their wealth for fear of witness,
 and purge their coffer and their conscience,
 curse their ill-got trifle, but in vain,
 for still the guilt, and still the fear, remain.

tell we you rabies of abstruser sense,
 who jumble fate and fool with providence;
 be this the choose army, this the fleet,
 for which heaven praise sound in every street?
can heaven provide they one occasion more,
 who have so ill discharge themselves before?
that fleet so many former million lose,
 so little have perform, so much have cost:
 that fleet so often man with knave before,
 that serve we all the war to make we poor;
 that twice have make their fruitless voyage to Spain,
 and see the Streights, and so come home again:
 our wooden wall that shall defend our trade,
 and many a witless wooden voyage have make;
 how oft have they be fit out in vain,
 waste our money, and destroy our man,
 betray our merchant, and expose their fleet,
 and cause eternal murmur in our street?
the nation genius sure prevail above,
 and heaven conceal his anger, show his love:
 the nation guardian angel have prevail,
 and on her guardian queen new favour have entail.

now let glad Europe in her turn rejoice,
 and sing new triumph with exalt voice.
see the glad post of tiding winge with news,
 with suit speed the wonder fleet pursue:
 his haste discern, increase their surprise,
 the more they wonder, and the more he fly.
nor wind, nor sea, proportion speed can bear;
 for joy and hope have swift wing than fear.
with what surprise of joy they meet the news!
joy, that to every vein new spirit infuse.
the wild excess in shout and cry appear;
 for joy and grief be all irregular.

council of war for sake of form they call,
 but shame admit of no dispute at all:
 how shall they differ where no doubt can be?
but if they shall accept of victory,
 whether they shall the great occasion take,
 or baffle heaven, and double their mistake?
whether the naked and defenceless prize
 they shall accept; or heaven and that despise?
whether they shall revive their reputation;
 or sink it twice, and twice betray the nation?
who dare the horrid negative design?
who dare the last suggest, the first decline?
envy her self; for Satan always there,
 and keep his council with the god of War.  
though with her swell spleen she seem to burst,
 will the design while the event she curse.

the word be go out, and now they spread the main
 with swell sail, and swell hope, for Spain:
 to double vengeance press wherever they come,
 resolve to pay the haughty Spaniard home:
 resolve by future conduct to atone
 for all our past mistake, and all their own.
new life spring up in every english face,
 and fit they all for glorious thing apace:
 the booty some excite, and some the cause;
 but more the hope to gain their lose applause.
eager their sully honour to restore,
 some anger whet, some pride and vengeance more.

the lazy minute now pass on too slow,
 fancy fly fast than the wind can blow:
 impatient wish lengthen out the day;
 they chide the loiter wind for their delay.
but time be nature faithful messenger,
 and bring up all we wish, as well as all we fear.

the mist clear up, and now the scout descry
 the subject of their hope and victory:
 the wish for fleet embay, in harbour lie,
 unfit to fight, and more unfit to fly.
triumphant joy throughout the navy fly,
 echo from shore with terror and surprise.
strange power of noise! which at one simple sound
 at once shall some encourage, some confound.

in vain the lion tangle in the snare
 with anguish roar, and rend the tremble air:
 it be vain to struggle with almighty fate;
 vain and impossible the weak debate.
the mighty boom the fort resist in vain,
 the gun with fruitless force in noise complain.
see how the troop intrepid fall on!
wish for more foe, and think they fly too soon,
 with eager fury to their fort pursue,
 and think the odds of four to one too few.
the land first conquer, and the prize attend;
 fate beckon in the fleet to back their friend:
 despair succeed, they struggle now too late,
 and soon submit to their prevail fate:
 courage be madness when occasion past,
 death the secure refuge, and the last.

and now the roll flame come threaten on,
 and mighty stream of melt gold run down.
the flame oar down to its center make,
 to form new mine beneath the oazy lake,

here a galleon with spicy drug inflame,
 in odoriferous fold of sulphur stream.
the god of old no such oblation know,
 their spice weak, and their perfume but few.
the fright Spaniard from their treasure fly,
 loath to forsake their wealth, but loath to die. 

here a vast carrack fly while none pursue,
 bulge on the shore by she distract crew:
 there like a mighty mountain she appear,
 and groan beneath the golden weight she bear.
conquest pervert the property of friend,
 and make man ruin what they can defend:
 some blow their treasure up into the air,
 with all the wild excess of despair.
strange fate! that war such odd event shall have;
 friend will destroy, and enemy will save:
 other their safety to their wealth prefer,
 and mix some small discretion with their fear.
life the best gift that nature can bestow;
 the first that we receive, the last which we forgo:
 and he that be vain prodigal of blood,
 forfeit his sense to do his cause no good.
all desparation the effect of fear;
 courage be temper, valour can despair:

and now the victory complete gain;
 no ship to conquer now, no foe remain.
the mighty spoil exceed whatever be know,
 that vanquish ever lose, or victor win:
 so great, if fame shall future time remind,
 they will think she lie, and libel all mankind.

well may the pious queen new anthem raise,
 sing she own fortune, and her maker praise;
 invite the nation will thanks to pay;
 and well may all the mighty one obey.
so may they sing, be always so preserve,
 by grace unwished, and conquest undeserved.

now let we welcome home the conquer fleet,
 and all their well atone mistake forget:
 such high success shall all resentment drown,
 nothing but joy and welcome shall be find.
no more their past miscarriage reprove,
 but bury all in gratitude and love;
 let their high conduct have a just regard,
 and mean merit meet a kind reward.

but now what fruit of victory remain?
to heaven what praise? what gratitude to man?
let France sing praise for sham of victory,
 and mock their maker with religious lie:
 but England bless with thankful heart shall raise,
 for mighty conquest, mighty song of praise.

she need no false pretence to deceive:
 what all man see, all man must needs believe.
our joy can hardly run into excess,
the well know subject all our foe confess:
we can desire more, they can pretend to less.

ANNE, like she great progenitor, sing praise:
 like she she conquer, and like she she pray;
 like she she grace and protect the throne,
 and count the land prosperity her own:
 like she, and long like she, be bless her reign,
 crown with new conquest, and more fleet from Spain. 

see now the royal chariot come amain,
 with all the will nation in her train,
 with humble glory, and with solemn grace,
 queen in her eye, and christian in her face.
with she, her represent subject join;
 and when she pray, the whole nation say, amen. 

with she, in stall the illustrious noble sit,
 the cherubim and seraphim of state:
 ANNE like a cornet in the center shine,
 and they like star that circumfere the sun.
she great in they, and they as great in she;
 sure heaven will such illustrious praise hear.
the crowd million hearty blessing pour:
 saint Paul never see but one such day before. 
