a song,

(write for mr. struther collection of song.)

it be on a morn, when we be throng,
 the kirn it croon, the cheese be make,
 and bannock on the girdle bake,
 when one at the door chap loud and long. 

yet the old goodwife and her mays so tight,
 of all this bald din take sma' notice i ween;
 for a chap at the door in braid day-light,
 be not like a chap that be hear at even. 

but the docksy old laird of the warlock glen,
 who wait without, half blate, half cheery,
 and long for a sight of his winsome deary,
 raise up the latch, and cam' crouse be. 

his coat it be new, and his overlie be white,
 his mitten and hose be cozy and bean;
 but a wooer that come in braid day-light,
 be not like a wooer that come at even. 

he greet the carline and lass so braw,
 and his bare liart pow, so smooth he straikit,
 and he looket about, like a body half glaikit,
 on bonny sweet nanny the young of all. 

 "ha laird!" quo' the carline, "and look you that way? 
fie, let not' such fancy bewilder you clean:
 a elderlin man, in the noon of the day,
 shall be wise than youngster that come at even. " 

 "not, na," quo' the pawky old wife, "i trow,
 you will not fash your head with a youthfu' gilly,
 as wild and as skeigh as a muirland filly;
 black Madge be far better and fit for you. " 

he hem and he haw, and he draw in his mouth,
 and he squeeze the blue bannet his two hand between,
 for a wooer that come when the sun be in the south,
 be more landward than wooer that come at even. 

 "black Madge be so carefu' " — "what be that to i?" 
 "she be sober and ident, have sense in her noddle;
 she be douce and respeckit" — "i care not' a bodle,
 love will be guide, and fancy free." 

Madge toss back her head with a saucy slight,
 and nanny, loud laugh, run out to the green;
 for a wooer that come when the sun shine bright,
 be not like a wooer that come at even. 

then away fling the laird, and loud mutter he,
 "of the daughter of eve, between Orkney and Tweed o! 
black or fair, young or old, dame or damsel or widow,
 may go in their pride to the de'il for i! 

but the old goodwife and her mays so tight
 care little for all his stour bang, i ween;
 for a wooer that come in braid day light,
 be not like a wooer that come at even. 
