six town eclogue.

by the right Hon. l. m. W. m. 

Monday.

Roxana from the court retire late,
sigh her soft sorrow at saint James gate.
such heavy thought lie brood in her breast,
not her own chairman with more weight oppress;
they groan the cruel load they doom to bear;
she in these gentle sound express her care.

"be it for this, that i these rose wear,
"for this new-set the jewel for my hair?
"ah! princess! with what zeal have i pursue!
"almost forget the duty of a prude.
"think i never can attend too soon,
"I have miss my prayer, to get i dress by noon.
"for thou, ah! what for thou do i resign?
"my pleasure, passion, all that ever be i.
"i sacrifice both modesty and ease,
"leave opera, and go to filthy play;
"double entendres shock my tender ear,
"yet even this for thou i choose to bear.
"in glow youth, when nature bid be gay,
"and every joy of life before i lie,
"by honour prompt, and by pride restrain,
"the pleasure of the young my soul disdain:
"sermon i seek, and with a mein severe
"censure my neighbour, and say daily prayer.
"alas! how change! — with the same sermon-mien
"that once i pray, the what-d'ye-called I have see.
"ah! cruel princess, for thy sake i have lose
"that reputation which so dear have cost:
"i, who avoid every public place,
"when bloom and beauty bid i show my face;
"now near thou constant every night abide
"with never-failing duty by thy side,
"myself and daughter stand on a row,
"to all the foreigner a goodly show!
"oft have your drawing-room be sad thin,
"and merchants wife close by the chair be see;
"have not i ample fill the empty space,
"and save your highness from the dire disgrace.

"yet coquetilla artifice prevail,
"when all my merit and my duty fail:
"that coquetilla, who delude air
"corrupt our virgin, and our youth ensnare;
"so sink her character, so lose her fame,
"scarce visit before your highness come:
"yet for the bedchamber it be her you choose,
"when zeal and fame and virtue you refuse.
"ah! worthy choice! not one of all your train
"who censure blast not, and dishonour stain.
"let the nice hind now suckle dirty pig,
"and the proud pea-hen hatch the cuckoo egg!
"lot Iris leave her paint and own her age,
"and grave suffolka wed a giddy page!
"a great miracle be daily view,
"a virtuous princess with a court so lewd.

"i know thou, court! with all thy treacherous wile,
"thy false caress and undo smile!
"ah! princess, learn in all the courtly art
"to cheat our hope, and yet to gain our heart!

"large lovely bribe be the great statesman aim;
"and the neglect patriot follow fame.
"the prince be ogle; some the king pursue;
"but your Roxana only follow you.
"despise Roxana, cease, and try to find
"some other, since the princess prove unkind;
"perhaps it be not hard to find at court,
"if not a great, a more firm support. "

Tuesday.

saint James coffee-house.

thou, who so many favour have receive,
wondrous to tell, and hard to be believe,
oh! h—d, to my lay attention lend,
hear how too lover boasting contend:
like thou successful, such their bloomy youth,
renown alike for gallantry and truth.

saint James bell have toll some wretch in,
(as tatter riding-hood alone can sin)
the happy sinner now their charm put out,
and to their manteau their complexion suit;
the opera queen have finish half their face,
and city-dame already take place;
fop of all kind, to see the lion, run;
the beauty stay till the first act be begin,
and beaux step home to put fresh linen on.
no well-dressed youth in coffee-house remain,
but pensive patch, who on the window lean;
and silliander, that alert and gay,
first pick his tooth, and then begin to say.

silliander.

why all these sigh; ah! why so pensive grow?
some cause there be why thus you sit alone.
do hapless passion all this sorrow move?
or do thou envy where the lady love?

patch.

if, who they love, my envy must pursue,
it be true, at least, i never envy you.

silliander.

no, i be unhappy — you be in the right —
it be you they favour, and it be i they slight.
yet i can tell, but that i hate to boast,
a club of lady where it be i they toast.

patch.

toast do seldom any favour prove;
like we, they never toast the thing they love.
a certain duke one night my health begin;
with cheerful pledge round the room it run,
till the young Sylvia, press to drink it too,
start and vow she know not what to do:
what, drink a fellow health! she die with shame:
yet blush whenever she pronounce my name.

silliander.

ill fate pursue i, may i never find
the dice propitious, or the lady kind,
if fair miss flippy fan i do not tear,
and one from i she condescend to wear.

patch.

woman be always ready to receive;
it be then a favour when the sex will give.
a lady (but she be too great to name)
beauteous in person, spotless in her fame,
with gentle struggle let i force this ring;
another day may give another thing.

silliander.

i can say something — see this billet-doux —
and as for present — look upon my shoe —
these buckle be not force, nor half a theft,
but a young countess fond make the gift.

patch.

my countess be more nice, more artful too,
affect to fly, that i may fierce pursue:
this snuff-box which i beg, she still deny,
and when i strive to snatch it, seem to hide;
she laugh and flee, and as i seek to seize,
with affectation cram it down her stay;
yet hope she do not place it there unseen,
i press her breast, and pull it from between.

silliander.

last night, as i stand ogle of her grace,
drink delicious poison from her face,
the soft enchantress do that face decline,
nor ever raise her eye to meet with i;
with sudden art some secret do pretend,
lean cross two chair to whisper to a friend,
while the stiff whalebone with the motion rise,
and thousand beauty to my sight expose.

patch.

early this morn — (but i be ask to come)
i drink bohea in caelia dressing-room:
warm from her bed, to i alone within,
her nightgown fasten with a single pin;
her night-clothes tumble with resistless grace,
and her bright hair play careless round her face;
reach the kettle make her gown unpin,
she wear no waistcoat, and her shift be thin.

silliander.

see Titiana, drive to the park!
hark! let we follow, it be not yet too dark;
in her all beauty of the spring be see,
her cheek be rosy, and her mantle green.

patch.

see tintoretta to the opera go!
haste, or the crowd will not permit our bow;
in she the glory of the heaven we view,
her eye be starlike, and her mantle blue.

silliander,

what colour do in caelia stocking shine?
reveal that secret, and the prize be thy.

patch.

what be her garter? tell i if you can;
i will free own thou far the happy man

thus patch continue his heroic strain,
while silliander but contend in vain,
after a conquest so important gain,
unrivalled patch in every ruelle reign.

Wednesday.

the tête à tête.

"no, fair dancinda, no; you strive in vain
"to calm my care and mitigate my pain;
"if all my sigh, my care, can fail to move,
"ah! sooth i not with fruitless vow of love. "
thus Strephon speak. dancinda thus reply:
what must i do to gratify your pride?
too well you know (ungrateful as thou be)
how much you triumph in this tender heart:
what proof of love remain for i to grant?
yet still you tease i with some new complaint.
oh! will to heaven! — but the fond wish be vain —
too many favour have not make it plain!
but such a passion break through all disguise,
love redden on my cheek and wish in my eye.
be it not enough (inhuman and unkind!)
i own the secret conflict of my mind;
you can know what secret pain i prove,
when i with burn blush own i love.
you see my artless joy at your approach,
i sigh, i faint, i tremble at your touch;
and in your absence all the world i shun;
i hate mankind, and curse the cheere sun.
still as i fly, ten thousand swain pursue;
ten thousand swain i sacrifice to you.
i show you all my heart without disguise:
but these be tender proof that you despise —
i see too well what wish you pursue;
you will not only conquer, but undo:
you, cruel victor, weary of your flame,
will seek a cure in my eternal shame;
and not content my honour to subdue,
now strive to triumph over my virtue too.
oh! love, a god indeed to womankind,
who arrow burn i and who fetter bind,
avenge thy altar, vindicate thy fame,
and blast these traitor that profane thy name;
who by pretend to thy sacred fire,
raise curse trophy to impure desire.

have you forget with what ensnare art
you first seduce this fond uncautious heart?
then as i flee, do you not kneel cry,
"turn, cruel beauty; whither will you fly?
"why all these doubt? why this distrustful fear?
"no impious wish shall offend your ear:
"nor ever shall my bold hope pretend
"above the title of a tender friend;
"bless, if my lovely goddess will permit
"my humble vow thus sigh at her foot.
"the tyrant love that in my bosom reign,
"the god himself submit to wear your chain.
"you shall direct his course, his ardour tame,
"and check the fury of his wild flame."

unpractised youth be easy deceive;
soothe by such sound, i listen and believe;
now quite forget that soft submissive fear,
you dare to ask what i must blush to hear.

can i forget the honour of my race,
and meet your wish, fearless of disgrace;
can passion over my tender youth prevail,
and all my mother pious maxim fail;
yet to preserve your heart (which still must be,
false as it be, for ever dear to i)
this fatal proof of love i will not give,
which you will contemn the moment you receive.
the wretched she, who yield to guilty joy,
a man may pity, but he must despise.
your ardour cease, i then shall see you shun
the wretched victim by your art undo.
yet if i can that cold indifference bear,
what more will strike i with the last despair,
with this reflection will my soul be tear,
to know i merit your cruel scorn.

"have love no pleasure free from guilt or fear?
"pleasure less fierce, more last, more sincere?
"thus let we gentle kiss and fond gaze,
"love be a child, and like a child it play. "

o Strephon, if you will continue just,
if love be something more than brutal lust,
forbear to ask what i must still deny,
this bitter pleasure, this destructive joy,
so close follow by the dismal train
of cut shame, and guilt heart-piercing pain.

she pause; and fix her eye upon her fan;
he take a pinch of snuff, and thus begin;
madam, if love — but he can say no more,
for mademoiselle come rap at the door.
the dangerous moment no adieu afford;
— begone, she cry, i be sure i hear my lord.
the lover start from his unfinished love,
to snatch his hat, and seek his scatter glove:
the sigh dame to meet her dear prepare,
while Strephon curse slip down the back-stairs.

Thursday.

the bassette-table.

cardelia.

the bassette-table spread, the tallier come,
why stay smilinda in the dressing-room?
rise, pensive nymph! the tallier stay for you.

smilinda.

ah! madam, since my sharp be untrue,
i joyless make my once adore alpieu.
i see he stand behind ombrelia chair,
and whisper with that soft, delude air,
and those feign sigh, that cheat the listen fair.

cardelia.

be this the cause of your romantic strain?
a mighty grief my heavy heart sustain.
as you by love, so i by fortune cross,
in one bad deal three septlevas i lose.

smilinda.

be that a grief which you compare with i?
with ease the smile of fortune i resign.
will all my gold in one bad deal be go,
be lovely sharp mine, and my alone;

cardelia.

a lover lose be but a common care,
and prudent nymph against the change prepare.
the queen of club thrice lose! oh! who can guess
this fatal stroke! this unforeseen distress!

smilinda.

see! Betty loveit very à propos!
she all the pain of love and play do know,
deep experience many year ago.
dear Betty shall the important point decide,
Betty, who oft the pain of each have try:
impartial, she shall say who suffer most,
by cards ill-usage, or by lover lose.

loveit.

tell, tell your grief; attentive will i stay,
though time be precious, and i want some tea.

cardelia.

behold this equipage by Mathers wrought,
with fifty guinea (a great pennyworth!) buy!
see on the tooth-pick Mars and Cupid strive,
and both the struggle figure seem to live.
upon the bottom see the queen bright face;
a myrtle foliage round the thimble case;
Jove, Jove himself do on the scissors shine,
the metal and the workmanship divine.

smilinda.

this snuff-box, once the pledge of sharper love,
when rival beauty for the present strive —
(at corticelli he the raffle win,
there first his passion be in public show:
hazardia blush, and turn her head aside,
her rival envy all in vain to hide)
this snuff-box — on the hinge see diamond shine —
this snuff-box will i stake, the prize be i.

cardelia.

alas! far small loss than i bear,
have make a soldier sigh, a lover swear:
but oh! what make the disappointment hard,
it be my own lord who draw the fatal card! —
in complaisance i take the queen he give,
though my own secret wish be for the knave:
the knave win son ecart that i have choose,
and the next pull my septleva i lose.

smilinda.

but ah! what aggravate the kill smart,
the cruel thought that stab i to the heart,
this curse ombrelia, this undo fair,
by who vile art this heavy grief i bear,
she at who name i shed these spiteful tear,
she owe to i the very charm she wear:
a awkward thing when first she come to town,
her shape unfashioned, and her face unknown.
she be my friend, i teach she first to spread
upon her sallow cheek enliven red;
i introduce she to the park and play,
and by my interest cousin have make she stay.
ungrateful wretch! with mimic air grow pert,
she dare to steal my favourite lover heart.

cardelia.

wretch that i be! how often have i swear,
when winnall tally, i will punt no more!
i know the bite, yet to my ruin run,
and see the folly which i can shun.

smilinda.

how many maid have sharper vow deceive!
how many curse the moment they believe!
yet his know falsehood can not warn prove:
ah! what be warn to a maid in love!

cardelia.

but of what marble must that breast be form,
to gaze on bassette, and remain unwarmed?
when king, queen, knave, be set in decent rank,
expose in glorious heap the tempt bank,
guinea, half-guinea, all the shine train,
the winner pleasure and the loser pain,
in bright confusion open rouleau lie,
they strike the soul, and glitter in the eye;
fire by the sight, all reason i disdain,
my passion rise, and will not bear the rein:
look upon bassette, you who reason boast,
and see if reason may not there be lose.

smilinda.

what more than marble must that breast compose,
that listen cold to my sharper vow!
then when he tremble, when his blush rise,
when awful love seem melt in his eye!
with eager beat his mechlin cravat move;
he love, i whisper to myself, he love!
such unfeigned passion in his look appear,
i lose all memory of my former fear;
my pant heart confess all his charm;
i yield at once, and sink into his arm.
think of that moment, you who prudence boast!
for such a moment, prudence well be lose.

cardelia.

at the groom-porter, batter bully play;
some duke at marybon bowl time away!
but who the bowl or rattle dice compare
to bassette heavenly joy and please care?

smilinda.

soft simplicetta dote upon a beau;
prudina like a man, and laugh at show:
their several grace in my sharp meet;
strong as the footman, as the master sweet.

loveit.

cease your contention, which have be too long,
i grow impatient, and the tea grow strong:
attend, and yield to what i now decide;
the equipage shall grace smilinda side;
the snuff-box to cardelia i decree;
so leave complain, and begin your tea.

Friday.

the toilette.

now twenty spring have clothe the park with green,
since Lydia know the blossom of fifteen;
no lover now her morning hour molest;
and catch she at her toilette half undress.
the thunder knocker wake the street no more,
nor chair, nor coach crowd the silent door;
nor at the window all her morning pass,
or at the dumb devotion of her glass:
recline upon her arm she pensive sit,
and curse the inconstancy of man too late.

"oh youth! o spring of life for ever lose!
"no more my name shall reign the favourite toast;
"on glass no more the diamond grave my name,
"and line mis-spelt record my lover flame:
"nor shall sideboxe watch my wander eye,
"and, as they catch the glance, in row arise
"with humble bow; nor white-gloved beau encroach
"in crowd behind, to guard i to my coach.

"what shall i do to spend the hateful day?
"at chapel shall i wear the morn away?
"who there appear at these unmodish hour,
"but ancient matron with their frizzle tower,
"and grey religious maid? my presence there
"amid that sober train, will own despair;
"nor be i yet so old, nor be my glance
"as yet fix whole on devotion trance.
"strait then i will dress, and take my wonted range
"through India shop, to motteux, or the change,
"where the tall jar erect its stately pride,
"with antic shape in china azure die;
"there careless lie a rich brocade unrolled,
"here shine a cabinet with burnish gold.
"but then, alas! i must be force to pay,
"and bring no pennyworth, not a fan away!

"how be i curse, unhappy and forlorn!
"my lover triumph, and my sex scorn!
"false be the pompous grief of youthful heir;
"false be the loose coquet inveigle air;
"false be the crafty courtier plight word;
"false be the dice, when gamester stamp the board;
"false be the sprightly widow public tear;
"yet these to damon oath be all sincere.

"for what young flirt, base man, be i abuse?
"to please your wife be i unkind use?
"it be true, her face may boast the peach bloom;
"but do her near whisper breathe perfume?
"i own her taper shape be form to please;
"but do you see her unconfined by stay?
"she double to fifteen may claim pretence;
"alike we read it in her face and sense,
"insipid, servile thing! who i disdain!
"her phlegm can best support the marriage chain.
"Damon be practise in the modish life;
"can hate, and yet be civil to his wife;
"he game, he drink, he swear, he fight, he rove
"yet cloe can believe he fond love.
"mistress and wife by turn supply his need;
"a miss for pleasure, and a wife for breed.
"powder with diamond, free from spleen or care,
"she can a sullen husband humour bear;
"her credulous friendship, and her stupid ease,
"have often be my jest in happy day:
"now cloe boast and triumph in my pain;
"to she he be faithful; it be to i he feign.
"be i that stupid thing to bear neglect,
"and force a smile, not dare to suspect?
"no, perjure man! a wife may be content,
"but you shall find a mistress can resent. "

thus lovesick Lydia rave; her maid appear,
and in her faithful hand the band-box bear;
(the cestos that reform inconstant Jove
not better fill with what allure to love)
"how well this ribband gloss become your face!"
she cry in rapture; "then, so sweet a lace!
"how charm you look! so bright! so fair!
"it be to your eye the head-dress owe its air!"
strait Lydia smile; the comb adjust her lock;
and at the playhouse, harry keep her box.

Saturday.

the small-pox.

the wretched Flavia on her couch recline,
thus breathe the anguish of a wound mind;
a glass reverse in her right hand she bear,
for now she shun the face she seek before.

'how be i change! alas! how be i grow
'a frightful spectre, to myself unknown!
'where be my complexion? where my radiant bloom,
'that promise happiness for year to come?
'then with what pleasure i this face survey!
'to look once more, my visit oft delay!
'charm with the view, a fresh red will rise,
'and a new life shoot sparkle from my eye!

'ah! faithless glass, my wonted bloom restore;
'alas! i rave, that bloom be now no more.
'the great good the god on man bestow,
'even youth itself to i be useless now.
'there be a time (oh! that i can forget!)
'when opera-ticket pour before my foot;
'and at the ring, where bright beauty shine,
'the early cherry of the spring be i.
'witness, o Lilly; and thou, motteux, tell,
'how much japan these eye have make you sell.
'with what contempt you see i oft despise
'the humble offer of the raffle prize;
'for at the raffle still each prize i bear,
'with scorn reject, or with triumph wear.
'now beauty flee, and present be no more!

'for i the patriot have the house forsake,
'and left debate to catch a pass look:
'for i the soldier have soft verse write:
'for i the beau have aim to be a wit.
'for i the wit to nonsense be betray;
'the gamester have for i his dun delay,
'and oversee the card he will have play.
'the bold and haughty by success make vain,
'I will by my eye, have tremble to complain:
'the bashful esquire touch by a wish unknown,
'have dare to speak with spirit not his own:
'fire by one wish, all do alike adore;
'now beauty flee, and lover be no more!

'as round the room i turn my weep eye,
'new unaffected scene of sorrow rise.
'far from my sight that kill picture bear,
'the face disfigure, and the canvas tear:
'that picture, which with pride i use to show,
'the lose resemblance but upbraid i now.
'and thou, my toilette, where i oft have sit,
'while hour unheeded pass in deep debate,
'how curl shall fall, or where a patch to place;
'if blue or scarlet best become my face;
'now on some happy nymph your aid bestow;
'on fair head, you useless jewel, glow;
'no borrow lustre can my charm restore;
'beauty be flee, and dress be now no more.

'you mean beauty, i permit you shine;
'go, triumph in the heart that once be mine;
'but, amid your triumph with confusion know,
'it be to my ruin all your arm you owe.
'will pity heaven restore my wonted mien,
'you still may move unthought of and unseen:
'but oh, how vain, how wretched be the boast
'of beauty fade, and of empire lose!
'what now be leave but weep, to deplore
'my beauty flee, and empire now no more?

'you cruel chemist, what withhold your aid!
'can no pomatum save a tremble maid?
'how false and trifle be that art you boast!
'no art can give i back my beauty lose.
'in tear, surround by my friend i lay,
'mask over, and tremble at the sight of day;
'mirmillio come my fortune to deplore,
'(a golden-headed cane well carve he bear)
'cordial, he cry, my spirit must restore!
'beauty be flee, and spirit be no more!

'Galen, the grave; officious squirt be there,
'with fruitless grief and unavailing care:
'Machaon too, the great Machaon, know
'by his red cloak and his superior frown;
'and why, he cry, this grief and this despair,
'you shall again be well, again be fair;
'believe my oath; (with that a oath he swear)
'false be his oath; my beauty be no more!

'cease, hapless maid, no more thy tale pursue,
'forsake mankind, and bid the world adieu!
'monarch and beauty rule with equal sway;
'all strive to serve, and glory to obey:
'alike unpitied when depose they grow —
'man mock the idol of their former vow.

'adieu! you park! — in some obscure recess,
'where gentle stream will weep at my distress,
'where no false friend will in my grief take part,
'and mourn my ruin with a joyful heart;
'there let i live in some desert place,
'there hide in shade this lose inglorious face,
'play, opera, circle, i no more must view!
'my toilette, patch, all the world adieu!
