[fragment] viii.

by the side of a rock on the hill, beneath the age tree, old oscian sit on the moss; the last of the race of Fingal. sightless be his age eye; his beard be wave in the wind. dull through the leafless tree he hear the voice of the north. sorrow revive in his soul: he begin and lament the dead.

how have thou fall like a oak, with all thy branch round thou! where be Fingal the king? where be oscur my son? where be all my race? alas! in the earth they lie. i feel their tomb with my hand. i hear the river below murmur hoarse over the stone. what do thou, o river, to i? thou bring back the memory of the past.

the race of Fingal stand on thy bank, like a wood in a fertile soil. keen be their spear of steel. HARDY be he who dare to encounter their rage. Fillan the great be there. thou oscur be there, my son! Fingal himself be there, strong in the grey lock of year. full rose his sinewy limb; and wide his shoulder spread. the unhappy meet with his arm, when the pride of his wrath arise.

the son of morny come; Gaul, the tall of man. he stand on the hill like a oak; his voice be like the stream of the hill. why reign alone, he cry, the son of the mighty corval? Fingal be not strong to save: he be no support for the people. i be strong as a storm in the ocean; as a whirlwind on the hill. yield, son of corval; Fingal, yield to i.

oscur stand forth to meet he; my son will meet the foe. but Fingal come in his strength, and smile at the vaunter boast. they throw their arm round each other; they struggle on the plain. the earth be plough with their heel. their bone crack as the boat on the ocean, when it leap from wave to wave. long do they toil; with night, they fall on the sound plain; as two oak, with their branch mingle, fall crash from the hill. the tall son of morny be bind; the age overcome.

fair with her lock of gold, her smooth neck, and her breast of snow; fair, as the spirit of the hill when at silent noon they glide along the heath; fair, as the rainbow of heaven; come minvane the maid. Fingal! she soft say, loose i my brother Gaul. loose i the hope of my race, the terror of all but Fingal. can i, reply the king, can i deny the lovely daughter of the hill? take thy brother, o minvane, thou fair than the snow of the north!

such, Fingal! be thy word; but thy word i hear no more. sightless i sit by thy tomb. i hear the wind in the wood; but no more i hear my friend. the cry of the hunter be over. the voice of war be cease.

