the prodigy.

a letter to a friend in the country.

though rhyme serve the thought of great poet to fetter,
 it set off the sense of small poet the better. 
when i have write in prose, i often have find,
 that my sense, in a jumble of word, be quite drown. 
in verse, as in army, that march over the plain,
 the least man among they be see without pain. 
this they owe to good order, it must be allow;
 else man that be little, be lose in a croud. 

so much for simile: now, to be brief,
 the follow line come to tell you my grief. 
it be well i can write; for i scarce can speak,
 i be so plague with my tooth, which eternal ache. 
when the wind be in the point which oppose the south,
 for fear of the cold, i can open my mouth:
 and you know, to the sex it must be a heart-breaking,
 to have any distemper, that keep they from speak. 

when first i be silent a day and a night,
 the woman be all in a terrible fright. 
supplication to Jove, in a instant, they make —
 "avert the portent — a woman not speak! 
"since poet be prophet, and often have sing,
 "the last thing that die in a woman her tongue;
"o Jove, for what crime be sapphira thus curse? 
 "it be plain by her breathe, her tongue have die first. 
"you power celestial, tell mortal, what cause
 "occasion dame nature to break she own law? 
"do the preacher live now, from his text he must run;
 "and own there be something new under the sun. 
"o Jove, for the future this punishment spare;
 "and all other evil we will will bear."

then they throng to my house, and my maid they beseech,
 to say, if her mistress have quite lose her speech. 
Nell ready own, what they hear be too true;
 that today i be dumb, give the devil his due:
 and frank confess, be it always the case,
 no servant can ever have a happy place. 

when they find it be fact, they begin all to fear i;
 and, dread infection, will scarce come near i:
 till a neighbour of i, who be famous for speech,
 bid they be of good cheer, the disease be not catch;
 and offer to prove, from author good store,
 that the like case with this never happen before;
 and if age to come shall resemble the past,
 as it be the first instance, it will be the last. 
yet against this disorder we all ought to strive:
 be i in her case, i will be bury alive. 
be i one moment silent, except in my bed,
 my good nature husband will swear i be dead. 

the next say, her tongue be so much in her power,
 she be sullen silent almost — half a hour:
 that, to vex her good man, she take this way to teaze he;
 but soon leave it off, when she find it will please he:
 and vow, for the future, she will make the houser;
 for when she be dumb, he do nothing but sing. 

quite tire with their talk, i hold down my head:
 so she who sit next metaphor, cry out, i be dead. 
they call for cold water to throw in my face:
 give her air, give her air — and cut open her lace. 
say good neighbour Nevil, you be out of your wit;
 she oft, to my knowledge, have these sullen fit:
 let she husband come in, and make one step that be wrong,
 my life for it, the woman will soon find her tongue. 
you will soon be convince — of my conscience, he be here —
 why what be all this rout? — be you sullen, my dear? 

this strike they all silent; which give i some ease. 
and make they imagine they will get my disease. 
so they haste away in a terrible fright;
 and leave i, in silence, to pass the long night. 

not the woman alone be scar at my fate;
 it be reckon of dreadful portent to the state. 
when the governor hear it, they great be trouble;
 and, while i be silent, the guard be all double:
 the militia drum beat a perpetual alarm,
 to rouse up the son of the city to arm. 
a story be rumour about from Lambey,
 of a powerful fleet, that be see off at sea. 
with horror all list to the terrible tale;
 the barrister tremble, the judge grow pale;
 to the castle the fright nobility fly;
 and the council be summon, they can not tell why;
 the clergy in croud to the church repair;
 and army, embattle, be see in the air. 

why they be in this fright, i have late be tell,
 it seem, it be sing by a druid of old,
 that the Hanover race to Great-Britain shall come;
 and sit on the throne, till a woman grow dumb. 

as soon as this prophecy reach the pretender,
 he cry out, my claim to the crown i surrender. 
