windsor-forest.

to the right honourable GEORGE lord Lansdown. 

thy forest, Windsor! and thy green retreat,
 at once the monarch and the muse seat,
 invite my lay. be present, sylvan maid! 
unlock your spring, and open all your shade. 
Granville command: your aid o muse bring! 
what muse for Granville can refuse to sing? 

the groves of Eden, vanish now so long,
 live in description, and look green in song:
 these, be my breast inspire with equal flame,
 like they in beauty, shall be like in fame. 
here hill and vale, the woodland and the plain,
 here earth and water seem to strive again,
 not chaos-like together crush and bruise,
 but as the world, harmonious confuse:
 where order in variety we see,
 and where, though all thing differ, all agree. 
here wave groves a chequer scene display,
 and part admit and part exclude the day;
 as some coy nymph her lover warm address
 nor quite indulge, nor can quite repress. 
there, intersperse in lawn and open glade,
 thin tree arise that shun each other shade. 
here in full light the russet plain extend;
 there wrap in cloud the blueish hill ascend:
 even the wild heath display her purple die,
 and amid the desert fruitful field arise,
 that crown with tuft tree and spring corn,
 like verdant isle the sable waste adorn. 
let India boast her plant, nor envy we
 the weep amber or the balmy tree,
 while by our oak the precious load be bear,
 and realm command which those tree adorn. 
not proud Olympus yield a noble sight,
 though god assemble grace his tower height,
 than what more humble mountain offer here,
 where, in their blessing, all those god appear. 
see Pan with flock, with fruit Pomona crown,
 here blush Flora paint the enamel ground,
 here ceres gift in wave prospect stand,
 and nod tempt the joyful reaper hand,
 rich industry sit smile on the plain,
 and peace and plenty tell, a Stuart reign. 

not thus the land appear in age past,
 a dreary desert and a gloomy waste,
 to savage beast and savage law a prey,
 and king more furious and severe than they:
 who claim the sky, dispeople air and flood,
 the lonely lord of empty wild and wood. 
city lay waste, they storm the den and cave
 (for wise brute be backward to be slave)
 what can be free, when lawless beast obey,
 and even the element a tyrant sway? 
in vain kind season swell the teem grain,
 soft shower distil, and sun grow warm in vain;
 the Swain with tear to beast his labour yield,
 and famish die amid his ripen field. 
no wonder savage or subject slay
 be equal crime in a despotic reign;
 both doom alike for sportive tyrant bleed,
 but subject starve while savage be feed. 
proud Nimrod first the bloody chace begin,
 a mighty hunter, and his prey be man. 
our haughty norman boast that barbarous name,
 and make his tremble slave the royal game. 
the field be ravish from the industrious swain,
 from man their city, and from god their fane:
 the level town with weed lie cover over,
 the hollow wind through naked temple roar;
 round break column clasp ivy twine;
 over heap of ruin stalk the stately hind;
 the fox obscene to gape tomb retire,
 and wolf with howl fill the sacred quire. 
I will by his noble, by his commons curse,
 the oppressor rule tyrannic where he dare,
 stretch over the poor, and church, his iron rod,
 and treat alike his vassal and his god. 
who even the saxon spare, and bloody Dane,
 the wanton victim of his sport remain. 
but see the man who spacious region give
 a waste for beast, himself deny a grave! 
stretch on the lawn his second hope survey,
 at once the chaser and at once the prey. 
lo Rufus, tug at the deadly dart,
 bleed in the forest, like a wound hart. 
succeed monarch hear the subject cry,
 nor saw displease the peaceful cottage rise. 
then gather flock on unknown mountain feed,
 over sandy wild be yellow harvest spread,
 the forest wonder at the unusual grain,
 and secret transport touch the conscious Swain. 
fair liberty, britannia goddess, rear
 her cheerful head, and lead the golden year. 

you vigorous swain! while youth ferment your blood,
 and pure spirit swell the sprightly flood,
 now range the hill, the thick wood beset,
 wind the shrill horn, or spread the wave net. 
when mild autumn summer heat succeed,
 and in the new-shorn field the partridge feed,
 before his lord the ready spaniel bound,
 pant with hope, he try the furrow ground,
 but when the taint gale the game betray,
 couch close he lie, and meditate the prey;
 secure they trust the unfaithful field, beset,
 till hover over they sweep the swell net. 
thus (if small thing we may with great compare)
 when Albion send her eager son to war,
 please, in the general sight, the host lie down
 sudden, before some unsuspecting town,
 the young, the old, one instant make our prize,
 and high in air britannia standard fly. 

see! from the brake the whirr pheasant spring,
 and mount exult on triumphant wing;
 short be his joy! he feel the fiery wound,
 flutter in blood, and pant beat the ground. 
ah! what avail his glossy, vary dye,
 his purple crest, and scarlet-circled eye,
 the vivid green his shine plume unfold;
 his paint wing, and breast that flame with gold? 

nor yet, when moist Arcturus cloud the sky,
 the wood and field their please toil deny. 
to plain with well-breathed beagle we repair,
 and trace the maze of the circle hare. 
(beast, teach by we, their fellow beast pursue,
 and learn of man each other to undo.) 
with slaughter gun the unwearied Fowler rove,
 when frost have whiten all the naked groves;
 where dove in flock the leafless tree overshade,
 and lonely woodcock haunt the watery glade. 
he lift the tube, and level with his eye;
 strait a short thunder break the freeze sky. 
oft, as in airy ring they skim the heath,
 the clamorous plover feel the leaden death:
 oft as the mount lark their note prepare,
 they fall, and leave their little live in air. 

in genial spring, beneath the quiver shade
 where cool vapour breathe along the Mead,
 the patient Fisher take his silent stand
 intent, his angle tremble in his hand;
 with look unmoved, he hope the scaly breed,
 and eye the dance cork and bend reed. 
our plenteous stream a various race supply;
 the bright-eyed perch with fin of Tyrian dye,
 the silver eel, in shine volume roll,
 the yellow carp, in scale bedrop with gold,
 swift trout, diversify with crimson stain,
 and pike, the tyrant of the watery plain. 

now cancer glow with phoebus fiery car;
 the youth rush eager to the sylvan war;
 swarm over the lawn, the forest walk surround,
 rouse the fleet hart, and cheer the open hound. 
the impatient courser pant in every vein,
 and paw, seem to beat the distant plain,
 hill, vale, and flood appear already cross,
 and ere he start, a thousand step be lose. 
see! the bold youth strain up the threaten steep,
 rush through the thicket, down the valley sweep,
 hang over their courser head with eager speed,
 and earth roll back beneath the fly steed. 
let old Arcadia boast her spacious plain,
 the immortal Huntress, and her virgin train;
 nor envy Windsor! since thy shade have see
 as bright a goddess, and as chaste a queen;
 who care, like she, protect the sylvan reign,
 the earth fair light, and empress of the main. 

here, as old bard have sing, Diana stray
 bathe in the spring, or seek the cool shade;
 here arm with silver bow, in early dawn,
 her buskin virgin trace the dewy lawn. 
above the rest a rural nymph be fame,
 thy offspring, Thames! the fair lodona name,
 (lodona fate, in long oblivion cast,
 the muse shall sing, and what she sing shall last)
 scarce can the goddess from her nymph be know,
 but by the crescent and the golden zone,
 she scorn the praise of beauty, and the care;
 a belt her waste, a fillet bind her hair,
 a paint quiver on her shoulder sound,
 and with her dart the fly deer she wound. 
it chance, as eager of the chace the maid
 beyond the forest verdant limit stray,
 Pan see and love, and furious with desire
 pursue her flight; her flight increase his fire. 
not half so swift the tremble dove can fly,
 when the fierce eagle cleave the liquid sky;
 not half so swift the fierce eagle move,
 when through the cloud he drive the tremble dove;
 as from the god with fearful speed she fly,
 as do the god with equal speed pursue. 
now faint, sink, pale, the nymph appear;
 now close behind his sound step she hear;
 and now his shadow reach she as she run,
 (his shadow lengthen by the set sun)
 and now his short breath with sultry air
 pant on her neck, and fan her part hair. 
in vain on father Thames she call for aid,
 nor can Diana help her injure maid. 
faint, breathless, thus she pray, nor pray in vain;
 "ah Cynthia! ah — though banish from thy train,
"let i, o let i, to the shade repair,
 "my native shade — there weep, and murmur there. 
she say, and melt as in tear she lie,
 in a soft, silver stream dissolve away. 
the silver stream her virgin coldness keep,
 for ever murmur, and for ever weep;
 still bear the name the hapless virgin bear,
 and bath the forest where she range before. 
in her chaste current oft the goddess lave,
 and with celestial tear augment the wave. 
oft in her glass the muse shepherd spy
 the headlong mountain and the downward sky,
 the watery landskip of the pendant wood,
 and absent tree that tremble in the flood;
 in the clear azure gleam the flock be see,
 and float forest paint the wave with green. 
through the fair scene roll slow the linger stream,
 then foam pour along, and rush into the Thames. 

thou too, great father of the british flood! 
with joyful pride survey our lofty wood,
 where tower oak their spread honour rear,
 and future navy on thy bank appear. 
not neptune self from all his flood receive
 a wealthy tribute, than to thy he give. 
no sea so rich, so full no stream appear,
 no lake so gentle, and no spring so clear. 
not fable po more swell the poet lay,
 while through the sky his shine current stray,
 than thy, which visit windsor fame abode,
 to grace the mansion of our earthly god. 
nor all his star a bright lustre show,
 than the fair nymph that gild thy shore below:
 here Jove himself, subdue by beauty still,
 may change Olympus for a noble hill. 

happy the man who this bright court approve,
 his sovereign favour, and his country love;
 happy next he who to these shade retire,
 who nature charm, and who the muse inspire,
 who humble joy of homefelt quiet please,
 successive study, exercise and ease. 
he gather health from herb the forest yield,
 and of their fragrant Physick spoil the field:
 with chemic art exalt the mineral power,
 and draw the aromatic soul of flower. 
now mark the course of roll orb on high;
 over figure world now travel with his eye. 
of ancient write unlock the learned store,
 consult the dead, and live past age over. 
or wander thoughtful in the silent wood,
 attend the duty of the wise and good,
 the observe a mean, be to himself a friend,
 to follow nature, and regard his end.
 or look on heaven with more than mortal eye,
 bid his free soul expatiate in the sky,
 amid her kindred star familiar roam,
 survey the region, and confess she home! 
such be the life great Scipio once admire,
 thus Atticus, and Trumbal thus retire

you sacred nine! that all my soul possess,
 who rapture fire i, and who vision bless,
 bear i, oh bear i to sequester scene
 of Bow'ry maze and surround green;
 to thames bank which fragrant breeze fill,
 or where you muse sport on Cooper hill. 
(on Cooper hill eternal wreath shall grow,
 while last the mountain, or while Thames shall flow)
 i seem through consecrate walk to rove,
 and hear soft music die along the grove;
 lead by the sound i roam from shade to shade,
 by god-like poet venerable make:
 here his first lay majestic Denham sing;
 there the last number flow from Cowley tongue. 
o early lose! what tear the river shed
 when the sad pomp along his bank be lead? 
his droop swan on every note expire,
 and on his willow hang each muse lyre. 

since fate relentless stop their heavenly voice,
 no more the forest ring, or groves rejoice;
 who now shall charm the shade where Cowley string
 his live harp, and lofty Denham sing? 
but hark! the groves rejoice, the forest ring! 
be these revive? or be it Granville sing? 

it be you, my lord, to bless our soft retreat,
 and call the muse to their ancient seat,
 to paint anew the flowery sylvan scene,
 to crown the forest with immortal green,
 make Windsor hill in lofty number rise,
 and lift her turret near to the sky;
 to sing those honour you deserve to wear,
 and add new lustre to her silver star. 

here noble Surrey feel the sacred rage,
 Surrey, the Granville of a former age:
 matchless his pen, victorious be his lance;
 bold in the list, and graceful in the dance:
 in the same shade the cupid tune his lyre,
 to the same note, of love, and soft desire:
 fair Geraldine, bright object of his vow,
 then fill the groves, as heavenly Myra now. 

oh will thou sing what hero Windsor bear,
 what king first breathe upon her wind shore,
 or raise old warrior who adore remains
 in weep vault her hallow earth contain! 
with Edward act adorn the shine page,
 stretch his long triumph down through every age,
 draw king enchain; and cressi glorious field,
 the lily blaze on the regal shield. 
then, from her roof when verrio colour fall,
 and leave inanimate the naked wall;
 still in thy song shall vanquish France appear,
 and bleed for ever under britain spear. 

let soft strain ill-fated Henry mourn,
 and palm eternal flourish round his urn.
 here over the martyr-king the marble weep,
 and fast beside he, once-feared Edward sleep:
 who not the extend Albion can contain,
 from old Belerium to the german main,
 the grave unite; where even the great find rest,
 and blend lie the oppressor and the oppress! 

make sacred Charles tomb for ever know,
 (obscure the place, and uninscribe the stone)
 oh fact accurse! what tear have Albion shed,
 heaven! what new wound, and how her old have bleed? 
she see her son with purple death expire,
 her sacred dome involve in roll fire. 
a dreadful series of intestine war,
 in glorious triumph, and dishonest scar. 
at length great ANNA say — let discord cease! 
she say, the world obey, and all be peace! 

in that bless moment, from his oozy bed
 old father Thames advance his reverend head. 
his tress drop with dew, and over the stream
 his shine horn diffuse a golden gleam:
 grave on his urn appear the moon, that guide
 his swell water, and alternate tide;
 the figure stream in wave of silver roll,
 and on their bank Augusta rise in gold. 
around his throne the sea-born brother stand,
 that swell with tributary urn his flood. 
first the fame author of his ancient name,
 the wind Isis, and the fruitful tame:
 the Kennet swift, for silver eel renowned;
 the Loddon slow, with verdant alder crown:
 Cole, who clear stream his flowery island lave;
 and chalky Wey, that roll a milky wave:
 the blue, transparent vandalis appear;
 the gulphy lee his sedgy tress rear:
 and sullen mole, that hide his dive flood;
 and silent darent, stain with danish blood. 

high in the midst, upon his urn recline,
 (he sea-green mantle wave with the wind)
 the god appear; he turn his azure eye
 where windsor-domes and pompous turret rise,
 then bow and speak; the wind forget to roar,
 and the hush wave glide soft to the shore. 

hail sacred peace! hail long-expected day,
 which thames glory to the star shall raise! 
though tiber stream immortal Rome behold,
 though foam Hermus swell with tide of gold,
 from heaven it self though sevenfold Nilus flow,
 and harvest on a hundred realm bestow;
 these now no more shall be the muse theme,
 lose in my fame, as in the sea their stream. 
let volga bank with iron squadron shine,
 and groves of lance glitter on the Rhine,
 let barbarous Ganges arm a servile train;
 be mine the blessing of a peaceful reign. 
no more my son shall die with british blood
 red iber sand, or ister foam flood;
 safe on my shore each unmolested Swain
 shall tend the flock, or reap the beard grain;
 the shady empire shall retain no trace
 of war or blood, but in the sylvan chace,
 the trumpet sleep, while cheerful horn be blow,
 and arm employ on bird and beast alone. 
behold! the ascend villa on my side
 project long shadow over the crystal Tyde. 
behold! augusta glitter spire increase,
 and temple rise, the beauteous work of peace. 
i see, i see where two fair city bend
 their ample bow, a new white-hall ascend! 
there mighty nation shall inquire their doom,
 the world be great oracle in time to come;
 there king shall sue, and suppliant state be see
 once more to bend before a british queen. 

thy tree, fair Windsor! now shall leave their wood,
 and half thy forest rush into my flood,
 bear britain thunder, and her cross display,
 to the bright region of the rise day;
 tempt icy sea, where scarce the water roll,
 where clear flame glow round the freeze pole;
 or under southern sky exalt their sail,
 lead by new star, and bear by spicy gale! 
for i the balm shall bleed, and amber flow,
 the coral redden, and the ruby glow,
 the pearly shell its lucid globe enfold,
 and Phoebus warm the ripen over to gold. 
the time shall come, when free as sea or wind
 unbounded Thames shall flow for all mankind,
 whole nation enter with each swell Tyde,
 and ocean join who they do first divide;
 earth distant end our glory shall behold,
 and the new world launch forth to seek the old.
 then ship of uncouth form shall stem the Tyde,
 and feather people crowd my wealthy side,
 while naked youth and paint chief admire
 our speech, our colour, and our strange attire! 
oh stretch thy reign, fair peace! from shore to shore,
 till conquest cease, and slavery be no more:
 till the free indian in their native groves
 reap their own fruit, and woo their sable love,
 Peru once more a race of king behold,
 and other mexico be roof with gold. 
exile by thou from earth to deep hell,
 in brazen bond shall barbarous discord dwell:
 gigantic pride, pale terror, gloomy care,
 and mad ambition, shall attend she there. 
there purple vengeance bathe in gore retire,
 her weapon blunt, and extinct her fire:
 there hateful envy she own snake shall feel,
 and persecution mourn her break wheel:
 there faction roar, rebellion bite her chain,
 and gasp fury thirst for blood in vain. 

here cease thy flight, nor with unhallowed lay
 touch the fair fame of albion golden day. 
the thought of god let granville verse recite,
 and bring the scene of open fate to light. 
my humble muse, in unambitious strain,
 paint the green forest and the flowery plain,
 where peace descend bid her olive spring,
 and scatter blessing from her dove-like wing. 
even i more sweet pass my careless day,
 please in the silent shade with empty praise;
 enough for i, that to the listen swain
 first in these field i sing the sylvan strain. 
