a poem.

humble present to his most sacred majesty

the lark, while she she gratitude to prove,
 Lauds with her sprightly note, immortal Jove
 shut not his ear against the sparrow lay;
 who tuneless pipe can only chirp his praise. 
thus i, though learned bard before have string
 their sound lyre, and most divine sing,
 fear not the dictate of my soul to own;
 the less of art, the more of love be show:
 vouchsafe, great prince, to hear my humble muse,
 and let my zeal my want of skill excuse. 

hail! hero bear to rule, and reconcile
 the fatal discord of our english isle! 
our pure religion, long the mark of Rome,
 reprieve by you escape her final doom. 
innumbered joy you to Britannia bring,
 and lo paean through the nation ring. 
delightful liberty, with fear half dead,
 hear the glad noise, and rear her please head;
 her slacken nerve their former strength regain,
 and she she life redate from george reign. 

so cruel faction tear Rome ancient state,
 and all her glory seem the sport of fate;
 when by adoption Trajan take the reins,
 and check his people heat, and quench the flame;
 enlarge her bound to distant india shore,
 and teach her droop eagle how to soar. 

you sir, like he, the british throne ascend;
 may equal victory your reign attend. 
when round the continent the trump of fame
 do britain glory in your right proclaim,
 tyrannic monarch, as with thunder scar,
 send up their prayer impend fate to ward;
 while belgia's lion brave his threaten chain,
 roll his glad eye, and stretch his paw again. 

by your fame justice, and your prudent sway,
 France shall be teach to love, or to obey;
 while you the right of liberty assert,
 and all the ill of break faith avert;
 to Barcelona may your succour fly,
 before her champion amid her ruin die. 

prophetic sage have this day in view,
 and name our patron as a type of you:
 so man to oracle have once regard,
 until the great saviour of the world appear. 

the swell wave, which often heretofore
 our yet love king, the glorious WILLIAM, bear,
 proud in convey his adopt son,
 part with regret, and murmur as they run. 

Wellcome great guardian of our british land;
 receive the nation rescue by thy hand. 
a wicked race of man, for private end,
 have raise her baffle foe, and sink her friend,
 disperse her strength, and royal Ann betray
 while in the sunshine of her smile they play;
 the ruin roll too fast for she to stem,
 who great weakness be her choice of they:
 when heaven, in pity to those suppliant few,
 who own its power, and keep their vow to you,
 come to our aid, reverse our lower fate,
 and by thy destine arm retrieve the state. 

hail great deliverer, much love monarch hail! 
no more shall France, no more shall Rome prevail:
 by heaven decree, you and your issue stand
 sure sign of future safety to this land. 
so when the almighty cause the flood to cease,
 he fix his bow in token of the peace. 
