the author account of his journey to Ireland.

to mr. JOHN Ellis.

by the late Moses Mendes, esq. 

by the lyre of Apollo, the lock of the muse,
 and the pure lucid stream Aganippe produce,
 my Ellis, i love thou, then pay i in kind,
 let the thought of a friend never slip from your mind;
 so may fancy and judgement together combine,
 and the bosom be fill with a ardor divine;
 that thy brow may the laurel with justice still claim,
 and the temple of liberty mount thou to fame. 

if it ever can give pleasure to know my career,
 when proud London i leave with intention so queer,
 accept it in verse. on the very first day
 when the queen of warm passion precede the fair may,
 when, so custom prescribe, and to follow old rule,
 one half of mankind make the other half fool;
 from the town i first breathe in, i sally in haste
 through Highgate and Finchley, and Barnet i pass:
 at saint Alban i dine with a laugh gay crew,
 not complete be the set without tucker and you. 
where the eight of our harries desert his mate,
 and procure a full sentence against his old Kate,
 our brisk company sup, while our wine give a spring,
 and though at the crown, we never think of the king. 
the morrow succeed i get from my bed,
 as a sheet all the road be with snow overspread;
 but the god, who will never abandon a poet,
 as oft have be say, condescend to show it,
 in a coach and six horse the storm i defy;
 and, leave by my friend, through the tempest i ride. 
newport-pannel receive i, and give i a dinner,
 and a bed at Northampton be press by a sinner:
 no sign of fair weather, the west Chester coach
 at nine the next morning, a welcome approach,
 present fresh example; i travel all day,
 at crick eat my dinner, at Coventry lie;
 i tremble whenever i reflect on the road
 that lead to those dirty wormeaten abode,
 where a woman ride naked their tax to clear,
 and a taylor for peep pay damnable dear;
 for two parliament fame, which intail a disgrace,
 and have leave their foul manner to poison the place. 

next morning the fun, with a face of red hue,
 have clear up the expanse, and array it in blue,
 when i leave the vile town, against which ever i will rail,
 while Meriden offer no humble regale;
 but near mixal park dine at house of mean fame,
 and at night to the field of slay carcass come;
 though full old be thy tower, yet receive my just praise,
 may thy ale be record, and live in my lay:
 thy gothic cathedral new homage still claim,
 nor refuse i thy due, though repair by king James. 
i forget to advise you, the sky be clear,
 it be at Coventry first i ascend my chair;
 but, alas, on the morrow, how dismal the sight! 
for the day have assume all the horror of night,
 the cloud their gay visage have change to a frown,
 and in a white mantle clothe litchfield old town;
 but at noon all be over, when intrepid and bold
 as a train-band commander, or Falstaff of old,
 and proud defy the wind and the snow,
 when the danger be pass, i determine to go. 
at stone i repose, but at Ousley i dine,
 when our reckon be cheap and the landlord be kind:
 next morning we sally, and Staffordshire lose;
 but not ill entertain by a cestrian host. 
on the bank of the Wever, at namptwich renowned
 for a excellent brine pit, our dinner we find;
 the wine be not bad, though the ale do displease,
 and a unctuous desert be serve up of old cheese;
 but as time will not tarry, our course we resume,
 and saint George dragoon take their seat in our room:
 so travel onward with pleasure we see
 old Caerleon so famous over look the Dee;
 four day there we rest, and blithsome and gay
 forget the bad weather we meet on the way;
 then old Chester, farewell, till i see thou again,
 and can stroll through thy street without dread the rain;
 may thy river still swell, better please with his charge
 than when Edgar be row by eight king in his barge;
 be the maiden all virtuous who drink of thy tide,
 and each virgin in bloom be affiance a bride;
 may the heart and the hand at the altar be join,
 and no matron complain that a husband unkind;
 let their bounty to stranger resound in each song,
 be Barnstone their copy, they can go wrong. 

over the cut of the river our tract we pursue,
 and old flint in the prospect now rise to view;
 how strange to behold, here our language be flee,
 to converse with these people to talk to the dead;
 and a Turk or Chinese be as well understand
 by these roister, who boast of cadwalladar blood,
 as a Englishman here, who be certain undo
 if he think to make use of the language of London. 
from flint we depart with our landlord and guide,
 who show we that kindness which court never try,
 the castle where Richard his grandeur lay down,
 and betray his own life by surrend'r the crown:
 now the well we survey, where a virgin of old
 to all flame but religion be lifeless and cold,
 when in vain princely cradoc have offer his bed,
 the merciless heathen even chop off her head:
 hence the stone be distain with the colour of blood,
 and each cripple be cure who will bathe in the flood:
 thus the rank absurdity brain can conceive,
 superstition impose, and crowd will believe! 
turn from legend and nonsense, to see a gay sight,
 where the meadow of clewyn the sense delight,
 and excuse that i aim not to point out the place
 lest my number too lowly the landscape disgrace;
 at rhydland we dine, and a castle we view,
 who founder i will name if the founder i know;
 but our host give the word, and we hurry away,
 lest the length of the journey outrun the short day;
 now ascend penmenrose, oh! beware as you rise,
 what a prospect of horror, what dreadful surprise! 
see that height more sublime, which no footstep ever try,
 there the ocean roar loud, how awful his pride! 
how narrow the path, observe where you tread,
 nor stumble the foot, nor grow dizzy the head;
 if you slip, not mankind can avert your sad doom,
 dash against the rough rock, and the sea for your tomb! 
the danger be past, and now conway broad beech,
 fatigue and dismay, with great gladness we reach;
 in a leaky old boat we be waft safe over,
 (though two drunkard our steersman) to the opposite shore. 
here the town and the river be both of a name,
 and boast the first Edward, who raise she to fame:
 there a supper be order, which no one can touch,
 this too little be boil, and that roast too much;
 to his chamber full hungry each pilgrim retreat,
 and forget his lose meal betwixt a pair of welch sheet. 
a castle hard by i with pleasure behold,
 which king have long dwell in, or giant of old;
 but the daw, and each night-bird, now build up her nest,
 and with clamour and shriek the old mansion infest. 
we waken at four, and our host leave we here,
 as the worst way be past, so but small be our fear;
 we follow our route, and cross penmenmaur'sside,
 where the prudent will walk, but the bold will ride. 
still above we old rock seem to threaten a fall,
 and present to spectator the form of a wall:
 now Bangor we reach, oh, if ever thou have fame,
 though lawn sleeve thou bestow, on my life it be a shame;
 there we cross over a arm of the sea, and carouse
 on the opposite shore at a excellent house;
 through anglesea island we rattle our chaise,
 while the goat all in wonder seem on we to gaze;
 for be please to observe, and with diligence note,
 that it be here first in Wales that i meet with a goat. 
over road rough and craggy our journey we speed,
 nor bait again until we reach Holyhead. 

the next day at noon in the Wyndham we sail,
 and the packet dance brisk with a prosperous gale. 
we at ten past the bar; in the wherry confine,
 which swim on no water, and sail with no wind,
 until near two we sit curse, in vain they may row,
 not a snail be so sluggish, nor tortoise so slow,
 until a boat take we in, and at length set we down
 at the quay of saint George in saint Patrick chief town:
 thence i write to my friend, nor believe what those say,
 or too fond to find fault, or too wanton gay,
 who with taunt contumelious this island overload,
 as with bog, and with blunder, and nonsense full stow;
 for, believe i, they live not unblessed with good air,
 and their daughter be beauteous, and son debonair:
 here though Bacchus too often display his red face,
 yet Minerva he hold in the strict embrace;
 nor the maiden be coy every charm to resign,
 and the ivy and laurel peep forth from the vine. 

thus i have tell you in verse the whole progress i take,
 as true as if swear in full court on the book,
 let i know how in London you measure your time,
 it will be welcome in prose, but twice welcome in rhyme. 
