a character of mr. pope write.

be a episode from the poem call sickness, book ii.

by the reverend mr. Thompson.

— in measure time
(so heaven have will) together with their snow,
the everlasting hill shall melt away:
this solid globe dissolve, as ductile wax
before the breath of Vulcan; like a scroll
shrivel the unfolded curtain of the sky;
thy planet, Newton, tumble from their sphere;
the moon be perish from her bloody orb;
the sun himself, in liquid ruin, rush
and deluge with destroy flame the globe —
peace then, my soul, nor grieve that pope be dead.

if ever the tuneful spirit, sweet strong,
spontaneous number, teem in my breast,
enkindle; o, at that exalt name,
be favourable, be propitious now,
while, in the gratitude of praise, i sing
the work and wonder of this man divine.

i tremble while i write — his lisp muse
surmount the lofty effort of my age.
what wonder? when a infant, he apply
the loud papinian trumpet to his lip,
fire by a sacred fury, and inspire
with all the god, in sound number sing
"fraternal rage, and guilty thebes alarm."

sure at his birth (thing not unknown of old)
the grace round his cradle weave the dance,
and lead the maze of harmony: the nine
prophetic of his future honour, pour
plenteous, upon his lip, castalian dew;
and attic bee their golden store distil.
the soul of Homer, slide from its star,
where, radiant, over the poetic world
it rule and shed its influence, for joy
shout, and bless the birth: the sacred choir
of poet, bear in elder, better time,
enrapture catch the elevate sound,
and roll the gladden news from sphere to sphere.

imperial Windsor! raise thy brow august,
superble gay exalt thy towery head;
and bid thy forest dance, and nod, wave
a verdant testimony of thy joy:
a native Orpheus warble in thy shade.

o listen to alexis tender plaint!
how gentle rural! without coarseness plain;
how simple in his elegance of grief!
a shepherd, but no clown. his every lie
sweet as the early pipe along the dale,
when hawthorn bud, or on the thymy brow
when all the mountain bleat, and valley sing.
soft as the nightingale harmonious woe,
in dewy even-tide, when cowslip drop
their sleepy head, and languish in the breeze.

next in the critic-chair survey he throne,
imperial in his art, prescribe law
clear from the knit brow, and squint sneer;
learnt without pedantry; correct bold,
and regular easy. gentle, now,
as rise incense, or descend dew,
the variegate echo of his theme:
now, animate flame command the soul
to glow with sacred wonder. point wit
and keen discernment form the certain page.
just, as the Stagyrite; as Horace, free;
as Fabian, clear; and as Petronius, gay.

but whence those peal of laughter shake the side
of decent mirth? be i in fairyland?
young, evanescent form, before my eye,
or skim, or see to skim; thin essence
of fluid light; zilph, zilphid, elf, and gnome;
genii of rosicruce, and lady god! —
and, lo, in shine trail Belinda hair,
bespangle with dishevel beam the sky,
flame over the night. behind, a satyr grin,
and, jocund, hold a glass, reflect, fair,
hoop, cross, mattadore; beaux, shock, and bell,
promiscuous whimsical and gay.
tassoni, hide his diminish head,
droop over the laugh page: while Boileau skulk,
with blush cover, low beneath the desk.

more mournful scene invite. the milky vein
of amorous grief devolve its placid wave
soft-streaming over the soul, in weep woe
and tenderness of anguish. while we read
the infectious page, we sicken into love,
and languish with involuntary fire.
the zephyr, pant on the silken bud
of breathe violet; the virgin sigh,
rosy with youth, be turbulent and rude,
to sappho plaint, and eloïsa moan.

heaven! what a flood of empyréal day
my ache eye involve! a temple soar,
rise like exhalation on a mount,
and wide its adamantine valve expand.
three monumental column, bright in air,
of figure gold, the centre of the choir
with lustre fill. pope on the midmost shine
betwixt his Homer and his Horace place,
superior, by the hand of justice. fame,
with all her mouth, the eternal trumpet swell,
exult at his name; and, grateful, pour
the lofty note of never-dying praise,
triumphant, float on the wing of wind,
sweet over the world: the ambrosial spirit fly
diffusive, in its progress widen still,
"dear to the earth, and grateful to the sky."
fame owe he more than ever she can repay:
she owe her very temple to his hand;
like Ilium build; by hand no less divine!

attention, rouse thyself! the master hand,
(the master of our soul!) have change the key,
and bid the thunder of the battle roar
tumultuous. Homer, Homer be our own!
and grecian hero flame in british line.
what pomp of word! what nameless energy
kindle the verse; invigour every line;
astonish, and overwhelm the soul
in transport toss! when fierce Achilles rave,
and flash, like a comet, over the field,
to wither army with his martial frown.
i see the battle rage; i hear the wheel
career with their brazen orb! the shout
of nation roll (the labour of the wind)
full on my ear, and shake my inmost soul.
description never can so well deceive:
it be real! Troy be here, or i at Troy
enjoy the war. my spirit, all on fire,
with unextinguished violence be bear
above the world, and mingle with the god.
Olympus ring with arm! the firmament,
beneath the lightning of minerva shield,
burns to the centre: rock the tower of heaven,
all nature tremble, save the throne of Jove.

to root excess from the human breast;
behold a beauteous pile of ethic rise;
sense, the foundation; harmony, the wall;
(the dorique grave, and gay Corinthian join)
where Socrates and Horace joint reign.
best of philosopher! of poet too
the best! he teach thou thy self to know:
that virtue be the noble gift of heaven:
"and vindicate the way of god to man."
o harken to the moralist polite!
enter his school of truth: where Plato self
may preach; and Tully deign to lend a ear.

last see he wage with the fool of rhyme
a wanton, harmless war. dunce after dunce;
beaux, doctor, templar, courtier; soph and cit,
condemn to suffer life. the motley crew,
emerge from oblivion muddy pool,
give the round face to view; and shameless front
proud expose; till laughter have she fill.

bear to improve the age, and cheat mankind
into the road of honour! — vice again
the gild chariot drive: — for he be dead!

i see the sable barge, along his Thames,
in slow solemnity beat the tide,
convey his sacred dust! — its swain expire;
wither, in twit'nam bower, the laurel-bough;
silent, the muse break their idle lyre:
the attendant grace check the sprightly dance,
their arm unlocked, and catch the start tear:
and virtue for her lose defender mourn!
