the journey.

some of my friend (for friend i must suppose
 all, who, not dare to appear my foe,
 feign great good will, and, not more full of spite
 than full of craft, under false colour fight)
 some of my friend (so lavish i print)
 as more in sorrow than in anger, hint
 (though that indeed will scarce admit a doubt)
 that i shall run my stock of genius out,
 my no great stock, and, publish so fast,
 must needs become a bankrupt at the last. 

 "the husbandman, to spare a thankful soil,
"which, rich in disposition, pay his toil
 "more than a hundred fold, which swell his store
"even to his wish, and make his barn run over,
 "by long experience teach, who teach best,
"forego his hope awhile, and give it rest. 
 "the land, allow its loss to repair,
"refresh, and full in strength, delight to wear
 "a second youth, and to the farmer eye
"bid rich crop, and double harvest rise. 

 "nor think this practice to the earth confine,
"it reach to the culture of the mind. 
 "the mind of man crave rest, and can bear,
"though next in power to god, continual care. 
 "genius himself (nor here let genius frown)
"must, to ensure his vigour, be lay down,
 "and fallow well; have Churchill know but this,
"which the most slight observer scarce can miss,
 "he may have flourish twenty year, or more,
"though now alas! poor man! wear out in four. 

recover from the vanity of youth,
 i feel, alas! this melancholy truth,
 thanks to each cordial, each advise friend,
 and be, if not too late, resolve to mend,
 resolve to give some respite to my pen,
 apply myself once more to book, and man,
 view what be present, what be past review,
 and my old stock exhaust lie in new. 
for twice six moon (let wind, turn porter, bear
 this oath to heaven) for twice six moon i swear,
 no muse shall tempt i with her siren lie,
 nor draw i from improvement thorny way. 
verse i abjure, nor will forgive that friend,
 who in my hear shall a rhyme commend. 

it can be — whether i will, or not,
 such as they be, my thought in measure flow. 
convince, determine, i in prose begin,
 but ever i write one sentence, verse creep in,
 and taint i through and through; by this good light
 in verse i talk by day, i dream by night;
 if now and then i curse, my curse chime,
 nor can i pray, unless i pray in rhyme. 
even now i err, in spite of common sense,
 and my confession double my offence. 

rest then my friend — spare, spare your precious breath,
 and be your slumber not less sound than death;
 perturb spirit rest, nor thus appear
 to waste your counsel in a spendthrift ear,
 on your grave lesson i can subsist,
 nor even in verse become oeconomist;
 rest then my friend, nor, hateful to my eye,
 let envy, in the shape of pity, rise
 to blast i ever my time; with patience wait,
 (it be no long interval) propitious fate
 shall glut your pride, and every son of phlegm
 find ample room to censure and condemn. 
read some three hundred line, (no easy task;
 but probable the last that i shall ask)
 and give i up for ever; wait one hour,
 nay not so much, revenge be in your power,
 and you may cry, ever time have turn his glass,
 lo! what we prophesy be come to pass. 

let those, who poetry in poem claim,
 or not read this, or only read to blame;
 let those, who be by fiction charm enslave,
 return i thanks for half a crown well-saved;
 let those, who love a little gall in rhyme,
 postpone their purchase now, and call next time;
 let those, who, void of nature, look for art,
 take up their money, and in peace depart;
 let those, who energy of diction prize,
 for Billingsgate quit flexney, and be wise;
 here be no lie, no gall, no art, no force,
 mean be the word, and such as come of course,
 the subject not less simple than the lay;
 a plain, unlaboured journey of a day. 

far from i now be every tuneful maid,
 i neither ask, nor can receive their aid. 
Pegasus turn into a common hack,
 alone i jog, and keep the beat track,
 nor will i have the sister of the hill
 behold their bard in such a dishabille. 
absent, but only absent for a time,
 let they caress some dear son of rhyme,
 let they, as far as decency permit,
 without suspicion, play the fool with wit,
 against fool be guard; it be a certain rule,
 wit be safe thing, there be danger in a fool. 

let they, though modest, grey more modest woo;
 let they with Mason bleat, and bray, and cooe;
 let they with franklin, proud of some small greek,
 make Sophocles, disguise, in english speak;
 let they with Glover over Medea doze;
 let they with Dodsley wail cleone woe,
 while he, fine feeling creature, all in tear,
 melt as they melt, and weep with weep peer;
 let they with simple Whitehead, teach to creep
 silent and soft, lie Fontenelle asleep;
 let they with Browne contrive, no vulgar trick,
 to cure the dead, and make the live sick;
 let they in charity to Murphy give
 some old french piece, that he may steal and live;
 let they with antic Foote subscription get,
 and advertise a summer-house of wit. 

thus, or in any better way they please,
 with these great man, or with great man like these,
 let they their appetite for laughter feed;
 i on my journey all alone proceed. 

if fashionable grow, and fond of power
 with humorous scots let they disport their hour;
 let they dance, fairy like, round ossian tomb;
 let they forge lie, and history for Hume;
 let they with home, the very prince of verse,
 make something like a tragedy in erse;
 under dark allegory flimsy veil
 let they with Ogilvie spin out a tale
 of rueful length; let they plain thing obscure,
 debase what be true rich, and what be poor
 make poor still by jargon most uncouth;
 with every pert, prim prettiness of youth
 bear of false taste, with fancy (like a child
 not know what it cry for) run wild,
 with bloat stile, by affectation teach,
 with much false colour, and little thought,
 with phrase strange, and dialect decree
 by reason never to have pass the Tweed,
 with word, which nature mean each other foe,
 force to compound whether they will or no,
 with such material, let they, if they will,
 to prove at once their pleasantry and skill,
 build up a bard to war against common sense,
 by way of compliment to providence;
 let they with ARMSTRONG, take leave of sense,
 read musty lecture on benevolence,
 or conn the page of his gape day,
 where all his former fame be throw away,
 where all, but barren labour, be forget,
 and the vain stiffness of a letter Scot;
 let they with ARMSTRONG pass the term of light,
 but not one hour of darkness; when the night
 suspend this mortal coil, when memory wake,
 when for our past misdoing conscience take
 a deep revenge, when, by reflection lead,
 she draw his curtain, and look comfort dead,
 let every muse be go; in vain he turn
 and try to pray for sleep; a Aetna burn,
 a more than Aetna in his coward breast;
 and guilt, with vengeance arm, forbid he rest. 
though soft as plumage from young zephyr wing,
 his couch seem hard, and no relief can bring. 
ingratitude have plant dagger there,
 no good man can deserve, no brave man bear. 

thus, or in any better way they please,
 with these great man, or with great man like these,
 let they their appetite for laughter feed;
 i on my journey all alone proceed. 
