to dr. Sherlock, on his practical discourse concern death.

forgive the muse, who in unhallowed strain
 the saint one moment from his god detain:
 for sure, whatever you do, wherever you be,
 it be all but one good work, one constant prayer:
 forgive she; and entreat that god, to who
 thy favour vow with kind acceptance come,
 to raise her note to that sublime degree,
 which suit a song of piety and thou. 

wondrous good man! who labour may repel
 the force of sin, may stop the rage of hell:
 thou, like the baptist, from thy god waste send
 the cry voice, to bid the world repent. 

thou youth shall study; and no more engage
 their flatter wish for uncertain age;
 no more with fruitless care, and cheat strife
 Chace fleet pleasure through this maze of life;
 find the wretched all they here can have,
 but present food, and but a future grave:
 each, great as philip victor son, shall view
 this abject world, and weep, ask a new. 

decrepit age shall read thou, and confess,
 thy labour can assuage, where medicine cease:
 shall bless thy word, their wound soul relief,
 the drop that sweeten their last dregs of life:
 shall look to heaven, and laugh at all beneath;
 own riches gather, trouble; fame, a breath;
 and life a ill, who only cure be death. 

thy even thought with so much plainness flow;
 their sense untutored infancy may know:
 yet to such height be all that plainness wrought;
 wit may admire, and letter pride be teach:
 easy in word thy style, in sense sublime:
 on it be bless step each age and sex may rise:
 it be like the ladder in the patriarch dream,
 it be foot on earth, it be height above the sky. 
diffuse it be virtue, boundless be it be power:
 it be public health, and universal cure:
 of heavenly manna, it be a second feast,
 a nation food, and all to every taste. 

to it be last height mad britain guilt be rear:
 and various death for various crime she fear:
 with your kind work her droop hope revive:
 you bid she read, repent, adore, and live:
 you wrest the bolt from heaven avenge hand;
 stop ready death, and save a sink land. 

o! save we still; still bless we with thy stay:
 o! want thy heaven, until we have learn the way:
 refuse to leave thy destine charge too soon:
 and for the church good, defer thy own. 
o! live; and let thy work urge our belief;
 live to explain thy doctrine by thy life;
 until future infancy, baptise by thou,
 grow ripe in year, and old in piety;
 until christian, yet unborn, be teach to die. 

then in full age, and hoary holiness
 retire, great teacher, to thy promise bliss:
 untouched thy tomb, uninjured be thy dust,
 as thy own fame among the future just;
 until in last sound the dreadful trumpet speak:
 till judgement call; and quicken nature wake:
 until through the utmost earth, and deep sea
 our scatter atom find their destine way,
 in haste to cloth their kindred soul again;
 perfect our state, and build immortal man:
 then fearless thou, who well sustain'dst the fight,
 to path of joy, and tract of endless light
 lead up all those who hear thou, and believe:
 'midst thy own flock, great shepherd, be receive;
 and glad all heaven with million thou have save. 
