FROM PHILANDER TO EUMENES. 

WITH pleasure I your welcome letter read,
 While Cupid for a little from me fled. 
With freedom write, dispel your trivial fears;
 There's nought presumptuous in your song appears;
 Tho' strange th' ideas which you now convey,
 While you our lovely females thus portray. 

No doubt, there are, in the promiscuous crowd,
 The worthless fair, the virtuous and the good;
 The haughty nymph, the maid of humble mind;
 Th' imperious, yea, the gentle and the kind;
 Such as an adamantine heart could charm,
 And furious tygers of their rage disarm. 
In all vicissitudes of human life,
 Man's greatest blessing is a virtuous wife:
 Her smiles can't fail to sooth his anxious breast,
 Diffusing joy, while various cares molest:
 Her prudent counsel swift relief can bring,
 As Abigail appeased Isr'el's king. 

Nor need I thus the sacred annals trace,
 In Britain's Isle they claim the highest place;
 When dire oppression, with uplifted hand,
 His yoke extended o'er our native land,
 Our sires to abject slavery were doom'd,
 Our mothers all their ancient claims resum'd:
 You'll say my speeches do me partial prove,
 And so ascribe the cruel cause to love. 
Are you alone exempt from such a guest? 
Are you of every antidote possess'd
 T' effect a cure, or mitigate the pain? 
Then may the archer cast his shafts in vain. 

Of late dear friend I did such valour boast;
 But by one fatal glance the field was lost. 
While you are free of dangers, still beware;
 Be warn'd by me, and shun th' alluring snare. 
It is by some deem'd cowardice to fly,
 But sure it more ignoble is to die:
 To die, I'm frantic, sir; what did I say? 
Reason once more resume thy wonted sway;
 Kind heaven defend us from such dire alarms;
 Who would a victim fall to female charms? 
I find I'm better while your lines I read,
 I'm almost from my Gallic fetters free'd. 
As you alone were partner of my grief,
 Pray now congratulate my quick relief. 
I would not by prolixity offend;
 Both bound and free, Philander is your friend. 
