the praise of Isis; a poem.

write mdcclv.

by CHARLES Emily, ESQ.

castalian goddess, come; nor slight the call
 of simple bard; auspicious come, and prompt
 the flow number; so may Isis lend
 attentive ear well-pleased, nor with disdain
 reject the wreath of fresh flowret cull
 from pindus hill to deck her lovely brow. —
 begin; what muse to Isis shall deny
 the votive song? for Isis love the muse. —

thou, fair naiad, oft at early dawn
 i meditate, till evening, matron stay,
 her tress drip with ambrosial dew
 advance slow-pacing from the gild west;
 nor cease i to reflect, how bless be they,
 to envy bless, that in thy peaceful haunt
 hold please dalliance with the muses train;
 yet though in other clime i rest remote,
 ill-fated, that my wayward lot forbid
 to wander thy green verge beside, shall thou
 remain unsung; while now the hoary cam
 hard by i roll his slowly-winding wave. 

as where Apelles in accordance meet
 wed light to shade; and with Promethean art
 teach the breathe canvas to express
 a furtive life; with wonder we behold
 unnumbered beauty rush upon the sight,
 gaze, while on the border of the lip
 stand mute suspense, yet doubtful which may first
 demand, which last, the tribute of applause;
 thus, Isis, while for thou i string the lyre,
 the tongue of praise awhile forget its purpose,
 in magic wonder bind; nor know the muse
 lose in the please labyrinth, where to bend
 her footstep first. — say, shall i first rehearse,
 how thou, a virgin yet, be whilom wont
 in nereus hall to join the festive dance
 thy sister train among, the fair thou
 of all the naiad, that with silver foot
 skim the smooth surface of the glassy deep? 
say, rather shall i sing, how kingly Thame
 (if holy bard in better age bear
 have story true) to share his watery bed
 thou woo long love? nor in proud disdain
 do thou refuse with kingly Thame to mix
 thy marriageable wave. to neptune court
 upon that great solemnity repair
 the river god: all that from crystal urn
 enrichen moisture pour over british plain. 
there first advance with imperial port
 proud Humber come; majestic as the god
 who mighty trident shake the tremble earth:
 next Severn, conscious of sabrina fate,
 the king of flood; in greenish mantle clad
 bespangle here and there with costly gem
 and many a glister pearl: there too be see
 the Medway, and the hoarse-resounding Trent,
 the pleasant Medway, that with conscious pride
 behold the glorious race, who long of yore
 breathe stern-visaged valour scorn to stoop
 the servile neck to William gall yoke,
 unconquerable soul: the yellow ouse
 there come, and towy wind up and down
 his watery fold, and Deva hold of old
 a sacred current; with the blue-robed dove,
 and Derwent, sister stream; and Avon fair,
 the silver-sandaled nymph: who bank along
 at silent eve in pensive posture stretch,
 call rapture fancy from elysian bower
 her darling shakespeare ever hallow shade. 
there be the Tweed, the turret-crested Tyne,
 and Eden, famous stream; who have not hear
 of Eden? there the ploughman as he turn
 with crooked share the border glebe, full oft
 gauntlet and rust-worn spear and vizored helm,
 and ponderous shield with quaint device portray,
 and bone enormous of gigantic size
 with gape wonder see; then call to mind
 the well know tale, how there by british knight
 be many a bold exploit and bloody fight
 achieve of old. — but tedious it be to name
 all that with one accord to neptune hall
 then come, when now the beauteous Isis give
 to mix with royal thame uxorious flood
 her virgin stream. nor on that solemn day
 be want (then with rural chaplet crown,
 though now adorn with many a glitter tower)
 thou, father cam: that oft with kind attention
 have deign awhile to listen, as i tune
 the simple madrigal; nor jealous he,
 that now his wind intricate i trace
 with muse gait; and teach the mimic nymph,
 all as she sit his flowery bank along,
 to sound the praise of a sister flood: —
 and can i sing aught better, than thy praise,
 o lovely Isis? lovely in the eye
 of Phoebus see, than erst the silver stream
 of fable castaly; and fame as that
 which flow minerva city fast beside,
 Ilissus, nurse of each ingenuous art. 

shall i rehearse, or those, who bounty bad
 the liquid mirror of thy glassy wave
 yond towery mansion to reflect; or those,
 thy darling progeny, who burn to grasp
 immortal fame, and with unwearied search
 urge fly science to its inmost maze;
 shall i their name rehearse, the sun, that now
 his mattin beam wide scatter tip with gold
 the ragged skirt of yonder orient cloud,
 will drink the western wave, or ever cease
 the lengthen song. — these structure Bodley plan;
 those sheldon bounty rear. that beauteous dome
 bid grateful Isis still adore the shade
 of Radcliffe, honour name: he Paean teach
 (for he be love of Paean) to explore
 the medicinal power of juicy shrub
 and heal plant, that over her verdant lap
 with free profusion parent nature strew;
 nor thankless he; for to the god he rear
 in pious gratitude a stately fane. 

whence rise yond fabric, that conspicuous lift
 its sky-topt dome with more majestic pride? 
it be wolsey glorious work: to science rise
 no tower more love; for there the mitred sage,
 in wisdom lore deep skill, with kind eye
 observe the bud genius as it thrust
 its youthful blossom; or with conscious joy
 there oft in recollection sweet behold
 those, (who his honest nurture erst inform
 with all that be deem or excellent or fair)
 over britain peaceful land their goodly beam
 dispense abroad: name, that to late time
 shall shine distinguish in the roll of fame. 

oft, as thou sat within thy pearl pave grot,
 with please attention, Isis, have thou catch
 the dulcet sound, when in yond sacred grove,
 to Phoebus sacred, woo the latian muse
 sweet ADDISON: who like the sedulous bee
 rifle each honey-bosomed flower, that edge
 the fount of Helicon. — why love to bend
 his lonely step to yonder age oak,
 deep muse, while bright Cynthia silver over
 the negro forehead of uncomely night,
 the enrapture bard? and on the dew-sprent turf
 his temple pillow, see before he dance
 (or dream he see) the muse nine, and glow
 with inspiration strange? there fame record
 custom the merry Chaucer erst to frame
 his laughter-moving tale: nor, when his harp
 he tune to note of loud pitch, and sing
 of lady pass fair, and bloody joust,
 and warrior steed, and valour-breathing knight
 for matchless prowess fame, deserve he not
 the laureate wreath; for he, like Phoebus, know
 to build in number apt the lofty song. —

 "whence be thou, gracious presence? be thou send
" from heaven, a angel minister, to bless
 "these favour seat? for that excel form
" bespeak thou more than man; "in wonder wrap
 thus Isis cry, while on her margin green
 in youthful grace how amiable! stand
 britannia rise hope. with steadfast eye
 long time she gaze unsatisfied, and mark
 each godlike thought, that image on his look
 with strong reflection shine, the undoubted pledge
 of future deed: though yet be cressy plain
 unstained with slaughter: nor have gallia king
 his ravage crown yet mourn; nor deem, that soon
 will dawn the luckless day, when he must drag
 the gall bond of sore captivity,
 the gaze of cluster multitude, and deck
 the glorious triumph of a british boy. —

nor, while yond fair aspire dome adorn
 thy verge, o Isis, shall unmentioned pass
 Alfred, auspicious name: say, goddess say,
 burst not thy breast with swell rapture fraught,
 while memory with her foregeful pencil paint
 the glorious portrait? on the godlike form
 advance, not graceful less, than on the top
 of delian Cynthus, step latona son,
 in mild majesty: beside he go,
 as muse deep, a hoaryheaded sa,
 of wondrous reverence; on his broad smooth front
 have wisdom stamp its fair similitude. 
the laurel grace his temple: in his hand
 a golden harp, apollo gift, he bear;
 and oft with cunning finger be he wont
 to rove along the sound string, and lift
 the ravish soul of statue-fixed attention
 to the heaven of rapture — o how sweet thy charm,
 all-powerful harmony! in year indeed
 advance he seem; yet on the cheek of age
 hale vigour with unfading freshness bloom;
 upright he step in stately mien, and breathe
 amiable dignity: such seem of yore
 the sire of Jove, what time on latian plain
 he dwell with Janus, hospitable king. 
well know, what be, what be, what be to come,
 the reverend sage; and wise can he treat
 of justice, truth, and universal love
 from man to man; and mark the limit, when
 virtue be virtue; when its mad excess
 stray headlong into vice: he too can tell
 how move the planet in harmonious dance
 its central sun around: whence Iris steal
 the bright variety of hue, that fringe
 her humid bow; how spring of night and day
 the due vicissitude; why over the earth
 circle the year with grateful interchange
 the wander season roll; of high thing
 nor know not he; for of the aetherial mind,
 that beam to day, tomorrow, and for ever,
 a unextinguished spark; of nature law;
 and nature god full well can he discourse. 

he gracious heaven in pity to mankind
 send from its star-paved court (so sing beneath
 his ivy oak of yore the druid sage)
 and name he science: first on asian clime
 he settle, there where proud Euphrates roll
 amid chaldaean plain, or on the bank
 of pharian Nile; there he his favourite seat
 long choose, soften with refinement meet
 the savage genius of mankind, and teach
 with awful law to curb licentious guilt,
 to build the wall gird city, and to frame
 the peaceful league of bless society
 with all the sweet civility of life. 

he Greece from thence with open arm embrace
 a welcome guest: but chief he love to haunt
 the porch of academe; where mild beam
 the modest wisdom of good Socrates;
 where wont the honeyed eloquence to flow
 from Plato sweet-distilling lip; and where
 the letter Stagyrite from nature source
 his maxim draw. nor on ausonian coast
 be science honour less; since there have come
 the samian sage, who smite with love of knowledge
 over many a distant realm have stretch his search,
 and climate warm beneath another sun. 

at length when now in more degenerate time
 have exile freedom loathe the hesperian shore,
 with crooked keel do heaven-born science blow
 the swell back of ocean, till he gain
 neptunian albion hospitable beech;
 the nurse of liberty; for ill, i ween,
 can learning thrive, if freedom shall deny
 to cherish with mild ray the rise flower;
 to Albion isle he come, what time be sheathe
 the sword of war; and alfred arm have crush
 the might of paynim foe: the gracious king
 with gladness hail his venerable guest;
 and lead he forth, where through the flowery mead
 the silver Isis wind her liquid maze. 
when thus the royal goodness speak benign:
 "here deign, o heaven-descended sage, to fix
" thy favourite mansion; here to late time
 "instruct thy son (nor think that briton bear
" such savage-hearted nature, but will melt
 "in soft humanity) thy secret store
" to pierce with curious diligence, and snatch
 "each fair perfection, each excel art,
" and all, that profit or delight mankind;
 "here (as recline on the peaceful lap
" of leisure not inglorious, they delight
 "to muse in calm retirement lonely haunt)
" instruct they to pursue the unerring print
 "of wisdom step; or with no lowly flight,
" high bear on contemplation eagle wing,
 "to rise from nature up to nature god. 
" how happy they! who thou shall give to tread
 "the pleasant path of knowledge, and to weave
" the laurel chaplet for their honour brow! " 
he cease, with look mild as when Phoebus shed
 his soft effulgence on autumnal eve. 
the laureled seer in thankful guise bow low
 his hoary reverence:" with peculiar love
 "sure heaven then look (he cry) on mortal down,
" when king, like Alfred, rise; who patriot soul
 "still centre in a nation good; who live
" by glorious work to make their country great:
 "such well deserve to rule: such heaven behold
 "well-pleased; nor grudge, that to they it give
" its high vicegerency. — in future time
 "some one mayhap, the while he shall behold
" with conscious pride, how far his native land
 "transcend whatever vaunt historic fame
" of polish Athens, and imperial Rome
 "the seat of demi-god, in holy rapture
" shall bless the name of Alfred; and relate,
 "that he, still anxious for his britain weal,
" lead science there where through the flowery mead
 "her liquid maze the silver Isis wind —
" nor shall thou, hospitable flood, where now
 "i stay my wander foot, a strange guest,
" unhonoured flow: for on thy grassy brim
 "full oft shall thou in silent joy behold,
" bard that shall know to bind the captive soul
 "with energy of song; and sage wise,
" as whilom muse the athenian stream beside;
 "and statesman, patriot soul, with merit fraught
" and virtue more than roman. — here shall rise
 "my best-loved progeny, that shall explore
 "(of heaven how high favour) what till then
" stagger the pedant pride, and slip the grasp
 "of baffle sophist: he with truth be bright ray
" the tenfold gloom, which darken logic spread,
 "shall pierce; and, like the golden-footed morn,
" scatter abroad the cheere beam of light. —

 "these be the glory, that with influence sweet
" shall gild thy shore, bless Isis: these be they,
 "with homage due that each revolve year
" shall visit alfred hallow shrine, and bring
 "the pledge of gratitude and filial love." 
