THE PRAISES OF ISIS; A POEM.

WRITTEN MDCCLV.

BY CHARLES EMILY, ESQ.

CASTALIAN goddess, come; nor slight the call
 Of simplest bard; auspicious come, and prompt
 The flowing numbers; so may Isis lend
 Attentive ear well-pleas'd, nor with disdain
 Reject the wreath of freshest flowrets cull'd
 From Pindus' hill to deck her lovely brow. —
 Begin; what Muse to Isis shall deny
 The votive song? for Isis loves the Muse. —

Thee, fairest Naiad, oft at early dawn
 I meditate, till Evening, matron staid,
 Her tresses dripping with ambrosial dew
 Advance slow-pacing from the gilded West;
 Nor cease I to reflect, how blest are they,
 To envy blest, that in thy peaceful haunts
 Hold pleasing dalliance with the Muses' train;
 Yet tho' in other clime I rest remote,
 Ill-fated, that my wayward lot forbids
 To wander thy green verge beside, shalt thou
 Remain unsung; while now the hoary Cam
 Hard by me rolls his slowly-winding wave. 

As where Apelles in accordance meet
 Weds light to shade; and with Promethean art
 Teaches the breathing canvas to express
 A furtive life; with wonder we behold
 Unnumbered beauties rush upon the sight,
 Gazing, while on the border of the lip
 Stands mute Suspence, yet doubtful which may first
 Demand, which last, the tribute of applause;
 Thus, Isis, while for thee I string the lyre,
 The tongue of praise awhile forgets its purpose,
 In magic wonder bound; nor knows the Muse
 Lost in the pleasing labyrinth, where to bend
 Her footstep first. — Say, shall I first rehearse,
 How thou, a virgin yet, wert whilom wont
 In Nereus' hall to join the festive dance
 Thy sister train among, the fairest thou
 Of all the Naiads, that with silver foot
 Skim the smooth surface of the glassy deep? 
Say, rather shall I sing, how kingly Thame
 (If holy bards in better ages born
 Have story'd true) to share his watery bed
 Thee woo'd long loving? nor in proud disdain
 Didst thou refuse with kingly Thame to mix
 Thy marriageable wave. To Neptune's court
 Upon that great solemnity repair'd
 The river gods: all that from crystal urn
 Enrichening moisture pour o'er British plains. 
There first advancing with imperial port
 Proud Humber came; majestic as the god
 Whose mighty trident shakes the trembling earth:
 Next Severn, conscious of Sabrina's fate,
 The king of floods; in greenish mantle clad
 Bespangled here and there with costly gems
 And many a glistering pearl: there too was seen
 The Medway, and the hoarse-resounding Trent,
 The pleasant Medway, that with conscious pride
 Beholds the glorious race, who long of yore
 Breathing stern-visag'd valour scorn'd to stoop
 The servile neck to William's galling yoke,
 Unconquerable souls: the yellow Ouse
 There came, and Towy winding up and down
 His watry folds, and Deva held of old
 A sacred current; with the blue-rob'd Dove,
 And Derwent, sister streams; and Avon fair,
 The silver-sandal'd nymph: whose bank along
 At silent eve in pensive posture stretch'd,
 Calls raptur'd Fancy from Elysian bower
 Her darling Shakespear's ever hallow'd shade. 
There was the Tweed, the turret-crested Tyne,
 And Eden, famous stream; who hath not heard
 Of Eden? there the plowman as he turns
 With crooked share the bordering glebe, full oft
 Gauntlets and rust-worn spears and vizor'd helms,
 And pond'rous shields with quaint device pourtray'd,
 And bones enormous of gigantic size
 With gaping wonder sees; then calls to mind
 The well known tale, how there by British knights
 Was many a bold exploit and bloody fight
 Atchiev'd of old. — But tedious 'twere to name
 All that with one accord to Neptune's hall
 Then came, when now the beauteous Isis gave
 To mix with royal Thame's uxorious flood
 Her virgin stream. Nor on that solemn day
 Was wanting (then with rural chaplet crown'd,
 Tho' now adorn'd with many a glittering tower)
 Thou, father Cam: that oft with kind attention
 Hast deign'd awhile to listen, as I tun'd
 The simple madrigal; nor jealous he,
 That now his windings intricate I trace
 With musing gait; and teach the mimic nymph,
 All as she sits his flowery bank along,
 To sound the praises of a sister flood: —
 And can I sing aught better, than thy praise,
 O lovely Isis? lovelier in the eye
 Of Phoebus seen, than erst the silver stream
 Of fabled Castaly; and fam'd as that
 Which flow'd Minerva's city fast beside,
 Ilissus, nurse of each ingenuous art. 

Should I rehearse, or those, whose bounty bad
 The liquid mirrour of thy glassy wave
 Yon towery mansions to reflect; or those,
 Thy darling progeny, who burn'd to grasp
 Immortal fame, and with unwearied search
 Urg'd flying Science to its inmost maze;
 Should I their names rehearse, the sun, that now
 His mattin beam wide scattering tips with gold
 The ragged skirt of yonder orient cloud,
 Wou'd drink the western wave, or ever ceas'd
 The lengthen'd song. — These structures Bodley plann'd;
 Those Sheldon's bounty rear'd. That beauteous dome
 Bids grateful Isis still adore the shade
 Of Radcliffe, honour'd name: him Paean taught
 (For he was lov'd of Paean) to explore
 The medicinal power of juicy shrub
 And healing plant, that o'er her verdant lap
 With free profusion parent Nature strews;
 Nor thankless he; for to the god he rear'd
 In pious gratitude a stately fane. 

Whence rose yon fabric, that conspicuous lifts
 Its sky-topt dome with more majestic pride? 
'Twas Wolsey's glorious work: to Science rise
 No towers more lov'd; for there the mitred sage,
 In wisdom's lore deep skill'd, with kindest eye
 Observes the budding Genius as it thrusts
 Its youthful blossoms; or with conscious joy
 There oft in recollection sweet beholds
 Those, (whom his honest nurture erst inform'd
 With all that's deem'd or excellent or fair)
 O'er Britain's peaceful land their goodly beams
 Dispense abroad: names, that to latest time
 Shall shine distinguish'd in the rolls of Fame. 

Oft, as thou sat'st within thy pearl pav'd grot,
 With pleas'd attention, Isis, hast thou caught
 The dulcet sounds, when in yon sacred grove,
 To Phoebus sacred, woo'd the Latian Muse
 Sweet Addison: who like the sedulous bee
 Rifled each honey-bosom'd flower, that edg'd
 The fount of Helicon. — Why loves to bend
 His lonely step to yonder aged oak,
 Deep musing, while bright Cynthia silvers o'er
 The negro forehead of uncomely Night,
 Th' enraptur'd Bard? and on the dew-sprent turf
 His temples pillowing, sees before him dance
 (Or dreams he sees) the Muses Nine, and glows
 With inspiration strange? There Fame records
 Custom'd the merry Chaucer erst to frame
 His laughter-moving tale: nor, when his harp
 He tun'd to notes of louder pitch, and sung
 Of ladies passing fair, and bloody jousts,
 And warrior steeds, and valour-breathing knights
 For matchless prowess fam'd, deserv'd he not
 The laureat wreath; for he, like Phoebus, knew
 To build in numbers apt the lofty song. —

 "Whence art thou, gracious Presence? Art thou sent
" From heaven, an angel minister, to bless
 "These favour'd seats? for that excelling form
" Bespeaks thee more than man; "in wonder wrapt
 Thus Isis cry'd, while on her margent green
 In youthful grace how amiable! stood
 Britannia's rising hope. With stedfast eye
 Long time she gaz'd unsatisfied, and mark'd
 Each godlike thought, that imag'd on his look
 With strong reflection shone, the undoubted pledge
 Of future deeds: tho' yet was Cressy's plain
 Unstain'd with slaughter: nor had Gallia's king
 His ravag'd crown yet mourn'd; nor deem'd, that soon
 Wou'd dawn the luckless day, when he must drag
 The galling bond of sore captivity,
 The gaze of clustering multitudes, and deck
 The glorious triumph of a British boy. —

Nor, while yon fair aspiring domes adorn
 Thy verge, O Isis, shall unmention'd pass
 Alfred, auspicious name: say, goddess say,
 Bursts not thy breast with swelling raptures fraught,
 While Memory with her foregeful pencil paints
 The glorious portrait? On the godlike form
 Advanc'd, not graceful less, than on the top
 Of Delian Cynthus, steps Latona's son,
 In mildest majesty: beside him went,
 As musing deep, an hoary-headed Sa,
 Of wonderous reverence; on his broad smooth front
 Had Wisdom stampt its fair similitude. 
The laurel grac'd his temples: in his hand
 A golden harp, Apollo's gift, he bore;
 And oft with cunning finger was he wont
 To rove along the sounding strings, and lift
 The ravish'd soul of statue-fixt Attention
 To the heaven of rapture — O how sweet thy charms,
 All-powerful Harmony! in years indeed
 Advanc'd he seem'd; yet on the cheek of age
 Hale vigour with unfading freshness bloom'd;
 Upright he stept in stately mien, and breath'd
 Amiable dignity: such seem'd of yore
 The sire of Jove, what time on Latian plains
 He dwelt with Janus, hospitable king. 
Well knew, what was, what is, what is to come,
 The reverend Sage; and wisely could he treat
 Of justice, truth, and universal love
 From man to man; and mark the limits, when
 Virtue is virtue; when its mad excess
 Strays headlong into vice: he too could tell
 How moves the planet in harmonious dance
 Its central sun around: whence Iris steals
 The bright variety of hues, that fringe
 Her humid bow; how springs of night and day
 The due vicissitude; why o'er the earth
 Circling the year with grateful interchange
 The wandering seasons roll; of higher things
 Nor knew not he; for of th' aetherial mind,
 That beams to day, to-morrow, and for ever,
 An unextinguish'd spark; of nature's laws;
 And nature's God full well could he discourse. 

Him gracious Heaven in pity to mankind
 Sent from its star-pav'd court (so sung beneath
 His ivy'd oak of yore the Druid sage)
 And nam'd him SCIENCE: first on Asian clime
 He settled, there where proud Euphrates rolls
 Amid Chaldaean plains, or on the bank
 Of Pharian Nile; there he his favourite seat
 Long choosing, soften'd with refinements meet
 The savage genius of mankind, and taught
 With awful laws to curb licentious guilt,
 To build the wall girt city, and to frame
 The peaceful league of blest society
 With all the sweet civilities of life. 

Him Greece from thence with open arms embrac'd
 A welcome guest: but chief he lov'd to haunt
 The porch of Academe; where mildly beam'd
 The modest wisdom of good Socrates;
 Where wont the honey'd eloquence to flow
 From Plato's sweet-distilling lip; and where
 The letter'd Stagyrite from Nature's source
 His maxims drew. Nor on Ausonian coast
 Was Science honour'd less; since there had come
 The Samian sage, who smit with love of knowledge
 O'er many a distant realm had stretch'd his search,
 And climates warm'd beneath another sun. 

At length when now in more degenerate times
 Had exile Freedom loath'd the Hesperian shore,
 With crooked keel did heaven-born Science plow
 The swelling back of Ocean, till he gain'd
 Neptunian Albion's hospitable beech;
 The nurse of Liberty; for ill, I ween,
 Can Learning thrive, if Freedom shall deny
 To cherish with mild ray the rising flower;
 To Albion isle he came, what time was sheath'd
 The sword of war; and Alfred's arm had crush'd
 The might of Paynim foes: the gracious king
 With gladness hail'd his venerable guest;
 And led him forth, where thro' the flowery meads
 The silver Isis winds her liquid maze. 
When thus the royal goodness spake benign:
 "Here deign, O heaven-descended Sage, to fix
" Thy favourite mansion; here to latest times
 "Instruct thy sons (nor think that Britons bear
" Such savage-hearted natures, but will melt
 "In soft humanity) thy secret stores
" To pierce with curious diligence, and snatch
 "Each fair perfection, each excelling art,
" And all, that profits or delights mankind;
 "Here (as reclining on the peaceful lap
" Of Leisure not inglorious, they delight
 "To muse in calm Retirement's lonely haunt)
" Instruct them to pursue the unerring print
 "Of Wisdom's step; or with no lowly flight,
" High borne on Contemplation's eagle wing,
 "To rise from nature up to nature's God. 
" How happy they! whom thou shalt give to tread
 "The pleasant paths of knowledge, and to weave
" The lawrel chaplet for their honour'd brows! " 
He ceas'd, with look mild as when Phoebus sheds
 His soft effulgence on autumnal eve. 
The laurel'd seer in thankful guise bow'd low
 His hoary reverence:" With peculiar love
 "Sure heaven then looks (he cry'd) on mortals down,
" When kings, like Alfred, rise; whose patriot souls
 "Still center in a nation's good; who live
" By glorious works to make their country great:
 "Such well deserve to rule: such heaven beholds
 "Well-pleas'd; nor grudges, that to them it gave
" Its high vicegerency. — In future time
 "Some one mayhap, the whilst he shall behold
" With conscious pride, how far his native land
 "Transcends whatever vaunts historic fame
" Of polish'd Athens, and imperial Rome
 "The seat of demi-gods, in holy rapture
" Shall bless the name of Alfred; and relate,
 "That he, still anxious for his Britain's weal,
" Led Science there where thro' the flowery meads
 "Her liquid maze the silver Isis winds —
" Nor shalt thou, hospitable flood, where now
 "I stay my wandering feet, a stranger guest,
" Unhonour'd flow: for on thy grassy brim
 "Full oft shalt thou in silent joy behold,
" Bards that shall know to bind the captiv'd soul
 "With energy of song; and sages wise,
" As whilom mus'd th' Athenian stream beside;
 "And statesmen, patriot souls, with merit fraught
" And virtue more than Roman. — Here shall rise
 "My best-lov'd progeny, that shall explore
 "(Of Heaven how highly favour'd) what till then
" Stagger'd the pedant's pride, and slipt the grasp
 "Of baffled sophist: he with Truth's bright ray
" The ten-fold gloom, which darkening logic spread,
 "Shall pierce; and, like the golden-footed morn,
" Scatter abroad the chearing beam of light. —

 "These are the glories, that with influence sweet
" Shall gild thy shores, blest Isis: these are they,
 "With homage due that each revolving year
" Shall visit Alfred's hallowed shrine, and bring
 "The pledge of gratitude and filial love." 
