the rosciad.

Roscius decease, each high aspire player
 push all his interest for the vacant chair. 
the buskin hero of the mimic stage
 no long whine in love, and rant in rage;
 the monarch quit his throne, and condescend
 humble to court the favour of his friend;
 for pity sake tell undeserved mishap,
 and their applause to gain, recount his clap. 
thus the victorious chief of ancient Rome,
 to win the mob, a suppliant form assume,
 in pompous strain fight over the extinguish war,
 and show where honour bleed in every scar

but though bear merit may in Rome appear
 it be not the strong plea for favour, it be not here;
 we form our judgement in another way;
 and they will best succeed, who best can pay:
 those who will gain the vote of british tribe,
 must add to force of merit, force of bribe. 

what can a actor give? in every age
 cash have be rude banish from the stage;
 monarch themselves to grief of every player,
 appear as often as their image there:
 they can, like candidate for other seat,
 pour sea of wine, and mountain raise of meat. 
wine! they can bribe you with the world as soon;
 and of roast beef, they only know the tune. 
but what they have they give; can Clive do more,
 though for one million he have bring home four? 

s—r keep open house at Southwark fair,
 and hope the friend of humour will be there. 
in Smithfield, Y—s prepare the rival treat,
 for those who laughter love instead of meat. 
F—TE, at old house, for even f—te will be
 in self-conceit a actor) bribe with tea;
 which w—k—s—n at second hand receive,
 and at the new pour water on the leaf. 

the town divide, each run several way,
 as passion, humour, interest, party sway. 
thing of no moment, colour of the hair,
 shape of a leg, complexion brown or fair;
 a dress well choose, or a patch misplace,
 conciliate favour, or create distaste. 

from gallery loud peal of laughter roll,
 and thunder shuter praise — he be so droll. 
embox the lady must have something smart,
 Palmer! oh! Palmer top the janty part. 
seat in pit, the dwarf with ache eye
 look up, and vow that barry out of size;
 while to six foot the stripling vigorous grow,
 declare that Garrick be another Coan. 

when place of judgement be by whim supply,
 and our opinion have their rise in pride;
 when, in discourse on each mimic elf,
 we praise and censure with a eye to self;
 all must find friend; and a—m—n bid as fair
 in such a court, as Garrick for the chair. 

at length agree all squabble to decide,
 by some one judge the cause be to be try;
 but this their squabble do afresh renew,
 who shall be judge in such a trial: — who? 

for j—hns—n some; but j—hns—n, it be fear,
 will be too grave; and st—ne too loose appear:
 some call for m—y, but that sound soon die,
 and desert island ring on every side:
 other for f—kl—n vote, but it be know,
 he sicken at all triumph but his own:
 for Colman many, but the peevish tongue
 of prudent age find out that he be young. 

with sleek appearance, and with amble pace,
 and, type of vacant head, with vacant face,
 the Proteus h—ll put in his modest plea —
 let favour speak for other, worth for i. 
for who like he his various power can call
 into so many shape, and shine in all? 
who can so noble grace the motley list,
 actor, inspector, doctor, botanist. 
know any one so well, sure not one know,
 at once to play, prescribe, compound, compose? 
who can? — but Woodward come, — h—ll slip away,
 melt like ghost before the rise day. 

coldblooded critic, by enervate sire
 scarce hammer out, when nature feeble fire
 glimmer their last; who sluggish blood, half freeze,
 creep labour through the vein; who heart never glow
 with fancy-kindled heat — a servile race,
 who in mere want of fault all merit place;
 who blind obedience pay to ancient school,
 bigot to Greece, and slave to musty rule;
 with solemn consequence declare that none
 can judge that cause but Sophocles alone. 
dupe to their fancy excellence, the crowd
 obsequious to the sacred dictate bow. 

when, from amid the throng a youth stand forth,
 unknown his person, not unknown his worth;
 his look bespeak applause; alone he stand,
 alone he stem the mighty critic flood. 
he talk of ancient as the man become
 who prize our own, but envy not their fame;
 with noble reverence speak of Greece and Rome,
 and scorn to tear the laurel from the tomb. 

 "but more than just to other country grow,
"must we turn base apostate to our own? 
 "where do these word of Greece and Rome excel,
"that England may not please the ear as well? 
 "what mighty magic in the place or air,
"that all perfection needs must centre there? 
 "in state, let stranger blind be prefer;
"in state of letter, merit shall be hear. 
 "genius be of no country, her pure ray
"spread all abroad as general as the day. 
 "foe to restraint, from place to place she fly,
"and may hereafter even in holland rise. 
 "may not, to give a please fancy scope,
"and cheer a patriot heart with patriot hope;
 "may not some great extensive genius raise
"the name of Britain above athenian praise;
 "and, while brave thirst of fame his bosom warm,
"make England great in letter as in arm? 
 "there may — there have — and shakespeare muse aspire
"beyond the reach of Greece; with native fire,
 "mount aloft he wing his dare flight,
"while Sophocles below stand tremble at his height. "

why shall we then abroad for judge roam,
 when able judge we may find at home? 
happy in tragic and in comic power,
 have we not Shakespear? — be not Johnson we? 
for they, your natural judge, briton vote;
 they will judge like briton, who like briton write. 

he say, and conquer. — sense resume she sway,
 and disappoint pedant stalk away. 
Shakespear and Johnson, with deserve applause,
 joint-judge be ordain to try the cause. 
meantime the stranger every voice employ,
 to ask or tell his name. — "who be it?"— Lloyd. 

thus, when the age friend of job stand mute,
 and tame prudent give up the dispute,
 Elihu, with the decent warmth of youth,
 bold stand forth, the advocate of truth;
 confute falsehood, and disable pride,
 while baffle age stand snarl at his side. 

the day of trial have fix, nor any fear
 lest day of trial shall be put off here. 
cause but seldom for delay can call
 in court where form be few, fee none at all. 

the morning come, nor find i that the sun,
 as he on other great event have do,
 put on a bright robe than what he wear
 to go his journey in the day before. 

full in the centre of a spacious plain,
 on plan entire new, where nothing vain,
 nothing magnificent appear, but art,
 with decent modesty, perform her part,
 rise a tribunal: from no other court
 it borrow ornament, or seek support:
 no jury here be pack to kill or clear,
 no bribe be take, nor oath break here:
 no gownsman, partial to a client cause,
 to their own purpose tune the pliant law. 
each judge be true and steady to his trust,
 as Mansfield wise, and as old Foster just. 

in the first seat, in robe of various dye,
 a noble wildness flash from his eye,
 sit Shakespear. — in one hand a wand he bear,
 for mighty wonder fame in day of yore;
 the other hold a globe, which to his will
 obedient turn, and own the master skill:
 thing of the noble kind his genius draw,
 and look through nature at a single view:
 a loose he give to his unbounded soul,
 and teach new land to rise, new sea to roll;
 call into be scene unknown before,
 and, pass nature bound, be something more. 

next Johnson sit, — in ancient learning train,
 his rigid judgement fancy flight restrain,
 correct prune each wild luxuriant thought,
 mark out her course, nor spare a glorious fault. 
the book of man he read with nice art,
 and ransack all the secret of the heart;
 exert penetration utmost force,
 and trace each passion to its proper source. 
then, strong mark, in lively colour draw,
 and bring each foible forth to public view. 
the coxcomb feel a lash in every word,
 and fool hang out their brother fool deter. 
his comic humour keep the world in awe,
 and laughter frighten folly more than law. 

but, hark! — the trumpet sound, the crowd give way,
 and the procession come in just array. 

now shall i, in some sweet poetic line,
 offer up incense at apollo shrine;
 invoke the muse to quit her calm abode,
 and waken memory with a sleep ode. 
for how shall mortal man, in mortal verse,
 their title, merit, or their name rehearse? 
but give, kind dullness, memory and rhime,
 we will put off genius till another time. 

first, order come, — with solemn step, and slow,
 in measure time his foot be teach to go. 
behind, from time to time, he cast his eye,
 lest this shall quit his place, that step awry. 
appearance to save, his only care;
 so thing seem right, no matter what they be. 
in he his parent see themselves renew,
 beget by sir critic on saint prude. 

then come drum, trumpet, hautboy, fiddle, flute;
 next, snuffer, sweeper, shifter, soldier, mute:
 legion of angel all in white advance;
 fury, all fire, come forward in a dance:
 pantomine figure then be bring to view,
 fool, hand in hand with fool, go two by two. 
next come the treasurer of either house;
 one with full purse, other with not a sou. 

behind a group of figure awe create,
 set off with all the impertinence of state;
 by lace and feather consecrate to fame,
 expletive king and queen without a name. 

here h—v—d, all serene, in the same strain,
 love, hate, and rage, triumph and complain;
 his easy vacant face proclaim a heart
 which can not feel emotion, nor impart. 
with he come mighty d—s: — on my life,
 that D—s have a very pretty wife! —
 statesman all over! — in plot famous grow! —
 he mouth a sentence, as — we mouth a bone. 

next, h—ll—nd come. — with true tragic stalk,
 he creep, he fly. — a hero shall not walk. 
as if with heaven he war, his eager eye
 plant their battery against the sky:
 attitude, action, air, pause, sigh, groan
 he borrow, and make use of as his own. 
by fortune throw on any other stage,
 he may, perhaps, have please a easy age;
 but now appear a copy, and no more,
 of something better we have see before. 
the actor who will build a solid fame,
 must imitation servile art disclaim;
 act from himself, on his own bottom stand. —
 i hate even Garrick thus at second hand. 

behind come K—G. — breed up in modest lore,
 bashful and young, he seek hibernia shore;
 Hibernia, fame, above every other grace,
 for matchless intrepidity of face. 
from she his feature catch the generous flame,
 and bid defiance to all sense of shame:
 tutor by all her rival to surpass,
 among drury son he come, and shine in brass. 

lo y—s! — without the least finesse of art
 he get applause! — i wish he will get his part. 
when hot impatience be in full career,
 how vile "harkee! harkee!"grate the ear? 
when active fancy from the brain be send,
 and stand on tiptoe for some wish event,
 i hate those careless blunder which recall
 suspend sense, and prove it fiction all. 

W—D—D, endow with various power of face,
 great master in the science of grimace,
 from Ireland venture, favourite of the town,
 lure by the please prospect of renown. 
his wit and humour in distortion lie,
 and all his merit enter at the eye. 
we laugh, we clap, — but, on reflection birth,
 we wonder at ourselves, and curse our mirth. 
his walk of part he fatal misplace,
 and inclination fond take for taste. 
hence have the town so often see display
 beau in burlesque, high-life in masquerade. 
merit he have, some merit in his way,
 but seldom find out in what part it lie. 
in Bobadil, indeed, such praise he bear,
 such worthy praise, that Kitely scarce have more. 

by turn transform into all kind of shape,
 constant to none, f—te laugh, cry, strut, and scrape:
 now in the centre, now in van or rear,
 the Proteus shift, bawd, parson, auctioneer. 
his stroke of humour, and his burst of sport,
 be all contain in this one word, distort. 
do a man stutter, look asquint, or halt;
 mimic draw humour out of nature fault:
 with personal defect their mirth adorn,
 and hang misfortune out to public scorn. 
even i, who nature cast in hideous mould,
 who have make, she tremble to behold,
 beneath the load of mimicry may groan,
 and find that nature error be my own. 

shadow behind of f—te and w—d—d come;
 w—k—s—n this, OB—I—N be that name. 
strange to relate, but wonderful true,
 that even shadow have their shadow too! 
with not a single comic power endue,
 the first, a mere mere mimic mimic stand. 
the last, by nature form to please, who show,
 in Johnson Stephen, which way genius grow;
 self quite put off, affect, with too much art,
 to put on Woodward in each mangle part;
 adopt his shrug, his wink, his stare; nay more,
 his voice, and croak; for Woodward croak before. 
thus the dull copyer simple grace neglect,
 and rest his imitation in — defect. 

arm cross, brow bend, eye fix, foot march slow,
 a band of malcontent with spleen overflow;
 wrap in conceit impenetrable fog,
 which pride, like Phoebus, draw from every bog;
 they curse the manager, and curse the town,
 who partial favour keep such merit down. 

but if some man, more hardy than the rest,
 shall dare attack these gnatling in their nest;
 at once they rise with impotence of rage,
 whet their small sting, and buzz about the stage. 
 "it be breach of privilege! — shall any dare
"to arm satyric truth against a player? 
 "prescriptive right we plead, time out of mind;
"actor, unlashed themselves, may lash mankind. "

what! shall opinion then, of nature free
 and liberal as the vagrant air, agree
 to rust in chain like these, impose by thing
 which, less than nothing, ape the pride of king? 
no, — though half-poet with half-player join
 to curse the freedom of each honest line,
 though rage and malice dim their fade cheek,
 what the muse free think, she will free speak. 
with just disdain of every paltry sneer,
 stranger alike to flattery and fear,
 in purpose fix, and to herself a rule,
 public contempt shall wait the public fool. 

A—ST—N will always glisten in french silk,
 a—km—n will Norris be, and p—ck—r Wilks. 
for who, like a—km—n can with humour please? 
who can, like p—ck—r, charm with sprightly ease? 
high than all the rest, see br—ns—y strut:
 a mighty Gulliver in Lilliput! 
ludicrous nature! which at once can show
 a man so very high, so very low. 

if i forget thou, BL—K—S, or if i say
 ought hurtful, may i never see thou play. 
let critic, with a supercilious air,
 decry thy various merit, and declare,
 frenchman be still at top; — but scorn that rage
 which, in attack thou, attack the age. 
french folly, universal embrace,
 at once provoke our mirth, and form our taste. 

long from a nation, ever hardly use,
 at random censure, wanton abuse,
 have briton draw their sport; with partial view
 form general notion from the rascal few;
 condemn a people, as for vice know,
 which from their country banish seek our own. 
at length, however, the slavish chain be break,
 and sense, awaken, scorn her ancient yoke:
 teach by thou, Moody, we now learn to raise
 mirth from their foible; from their virtue, praise. 

from c—v—nt-g—rd—n crowd promiscuous go,
 who the muse know not, nor desire to know. 
Vet'rans they seem, but know of arm no more
 than if, till that time, arm they never bear. 
like Westminster militia, train to fight,
 they scarce know the left hand from the right. 
ashamed among such troop to show the head,
 their chief be scatter, and their hero flee. 

S—RKS at his glass sit comfortable down
 to separate frown from smile, and smile from frown. 
sm—h the genteel, the airy, and the smart,
 SM—H be just go to school to say his part. 
r—ss (a misfortune which we often meet)
 be fast asleep at dear statira foot;
 Statira, with her hero to agree,
 stand on her foot as fast asleep as he. 
M—KL—N, who large deal in half-formed sound,
 who wanton transgress nature bound,
 eager to touch up some new comic scene,
 lay happy conceal behind a screen. 
SH—T—R, who never care a single pin
 whether he leave out nonsense or put in,
 who aim at wit, though, level in the dark,
 the random arrow seldom hit the mark,
 at Islington, all by the placid stream. 
where city swain in lap of dullness dream,
 where, quiet as her strain, their strain do flow,
 that all the patron by the bard may know;
 secret as night, with r—lt's experience aid,
 the plan of future operation lay,
 project scheme, the summer-month to cheer,
 and spin out happy folly through the year. 

but think not, though these dastard chief be flee,
 that c—ve—nt-g—rd—n troop shall want a head:
 harlequin come their chief! — see, from afar,
 the hero seat in fantastic car! 
wed to novelty, his only arm
 be wooden sword, wand, talisman, and charm. 
on one side folly sit, by some call fun,
 and, on the other, his arch-patron lun. 
behind, for liberty athirst in vain,
 sense, helpless captive, drag the gall chain. 
six rude mishapen beast the chariot draw,
 who reason loathe, and nature never see;
 monster, with tail of ice, and head of fire;
 gorgons, and hydras, and chymaeras dire. 
each be bestride by full as monstrous wight,
 giant, dwarf, genius, elf, hermaphrodite. 
the town, as usual, meet he in full cry:
 the town, as usual, know no reason why. 
but fashion so direct, and modern raise,
 on fashion moulder base, their transient praise. 

next, to the field a band of female draw
 their force; for Britain own no salic law:
 just to their worth, we female right admit,
 nor bar their claim to empire or to wit. 

first, giggle, plot chamber-maid arrive,
 hoyden and romp, lead on by general Clive. 
in spite of outward blemish she shine
 for humour fame, and humour all her own. 
easy, as if at home, the stage she tread,
 nor seek the critic praise, nor fear his rod. 
original in spirit and in ease,
 she please by hide all attempt to please. 
no comic actress ever yet can raise,
 on humour base, more merit or more praise. 

with all the native vigour of sixteen,
 among the merry troop conspicuous see,
 see lively pope advance in jig and trip,
 Corinna, cherry, honeycomb, and snip. 
not without art, but yet to nature true,
 she charm the town with humour just, yet new. 
cheere by her promise, we the less deplore
 the fatal time when Clive shall be no more. 

may figure give a title unto fame,
 what rival shall with y—t—s dispute her claim? 
but justice may not partial trophy raise,
 nor sink the actress in the woman praise. 
still, hand in hand, her word and action go,
 and the heart feel more than the feature show;
 for through the region of that beauteous face,
 we not variety of passion trace;
 dead to the soft emotion of the heart,
 no kindred softness can those eye impart;
 the brow, still fix in sorrow gloomy frame,
 void of distinction, mark all part the same. 

what be a fine person, or a beauteous face,
 unless deportment give it decent grace? 
bless with all other requisite to please,
 some want the strike elegance of ease;
 the curious eye their awkward movement tire;
 they seem like puppet lead about by wire. 
other, like statue, in one posture still,
 give great idea of the workman skill;
 wonder, his art we praise the more we view,
 and only grieve he give not motion too. 
weak of themselves be what we beauty call,
 it be the manner which give strength to all. 
this teach every beauty to unite,
 and bring they forward in the noble light. 
happy in this, behold, amid the throng,
 with transient gleam of grace, h—t sweep along. 

form for the tragic scene, to grace the stage,
 with rival excellence of love and rage,
 mistress of each soft art, with matchless skill
 to turn and wind the passion as she will;
 to melt the heart with sympathetic woe,
 awake the sigh, and teach the tear to flow;
 to put on frenzy wild distract glare,
 and freeze the soul with horror and despair;
 with just desert enrol in endless fame,
 conscious of worth superior, c—bb—r come. 

when poor alicia mad brain be rack,
 and strong image grief her mind distract;
 strike with her grief, i catch the madness too! 
my brain turn round! the headless trunk i view! 
the roof crack, shake, and fall! — new horror rise,
 and reason bury in the ruin lie. 

noble disdainful of each slavish art,
 she make her first attack upon the heart:
 please with the summons, it receive her law;
 and all be, silence, sympathy, applause. 

but when, by fond ambition draw aside,
 giddy with praise, and puff with female pride,
 she quit the tragic scene, and, in pretence
 to comic merit, break down nature fence;
 i scarce can believe my ear and eye,
 or find out c—bb—r through the dark disguise. 

Pritchard, by nature for the stage design,
 in person graceful, and in sense refine;
 her art as much as nature friend become,
 her voice as free from blemish as her fame. 
who know so well in majesty to please,
 attempered with the graceful charm of ease? 

when congreve favour pantomine to grace,
 she come a captive queen of moorish race;
 when love, hate, jealousy, despair, and rage,
 with wild tumult in her breast engage;
 still equal to herself be Zara see:
 her passion be the passion of a queen. 

when she to murder whet the timorous thane,
 i feel ambition rush through every vein;
 persuasion hang upon her dare tongue,
 my heart grow flint, and every nerve new string. 

in comedy — "nay, there,"cry critic, "hold. 
"pritchard for comedy too fat and old. 
 "who can, with patience, bear the grey coquette,
"or force a laugh with over-grown julett? 
 "her speech, look, action, humour, all be just;
"but then, her age and figure give disgust. "

be foible then, and grace of the mind,
 in real life, to size or age confine? 
do spirit flow, and be good-breeding place
 in any set circumference of waist? 
as we grow old, do affectation cease,
 or give not age new vigour to caprice? 
if in original these thing appear,
 why shall we bar they in the copy here? 

the nice punctilio-monger of this age,
 the grand minute reformer of the stage,
 slave to propriety of every kind,
 some standard-measure for each part shall find;
 which, when the best of actor shall exceed,
 let it devolve to one of small breed. 

all actor too upon the back shall bear
 certificate of birth; — time, when; — place, where. 
for how can critic right fix their worth,
 unless they know the minute of their birth? 
a audience too, deceive, may find, too late,
 that they have clap a actor out of date. 

figure, i own, at first, may give offence,
 and harsh strike the eye too curious sense:
 but when perfection of the mind break forth,
 humour chaste sally, judgement solid worth;
 when the pure genuine flame, by nature teach,
 spring into sense, and every action thought;
 before such merit, all objection fly;
 pritchard genteel, and Garrick six foot high. 

oft have i, Pritchard, see thy wondrous skill,
 confess thou great, but find thou great still. 
that worth, which shine in scatter ray before,
collect now, break forth with double power. 
the jealous wife! — on that thy trophy raise,
 inferior only to the author praise. 

from d—bl—n, fame in legend of romance
 for mighty magic of enchant lance,
 with which her hero arm victorious prove,
 and, like a flood, rush over the land of love;
 m—ss—p and b—r—y come. — name never design
 by fate in the same sentence to be join. 

raise by the breath of popular acclaim,
 they mount to the pinnacle of fame:
 there the weak brain, make giddy with the height,
 spur on the rival chief to mortal fight. 
thus sportive boy, around some basin brim,
 behold the pipe-drawn bladder circle swim;
 but if, from lung more potent, there arise
 two bubble of a more than common size,
 eager for honour, they for fight prepare,
 bubble meet bubble, and both sink to air. 

M—SS—P, attach to military plan,
 still keep his eye fix on his right-hand man:
 while the mouth measure word with seem skill,
 the right hand labour, and the left lie still. 
for he resolve on scripture-ground to go,
 what the right do, the left hand shall not know. 
with study impropriety of speech,
 he soar beyond the hackney critic reach;
 to epithet allot emphatic state,
 while principal, ungraced, like lackey wait;
 in way first tread by himself excel,
 and stand alone in indeclinable:
 conjunction, preposition, adverb, join
 to stamp new vigour on the nervous line:
 in monosyllable his thunder roll,
 he, she, it, and, we, you, they fright the soul. 

in person tall than the common size,
 behold where b—y draw admire eye! 
when labour passion, in his bosom pen,
 convulsive rage, and struggle heave for vent;
 spectator, with imagine terror warm,
 anxious expect the burst of the storm:
 but all unfit in such a pile to dwell,
 his voice come forth like echo from her cell;
 to swell the tempest needful aid deny,
 and all down the stage in feeble murmur die. 

what man, like b—y, with such pain can err
 in elocution, action, character? 
what man can give, if B—Y be not here,
 such well-applauded tenderness to Lear? 
who else can speak so very, very fine,
 that sense may kind end with every line? 

some dozen line before the ghost be there,
 behold he for the solemn scene prepare. 
see how he frame his eye, poise each limb,
 put the whole body into proper trim, —
 from whence we learn, with no great stretch of art,
 five line hence come a ghost, and, ha! a start. 

when he appear most perfect, still we find
 something which jar upon, and hurt the mind. 
whatever light upon a part be throw,
 we see too plain they be not his own. 
no flame from nature ever yet he catch,
 nor know a feeling which he be not teach:
 he raise his trophy on the base of art,
 and con his passion as he con his part. 

Q—N, from afar, lure by the scent of fame,
 a stage-leviathan, put in his claim. 
pupil of Betterton and Booth. alone,
 sullen he walk, and deem the chair his own. 
for how shall modern, mushroom of the day,
 who never those master know, know how to play? 

gray-bearded veteran, who, with partial tongue,
 extol the time when they themselves be young;
 who, have lose all relish for the stage,
 see not their own defect, but lash the age,
 receive, with joyful murmur of applause,
 their darling chief, and line his favourite cause. 

far be it from the candid muse to tread
 insult over the ash of the dead. 
but just to live merit, she maintain,
 and dare the test, while Garrick genius reign;
 ancient, in vain, endeavour to excel,
 happy praise if they can act as well. 

but, though prescription force we disallow,
 nor to antiquity submissive bow;
 though we deny imaginary grace,
 found on accident of time and place;
 yet real worth of every growth shall bear,
 due praise, nor dare we, q—n, forget thou there. 

his word bear sterling weight, nervous and strong,
 in manly tide of sense they roll along. 
happy in art, he chief have pretence
 to keep up number, yet not forfeit sense,
 no actor ever great height can reach
 in all the labour artifice of speech. 

speech! be that all? and, shall a actor find,
 a universal fame on partial ground? 
parrot themselves speak proper by rote,
 and, in six month, my dog shall howl by note. 
i laugh at those who, when the stage they tread,
 neglect the heart to compliment the head;
 with strict propriety, their care confine
 to weigh out word, while passion halt behind. 
to syllable-dissector they appeal,
 allow they accent, cadence, — fool may feel;
 but, spite of all the criticise elf,
 those who will make we feel, must feel themselves. 

his eye, in gloomy socket teach to roll,
 proclaim the sullen habit of his soul. 
heavy and phlegmatic he tread the stage,
 too proud for tenderness, too dull for rage. 

when hector lovely widow shine in tear,
 or rowe gay rake dependant virtue jeer;
 with the same cast of feature he be see
 to chide the libertine, and court the queen. 

from the tame scene which without passion flow,
 with just desert his reputation rise. 
nor less he please, when, on some surly plan,
 he be, at once, the actor and the man. 

in brute he shine unequalled: all agree
 Garrick not half so great a brute as he. 
when Cato labour scene be bring to view,
 with equal praise the actor labour too. 
for still you will find, trace passion to their root,
 small difference betwixt the stoic and the brute. 

in fancy scene, as in life real plan,
 he can not, for a moment, sink the man. 
in whatever cast his character be lay,
 self still, like oil, upon the surface play. 
nature, in spite of all his skill, creep in:
 Horatio, dorax, Falstaff, — still it be q—n. 

next follow SH—R—D—N. — a doubtful name,
 as yet unsettled in the rank of fame. 
this, fond lavish in his praise grow,
 give he all merit; that, allow he none. 
between they both, we will steer the middle course,
 nor, love praise, rob judgement of her force. 

just his conception, natural and great:
 he feeling strong, his word enforce with weight. 
be speech-famed q—n himself to hear he speak,
 envy will drive the colour from his cheek:
 but step-dame nature, niggard of her grace,
 deny the social power of voice and face. 

fix in one frame of feature, glare of eye,
 passion, like chaos, in confusion lie:
 in vain the wonder of his skill be try
 to form distinction nature have deny. 

his voice no touch of harmony admit,
 irregular deep and shrill by fit:
 the two extreme appear, like man and wife,
 couple together for the sake of strife. 

his action always strong, but sometime such
 that candour must declare, he act too much. 
why must impatience fall three pace back? 
why pace three return to the attack? 
why be the right leg too forbid to stir,
 unless in motion semicircular? 
why must the hero with the Nailor vie,
 and hurl the close-clenched fist at nose or eye? 

in royal John, with Philip angry grow,
 i think he will have knock poor D—V—S down. 
inhuman tyrant! be it not a shame
 to fright a king so harmless and so tame? 

but, spite of all defect, his glory rise;
 and art, by judgement form, with nature vie. 
behold he sound the depth of hubert soul,
 while in his own contend passion roll. 
view the whole scene, with critic judgement scan,
 and then — deny he merit if you can. 
where he fall short, it be nature fault alone;
 where he succeed, the merit all his own. 

last, Garrick come. — behind he throng a train
 of snarl critic, ignorant as vain. 

one find out, — "he be of stature somewhat low, —
"your hero always shall be tall you know. —
 "true natural greatness all consist in height. "—
 produce your voucher, critic. — "sergeant kyte."

another can forgive the paltry art
 by which he make his way to shallow heart;
 mere piece of finesse, trap for applause. —
 "Avant unnatural start, affect pause."

for i, by nature form to judge with phlegm,
 i can acquit by wholesale nor condemn. 
the best thing carry to excess be wrong;
 the start may be too frequent, pause too long. 
but only use in proper time and place,
 severe judgement must allow they grace. 

if bungler, form on imitation plan,
 just in the way that monkey mimic man;
 their copy scene with mangle art disgrace,
 and pause and start with the same vacant face;
 we join the critic laugh; those trick we scorn,
 which spoil the scene they mean they to adorn. 

but when, from nature pure and genuine source,
 these stroke of act flow with generous force;
 when in the feature all the soul portray,
 and passion, such as Garrick, be display;
 to i they seem from quick feeling catch:
 each start, be nature; and each pause, be thought. 

when reason yield to passion wild alarm,
 and the whole state of man be up in arm;
 what, but a critic, can condemn the player
 for pause here, when cool sense pause there? 
while, work from the heart, the fire i trace,
 and mark it strong flame to the face;
 while, in each sound, i hear the very man;
 i can catch word, and pity those who can. 

let wit, like spider, from the torture brain
 fine-draw the critic-web with curious pain;
 the god, — a kindness i with thanks must pay, —
 have form i of a coarse kind of clay;
 nor sting with envy, nor with spleen disease,
 a poor dull creature, still with nature please:
 hence to thy praise, Garrick, i agree,
 and, please with nature, must be please with thou. 

now may i tell how silence reign throughout,
 and deep attention hush the rabble rout;
 how every claimant, torture with desire,
 be pale as ash, or as red as fire:
 but, loose to fame, the muse more simple act,
 reject all flourish, and relate mere fact. 

the judge, as the several party come,
 with temper hear, with judgement weigh each claim,
 and in their sentence happy agree,
 in name of both, great Shakespear thus decree:

 "if manly sense; if nature, link with art;
"if thorough knowledge of the human heart;
 "if power of act, vast and unconfined;
"if few fault, with great beauty join;
 "if strong expression, and strange power, which lie
"within the magic circle of the eye;
 "if feeling which few heart, like he, can know,
"and which not face so well as he can show;
 "deserve the preference; — Garrick take the chair;
"nor quit it — until thou place a equal there. 
