a letter send to mrs. barber, at tunbridge-well. 

thou glorious ruler of the beauteous day! 
have sev'nteen year so swift roll away? 
have thou so oft the heavenly circle run,
 when scarce i think thy radiant course begin? 
never shall i my fleet time renew? 
must it all perish in one transient view? 
i wish — alas! my wish be in vain:
 those fly year they never can regain:
 with rapid haste old time the moment drive;
 and scarce a trace of youth in age survive:
 so, when the weary mortal sink to rest,
 and every tumult cease in his breast;
 imagine scene, and wished-for view arise;
 anew creation feed his wonder eye;
 till Phoebus, rise over the spangle plain,
 recall he from the bright, delusive scene;
 with grief he then perceive the enchant sight,
 the fleet creature of oblivious night. 

when some fine voice delight the rapture heart,
 by nature please, yet improve by art;
 though tremble each seraphic sound decay,
 and with melodious cadence melt away;
 the faithful echo still revive the strain,
 and sweet charm the listen ear again:
 but life, once vanish, will return no more;
 no mimic think its presence can restore. 

say then, my soul, how must i now survey
 so many year, so quick snatch away? 
awake, my muse! thou only can impart
 ease to my grief, and heal the wound heart:
 what theme shall now employ my youthful lay? 
say! next to heaven, what subject claim my praise? 
o impious question! dare i ask the theme,
 when a love parent do that duty claim? 
the infant tree, that, with judicious care,
 some hand defend from the pierce air,
 with cool stream relieve the burn root,
 or lop, with tender skill, each sickly shoot,
 soon as it learn the tempest to despise,
 and with diffusive branch hide the sky,
 glad reward the weary peasant pain,
 and load the parent hand with annual gain. 

haste then, my muse; sapphira be the theme;
 o strive, though vain, to enhance her fame:
 her guardian care do all my grief assuage,
 those sure attendant of a infant age! 
by she conduct to the light of truth,
 i sail, unshipwreck, through the storm of youth:
 the heavenly influence of her sage advice
 point from afar the dangerous rock of vice;
 show, with discern eye, the blissful plain,
 where peace, eternal, with fair virtue reign. 

o thou, who every grace and worth attend,
 thou best of mother, and thou best of friend,
 indulgent accept these filial lay;
 accept thy son inartificial praise:
 may heaven restore thou to these eye again,
 and safe waft thou over the iernian main:
 o quick to my longing eye repair,
 and ever bless i with thy guardian care! 
