croma: a poem.

it be the voice of my love! few be his visit to the dream of Malvina! open your airy hall, you father of mighty toscar. unfold the gate of your cloud; the step of malvina departure be near. i have hear a voice in my dream. i feel the flutter of my soul. why do thou come, o blast, from the dark-rolling of the lake? thy rustle wing be in the tree, the dream of Malvina depart. but she behold her love, when his robe of mist fly on the wind; the beam of the sun be on his skirt, they glitter like the gold of the stranger. it be the voice of my love! few be his visit to my dream!

but thou dwell in the soul of Malvina, son of mighty Ossian. my sigh arise with the beam of the east; my tear descend with the drop of night. i be a lovely tree, in thy presence, Oscar, with all my branch round i; but thy death come like a blast from the desert, and lay my green head low; the spring return with its shower, but no leaf of i arise. the virgin see i silent in the hall, and they touch the harp of joy. the tear be on the cheek of Malvina: the virgin behold i in my grief. why be thou sad, they say; thou first of the maid of lutha? be he lovely as the beam of the morning, and stately in thy sight?

pleasant be thy song in ossian ear, daughter of streamy lutha! thou have hear the music of depart bard in the dream of thy rest, when sleep fall on thy eye, at the murmur of moruth. when thou do return from the chace, in the day of the sun, thou have hear the music of the bard, and thy song be lovely. it be lovely, o Malvina, but it melt the soul. there be a joy in grief when peace dwell in the breast of the sad. but sorrow waste the mournful, o daughter of toscar, and their day be few. they fall away, like the flower on which the sun look in his strength after the mildew have pass over it, and its head be heavy with the drop of night. attend to the tale of Ossian, o maid; he remember the day of his youth.

the king command; i raise my sail, and rush into the bay of croma; into croma sound bay in lovely Inisfail. high on the coast arise the tower of crothar king of spear; crothar renown in the battle of his youth; but age dwell then around the chief. rothmar raise the sword against the hero; and the wrath of Fingal burn. he send Ossian to meet rothmar in battle, for the chief of croma be the companion of his youth.

i send the bard before i with song; i come into the hall of crothar. there sit the hero amid the arm of his father, but his eye have fail. his grey lock wave around a staff, on which the warrior lean. he hum the song of other time, when the sound of our arm reach his ear. crothar rise, stretch his age hand and bless the son of Fingal.

Ossian! say the hero, the strength of crothar arm have fail. o can i list the sword, as on the day that Fingal fight at strutha! he be the first of mortal man; but crothar have also his fame. the king of Morven praise i, and he place on my arm the bossy shield of calthar, who the hero have slay in war. do thou not behold it on the wall, for crothar eye have fail? be thy strength, like thy father, Ossian? let the age feel thy arm.

i give my arm to the king; he feel it with his age hand. the sigh rise in his breast, and his tear descend. thou be strong, my son, he say, but not like the king of Morven. but who be like the hero among the mighty in war! let the feast of my hall be spread; and let my bard raise the song. great be he that be within my wall, son of echo croma!

the feast be spread. the harp be hear; and joy be in the hall. but it be joy cover a sigh, that dark dwell in every breast. it be like the faint beam of the moon spread on a cloud in heaven. at length the music cease, and the age king of croma speak; he speak without a tear, but the sigh swell in the midst of his voice.

son of Fingal! do thou not behold the darkness of crothar hall of shell? my soul be not dark at the feast, when my people live. i rejoice in the presence of stranger, when my son shine in the hall. but, Ossian, he be a beam that be depart, and leave no streak of light behind. he be fall, son of Fingal, in the battle of his father. — rothmar the chief of grassy tromlo hear that my eye have sail; he hear that my arm be fix in the hall, and the pride of his soul arise. he come towards croma; my people fall before he. i take my arm in the hall, but what can sightless crothar do? my step be unequal; my grief be great. i wish for the day that be past. day! wherein i fight; and win in the field of blood. my son return from the chace; the fair-haired fovar-gormo. he have not lift his sword in battle, for his arm be young. but the soul of the youth be great; the fire of valour burn in his eye. he see the disorder step of his father, and his sigh arise. king of croma, he say, be it because thou have no son; be it for the weakness of fovar-gormo arm that thy sigh arise? i begin, my father, to feel the strength of my arm; i have draw the sword of my youth; and i have bend the bow. let i meet this rothmar, with the youth of croma: let i meet he, o my father; for i feel my burn soul.

and thou shall meet he, i say, son of the sightless crothar! but let other advance before thou, that i may hear the tread of thy foot at thy return; for my eye behold thou not, fair-haired fovar-gormo! — he go, he meet the foe; he fall. the foe advance towards croma. he who slay my son be near, with all his point spear.

it be not time to fill the shell, i reply, and take my spear. my people see the fire of my eye, and they rise around. all night we stride along the heath. grey morning rise in the east. a green narrow vale appear before we; nor do it want its blue stream. the dark host of rothmar be on its bank, with all their glitter arm. we fight along the vale; they flee; rothmar sink beneath my sword. day have not descend in the west when i bring his arm to crothar. the age hero feel they with his hand; and joy brighten in his soul.

the people gather to the hall; the shell of the feast be hear. ten harp be string; five bard advance, and sing, by turn,, the praise of Ossian; they pour forth their burn soul, and the harp answer to their voice. the joy of croma be great: for peace return to the land. the night come on with silence, and the morning return with joy. no foe come in darkness, with his glitter spear. the joy of croma be great; for the gloomy rothmar fall.














i raise my voice for fovar-gormo, when they lay the chief in earth. the age crothar be there, but his sigh be not hear. he search for the wound of his son, and find it in his breast. joy rise in the face of the age. he come and speak to Ossian.

king of spear! he say, my son have not fall without his fame. the young warrior do not fly; but meet death, as he go forward in his strength. happy be they who die in youth, when their renown be hear! the feeble will not behold they in the hall; or smile at their tremble hand. their memory shall be honour in the song; the young tear of the virgin fall. but the age wither away, by degree, and the fame of their youth begin to be forget. they fall in secret; the sigh of their son be not hear. joy be around their tomb; and the stone of their fame be place without a tear. happy be they who die in youth, when their renown be around they!

