address to a steam vessel.

freight with passenger of every sort,
 a motley throng, thou leave the busy port:
 thy long and ample deck, — where scatter lie,
 basket and cloak and shawl of crimson dye;
 where dog and child through the crowd be stray,
 and on his bench apart the fiddler play,
 while matron dame to tresseled seat repair, —
 seem, on the glassy wave, a float fair. 

its dark form on the sky pale azure cast,
 tower from this cluster group thy pillar mast;
 the dense smoke, issue from its narrow vent,
 be to the air in curly volume send,
 which coil and uncoil on the wind,
 trail, like a writhe serpent, far behind. 
beneath, as each merge wheel its motion ply,
 on either side the white-churned water rise,
 and new part from the noisy fray,
 track with light ridgy foam thy recent way,
 then far diverge, in many a lustrous line
 on the still-moving distant surface shine. 

thou hold thy course in independent pride;
 no leave ask thou of either wind or tide. 
to whatever point the breeze inconstant veer,
 still do thy careless helmsman onward steer;
 as if the stroke of some magician wand
 have lend thou power the ocean to command. 
what be this power which thus within thou lurk,
 and all unseen, like a mask giant work? 
even that which gentle dame at morning tea,
 from silver urn ascend, daily see
 with tressy wreathe bear upon the air
 like loosen ringlet of a lady hair;
 or rise from the enamel cup beneath,
 with the soft fragrance of a infant breath:
 that which within the peasant humble cot
 come from the uncovered mouth of savoury pot,
 as his kind mate prepare his noonday fare,
 which cur and cat and rosy urchin share;
 that which, all silver by the moon pale beam
 precede the mighty geyser upcast stream,
 what time, with bellow din, explode forth,
 it deck the midnight of the freeze north,
 while traveller from their skin-spread couch rise
 to gaze upon the sight with wonder eye. 

thou have to those "in populous city pen"
 glimpse of wild and beauteous nature lend,
 a bright remembrance never to be destroy,
 that prove to they a treasure long enjoy,
 and for this scope to being erst confine,
 i fain will hail thou with a grateful mind. 
they who have nought of verdant freshness see,
 but suburb orchard choke with colewort green,
 now, seat at their ease, may glide along,
 loch lomond fair and fairy isle among;
 where bushy promontory fond peep
 at their own beauty in the nether deep,
 over droop birch and rowen red that lave
 their fragrant branch in the glassy wave:
 they who on high object scarce have count
 than church-spire with its gild vane surmount,
 may view within their near, distinctive ken
 the rocky summit of the lofty ben;
 or see his purple shoulder dark low
 through the dim drapery of a summer shower. 
where, spread in broad and fair expanse, the Clyde
 mingle his water with the briny tide,
 along the less cumra rocky shore,
 with moss and crust lichen flecker over,
 he who but warfare hold with thievish cat,
 or from his cupboard chase a hungry rat,
 the city cobbler, — scare the wild sea-mew
 in its mid-flight with loud and shrill halloo;
 or valiant with fearful threaten shake
 his lank and greasy head at kittywake. 
the eye that have no fair outline see,
 than chimney wall with slate roof between,
 which hard and harsh edge the smoky sky,
 may aron softly-visioned peak descry,
 cope with graceful state her steepy side
 over which the cloud broad shadow swift glide,
 and interlacing slope that gentle merge
 into the pearly mist of ocean verge. 
eye which admire that work of sordid skill,
 the story structure of a cotton mill,
 may wonder now behold the unnumbered host
 of marshal pillar on fair Ireland coast,
 phalanx on phalanx range with sidelong bend
 or break rank that to the main descend,
 like Pharaoh army on the red sea shore,
 who deep and deep sink, to rise no more. 

yet nevertheless, whatever we owe to thou,
 rover at will on river, lake, and sea,
 as profit bait or pleasure lure engage,
 offspring of Watt, that philosophic sage,
 who in the heraldry of science rank
 with those to who man owe high meed of thanks
 for genius useful employ, who fame
 shall still be link with davy splendid name! 
dear to fancy, to the eye more fair
 be the light skiff, that to the breezy air
 unfurl their swell sail of snowy hue
 upon the move lap of ocean blue:
 as the proud swan on summer lake display,
 with plumage brighten in the morning ray,
 her fair pavilion of erect wing,
 they change and veer and turn like live thing. 

with ample store of shroud, sail and mast
 to brave with manly skill the winter blast
 of every clime, — in vessel rig like these
 do great Columbus cross the western sea,
 and to the stint thought of man reveal
 what yet the course of age have conceal:
 in such as these, on high adventure bend
 round the vast world magellan comrade go. 
to such as these be hardy seaman find
 as with the tie of kindred feeling bind,
 boast, while can of cheer grog they sip,
 the vary fortune of "our gallant ship:"
 the offspring these of bold sagacious man,
 ere yet the reign of letter lore begin. 

in very truth, compare to these, thou be
 a daily labourer, a mechanic swart,
 in work weed array of homely grey,
 oppose to gentle nymph or lady gay,
 to who free robe the graceful right be give
 to play and dally with the wind of heaven. 
behold thou, the great of other day
 and modern man with all their alter way,
 across my mind with hasty transit gleam,
 like fleet shadow of a feverish dream:
 fitful i gaze, with adverse humour tease,
 half sad, half proud, half angry, and half please. 
