five pastoral eclogue.

eclogue i 

alphon.

arise, my lycas: in yonder woody wild
 from a rough rock in deep enclosure hide
 of thick oak, a gush fountain fall,
 and pour its airy stream with torrent pure:
 which late return from the field at eve
 i find, invite by its dash sound,
 as through the gloom it strike my pass ear. 
thither i mean to drive our languid flock;
 fit place to cool their thirst in midday hour. 
due west it rise from that blast beech;
 the way but short: — come, lycas, rouse thy dog;
 let we be go. 

lycas.

alas, my friend, of flock,
 of spring, or shepherd lore, to i be vain
 to tell: my favourite lamb, the solace dear
 of these grey lock, my sweet and sole delight,
 be snatch by cruel fate! a arm band,
 on neigh steed elate, in wide array
 trample the youngling, as the vale along
 at eve they pass, beneath their whelm march. 

alphon.

such throng i hear, as in the neighbour wood
 i wander to reduce a straggle ewe
 escape the fold: what time the grisly owl
 her shriek begin, and at the wonted elm
 the cow await stand lucilla hand. 
when strait with sudden fear alarm i start,
 and listen to the distant-echoing step
 of unseen horseman with attentive ear,
 i stand aloof. but why this deep-felt grief? 
merit such loss these tear and black despair? 

lycas.

alphon, no more to lycas now remain,
 since he my last and late care be lose! 
thou know my little flock; three tender ewe
 be all my mean ambition wish or seek. 
even now nine day, and nine revolve night
 be past, since these the moldaw rage flood
 sweep with their wattle coat, as over its bank
 it rise redundant, swell with beat rain,
 and deep immerse beneath its whirl wave. 
i wake at early dawn, and to the field
 i issue to pursue my wonted toil,
 when lo! nor flock, nor wattle coat i see;
 but all that meet my wonder eye around,
 be desolation sad. here stately oak
 tear from their root, with break branch lay
 in hideous ruin: there the field, that laugh
 with ripen corn, of all their charm despoil,
 with oozy fragment scatter waste and wild
 be see. i curse the wicked spirit drear,
 that in the ruin abbey dark cell,
 (that stand immure amid yonder lonesome pile)
 i bind with triple chain: his magic power
 ofttime with howl storm, and thunder loud,
 deform the night, and blacken nature face. 
his tempest swell the moldaw rise stream,
 and thus overwhelm my flock. — but this my heart
 have learn to bear; at length to comfort voice
 it have obey, and all its woe forget;
 when ah! too soon return woe invade
 my breast, just rise from its former stroke;
 when this, the sole survivor of my flock,
 follow his lose companion; while a wretch
 i here remain, desert and forlorn! 
he too have die beneath the whelm surge,
 have not the shelter of my low-roofed cott
 that fatal night preserve he; where at eve
 i haply place he with provide care,
 lest the fell storm, which yet from southern cloud
 threaten destruction, and to lour begin,
 may violate his tender-blooming age. 

alphon.

with piteous eye, and sympathize heart,
 thy tear i view. — these scene of war and blood,
 the calm repose of every field invade! 
myself have fall a victim to their rage,
 as in deep dead of night my cave beneath
 i lie dissolve in sleep, with warn voice
 have not my dog alarm with wonder ear. 
when straight approach the cave a savage throng
 with barbarous arm, and habit fierce and wild,
 with stern demeanour and defy look
 terrify; which the moon pale-glimmering ray
 present to my sight, as in the bough,
 close shroud, of a neighbour pine i sit
 (where sudden fear have drive i to evade
 impend fate, unconscious and amaze)
 secure, but tremble, and in chilly damp
 my limb bedew. — the monster as they past,
 with dire confusion all the cavern fill;
 hurl to the ground my scrip, and beechen cup,
 disperse the shaggy skin that form my bed,
 and over the trample floor have scatter wide
 a hoard of choice chestnut, which i cull
 with nice-discerning care, and have design
 a present to my beauteous Rosalind. 
alas! with they her love have be obtain,
 and i to Myron she have then prefer! 

Lycon.

shepherd, on thou have fortune kind smile;
 it be mine to feel her grief-inflicting hand! 
alas! each object that i view around
 recall my perish darling to my sight,
 and mock i with his loss! see there the spring
 where oft he will to slake his eager thirst! 
and there the beech, beneath who breezy shade
 he love to lie, close covert from the sun! 
see yet the bark smooth-worn and bare remains,
 where oft the youngling rub his tender side! 
ah! what avail my care, and foresight vain? 
that day he fall oppress by whelm steed,
 this hand have build a bower of thick bough
 compose, and weave with intermingle leaf,
 impervious to the sun; and strew the floor
 with choice hay, that in the secret shade
 he may repose, nor feel the dogstar beam! 
but why this sad, repeat track of woe
 i still pursue? farewell, my alphon dear,
 to distant field, and pasture will i go,
 where impious war, and discord, nurse of blood,
 shall never profane the silence of the grove. 

eclogue ii.

Acis.

while in the bosom of this deep recess
 the voice of war have lose its mad shout,
 let we improve the transient hour of peace,
 and calm our trouble mind with mutual song;
 while this recess conspire with the muse
 invite to peaceful thought; this cavern deep,
 and these tall pine that nod from the rock
 wave over its mouth their umbrage black, and cast
 a venerable gloom, with this clear fount
 that cleave the rive stone, and fill the cave
 with hollow-tinkling sound. repeat the song
 which late, alcyon, from thy mouth i hear,
 as to the spring we drive our thirst flock;
 it tell the charm of grateful evening mild:
 begin, alcyon: Acis in return
 shall sing the praise of the dawn morn. 

alcyon.

behind the hill when sink the western sun,
 and fall dew breathe fragrance through the air,
 refresh every field with coolness mild:
 then let i walk the twilight meadow green,
 or breezy upland, near thick-branching elm,
 while the still landscape sooth my soul to rest,
 and every care subside to calm peace:
 the mist slow-rising from the river dank,
 the wood scarce stir at the whisper wind,
 the streaky cloud, that tinge their darken top
 with russet hue, and faint gleam of light,
 the solitude that all around becalm
 the peaceful air, conspire to wrap my soul
 in muse mild: and nought the solemn scene
 and the still silence break, but distant sound
 of bleat flock, that to their destine fold
 the shepherd drive; meantime the shrill-tuned bell
 of some lone ewe that wander from the rest,
 tinkle far off, with solitary sound:
 the low cow that wait the milker hand,
 the cottage-mastiff's bark, the joyous shout
 of swain that meet to wrestle on the green,
 be hear around. but ah! since ruthless war
 have ravage in these field, so tranquil once,
 too oft alas, the din of clash arm
 and discord fell disturb the soft scene! 
thy sweet approach delight the weary ox,
 while in loose trace from the furrow field
 he come: thy dawn the weary reaper love,
 who long have saint in the midday sun,
 please with the cool hour, along the vale
 whistle he home return to kiss his babe,
 with joyful heart, his labour sweet reward! 
but ah! what sudden fear amaze his soul,
 when near approach, all before he see
 his lowly cottage and the village round
 sweep into ruin by the hand of war,
 disperse his child, and his much-loved wife,
 no more to glad his breast with home felt-joy! 
i too, when in my wattle coat be lay
 my sup flock, rejoice to meet my dear,
 my fair Lauretta, at the wonted oak;
 or haply as her miking-pail she bear
 return from the field, to ease her arm,
 (sweet office!) and impart my aid hand! 
thy charm (o beauteous evening!) shall be sing,
 as long as these tall pine shall wave their head,
 or this clear fountain cleave the rive stone! 

Acis.

sweet be the dew of eve; her fragrance sweet;
 sweet be the pine-top hill at sultry noon;
 sweet be the shelter of the friendly grot
 to sheep, and shepherd, at impend storm;
 but ah! less sweet the fragrant dew of eve;
 less sweet the pine-top hill at sultry noon;
 less sweet the shelter of the friendly grot,
 than when the rise sun with rosy beam
 peep over the village-top, and over the field,
 the wood, the hill, the stream, and level mead,
 scatter bright splendor and diffusive joy! 
as to his flock the shepherd issue forth,
 print new footstep in the dewy vale,
 each object of the joyous scene around
 vernal delight inspire, and glad his heart,
 unknowing of the cause, with new-felt glee! 
the chaunt of early bird on every bush,
 the steam odour of the fresh-blow flower —

alcyon.

cease, Acis, cease thy song: — from yonder hill,
 who lofty side enclose this secret seat,
 our flock, that graze along its verdurous brow,
 tumultuous rush, as strike with sudden fright:
 and hark, methinks i hear the deathful sound
 of war approach, and its thunder roar! 

Acis.

kind heaven preserve my wife and child dear! 
alas! i fear the sound, that loud now
 swell in the wind, and come with full din,
 be near my cottage; which, thou know, my friend,
 stand at the spring, that issue from beneath
 that rise hill, fast by the branch elm! 

alcyon.

see, see, my friend, what darksome spire arise
 of wreath smoke, and blacken all the sky! —
 near and near come the threaten voice,
 and more distinguish strike our tremble ear! 
but lo! the foe advance above the hill;
 i see their glitter arm begin to gleam! 
come let we fly, and in the deep nook,
 the inmost cavern of this wind grott,
 close shroud ourselves, lest in the general stream
 of thousand throng down, we shall oppress. 

eclogue iii.

when sable midnight on the field and wood
 have spread her mantle dark, then wander forth
 the pensive Alcon, and the bosom deep
 of a wild wood with solitary step,
 there to lament his wretched fate, he seek. 
he, late as over the vale at come eve
 joyful he walk with his Lucilla dear,
 a soldier stern advance on his steed,
 rob of his love, and tear the beauteous maid
 with brutal hand from his contend arm,
 weep in vain, and shriek for his aid,
 and frown bear the precious prize away. 
the wood, who shade the plaintive shepherd seek,
 be dark and pathless, and by neighbour foot
 long time untrod: for there in ancient day
 two knight of bold emprise, and high renown,
 meet in fierce combat, to dispute the prize
 of beauty bright, who valiant arm shall win
 a virgin fair, who fair-emblazoned charm
 with equal love have smite their rival breast. 
the knight who fall beneath the victor sword,
 unhearsed and restless, from that fatal day
 wander the hate shade, a spectre pale;
 and each revolve night, be hear to sound
 far from the inmost bower of the deep wood,
 loud shriek, and hollow groan, and rattle chain. 
when the dark secret of the grove he gain,
 beneath a ancient oak his weary limb
 he lay down, and thus to plain begin. 

this midnight deep to plaintive love accord;
 this lonesome silence, and these hideous shade,
 that in this darksome hour i dare to tread,
 and all the horror of this fearful place,
 will suit a wretch, abandon to despair! —

but ah! — what mean this sudden fear, that creep
 in chilly sweat over all my tremble limb? —
 what hollow whisper sound be those i hear
 from yonder glade? — do not i hear his voice? 
do not the knight, that in these shade be slay,
 call i to come, and beckon with his hand? 
do not i see his visionary sword
 wave in bright circle through the murky air? —
 do not he point his wound? — be still, my fear:
 it be vain illusion all, and fantasy. 
these fear my love-distempered brain suggest:
 alas, they will not bring i back my love! —
 who now, perhaps, amid the throng camp
 on earth cold breast recline her weary head,
 a helpless virgin, subject to the will
 of each rude ravisher, and distant far
 from her dear Alcon, and her native field. —
 ill will the hardship of inclement sky
 suit with her tender limb; the various toil
 of painful march; her unwonted ear
 how bear the trumpet, and the sound of war:
 this task be hard indeed — but soon, alas! 
at will her savage lord may cast she off,
 and leave she to succeed scene of woe! 
i see my dear Lucilla, once my own,
 naked and hungry, tread the pensive step
 of desolation, doom to wander over,
 helpless and vagabond, the friendless earth! 
i hear her sigh for Alcon and her home;
 and ask for bread at some proud palace-gate
 with unavailing voice! this toilsome scene,
 alas, how different from the smooth path
 of rural life my dear be wont to tread! 
forth to the field to bear the milking-pail
 be all her wont; to tread the ted grass,
 to tend her father flock, beneath the oak
 to snatch her dinner sweet, and on the green
 with the companion of her age to sport! 
in vain i now expect the come on
 of dew-bathed eve, to meet my wonted love;
 no more i hear the wood-girt valley ring
 with her blythe voice, that oft have bless my ear,
 as in the distant shade i sit unseen;
 no more i meet she at the wonted spring,
 where each revolve noon she daily go
 to fill her pitcher with the crystal flood! —
 if in her native field the hand of death
 have snatch she from my arm, i can have bear
 the fatal shoek with less repine heart;
 for then i can have have one part kiss;
 i can have strew her hearse with fair flower,
 and pay the last sad office to my dear! —
 return, my sweet Lucilla, to my arm;
 at thy return, all nature will rejoice. 
together will we walk the verdant vale,
 and mingle sweet discourse with kiss sweet. 
come, i will climb for thou the knot oak,
 to rob the stock-dove of his feathery young;
 i will show thou where the soft cowslip spring,
 and cluster nut their load branch bend;
 together will we taste the dew of morn;
 together seek the grott at sultry noon;
 together from the field at eve return. —
 what have i say? what paint scene of bliss
 my vain imagination have display! 
alas, she be go, ah, never to return! 
farewell my pasteral pipe, and my dear flock;
 farewell my faithful dog; my once-loved haunt
 farewell; or cave, or fountain, or fresh shade,
 farewell; and thou, my low-roofted cott, farewell! —
 here will i lie, and fell wolf, that roam
 this savage forest shall devour my limb,
 unwept, unburied, in a place unknown! " 

eclogue iv.

mycon.

welcome, philanthes, to thy native field;
 thrice three revolve moon be go and pass,
 since first you part from your father cott,
 to drive to pasture far remote your flock. 
since that, alas, how oft have savage war
 disturb our dwelling, and deface our field. 

philanthes.

mycon, each object that i view around
 speak ruin and destruction. see, my friend,
 the ancient wood, who venerable shade
 so oft have shelter we from noonday sun;
 so oft have echo to the low herd,
 that feed wide-wandering in the neighbour vale,
 the soldier ax have level with the ground,
 and to the sun expose its darksome bower:
 the distant village, and blue-top hill,
 the far-stretched mead appear, and meet my eye,
 that erst be intercept by the grove. 

mycon.

how be the wonted face of all thing change! 
those tree, by who aspire top we know
 the sun ascent at noon, unerring mark,
 no more be see to tell the come hour. 
how naked do the wind rill appear,
 who bank its pendant umbrage deep-imbrowned,
 and far-invested with its arborous roof,
 as by its side it roll its secret stream! 
how oft, alas! those shadowy bank along
 (close solitude!) my Rosalind and i
 have walk in converse sweet, and link in love! 
but tell i, dear philanthes, be the field,
 which late you leave, like we by war oppress,
 alike in tumult and confusion wrap? 

philanthes.

mycon, i will tell thou wonder past belief. 
it hap one morn, when first the dawn sun
 begin to cheer the light-enlivened earth,
 catch with so bright a scene, i seek the field
 before my wonted hour, and rove wide
 among the vale, the village and wood,
 wherever my fancy lead, or pleasure call,
 i chance upon a neighbour hill to stray,
 to view the glitter prospect from its top
 of the broad Rhine, that roll his wave beneath,
 amid the level of extend mead;
 when lo! ere yet i gain its lofty brow,
 the sound of dash flood, and dash arm,
 and neigh steed, confusive strike my ear. 
studious to know what tumult be at hand,
 with step adventurous i advance, and gain
 with timorous care and cautious ken its top. 
sudden a burst of brightness smite my sight,
 from arm, and all the imblazonrie of war
 reflect far, while steed, and man, and arm
 seem float wide, and stretch in vast array
 over the broad bosom of the big-swollen flood,
 that dash roll its beamy wave between. 
the bank promiscuous swarm with throng troop:
 these on the flood embark, those appear
 crowd the adverse shore, already past. 
all be confusion, all tumultuous din. 
i tremble as i look, though far above,
 and in one blaze their arm be blend bright
 with the broad stream, while all the glisten scene
 the morn illume, and in one splendour clad. 
strike at the sight, i lest with headlong haste
 the steep-browed hill, and over the extend vale,
 the wood-girt lawn i run, nor slack my pace,
 till at my flock thick-panting i arrive,
 and drive far off, beneath a deep-arched cave. 
but come, my friend, inform i in return,
 since this my absence what have here fall out. 

mycon.

do thou remember at the river side
 that solitary convent, all behind
 hide by the covert of a mantling wood? —
 one night, when all be wrap in darkness deep,
 a arm troop, on rage and rapine bend,
 pour over the field and ravage all they meet;
 nor do that sacred pile escape their arm,
 who wall the murderous band to ruin sweep,
 and fill its cavern deep with arm throng
 greedy of spoil, and snatch their treasure old
 from their dark seat: the shriek sister flee
 disperse and naked through the field and wood,
 while sable night conceal their wander step. 
part in my moss grow cottage shelter seek,
 which haply scape their rage, in secret glade
 immerse deep. — i rise at early morn,
 with fearful heart to view the ruin dome,
 where all be desolation, all appear
 the seat of horror, and devour war. 
the deep recess, and the gloomy nook,
 the vault isle, and shrine of image saint,
 the cavern wear by holy knee appear,
 and to the sun be open. — in muse thought
 i say, as on the pile i bend my brow —
 "this seat to future age will appear,
" like that which stand fast by the piny rock;
 "these silent wall with ivy shall be hang,
" and distant time shall view the sacred pile,
 "unknow how it fall, with pious awe! 
" the pilgrim here shall visit, and the swain
 "return from the field at twilight grey,
" shall shun to pass this way, subdue by fear,
 "and slant his course across the adverse vale!" 

philanthes.

mycon, thou see that cow, which stand in cool
 amid yond rushy lake, beneath the shade
 of willow green, and ruminate at ease
 the watery herbage that around her float. 
that way my business lead. i go to greet
 my father, and my wonted cottage dear. 

mycon.

come, let we go: my path be that way too. 
come, my philanthes, and may piteous heaven
 indulge more happy day, and calm our grief! 
alas! i think some trouble be at hand,
 and long before presage the come storm,
 even when the lightning one disastrous night
 blast the hoary oak, who ample bough
 imbower my cottage; and as on the grass
 at noon i sleep, a serpent sudden hiss
 break my sweet rest! — but come, let we be go,
 the sun begin to welk in ruddy west. 

eclogue v. 

corin.

which way, calistan, whither do thou lead
 that lamb, who yet his mother scarce have wean? 

calistan.

his mother, corin, as she wander feed,
 with this tender youngling by her side,
 fall by a shot which from the battle come,
 that in the neighbour field so late rage. 

corin.

alas! what woe that fatal day involve
 our suffering village, and the field around! 
but come, calistan, on this rise bank,
 come, let we sit, and on the danger past
 converse secure, and number all our grief. 
see how the flaunt woodbine shade the bank,
 and weave a mantling canopy above! 

calistan.

corin, that day i chance at early hour
 to rise, and drive far-off my flock unpent;
 to wash they in a spring that late i mark. 
there the first motion of the deathful day
 i hear, as listen to the trickle wave
 i stand attentive: when like rise storm,
 hoarse, hollow murmur from afar i hear,
 and undistinguished sound of distant din. 
alarm i stand, unknow whence it come;
 and from the fount my flock unwashed i drive
 suspect danger: when as near yet,
 i come advance, all be tumult loud,
 all be tempestuous din on every side,
 and all around the roar of war be up,
 from rock to rock retost, from wood to wood. 
not half so loud the tumble cataract
 be hear to roar, that from the pine-clad cliff
 precipitate its wave; who distant sound
 i oft have listen, as at twilight grey
 i pen my flock within their wattle coat. 

corin.

for three revolve day, nor voice of bird
 melodious chant, or the bleat of sheep,
 or low ox, near the fatal place
 be hear to sound; but all be silence sad! 
the ancient grove of elm desert stand,
 where long have dwell a age race of rook,
 that with their nest have crowd every branch,
 we oft have hear they at the dusk of eve
 in troop return to their well know home,
 in mingle clamour sound from on high! 

calistan.

corin, thou know the fir-invested cave,
 where late we shelter from a gather storm,
 our flock together drive: beneath its shade
 i have appoint at sweet even-tide
 to meet my Delia homeward as she pass,
 bear her milking-pail: alas! the thought
 of that sweet congress, the precede night
 soften my dream, and all my sense lull,
 and with more joyful heart at morn i rise. 
but ah! that tumult crop my bloom hope,
 and in confusion wrap my love and i. 

corin.

that day, nor in the fold my flock i pen,
 or walk at eve the vale, or on the turf
 beneath the wonted oak my dinner take,
 or sleep at noon amid my languid sheep,
 repose at ease on the green meadow bed. 
when sable night come on, for not even yet
 the tumult have subside into peace,
 even then low sound, and interrupt burst
 of war we hear, and cry of die man,
 and a confuse hum of the cease storm. 
all night close-shrouded in a forest thick
 wakeful i sit, my flock around i lay;
 and of neglect bough i kindle up
 a scanty flame, who darkly-gleaming blaze
 among the enlighten tree form hideous shape,
 and spectre pale, to my distemper mind. 
how oft i look behind with cautious fear,
 and tremble at each motion of the wind! —
 but where do you, calistan, shelter seek? 
what dark retreat conceal your wander step? 

calistan.

corin, thou know the fur-clad hermit cell,
 deep-arched beneath a rock among the wild;
 thither i bend my flight, a welcome guest,
 and not unknown; for when my flock i feed
 of late beneath the neighbour pasture green,
 i oft be wont, invite at his call,
 at noon beneath his cavern to retire
 from the sun heat, where all the pass hour
 the good old man improve with converse high,
 and in my breast enkindle virtue love;
 nor seldom will his hospitable hand
 afford a short repast of berry cool,
 which over the wild (his scanty food) he pluck:
 here be my refuge. — all the live-long night
 pensive by one pale lonesome lamp we sit,
 and listen to the bleak wind whistle loud,
 and the shrill crash of forest from without. 
soon as the morning dawn, the craggy height
 of the steep rock i climb, on who wild top
 his rustic temple stand, and moss-grown cross
 (the sacred object of his pious prayer)
 form of a tall fir thunder-blasted trunk:
 where all beneath the expansive plain i see
 with white pavilion hide, in deep array. 
there too my little fold, which late i leave
 stand at eve, amid the warlike scene
 with tearful eye affright, i behold. 
alas, how change the scene! when there i pitch
 those hurdle coat, the night be calm and mild,
 and all be peaceful. i remember well,
 while there within that fold my flock i pen;
 how blythe i hear my beauteous Delia sing! 
her distant echo voice how sweet ring,
 and all my ravish sense wrap in bliss! 

corin.

have thou not see the fatal plain of death,
 where rage the conflict? there, they say, at eve
 grim ghost be see of man that there be slay,
 point their wound, and shriek to their mate,
 still doom to haunt the field on which they fall. 

calistan.

corin, no more. this lamb demand my speed. 
see how the youngling hang his sickly head,
 tender, and faint for his wonted food! 
i haste to place he in my shelter cot,
 feed from my hand, and cherish by my care. —
 and see, my friend, far off in darken west
 a cloud come on, and threaten sudden rain:
 corin, farewell, the storm begin to lower. 
