love triumphant over reason.

a vision.

though gloomy thought disturb my anxious breast,
 all the long night, and drive away my rest. 
just as the dawn day begin to rise,
 a grateful slumber close my wake eye:
 but active fancy to strange region fly,
 and bring surprise object to my view. 

methinks i walk in a delightful grove,
 the soft retreat of god, when god make love. 
each beauteous object my charm soul amaze,
 and i on each with equal wonder gaze;
 nor know which most delight, all be fine,
 the noble product of some power divine. 
but as i traverse the oblige shade,
 which myrtle, jessamin, and rose make,
 i see a person who celestial face
 at first declare she, goddess of the place;
 but i discover, when approach near,
 a aspect full of beauty, but severe:
 bold, and majestic, every awful look
 into my soul a secret terror strike. 
advance farther on, she make a stand,
 and beckon i, i kneel, kiss her hand:
 then thus begin — bright deity! for so
 you be, no mortal such perfection know;
 i may intrude, but how i be convey
 to this strange place, or by what powerful aid,
 i be whole ignorant, nor know i more,
 or where i be, or who i do adore,
 instruct i then, that i no long may
 in darkness serve the goddess i obey. 

youth, she reply, this place belong to one,
 by who you will be, and thousand be undo. 
these pleasant walk, and all these shady bower
 be in the government of dangerous power. 
love the capricious master of this coast,
 this fatal labyrinth where fool be lose. 
i dwell not here amid these gaudy thing,
 who short enjoyment no true pleasure bring. 
but have a empire of a noble kind,
 my regal seat in the celestial mind;
 where with a god-like, and a peaceful hand
 i rule, and make those happy, i command. 
for while i govern, all within at rest;
 no stormy passion revel in the breast:
 but when my power be despicable grow,
 and rebel appetite usurp my throne,
 the soul no long quiet thought enjoy;
 but all be tumult, and eternal noise. 
know youth! I be reason, which you have oft despise,
 i be that reason, which you never prize:
 and though my argument successless prove,
 (for reason seem impertinence in love.) 
yet i will not see my charge, (for all mankind
 be to my guardianship by heaven assign)
 into the grasp of any ruin run,
 that i can warn they of, and they may shun. 
fly youth these guilty shade, retreat in time
 ever your mistake convert to a crime;
 for ignorance no long can atone,
 when once the error, and the fault be know. 
you think perhaps, as giddy youth incline,
 imprudent to value all that shine,
 in these retirement free to possess
 true joy, and strong substantial happiness. 
but here gay folly keep her court, and here
 in crowd her tributary fop appear;
 who blind lavish of their golden day,
 consume they all in her fallacious way. 
pert love with she, by joint commission rule
 in this capacious realm of idle fool;
 who by false art, and popular deceit,
 the careless, fond, unthinking mortal cheat. 
it be easy to descend into the snare,
 by the pernicious conduct of the fair;
 but safe to return from this abode
 require the wit, the prudence of a god;
 though you, who have not taste that delight,
 which only at a distance charm your sight;
 may with a little toil retreive your heart,
 which lose, be subject to eternal smart. 
bright delia beauty, i must needs confess. 
be true great, nor will i make it less:
 that be to wrong she, where she merit most,
 but dragon guard the fruit, and rock the coast. 
and who will run, that be moderate wise,
 a certain danger, for a doubtful prize? 
if you miscarry, you be lose so far,
 (for there be no err twice in love, and war)
 you will never recover, but must always wear
 those chain you will find it difficult to bear. 
Delia have charm i own, such charm will move,
 old age, and freeze impotence to love;
 but do not venture where such danger lie,
 avoid the sight of those victorious eye,
 who poisonous ray do to the soul impart
 delicious ruin, and a please smart. 
you draw, insensible, destruction near,
 and love the danger, which you ought to fear. 
if the light pain, you labour under now
 destroy your ease, and make your spirit bow? 
you will find they much more grievous to be bear,
 when heavy make by a imperious scorn. 
nor can you hope, she will your passion hear
 with soft notion, or a kind ear,
 than those of other swain, who always find,
 she rather widen, than close up the wound. 
but grant she shall indulge your flame, and give
 whatever you will ask, nay all you can receive;
 the short live pleasure will so quick cloy,
 bring such a weak, and such a feeble joy,
 you will have but small encouragement to boast
 the tinsel rapture worth the pain it cost. 
consider Strephon sober of thing
 what strange inquietude love always bring,
 the foolish fear, vain hope, and jealousy,
 which still attend upon this fond disease:
 how you must cringe and bow, submit and whine,
 call every feature, every look, divine;
 commend each sentence with a humble smile,
 though nonsense, swear it be a heavenly stile. 
servile rail at all she disapprove,
 and as ignoble, flatter all she love. 
renounce your very sense, and silent sit,
 while she put off impertinence for wit. 
like setting-dog new whip for spring game,
 you must be make by due correction tame
 but if you can endure the nauseous rule
 of woman, do, love on, and be a fool. 
you know the danger, your own method use,
 the good, or evil be in your power to choose;
 but who will expect a short, and dubious bliss
 on the decline of a precipice:
 where if he slip, not fate it self can save
 the fall wretch from a untimely grave. 

thou great directress of our mind, say i,
 we safe on your dictate may rely. 
and that which you have now so kind press
 be true, and without contradiction best;
 but with a steady sentence to control
 the heat, and vigour of a youthful soul,
 while gay temptation hover in our sight,
 and daily bring new object of delight,
 which on we with surprise beauty smile,
 be difficult, but it be a noble toil. 
the best may slip, and the most cautious fall,
 he be more than mortal that never err at all;
 and, though fair Delia have my soul possess,
 i will chace her bright idea from my breast. 
at least i will make one essay, if i fail,
 and delia charm over reason do prevail,
 i may be sure from rigid censure free,
 love be my foe, and love a deity. 

then she rejoin, may you successful prove,
 in your attempt to curb imperious love,
 then will proud passion own her rightful lord,
 you to your self, i to my throne restore;
 but to confirm your courage, and inspire
 your resolution with a bold fire,
 follow i youth! i will show you that shall move
 your soul to curse the tyranny of love. 

then she convey i to a dismal shade,
 which melancholy yew, and cypress make;
 where i behold a antiquate pile
 of rugged building in a narrow isle;
 the water round it give a nauseous smell,
 like vapour steem from a sulphurous cell. 
the ruin wall compose of stink mud,
 overgrow with hemlock, on supporter stand;
 as do the roof ungrateful to the view
 it be both a hospital, and bedlam too. 
before the entrance, moulder bone be spread
 some skeleton entire, some late dead,
 a little rubbish loose scatter over
 their body uninter, lie round the door. 
no funeral rite, to any here, be pay,
 but dead like dog into the dust convey. 
from hence, by reason conduct, i be bring
 through various turn to a spacious vault,
 where, i behold, and it be a mournful sight,
 vast crowd of wretch, all debar from light,
 but what a few dim lamp expire have,
 which make the prospect more amaze sad;
 some weep, some rave, some musical mad. 
some swear loud, and other laugh; some
 be always talk, other always dumb. 
here one, a dagger in his breast, expire,
 and quench with his blood his amorous fire;
 there hang a second, and not far remove,
 a third lie poison, who false Celia love. 
all sort of madness, every kind of death,
 by which unhappy mortal lose their breath,
 be there expose before my wonder eye,
 the sad effect of female treachery. 
other i see, which be not quite bereave
 of sense, though very small remains be leave,
 curse the fatal folly of their youth,
 for trust to perjurious woman truth,
 these on the leave. upon the right a view
 of equal horror, equal misery too,
 amaze, all employ my trouble thought,
 and with new wonder, new aversion bring. 
there i behold a wretched numerous throng
 of pale lean mortal, some lay stretch along
 on bed of straw, disconsolate and poor,
 other extend naked on the floor:
 exile from human pity, here they lie
 and know no end of misery till they die:
 but death which come in gay and prosperous day
 too soon; in time of misery delay. 

these dreadful spectacle have so much power,
 i vow, and solemn, to love no more:
 for sure that flame be kindle from below,
 which breed such sad variety of woe. 

then we descend by some few degree
 from this stupendous scene of misery;
 bold reason bring i to another cave
 dark as the inmost chamber of the grave. 
here youth, she cry, in the acute pain
 those villain lie, who have their father slay. 
stab their own brother, nay their friend, to please
 ambitious, proud, revengeful mistress;
 who after all their service, prefer
 some rugged fellow of the brawny herd,
 before these wretch, who despair dwell
 in agony no human tongue can tell. 
darkness prevent the too amaze sight,
 and you may bless the happy want of light. 
but my torment ear be fill with sigh,
 expire groan, and lamentable cry,
 so very sad i can endure no more,
 methinks i feel the misery they bear. 

then to my guide say i, for pity now
 conduct i back, here i confirm my vow;
 which if i dare infringe, be this my fate,
 to die thus wretched, and repent too late. 
the charm of beauty i will no more pursue;
 Delia farewell, farewell for ever too. 

then we return to the delightful grove,
 where reason still dissuade i from love. 
you see, she cry, what misery attend
 on love, and where too frequent it end;
 and let not that unwieldy passion sway
 your soul, which none but whine fool obey. 
the masculine, brave spirit, scorn to own
 that proud usurper of my sacred throne;
 nor with idolatrous devotion pay
 to the false god, or sacrifice, or praise. 
the syren music, charm the sailor ear,
 but he be ruin if he stop to hear;
 and if you listen, love harmonious voice,
 as much delight, as certain destroy. 
Ambrosia mix with aconite may have
 a pleasant taste but send you to the grave;
 for though the latent poison may be still
 a while, it very seldom fail to kill. 
but who will partake the food of god to die
 within a day, or live in misery,
 who will eat with emperor, if over his hea
 a poniard hang, but by a single thread? 
love banquet be extravagant sweet,
 and either kill, or surfeit all that eat;
 who, when the sate appetite be tire,
 even loath the thought of what they once admire. 
you have promise Strephon, to forsake the charm
 of Delia, though she court you to her arm;
 and sure i may your resolution trust,
 you will never want temptation, but be just:
 vow of this nature, youth, must not be break,
 you be always bind, though it be a gentle yoke,
 will man be wise, and my advice pursue;
 love conquest will be small, his triumph few. 
for nothing can oppose his tyranny,
 with such a prospect of success as i:
 i he detest, and from my presence fly,
 who know his art, and stratagem despise;
 by which he cancel mighty wisdom rule
 to make himself the deity of fool:
 he dull they adore, he blind serve,
 some while they be sots, and other while they starve. 
for those, who under his wild conduct go,
 either come coxcomb, or he make they so. 
his charm deprive, by their strange influence,
 the brave of courage, and the wise of sense;
 in vain philosophy will set the mind
 at liberty, if once by he confine;
 the scholar learning, and the poet wit
 a while may struggle, but at last submit:
 well weigh result, and wise conclusion seem
 but empty chat, impertinence to he,
 his opiate seize so strong on the brain,
 they make all prudent application vain. 
if therefore you resolve to live at ease,
 to taste the sweetness of internal peace:
 will not for safety to a battle fly,
 or choose a shipwreck, if afraid to die,
 far from these pleasurable shade remove,
 and leave the fond inglorious toil of love

this say, she vanish, and methinks i find
 my self transport to a rise ground,
 from whence i do a pleasant vale survey;
 large be the prospect, beautiful, and gay. 
there i behold the apartment of delight,
 who curious form oblige the wonder sight. 
some in full view upon the champion place,
 with lofty wall, and cool stream embrace:
 other, in shady groves, retire from noise,
 the seat of private and exalt joy. 
at a great distance i perceive there stand
 a stately building in a spacious wood,
 who gild turret raise their beauteous head,
 high in the air to view the neighbour mead,
 where vulgar lover spend their happy day
 in rustic dance and delightful play. 
but while i gaze with admiration round,
 i hear from far, celestial music sound,
 so soft, so move; so harmonious all,
 the artful charm note do rise and fall,
 my soul, transport with the grateful air,
 shake off, the pressure of its former fear. 
i feel afresh the little god begin
 to stir himself, and gentle move within:
 then i repent i have vow no more
 to love, or delia beauteous eye adore:
 why be i now condemn to banishment,
 and make a exile by my own consent. 
i sigh cry; why shall i live in pain
 those fleet hour, which never return again? 
o Delia! what can wretched Strephon do? 
inhuman to himself, and false to you. 
it be true, i have promise reason to remove
 from these retreat, and quit bright delia love:
 but be not reason partial unkind? 
be all her votary like i confine? 
must none, that under her dominion live,
 to love, and beauty, veneration give? 
why then do nature youthful Delia grace
 with a majestic mien, and charm face? 
why do she give her that surprise air,
 make she so gay, so witty, and so fair? 
mistress of all, that can affection move;
 if reason will not suffer we to love? 
but since it must be so, i will haste away,
 it be fatal to return, and death to stay. 
from you, bless shade, (if i may call you so
 inculpable) with mighty pain i go. 
compel from hence, i leave my quiet here
 i may find safety, but i buy it dear. 

then turn round, i see a beauteous boy,
 such as of old be messenger of joy:
 who be thou, or from whence? if send, say i,
 to i, my haste require a quick reply. 

i come, he cry, from yond celestial grove,
 where stand the temple of the god of love:
 with who important favour you be grace,
 and, just in his high protection place. 
be grateful, Strephon, and obey that god,
 who sceptre never be change into a rod,
 that god to who the haughty, and the proud,
 the bold, the brave, nay the best have bow:
 that god, who all the less god adore;
 first in existence, and the first in power. 
from he i come on embassy divine,
 to tell thou, Delia, Delia may be thy. 
to who all beauty rightful tribute pay,
 Delia the young, the lovely, and the gay. 
if you dare push your fortune, if you dare
 but be resolve, and press the yield fair. 
success, and glory will your labour crown;
 for fate do rare on the valiant frown. 
but be you sure to be unkind use,
 cold receive, and scornful refuse;
 he great glory, and more fame obtain,
 who loose Delia, than who Phillis gain. 
but to prevent all fear that may arise,
 (though fear never move the dare and the wise)
 in the dark volume of eternal doom,
 where all thing past, and present, and to come
 be write, i see these word; — it be decree
 that strephon love to Delia shall succeed. 
what will you more? while youth and vigour last,
 love, and be happy, they decline too fast:
 in youth alone you be capable to prove
 the mighty transport of a generous love. 
for dull old age with fumble labour cloy
 before the bliss, or give but wither joy;
 youth the best time for action mortal have,
 that past, they touch the confine of the grave. 
now if you hope to lie in delia arm,
 to die in rapture, and dissolve in charm,
 quick to the blissful happy mansion fly,
 where all be one continue ecstasy. 
Delia impatient expect you there,
 and sure you will not disappoint the fair. 
none but the impotent, or old, will stay,
 when love invite, and beauty call away. 

o, you convey, say i, dear charm boy:
 into my soul a strange disorder joy. 
i will, but dare not your advice pursue;
 i have promise reason, and i must be true:
 reason the rightful empress of the soul,
 do all exorbitant desire control;
 check every wild excursion of the mind,
 by her wise dictate, happy confine. 
and he that will not her command obey,
 leave a safe convoy in a dangerous sea. 
true, i love Delia to a vast excess,
 but i must try to make my passion less:
 try, if i can, if possible, i will;
 for i have vow, and must that vow fulfil. 
o! have i not, with what a vigorous flight
 can i pursue the quarry of delight? 
how can i press fair Delia in these arm,
 till i dissolve in love, and she in charm. 
but now no more must i her beauty view,
 yet tremble at the thought to leave she too. 
what will i give, i may my flame allow? 
but it be forbid by reason, and a vow;
 two mighty obstacle; though love of old
 have break through great, strong power control,
 shall i offend, by high example teach,
 it will not be a inexpiable fault. 
the crime of malice have find grace above,
 and sure kind heaven will spare the crime of love,
 can thou, my angel, but instruct i how
 i may be happy, and not break my vow,
 or by some subtle art dissolve the chain;
 you will soon revive my die hope again. 
reason and love, i know, can never agree,
 both will command, and both superior be. 
reason support by the sinewy force
 of solid argument, and wise discourse;
 but love pretend to use no other arm
 than soft impression, and persuasive charm. 
one must be disobey, and shall i prove
 a rebel to my reason or to love? 
but then suppose i shall my flame pursue,
 Delia may be unkind, and faithless too;
 reject my passion with a proud disdain,
 and scorn the love of such a humble Swain
 then shall i labour under mighty grief,
 beyond all hope, or prospect of relief:
 so that methinks it be safe to obey
 right reason, though she bear a rugged sway,
 than love soft rule, who subject undergo
 early or late too sad a share of woe,
 can i so soon forget that wretched crew,
 reason just now expose before my view;
 if Delia shall be cruel, i must be
 a sad partaker of their misery:
 but your encouragement so strong move,
 i be almost tempt to pursue my love:
 for sure, no treacherous design shall dwell
 in one that argue, and persuade so well,
 for what can love by my destruction gain? 
love a immortal god, and i a Swain:
 and sure i may, without suspicion, trust
 a god, for god can never be unjust. 

right you conclude, reply the smile boy
 love ruin none, it be man themselves destroy;
 and those vile wretch, which you late see,
 transgress his rule, as well as reason law. 
they be not love subject, but the slave of lust,
 nor be their punishment so great, as just. 
for love and lust essential divide,
 like day and night, humility and pride;
 one darkness hide, tother do always shine,
 this of infernal make, and that divine. 
reason no generous passion do oppose;
 it be lust, (not love) and reason, that be foe. 
she bid you scorn a base inglorious flame,
 black as the gloomy shade, from whence it come,
 in this, her precept shall obedience find,
 but you be not of that ignoble kind. 
you err, in think she will disapprove
 the brave pursuit of honourable love,
 and therefore judge what be harmless, a offence,
 invert she mean, and mistake her sense. 
she can not such insipid counsel give,
 as not to love at all, it be not to live,
 but where bright virtue, and true beauty lie,
 and that in Delia, charm delia eye. 
can you, content, see the angelic maid
 in old alexis dull embrace lay? 
or roughhewn Tityrus possess those charm,
 which be in heaven, the heaven of delia arm? 
consider, youth, what transport you forgo,
 the most entire felicity below;
 which be by fate alone reserve for you;
 monarch have be deny, for monarch sue. 
i own it be difficult to gain the prize,
 or it will be cheap, and low in noble eye;
 but there be one soft minute, when the mind
 be leave unguarded, wait to be kind,
 which the wise lover understanding right,
 steal in like day upon the wing of light. 
you urge your vow, but can those vow prevail
 who first foundation, and who reason fail? 
you vow to leave fair Delia, but you think
 your passion be a crime, your flame a fault;
 but since your judgement err, it have no force
 to bind at all, but be dissolve of course. 
and therefore hesitate no long here,
 but banish all the dull remains of fear. 
dare you be happy youth, but dare, and be;
 i will be your convoy to the charm she. 
what still irresolute? debate still? 
view she, and then forsake she if you will. 

i will go, say i, once more i will venture all,
 it be brave to perish by a noble fall. 
beauty no mortal can resist, and Jove
 lay by his grandeur, to indulge his love. 
reason, if i do err, my crime forgive? 
angel alone, without offend live,
 i go astray, but as the wise have do,
 and act a folly, which they do not shun. 

then we, descend to a spacious plain,
 be soon salute by a numerous train
 of happy lover, who consume their hour,
 with constant jollity, in shady bower. 
there i behold the bless variety
 of joy, from all corrod trouble free;
 each follow his own fancy to delight;
 though all go different way, yet all go right,
 none err, or miss the happiness he seek
 love to one center every twine bring. 
we pass through numerous pleasant field, and glade,
 by murmur fountain, and by peaceful shade,
 till we approach the confine of the wood,
 where mighty love immortal temple stand,
 round the celestial Fane in goodly row,
 and beauteous order, amorous myrtle grow,
 beneath who shade, expect lover wait
 for the kind minute of indulgent fate:
 each have his guardian Cupid, who chief care,
 by secret motion be to warm the fair,
 to kindle eager long for the joy,
 to move the slow, and to incline the coy. 

the glorious fabric charm my wonder sight,
 of vast extent, and of prodigious height;
 the case be marble, but the polish stone
 with such a admirable lustre shine,
 as if some architect divine have strive
 the outdo the palace of imperial Jove. 
the ponderous gate of mercy gold be make
 with diamond of a mighty size inlay. 
here stand the wing guard in order place,
 with shine dart, and golden quiver grace:
 as we approach, they clape their joyful wing;
 and cry aloud, tune, tune the warble string;
 the grateful youth be come to sacrifice
 at delia altar, to bright delia eye:
 with harmony divine his soul inspire,
 that he may bold touch the sacred fire. 
hnd you, that wait upon the blush fair,
 celestial incense and perfume prepare;
 while our great god her pant bosom warm,
 refine her beauty and improve her charm. 

enter the spacious dome, my ravish eye
 a wondrous scene of glory do surprise. 
the riches, symmetry, and brightness, all
 do equal for admiration call:
 but the description be a labour fit
 for none beneath a laureate angel wit. 

amid the temple be a altar make
 of solid gold, where adoration pay. 
here i perform the usual rite with fear,
 not dare bold to approach too near;
 till from the god a smile Cupid come
 and bid i touch the consecrate flame;
 which do, my guide my eager step convey
 to the apartment of the beauteous maid. 

before the entrance be her altar raise,
 on pedestal of polish marble place. 
by it, her guardian Cupid always stand,
 who troop of missionary love command. 
to he with soft address all repair;
 each for his captive humble beg the fair;
 though still in vain they importune, for he
 will give encouragement to none, but i. 
there stand the youth, he cry, must taste the bliss,
 the lovely Delia can be none, but he,
 fate have select he, and mighty love
 confirm below, what that decree above. 
then press no more, there be not another Swain
 on earth, but Strephon can bright Delia gain. 
kneel youth, and with a grateful mind renew
 your vow, swear you will eternal be true:
 but if you dare be false, dare perjure prove,
 you will find in sure revenge, affront love,
 as hot, as fierce, as terrible as Jove. 
hear i, you god, say i, now hear i swear
 by all that be sacred, and by all that be fair! 
if i prove false to Delia, let i fall
 the common obloquy, condemn by all. 
let i the utmost of your vengeance try,
 force to live wretched, and unpitied die. 

then he expose the lovely, sleep maid
 upon a couch of new-blown rose lay. 
the blush colour in her cheek express,
 what tender thought inspire her heave breast. 
sometime a sigh half smother steal away,
 then she will Strephon, charm Strephon say. 
sometime she smile cry, you love, it be true;
 but will you always, and be faithful too? 
ten thousand grace play about her face,
 ten thousand charm attend every grace
 each admirable feature do impart
 a secret rapture to my throb heart. 
the nymph imprison in the brazen tower,
 when Jove descend in a golden shower,
 less beautiful appear, and yet her eye
 bring down that god from the neglect sky. 
so move, so transport be the sight,
 so much a goddess Delia seem, so bright,
 my ravish soul with secret wonder fraught,
 lay all dissolve in ecstasy of thought. 

long time i gaze, but as i tremble draw
 near, to take a more oblige view:
 it thunder loud, and the ungrateful noise
 wake i, and put a end to all my joy. 
