love and madness;

a elegy write in 1795. 

hark! from the battlement of yonder tower
 the solemn bell have toll the midnight hour! 
rouse from drear vision of distemper sleep,
 poor b—k wake — in solitude to weep! 

 "cease, memory, cease (the friendless mourner cry),
 to probe the bosom top severe try! 
oh! ever cease, my pensive thought, to stray
 through the bright field of Fortune better day;
 when youthful hope, the music of the mind,
 tune all its charm, and e—n be kind! 

 "yet, can i cease, while glow this tremble frame,
 in sigh to speak thy melancholy name! 
i hear thy spirit wail in every storm! 
in midnight shade i view thy pass form! 
pale as in that sad hour, when doom to feel,
 deep in thy perjure heart, the bloody steel! 

 "demon of vengeance! you at who command
 i grasp the sword with more than woman hand,
 say you, do pity be tremble voice controul,
 or horror damp the purpose of my soul? 
no! my wild heart sit smile over the plan,
 till hate fulfil what baffle love begin! 

 "yes; let the clay-cold breast, that never know
 one tender pang, to generous nature true,
 half mingle pity with the gall of scorn,
 condemn this heart, that bleed in love forlorn! 

 "and you, proud fair, who soul no gladness warm,
 save rapture homage to your conscious charm! 
delight idol of a gaudy train! 
ill can your blunt feeling guess the pain,
 when the fond faithful heart, inspire to prove
 friendship refine, the calm delight of love,
 feel all its tender string with anguish tear,
 and bleed at perjure pride inhuman scorn! 

 "say, then, do pity heaven condemn the deed,
 when vengeance bid thou, faithless lover! bleed? 
long have i watch thy dark foreboding brow,
 what time thy bosom scorn its dear vow! 
sad, though i weep the friend, the lover change,
 still thy cold look be scornful, and estrange,
 till from thy pity, love, and shelter throw,
 i wander, hopeless, friendless, and alone! 

 "oh! righteous heaven! it be then my torture soul
 first give to wrath unlimited controul! 
adieu the silent look! the stream eye! 
the murmur plaint! the deep heart-heaving sigh! 
long slumber vengeance wake to better deed;
 he shriek, he fall, the perjure lover bleed! 
now the last laugh of agony be over,
 and pale in blood he sleep, to wake no more! 

 "it be do! the flame of hate no long burn;
 nature relent; but, ah! too late return! 
why do my soul this gush of anguish feel? 
tremble and faint, i drop the guilty steel! 
cold on my heart the hand of terror lie;
 and shade of horror close my languid eye! —

 "oh! it be a deed of murder deep grain! 
can B—k's soul so true to wrath remain? 
a friend long true, a once fond lover fall! —
 where love be foster, can not pity dwell? 

 "unhappy youth! while yond pale crescent swallow
 to watch on silent nature deep repose,
 thy sleepless spirit, breathe from the tomb,
 foretell my fate, and summons i to come! 
once more i see thy sheet spectre stand,
 roll the dim eye, and wave the paly hand! 

 "soon may this flutter spark of vital flame
 forsake its languid melancholy frame! 
soon may these eye their tremble lustre close,
 welcome the dreamless night of long repose! 
soon may this woe-worn spirit seek the bourn
 where, lull to slumber, grief forget to mourn!" 
