the month of august.

Sylvanus.

hail, Phillis, bright than a morning sky,
 joy of my heart, and darling of my eye;
 see the kind year her grateful tribute yield,
 and round-faced plenty triumph over the field. 
but to yond garden let i lead thy charm,
 where the curl vine extend her will arm:
 who purple cluster lure the longing eye,
 and the ripe cherry show their scarlet dye. 

Phillis.

not all the sight your boast garden yield,
 be half so lovely as my father field,
 where large increase have bless the fruitful plain,
 and we with joy behold the swell grain,
 who heavy ear towards the earth recline,
 wave, nod, and tremble to the whisk wind. 

Sylvanus.

but see, to emulate those cheek of thy,
 on yond fair tree the blush nect'rin shine:
 beneath their leaf the ruddy peach glow,
 and the plump Figs compose a gallant show. 
with gaudy plumb see yonder bough recline,
 and ruddy pear in you espalier twine. 
there humble dwarf in please order stand,
 who golden product seem to court thy hand. 

Phillis.

in vain you tempt i while our orchard bear
 long-keeping russet, lovely catherine pear,
 pearmain and codling, wheaten plumb enough,
 and the black damson load the bend bough. 
no pruning-knife our fertile branch teaze,
 while you must grow but as their master please. 
the grateful tree our mercy well repay,
 and rain we bushel at the rise day. 

Sylvanus.

fair be my garden, yet you slight they all;
 then let we haste to you majestic hall,
 where the glad roof shall to thy voice resound,
 thy voice more sweet than music melt sound:
 now oriȝon beam infest the sultry sky,
 and scorch fever through the welkin fly;
 but art shall teach we to evade his ray,
 and the force fountain near the window play;
 there choice perfume shall give a please gale,
 and orange-flower their odorous breath exhale,
 while on the wall the well-wrought paint glow,
 and dazzle carpet deck the floor below:
 o tell i, thou who careless beauty charm,
 be these not fair than a thresher barn? 

Phillis.

believe i, i can find no charm at all
 in your fine carpet and your paint hall. 
it be true our parlour have a earthen floor,
 the side of plaster and of Elm the door:
 yet the rub chest and table sweet shine,
 and the spread mint along the window climb:
 a age laurel keep away the sun,
 and two cool stream across the garden run. 

Sylvanus.

can feast or music win my lovely maid? 
in both those pleasure be her taste obey. 
the ransack earth shall all its dainty send,
 till with its load her plenteous table bend. 
then to the roof the swell note shall rise,
 pierce the glad air and gain upon the sky,
 while ease and rapture spread itself around,
 and distant hill roll back the charm sound. 

Phillis.

not this will lure i, for i will have you know
 this night to feast with Corydon i go:
 to night his reaper bring the gather grain,
 home to his barn, and leave the naked plain:
 then beef and colewort, bean and Bacon too,
 and the plumb-pudding of delicious hue,
 sweet-spiced cake, and apple-py good store,
 deck the brown board; who can desire more? 
his flute and Tabor too Amyntor bring,
 and while he play soft Amaryllis sing. 
then strive no more to win a simple maid,
 from her love cottage and her silent shade. 
let Phillis never, ah never let she rove
 from her first virtue and her humble grove. 
go seek some nymph that equal your degree,
 and leave content and Corydon for i. 
