the prospect of peace.

the close scene of tyrant 'fruitless rage,
the open prospect of a golden age,
the dread event that crown the important year,
wake the glad song, and claim the attentive ear.
long have Columbia ring with dire alarm,
while freedom call her injure son to arm;
while various fortune fire the embattle field,
conquest delay, and victory stand conceal;
while close legion mark their dreadful way,
and million tremble for the dubious day.
in this grand conflict heaven eternal sire,
at who dread frown the son of guilt expire,
bid vengeance rise, with sacred fury drive,
on those who be with innocence and heaven.
behold, where late the tremble squadron flee,
host bow in chain, and hapless number bleed,
in different field our numerous hero rouse,
to crop the wreath from britain impious brow.
age follow age shall these event relate
until time be old empire yield to destine fate;
historic truth our guardian chief proclaim,
their worth, their action, and their deathless fame;
admire croud their life-touched form behold
in breathe canvas, or in sculpture gold,
and hail the leader of the favourite throng,
the rapturous theme of some heroic song.
and soon, emerge from the orient sky,
the blissful morn in glorious pomp shall rise,
waft fair peace from europe fate coast;
where wander long, in mazy faction lose,
from realm to realm, by rage and discord drive,
she seem resolve to reascend her heaven.
this Lewis view, and reach a friendly hand,
point her flight to this far-distant land;
bid she extend her empire over the west,
and europe balance tremble on her crest!
now, see the goddess mount on the day,
to these fair clime direct her circle way,
will to seek, once more, a earthly throne,
to cheer the globe, and emulate the sun.
with placid look she eye the blissful shore,
bid the loud-thundering cannon cease to roar;
bid british navy from these port be toss,
and hostile keel no more insult the coast;
bid private feud her sacred vengeance feel,
and bow submissive to the public weal;
bid long, calm year adorn the happy clime,
and roll down blessing to remote time.
hail! heaven-born peace, fair nurse of virtue hail!
here, fix thy sceptre and exalt thy scale;
hence, through the earth extend thy late domain,
until heaven own splendour shall absorb thy reign!
what scene arise! what glory we behold!
see a broad realm its various charm unfold;
see croud of patriot bless the happy land,
a godlike senate and a warlike band;
one friendly genius fire the numerous whole,
from glow Georgia to the freeze pole.
along these shore, amid these flowery vale,
the woodland shout the joyous ear assail;
industrious croud in different labor toil,
those ply the art, and these improve the soil.
here the fond merchant count his rise gain,
there stride the rustic over the furrow plain,
here walk the statesman, pensive and serene,
and there the school boy gambol round the green.
see ripen harvest gild the smile plain,
kind nature bounty and the pride of swain;
luxuriant vine their curl tendril shoot,
and bow their head to drop the cluster fruit;
in the gay field, with rich profusion strow,
the orchard bend beneath its yellow load,
the lofty bough their annual burden pour,
and juicy harvest swell the autumnal store.
these be the blessing of impartial heaven,
to each fond heart in just proportion give.
no grasp lord shall grind the neighbour poor,
starve numerous vassal to increase his store;
no cringe slave shall at his presence bend,
shrink at his frown, and at his nod attend;
afric unhappy child, now no more
shall feel the cruel chain they feel before,
but every state in this just mean agree,
to bless mankind, and set the oppress free.
then, rapt in transport, each exult slave
shall taste that boon which god and nature give,
and, fire with virtue, join the common cause,
protect our freedom and enjoy our law.
at this calm period, see, in please view,
art vie with art, and nature smile anew:
on the long, wind strand that meet the tide,
unnumbered city lift their spiry pride;
gay, flowery walk salute the enrapture eye,
tall, beauteous dome in dazzle prospect rise;
there throng navy stretch their wanton sail,
tempt the broad main and catch the drive gale;
there commerce swell from each remote shore,
and waft in plenty to the smile store,
to these throng seat the country wide resort,
and roll her treasure to the open port;
while, far remote, gay health and pleasure flow,
and calm retirement cheer the labour brow.
no din of arm the peaceful patriot hear,
no part sigh the tender matron fear,
no field of fame invite the youth to rove,
nor virgin know a harsh sound than love.
fair science then her laureled beauty rear,
and soar with genius to the radiant star.
her glimmer dawn from gothic darkness rise,
and nation see her shadowy veil disclose;
she cheere fair Europe with her rise smile,
beam a bright morning over the british isle,
now soar reach her meridian height,
and bless Columbia hail the dazzle light!
here, rapt in tho't, the philosophic soul
shall look through nature part and grasp the whole.
see genius kindle at a franklin fame,
see unborn sage catch the electric flame,
bid hover cloud the threaten blast expire,
curb the fierce stream and hold the imprison fire!
see the please youth, with anxious study, rove,
in orb eccentric through the realm above,
no more perplex, while Rittenhouse appear
to grace the museum with the roll sphere.
see that young genius, that inventive soul,
who law the jar element control;
who guide the vengeance of mechanic power,
to blast the watery world and guard the peaceful shore.
and where be the rise sage, the unknown name,
that new adventurer in the list of fame,
to find the cause, in secret nature bind,
the unknown cause, and various charm of sound?
what subtle medium lead the devious way;
why different tension different sound convey;
why harsh, rough tone in grate discord roll,
or mingle concert charm the enrapture soul.
and tell the cause why sluggish vapor rise,
and wave, exalt, through the genial sky;
what strange contrivance nature form to bear
the ponderous burden through the light air.
these last display the curious mind engage,
and fire the genius of the rise age;
while moral tho'ts the please attention claim,
swell the warm soul, and wake the virtuous flame;
while metaphysic soar a boundless height,
and launch with Edwards to the realm of light.
see the bless muse hail their roseate bower,
their mansion bloom with poetic flower;
see listen seraph join the epic throng,
and unborn Joshuas rise in future song.
satire attend at virtue waken call,
and pride and coquetry and dullness fall.
unnumbered bard shall string the heavenly lyre,
to those bless strain which heavenly theme inspire;
sing the rich grace on mortal man bestow,
the virgin offspring and the filial god;
what love descend from heaven when Jesus die!
what shout attend he rise through the sky!
see science now in lovely charm appear,
grace with new garland from the bloom fair.
see laureled nymph in polish page shine,
and sapphic sweetness glow in every line.
no more the rough muse shall dare disgrace
the radiant charm that deck the blush face;
but rise beauty scorn the tinsel show,
the powder coxcomb and the flaunt beau;
while humble merit, void of flatter wile,
claim the soft glance, and wake th'enlivening smile.
the open lustre of a angel-mind,
beauty bright charm with sense superior join,
bid virtue shine, bid truth and goodness rise,
melt from the voice, and sparkle from the eye;
while the please muse the gentle bosom warm,
the first in genius, as the first in charm.
thus age and youth a smile aspect wear,
I will into virtue by the lead fair;
while the bright offspring, rise to the stage,
convey the blessing to the future age.
these be the view that freedom cause attend;
these shall endure until time and nature end.
with science crown, shall peace and virtue shine,
and bless religion beam a light divine.
here the pure church, descend from her god,
shall fix on earth her long and last abode;
Zion arise, in radiant splendor dress,
by saint admire, by infidel confess;
her open court, in dazzle glory, blaze,
her wall salvation, and her portal praise.
from each far corner of the extend earth,
her gather son shall claim their promise birth.
through the drear waste, beneath the set day,
where prowl native haunt the wood for prey,
the swarthy million lift their wonder eye,
and smile to see the gospel morning rise:
those who, through time, in savage darkness lie,
wake to new light, and hail the glorious day!
in those dark region, those uncultured wild,
fresh bloom the rose, the peaceful lily smile.
on the tall cliff unnumbered carmel rise,
and in each vale some beauteous Sharon lie.
from this fair mouth th'excind stone shall roll,
reach the far east and spread from pole to pole;
from one small stock shall countless nation rise,
the world replenish and adorn the sky.
earth blood-stained empire, with their guide the sun,
from orient clime their gradual progress run;
and circle far, reach every western shore,
until earth-born empire rise and fall no more.
but see the imperial guide from heaven descend,
who beam be peace, who kingdom know no end;
from calm Vesperia, through the etherial way,
back sweep the shade before the effulgent day;
through the broad east, the brighten splendour drive,
reverse nature and illumin heaven;
astonish region bless the gladden sight,
and sun and system own superior light.
as when the asterial blaze over bethl'em stand,
which mark the birth-place of the incarnate god;
when eastern priest the heavenly splendour view,
and numerous croud the wondrous sign pursue:
so eastern king shall view the unclouded day
rise in the west and streak its golden way:
that signal speak a saviour humble birth,
this speak his long and glorious reign on earth!
then love shall rule, and innocence adore,
discord shall cease, and tyrant be no more;
until you bright orb, and those celestial sphere,
in radiant circle, mark a thousand year;
until the grand fiat burst the etherial frame,
world crush on world, and nature sink in flame!
the church elect, from smoulder ruin, rise,
and sail triumphant through the yield sky,
hail by the bridegroom! to the father give,
the joy of angel, and the queen of heaven!
