a winter day.

the cock warm roost amid his feather mate,
 now lift his beak and snuff the morning air,
 stretch his neck and clap his heavy wing,
 give three hoarse crow, and glad his task be do,
 low chuckle turn himself upon the roost,
 then nestle down again into his place. 
the labour hind, who on his bed of straw
 beneath his home-made cover, coarse but warm,
 lock in the kindly arm of she who spin they,
 dream of the gain that next year crop shall bring;
 or at some fair, dispose of his wool,
 or by some lucky and unlooked-for bargain,
 fill his skin purse with store of tempt gold,
 now wake from sleep at the unwelcome call,
 and find himself but just the same poor man
 as when he go to rest. 
he hear the blast against his window beat
 and wish to himself he be a laird,
 that he may lie abed. it may not be:
 he rub his eye and stretch out his arm;
 hey ho! hey ho! he drawl with gape mouth,
 then, most unwilling creep from his lair,
 and without looking-glass put on his clothes. 

with rueful face he blow the smother fire,
 and light his candle at the redden coal;
 first see that all be right among his cattle,
 then hie he to the barn with heavy tread,
 print his footstep on the new-fallen snow. 
from out the heaped-up mow he draw his sheaf,
 dislodge the poor red-breast from his shelter
 where all the live-long night he sleep secure;
 but now, affright, with uncertain flight,
 flutter round wall, and roof, to find some hole
 through which he may escape. 
then whirl over his head, the heavy flail
 descend with force upon the jump sheaf,
 while every rugged wall and neighbour cot
 the noise re-echo of his sturdy stroke. 

the family care call next upon the wife
 to quit she mean but comfortable bed. 
and first she stir the fire and fan the flame,
 then from her heap of stick for winter store
 a armful bring; loud crackle as they burn,
 thick fly the red spark upward to the roof,
 while slow mount the smoke in wreathy cloud. 
on go the seethe pot with morning cheer,
 for which some little wistful folk await,
 who, peep from the bedclothes, spy well please,
 the cheery light that blaze on the wall,
 and bawl for leave to rise. 
their busy mother know not where to turn,
 her morning work come now so thick upon she. 
one she must help to tie his little coat,
 unpin another cap, or seek his shoe
 or hosen lose, confusion soon overmastered! 
when all be over, out to the door they run
 with new-combed sleeky hair and glisten face,
 each with some little project in his head. 
his new-soled shoe one on the ice must try;
 to view his well-set trap another hie,
 in hope to find some poor unwary bird,
 (no worthless prize) entangle in his snare;
 while one, less active, with round rosy cheek,
 spread out his purple finger to the fire,
 and peep most wishful into the pot. 

but let we leave the warm and cheerful house
 to view the bleak and dreary scene without,
 and mark the dawn of a winter day. 
the morning vapour rest upon the height
 lurid and red, while grow gradual shade
 of pale and sickly light spread over the sky. 
then slow from behind the southern hill
 enlarge and ruddy come the rise sun,
 shoot askance the hoary waste his beam
 that gild the brow of every ridgy bank,
 and deepen every valley with a shade. 
the crust window of each scatter cot,
 the icicle that fringe the thatch roof,
 the new-swept slide upon the freeze pool,
 all keen glance, new kindle with his ray;
 and even the rugged face of scowl winter
 look somewhat gay. but only for a time
 he show his glory to the brighten earth,
 then hide his face behind a sullen cloud. 

the bird now quit their hole and lurk shed,
 most mute and melancholy, where through night,
 all nestle close to keep each other warm,
 in downy sleep they have forget their hardship;
 but not to chant and carol in the air,
 or light swing upon some wave bough,
 and merry return each other note;
 no; silent they hop from bush to bush,
 can find no seed to stop their crave want,
 then bend their flight to the low smoke cot,
 chirp on the roof, or at the window peck,
 to tell their want to those who lodge within. 
the poor lank hare fly homeward to his den,
 but little burden with his nightly meal
 of wither colewort from the farmer garden;
 a wretched scanty portion, snatch in fear;
 and fearful creature, force abroad by hunger,
 be now to every enemy a prey. 

the husbandman lay by his heavy flail,
 and to the house return, where for he wait
 his smoke breakfast and impatient child,
 who, spoon in hand, and ready to begin,
 towards the door cast many a eager look
 to see their dad come in. 
then round they sit, a cheerful company;
 all quick set to work, and with heap spoon
 from ear to ear besmear their rosy cheek. 
the faithful dog stand by his master side
 wag his tail and look in his face;
 while humble puss pay court to all around,
 and pur and rub they with her furry side,
 nor go this little flattery unrewarded. 
but the laborious sit not long at table;
 the grateful father lift his eye to heaven
 to bless his god, who ever bounteous hand
 he and his little one do daily feed,
 then rise satisfy to work again. 

the vary rouse sound of industry
 be hear through all the village. 
the hum wheel, the thrifty housewife tongue,
 who scold to keep her maiden to their work,
 the wool-card's grate most unmusical! 
issue from every house. 
but hark! the sportsman from the neighbour hedge
 his thunder send! loud bark the village cur;
 up from her card or wheel the maiden start
 and hasten to the door; the housewife chide,
 yet run herself to look, in spite of thrift,
 and all the little town be in a stir. 

strut before, the cock lead forth his train,
 and chuckle near the barn-door amid the straw,
 remind the farmer of his morning service. 
his grateful master throw a liberal handful;
 they flock about it, while the hungry sparrow,
 perch on the roof, look down with envious eye,
 then, aim well, amid the feeder light,
 and seize upon the feast with greedy bill,
 till angry partlet peck they off the field. 
but at a distance, on the leafless tree,
 all woe-begone, the lonely blackbird sit;
 the cold north wind ruffle his glossy feather;
 full oft he look, but dare not make approach,
 then turn his yellow beak to peck his side
 and clap his wing close to' he sharpen breast. 
the wander fouler from behind the hedge,
 fasten his eye upon he, point his gun,
 and fire wanton, as at a mark,
 of life bereave he in the cheerful spot
 that oft have echo to his summer song. 

the midday hour be near, the pent-up cow
 be drive from their stall to take the air. 
how stupid they stare! and feel how strange! 
they open wide their smoke mouth to low,
 but scarce can their feeble sound be hear,
 then turn and lick themselves, and step by step,
 move, dull and heavy, to their stall again. 

in scatter group the little idle boy
 with purple finger mould in the snow
 their icy ammunition, pant for war;
 and draw up in opposite array,
 send forth a mighty shower of well-aimed ball,
 each tiny hero try his grow strength,
 and burn to beat the foeman off the field. 
or on the well-worn ice in eager throng,
 after short race, shoot rapid along,
 trip up each other heel and on the surface
 with stud shoe draw many a chalky line. 
untired and glow with the healthful sport
 they cease not till the sun have run his course
 and threaten cloud, slow rise from the north,
 spread leaden darkness over the face of heaven;
 then by degree they scatter to their home,
 some with a break head or bloody nose,
 to claim their mother pity, who most skilful! 
Cures all their trouble with a bit of bread. 

the night come on apace —
 chill blow the blast and drive the snow in wreath;
 now every creature look around for shelter,
 and whether man or beast, all move alike
 towards their home, and happy they who have
 a house to skreen they from the pierce cold! 
lo, over the frost a reverend form advance! 
his hair white as the snow on which he tread,
 his forehead mark with many a care-worn furrow,
 who feeble body bend over a staff,
 show still that once it be the seat of strength,
 though now it shake like some old ruin tower. 
clothe indeed, but not disgrace with rag,
 he still maintain that decent dignity
 which well become those who have serve their country. 
with totter step he gain the cottage door:
 the wife within, who hear his hollow cough,
 and patter of his stick upon the threshold,
 send out her little boy to see who be there. 
the child look up to mark the stranger face,
 and, see it enlighten with a smile,
 hold out his tiny hand to lead he in. 
round from her work, the mother turn her head,
 and view they, not ill please. 
the stranger whine not with a piteous tale,
 but only ask a little to relieve
 a poor old soldier want. 
the gentle matron bring the ready chair
 and bid he sit to rest his weary limb,
 and warm himself before her blaze fire. 
the child full of curiosity,
 flock round, and with their finger in their mouth
 stand stare at he, while the stranger, please,
 take up the young urchin on his knee. 
proud of its seat, it wag its little foot,
 and prate and laugh and play with his white lock. 
but soon a change come over the soldier face;
 his thoughtful mind be turn on other day,
 when his own boy be wont to play around he,
 who now lie distant from their native land
 in honourable but untimely grave:
 he feel how helpless and forlorn he be,
 and big, round tear course down his wither cheek. 
his toilsome daily labour at a end,
 in come the weary master of the house,
 and mark with satisfaction his old guest,
 in the chief seat, with all the child round he. 
his honest heart be fill with manly kindness,
 he bid he stay and share their homely meal,
 and take with they his quarter for the night. 
the age wanderer thankful accept,
 and by the simple hospitable board,
 forget the bypast hardship of the day. 

when all be satisfy, about the fire
 they draw their seat and form a cheerful ring. 
the thrifty housewife turn she spin wheel;
 the husband, useful even in his hour
 of ease and rest, a stocking knit, belike,
 or plait store rush, which with after skill
 into a basket form may do good service,
 with egg or butter fill at fair or market. 

some idle neighbour now come drop in,
 draw round their chair and widen out the circle;
 and every one in his own native way,
 do what he can to cheer the social group. 
each tell some little story of himself,
 that constant subject upon which mankind
 whether in court or country, love to dwell. 
how, at a fair, he save a simple clown
 from be trick in buy of a cow;
 or lay a bet on his own horse head
 against his neighbour buy at twice his price,
 which fail not to repay his better skill;
 or on a harvest day bind in a hour
 more sheaf of corn than any of his fellow,
 though ever so stark, can do in twice the time;
 or win the bridal race with savoury bruise
 and first kiss of the bonny bride, though all
 the fleet youngster of the parish strive
 in rivalry against he. 
but chief the good man, by his own fire,
 have privilege of be listen to,
 nor dare a little prattle tongue presume
 though but in play, to break upon his story. 
the child sit and listen with the rest;
 and shall the young raise its lisp voice,
 the careful mother, ever on the watch,
 and ever please with what her husband say,
 give it a gentle tap upon the finger,
 or stop its ill-timed prattle with a kiss. 
the soldier next, but not unasked, begin
 his tale of war and blood. they gaze upon he,
 and almost weep to see the man so poor
 so bend and feeble, helpless and forlorn,
 who have undaunted stand the battle brunt
 while roar cannon shake the quake earth,
 and bullet hiss round his defenceless head. 
thus pass quick on the evening hour,
 till sober folk must needs retire to rest,
 then all break up, and, by their several path,
 hie homeward, with the evening pastime cheer
 far more, belike, than those who issue forth
 from city theatre gay scenic show,
 or crowd ball-room splendid move maze. 
but where the song and story, joke and gibe
 so late circle, what a solemn change
 in little time take place! 
the sound of psalm, by mingle voice raise
 of young and old, upon the night-air bear,
 haply to some benight traveller,
 or the late part neighbour on their way,
 a please notice give that, those who fire
 in former day on the bare mountain side,
 in desert, heath, and cavern, praise and prayer,
 at peril of their life, in their own form
 of covenant worship offer up,
 in peace and safety in their own quiet home
 be — (as in quaint and modest phrase be term)
 be now engage in evening exercise

but long accustom to observe the weather,
 the farmer can lay he down in peace
 till he have look to mark what bode the night. 
he lift the latch, and move the heavy door,
 see wreath of snow heap up on every side,
 and black and dismal all above his head. 
anon the neither blast begin to rise,
 he hear its hollow growl from afar,
 which, gather strength, roll on with double might
 and rave and bellows over his head. the tree
 like pithless sapling bend. he shut his door
 and, thankful for the roof that cover he,
 hie he to bed. 
