to the countess of Exeter, play on the lute.

what charm you have, from what high race you spring,
 have be the please subject of my song:
 unskilled and young, yet something still i write,
 of ca'ndish beauty join to cecil wit. 
but when you please to show the labour muse,
 what great theme your music can produce;
 my babble praise i repeat no more;
 but hear, rejoice, stand silent, and adore. 

the persian thus, first gaze on the sun,
 admire, how high it be place, how bright it shine:
 but, as his power be know, their thought be raise;
 and soon they worship, what at first they praise. 

Eliza glory live in Spencer song;
 and Cowley verse keep fair orinda young. 
that as in birth, in beauty you excel,
 the muse may dictate, and the poet tell:
 your art no other art can speak; and you,
 to show how well you play, must play anew:
 your music power your music must disclose;
 for what light be, it be only light that show. 

strange force of harmony, that thus control
 our thought, and turn and sanctify our soul:
 while with it be utmost art your sex can move
 our wonder only, or at best our love:
 you far above both these your god do place;
 that your high power may worldly thought destroy;
 that with your number you our zeal may raise,
 and, like himself, communicate your joy. 

when to your native heaven you shall repair,
 and with your presence crown the blessing there;
 your lute may wind it be string but little high,
 to tune their note to that immortal choir. 
your art be perfect here: your number do,
 more than our book, make the rude atheist know,
 that there be a heaven, by what he hear below. 

as in some piece, while Luke his skill express,
 a cunning angel come, and draw the rest:
 so, when you play, some godhead do impart
 harmonious aid; divinity help art:
 some cherub finish what you begin,
 and to a miracle improve a tune. 

to burn Rome when frantic Nero play,
 view that face, no more he have survey
 the rage flame; but strike with strange surprise,
 confess they less than those of anna eye:
 but have he hear thy lute, he soon have find
 his rage elude, and his crime atone:
 thy, like amphion hand, have wake the stone,
 and from destruction call the rise town:
 malice to music have be force to yield;
 nor can he burn so fast, as thou can build. 
