[pastoral 03] the third pastoral.

Albino.

when Virgil think no shame the doric reed
 to tune, and flock on mantuan plain to feed,
 with young augustus name he grace his song;
 and spencer, when amid the rural throng
 he carol sweet, and graze along the flood
 of gentle Thames, make every sound wood
 with good Eliza name to ring around;
 Eliza name on every tree be find. 
since then, through anna care at ease we live,
 and see our cattle unmolested thrive;
 like they will i my slender music raise,
 and teach the vocal valley anna praise. 
mean time, on oaten pipe a lowly lay,
 while my kid brouze, obscure in shade i play:
 yet not obscure, while Dorset think not scorn
 to visit wood, and swain ignoble bear. 

two country swain, both musical, both young,
 in friendship mutual bond unite long,
 retire within a mossy cave, to shun
 the croud of shepherd, and the noonday sun. 
a melancholy thought possess their mind:
 revolve now the solemn day they find,
 when young Albino die. his image dear
 bedew their cheek with many a trickle tear;
 to tear they add the tribute of their verse;
 these angelot, those Palin do rehearse. 

angelot.

thus yearly circle bypast time return;
 and yearly thus albino fate we mourn:
 albino fate be early, short his stay;
 how sweet the rose! how speedy the decay! 

can we forget how every creature moan,
 and sympathize rock in echo groan,
 presage future woe; when, for our crime,
 we lose Albino, pledge of peaceful time? 
the pride of Britain, and the darling joy
 of all the plain and every shepherd boy. 
no joyous pipe be hear, no flock be see,
 nor shepherd find upon the grassy green;
 no cattle graze the field, nor drink the flood,
 no bird be hear to warble through the wood. 

in yonder gloomy grove stretch out he lie,
 his beauteous limb upon the dampy clay,
 the rose on his pallid cheek decay,
 and over his lip a livid hue display:
 bleat around he lie his pensive sheep,
 and mourn shepherd come in croud to weep,
 the pious mother come, with grief oppress:
 you, conscious tree and fountain, can attest
 with what sad accent and what move cry
 she fill the grove, and importune the sky,
 and every star upbraid with his death,
 when in her widow arm, devoid of breath,
 she clasp her son. nor do the nymph for this
 place in her dearling's welfare all her bliss,
 and teach he young the sylvan Crook to wield,
 and rule the peaceful empire of the field. 

as milkwhite swan on silver stream do show,
 and silver stream to grace the meadow flow;
 as corn the vale, and tree the hill adorn,
 so thou to thy man ornament waste bear. 
since thou, delicious youth, do quit the plain,
 the ungrateful ground we till with fruitless pain;
 in labour furrow sow the choice of wheat,
 and over empty sheaf in harvest sweat:
 a thin increase our woolly subtance yield,
 and thorn and thistle overspread the field. 

how all our hope be flee, like morning dew! 
and we but in our thought thy manhood view. 
who now shall teach the point spear to throw,
 to whirl the sling, and bend the stubborn bow? 
nor do thou live to bless thy mother day,
 to share the sacred honour of her praise:
 in foreign field to purchase endless fame,
 and add new glory to the british name. 

o peaceful may thy gentle spirit rest! 
the flowery turf lie light upon thy breast;
 nor shriek owl, nor bat, fly round thy tomb,
 nor midnight fairy there to revel come. 

PALIN.

no more, mistake angelot, complain;
 Albino live; and all our tear be vain:
 and now the royal nymph, who bear he, deign
 to bless the field, and rule the simple swain,
 while from above propitious he look down. 
for this the golden sky no long frown,
 the planet shine indulgent on our isle,
 and rural pleasure round about we smile. 
hill, Dales, and wood with shrill pipe resound;
 the boy and virgin dance with garland crown,
 and hail Albino bless: the valley ring,
 Albino bless. o now! if ever, bring
 the laurel green, the smell eglantine,
 and tender branch from the mantling vine,
 the dewy cowslip, that in meadow grow,
 the fountain violet and the garden rise:
 your hamlet strew, and every public way,
 and consecrate to mirth albino day. 
my self will lavish all my little store,
 and deal about the goblet, flow over:
 old Moulin there shall harp, young Mico sing,
 and Cuddy dance the round amid the ring,
 and hobbinol his antic gambol play. 
to thou these honour yearly will we pay,
 when we our shear feast and harvest keep,
 to speed the blow, and bless our thrive sheep. 
while Mallow kid, and endive lamb pursue,
 while bee love thyme, and locust sip the dew;
 while bird delight in wood their note to strain,
 thy name and sweet memorial shall remain. 
