elegy to miss d—w—d. 

in the manner of Ovid.

by the late mr. Hammond.

o say, thou dear possessor of my breast,
where now be my boast liberty and rest!
where the gay moment which i once have know,
o where that heart i fond think my own!
from place to place i solitary roam,
abroad uneasy, nor content at home.
i scorn the beauty common eye adore,
the more i view they, feel thy worth the more;
unmoved i hear they speak, or see they fair,
and only think on thou — who be not there.
in vain will book their formal succour lend,
nor wit, nor wisdom can relieve their friend;
wit can deceive the pain i now endure,
and wisdom show the ill without the cure.
when from thy sight i waste the tedious day,
a thousand scheme i form, and thing to say;
but when thy presence give the time i seek,
my heart be so full, i wish, but can speak.

and can i speak with eloquence and ease,
till now not studious of the art to please,
can i, at woman who so oft exclaim,
expose (nor blush) thy triumph and my shame,
abjure those maxim i so late prize,
and court that sex i foolish despise,
own thou have soften my obdurate mind,
and thou revenge the wrong of womankind:
lose be my word, and fruitless all my pain,
in vain to tell thou all i write in vain;
my humble sigh shall only reach thy ear,
and all my eloquence shall be my tear.

and now (for more i never must pretend)
hear i not as thy lover, but thy friend;
thousand will fain thy little heart ensnare,
for without danger none like thou be fair;
but wise choose who best deserve thy flame,
so shall the choice itself become thy fame;
nor yet despise, though void of win art,
the plain and honest courtship of the heart:
the skilful tongue in love persuasive lore,
though less it feel, will please and flatter more,
and mean learn in that guilty trade
can long abuse a fond, unthinking maid.
and since their lip, so know to deceive,
thy unexperienced youth may soon believe,
and since their tear in false submission dress
may thaw the icy coldness of thy breast,
o! shut thy eye to such deceitful woe;
catch by the beauty of thy outward show,
like i they do not love, whatever they seem,
like i — with passion found on esteem.
