Erato the amorous muse on the death of John dryden, esq. 

in the wish close of evening welcome gloom,
 my longing step reach a invite bloom;
 who untrod path the sadden cypress grace,
 and in small plot be soft myrtle place. 
the lofty Cedars with extend arm,
 twine to keep off the force of rough storm;
 and numerous tower arbourets they make,
 the solemn glory of the please shade:
 on verdant moss, nature rich cloth of state,
 by a clear thrill stream supine i sit:
 upon my hand my thoughtful head recline,
 sad soft idea entertain my mind,
 and i to sing some lover fate incline;
 but strait Erato, who i do invoke,
 forbid my choice, her speech abrupt break,
 at last in sigh the interdiction speak. 
you shall no more write tender move strain,
 to please the nymph and melt the wish swain
 but to the world my sorrow you shall tell,
 how i have grieve since the lose hero fall,
 my darling Dryden who i love so well. 
he who have do such glory to my name,
 immortal as my self have make my fame;
 watchful as lover i first see his fate
 with rage sound Parnassus loss relate. 
call all my sister with my frantic cry,
 and every god to join in the obsequy,
 with tear make Helycon brackish as the sea. 
like a desert maid in wild despair,
 i tear my myrtle wreathe and flow hair,
 my mantle rent and shatter in the air;
 then in loose Cypriss veil my useless charm,
 sigh till i turn our æther into storm. 
no more i will wanton on our mountain brow,
 nor curious pain upon my lock bestow;
 in amorous fold my Rosey mantle twine,
 and sooth soft languishment in air divine:
 but careless throw i in some dusky shade,
 which willow, cypress, yew have awful make,
 there to my votress echo i will complain,
 who complaisance reverberate again,
 my pierce groan through every wood and plain. 
thus i and she in a eternal round,
 will my celestial grief for dryden death resound. 
Dryden, who with such ardour do invoke,
 that i through he my great rapture speak. 
whisper a thousand tender melt thing,
 till he write lay move as Orpheus string. 
oft i for ink do radiant nectar bring,
 and give he quill from infant Cupid wing:
 who gentle force do as victorious prove,
 as if they will be the immortal shaft of love. 
warm every breast with a surprise fire,
 and in the nice tender thought inspire;
 such lustre still grace his magnetic line,
 it be both irresistless and divine. 
with what celestial cadence do he tell,
 the pristine joy of love, ever mankind fall;
 when in the bloom grove the first kind pair,
 with amorous sigh fan the ambrosial air:
 smile on flowery bank supine lay,
 the ardent youth press the unblushing maid. 
in his soft line such ecstasy they boast,
 to hear their love rival the bliss they lose;
 when Cleopatra passion he adorn,
 how noble Anthony the empire scorn:
 dissolve in her kind arm transport lay,
 for love soft joy, give the rough crown away. 
such realm of bliss the hero there possess,
 sigh fond vow on she return breast;
 who read their languishment their passion feel,
 entrance in joy too exquisite to tell. 
when a incestuous flame his theme have be,
 he almost charm we to forgive the sin. 
my favourite ovid strain i do improve,
 and teach my dryden tender art of love;
 such art have our address Phoebus know,
 Daphne, though coy, have not unconquered fly,
 but bring the hero forth, and not their crown. 
he so advance whatever i bestow,
 i be love muse, but he himself the god. 
