Corsica. 

hail generous Corsica! unconquered isle! 
the fort of freedom; that amid the wave
 stand like a rock of adamant, and dare
 the wild fury of the beat storm. 

and be there yet, in this late sickly age
 (unkind to the tower growth of virtue)
 such bold exalt spirit? man who deed,
 to the bright annal of old Greece oppose,
 will throw in shade she yet unrivalled name,
 and dim the lustre of her fair page. 
and glow the flame of liberty so strong
 in this lone speck of earth! this spot obscure,
 shaggy with wood, and crust over with rock,
 by slave surround and by slave oppress! 
what then shall briton feel? shall they not catch
 the warm contagion of heroic ardour,
 and kindle at a fire so like their own? 

such be the work thought which swell the breast
 of generous boswel; when with noble aim
 and view beyond the narrow beat track
 by trivial fancy tread, he turn his course
 from polish gallia soft delicious vale,
 from the grey relique of imperial Rome,
 from her long gallery of laureled stone,
 her chisele hero, and her marble god,
 who dumb majestic pomp yet awe the world,
 to animate form of patriot zeal,
 warm in the live majesty of virtue,
 elate with fearless spirit, firm, resolve,
 by forune unsubdued, unawed by power. 

how rapture fancy burn, while warm in thought
 i trace the picture landscape; while i kiss
 with pilgrim lip devout the sacred soil
 stain with the blood of hero. Cyrnus, hail! 
hail to thy rocky, deep indent shore,
 and point cliff, which hear the chafe deep
 incessant foam round their shaggy side:
 hail to thy wind bay, thy shelter port
 and ample harbour, which invite stretch
 their hospitable arm to every sail:
 thy numerous stream, that burst from the cliff
 down the steep channel rock impetuous pour
 with grateful murmur: on the fearful edge
 of the rude precipice, thy hamlet brown
 and straw-roofed cot, which from the level vale
 scarce see, among the craggy hang cliff
 seem like a eagle nest aerial build:
 thy swell mountain, brown with solemn shade
 of various tree, that wave their giant arm
 over the rough son of freedom; lofty pine,
 and hardy fir, and ilex ever green,
 and spread chesnut, with each humble plant,
 and shrub of fragrant leaf, that clothes their side
 with live verdure; whence the cluster bee
 extract her golden dew: the shine box,
 and sweet-leaved myrtle, aromatic thyme,
 the prickly juniper, and the green leaf
 which feed the spin worm; while glow bright
 beneath the various foliage, wild spread
 the arbutus, and rear his scarlet fruit
 luxuriant, mantl over the craggy steep;
 and thy own native laurel crown the scene. 
hail to thy savage forest, awful, deep:
 thy tangle thicket, and thy crowd wood,
 the haunt of herd untamed; which sullen bind
 from rock to rock with fierce unsocial air
 and wild gaze, as conscious of the power
 that love to reign amid the lonely scene
 of unbroken nature: precipice huge,
 and tumble torrent; trackless desert, plain
 fence in with guardian rock, who quarry teem
 with shine steel, that to the culture field
 and sunny hill which wave with beard grain
 defend their homely produce. liberty,
 the mountain goddess, love to range at large
 amid such scene, and on the iron soil
 print her majestic step: for these she scorn
 the green enamel vale, the velvet lap
 of smooth savannah, where the pillowed head
 of luxury repose; balmy gale,
 and bower that breathe of bliss: for these, when first
 this isle emerge like a beauteous gem
 from the dark bosom of the tyrrhene main
 rear its fair front, she mark it for her own,
 and with her spirit warm: her genuine son,
 a break remnant, from the generous stock
 of ancient Greece, from sparta sad remains,
 true to their high descent, preserve unquenched
 the sacred fire through many a barbarous age:
 who, nor the iron rod of cruel Carthage,
 nor the dread sceptre of imperial Rome,
 nor bloody goth, nor grisly Saracen,
 nor the long gall yoke of proud Liguria,
 can crush into subjection. still unqelled
 they rise superior, burst from their chain
 and claim man dear birthright, liberty:
 and long, through many a hard unequal strife
 maintain the glorious conflict; long withstand
 with single arm, the whole collect force
 of haughty Genoa, and ambitious Gaul:
 and shall withstand it, trust the faithful muse. 
it be not in the force of mortal arm,
 scarce in fate, to bind the struggle soul
 that gall by wanton power, indignant swell
 against oppression; breathe great revenge,
 careless of life, determine to be free. 
and favour heaven approve: for see the man,
 bear to exalt his own, and give mankind
 a glimpse of high nature: just, as great;
 the soul of counsel, and the nerve of war;
 of high unshaken spirit, tempere sweet
 with soft urbanity, and polish grace,
 and attic wit, and gay unstudied smile:
 who heaven in some propitious hour endow
 with every pure virtue: give he all
 that lift the hero, or adorn the man. 
give he the eye sublime; the search glance
 keen, scan deep, that smite the guilty soul
 as with a beam from heaven; on his brow
 serene, and spacious front, set the broad seal
 of dignity and rule; then smile benign
 on this fair pattern of a god below,
 high wrought, and breathe into his swell breast
 the large ambitious wish to save his country. 
oh beauteous title to immortal fame! 
the man devote to the public, stand
 in the bright record of superior worth
 a step below the sky: if he succeed,
 the first fair lot which earth afford, be he;
 and if he fall, he fall above a throne. 
when such their leader can the brave despair? 
freedom the cause and Paoli the chief. 
success to your fair hope! a british muse,
 though weak and powerless, lift her fervent voice,
 and breathe a prayer for your success. oh can
 she scatter blessing as the morn shed dew,
 to drop upon your head! but patient hope
 must wait the appoint hour; secure of this,
 that never with the indolent and weak
 will freedom deign to dwell; she must be seize
 by that bold arm that wrestle for the blessing:
 it be heaven best gift and must be buy with blood. 
when the storm thicken, when the combat burn,
 and pain and death in every horrid shape
 that can appall the feeble, prowl around,
 then virtue triumph; then her tower form
 dilate with kindle majesty; her mien
 breathe a divine spirit, and enlarge
 each spread feature, with a ampler port
 and bold tone, exult, ride the storm,
 and joy amid the tempest: then she reap
 her golden harvest; fruit of noble growth
 and high relish than meridian sun
 can ever ripen; fair, heroic deed,
 and godlike action. it be not meat, and drink,
 and balmy air, and vernal sun, and shower
 that feed and ripen mind; it be toil and danger;
 and wrestle with the stubborn gripe of fate;
 and war, and sharp distress, and path obscure
 and dubious. the bold swimmer joy not so
 to feel the proud wave under he, and beat
 with strong repel arm the billowy surge;
 the generous courser do not so exult
 to toss his float mane against the wind,
 and neigh amid the thunder of the war,
 as virtue to oppose her swell breast
 like a firm shield against the dart of fate. 
and when her son in that rough school have learn
 to smile at danger, then the hand that raise
 shall hush the storm, and lead the shine train
 of peaceful year in bright procession on. 
then shall the shepherd pipe, the muse lyre,
 on cyrnus shore be hear: her grateful son
 with loud acclaim and hymn of cordial praise
 shall hail their high deliverer; every name
 to virtue dear be from oblivion snatch,
 and place among the star: but chief thy,
 thy, Paoli, with sweet sound shall dwell
 on their applaud lip; thy sacred name,
 endear to long posterity, some muse,
 more worthy of the theme, shall consecrate
 to after age, and applaud world
 shall bless the godlike man who save his country. 

so vain wish, so fond hope the muse:
 too fond hope: the iron fate prevail,
 and Cyrnus be no more. her generous son,
 less vanquish than overwhelm, by number crush,
 admire, unaided fall. so strive the moon
 in dubious battle with the gather cloud,
 and strike a splendour through they; till at length
 storm roll on storm involve the face of heaven
 and quench she struggle fire. forgive the zeal
 that, too presumptuous, whisper better thing
 and read the book of destiny amiss. 
not with the purple colour of success
 be virtue best adorn: the attempt be praise. 
there yet remain a freedom, noble far
 than king or senate can destroy or give;
 beyond the proud oppressor cruel grasp
 seat secure; uninjured; undestroyed;
 worthy of god: the freedom of the mind. 
