epilogue to tamerlane. on the suppression of the rebellion.

speak by mrs. Pritchard, in the character of the Comick Muse, Nov. 4, 1746. 

by the same.

briton, once more in annual joy we meet,
this genial night in freedom favourite seat:
and over the two great empire still i reign
of Covent-Garden, and of Drury-lane.
but ah! what cloud over all our realm impend!
our ruin artless prodigy portend.
chain, real chain, our hero have in view,
and scene of mimic dungeon change to true.
a equal fate the stage and Britain dread,
have room young missionary spark succeed.
but law and liberty be trifle treasure:
he threaten that grave property, your pleasure.

for i, a idle muse, i never dissemble
my fear; but even my tragic sister tremble:
over all her son she cast her mournful eye,
and heave her breast more than dramatic sigh;
to eye well tutor in the trade of grief,
she raise a small and well palace handkerchief;
and then with decent pause — and accent break,
her buskin progeny the dame bespeak:
"ah! son our dawn be overcast, and all
"theatric glory nod to their fall;
"from foreign realm a bloody chief be come,
"big with the work of slavery and of Rome.
"a general ruin on his sword he wear,
"fatal alike to audience and to player.
"for ah! my son, what freedom for the stage,
"when bigotry with sense shall battle wage?
"when monkish laureate only wear the bay,
" inquisitor lord chamberlain of play?
"play shall be damn that escape the critic rage,
"for priest be still worse tyrant to the stage.
"Cato, receive by audience so gracious,
"shall find ten caesar in one saint Ignatius:
"and godlike Brutus here shall meet again
"he evil genius in a Capuchin.
"for heresy the favourite of the pit
"must burn, and excommunicate wit;
"and at one stake we shall behold expire
"my Anna bullen, and the spanish Fryar.

"even tamerlane, who saint name appear
"red-lettered in the calendar of player,
"oft as these festal rite attend the morn
"of liberty restore and WILLIAM bear —
"but at that name, what transport flood my eye?
"what golden vision this i see arise?
"what youth be he with comely conquest crown,
"he warlike brow with full-blown laurel bind?
"what wreath be these that victory dare to join,
"and blend with trophy of my favourite boyn?
"oh! if the muse can happy aught presage
"of new deliverance to the state and stage;
"if not untaught the character to spell
"of all who brave fight or conquer well;
" thou shall be WILLIAM — like the last design
"the tyrant scourge, and blessing of mankind;
"bear civil tumult and blind zeal to quell,
"that teach happy subject to rebel.
"Nassau himself but half our vow shall share,
"divide our incense and divide our prayer;
"and oft as tamerlane shall lend his fame
"to shadow his, thy rival star shall claim
" the ambiguous laurel and the double name.
