a new essay in defence of verse, with a satyr upon the enemy of poetry.

what time be ever bless to that degree
as that fame golden age of poetry?
when the oaken garland, and the laurel crown
flourish, as equal trophy of renown.
when great Augustus do the sceptre wield,
and glitter art the imperial crown do guild,
poet and hero alike honour be,
the one to do great deed, the other to declare.
Horace, and Ovid, charm the courtly throng;
majestic Maro sing his lofty song,
and by the world great monarch be so grace,
the awful bard he on his right hand place.
nay even the less genius be not scorn,
but each to his desert with praise adorn;
from pindar height, to cinna low degree,
some honour still be do to poetry.
the nation cherish each harmonious strain,
and tuneful number charm each infant brain:
while jocund muse dance about their spring,
and caesar glory do to Caesar sing.
Momus his malice be ashamed to use;
nor dare discountenance a bashful muse.
the sober critic be all judge then,
and what they cavil at, can well maintain.
instruction, and not envy, fill their mind;
the wit, and will be wit, be different kind.
reason and judgement found their dispute,
and Orpheus there be safe among the brute;
but here where rout of bachanal do throng,
alas, what Orpheus can defend his song!
in this lewd age, each raw pert callow chit,
drink with the fume of undigested wit;
as much by wine inspire to play the fool:
one that a month before be whip at school
for grovel dullness, with inervate force
shall dare to back the muse soar horse.
so maggot breed by the sun genial eye,
in the morning crawl, and before evening fly.

how, sacred art, shall thy fame disperse!
how shall i sing the dignity of verse!
from whence the sweetness of each language spring,
by which of heavenly god, and conquer king,
be write, in mighty number, mighty thing,
extract from the flower of every tongue,
the artful poet frame his please song.
like bee, by heaven inspire to influence
the world, with work unknown to vulgar fence,
and do from power divine a gift receive,
the crowd may emulate, but nee'r atcheive.
it be this that do their sordid spleen alarm,
unskilled in th'magick, though they feel the charm.
though tuneful verse delight each clod brain;
poet, and science both, all fool disdain.
fool ever hate a art they can attain.
with black reproach they a fame work defile,
despise the vertue, and abhor the stile,
and book adorn with jem of learning spoil.
so have i see a brute tread down and tear
a laurel, he can never deserve to wear.

thus be instruction lose, for to what end
be find reproof to such as can mend.
ignorance, in age past, a curse have bin,
but in our time it be grow a wilful sin.
now fortune, not desert, acquire men fame:
he that best know to Crimp shall win the game
time serve parisite prefer shall be,
of any nation, notion, or degree,
but the poetic loyal fool like i.
in vain be study, useless be the school,
since every art abuse by every fool.
where verse have not the power to influence,
what method ever can reform the sense?
what will a Cato, or a Virgil be,
Iohnson, or Shakespeare, to the Mobile?
or how will Iuvenal appear at court,
that write truth have his bone break for it?
when time be so corrupt they can bear
reproof, it be a sign confusion near:
and when harmonious poetry design
to calm wild grief, and still the stormy mind;
and by a soft and please elegance,
the sweet of artful rhetoric to advance,
be by the town decry, it do declare
folly, and not philosophy rule there.

yet though good write by a gift sublime;
how do the poetaster of the time;
debauch the science still with Dogril rhime.
never heed what degree of nonsense swell;
the guilty line, if they but jingle well.
it be rhime the reader reason must control,
rhime be the sense, the substance, and the soul.
in a whole poem let no wit be find.
if every couplet end the with same sound.
poet, that just will their fame advance,
shall make rhime fall as if they come by chance.
a tuneful word the verse more sweet to make,
and not as study for the meeter sake.
such chime still from solid dullness spring,
rhimer and poet be vast different thing.
verse with rhime, be proper several way,
in great heroic, satyr, and essay,
but most ridiculous when tag in play.
first from the siege of Rhodes that method spring,
and there most fit since the verse be sing.
but your stiff herod, or cambises strain,
your maximins, or hot almanzor vein,
show rather than the wit, the heat of brain.
since nature bear chief rule in poetry,
than this, what more unnatural can be?
to hear a king, in rhime express his rage,
or for his cloak, in verse to ask his page.
a lady too in sound number tell,
how oft she take a glister, and how well.
such stuff the reader every day may meet,
too silly, and too tedious to repeat.

verse without rhime delightful may appear,
where sense in equal measure charm the ear.
this first to use seraphic Milton bring:
and great Roscommon since have better teach,
who more correct than any of our time,
oft show, true reason have no use of rhime:
patron of verse, thy soul on earth do move,
in the same glory now it shine above.

kindle in i, oh mighty bard, thy fire,
and with thy powerful art my muse inspire.
so the wrong sister shall their grief disperse,
and the age reform by my satyric verse:
while the wise few, do in this mirror see
the sordid enemy of poetry.
first the town fop, in modern stile, the beau,
inspire by learn pontack, or wise Grilleau:
dress like a wax-work-baby in a glass,
that waft the morn consult his odd face.
Studies his stocking with a pensive head,
to know which best become, the green or red;
and patch cut, scent with amber-greise,
to hide the ruby in his puddle phiz:
be one that do to poetry worst spite,
by the pretence that he have to write,
flush to will coffee house he come each night.
confirm those wit be all charm with his part,
as with his beau visage the lady heart.
to prove this, straight some poem be inspect,
and by this farrier barbarous dissect:
the mirth go round, the paper they condemn,
some at the verse laugh, and more at he;
but that be not heed by his grin crew,
fool always laugh, when ever their fellow do:
and when a jest be put, each have a pride
to think whoever laugh it be on their side.
thus it be not know which verse be good or bad,
because this fop the criticism make:
for all the wise owe poetry a grudge,
when such as he pretend to write, or judge.
his praise be fatal still, and if he read,
the martyr poem still the worse succeed.
so rat, that build in country barn their nest,
part of the corn devour, and spoil the rest.
such fop as this the poet fame expose;
this still be one of their inveterate foe:
he manage the state of verse so ill,
on the whole science bring a scandal still.
in vain, alas, toil the aspire drudge:
it be only wit, that wit can write, or judge.
a jewel rate at a price so high,
that few have stock of brain enough to buy,
yet all aim at the Jem to make'em fine;
nay, rather than they will not be think to shine:
deck with dull pebble, not true Warts of rock,
the appear like mrs. H—ton in a box.

though wit, within it self, a beauty be,
it be still more charm dress in poetry:
a robe, which be by heaven peculiar care,
design for very, very few to wear.
for as a awkard, ill breed, country clown,
from his dull parent new come to town:
though his court Taylor rack his brain to dress
the booby, and set off his silly face,
yet all find out the brutish soul within,
the ass be see for all the lion skin.
so the noisy bully that oft plague the pit,
though dress in the cast robe of antic wit,
the bray Momus be not hide from view,
for the dull ear will still be peep through.

the next ill tribe that poetry disgrace,
be, to their shame, among the female race:
a wanton sort of town coquette there be,
that poet hate, because they poet fear.
wholesome reproof, like age, still come too soon,
and worse than the small-pox, be a lampoon.
for tell but Lais there be satyr write,
strike with a conscious guilt she leave Basset. 
tear each alpieu, hate even dear sonica,
and against poet do with rage inveigh.
rogue, to expose her fault to all the town,
and make the intrigue with the dear coachman know.
what though to wanton play she will rail come,
yet act each night far lewder scene at home?
what though her fame be know so well abroad,
the court and town can prove her whore and bawd?
yet if she prim and swear she be very chaste,
shall homely satyr dare to spoil the jest?
when she have bosom friend, to prove untrue
each amorous slip, though do in open view.
for whether she be a devil, or a saint,
as womankind, she can no party want.
vertue on single innocence depend,
but favourite vice be store with many friend.

howe'r of these, a numerous tribe there be,
we have (thank heaven) some for desert as rare:
though Lais do the poet be abuse,
divine Asteria dignify a muse.
soul most divine, inspire verse approve,
verse that improve the saint in song above,
of charm honour, and more charm love.
and as she, sweet of that lovely kind,
a angel body, with a angel mind,
in beauty synod take the foremost place,
excel all in feature, as in grace:
so do her wit each fond admirer warm,
and with her kill eye have equal charm.
in her dear breast, the art will flourish still,
there lie no malice, nor there want no skill;
her divine soul enjoy a bless repose,
and, except gentle love, no passion know:
nor that, but in so awful a degree,
it be fit style a heavenly charity.
in vain her vertue, envy seek to stain:
the horny satyr lift his scourge in vain.
instead of find vice he may reprove,
the monster kneel, and sigh, and fall in love.
like she, each soul embellish with desert,
that sacred learning love, applaud this art.
but beside these i have expose to view,
there be a third, dull, dose, cant crew;
that noble science so little heed,
their clodpate offspring scarce be breed to read.
hence it be that by the curse of vacant brain,
so many whimsy in the nation raign:
hence pipe and Tabor, hum and Buz, be prize,
and each inspire muse as much despise.
with little band, and pique beard, new prune,
their brain unsettled, and their soul untuned:
they sordid the generous art decry,
and from tub pulpit knock down poetry.

the Swordman, yet unmarked with honour scar,
rout poet too, with criticism of war:
i mean the spark that whore, drink, game, and swear,
who valour more in scarf, than man appear:
one who hot brain, believe, that if he be
incline to wit, religion, modesty,
a scholar, and a friend to poetry;
it be the next way, his credit to abuse,
his honour and commission both to lose.
ah, dunce, look back on glorious ancient time,
and see how art the martial soul sublime.
see there a race of conquer emperor,
with science improve their idle hour:
wise Antoninus, Nerva, Adrian,
great Iulius, and adore Vespasian,
think it a luster to their dignity,
the advance, and be well skill in poetry.
how brutish then must be that grovel race,
that to bright knowledge never erect their face,
but with the down-looked herd unminded graze.
and how secure be art, and science,
though dart at by such weak foe as these.
what though the name of poet, in the vogue
o'th Mobile, be full as bad as rogue,
as wretched, and as scandalous to they,
as if he be for some vile theft condemn.
desert shall smile, rather than take offence,
they act accord to their Dole of sense.
wit will be still a Jem, though slight by a clown,
as rose will be sweet, though ass tread they down:
or if, which be their great infamy,
a poet general state be poverty.
as those that slight the world, t'inrich the mind,
from thence small favour can expect to find:
suppose no sun shine on he from the court,
his labour to reward, or life support;
suppose he be deceive in some redress,
as if he be honest, ten to one he be;
philosophy do his ill star control,
and far above the vulgar seat his soul.
beside, mecaenas will be still alive,
and bounteous Cesar every age survive.
some albem—le, or Dor—tt, will be find;
Ess—x, or carl, with true merit crown;
by grateful poet deathless verse renowned:
that over the bladder crowd will make they swim,
and lift their sink head above the stream.
hail, therefore, patron of the muse all,
low at your foot the nine do humble fall.
you that their work with generous pleasure see,
and shine upon the flower of poetry,
encourage satyr, that expose crime,
and version praise for wit, and not for rhime:
to you, with they, i dedicate my part,
a weak defender of a noble art:
glad of applause from judge, but not grieve
if by the crowd my line be not receive.
heaven do mankind to different wit condemn;
the vulgar hate i, and i pity they:
but when i with a man of judgement meet,
or with a virtuous lady, that have wit,
my breast entire, between they both they part,
he have my faithful service, she my heart.
for blast be my muse, when it shall dare
to wrong a worthy friend, or hurt the fair.
