[Tasso, aminta:] thirsis persuade amintor not to despair upon the prediction of Mopsus discover he to be a impostor.

thirsis.

why do thou still give way to such despair

amintor.

too just, alas! the weighty cause be
 Mopsus, wise Mopsus, who in art excel,
 and of all plant the secret vertue tell,
 know, with what heal gift our spring a bound
 and of each bird explain the mystic sound;
 it be he, even he! my wretched fate foretell

their.

do thou this speech then of that Mopsus hold,
 who, while his smile attract the easy view,
 drop flatter word, soft as the fall dew;
 who outward form all friendly still appear,
 though fraud and dagger in his thought he wear,
 and the unwary labour to surprise
 with look affect, and with riddle lie. 
if he it be, that bid thy love despair,
 i hope the happy end of all thy care. 
so far from truth his vain prediction fall. 

amint.

if ought thou know, that may my hope recall,
 conceal it not; for great i have hear his fame,
 and fear his word —

their.

— when hither first i come,
 and in these shade the false impostor meet,
 like thou i prize, and think his judgement great;
 on all his study speech still rely,
 nor fear to err, while lead by such a guide:
 when on a day, that business and delight
 my step do to the neighbour town invite,
 which stand upon that rise mountain side,
 and from our plain this river do his divide,
 he check i thus — be warn in time, my son,
 and that new world of paint mischief shun,
 who gay inhabitant thou shall behold
 plumed like our bird, and sparkle all in gold
 courtier, that will thy rustic garb despise,
 and mock thy plainness with disdainful eye. 
but above all, that structure see thou fly,
 where hoard vanity and witchcraft lie;
 to shun that path be thy peculiar care. 
i ask, what of that place the danger be:
 to which he soon reply, there shall thou meet
 of soft enchantress the enchantment sweet,
 who subt will thy solid sense bereave,
 and a false gloss to every object give. 
brass to thy sight as polish gold shall seem,
 and glass thou as the diamond shall esteem. 
huge heap of silver to thou shall appear,
 which if approach, will prove but shine air. 
the very wall by magic art be wrought,
 and repetition to all speaker teach:
 not such, as from our echo we obtain,
 which only our last word return again;
 but speech for speech entire there they give,
 and often add, beyond what they receive. 
there downy couch to false rest invite,
 the lawn be charm, that faint bar the light. 
no gild seat, no ivory board be there,
 but what thou may for some delusion fear:
 while, farther to abuse thy wonder eye,
 strange antic shape before they shall arise;
 fantastic fiend, that will about thou flock,
 and all they see, with imitation mock. 
nor be these ill the worst. thyself may be
 transform into a flame, a stream, a tree;
 a tear, congeal by art, thou may remain,
 until by a burn sigh dissolve again. 
thus speak the wretch; but can not shake my mind. 
my way i take, and soon the city find,
 where above all that lofty fabric stand,
 which, with one view, the town and plain command. 
here be i stop, for who can quit the ground,
 that hear such music from those roof resound! 
music! beyond the entice syrene note;
 music! beyond the swan expire throat;
 beyond the soft voice, that charm the grove,
 and equal only by the sphere above. 
my ear i think too narrow for the art,
 nor fast enough convey it to my heart:
 when in the entrance of the gate i see
 a man majestic, and command awe;
 yet tempere with a carriage, so refine
 that undetermined be my doubtful mind,
 whether for love, or war, that form be most design. 
with such a brow, as do at once declare
 a gentle nature, and a wit severe;
 to view that palace i he ask to go,
 though royal he, and i obscure and low. 
but the delight my sense there do meet,
 no rural tongue, no Swain can ever repeat. 
celestial goddess, or nymph as fair,
 in unveiled beauty, to all eye appear
 sprinkle with gold, as glorious to the view,
 as young Aurora, deck with pearly dew;
 bright ray dispense, as along they pass,
 and with new light the shine palace grace. 
Phabus be there by all the muse meet,
 and at his foot be our Elpino set. 
even humble i their harmony inspire,
 my breast expand, and my spirit fire. 
rude pastoral now, no long i rehearse,
 but hero crown with my exalt verse. 
of arm i sing, of bold adventurous war;
 and though bring back by my too envious star,
 yet keep my voice and reed those lofty strain,
 and send loud music through the wonder plain:
 which Mopsus hear, secret malign,
 and now to ruin both at once design. 
which by his sorcery he soon bring to pass;
 and sudden so clog, and hoarse i be,
 that all our shepherd, at the change amaze,
 believe, i on some ev'ning-wolf have gaze:
 when he it be, my luckless path have cross,
 by who dire look, my skill awhile be lose. 
this have i tell, to raise thy hope again,
 and render, by distrust, his malice vain. 
