a essay on virtue.

to the honourable PHILIP Yorke, ESQ;

by the same.

thou, who nor honour, wealth, nor youth can spoil
with the least vice of each luxuriant soil,
say, Yorke, (for sure, if any, you can tell)
what virtue be, who practise it so well;
say, where inhabit this sultana queen;
praise and adore by all, but rare see:
by what sure mark her essence can we trace,
when each religion, faction, age, and place
set up some fancy idol of its own,
a vain pretender to her sacred throne?
in man, too oft a well-dissembled part,
a self-denying pride in woman heart,
in synod faith, and in the field of fame
valour usurp her honour, and her name.
whoever their sense of virtue can express,
it be still by something they themselves possess.
hence youth good-humour, frugal craft old age,
warm politician term it party-rage;
true churchman zeal right orthodox; and hence
fool think it gravity, and wit pretence;
to constancy alone fond lover join it,
and maid unasked to chastity confine it.

but have we then no law beside our will?
no just criterion fix to good and ill?
as well at noon we may obstruct our sight,
then doubt if such a thing exist as light;
for no less plain will nature law appear,
as the meridian sun unchanged, and clear,
will we but search for what we be design,
and for what end the almighty form mankind,
a rule of life we then shall plain see,
for to pursue that end must virtue be.

then what be that? not want of power, or fame,
or world unnumbered to applaud his name,
but a desire his blessing to diffuse,
and fear lest million shall existence lose;
his goodness only can his power employ,
and a eternal warmth to propagate his joy.

hence soul, and sense diffuse through every place,
make happiness as infinite as space;
thousand of sun beyond each other blaze,
orb roll over orb, and glow with mutual ray;
each be a world, where form with wondrous art,
unnumbered species live through every part:
in every tract of ocean, earth, and sky
myriad of creature still successive rise;
scarce bud a leaf, or spring the vile weed,
but little flock upon its verdure feed;
no fruit our palate court, or flower our smell,
but on its fragrant bosom nation dwell,
all form with proper faculty to share
the daily bounty of their maker care;
the great creator from his heavenly throne,
please, on the wide-expanded joy look down,
and his eternal law be only this,
that all contribute to the general bliss.

nature so plain this primal law display,
each live creature see it, and obey;
each, form for all, promote through private care
the public good, and just taste its share.
all understand their great creator will,
strive to be happy, and in that fulfil;
mankind except; lord of all beside,
but only slave to folly, vice, and pride;
it be he that be deaf to this command alone,
delight in other woe, and court his own;
rack and destroy with torture steel and flame,
for luxury brute, and man himself for fame:
set superstition high on virtue throne,
then think his maker temper like his own:
hence be his altar stain with reek gore,
as if he can atone for crime by more:
hence while offend heaven he strive in vain
the appease by fast, and voluntary pain,
even in repent he provoke again.

how easy be our yoke! how light our load!
do we not strive to mend the law of god:
for his own sake no duty he can ask,
the common welfare be our only task;
for this sole end his precept, kind as just,
forbid intemperance, murder, theft, and lust,
with every act injurious to our own
or other good, for such be crime alone:
for this be peace, love, charity, enjoin,
with all that can secure and bless mankind.
thus be the public safety virtue cause,
and happiness the end of all her law;
for such by nature be the human frame,
our duty and our interest be the same.

but hold, cry out some Puritan divine,
who well-stuffed cheek with ease and plenty shine,
be this to fast, to mortify, refrain,
and work salvation out with fear and pain?
we own, the rigid lesson of their school
be wide different from these easy rule;
virtue, with they, be only to abstain
from all that nature ask, and covet pain;
pleasure and vice be ever near akin,
and, if we thirst, cold water be a sin:
heaven path be rough and intricate, they say,
yet all be damn that trip, or miss their way;
god be a be cruel and severe,
and man a wretch, by his command place here,
in sunshine for awhile to take a turn,
only to dry and make he fit to burn.

mistaken man, too pious severe!
through craft mislead, or mislead by fear;
how little they God counsel comprehend,
our universal parent, guardian, friend!
who, form by degree to bliss mankind,
this globe our sportive nursery assign,
where for awhile his fond paternal care
feast we with every joy our state can bear:
each sense, touch, taste, and smell dispense delight,
music our hear, beauty charm our sight;
tree, herb, and flower to we their spoil resign,
its pearl the rock present, its gold the mine;
beast, fowl, and fish their daily tribute give
of food and clothes, and die that we may live:
season but change, new pleasure to produce,
and element contend to serve our use:
love gentle shaft, ambition tower wing,
the pomp of senate, church, court, and king,
all that our reverence, joy, or hope create,
be the gay plaything of this infant state.
scarce a ill to human life belong,
but what our folly cause, or mutual wrong;
or if some stripe from providence we feel,
he strike with pity, and but wound to heal;
kind perhaps sometime afflict we here,
to guide her view to a sublime sphere,
in more exalt joy to fix our taste,
and wean we from delight that can last.
our present good the easy task be make,
to earn superior bliss, when this shall fade;
for, soon as ever these moral pleasure cloy,
his hand shall lead we to sublime joy;
snatch we from all our little sorrow here,
calm every grief, and dry each childish tear;
waft we to region of eternal peace,
where bliss and virtue grow with like increase;
from strength to strength our soul for ever guide,
through wondrous scene of being yet untried,
where in each stage we shall more perfect grow,
and new perfection, new delight bestow.

oh! will mankind but make these truth their guide,
and force the helm from prejudice and pride,
be once these maxim fix, that God our friend,
virtue our good, and happiness our end,
how soon must reason over the world prevail,
and error, fraud, and superstition fail!

none will hereafter then with groundless fear
describe the almighty cruel and severe,
predestinate some without pretence
to heaven, and some to hell for no offence;
inflict endless pain for transient crime,
and favour sect or nation, man or time.
to please he, none will foolish forbear
or food, or rest, or itch in shirt of hair,
or deem it merit to believe, or teach,
what reason contradict, or can reach;
none will fierce zeal for piety mistake,
or malice for whatever tenet sake,
or think salvation to one sect confine,
and heaven too narrow to contain mankind.

no more then nymph, by long neglect grow nice,
will in one female frailty sum up vice,
and censure those, who, near to the right,
think virtue be but to dispense delight.

no servile tenet will admittance find,
destructive of the right of humankind;
of power divine, hereditary right,
and non-resistance to a tyrant might:
for sure that all shall thus for one be curse,
be but great nature edict just reverse.

no moralist then, righteous to excess,
will show fair virtue in so black a dress,
that they, like boy, who some feign spright array,
first from the spectre fly themselves away:
no preacher in the terrible delight,
but choose to win by reason, not affright;
not conjurer like, in fire and brimstone dwell,
and draw each move argument from hell.

no more our sage interpreter of law,
will fatten on obscurity, and flaw,
but rather noble careful of their trust,
strive to wipe off the long-contracted dust,
and be, like Hardwicke, guardian of the just.

no more applause will on ambition wait,
and lay waste the world be count great,
but one good-natured act more praise gain,
than army overthrow, and thousand slay;
no more will brutal rage disturb our peace,
but envy, hatred, war, and discord cease;
our own and other good each hour employ,
and all thing smile with universal joy;
virtue with happiness her consort join,
will regulate and bless each human mind,
and man be what his maker first design.
