conlath and CUTHÓNA: a poem.

do not Ossian hear a voice? or be it the sound of day that be no more? often do the memory of former time come, like the evening sun, on my soul. the noise of the chace be renew; and, in thought, i lift the spear. — but Ossian do hear a voice: who be thou, son of the night? the son of little man be asleep, and the midnight wind be in my hall. perhaps it be the shield of Fingal that echo to the blast, it hang in ossian hall, and he feel it sometime with his hand. — yes! — i hear thou, my friend; long have thy voice be absent from my ear! what bring thou, on thy cloud, to Ossian, son of the generous morni? be the friend of the age near thou? where be Oscar, son of fame? — he be often near thou, o conlath, when the din of battle rise.


ghost of conlath.

sleep the sweet voice of cona, in the midst of his rustle hall? sleep Ossian in his hall, and his friend without their fame? the sea roll round the dark i-thona, and our tomb be not see by the stranger. how long shall our fame be unheard, son of the echo Morven?


Ossian.

o that my eye can behold thou, as thou sit, dim, on thy cloud! be thou like the mist of lano; or a half extinguish meteor? of what be the skirt of thy robe? of what be thy airy bow? — but he be go on his blast like the shadow of mist. — come from thy wall, my harp, and let i hear thy sound. let the light of memory rise on i-thona; that i may behold my friend. and Ossian do behold his friend, on the dark-blue isle. — the cave of thona appear, with its mossy rock and bend tree. a stream roar at its mouth, and toscar bend over its course. fercuth be sad by his side: and the maid of his love sit at a distance, and weep. do the wind of the wave deceive i? or do i hear they speak?


toscar.

the night be stormy. from their hill the groan oak come down. the sea darkly-tumbled beneath the blast, and the roar wave be climb against our rock. — the lightning come often and show the blast fern. — fercuth! i see the ghost of night. silent he stand, on that bank; his robe of mist fly on the wind. — i can behold his tear: a age man he seem, and full of thought.


fercuth.

it be thy father, o toscar; and he foresee some death among his race. such be his appearance on cromla, before the great maronnan fall. — Ullin! with thy hill of grass, how pleasant be thy vale! silence be near thy blue stream, and the sun be on thy field. soft be the sound of the harp in seláma, and lovely the cry of the hunter on Crómla. but we be in the dark i-thona, surround by the storm. the billow lift their white head above our rock: and we tremble amid the night.


toscar.

whither be the soul of battle flee, fercuth with the lock of age? i have see thou undaunted in danger, and thy eye burn with joy in the fight. whither be the soul of battle flee? our father never fear. — go: view the settle sea: the stormy wind be lay. the billow still tremble on the deep, and seem to fear the blast. but view the settle sea: morning be grey on our rock. the sun will look soon from his east; in all his pride of light.

i lift up my sail, with joy, before the hall of generous conlath. my course be by the isle of wave, where his love pursue the deer. i see she, like that beam of the sun that issue from the cloud. her hair be on her heave breast; she, bend forward, draw the bow: her white arm seem, behind she, like the snow of cromla: — come to my soul, i say, thou huntress of the isle of wave! but she spend her time in tear, and think of the generous conlath. where can i find thy peace, cuthona, lovely maid!


cuthona.

a distant steep bend over the sea, with age tree and mossy rock: the billow roll at its foot: on its side be the dwelling of roe. the people call it ardven. there the tower of Mora rise. there conlath look over the sea for his only love. the daughter of the chace return, and he behold their downcast eye. where be the daughter of rumar? but they answer not. — my peace dwell on ardven, son of the distant land!


toscar.

and cuthona shall return to her peace; to the hall of generous conlath. he be the friend of toscar: i have feast in his hall. — rise, you gentle breeze of Ullin, and stretch my sail towards ardven shore. cuthona shall rest on ardven: but the day of toscar will be sad. — i shall sit in my cave in the field of the sun. the blast will rustle in my tree, and i shall think it be cuthona voice. but she be distant far, in the hall of the mighty conlath.


cuthona.

oh! what cloud be that? it carry the ghost of my father. i see the skirt of their robe, like grey and watery mist. when shall i fall, o rumar? — sad cuthona see her death. will not conlath behold i, before i enter the narrow house?


Ossian.

and he will behold thou, o maid: he come along the roll sea. the death of toscar be dark on his spear; and a wound be in his side. he be pale at the cave of thona, and show his ghastly wound. where be thou with thy tear, cuthona? the chief of Mora die. — the vision grow dim on my mind: — i behold the chief not more. but, o you bard of future time, remember the fall of conlath with tear: he fall before his day; and sadness darken in his hall. his mother look to his shield on the wall, and it be bloody. she know that her hero die, and her sorrow be hear on Mora.

art thou pale on thy rock, cuthona, beside the fall chief? the night come, and the day return, but none appear to raise their tomb. thou frightnest the scream fowl away, and thy tear forever flow. thou be pale as a watery cloud, that rise from a lake.

the son of the desert come, and they find her dead. they raise a tomb over the hero; and she rest at the side of conlath. — come not to my dream, o conlath; for thou have receive thy fame. be thy voice far distant from my hall; that sleep may descend at night. o that i can forget my friend: till my footstep cease to be see! till i come among they with joy! and lay my age limb in the narrow house!

