jovi eleutherio.

or, an offer to liberty.

hail liberty! who presence glad the abode
of heaven itself, great attribute of god!
by thou sustain, the unbounded spirit run,
mould orb on orb, and light up sun on sun;
by thou sustain, in love unwearied life,
and uncontrolled create, support, forgive:
no power, or time, or space his will withstand;
almighty! endless! infinite in good!

"if so, why not communicate the bliss,
"and let man know what this great blessing be? "
say what proportion, creature, will thou claim;
as thy creator, in extent, the same!
unless his other attribute be join
to poise the will, and regulate the mind,
goodness to aim, and wisdom to direct,
what mighty mischief must we thence expect?
the maker know his work; nor judge it fit
to trust the rash resolve of human wit:
which prone to hurt, too blind to help, be still
alike pernicious, mean it good or ill.

a whim, the improvement make fond pretence,
will burst a system in experiment;
sparrow and cat indeed no more shall fear,
but Saturn tremble in his distant sphere:
give thou but foot in another world,
say, Archimedes, where shall we be hurl?

a sprightly wit, with liquour in his head,
will burn a globe to light he drink to bed:
the ephesian temple have escape the flame,
and heaven high dome have build the madman fame.

the sullen might (when malice boil within)
strike out the star to intimate his spleen:
not poppy-head have speak a Tarquin cross;
nature chief spring have break, and all be lose.

nor less destructive will this license prove,
though thy breast flame with universal love.
in vain be thy benevolence of soul;
soon will thy folly disconcert the whole.
no rain, or snow, shall discompose the air;
but flower and sunshine drain the weary year:
no cloud shall sully the clear face of day;
no tempest rise, — to blow a plague away.
mercy shall reign untired, unstained with blood;
spare the frail guilty, — to eat up the good:
in their defence, rise, sacred justice, rise!
awake the thunder sleep in the sky,
sink a corrupt city in a minute:
— woe! to the righteous ten who may be in it.
pick out the bad, and sweep they all away!
— so leave their babe, to cat and dog a prey.

such power without God wisdom and his will,
be only a omnipotence of ill.
suit to man can we such power esteem!
fiend will be harmless, if compare with he.

say then, shall all his attribute be give?
his essence follow, and his throne of heaven;
his very unity. proud wretch! shall he
ungod himself to make a god of thou?

how wide, such lust of liberty confound!
will less content thou, prudent mark the bound!
"those which the almighty monarch first design,
"when his great image seal the human mind;
"when to the beast the fruitful earth be give;
"to fish the ocean, and to bird their heaven;
"and all to man: who full creation, store,
"receive as its proprietor, and lord.
"ere earth, who spacious tract unmeasured spread,
"be slice by acre and by rood to shred;
"when tree and stream be make a general good;
"and not as limit, mean to exclude:
"when all to all belong; ere power be tell
"by number troop, or wealth by count gold:
"ere king, or priest, their tyranny begin;
"or man be vassal to his fellow-man. "

o halcyon state! when man begin to live!
a blessing, worthy of a god to give!
who on the unspotted mind his maker draw
the heavenly character, correct and true.
all useful knowledge, from that source, supply;
no blindness spring from ignorance, or pride:
all proper blessing, from that hand, bestow;
no mischief, or for want, or fullness, flow:
the quicken passion give a please zest;
while thankful man submit to be bless.
simplicity, be wisdom; temperance, health:
obedience, power; and full contentment, wealth.
so happy once be man! till the vain elf
shake off his guide, and set up for himself.
smite with the charm of independency,
he scorn protection, rage to be free.
now, self-exposed, he feel his naked state;
shrink with the blast, or melt before the heat:
and blind wander, as his fancy lead,
to starve on waste, or feast on poisonous weed.
now to the savage beast a obvious prey;
or crafty man, more savage still than they:
no less imprudent to his breast to take
the friend unfaithful, or the envenom snake;
equal fatal, whether on the Nile,
or in the city, weep the crocodile.

nor yet less blind deviate learned pride;
in Aetna burn, or drown amid the tide:
boast of superior sense; then rave to see
(when contradict) fool less wise than he.
mate with his great creator; vain bold
to make new system, or to mend the old.
shape out a deity; doubt, then deny:
and drink with science, curse god and die.

not heavenly wisdom, only, be withhold,
but the free bounty of the self-sow field:
no more, as erst, from nature ready feast,
rise the satisfy, but temperate guest:
cast wild abroad, no happy mean preserve;
by choice he surfeit, by constraint he starve:
toil life away upon the stubborn plain,
the extort from thence the slow reluctant grain;
the slow reluctant grain, procure today,
his less industrious neighbour steal away:
hence fist and club the village-peace confound,
till sword and cannon spread the ruin round;
for time and art but bring from bad to worse:
unequal lot succeed unequal force,
each lot a several curse. hence rich, and poor:
this pine, and die neglect at the door;
while gout and fever wait the load mess,
and take full vengeance for the poor distress.

no more the passion be the spring of life;
but seed of vice, and element of strife:
love, social love, to extend to all design,
back to its fountain flow; to self, confine.
source of misfortune; the fond husband wrong;
the maid dishonour, and desert young!
the mischief spread; when vengeance for the lust
unpeople realm, and call the ruin just.
hence, Troy, thy fate! the blood of thousand spill,
and orphan mourn for unconscious guilt.
thus love destroy, for kind purpose give;
and man corrupt the blessing mean by heaven;
self-injured, let we censure he no more:
ambition make we slave, and avarice poor.

what art the wild disorder shall control,
and render peace with virtue to the soul?
out-reason interest, balance prejudice;
give passion ear, and blind error eye?
arm the weak hand with conquest, and protect
from guile, the heart too honest to suspect?
for this, mankind, by sad experience teach,
again their safety in dependence seek:
press to the standard, sue before the throne;
and dare rely on wisdom not their own.
hence Saturn rule in peace the ausonian plain,
while salian song to virtue win the swain,

but poisonous stream must flow from pois'n spring:
the priest be mortal, and mere man the king.
what aid from monarch, mighty to enslave?
what good from teacher, cunning to deceive?
allegiance give defensive arm away;
and faith usurp imperial reason sway.

let civil Rome, from faithful record, tell
what royal blessing from she Nero fall.
when those, prefer all grievance to redress,
buy of their prince a licence to oppress;
when uncorrupted merit find no place,
but leave the trade of honour to the base.
see industry, by drain impost curse,
starve in the harvest, in the vintage thirst!
in vain for help the insult matron cry,
it be death in husband to have ear and eye:
fatal be beauty, virtue, wealth, or fame:
no man in aught a property can claim;
no, not his sex: strange art the monster try;
and Sporus, spite of nature, be his bride.
unhurt by foe proud Rome for age stand,
secure from all, but her protector hand.
recall your power, you roman, back again;
unmake the monarch, and never fear the man.
naked and scorn, see where the abject fly!
and once un-caesar, soon the fiddler die.

next holy Rome, thy happiness declare;
while peace and truth watch round the sacred chair.
peace! — which from rack and persecution flow!
mysterious truth! — which every sense oppose!
that god make man, be all the unlearned can reach;
that man make god the enlighten father teach.
man, blind and partial, need a light divine:
which pope new trim, and teach it how to shine.
rude nature dread accuse guilt, unknown
the balmy doctrine, that dead saint atone:
the careful pontiff, merciful to save,
hoard up a fund of merit from the grave;
and righteous hand the equal balance hold,
nor weigh it out but to just sum of gold.
sole judge, he deal his pardon, or his curse;
not heaven itself the sentence can reverse:
grace with his sceptre, awful with his rod,
this man of sin usurp the seat of god;
disarm and unadored the almighty lie,
and quit to saint his incense, and his sky:
no more the object of our fear, or hope;
the creature, and the vassal of the pope.
"from fane and city scar, fly swift away!"
— to the rude lybian in his wild a prey.
"the blood-stained sword from the fell tyrant wrest!"
— thousand unsheathed shall threat thy naked breast.
"the dogmatist imperious aid disdain!"
— so sink in brutish ignorance again.
"be there no medium? must we victim fall
"to one man lust, or to the rage of all?
"be reason doom a certain slave to be,
"to our blind passion, or a priest decree? "
hail happy Albion! who distinguish plain
this temperate mean, so dear earn, maintain!
senate, (the will of individual check)
the strength and prudence of the realm collect,
each yield to all; that each may thence receive
the full assistance, which the whole can give.
for this, thy patriot lawless power withstand,
and buy their child charter with their blood;
while reverend year, and various letter age,
dispassion open the mysterious page;
not one alone the various judgement sway,
but prejudice the general voice obey:
for this, thy martyr wake the bloody strife,
assert truth with brave contempt of life.
oh OXFORD! let deliver briton know
from thy fame seat her several blessing flow.
the accoutre baron, and assist knight,
in thou prepare for council, or for fight,
plane and obtain her civil liberty:
truth find her fearless witness in thou;
when, try as gold, saint, from thy totter pyre,
rise up to heaven, elijah-like, in fire!
peace to thy wall! and honour to thy name!
may age to age record thy gather fame!
while thy still favour seat pour forth their youth,
brave advocate of liberty and truth!
in fair succession rise to bless the realm!
father in church, and statesman at the helm!

"but factious synod through resentment err;
"and venal senate private good prefer:
"how wild the faith which wrangle soph dispose!
"the law how harsh of pension aye and no's! "

will thou by no authority be awe,
self-excommunicated, self-outlawed?
expunge the creed, the decalogue reject?
if they oblige not, nor will they protect.
you fear no god; — convince by what you say,
knave praise your wit, and swear your land away.
corrupt not wife, erase it if you will;
the injure husband blot out, — do not kill.
from god his sabbath steal, for sport, not need;
why hang the wretch, who steal thy purse for bread?

or shall each schismatic your faith new mould,
or senate stand by patriot mob control?
drive back, you flood! roll, Xanthus, to your spring!
go, crown the people, and subject the king;
break rule to piece, analyse its power,
and every atom to its lord restore:
as mix with knave, or fool, the weak, or brave,
a dupe, a plague, a tyrant, or a slave.
"what shall i do; how hit the happy mean
"betwixt blind submission, and unruly spleen? "
consult your watch; you guide your action by it;
and great its use, though not for ever right.
what though some think implicit faith be due,
and dine at twelve if their town-clock strike two?
or other brave squire their watch away,
disdain a guide, and guess the time of day?
they guess so lucky, or their part so great,
they come on all affair, but just too late;
you neither choose. nor travel through the street,
correct its hand by every one you meet;
yet scruple not, if you shall find at one
it point to six, to set it by the sun.

aim at the bliss that be suit to thy state,
nor vain hope for happiness complete;
some bound imperfect nature must include,
and vice and weakness feel defect of good.
nor be it blind necessity alone:
contrive wisdom, in the whole, we own:
and in that wisdom satisfy may trust,
in its restraint, as merciful, as just.
by these thy selfish passion it correct;
by these from wrong thy weakness it protect;
in sovereign power thy safety heaven design;
some fault permit, as the scourge of thy.
absurd the wish of all man, if express;
each grieve that he be not lord of all the rest.
why then shall we complain, or thankless live,
because not bless with more than god can give?
will you be safe from other? it be but due,
that other also shall be safe from you.
it be not virtue wake the clamorous throng;
each claim the exclusive privilege, to wrong.
when ceaseless faction must embroil the mad;
alike impatient, under of or zad.

how patriot Cromwell fight for liberty!
he shift the yoke, then call the nation free.
he can bear a monarch on the throne;
but vindicate his right — to rule alone.

Macheath roar out for freedom in his cell;
and Tindal wise will extinguish hell.
macheath approve by all who Tyburn awe,
and tremble guilt give tindal page applause.
o sage device, to set the conscience free
from dread! he wink; then say that heaven can see.
both blind plan the paradise of fool;
peace without law, and virtue without rule.

full of the roman let the school-boy quote,
and rant all lucian rhapsody by rote.
god! shall he tremble at a mortal nod!
his generous soul disdain the tyrant rod.
force to submit, at last he taste the fruit;
find wealth and honour blossom from its root.
will thy young soul be like the roman free?
from roman paint thy form of liberty:
the goddess offer gift from either hand;
 the auspicious bonnet, with the praetor wand;
the privilege of that will thou not miss,
bend, and submit beneath the stroke of this.

see Furioso on his keeper frown,
deprive the precious privilege to drown;
great he claim a right to his undo;
the chain that hold he, hold he from his ruin.
kindly proceed; strict discipline dispense;
till water-gruel lower he down to sense.

"why this to i? be i the froward boy,
"or knave to wrong, or madman to destroy? "
will thy denial prove that thou be none!
it be newgate logic: thou be all in one.
blind to their good, to be instruct loath,
 man be but child of a large growth;
if not superior force the will controul,
self-love's a villain, and corrupt the soul;
wild and destructive project fire our brain;
we all be madman, and demand our chain.
know your own sphere, content to be a man;
well please, to be as happy as you can:
lose not all good, by shun ill in vain;
it be wise to enjoy than to complain.
some evil must attend imperfect state;
but discontent new world of ill create.

hush thy complaint, nor quarrel with thy god;
if just the stroke, approve and kiss the rod.
by man if injure, turn thy eye within;
thou will find record some unpunished sin;
then heaven acquit: and with regard to man,
cool the amount of good and evil scan;
if great evil wait the wish redress,
grieve not that thou be free to choose the less.

unknown to court, ambition thirst subdue,
my lesson be to be obscure good;
in life still shade, which no man envy draw,
 to reap the fruit of government and law,
in fortune round, as on the globe i know
no top, no bottom, no where high or low;
whereve station, heaven in prospect still,
that point to i, the zenith of her wheel.

"what! double tax, unpensioned, unpreferred,
"in such bad time be easy? most absurd! "
yet heaven vouchsafe the daily bread entreat;
and these bad time have leave i free to eat it:
my tax, glad pay, their nature shift;
if just, cheap purchase; if unjust, a gift:
nor know ambition any rank so great;
my servant, king, and minister of state!
they watch my couch, my humble roof defend;
their toil the mean, my happiness the end.

my freedom to complete, convince i see
 thy service, heaven, be perfect liberty.
the will, conform to thy celestial voice,
know no restraint! for duty be her choice:
what ill thou send, thankful approve,
as kind correction, pledge of thy love;
in every change, whatever stage i run,
my daily wish succeed; thy will be do.
