the history of porsenna, king of Russia

in two book.

by the same.

book i 

in russia freeze clime some age since
there dwell, historian say, a worthy prince,
who to his people good confine his care,
and fix the basis of his empire there;
enlarge their trade, the liberal art improve,
make nation happy, and himself belove;
to all the neighbour state a terror grow,
the dear delight, and glory of his own.
not like those king who vain seek renown
from country ruin, and from battle win;
those mighty nimrods, who mean law despise,
call murder but a princely exercise,
and if one bloodless sun shall steal away,
cry out with Titus, they have lose a day;
who, to be more than man, themselves debase
beneath the brute, their maker form deface,
raise their title by their God disgrace.
like fame to bold Erostratus we give,
who scorn by less than sacrilege to live;
on holy ruin raise a last name,
and in the temple fire diffuse his shame.
far different praise, and a bright fame,
the virtue of the young porsenna claim;
for by that name the russian king be know,
and sure a noble never adorn the throne.
in war he know the deathful sword to wield,
and seek the thick danger of the field,
a bold commander; but, the storm overblow,
he seem as he be make for peace alone;
then be the golden age again restore,
nor less his justice honour than his sword.
all needless pomp, and outward grandeur spare,
the deed that grace he be his only guard;
no private view beneath a borrow name;
his and the public interest be the same.
in wealth and pleasure let the subject live,
but virtue be the king prerogative;
porsenna there without a rival stand,
and will maintain his right of do good.
nor do his person less attraction wear,
such majesty and sweetness mingle there;
heaven with uncommon art the clay refine,
a proper mansion for so fair a mind;
each look, each action bear peculiar grace,
and love itself be paint on his face.
in peaceful time he suffer not his mind
to rust in sloth, though much to peace incline;
nor wanton in the lap of pleasure lie,
and lose to glory loiter life away;
but active rise ere the prime of day,
through wood and lonely desert love to stray;
with hound and horn to wake the furious bear,
or rouse the tawny lion from his lair;
to rid the forest of the savage brood,
and whet his courage for his country good.

one day, as he pursue the dangerous sport,
attend by the noble of his court,
it chance a beast of more than common speed
spring from the brake, and through the desert flee.
the ardent prince impetuous as the wind
rush on, and leave his lag train behind.
fire with the chace, and full of youthful blood,
over plain, and vale, and woodland wild he ride,
urge his courser speed, nor think the day
how waste, nor how intricate the way;
nor, till the night in dusky cloud come on,
restrain his pace, or find himself alone.
miss his train, he strive to measure back
the road he come, but can not find the track;
still turn to the place he leave before,
and only labour to be lose the more.
the bugle horn, which over his shoulder hang,
so loud he wind, that the forest ring;
in vain, no voice but echo from the ground,
and vocal wood, make mockery of the sound.

and now the gather cloud begin to spread
over the dun face of night a deep shade;
and the hoarse thunder growl from afar,
with herald voice proclaim the approach war;
silence awhile ensue, — then by degree
a hollow wind come mutter through the tree.
sudden the full-fraught sky discharge its store,
of rain and rattle hail a mingle shower;
the active lightning run along the ground;
the fiery bolt by fit be hurl around,
and the wide forest tremble at the sound.
amazement seize the prince; — where can he fly?
no guide to lead, no friendly cottage nigh.
pensive and unresolved awhile he stand,
beneath the scanty covert of the wood;
but drive from thence soon sally forth again,
as chance direct, on the dreary plain;
constrain his melancholy way to take
through many a loathsome bog, and thorny brake,
catch in the thicket, flounder in the lake.
wet with the storm, and weary with the way,
by hunger pinch, himself to beast a prey;
nor wine to cheer his heart, nor fire to burn,
nor place to rest, nor prospect to return.
droop and spiritless, at life despair,
he bid it pass, not worth his farther care;
when sudden he spy a distant light,
that faint twinkle through the gloom of night,
and his heart leap for joy, and bless the welcome sight.
ofttime he doubt, it appear so far,
and hang so high, it be nothing but a star,
or kindle vapour wander through the sky,
but still press on his steed, still keep it in his eye;
till, much fatigue, and many danger past,
at a huge mountain he arrive at last.
there light from his horse, on hand and knee
grope out the darksome road, by slow degree,
crawl or clamber over the rugged way;
the thunder roll above, the flame around he play.
joyful at length he gain the steepy height,
and find the rift whence spring the friendly light.
and here he stop to rest his weary foot,
and weigh the peril he have still to meet;
unsheathed his trusty sword, and deal his eye
with caution round he to prevent surprise;
then summon all the force of his mind,
and enter bold cast his fear behind:
resolve to push his way, whatever withstand,
or perish brave as a monarch shall.

while he the wonder of the place survey,
and through the various cell at random stray,
in a dark corner of the cave he view
somewhat, that in the shape of woman stand;
but more deform than dream can represent
the midnight hag, or poet fancy paint
the Lapland witch, when she her broom bestride,
and scatter storm and tempest as she ride.
she look as nature make she to disgrace
her kind, and cast a blot on all the race;
her shrivel skin with yellow spot besmear
like mouldy record seem; her eye be blear;
her feeble limb with age and palsy shake;
bent be her body, haggard be her look.
from the dark nook outcreep the filthy crone,
and prop upon her crutch come totter on.

the prince in civil guise approach the dame,
tell she his piteous case, and whence he come,
and till Aurora shall the shade expel,
implore a lodging in her friendly cell.
mortal, whoever thou be, the fiend begin,
and as she speak a deadly horror run
through all his frame; his cheek the blood forsake,
chatter his tooth, his knee together strike.
whoever thou be, that with presumption rude
dare on her sacred privacy intrude,
and without licence in our court appear,
know, thou be the first that ever enter here.
but since thou plead excuse, thou be hither bring
more by thy fortune than thy own default,
thy crime, though great, a easy pardon find,
for mercy ever dwell in royal mind;
and will you learn from who indulgent hand
you live, and in who awful presence stand,
know farther, through yond wide extend plain
great eolus the king of tempest reign,
and in this lofty palace make abode,
well suit to his state, and worthy of the god.
the various element his empire own,
and pay their humble homage at his throne;
and hither all the storm and cloud resort,
proud to increase the splendour of his court.
his queen be i, from who the beauteous race
of wind arise, sweet fruit of our embrace!
she scarce have end, when, with wild uproar,
and horrid din, her son impetuous pour
around the cave; come rush in amain
lybs, eurus, Boreas, all the boisterous train;
and close behind they on a whirlwind ride
in cloud majesty the bluster god.
their lock a thousand way be blow about;
their cheek like full-blown bladder strut out;
their boast talk be of the feat the have do,
of tree uprooted, and of town overthrow;
and when they kind turn they to accost
the prince, they almost pierce he with their frost.

the gape hag in fix attention stand,
and at the close of every tale cry — good,
bless with outstretch arm each darling son,
in due proportion to the mischief do.
and where, say she, do little zephyr stray?
know you, my son, your brother rout today?
in what bold deed do he his hour employ?
grant heaven no evil have befall my boy!
never be he know to linger thus before.
scarce have she speak, when at the cavern door
come light trip in a form more fair
than the young poet fond idea be,
when fire with love, he try his utmost art
to paint the beauteous tyrant of his heart.

a satin vest his slender shape confine,
embroider over with flower of every kind,
Flora own work, when first the goddess strive
to win the little wanderer to her love.
of burnish silver be his sandal make,
silver his buskin, and with gem overlay;
a saffron-coloured robe behind he flow,
and add grace and grandeur as he tread.
his wing than lily white to behold,
sprinkle with azure spot, and streak with gold;
so thin their form, and of so light a kind,
that they for ever dance, and flutter in the wind.
around his temple with become air,
in wanton ringlet curl his auburn hair,
and over his shoulder negligent spread;
a wreath of fragrant rose crown his head.

such his attire, but o! no pen can trace,
no word can show the beauty of his face;
so kind! so win! so divine fair!
eternal youth and pleasure flourish there;
there all the little love and grace meet,
and every thing that be soft, and every thing that be sweet.

thou vagrant, cry the dame in angry tone,
where can thou loiter thus so long alone?
little thou care what anxious thought molest,
what pang be labour in a mother breast.
well do you show your duty by your haste,
for thou of all my son be always last;
a child less fondle will have flee more fast.
sure it be a curse on mother, doom to mourn,
where best they love, the least and worst return.

my dear mamma, the gentle youth reply,
and make a low obeisance, cease to chide,
nor wound i with your word, for well you know,
your zephyr bear a part in all your woe;
how great must be his sorrow then to learn
that he himself be the cause of your concern!
nor have i loiter thus have i be free,
but the fair princess of felicity,
entreat i to make some short delay,
and ask by she who can refuse to stay?

surround by the damsel of her court
she seek the shady grove, her love resort;
fresh rose the grass, the flower be mix between,
like rich embroidery on a ground of green,
and in the midst, protect by the shade,
a crystal stream in wild meander play;
while in its bank, the tremble leaf among,
a thousand little bird in concert sing.
close by a mount with fragrant shrub overgrow,
on a cool mossy couch she lay she down;
her air, her posture, all conspire to please;
her head, upon her snowy arm at ease
recline, a study carelessness express;
loose lay her robe, and naked heave her breast.
eager i fly to that delightful place,
and pour a shower of kiss on her face;
now hover over her neck, her breast, her arm,
like bee over flower, and taste all her charm;
and then her lip, and then her cheek i try,
and fan, and wanton round on every side.
o zephyr, cry the fair, thou charm boy,
thy presence only can create i joy;
to i thou be beyond expression dear,
nor can i quit the place while thou be here.
excuse my weakness, madam, when i swear
such gentle word join with so soft a air,
pronounce so sweet from a mouth so fair,
quite ravish all my sense, nor do i know
how long i stay; or when, or where to go.

mean while the damsel debonnair and gay,
prattle around, and laugh the time away:
these in soft note address the ravish ear,
and warble out so sweet, it be heaven to hear;
and those in ring, beneath the greenwood shade,
dance to the melody their fellow make.
some studious of themselves, employ their care
in weave flowery wreath to deck their hair;
while other to some favourite plant convey
refresh shower, and cheere its droop head.
a joy so general spread through all the place,
such satisfaction dwell on every face,
the nymph so kind, so lovely look the queen,
that never eye behold a sweet scene.

porsenna, like a statue fix appear,
and, wrap in silent wonder, gaze and hear;
much he admire the speech, the speaker more,
and dwell on every word, and grieve to find it over.
o gentle youth, he cry, proceed to tell,
in what fair country do this princess dwell;
what region unexplored, what hide coast
can so much goodness, so much beauty boast?

to who the wing god with gracious look,
numberless sweet diffuse while he speak,
thus answer kind — these happy garden lie
far hence remove, beneath a mild sky;
their name — the kingdom of felicity.
sweet scene of endless bliss, enchant ground,
a soil for ever seek, but seldom find;
though in the search all human kind in vain
weary their wit, and waste their life in pain.
in different party, different path they tread,
as reason guide they, or as folly lead;
these wrangle for the place they never shall see,
debate those, if such a place there be;
but not the wise, nor the best can say
where lie the point, or mark the certain way.
some few, by fortune favour for her sport,
have sail in sight of this delightful port;
in thought already seize the bless abode,
and in their fond delirium rank with god.
fruitless attempt! all avenue be keep
by dreadful foe, sentry that never sleep.
here fall detraction dart her poisonous breath
fraught with a thousand sting, and scatter death;
sharp-sighted envy there maintain her post,
and shake her flame brand, and stalk around the coast.
these on the helpless bark their fury pour,
plunge in the wave, or dash against the shore;
teach wretched mortal they be doom to mourn,
and never must rest but in the silent urn.

but say, young monarch, for what name you bear
your mien, your dress, your person, all declare;
and though i seldom fan the freeze north,
yet i have hear of brave porsenna worth.
my brother Boreas through the world have fly,
swell his breath to spread forth your renown;
say, will you choose to visit this retreat,
and view the world where all these wonder meet?
wish you some friend over that tempestuous sea
to bear you safe! behold that friend in i.
my active wing shall all their force employ,
and nimble waft you to the realm of joy;
as once, to gratify the god of love,
i bear fair Psyche to the cyprian grove;
or as Jove bird, descend from on high,
snatch the young trojan tremble to the sky.
there perfect bliss thou may for ever share,
'scape from the busy world, and all its care;
there in the lovely princess shall thou find
a mistress ever bloom, ever kind.
all ecstasy on air porsenna tread,
and to his bosom strain the little god;
with grateful sentiment his heart overflow,
and in the warm word million of thanks bestow.

when Aeolus in surly humour break
their strict embrace, and thus abrupt speak.
enough of compliment; i hate the sport
of meanless word; this be no human court;
where plain and honest be discard quite,
for the more modish title of polite;
where in soft speech hypocrite impart
the venom ill that lurk beneath the heart;
in friendship holy guise their guilt improve,
and kind kill with specious show of love.
for we, — may subject be not use to wait,
and waste their hour to hear a mortal prate;
they must abroad before the rise sun,
and hie they to the sea: there be mischief to be do.
excuse my plainness, sir, but business stand,
and we have storm and shipwreck on our hand.

he end frown, and the noisy rout,
each to his several cell go puff out.
but zephyr, far more courteous than the rest,
to his own bower convey the royal guest;
there on a bed of rose neat lay,
beneath the fragrance of a myrtle shade,
his limb to needful rest the prince apply,
his sweet companion slumber by his side.

book ii.

no soon in her silver chariot rise
the ruddy morn, than sate with repose
the prince address his host; the god awake,
and leap from his couch, thus kind speak.
this early call, my lord, that chide my stay,
require my thanks, and i with joy obey.
like you i long to reach the blissful coast,
hate the slow night, and mourn the moment lose.
the bright rosinda, lovely of the fair
that crowd the princess court, demand my care;
even now with fear and jealousy overbear
upbraid, and call i cruel and forswear.
what sweet reward on all my toil attend,
serve at once my mistress and my friend;
just to my love and to my duty too,
well pay in she, well please in please you.
this say, he lead he to the cavern gate,
and clasp he in his arm, and poise his weight;
then balance his body here and there,
stretch forth his agile wing, and launch in air;
swift as the fiery meteor from on high
shoot to its goal, and gleam athwart the sky.
here with quick fan his labour pinion play;
there glide at ease along the liquid way;
now light skim the plain with even flight;
now proud soar above the mountain height.

spiteful detraction, who envenom hate
sport with the suffering of the good and great,
spare not our prince, but with opprobrious sneer
arraign he of the heinous sin of fear;
that he, so try in arm, who very name
infuse a secret panic where it come,
even he, as high above the cloud he fly,
and spy the mountain lessen to the view,
nought round he but the wide expand air,
helpless, abandon to a stripling care,
strike with the rapid whirl, and dreadful height,
confess some faint alarm, some little fright.

the friendly god, who instant divine
the terror that possess his fellow mind,
to calm his trouble thought, and cheat the way,
describe the nation that beneath they lie,
the name, the climate, and the soil increase,
their arm in war, their government in peace;
show their domestic art, their foreign trade,
what interest they pursue, what league they make.
the sweet discourse so charm porsenna ear,
that lose in joy he have no time for fear.

from scandinavia cold inclement waste
over wide germania various realm they pass,
and now on albion field suspend their toil,
and hover for awhile, and bless the soil.
over the gay scene the prince delight hang,
and gaze in rapture, and forget his tongue;
till burst forth at length. behold, cry he,
the promise isle, the land i long to see;
those plain, those vale, and fruitful hill declare
my queen, my charmer must inhabit there.
thus rave the monarch, and the gentle guide,
please with his error, thus in smile reply.

i must applaud, my lord, the lucky thought;
even i, who know the original, be catch,
and doubt my sense, when i view the draught,
the slow-ascending hill, the lofty wood
that mantle over its brow, the silver flood
wander in maze through the flowery mead,
the herd that in the plenteous pasture feed,
and every object, every scene excite
fresh wonder in my soul, and fill with new delight:
dwell cheerful plenty there, and learned ease,
and art with nature seem at strife to please.
there liberty, delightful goddess, reign,
gladden each heart, and gild the fertile plain;
there firm seat may she ever smile,
and shower her blessing over her favourite isle!
but see, the rise sun reprove our stay.
he say, and to the ocean winge his way,
stretch his course to climates then unknown,
nation that swelter in the burn zone.
there in Peruvian vale a moment stay,
and smooth his wing beneath the citron shade;
then swift his oary pinion ply again,
cross the new world, and seek the southern main;
where many a wet and weary league overpass,
the wish for paradise appear at last.

with force abate now they gentle sweep
over the smooth surface of the shine deep;
the dryad hail they from the distant shore,
the nereid play around, the Triton swim before,
while soft Favonius their arrival greet,
and breathe his welcome in a thousand sweet.

nor pale disease, nor health-consuming care,
nor wrath, nor foul revenge can enter there;
no vapour foggy gloom embrown the sky;
no tempest rage, no angry lightning fly;
but dew, and soft-refreshing air be find,
and pure aetherial azure shine around.
whatever the sweet sabaean soil can boast,
or mecca plain, or india spicy coast;
what hybla hill, or rich oebalia field,
or flowery vale of fame Hymettus yield;
or what of old the hesperian orchard grace;
all that be ever delicious to the taste,
sweet to the smell, or lovely to the view,
collect there with add beauty grow.
high-towering to the heaven the tree be see,
their bulk immense, their leaf for ever green;
so close interwove, the telltale sun
can never descry the deed beneath they do,
but where by fit the sportive gale divide
their tender top, and fan the leaf aside.
like a smooth carpet at their foot lie spread
the mat grass, by bubble fountain feed;
and on each bough the feather choir employ
their melt note, and nought be hear but joy.
the paint flower exhale a rich perfume,
the fruit be mingle with eternal bloom,
and spring and autumn hand in hand appear,
lead on the merry month, and join to cloth the year.
here, over the mountain shaggy summit pour,
from rock to rock the tumble torrent roar,
while beauteous Iris in the vale below
paint on the rise fume her radiant bow.
now through the mead the mazy current stray,
now hide its wander in the myrtle shade;
or in a thousand vein divide its store,
visit each plant, refresh every flower;
over gem and golden sand in murmur flow,
and sweet soothe the soul, and lull to soft repose.

if hunger call, no soon can the mind
express her will to needful food incline,
but in some cool recess, or open glade,
the seat be place, the table neat lay,
and instant convey by magic hand
in comely row the costly dish stand;
meat of all kind that nature can impart,
prepare in all the nice form of art.
a troop of sprightly nymph array in green,
with flowery chaplet crown, come scud in;
with fragrant blossom these adorn the feast,
those with officious zeal attend the guest;
beneath his foot the silken carpet spread,
or sprinkle liquid odour over his head.
other in ruby cup with rose bind
delightful! deal the sparkle nectar round;
or weave the dance, or tune the vocal lay;
the lyre resound, the merry minstrel play,
gay health, and youthful joy overspread the place,
and swell each heart, and triumph in each face.
so when embolden by the vernal air,
the busy bee to bloom field repair;
for various use employ their chemic power;
one cull the snowy pounce, one suck the flower;
again to different work return home,
some steeve the honey, some erect the comb;
all for the general good in concert strive,
and every soul in motion, every limb alive.

and now descend from his flight, the god
on the green turf release his precious load;
there, after mutual salutation past,
and endless friendship vow, they part in haste;
zephyr impatient to behold his love,
the prince in rapture wander through the grove;
now skip on, and sing as he go,
now stop short to give his transport vent;
with sudden gust of happiness oppress,
or stand entranced, or rave like one possess;
his mind afloat, his wander sense quite
overcome with charm, and frantic with delight;
from scene to scene by random step convey,
admire the distant view, explore the secret shade,
dwell on each spot, with eager eye devour
the wood, the lawn, the building, and the bower;
new sweet, new joy at every glance arise,
and every turn create a fresh surprise.

close by the border of a rise wood,
in a green vale a crystal grotto stand;
and over its side, beneath a beechen shade,
in break fall a silver fountain play.
hither, attract by the murmur stream,
and cool recess, the please porsenna come,
and on the tender grass recline choose
to wave his joy awhile, and take a short repose.
the scene invite he, and the wanton breeze
that whisper through the vale, the dance tree,
the warble bird, and rill that gentle creep,
all join their music to prolong his sleep.

the princess for her morning walk prepare;
the female troop attend, a beauteous guard.
array in all her charm appear the fair;
tall be her stature, unconfined her air;
proportion deck her limb, and in her face
lay love enshrine, lie sweet attractive grace
temper the awful beam her eye convey,
and like a lambent flame around she play.
no foreign aid, by mortal lady wear,
from shell and rock her artless charm adorn;
for grant that beauty be by gem increase,
it be render more suspect at the least;
and foul defect, that will escape the sight,
start from the piece, and take a strong light.
her chesnut hair in careless ring around
her temple wave, with pink and jasmine crown,
and, gather in a silken cord behind,
curl to the waist, and float in the wind;
over these a veil of yellow gause she wear,
with amaranth and gold embroider over.
her snowy neck half naked to the view
graceful fall; a robe of purple hue
hang loose over her slender shape, and try
to shade those beauty, that it can not hide.

the damsel of her train with mirth and song
frolic behind, and laugh and sport along.
the bird proclaim their queen from every tree;
the beast run frisk through the grove to see;
the love, the pleasure, and the grace meet
in antic round, and dance before her foot.
by whatever fancy lead, it chance that day
they through the secret valley take their way,
and to the crystal grot advance spy
the prince extend by the fountain side.

he look as, by some skilful hand express,
apollo youthful form retire to rest;
when with the chace fatigue he quit the wood
for pindus vale, and aganippe flood;
there sleep secure, his careless limb display
at ease, encircle by the laurel shade;
beneath his head his sheaf of arrow lie,
his bow unbent hang negligent by.
the slumber prince may boast a equal grace,
so turn his limb, so beautiful his face.

wake he start from the ground in haste,
and see the beauteous choir around he place;
then, summon his sense, run to meet
the queen, and lay he humble at her foot.
deign, lovely princess, to behold, say he,
one, who have traverse all the world to see
those charm, and worship thy divinity:
accept thy slave, and with a gracious smile
excuse his rashness, and reward his toil.
stand motionless the fair with mute surprise,
and read he over with admire eye;
and while she steadfast gaze, a please smart
run thrill through her vein, and reach her heart.
each limb she scan, consider every grace,
and sage judge he of the phoenix' race.
a animal like this she never have know,
and thence conclude there can be but one;
the creature too have all the phoenix' air;
none but the phoenix can appear so fair.
the more she look, the more she think it true,
and call he by that name, to show she know.

o handsome phoenix, for that such you be
we know; your beauty do your breed declare;
and i with sorrow own through all my coast
no other bird can such perfection boast;
for nature form you single and alone:
alas! what pity it be there be but one!
be there a queen so fortunate to show
a aviary of charm bird like you,
what envy will her happiness create
in all, who see the glory of her state!

the prince laugh inward, surprise to find
so strange a speech, so innocent a mind.
the compliment indeed do some offence
to reason, and a little wrong her sense;
he can not let it pass, but tell his name,
and what he be, and whence, and why he come;
and hint other thing of high concern
for he to mention, and for she to learn;
and she have a pierce wit, of wondrous reach
to comprehend whatever he can teach.
thus hand in hand they to the palace walk,
please and instruct with each other talk.

here, shall i tell the furniture expense,
and all the structure vast magnificence,
describe the wall of shine saphire make,
with emerald and pearl the floor inlay,
and how the vault canopy unfold
a mimic heaven, and flame with gem and gold;
or how felicity regales she guest,
the wit, the mirth, the music, and the feast;
and on each part bestow the praise due,
it will tire the writer, and the reader too.
my amorous tale a soft path pursue:
love and the happy pair demand my muse.
o can her art in equal term express
the life they lead, the pleasure they possess!
fortune have never so plenteous before
bestow her gift, nor can she lavish more.
it be heaven itself, it be ecstasy of bliss,
uninterrupted joy, untired excess;
mirth follow mirth the moment dance away;
love claim the night, and friendship rule the day.

their tender care no cold indifference know;
no jealousy disturb their sweet repose;
no sickness, no decay; but youthful grace,
and constant beauty shine in either face.
benumb age may mortal charm invade,
flower of a day that do but bloom and fade;
far different here, on they it only blow
the lilly white, and spread the blush rose;
no conquest over those radiant eye can boast;
they like the star shine bright in its frost;
nor fear its rigour, nor its rule obey;
all season be the fame, and every month be may.

alas! how vain be happiness below!
man soon or late must have his share of woe;
slight be his joy, and fleet as the wind;
his grief wind home, and leave a sting behind.
his lot distinguish from the brute appear
less certain by his laughter than his tear;
for ignorance too oft our pleasure breed,
but sorrow from the reason soul proceed.

if man on earth in endless bliss can be,
the boon, young prince, have be bestow on thou.
bright shine thy star, thy fortune flourish fair,
and seem secure beyond the reach of care,
and so may still have be, but anxious thought
have dash thy cup, and thou must taste the draught.

it so befall, as on a certain day
this happy couple toy their time away,
he ask how many charm hour be fly,
since on her slave her heaven of beauty shine.
shall i consult my heart, cry he, the rate
be small, a week will be the utmost date:
but when my mind reflect on action past,
and count its joy, time must have flee more fast.
perhaps i may have say, three month be go.
three month! reply the fair, three month alone!
know that three hundred year have roll away,
since at my foot the lovely phoenix lay.
three hundred year! re-echo back the prince,
a whole three hundred year complete since
i land here! o! whither then be fly
my dear friend, my subject, and my throne?
how strange, alas! how alter shall i find
each earthly thing, each scene i leave behind!
who know i now? on who shall i depend
to gain my right? where shall i find a friend?
my crown perhaps may grace a foreign line,
a race of king, that know not i nor i;
who reign may wish my death, his subject treat
my claim with scorn, and call their prince a cheat.
oh have my life be end as begin!
my destine stage, my race of glory run,
i shall have die well please; my honour name
have live, have flourish in the list of fame;
reflect now my mind with horror see
the sad survey, a scene of shameful ease,
the odious blot, the scandal of my race,
scarce know, and only mention with disgrace.

the fair behold he with impatient eye,
and red with anger make this warm reply.
ungrateful man! be this the kind return
my love deserve; and can you thus with scorn
reject what once you prize, what once you swear
surpass all charm, and make even glory poor?
what gift have i bestow, what favour show!
make you partaker of my bed and throne;
three century preserve in youthful prime,
safe from the rage of death, and injury of time,
weak argument! for glory reign above
the feeble tie of gratitude and love,
i urge they not, nor will request your stay;
the phantom glory call, and i obey;
all other virtue be regardless quite,
sink and absorb in that superior light.
go then, barbarian, to thy realm return,
and show thyself unworthy my concern;
go, tell the world, your tender heart can give
death to the princess, by who care you live.

at this a deadly pale her cheek overspread,
cold tremble seize her limb, her spirit flee;
she sink into his arm: the prince be move,
feel all her grief, for still he great love.
he sigh, he wish he can forget his throne;
confine his thought, and live for her alone;
but glory shoot he deep, the venom dart
be fix within, and rankle at his heart;
he can not hide its wound, but pine away
like a sick flower, and languish in decay.
a age no long like a month appear,
but every month become a hundred year.

felicity be grieve, and can not bear
a scene so change, a sight of so much care.
she tell he with a look of cold disdain,
and seem ease, as woman well can feign,
he may depart at will; a mild air
will mend his health; he be no prisoner there;
she keep he not, and wish he never may find
cause to regret the place he leave behind;
which once he love, and where he still must own,
he have at least some little pleasure know.

if these prophetic word awhile destroy
his peace, the former balance it in joy.
he thank she for her kind concern, but choose
to quit the place, the rest let heaven dispose.
for fate, on mischief bend, pervert the will,
and first infatuate who it mean to kill.

Aurora now, not, as she will to rise,
in gay attire tinge with a thousand die,
but sober-sad in solemn state appear,
clad in a dusky veil bedew with tear.
thick mantling cloud beneath her chariot spread,
a fade wreath hang droop from her head.
the sicken sun emit a feeble ray,
half drown in fog, and struggle into day.
some black event the threaten sky foretell.
porsenna rise to take his last farewell.
a curious vest the mournful princess bring,
and armour by the lemnian artist wrought;
a shine lance with secret virtue store,
and of resistless force a magic sword;
caparison and gem of wondrous price,
and load he with gift and good advice;
but chief she give, and what he most will need,
the fleet of her stud, a fly steed.
the swift grifippo, say the afflict fair,
(such be the courser name) with speed shall bear,
and place you safe in your native air;
assist against the foe, with matchless may
ravage the field, and turn the doubtful fight;
with care protect you till the danger cease,
your trust in war, your ornament in peace.
but this, i warn, beware; whatever shall lay
to intercept your course, or tempt your stay,
quit not your saddle, nor your speed abate,
till safe land at your palace gate.
on this alone depend your weal or woe;
such be the will of fate, and so the god foreshow.
he in the soft term repay her love,
and vow, nor age, nor absence shall remove
his constant faith, and sure she can not blame
a short divorce due to his injure fame.
the debt discharge, then shall her soldier come
gay from the field, and flush with conquest, home;
with equal ardour her affection meet,
and lie his laurel at his mistress foot.
he cease, and sigh take a kind adieu;
then urge his steed; the fierce grifippo fly;
with rapid force outstrip the lag wind,
and leave the blissful shore, and weep fair behind;
now over the sea pursue his airy flight,
now scour the plain, and climb the mountain height.

thus drive on at speed the prince have run
near half his course, when, with the set sun,
as through a lonely lane he chance to ride,
with rock and bush fence on either side,
he spy a waggon full of wing, that lie
break and overturn across the narrow way.
the helpless driver on the dirty road
lay struggle, crush beneath the incumbent load.
never in human shape be see before
a wight so pale, so feeble, and so poor.
comparison of age will do he wrong,
for nestor self, if place by he, be young.
his limb be naked all, and wear so thin,
the bone seem start through the parchment skin,
his eye half drown in rheum, his accent weak,
bald be his head; and furrow be his cheek.

the conscious steed stop short in deadly fright,
and back recoil stretch his wing for flight.
when thus the wretch with supplicate tone,
and rueful face, begin his piteous moan,
and, as he speak, the tear run trickle down.
o gentle youth, if pity ever incline
thy soul to generous deed, if ever thy mind
be touch with soft distress, extend thy care
to save a old man life, and ease the load i bear.
so may propitious heaven your journey speed,
prolong your day, and all your vow succeed.

move with the prayer the kind porsenna stay,
too nobly-minded to refuse his aid,
and, prudence yield to superior grief,
leap from his steed, and run to his relief;
remove the weight, and give the prisoner breath,
just choke, and gasp on the verge of death.
then reach his hand, when light with a bind
the grizzly spectre vault from the ground,
seize he with sudden gripe, the astonish prince
stand horror-struck, and thoughtless of defence.

o king of Russia, with a thunder sound
bellow the ghastly fiend, at length thou be find.
receive the ruler of mankind, and know,
my name be time, thy everdreaded foe.
these foot be founder, and the wing you see
wear to the pinion in pursuit of thou;
through all the world in vain for age seek,
but fate have doom thou now; and thou be catch.
then round his neck his arm he nimble cast,
and seize he by the throat, and grasp he fast;
till force at length the soul forsake its seat,
and the pale breathless corpse fall bleed at his foot.

scarce have the curse spoiler leave his prey,
when, so it chance, young zephyr pass that way;
too late his presence to assist his friend,
a sad, but helpless witness of his end.
he chase, and fan, and strive in vain to cure
his stream wound; the work be do too sure.
now light with a soft embrace uprear
the lifeless load, and bath it in his tear;
then to the blissful seat with speed convey,
and graceful on the mossy carpet lay
with decent care, close by the fountain side,
where first the princess have her phoenix spy.
there with sweet flower his lovely limb he strew,
and give a part kiss, and sigh and tear bestow.

to that sad solitude the weep dame,
wild with her loss, and swell with sorrow, come.
there be she wont to vent her grief, and mourn
those dear delight that must no more return.
thither that morn with more than usual care
she speed, but o what joy to find he there!
as just arrive, and weary with the way,
retire to soft repose her hero lie.
now near approach she begin to creep
with careful step, loath to disturb his sleep;
till quite overcome with tenderness she fly,
and round his neck her arm in transport throw.
but, when she find he dead, no tongue can tell
the pang she feel; she shriek, and swoon fall.
wake, with loud lament she pierce the sky,
and fill the affright forest with her cry.
that fatal hour the palace gate she bar,
and fix around the coast a strong guard;
now rare appear, and at distance see,
with crowd of black misfortune place between;
mischief of every kind, corrod care,
and fear, and jealousy, and dark despair.
and since that day (the wretched world must own
these mournful truth by sad experience know)
no mortal ever enjoy that happy clime,
and every thing on earth submit to time.
