to the right Hon. sir ROBERT Walpole.

by the honourable mr. d —

though strength of genius, by experience teach,
give thou to sound the depth of human thought,
to trace the various work of the mind,
and rule the secret spring that rule mankind;
rare gift! yet, Walpole, will thou condescend
to listen, if thy unexperienced friend
can aught of use impart, though void of skill,
and raise attention by sincere good will:
for friendship sometime want of part supply,
the heart may furnish what the head deny.
as, when the rapid Rhine over swell tide,
to grace old ocean coast, in triumph ride,
though rich in source, he drain a thousand spring,
nor scorn the tribute each small rivulet bring:
so thou shall hence absorb each feeble ray,
each dawn of meaning in thy bright day;
shall like, or where thou can not like, excuse,
since no mean interest shall profane the muse;
no malice wrap in truth disguise offend,
no flattery taint the freedom of a friend.

when first a generous mind survey the great,
and view the crowd that on their fortune wait,
please with the show, (though little understand,)
he only seek the power, to do the good:
think, till he try, it be godlike to dispose,
and gratitude still spring when bounty flow;
that every grant sincere affection win,
and where our want have end, our love begin.
but they who long the path of state have tread,
learn from the clamour of the murmur crowd,
which cram, yet crave, still their gate besiege,
it be easy far to give, than to oblige.
this of thy conduct seem the nice part,
the chief perfection of the statesman art,
to give to fair assent a fair face,
or soften a refusal into grace.
but few there be, that can be free kind,
or know to fix the favour on the mind;
hence some whenever they will oblige, offend,
and while they make the fortune, lose the friend:
still give unthanked; still squander, not bestow;
for great man want not what to give, but how.
the race of man that follow court, it be true,
think all they get, and more than all, their due;
still ask, but never consult their own desert,
and measure by their interest, not their part.
from this mistake so many man we see
but ill become the thing they wish to be:
hence discontent and fresh demand arise,
more power, more favour in the great man eye
all feel a want, though none the cause suspect,
but hate their patron for their own defect.
such none can please, but who reform their heart,
and when he give they place, give they part.
as these overprize their worth, so sure the great
may sell their favour at too dear a rate.
when merit pine while clamour be prefer,
and long attachment wait among the herd;
when no distinction, where distinction due,
mark from the many the superior few;
when strong cabal constrain they to be just,
and make they give at last, because they must;
what hope that man of real worth shall prize
what neither friendship give, nor merit buy.
the man who just over the whole preside,
his well-weighed choice with wise affection guide:
know when to stop with grace, and when advance,
nor give from importunity, or chance;
but think how little gratitude be owe,
when favour be extort, not bestow.
when safe on shore ourselves, we see the crowd
surround the great, importunate and loud,
through such a tumult it be no easy task,
to drive the man of real worth to ask;
surround thus, and giddy with the show,
it be hard for great man right to bestow;
from hence so few be skill in either case,
to ask with dignity, or give with grace.
sometime the great, seduce by love of part,
consult our genius, but neglect our heart;
please with the glitter spark that genius fling,
they lift we tower on the eagle wing:
mark out the flight by which themselves begin,
and teach our dazzle eye to bear the sun,
until we forget the hand that make we great,
and grow to envy, not to emulate.
to emulate a generous warmth imply,
to reach the virtue that make great man rise;
but envy wear a mean malignant face,
and aim not at their virtue, but their place.
such to oblige, how vain be the pretence!
when every favour be a fresh offence,
by which superior power be still imply,
and while it help the fortune, hurt the pride.
slight be the hate neglect or hardship breed,
but those who hate from envy, hate indeed.
since so perplex the choice, who shall we trust?
methinks, i hear thou cry, the brave, the just;
the man by no mean fear or hope control,
who serve thou from affection, not for gold!
we love the honest, and esteem the brave,
despise the coxcomb, but detest the knave.
no show of part the true wise seduce,
to think that knave can be of real use.
the man who contradict the public voice,
and strive to dignify a worthless choice,
attempt a task that on the choice reflect,
and lend we light to point out new defect.
one worthless man that gain what he pretend,
disgust a thousand unpretend friend;
and since no art can make a counter pass,
or add the weight of gold to mimic brass,
when prince to bad over their image join,
they more debase the stamp than raise the coin;
be thy that care, true merit to reward,
and gain that good; nor will the task be hard.
soul find alike so quick by nature blend,
a honest man be more than half thy friend.
he no mere view, no haste to rise, shall sway,
thy choice to sully, or thy trust betray.
ambition here shall at due distance stand,
nor be wit dangerous in a honest hand:
beside, if fail at the bottom lie,
he view those fail with a lover eye.
though small his genius, let he do his best,
our wish and belief supply the rest:
let other barter servile faith for gold,
his friendship be not to be buy or sell.
fierce opposition he unmoved shall face,
modest in favour, dare in disgrace;
to share thy adverse fate alone pretend,
in power a servant, out of power a friend.
here pour thy favour in a ample flood,
indulge thy boundless thirst of do good.
nor think that good alone to he confine;
such to oblige be to oblige mankind.
if thus thy mighty master step thou trace,
the brave to cherish, and the good to grace,
long shall thou stand from rage and faction free,
and teach we long to love the king and thou;
or fall a victim, dangerous to the foe,
and make he tremble when he strike the blow;
while honour, gratitude, affection join,
to deck thy close, and brighten thy decline.
illustrious doom! the great when thus displace,
with friendship guard, and with virtue grace,
in awful ruin, like Rome senate, fall
the prey and worship of the wonder Gaul.

no doubt to genius some reward be due,
(exclude that be satirize you):
but yet believe thy undesigning friend,
when truth and genius for thy choice contend,
though both have weight, when in the balance cast,
let probity be first, and part the last.

on these foundation if thou dare be great,
and check the growth of folly and deceit,
when party rage shall drop through length of day,
and calumny be ripen into praise,
then future time shall to thy worth allow
that fame, which envy will call flattery now.

thus far my zeal, though for the task unfit,
have point out the rock where other split:
by that inspire, though stranger to the nine,
and negligent of any fame but thy,
i take that friendly, but superfluous part,
that act from nature what i teach from art.
