hymn to hope.

by the same.

all hail, bright hope! thou, when the fatal box,
 replete with ill, be send by angry Jove
 in punishment of japhet dare son,
 when every woe of fearful name fly forth
 to vex the human race, thou kind deign'dst
 to stay behind, man gentle comforter,
 life balm and blessing! or, without the aid
 of truth-assimilated fiction, thou
 be give by god himself, a cheere light
 to guide man foot, drive from fair eden grove
 across the untracked wilderness of life
 to heaven bless mansion: where and where alone
 thy office, friendly hope, shall sweet cease
 to full fruition yield! but on earth,
 nay, not, perchance, even in fair eden grove,
 be thy assuasive consolation vain:
 for what be life, or what its high scene
 of boast happiness, if present bliss
 bound the horizon of our view; nor hope,
 with eagle eye, ken aught beyond, on which
 to fix the future, ardent, heart desire,
 to fill the soul, and make the rapid wish
 run over with plenitude of joy? — vain, vain,
 to man felicity, in youth or age,
 the present draught of pleasure, though once wish
 with all the eagerness of pant thirst. 
deep, deep he drink, and long for more! from hope
 to hope he spring: he view, and still extend
 his view: over cloud-captain Alps new Alps arise! 
he gain the summit: still the prospect wide
 enlarge to his eye: forward he fare
 nor cease to ascend, till high in heaven
 he ride at anchor, and then hope not more. 

but o! thou general blessing, smile hope! 
thy lucid ray, not only lead we on
 from view to view; not only do thou cheer
 with expectation sweet of future good;
 but with serenity of present bliss
 thou fill the heart expectant! hope can give
 habitual good-humour! to the soul
 a vital heat: she quicken the still part,
 nay, even in motion keep the spring of life! 
and when most indolent, and most remiss,
 or rouze, or preserve the mind awake. 

see, too, how few — and even those few how short —
 be actual enjoyment! but through thou,
 bless hope, we gain a taste, delicious taste
 of pleasure possible! taste, not less sweet,
 perchance, than real: for kind hope bestow
 a bliss in expectation, not less full,
 and full oft than ripe fruition bring:
 fruition, haughty nymph, she never deign
 to walk with humble hope, who, at her sight
 retire, abash, unnoticed, and unthanked! 

but o! bless comforter, ingrate to thou
 let i not ever prove, shall wish success
 crown my heart hope! let i not ever forget
 the dear indulgence thy soothe view
 have to my soul present! yet, o yet —
 thy promise consummation too, too long
 delay, the heart in deep despondence sigh,
 and sicken sad with care. o then, indulge
 thy votary prayer, nor ever let i lose
 thy cheere aspect; never let the night
 of black despondence, with its dismal veil,
 my little prospect in thick darkness wrap! 
nor yet too long delay to grant my wish
 accomplishment, if worthy! so my soul
 invigorate still shall onward press
 to more and more improvement: nor grow faint
 till the big bud of hope terrestrial burst
 to blossom full and fair in better clime! 

but say, bright hope, what number shall be find,
 worthy to sing thy praise: for that thy hand
 not only to the happy life impart
 its zest, its relish; but with tender care
 be stretch forth to assuage the wretch woe,
 to soothe the anguish of disease and pain;
 and soften sad adversity rough bed! 
thou only cheap and universal cure
 of human ill — of human sorrow, thou
 best comforter, and oft, full oft, alas! 
the only comforter the wretched find! 

ah! see from that unfortunate, overwhelm
 in the deep gulph of sorrow, with what speed,
 what cruel speed, as from contagion, all
 with one consent be fly! — and will none,
 for gentle pity sake, remain behind
 to comfort the distress! yes, faithful hope
 benevolent stay! and, flatterer kind,
 her far-foreseeing tube apply, through which
 the eye, though dim with mourning, oft discern
 future and happy day, through the black gloom
 of melancholy prospect shine bright. 

ah, honest flatterer! — yes, for once the muse
 commend, what most the worthy mind abhor,
 and call thou honest flatterer: for while all
 assiduous join to adulate the bless,
 hope, tender hope alone, with soft concern,
 flatter the unhappy! and when every friend
 fly from the shipwrecked, naked, ruin wretch;
 when every woe, in dire array, crowd round,
 even then, in that sad hour, hope still remain,
 as loath to leave (divine philanthrophist!) 
her labour of disinterest love! 
see — with those anxious sailor, see she watch
 her eye! almost exhaust on the mast,
 the top-mast of yond high admiral
 just peep from those wave! that have engulf
 the gallant vessel with its hapless crew,
 save those who sit, as if for bitter fate
 reserve, long wakeful night and anxious day
 high on the top-mast! fear instant death
 from each insult wave! yet, yet, not yet
 will hope desert they! see, she strain her eye
 far over the trackless occan: see, she look,
 with eager expectation, look around! 
wild wind alone be hear: green wave alone,
 foam with fury, be behold! o hope,
 bless hope! forsake they not: shall thou forsake,
 and from the top mast fly, they fall, they sink
 irrevocable lose! — she will not go;
 still will she watch; nor watch in vain! she spy
 a white sail, rise from the wave: it come;
 behold! it come, and in its bosom bear
 thrice-precious life! they faint for joy! their foot
 scarce bear they tremble to the welcome bark;
 where safe board — hope she golden wing
 plume, and exult shoot across the deep,
 quick as in winter sky the radiant star! 

but whither thus precipitate her flight
 urge the general comforter? behold
 where, stretch upon the bed of sore disease,
 wear out with pain, the sick man languid lie! 
she come, bless hope! and lo! her kindly arm
 rear from the pillow his enfeeble head,
 and lenient sooth his melancholy heart! 
now, point to fair health, with roseate bloom,
 rekindle vigour in the mantling cheek:
 now, to the robe of white and crown of gold,
 reserve for Christ true servant, in the realm
 of everlasting day! — thrice faithful hope,
 thou, like the heart, live first, and dy last;
 nor, even in death extreme pang, will leave
 the flutter soul — but, when earth fear and joy
 sink into darkness all, thy beam light
 unvelope prospect new, and better far,
 prospect which make man, man: and cause the soul
 in death to triumph, and defy the grave. 

nor cease with the man of sorrow, stretch
 on bed of sickness, hore indulgent aid:
 the balm of comfort, see, how she present
 to the dear tender partner of his heart,
 the wife, with weep love, beside the couch
 watch solicitous, with sleepless eye! 
hope show she the fond husband, to her arm
 once more restore: hope to her ache heart
 the value parent represent, once more
 smile amid his child: and endear,
 as thus endanger, tenfold more endear! 

look through the vary scene of hapless life,
 hope, all-beneficent, be ever find
 whereve be find affliction! none so low
 can sink, but hope will to their wretchedness
 descend, and point out consolation star
 brighten in better sky! not even the slave,
 load with cruel chain, deep in the mine
 of rich potosi, toil, though from light
 ever sequester of all-cheering day,
 can, from her light, be hide! see, through his soul
 it shoot illuminate: and afford
 bright blessing glance of his native land,
 recover freedom, and rejoice friend! 

all hail, bright hope! o, through the weary way
 of this bad world, be thou the pilgrim staff
 on which my hand may lean, and find support
 against all despondency! yet, goddess! say,
 while on thy altar all of human race
 devout sacrifice; while to thy shrine
 all mortal bend the knee; whence do it hap,
 that oft the mournful tongue proclaim thou false,
 and dare to desecrate thy hallow name,
 deceitful call thou; and apt to slide
 full oft from the embrace, even in the hour
 of high expectation: often find
 to promise what thou never do bestow? 

 "vain mortal — (yes, with serious solemn heed,
 i mark thy word, celestial!) —" mortal! know,
 "it be not in hope, it be in yourself, deceive
" and still deceive, that the error lie:
 "short-lived, and of a span, you stretch your hope,
" proud hope of sublunary happiness,
 "far into time, as if of time secure,
" as if on earth immortal! or those hope
 "on object fix, incapable to bless,
" when grant to your wish! or, more vain,
 "by self-delusion blind, fancy-led,
" you idle hope, where reason self recoil:
 "thus render your existence, dream at best,
" still more a dream! — less credulous and fond,
 "mortal, be-wise; either as mortal hope,
" or, still more wise, hope as immortal! " yes! 
with sacred awe thy counsel i receive,
 bless teacher: o assist i to obey
 its dictate: far above this wane moon,
 teach i to rise over momentary bliss,
 triumphant: and to soar on thy bright wing
 beyond the lessen cloud, beyond all time
 deep into vast immensity! where thou,
 though bear of immortality, and proof
 of thy high parent glory — where, even thou,
 earth blessing — never, never shall be know! 

then, farewell, hope, for ever! — then adieu,
 sweet expectation; when each ravish sense
 live in the plenitude of God own joy! 
but, till that hour, o deign, all-cheering hope,
 to smile before i: gild my prospect round
 with thy revive splendour: full in view
 present the vast reality, which wait
 the immortal stranger, travel from this world
 to his eternal home, his rest, his haven! 
so shall my heart never with impatient throb
 pant for the uncertain, sublunary gift
 of this e'er-changing life! so reason hand
 with fortitude attend, on shall lead
 to the neat cottage of retire content,
 where dwell man true happiness! there lodge,
 like Caesar, with a generous disdain
 present possession noble i will despise,
 and from they frank part, in the full hope,
 hope, which can never deceive, nor mount too high,
 hope of possession, future, better far:
 boundless duration: bliss immutable! 

hail then, bright hope! of immortality
 true, genuine daughter! hail, man chief good,
 and his best portion, while no mor than man! 
smile over the human race: and still vouchsafe
 to gild, to gladden all their joy: to soothe
 with gentle blandishment their woe: to fill
 with just contempt of transitory life! 
still realize to their rapture view
 heaven high felicity! o! while strong faith,
 with steady finger, point we to our home,
 do thou invigorate our active foot
 along the rugged way: full, full in sight
 place that home glory: while thy sister love
 charm we the while, the weary journey through;
 and, when it end, receive we from the arm
 of faith and thou; to take up our abode
 in realm, where god and love be all in all. 
