a tale of the miser, and the poet. 

write about the year 1709. 

a wit, transport with indite,
 unpaid, unpraised, yet ever write;
 who, for all fight and favourite friend,
 have poem at his finger end;
 for new event be still provide;
 yet now desirous to be ride,
 he pack'd-up every ode and ditty,
 and in vacation leave the city;
 so rapt with figure, and allusion,
 with secret passion, sweet confusion;
 with sentence from play wellknown,
 and thousand couplet of his own;
 that even the chalky road look gay,
 and seem to he the milky way. 
but fortune, who the ball be toss,
 and poet ever will be cross,
 mislead the steed, which ill he guide,
 where several gloomy path divide. 
the steep in descent he follow,
 enclose by rock, which time have hollow;
 till, he believe, alive and boot,
 he will reach the shade by Homer quote. 
but all, that he can there discover,
 be, in a pit with thorn grow over,
 old Mammon dig, strain, sweat,
 as bag of gold he thence be get;
 who, when reprove for such dejection
 by he, who live on high reflection,
 reply; brave sir, your time be end,
 and poetry no more befriend. 
i hide this coin, when Charles be sway;
 when all be riot, mask, play;
 when witty beggar be in fashion,
 and learning have overrun the nation. 
but, since mankind be so much wise,
 that none be value like the miser,
 i draw it hence, and now these sum
 in proper soil grow up to plumb;
 which gather once, from that rich minute
 we rule the world, and all that be in it. 

but, quoth the poet, can you raise,
 as well as plumb-tree, groves of bay? 
where you, which i will choose much rather,
 may fruit of reputation gather? 
will man of quality, and spirit,
 regard you for intrinsic merit? 
and seek you out, before your better,
 for conversation, wit, and letter? 

fool, quoth the churl, who know no breed;
 have these be time for such proceed? 
instead of honour, and reward,
 be you not slight, or discard? 
what have you meet with, but disgrace? 
your prior can not keep in place;
 and your van-brug have find no quarter,
 but for his dabble in the Morter. 
Rowe no advantage can hit on,
 till verse he leave, to write north-briton. 
Philips, who be by the shilling know,
 never see a shilling of his own. 
meet Philomela, in the town
 her due proportion of renown? 
what preference have ardelia see,
 the expel, though she can write the spleen? 
of coach, or table, can you brag,
 or better clothes than poet rag? 
do wealthy kindred, when they meet you,
 with kindness, or distinction, greet you? 
or have your late flatter hero
 enrich you like the roman maroes? 

no — quoth the man of break slumber:
 yet we have patron for our number;
 there be mecaenas among they. 

quoth Mammon, pray sir, do not wrong they;
 but in your censure use a conscience,
 nor charge great man with thriftless nonsense:
 since they, as your own poet sing,
 now grant no worth in any thing
 but so much money as it will bring. 
then, never more from your endeavour
 expect preferment, or less favour. 
but if you will escape contempt, or worse,
 be sure, put money in your purse;
 money! which only can relieve you
 when fame and friendship will deceive you. 

sir, (quoth the poet humble bow,
 and all that he have say allow)
 behold i and my airy fancy
 subdue, like giant in romance. 
i here submit to your discourse;
 which since experience too enforce,
 i, in that solitary pit,
 your gold withdraw, will hide my wit
 till time, which hasty advance,
 and give to all new turn and chance
 again may bring it into use;
 roscommon may again produce;
 new augustean day revive,
 when wit shall please, and poet thrive. 
till when, let those converse in private,
 who taste what other do arrive at;
 yield that mammonist surpass we,
 and let the bank out-swell Parnassus. 
