slavery, a poem.

if heaven have into being deign to call
 thy light, o liberty! to shine on all;
 bright intellectual sun! why do thy ray
 to earth distribute only partial day? 
since no resist cause from spirit flow
 thy penetrate essence to oppose;
 no obstacle by nature hand impress,
 thy subtle and ethereal beam arrest;
 nor motion law can speed thy active course,
 nor strong repulsion power obstruct thy force;
 since there be no convexity in mind,
 why be thy genial beam to part confine? 
while the chill north with thy bright ray be bless,
 why shall fell darkness half the south invest? 
be it decree, fair freedom! at thy birth,
 that thou shall never irradiate all the earth? 
while Britain bask in thy full blaze of light,
 why lie sad Afric quench in total night? 

thou only, sober goddess! i attest,
 in smile chastise, and decent grace dress. 
not that unlicensed monster of the crowd,
 who roar terrific burst in peal so loud,
 deafen the ear of peace: fierce faction tool;
 of rash sedition bear, and mad misrule;
 who stubborn mouth, reject reason rein,
 no strength can govern, and no skill restrain;
 who magic cry the frantic vulgar draw
 to spurn at order, and to outrage law;
 to tread on grave authority and power,
 and shake the work of age in a hour:
 convulse her voice, and pestilent her breath,
 she rave of mercy, while she deal out death:
 each blast be fate; she dart from either hand
 red conflagration over the astonish land;
 clamour for peace, she rend the air with noise,
 and to reform a part, the whole destroy. 

o, plaintive southern! who impassion strain
 so oft have wake my languid muse in vain! 
now, when congenial theme her care engage,
 she burn to emulate thy glow page;
 her fail effort mock her fond desire,
 she share thy feeling, not partake thy fire. 
strange power of song! the strain that warm the heart
 seem the same inspiration to impart;
 touch by the kindle energy alone,
 we think the flame which melt we be our own;
 deceive, for genius we mistake delight,
 charm as we read, we fancy we can write. 

though not to i, sweet bard, thy power belong,
 fair truth, a hallow guide! inspire my song. 
here art will weave her gay flower in vain,
 for truth the bright invention will disdain. 
for no fictitious ill these number flow,
 but live anguish, and substantial woe;
 no individual grief my bosom melt,
 for million feel what oronoko feel:
 fire by no single wrong, the countless host
 i mourn, by rapine drag from afric coast. 

perish the illiberal thought which will debase
 the native genius of the sable race! 
perish the proud philosophy, which seek
 to rob they of the power of equal thought! 
do then the immortal principle within
 change with the casual colour of a skin? 
do matter govern spirit? or be mind
 degrade by the form to which it be join? 

no: they have head to think, and heart to feel,
 and soul to act, with firm, though err zeal;
 for they have keen affection, kind desire,
 love strong as death, and active patriot fire;
 all the rude energy, the fervid flame,
 of high-souled passion, and ingenuous shame:
 strong, but luxuriant virtue bold shoot
 from the wild vigour of a savage root. 

nor weak their sense of honour proud control,
 for pride be virtue in a pagan soul;
 a sense of worth, a conscience of desert,
 a high, unbroken haughtiness of heart;
 that self-same stuff which erst proud empire sway,
 of which the conqueror of the world be make. 
capricious fate of man! that very pride
 in Afric scourge, in Rome be deify. 

no muse, o qua-shi! shall thy deed relate,
 no statue snatch thou from oblivious fate! 
for thou be bear where never gentle muse
 on valour grave the flower of genius strew;
 and thou be bear where no record page
 plucks the fair deed from time be devour rage. 
have fortune place thou on some happy coast,
 where polish soul heroic virtue boast,
 to thou, who seek a voluntary grave,
 the uninjured honour of thy name to save,
 who generous arm thy barbarous master spare,
 altar have smoke, and temple have be rear. 

whenever to asric shore i turn my eye,
 horror of deep, deadly guilt arise;
 i see, by more than fancy mirror show,
 the burn village, and the blaze town:
 see the dire victim tear from social life,
 the shriek babe, the agonize wife! 
she, wretch forlorn! be drag by hostile hand,
 to distant tyrant sell, in distant land! 
transmit misery, and successive chain,
 the sole sad heritage her child obtain! 
even this last wretched boon their foe deny,
 to weep together, or together die. 
by felon hand, by one relentless stroke,
 see the fond link of feeling nature break! 
the fibre twist round a parent heart,
 tear from their grasp, and bleed as they part. 

hold, murderer, hold! nor aggravate distress;
 respect the passion you yourself possess;
 even you, of ruffian heart, and ruthless hand,
 love your own offspring, love your native land. 
ah! leave they holy freedom cheer smile,
 the heaven-taught fondness for the parent soil;
 revere affection mingle with our frame,
 in every nature, every clime the same;
 in all, these feeling equal sway maintain;
 in all the love of home and freedom reign:
 and tempe vale, and parch angola sand,
 one equal fondness of their son command. 
the unconquered savage laugh at pain and toil,
 bask in freedom beam which gild his native soil. 

do thirst of empire, do desire of fame,
 (for these be specious crime) our rage inflame? 
no: sordid lust of gold their fate control,
 the base appetite of base soul;
 gold, better gain, by what their ripen sky,
 their fertile field, their art and mine supply. 

what wrong, what injury do oppression plead
 to smooth the horror of the unnatural deed? 
what strange offence, what aggravate sin? 
they stand convict — of a dark skin! 
barbarian, hold! the opprobrious commerce spare,
 respect his sacred image which they bear:
 though dark and savage, ignorant and blind,
 they claim the common privilege of kind;
 let malice strip they of each other plea,
 they still be man, and man shall still be free. 
insult reason loathe the invert trade —
 dire change! the agent be the purchase make! 
perplex, the baffle muse involve the tale;
 nature confound, well may language fail! 
the outrage goddess with abhorrent eye
 see man the traffic, soul the merchandise! 

plead not, in reason palpable abuse,
 their sense of feeling callous and obtuse:
 from head to heart lie nature plain appeal,
 though few can reason, all mankind can feel. 
though wit may boast a lively dread of shame,
 a lofty sense of wrong refinement claim;
 though polish manner may fresh want invent,
 and nice distinction nice soul torment;
 though these on fine spirit heavy fall,
 yet natural evil be the same to all. 
though wound there be which reason force may heal,
 there need no logic sure to make we feel. 
the nerve, however untutored, can sustain
 a sharp, unutterable sense of pain;
 as exquisite fashion in a slave,
 as where unequal fate a sceptre give. 
sense be as keen where congo son preside,
 as where proud Tiber roll his classic tide. 
rhetoric or verse may point the feeling line,
 they do not whet sensation, but define. 
do ever slave less feel the gall chain,
 when Zeno prove there be no ill in pain? 
their misery philosophic quirk deride,
 slave groan in pang disown by stoic pride. 

when the fierce sun dart vertical his beam,
 and thirst and hunger mix their wild extreme;
 when the sharp iron wound his inmost soul,
 and his strain eye in burn anguish roll;
 will the parch negro find, ere he expire,
 no pain in hunger, and no heat in fire? 

for he, when fate his torture frame destroy,
 what hope of present fame, or future joy? 
for this, have hero shorten nature date;
 for that, have martyr glad meet their fate;
 but he, forlorn, no hero pride sustain,
 no martyr blissful vision sooth his pain;
 sullen, he mingle with his kindred dust,
 for he have learn to dread the christian trust;
 to he what mercy can that power display,
 who servant murder, and who son betray? 
savage! thy venial error i deplore,
 they be not christian who infest thy shore. 

o thou sad spirit, who preposterous yoke
 the great deliverer death, at length, have break! 
release from misery, and escape from care,
 go, meet that mercy man deny thou here. 
in thy dark home, sure refuge of the oppress,
 the wicked vex not, and the weary rest. 
and, if some notion, vague and undefined,
 of future terror have assail thy mind;
 if such thy master have presume to teach,
 as terror only they be prone to preach;
 (for shall they paint eternal mercy reign,
 where be the oppressor rod, the captive chain?) 
if, then, thy trouble soul have learn to dread
 the dark unknown thy tremble footstep tread;
 on he, who make thou what thou be, depend;
 he, who withhold the mean, accept the end. 
not thy the reckon dire of light abuse,
 knowledge disgrace, and liberty misuse;
 on thou no awful judge incense shall sit
 for part pervert, and dishonour wit. 
where ignorance will be find the sure plea,
 how many learn and wise shall envy thou! 

and thou, white savage! whether lust of gold,
 or lust of conquest, rule thou uncontrolled! 
hero, or robber! — by whatever name
 thou plead thy impious claim to wealth or fame;
 whether inferior mischief be thy boast,
 a petty tyrant rifle gambia coast:
 or bold carnage track thy crimson way,
 king dispossess, and province thy prey;
 pant to tame wide earth remote bound;
 all Cortez murder, all Columbus find;
 over plunder realm to reign, detest lord,
 make million wretched, and thyself abhor; —
 in reason eye, in wisdom fair account,
 your sum of glory boast a like amount;
 the mean may differ, but the end the same;
 conquest be pillage with a noble name. 
who make the sum of human blessing less,
 or sink the stock of general happiness,
 no solid same shall grace, no true renown,
 his life shall blazon, or his memory crown. 

have those adventurous spirit who explore
 through ocean trackless waste, the far-sought shore;
 whether of wealth insatiate, or of power,
 conqueror who waste, or ruffian who devour:
 have these possess, o cook! thy gentle mind,
 thy love of art, thy love of humankind;
 have these pursue thy mild and liberal plan,
 discoverer have not be a curse to man! 
then, bless philanthropy! thy social hand
 have link dissever world in brother band;
 careless, if colour, or if clime divide;
 then, love, and love, man have live, and die. 

the pure wreath which hang on glory shrine,
 for empire found, peaceful Penn! be thy;
 no blood-stained laurel crown thy virtuous toil,
 no slaughter native drench thy fair-earned soil. 
still thy meek spirit in thy flock survive,
 consistent still, their doctrine rule their life;
 thy follower only have efface the shame
 inscribe by slavery on the christian name. 

shall Britain, where the soul of freedom reign,
 forge chain for other she herself disdain? 
forbid it, heaven! o let the nation know
 the liberty she love she will bestow;
 not to herself the glorious gift confine,
 she spread the blessing wide as humankind;
 and, scorn narrow view of time and place,
 bid all be free in earth extend space. 

what page of human annal can record
 a deed so bright as human right restore? 
o may that god-like deed, that shine page,
 redeem our fame, and consecrate our age! 

and see, the cherub mercy from above,
 descend soft, quit the sphere of love! 
on feel heart she shed celestial dew,
 and breathe her spirit over the enlighten few;
 from soul to soul the spread influence steal,
 till every breast the soft contagion feel. 
she bear, exult, to the burn shore
 the lovely office angel ever bear;
 to vindicate the power in heaven adore,
 to still the clank of chain, and sheathe the sword;
 to cheer the mourner, and with soothe hand
 from burst heart unbind the oppressor band;
 to raise the lustre of the christian name,
 and clear the foul blot that dim its fame. 

as the mild spirit hover over the coast,
 a fresh hue the wither landscape boast;
 her heal smile the ruin scene repair,
 and blast nature wear a joyous air. 
she spread her bless commission from above,
 stamp with the sacred character of love;
 she tear the banner stain with blood and tear,
 and, liberty! thy shine standard rear! 
as the bright ensign glory she display,
 see pale oppression faint beneath the blaze! 
the giant die! no more his frown appal,
 the chain untouched, drop off; the fetter fall. 
astonish echo tell the vocal shore,
 oppression fall, and slavery be no more! 
the dusky myriad crowd the sultry plain,
 and hail that mercy long invoke in vain. 
victorious power! she burst their twofold band,
 and faith and freedom spring from mercy hand,
