gorthmund,

translate from the saxon.

the loud wind whistle through the sacred grove of Thor; far over the plain of denania, be the cry of the spirit hear. the howl of hubba horrid voice swell upon every blast, and the shrill shriek of the fair locabara, shoot through the midnight-sky.

gorthmund sleep on his couch of purple; the blood of the slay be still on his cruel hand: his helmet be stain with purple, and the banner of his father be no more white. his soul shudder at the howl of hubba, and the shrill shriek of locabara: he shake like the tremble reed, when the loud tempest roll the foam flood over the point rock: pale be his face as the eglantine, which climb the branch of the flowery bramble. he start from his couch: he black lock stand upright on his head, like the spear which stand round the tent of the warrior, when the silver moon spangle on the tranquil lake.

why will thou torment i, hubba; it be not by my hand that the sword drink thy blood. who see i plunge the dagger to the heart of locabara? no! Nardin of the forest be far away. cease, cease, thy shriek; i can bear they. on thy own sword thou have thy death; and the fair virgin of the hill fall beneath the rage of the mountain. leave i, leave i: witness hell, i know not locabara, i force she not to my embrace; no, i slay she not; she fall by the mountaincer. leave i, leave i, o soul of hubba!

exmundbert, who bear the silver shield of gorthmund, fly from his downy couch, swift as the rumour of a come host. he strike the golden cup, and the king of the fly warrior awaken from his dream of terror. exmundbert, be he go? strike the silver shield, call up the son of battle, who sleep on the mossy bank of Frome. but stay, it be all a vision; it be over and go as the image of Woden, in the evening of a summer-day. hence to thy tent, i will sleep again.

gorthmund double his purple robe, and sleep again.

loud as the noise of a break rock break down the cavern of seoggeswaldscyre, be the voice of hubba hear: sharp as the cry of the bird of death at the window of the wound warrior, when the red ray of the morning rise break from the east, and the soul of the sick be fly away with the darkness, be the shriek of locabara. rise from thy couch, gorthmund, thou wolf of the evening. when the sun shine in the glory of the day; when the labour swain dance in the woodland shade; when the sparkle star glimmer in the azure of the night, and contentment sleep under the rustic roof, thou shall have no rest. thy be the bitter herb of affliction; for thou shall the wormwood shed its seed on the blossom of the bloom flower, and embitter with its fall leaf the water of the brook. rise, gorthmund, rise, the saxon be burn thy tent: rise, for the mercian be assemble together, and thy army will be slay with the sword, or burn in the image of tewisk. the god of victory shall be red with thy blood, and they shall shout at the sacrifice. rise, gorthmund, thy eye shall be close in peace no more.

the king of the swift warrior start from his couch: he shake like a oak through which the lightning have cut their rapid way; his eye roll like the light on the saxon bark, in the tempest of the dark and black night.

exmundbert fly to his chief: he strike the silver shield. sueno of the dark lake, and the black haired lecolwin, catch the lance and the shield, and press into the royal tent.

warrior strike the shield of alarm; the mercian be assemble together, the saxon be burn our tent: give the cry of war, and issue to the battle: come upon they by the side of the thick wood, near the city of reggacester. lift the banner reafan; and he be a worshipper of false god who withhold his sword from blood. the silver shield resound to the wood of sell, and the great island tremble at the clamorous noise.

delward of the strong arm, and ax-bred of the forest of wolf, lead the warrior to the thick wood: but quiet be the forest as the tranquil lake, when the wind sleep on the top of the lofty tree. the inhabitant of reggacester sleep in the strength of their wall. the leader return.

there be no enemy near, o king: still as the habitation of the dead, be the kingdom around we: they have feel the strength of thy arm, and will no more rise up to oppose we. as the grass fall by the hand of the mower, so shall they fall before we, and be no more. the banner reafan shall be exalt, and the seven god of the saxon be trample in the dust. let the army of the north rejoice, let they sacrifice to the god of war, and bring out the prisoner, for the feast of blood. the warrior throw down the lance, and the shield, and the axe of battle: the plate of brass drop from their shoulder; and they dance to the sound of the instrument of sacrifice. confuse as the cry of the fleet dog when the white bear be pursue over the mountain of the north: confuse as the resolution of terror be the noise of the warrior. they dance till the mantle of midnight ascend from the earth.

the morning shake the dew from her crown of rose, on the yellow lock of the dancer; and the gleam of light shoot through the dark grey sky, like the reek blood over the shield of steel. see, warrior, a dark cloud sit on the mountain brow, it will be a tempest at noon, and the heavy rain will fall upon we. yes, you Dane, it will be a tempest, but a tempest of war: it will rain, but in shower of blood. for the dark cloud be the army of segowald: he lead the flower of the warrior of Mercia, and on his right hand be the mighty son of battle, the great sigebert, who lead the warrior of Wessex.

the dance be end; and the captive of sacrifice bind to the sacred tree: they pant in the pang of death.

sudden from the border of the wood, be the alarm give: and the silver shield rouse the sun from behind the black cloud. the archer of the sacrifice drop the bow, and catch the lance and the shield. confusion spread from watch-tower to watch-tower, and the clamour ring to the distant hill.

gorthmund rage like a wild boar, but he rage in vain: he whole army be disorder, and the cry of war be mix with the yell of retreat.

segowald come near with his mercian on the right-hand: and the great sigebert lead the saxon round the thick wood.

the Dane rage like the tempest of winter, but the mercian stand firm as the grove of oak on the plain of ambroisburgh: great be the strength of the swift warrior of the north, but their troop be break, and out of the order of battle.

the saxon, with the great sigebert, have encircle the wood; they rage in the fight like wolf. the Dane be press on all side; they fly like the leaf in autumn before the strong wind.

gorthmund scorn to fly; he be descend from the son of battle, l'achollan, who sword put to flight the army of moeric, when the sun be cover with a mantle of blood, and darkness descend upon the earth at noon day. he bear upon his arm the shield of lofgar, the keeper of the castle of teigne. lofgar never flee, though the lance of the foe fly about he numerous as the wing ant in summer. lofgar never flee, though the warrior of the mountain hurl the rock upon he in the valley, when he fight for the shield of penda: and shall gorthmund fly, gorthmund, who sword be his law, who hold justice in his banner?

segowald seek gorthmund: he find he single encounter a army.

turn to i, son of lofgar; i be segowald of the lake have thou not hear of my fame in battle? when the army of Hengist pant on the dark-brown heath, i cheere they to the war; and the banner of victory wave over my head. turn thy arm upon i, gorthmund, i be worthy thy strength.

the son of lofgar rush to the son of alderwold: they fight like the child of destruction on the plain of marocan. gorthmund fall. he fall, like the mountain boar beneath the arrow of the hunter.

as the shade of death dance before his eye, he hear the yell of hubba, and the shrill shriek of locabara: thou be fall, thou son of injustice, thou be fall; thy shield be degrade in the dust; and thy banner will be honour no more! thy swift warrior be flee over the plain, as the drive sheep before the wolf. think, gorthmund, think on hubba, the son of crinewalch of the green hill. think on locabara, who thy sword send to the region of death. remember thy injustice and die.

