the missionary.

preface to the second edition. 

the missionary.

introduction.

when over the atlantic wild, rock by the blast,
sad lusitania exile sovereign pass,
rest of her pomp, from her paternal throne
cast forth, and wander to a clime unknown,
to seek a refuge on that distant shore,
that once her country legion dye with gore; —
sudden, methinks, high tower over the flood,
hesperian world! thy mighty genius stand;
where spread, from cape to cape, from bay to bay,
serene blue, the vast pacific lay;
and the huge cordillera to the sky
with all their burn summit seem to rise.

then the stern spirit speak, and to his voice
the wave and wood reply: — mountain, rejoice!
thou solitary sea, who billow sweep
the margin of my forest, dark and deep,
rejoice! the hour be come: the mortal blow,
that smite the golden shrine of Mexico,
in Europe be avenge; and thou, proud Spain,
now hostile host insult thy own domain;
now fate, vindictive, roll, with refluent flood,
back on thy shore the tide of human blood,
think of my murder million! of the cry
that once i hear from all my kingdom rise;
of famine feeble plaint, of slavery tear; —
think, too, if valour, freedom, fame, be dear,
how my antarctic son, undaunted, stand,
exact groan for groan, and blood for blood;
and shout, (may the sound be hail by thou!)
tyrant, the virtuous and the brave be free!

Canto first.

argument.

beneath aërial cliff, and glitter snow,
the rush-roof of a age warrior rise,
chief of the mountain tribe: high overhead,
the Andes, wild and desolate, be spread,
where cold sierras shoot their icy spire,
and Chillan trail its smoke and smoulder fire.
a glen beneath, a lonely spot of rest,
hang, scarce discover, like a eagle nest.

summer be in its prime; — the parrot-flock
darken the pass sunshine on the rock;
the chrysomel and purple butterfly,
amid the clear blue light, be wander by;
the humming-bird, along the myrtle bower,
with twinkle wing, be spin over the flower,
the woodpecker be hear with busy bill,
the mock-bird sing — and all beside be still,
and look! the cataract that burst so high,
as not to mar the deep tranquillity,
the tumult of its dash fall suspend,
and, steal drop by drop, in mist descend;
through who illumine spray and sprinkle dew,
shine to the adverse sun the break rainbow hue.

chequer, with partial shade, the beam of noon,
and arch the grey rock with wild festoon,
here its gay net-work, and fantastic twine,
the purple cogul thread from pine to pine,
and oft, as the fresh air of morning breathe,
dip its long tendril in the stream beneath.
there, through the trunk with moss and lichen white,
the sunshine dart its interrupt light,
and, 'amid the cedar darksome bough, illume,
with instant touch, the lori scarlet plume.

so smile the scene; — but can its smile impart
aught to console yond mourn warrior heart?
he heed not now, when beautiful bright,
the humming-bird be circle in his sight;
nor even, above his head, when air be still,
hear the green woodpecker resound bill;
but gaze on the rock and mountain wild,
rock after rock, in glitter mass pile
to the volcano cone, that shoot so high
grey smoke who column stain the cloudless sky,
he cry, oh! if thy spirit yet be flee
to the pale kingdom of the shadowy dead, —
in yonder tract of pure light above,
dear long-lost object of a father love,
do thou abide; or like a shadow come,
circle the scene of thy remember home,
and pass with the breeze, or, in the beam
of evening, light the desert mountain stream!
or at deep midnight be thy accent hear,
in the sad note of that melodious bird,
which, as we listen with mysterious dread,
bring tiding from our friend and father dead?
perhaps, beyond those summit, far away,
thy eye yet view the live light of day;
sad, in the stranger land, thou may sustain
a weary life of servitude and pain,
with waste eye gaze on the orient beam,
and think of these white rock and torrent stream,
never to hear the summer cocoa wave,
or weep upon thy father distant grave.

you, who have wake, and listen with a tear,
when cry confuse, and clangour roll more near;
with murmur prayer, when mercy stand aghast,
as war black trump peal its terrific blast,
and over the wither earth the arm giant pass!
you, who his track with terror have pursue,
when some delightful land, all blood-imbrued,
he sweep; where silent be the champaign wide,
that echo to the pipe of yester-tide,
save, when far off, the moonlight hill prolong
the last deep echo of his part gong;
nor aught be see, in the desert spot
where trail the smoke of many a peaceful cot,
save livid corpse that unburied lie,
and conflagration, reek to the sky; —
come listen, while the cause i relate
that bow the warrior to the storm of fate,
and leave these smile scene forlorn and desolate.

in other day, when, in his manly pride,
two child for a father fondness vie, —
oft they essay, in mimic strife, to wield
his lance, or laugh peep behind his shield;
oft in the sun, or the magnolia's shade,
lightsome of heart as gay of look they play,
brother and sister. she, along the dew,
blithe as the squirrel of the forest fly;
blue rush wreathe her head; her dark-brown hair
fall, gentle lift, on her bosom bare;
her necklace shine, of sparkle insect make,
that flit, like speck of fire, from sun to shade.
light be her form; a clasp of silver brace
the azure-died ichella round her waist;
her ancle ring with shell, as unconfined
she dance, and sing wild carol to the wind. 
with snow-white tooth, and laughter in her eye,
so beautiful in youth she bound by.

yet kindness sit upon her aspect bland, —
the tame alpaca stand and lick her hand;
she bring he gather moss, and love to deck
with flowery twine his tall and stately neck,
while he with silent gratitude reply,
and bend to her caress his large blue eye.

these child dance together in the shade,
or stretch their hand to see the rainbow fade;
or sit and mock, with imitative glee,
the paroquet, that laugh from tree to tree;
or through the forest wild solitude,
from glen to glen, the marmozet pursue;
and think the light of part day too short,
that call they, linger, from their daily sport.

in that fair season of awaken life,
when dawn youth and childhood be at strife;
when on the verge of thought gay boyhood stand
tiptoe, with glisten eye and outspread hand;
with airy look, and form and footstep light,
and glossy lock, and feature berry-bright,
and eye like the young eaglet, to the ray
of noon unblenching as he sail away;
a breed of sea-shell on his bosom string,
a small stone-hatchet over his shoulder sling,
with slender lance, and feather blue and red,
that, like the heron crest, wave on his head, —
buoyant with hope, and airiness, and joy,
lautaro be a graceful indian boy:
teach by his sire, even now he draw the bow,
or track the jagguar on the morning snow;
startle the condor, on the craggy height;
then silent sit, and mark its upward flight,
lessen in ether to a speck of white.

but when the impassion chieftain speak of war,
smite his broad breast, or point to a scar, —
speak of the stranger of the distant main,
and the proud banner of insult Spain, —
of the barb horse and iron horseman speak,
and his red god, that, wrap in roll smoke,
roar from the gun; — the boy, with still-drawn breath,
hang on the wondrous tale, as mute as death;
then raise his animate eye, and cry,
oh, let i perish by my father side!

once, when the moon, over chillan cloudless height,
pour, far and wide, its soft, mild light,
a predatory band of mail man
burst on the stillness of the shelter glen:
they shout, death! and shake their sabre high,
that shine terrific to the moonlight sky;
wherever they ride, the valley and the hill
echo the shriek of death, till all again be still.

the warrior, ere he sink in slumber deep,
have kiss his son, soft-breathing in his sleep,
where on a llama skin he lie, and say,
place his hand, with tear, upon his head,
aërial nymph! that in the moonlight stray,
o gentle spirit! here awhile delay;
bless, as you pass unseen, my sleep boy,
till blithe he wake to daylight and to joy.
if the great spirit will, in future day,
over the fall foe his hatchet he shall raise,
and, 'amid a grateful nation high applause,
avenge his violate country cause!

now, near point of spear, and many a cone
of move helmet, in the moonlight shine,
as, clank through the pass, the band of blood
spring, like hyæna, from the secret wood.
they rush, they seize their unresisting prey,
ruthless they tear the shriek boy away;
but, not till gash by many a sabre wound,
the father sink, expire, on the ground.
he wake from the dark trance to life and pain,
but never see his darling child again.

seven snow have fall, and seven green summer pass,
since here he hear that son love accent last.
still his belove daughter soothe his care,
while time begin to strew with white his hair.
oft as his paint feather he unbind,
or gaze upon his hatchet on the ground,
muse with deep despair, nor strive to speak,
light she approach, and climb to reach his cheek,
hold with both hand his forehead, then her head
draw smile back, and kiss the tear he shed.

but late, to grief and hopeless love a prey,
she leave his side, and wander far away.
now in this still and shelter glen, that smile
beneath the crag of precipice wild,
wrap in a stern yet sorrowful repose,
the warrior half forget his country woe;
forget how many, impotent to save,
shed their best blood upon a father grave;
how many, tear from wife and child, pine
in the dark cavern of the hopeless mine,
never to see again the bless morn; —
slave in the lovely land where they be bear;
how many at sad sunset, with a tear,
the distant roar of sullen cannon hear,
while evening seem, as die the sound, to throw
a deadly stillness on a nation woe!

so the dark warrior, day succeed day,
wear in distemper thought the noon away;
and still, when weary evening come, he sigh,
my son, my son! or, with emotion, cry,
when i descend to the cold grave alone,
who shall be there to mourn for i? — not one! 

the crimson orb of day now wester fling
his beam, and over the vast pacific hang;
when from afar a shrill sound be hear,
and, hurry over the dew, a scout appear.
the watchful warrior know the pierce tone,
the signal-call of war, from human bone, —
what tiding? with impatient look, he cry.
tiding of war, the hurry scout reply;
then the sharp pipe with shrill summons blow,
and hold the blood-red arrow high in view. 

chief.

where speed the foe?

indian.

along the southern main,
have pass the vulture of accurse Spain. 

chief.

ruin pursue they on the distant flood,
and be their deadly portion — blood for blood!

indian.

when, round and red, the moon shall next arise,
the chief attend the midnight sacrifice
in encol wood, where the great visard dwell,
who wake the dead man by his thrill spell;
thou, Ulmen of the mountain, they command
to lift the hatchet for thy native land;
while in dread circle, round the sere-wood smoke,
the mighty god of vengeance they invoke;
and call the spirit of their father slay,
to nerve their lift arm, and curse devote Spain.

so speak the scout of war; — and over the dew,
onward along the craggy valley, fly.
then the stern warrior sing his song of death —
and blow his conch, that all the glen beneath
echo, and rush from the hollow wood,
soon at his side three hundred warrior stand.

warrior.

child, who for his country dare to die?

three hundred brandish spear shine to the sky:
we perish, or we leave our country free;
father, our blood for chili and for thou!

the mountain-chief essay his club to wield,
and shake the dust indignant from the shield.
then speak: —

o thou! that with thy linger light
do warm the world, till all be hush in night;
i look upon thy part beam, o sun!
and say, even thus my course be almost run.
when thou do hide thy head, as in the grave,
and sink to glorious rest beneath the wave,
do thou, majestic in repose, retire,
below the deep, to unknown world of fire!
yet though thou sink, awful, in the main,
the shadowy moon come forth, and all the train
of star, that shine with soft and silent light,
make so beautiful the brow of night.
thus, when i sleep within the narrow bed,
the light of after-fame around shall spread;
the son of distant ocean, when they see
the grass-green heap beneath the mountain tree,
and hear the leafy bough at evening wave,
shall pause and say, there sleep in dust the brave!

all earthly hope my lonely heart have flee!
stern Guecubu, angel of the dead,
who laugh when the brave in pang expire;
who dwelling be beneath the central fire
of yonder burn mountain; who have pass
over my poor dwelling, and with one fell blast
scatter my summer-leaf that cluster round,
and sweep my fair blossom to the ground;
angel of dire despair, oh! come not nigh,
nor wave thy red wing over i where i lie;
but thou, o mild and gentle spirit! stand,
angel of hope and peace, at my right hand,
(when blood-drop stagnate on my brow) and guide
my pathless voyage over the unknown tide,
to scene of endless joy, to that fair isle,
where bower of bliss, and soft savannah smile:
where my forefather oft the fight renew,
and Spain black visionary steed pursue;
where, cease the struggle of all human pain,
i may behold thou — thou, my son, again!

he speak, and while at evening glimmer close
the distant mist, like the grey ocean, rose,
with patriot sorrow swell at his breast,
he sink upon a jagguar hide to rest.

it be night: remote on caracalla bay,
valdivia army, hush in slumber, lay.
around the limit of the silent camp,
alone be hear the steed patrol tramp
from line to line, while the fix sentinel
proclaim the watch of midnight — all be well!
Valdivia dream of million yet untold,
villrica gem, and El dorado gold!

what different feeling, by the scene impress,
rise in sad tumult over lautaro breast!
on the broad ocean, where the moonlight sleep,
thoughtful he turn his wake eye, and weep,
and while the throng form of memory start,
thus hold communion with his lonely heart:

land of my father, still i tread your shore,
and mourn the shade of hour that be no more;
while night-air, like remember voice, sweep,
and murmur from the undulate deep.
be it thy voice, my father! thou be dead,
the green rush wave on thy forsake bed.
be it thy voice, my sister! gentle maid,
thou too, perhaps, in the dark cave be lay;
perhaps, even now, thy spirit see i stand
a homeless stranger in my native land;
perhaps, even now, along the moonlight sea,
it bend from the blue cloud, remember i!
land of my father! yet, oh yet forgive,
that with thy deadly enemy i live:
the tender tie (it boot not to relate)
have bind i to their service, and their fate;
yet, whether on peru war-wasted plain,
or visit these sacred shore again,
whatever the struggle of this heart may be,
land of my father, it shall beat for thou!

Canto second.

argument.

the night be still and clear, when, over the snow,
Andes! thy melancholy spirit rise, —
a shadow stern and sad: he stand alone,
upon the topmost mountain burn cone;
and while his eye shine dim, through surge smoke,
thus to the spirit of the fire he speak: —

you, who tread the hide deep,
where the silent earthquake sleep;
you, who track the sulphurous tide,
or on hiss vapour ride, —
spirit, come! 
from world of subterraneous night;
from fiery realm of lurid light;
from the ore's unfathomed bed;
from the lava's whirlpool red, —
spirit, come!
on chili foe rush with vindictive sway,
and sweep they from the light of live day!
hear you not the ravenous brood,
that flap their wing, and scream for blood?
on peru devote shore
their murderous beak be red with gore;
yet here, impatient for new prey,
the insatiate vulture track their way.
let they perish! they, who band
sweep remote and peaceful land!
let they perish! — on their head,
descend the darkness of the dead!
spirit, now your cave forsake:
hark! ten thousand warrior wake! —
spirit, their high cause defend! —
from your cave ascend! ascend!

as thus the genius of the Andes speak,
the tremble mountain heave with dark smoke;
lightning, and phantom-form, by fit appear;
his mighty voice far off Osorno hear;
the caverned deep shake through their vast profound,
and chimborazzo height roll back the sound.

with lift arm, and tower stature high,
and aspect frown to the middle sky
(its misty form dilate in the wind),
the phantom stand, — till, less and less define,
into thin air it fade from the sight,
lose in the ambient haze of slow-returning light.
its feathery-seeming crown, its giant spear,
its limb of huge proportion, disappear;
and the bare mountain to the dawn disclose
the same long line of solitary snow.

the morning shine, the military train
stream far and wide along the tent plain;
and plait cuirass, and helm of steel,
throw back the sunbeam, as the horseman wheel:
thus, with arm glance to the eastern light,
pass, in review, proud steed and cohort bright;
for all the host, by break of morrow grey,
wind back their march to penco northern bay,
Valdivia, fearful lest confederate foe,
ambush and dark, his progress may oppose,
marshal today the whole collect force,
file and artillery, cuirassy and horse:
himself yet linger ere he join the train,
that move, in order march, along the plain,
while troop, and indian slave beneath his eye,
the labour of the rise city ply:
wide glow the general toil; the mole extend,
the watch-tower over the desert surge ascend;
and battlement, and rise rampart, shine
above the ocean blue and level line.

the sun ascend to meridian height,
and all the northern bastion shine in light;
with hoarse acclaim, the gong and trumpet ring,
the moorish slave aloft their cymbal swing,
when the proud victor, in triumphant state,
ride forth, in arm, through the portcullis' gate. 

with neck high-arching as he smite the ground,
and restless paw to the trumpet sound, —
with mantl mane, over his broad shoulder spread,
and nostril blow, and dilate red, —
the coalblack steed, in rich caparison
far trail to the ground, go proud on.
proud he tramp, as conscious of his charge,
and turn around his eye-ball, bright and large,
and shake the frothy boss, as in disdain;
and toss the flake, indignant, off his mane;
and, with high-swelling vein, exult press
proud against the barb his heave breast.

the fate of empire glow in his thought,
thus arm, the tent field Valdivia seek.
on the left side his poise shield he bear,
with quaint device rich blazon over;
above the plume, upon his helmet cone,
castile imperial crest illustrious shine;
blue in the wind the escutcheoned mantle flow,
over the chain mail, which tinkle as he ride.
the bar vizor raise, you may discern
his clime-changed countenance, though pale, yet stern,
and resolute as death, — while in his eye
sit proud assurance, fame, and victory.

lautaro, now in manhood rise pride,
ride, with a lance, attendant at his side,
in spanish mantle graceful array;
upon his brow a tuft of feather play:
he glossy lock, with dark and mantl grace,
shade the noonday sunbeam on his face.
though pass in tear the day-spring of his youth,
Valdivia love his gratitude and truth:
he, in Valdivia, own a noble friend;
kind to protect, and mighty to defend.
so, on he ride; upon his youthful mien
a mild but sad intelligence be see;
courage be on his open brow, yet care
seem like a wander shade to linger there;
and though his eye shine, as the eagle, bright,
it beam with humid, melancholy light

when now Valdivia see the embattle line,
helmet, and sword, and shield, and matchlock, shine;
now the long phalanx still and steady stand,
fix every eye, and motionless each hand;
then slow cluster, into column wheel,
each with the red-cross banner of Castile;
while trump, and drum, and cymbal, to his ear
make music such as soldier love to hear;
while horseman check their steed, or, bend low
with level lance, over the saddlebow,
ride gallant at tilt; and thunder break,
instant involve van and rear in smoke,
till wind the obscure volume roll away,
and the red file, stretch out in long array,
more radiant move beneath the beam of day;
while ensign, arm, and cross, glitter bright, —
Philip! he cry, see thou the glorious sight?
and do thou deem the tribe of this poor land
can man, and arm, and steed, like these, withstand?

forgive! — the youth reply, and check a tear, —
the land where my forefather sleep be dear! —
my native land! — this spot of bless earth,
the scene where i, and all i love, have birth!
what gratitude fidelity can give
be you, my lord! — you shield — bid i live,
when, in the circuit of the world so wide,
i have but one, one only friend beside.
i bow resign to fate; i kiss the hand,
red with the best blood of my father land! 
but mighty as thou be, Valdivia, know,
though Cortes' desolate march lay low
the shrine of rich, voluptuous Mexico;
with carcase, though proud Pizarro strew
the sun imperial temple in Peru,
yet the rude dweller of this land be brave,
and the last spot they lose will be their grave!

a moment crimson cross valdivia cheek —
then over the plain he spur, nor deign to speak,
wave the youth, at distance, to retire;
none see the eye that shoot terrific fire.
as their commander stern ride along,
troop after troop, halt the martial throng;
and all the pennoned trump a loud blast
blow, as the southern world great victor pass.

lautaro turn, scarce heed, from the view,
and from the noise of trump and drum withdraw;
and now, while trouble thought his bosom swell,
seek the grey missionary's humble cell.

front the ocean, but beyond the ken
of public view, and sound of murmur man,
of unhewn root compose, and gnarl wood,
a small and rustic oratory stand;
upon its roof of reed appear a cross,
the porch within be line with mantl moss;
a crucifix and hourglass, on each side —
one to admonish seem, and one to guide;
this, to impress how soon life race be over;
and that, to lift our hope where time shall be no more. 
over the rude porch, with wild and gad stray,
the cluster copu weave its trellis gay;
two mossy pine, high bend, interwove
their age and fantastic arm above.
in front, amid the gay surround flower,
a dial count the depart hour,
on which the sweet light of summer shine, —
a rude and brief inscription mark the stone:
to count, with pass shade, the hour,
i place the dial 'amid the flower;
that, one by one, come forth, and die,
bloom, and wither, round its side.
mortal, let the sight impart
its pensive moral to thy heart!

just hear to trickle through a covert near,
and soothe, with perpetual lapse, the ear,
a fount, like rain-drop, filter through the stone,
and, bright as amber, on the shallows shine.
intent his fairy pastime to pursue,
and, gem-like, hover over the violet blue,
the humming-bird, here, its unceasing song
heedless murmur, all the summer long;
and when the winter come, retire to rest,
and from the myrtle hang its tremble nest.
no sound of a conflict world be near;
the noise of ocean faint meet the ear,
that seem, as sink to rest the noontide blast,
but die sound of passion that be past;
or close anthem, when, far off, expire
the lessen echo of the distant choir.

here, every human sorrow hush to rest,
his pale hand meek cross upon his breast,
anselmo sit: the sun, with wester ray,
just touch his temple, and his lock of grey. 
there be no worldly feeling in his eye;
the world to he be "as a thing go by."

now, all his feature lit, he raise his look,
then bend it thoughtful, and unclasp the book;
and while the hourglass shed its silent sand,
a tame opossum lick his wither hand.
that sweet light of slow-declining day,
which through the trellis pour its slant ray,
rest a moment on his few grey hair,
seem light from heaven send down to bless his prayer.

when the trump echo to the quiet spot,
he think upon the world, but mourn it not;
enough if his meek wisdom can control,
and bend to mercy, one proud soldier soul;
enough, if, while these distant scene he tread,
he lead one err indian to his god.

whence come my son? with kind complacent look
he ask, and close again the emboss book.

i come to thou for peace, the youth reply:
oh, there be strife, and cruelty, and pride,
in this sad christian world! my native land
be happy, ere the soldier, with his band
of fell destroyer, like a vulture, come,
and give its peaceful scene to blood and flame.
when will the turmoil of earth tempest cease?
father, i come to thou for peace — for peace!

seek peace, the father cry, with god above:
in his good time, all will be peace and love.
we mourn, indeed, mourn that all sound of ill,
earth fair scene with one deep murmur fill;
that yonder sun, when evening paint the sky,
sink, beauteous, on a world of misery;
the course of wide destruction to withstand,
we lift our feeble voice — our tremble hand;
but still, bow low, or smite to the dust,
father of mercy, still in thou we trust!
through good or ill, in poverty or wealth,
in joy or woe, in sickness or in health,
meek piety thy awful hand survey,
and the faint murmur turn to prayer and praise!
we know — whatever evil we deplore —
thou have permit, and we know no more!
behold, illustrious on the subject plain,
some tower-crowned city of imperial Spain!
hark! it be the earthquake! cloud of dust alone
ascend from earth, where tower and temple shine!
such be the conqueror dread path: the grave
yawn for its million where his banner wave;
but shall vain man, who life be but a sigh,
with sullen acquiescence gaze and die?
alas, how little of the mighty maze
of providence our mortal ken survey!
heaven awful lord, pavilion in the cloud,
look through the darkness that all nature shroud;
and, far beyond the tempest and the night,
bid man his course hold on to scene of endless light.

Canto third.

argument.

come, — for the sun yet hang above the bay, —
and while our time may brook a brief delay
with other thought, and, haply with a tear,
a old man tale of sorrow thou shall hear.
i wish not to reveal it; — thought that dwell
deep in the lonely bosom inmost cell
unnoticed, and unknown, too painful wake,
and, like a tempest, the dark spirit shake,
when, start from our slumberous apathy,
we gaze upon the scene of day go by.
yet, if a moment irritate flush,
darken thy cheek, as thought conflict rush,
when i disclose my hide grief, the tale
may more than wisdom or reproof prevail.
oh, may it teach thou, till all trial cease,
to hold thy course, though sorrow, yet in peace;
still look up to he, the soul best stay,
who faith and hope shall crown, when world be sweep away!

where fair seville morisco turret gleam
on guadilquiver gently-stealing stream;
who silent water, seaward as they glide,
reflect the wild-rose thicket on its side,
my youth be pass. oh, day for ever go!
how touch with heaven own light your morning shine

even now, when lonely and forlorn i bend,
my weary journey hasten to its end,
a droop exile on a distant shore,
i mourn the hour of youth that be no more.
the tender thought amid my prayer have part,
and steal, at time, from heaven my age heart.

forgive the cause, o god! — forgive the tear,
that flow, even now, over leonora bier;
for, 'midst the innocent and lovely, none
more beautiful than Leonora shine.

as by her widow mother side she kneel,
a sad and sacred sympathy i feel.
at eastertide, when the high mass be sing,
and, fume high, the silver censer swing;
when rich-hued window, from the arch' height,
pour over the shrine a soft and yellow light;
from aisle to aisle, amid the service clear,
when "adoremus" swell upon the ear.
(such as to heaven thy rapt attention draw
first in the christian church of Peru),
she seem, methinks, some spirit of the sky,
descend to that holy harmony.

but wherefore tell, when life and hope be new,
how by degree the soul first passion grow!
i love she, and i win she virgin heart;
but fortune whisper, we a while must part.

the minster toll the middle hour of night,
when, wake to agony and wild affright,
i hear those word, word of appal dread —
"the holy inquisition!" — from the bed
i start; snatch my dagger, and my cloak —
who dare accuse i! — none, in answer, speak. 
the demon seize, in silence, on their prey,
and tear i from my dream of bliss away.

how frightful be their silence, and their shade,
in torch-light, as their victim they convey,
by dark-inscribed, and massy-windowed wall,
through the dim twilight of terrific hall;
(for thou have hear i speak of that foul stain
of pure religion, and the right of Spain;)
while the high window shake to night cold blast,
and echo to the foot-fall as we pass!

they leave i, faint and breathless with affright,
in a cold cell, to solitude and night;
oh! think, what horror through the heart must thrill
when the last bolt be bar, and all at once be still!

nor day nor night be here, but a deep gloom,
sad than darkness, wrap the live tomb.
some bread and water, nature to sustain,
due be bring when eve return again;
and thus i know, hope it be the last,
another day of linger life be pass.

five year immure in that deep den of night,
i never see the sweet sun bless light.
once as the grate, with sullen sound, be bar,
and to the bolt the inmost cavern jar,
methinks i hear, as clange the iron door,
a dull and hollow echo from the floor;
i stamp; the vault, and wind cave around,
return a long and melancholy sound.
with patient toil i raise a massy stone,
and look into a depth of shade unknown;
the murky twilight of the lurid place
help i, at length, a secret way to trace:
i enter; step by step explore the road,
in darkness, from my desolate abode;
till, wind through long passage of night,
i see, at distance, a dim streak of light: —
it be the sun — the bright, the bless beam
of day! i kneel — i weep; — the glitter stream
roll on beneath i, as i leave the cave,
conceal in wood above the wind wave.

i rest on a verdant bank a while,
i see around the summer landscape smile;
i gain a peasant hut; nor dare to leave,
till, with slow step, advance the glimmer eve.
remember still affection fond hour,
i turn my footstep to the city tower;
in pilgrim dress, i trace the street unknown:
no light in leonora lattice shine.

the morning come; the busy tumult swell;
knoll to church, i hear the minster bell;
involuntary to that scene i stray,
disguise, where first i see my faithful maid.
i see she, pallid, at the altar stand,
and yield, half-shrinking, her reluctant hand;
she turn her head; she see my hollow eye,
and know i, waste, wan, in my disguise;
she shriek, and fall; — breathless, i leave the fane
in agony — nor see her form again;
and from that day her voice, her look be give,
her name, her memory, to the wind of heaven.

far off i bend my melancholy way,
heart-sick and faint, and, in this gown of grey,
from every human eye my sorrow hide,
unknown, amid the tumult of Madrid.
grief in my heart, despair upon my look,
with no companion save my bead and book,
my morsel with affliction son to share,
to tend the sick and poor, my only care,
forget, thus i live; till day by day
have wear nigh thirteen year of grief away.

one winter night, when i have close my cell,
and bid the labour of the day farewell,
a age crone approach, with pant breath,
and bid i hasten to the house of death.

i come. with move lip intent to pray,
a die woman on a pallet lie;
her lift hand be waste to the bone,
and ghastly on her look the lamplight shine;
beside the bed a pious daughter stand
silent, and, weep, kiss her pale hand.
feeble she speak, and raise her languid head,
forgive, forgive! — they tell i he be dead! —
but in the sunshine of that dreadful day,
that give i to another arm away,
i see he, like a ghost, with deadly stare;
i see his waste eye-ball' ghastly glare;
i see his lip (oh, hide they, god of love!)
i see his livid lip, half-muttering, move,
to curse the maid — forgetful of her vow: —
perhaps he live to curse — to curse i now!

he live to bless! i cry; and, draw nigh,
hold up the crucifix; her heavy eye
she raise, and scarce pronounce — do he yet live?
can he his lose, his die child forgive?
will god forgive — the lord who bleed — will he? —
ah, no, there be no mercy leave for i!

word be but vain, and colour all too faint,
that awful moment of despair to paint.
she know i; her exhaust breath, with pain,
draw, she press my hand, and speak again:

by a false guardian cruel wile deceive,
the tale of fraudful falsehood i believe,
and think thou dead; he give the stern command,
and bid i take the rich antonio hand.
i kneel, implore, embrace my guardian knee;
ruthless inquisitor, he hold the key
of the dark torture-house. tremble for life,
yes, i become a sad, heart-broken wife!
yet curse i not; of every human care
already my full heart have have its share:
abandon, leave in youth to want and woe,
oh! let these tear, that agonise flow,
witness how deep even now my heart be rend!
yet one be lovely — one be innocent!
protect, protect, (and faint in death she smile)
when i be dead, protect my orphan child!

the dreadful prison, that so long detain
my waste life, her die word explain.
the wretched priest, who wound i by stealth,
barter her love, her innocence for wealth!

i lay her bone in earth; the chant hymn
echo along the hollow cloister dim;
i hear, far off, the bell funereal toll,
and sorrow say: now peace be with her soul!

far over the western ocean i convey,
and Indiana call the orphan maid;
beneath my eye she grow, and, day by day,
seem, grateful, every kindness to repay.

renounce Spain, her cruelty and crime,
amid untutored tribe, in distant clime,
it be mine to spread the light of truth, or save
from stripe and torture the poor indian slave.
i see thou, young and innocent, alone,
cast on the mercy of a race unknown;
i see, in dark adversity cold hour,
thy virtue bloom, like a winter flower;
from chain and slavery i redeem thy youth,
pour on thy mental sight the beam of truth;
by thy warm heart and mild demeanour win,
call thou my other child — my age son.
i need not tell the sequel; — not unmoved
poor Indiana hear thy tale, and love;
some sympathy a kindred fate may claim;
your year, your fortune, and your friend the same;
both early of a parent care bereave,
both stranger in a world of sadness leave;
i mark each slowly-struggling thought; i shed
a tear of love paternal on each head;
and, while i see she timid eye incline,
bless the affection that have make she thy!
here let the murmur of despondence cease:
there be a god — believe — and part in peace!

rich hue illume the track of die day
as the great sun sink in the western bay,
and only its last light yet linger shine,
upon the high palmtree feathery cone;
when at a distance on the dewy plain,
in mingle group appear a indian train;
man, woman, child, round anselmo press,
farewell! they cry. he raise his hand to bless,
and say: my child, may the god above
still lead you in the path of peace and love;
tomorrow, we must part; — when i be go,
raise on this spot a cross, and place a stone,
that tribe unborn may some memorial have,
when i far off be moulder in the grave,
of that poor messenger, who tiding bear
of gospel-mercy to your distant shore. 

the crowd retire; along the twilight grey,
the condor keep its solitary way,
the fire-fly shine, when to the hermit cell
who hasten but the minstrel Zarinel!
in foreign land, far from his native home,
it be he, a gay, romantic youth, to roam,
with a light cittern over his shoulder sling,
wherever he pass he play, and love, and sing;
and thus accomplish, late have join the train
of gallant soldier on the southern plain.
father, he cry, uncertain of the fate
that may tomorrow toilsome march await,
for long will be the road, i will confess
some secret thought that on my bosom press.
they be of one i leave, a indian maid,
who trust love my careless heart betray.
say, may i speak?
say on, the father cry,
nor be to penitence all hope deny.

then hear, anselmo! from a very child
i love all fancy marvellous and wild;
i turn from truth, to listen to the lore
of many a old and fable troubadour.
thus, with impassion heart, and wayward mind,
to dream and shape of shadowy thing resign,
i leave my native vale and village home,
wide over the world a minstrel boy to roam.

i never shall forget the day, the hour,
when, all my soul resign to fancy power,
first, from the snowy Pyrenees, i cast
my labour vision over the landscape vast,
and see beneath my foot long vapour float,
stream, mountain, wood, and ocean mist remote. 
there once i meet a soldier, poor and old,
who tale of Cortes and Bilboa tell,
and this new world; he speak of indian maid,
river like sea, and forest who deep shade
have never yet be pierce by morning ray,
and how the green bird mock, and talk all day.

imagination thus, in colour new,
this distant world present to my view;
young, and enchant with the fancy scene,
i cross the toil sea that roar between,
and with ideal image impress,
stand on these unknown shore a wonder guest.

still to romantic fantasy resign,
i leave callao crowd port behind,
and climb the mountain which their shadow throw
upon the lessen summit of Peru.
some sheep the arm peasant drive before,
that all our food through the wild pass bear,
have wander in the frost-smoke of the morn,
far from the track; i blow the signal horn —
but echo only answer: 'amid the snow,
wilder and lose, i see the evening close.
the sun be set in the crimson west;
in all the earth i have no home of rest;
the last sad light upon the ice-hill shine;
i seem forsake in a world unknown;
how do my cold and sink heart rejoice,
when, hark! methinks i hear a human voice!
it may be some wild indian rove troop,
or the dread echo of their distant whoop;
still it be human, and i seem to find
again some commerce with remote mankind.
the voice come near, rise through the shade —
be it the song of some rude mountain-maid? 
and now i hear the tread of hasten foot,
and, in the western glen, a Llama bleat.
i listen — all be still; but hark! again
near and more near be hear the welcome strain;
it be a wild maid carol, who seek
her wander Llama 'midst the snowy peak:
truant, she cry, thy lurk place be find!

with languid touch i wake the cittern sound,
and soon a maid, by the pale light, i see
gaze breathless with astonishment and awe:
what instant terror to her fancy rise,
ha! be it not the spirit of the snow!
but when she see i, weary, cold, and weak,
stretch forth my hand (for now i can not speak),
she pity, raise i from the snow, and lead
my falter footstep to her father shed;
the Llama follow with her tinkle bell;
the dwelling rise within a craggy dell,
overhang with icy summit. to be brief,
she be the daughter of a age chief;
he, by her gentle voice to pity win,
show mercy, for himself have lose a son.
the father speak not; by the pine-wood blaze,
the daughter stand, and turn a cake of maize;
and then, as sudden shine the light, i see
such feature as no artist hand may draw.
her form, her face, her symmetry, her air,
father! thy age must such recital spare: —
she save my life; and kindness, if not love,
may sure in time the cold bosom move!
i be not cold; she love to hear i sing,
and sometime touch with playful hand the string;
and when i wake some melancholy strain,
she weep, and smile, and bid i sing again. 
so many a happy day, in this deep glen,
far from the noise of life, and sound of man,
be pass! nay, father, the sad sequel hear:
it be now the leafy springtime of the year —
ambition call i: true, i know to part
will break her generous, warm, and trust heart;
true, i have vow, but now estrange and cold,
she see my look, and shudder to behold: —
she will go with i, leave the lonely glade
where she grow up, but my stern voice forbid;
she hide her face and weep: go then away,
(father, methinks, even now, i hear she say)
go to thy distant land, forget this tear,
forget these rock, forget i once be dear;
fly to the world, over the wide ocean fly,
and leave i unremembered here to die!
yet to my father shall i all relate,
death, instant death, will be a traitor fate!

nor fear, nor pity move my stubborn mind,
i leave her sorrow and the scene behind;
i seek Valdivia on the southern plain,
and join the careless military train;
oh! ere i sleep, thus, lowly on my knee,
father, i absolution crave from thou!

anselmo speak, with look and voice severe:
yes, thoughtless youth, my absolution hear.
first, by deep penitence the wrong atone,
then absolution ask from god alone!
yet stay, and to my warn voice attend,
and hear i as a father, and a friend.
let truth severe be wayward fancy guide,
let stern-eyed conscience over each thought preside;
the passion, that on noble nature prey,
oh! cast they, like corrod bond, away! 
disdain to act mean falsehood coward part,
and let religion dignify thy art.
if, by thy bed, thou see at midnight stand
pale conscience, point, with terrific hand,
to deed of darkness do, while, like a corpse,
to shake thy soul, uprise dire remorse;
fly to God mercy, fly, ere yet too late —
perhaps one hour mark thy eternal fate;
let the warm tear of deep contrition flow,
the heart obdurate melt, like soften snow,
the last vain folly of thy youth deplore,
then go, in secret weep, and sin no more!

the star innumerous in their watch shine —
anselmo kneel before the cross alone.
ten thousand glow orb their pomp display,
while, look up, thus silent he pray: —

oh! how oppressive to the ache sense,
how fearful be this vast magnificence,
this prodigality of glory, spread
above a poor and die emmet head,
that toil his transient hour upon the shore
of mortal life, and then be see no more;
if man behold, on his terrific throne,
a dark, cold, distant deity, alone!
feel no relate, no endear tie,
that hope may upward raise her glisten eye,
and think, with deep unutterable bliss,
in yonder radiant realm my kingdom be!

more glorious than those orb that silent roll,
shine heaven redeem mercy on the soul —
oh, pure effulgence of unbounded love!
in thou, i think — i feel — i live — i move;
yet when, o thou, who name be love and light,
when will thy day-spring on these realm of night
arise! oh! when shall sever nation raise
one hallelujah of triumphant praise,
Tibet on Fars, Andes on Atlas call,
and "roll the loud hosannah" round the ball!

soon may thy kingdom come, that love, and peace,
and charity, may bid earth chide cease!
meantime, in life or death, through good or ill,
thy poor and feeble servant, i fulfil,
as best i may, thy high and holy will,
till, weary, on the world my eyelid close,
and i enjoy my long and last repose!

Canto four.

argument.

far in the centre of the deep wood,
the assemble father of their country stand.
it be midnight now; the pine-wood fire burn red,
and to the leaf a shadowy glimmer spread;
the struggle smoke, or flame with fitful glance,
obscure, or show, some dreadful countenance;
and every warrior, as his club he rear,
with large shadow, indistinct, appear;
while more terrific, his wild lock and mien,
and fierce eye, through the quiver smoke, be see.

in sea-wolf skin, here mariantu stand;
gnash his white tooth, impatient, and cry, blood!
his lofty brow, with crimson feather bind,
here, brood death, the huge ongolmo frown;
and, like a giant of no earthly race,
to his broad shoulder heave his ponderous mace.
with lift hatchet, as in act to fell,
here stand the young and ardent Teucapel.
like a lone cypress, stately in decay,
when time have wear its summer bough away,
and hang its trunk with moss and lichen seré,
the mountain-warrior rest on his spear.
and thus, and at this hour, a hundred chief,
choose avenger of their country grief;
chief of the scatter tribe that roam the plain,
that sweep from Andes to the western main,
their country-god, around the coil smoke,
with sacrifice, and silent prayer, invoke.
for all, at first, be silent as the dead;
the pine be hear to whisper over their head,
so stand the stern assembly; but apart,
wrap in the spirit of his fearful art,
alone, to hollow sound of hideous hum,
the wizard-seer strike his prophetic drum.

silent they stand, and watch with anxious eye,
what phantom-shape may from the ground arise;
no voice come, no spectre-form appear;
a hollow sound, but not of wind, be hear
among the leaf, and distant thunder low,
which seem like moan of a expire foe.
his crimson feather quiver in the smoke,
then, with loud voice, first mariantu speak:

hail we the omen! spirit of the slay,
i hear your voice! mourn, devote Spain!
pale-visaged tyrant! still, along our coast,
shall we despair mark your iron host!
spirit of our brave father, curse the race
who thus your name, your memory disgrace! 
no; though yond mountain everlasting snow
in vain almagro toilsome march oppose;
though atacama long and wasteful plain
be heap with blacken carcase in vain;
though still fresh host those snowy summit scale,
and scare the Llamas with their glitter mail;
though sullen castle lour along our shore;
though our pollute soil be drench with gore;
insolent tyrant! we, prepare to die,
your arm, your horse, and your god, defy!

he speak: the warrior stamp upon the ground,
and tear the feather that their forehead bind.
insolent tyrant! burst the general cry,
we, meet for vengeance — we, prepare to die,
your arm, your horse, and your god, defy!

then Teucapel, with warm emotion, cry:
this hatchet never yet in blood be dye;
may it be bury deep within my heart,
if live from the conflict i depart,
till loud, from shore to shore, be hear one cry,
see! in their gore where the last tyrant lie!

the mountain-warrior: oh, that i can raise
the hatchet too, as in my better day,
when victor on maypocha bank i stand;
and while the indignant river roll in blood,
and our swift arrow hiss like rush rain,
i cleave almagro iron helm in twain!
my strength be well-nigh go! year mark with woe
have over i pass, and bow my spirit low!
alas, i have no son! belove boy,
thy father last, best hope, his pride, his joy! 
oh, have thou live, sole object of my prayer,
to guard my wane life, and these grey hair,
how brave have thou now, in manhood pride,
swing the uplift war-club by my side!
but the great spirit will not! thou be go;
and, weary, on this earth i walk alone;
thankful if i may yield my late breath,
and bless my country in the pang of death!

with word deliberate, and uplift hand,
mild to persuade, yet dauntless to command,
raise his hatchet high, caupolican
survey the assemble chief, and thus begin:

friend, father, brother, dear and sacred name!
your stern resolve each ardent look proclaim;
on then to conquest; let one hope inspire,
one spirit animate, one vengeance fire!
who doubt the glorious issue! to our foe
a tenfold strength and spirit we oppose.
in they no god protect his mortal son,
or speak, in thunder, from their roar gun.
nor come they child of the radiant sky;
but, like the wound snake, to writhe and die.
then, rush resistless on their prostrate band,
snatch the red lightning from their feeble hand,
and swear to the great spirit, hover near,
who now this awful invocation hear,
that we shall never see our household hearth,
till, like the dust, we sweep they from the earth.
but vain our strength, that idle, in the fight,
tumultuous waste its ineffectual might,
unless to one the hatchet we confide;
let one our number, one our counsel guide.
and, lo! for all that in this world be dear,
i raise this hatchet, raise it high, and swear,
never again to lay it down, till we,
and all who love this injure land, be free!

at once the loud acclaim tumultuous run:
our spear, our lifeblood, for caupolican!
with thou, for all that in this world be dear,
we lift our hatchet, lift they high, and swear,
never again to lay they down, till we,
and all who love this injure land, be free!

then thus the choose chief: bring forth the slave,
and let the death-dance recreate the brave.

two warrior lead a spanish captive, bind
with thong; his eye be fix upon the ground.
dark cypress the mournful spot enclose:
high in the midst a ancient mound arise,
mark on each side with monumental stone,
and white beneath with skull and scatter bone.
four poniard, on the mound, encircle stand,
with point erect, dark with forget blood.

forthwith, with loud voice, the chief command:
bring forth the lot, unbind the captive hand;
then north, towards his country, turn his face,
and dig beneath his foot a narrow space. 

caupolican uplift his axe, and cry:
god, of our land be you this sacrifice! —
now, listen, warrior! — and forthwith command
to place the billet in the captive hand —
soldier, cast in the lot!
with look aghast,
the captive in the trench a billet cast.

soldier, declare, who lead the arm of Spain,
where Santiago frown upon the plain? 

captive.

Villagra!

warrior.

earth upon the billet heap;
so may a tyrant heart be bury deep!
the dark wood echo to the long acclaim,
accurse be his nation and his name!

warrior.

captive, declare who lead the spanish band,
where the proud fortress shade coquimbo sand.

captive.

Ocampo!

warrior.

earth upon the billet heap;
so may a tyrant heart be bury deep!
the dark wood echo to the long acclaim,
accurse be his nation and his name!

warrior.

cast in the lot.
again, with look aghast,
the captive in the trench a billet cast.
pronounce his name who here pollute the plain,
the leader of the mail host of Spain!

captive.

Valdivia!
at that name a sudden cry
burst forth, and every lance be lift high. 

warrior.

Valdivia!
earth upon the billet heap;
so may a tyrant heart be bury deep!
the dark wood echo to the long acclaim,
accurse be his nation and his name!

and now loud yell, and whoop of death resound;
the shudder captive ghastly gaze around,
when the huge war-club smite he to the ground.
again deep stillness hush the listen crowd,
while the prophetic visard sing aloud.

song to the god of war.

by thy habitation dread,
in the valley of the dead,
where no sun, nor day, nor night,
break the red and dusky light;
by the grisly troop, that ride,
of slaughter Spaniard, at thy side, —
slaughter by the indian spear,
mighty epananum, hear!
hark, the battle! hark, the din!
now the deed of death begin!
the Spaniard come, in cloud! above,
i hear their hoarse artillery move!
spirit of our father slay,
haste, pursue the dog of Spain!
the noise be in the northern sky!
haste, pursue! they fly — they fly!
now from the cavern secret cell,
where the dire phantom dwell,
see they rush, and, ride high,
break the moonlight as they fly;
and, on the shadow plain beneath,
shoot, unseen, the shaft of death!
over the devote spanish camp,
like a vapour, dark and damp,
may they hover, till the plain
be hide beneath the countless slay;
and none but silent woman tread
from corpse to corpse, to seek the dead!

the waver fire flash with expire light,
when shrill and hollow, through the cope of night,
a distant shout be hear; at interval,
increase on the listen ear it fall.
it cease; when, burst from the thick wood,
with lift axe, two gloomy warrior stand;
wan in the midst, with dark and stream hair,
blow by the wind upon her bosom bare,
a woman, faint from terror wild alarm,
and fold a white infant in her arm,
appear. each warrior stoop his lance to gaze
on her pale look, see ghastly through the blaze.
save! she exclaim, with harrow aspect wild;
oh, save my innocent, my helpless child!
then faint fall, as from death instant stroke;
caupolican, with stern inquiry, speak:
whence come, to interrupt our awful rite,
at this dread hour, the warrior of the night?

from ocean.
who be she who faint lie,
and now scarce lift her supplicate eye? 

the spanish ship go down; the seaman bear,
in a small boat, this woman to the shore:
they fall beneath our hatchet, — and again,
we give they back to the insult main. 
the child and woman — of a race we hate —
warrior, it be you, here to decide their fate.

vengeance! aloud fierce mariantu cried:
let vengeance on the race be satisfy!
let none of hate spanish blood remain,
woman or child, to violate our plain!

amid that dark and bloody scene, the child
stretch to the mountain-chief his hand and smile.
a start tear of pity dim the eye
of the old warrior, though he know not why.
oh, think upon your little one! he cry,
nor be compassion to the weak deny.

caupolican then fix his aspect mild
on the white woman and her shrink child,
then firm speak: —
white woman, we be free,
when first thy brother of the distant sea
come to our shore! white woman, they the guilt!
they, if the blood of innocence be spill!
yet blood we seek not, though our arm oppose
the hate of foreign and remorseless foe;
thou come here a captive, so abide,
till the great spirit shall our cause decide.

he speak: the warrior of the night obey;
and, ere the early streak of dawn day,
they lead she from the scene of blood away.

Canto five.

argument.

it be dawn: — the distant Andes' rocky spire,
one after one, have catch the orient fire.
where the dun condor shoot his upward flight,
his wing be touch with momentary light.
meantime, beneath the mountain' glitter head,
a boundless ocean of grey vapour spread,
that over the champaign, stretch far below,
move now, in cluster mass, rise slow,
till all the live landscape be display
in various pomp of colour, light, and shade,
hill, forest, river, lake, and level plain,
lessen in sunshine to the southern main.
the llama fleece fume with ascend dew;
the gem-like humming-bird their toil renew;
and there, by the wild river devious side,
the tall flamingo, in its crimson pride,
stalk on, in rich plumage bright array,
with snowy neck superb, and leg of lengthen shade.

sad maid, for other may the valley ring,
for other ear the bird of morning sing;
for other eye the palm in beauty wave,
dark be thy prison in the ocean-cave!

amid that wind cavern inmost shade,
a drip rill its ceaseless murmur make:
mass of dim-discovered crag aloof,
hang, threaten, from the vast and vault roof:
and through a fissure, in its glimmer height,
see like a star, appear the distant light;
beneath the open, where the sunbeam shine,
far down, the rockweed hang its slender twine.

here, pale and bind, the spanish captive lie,
till morn on morn, in silence, pass away;
when once, as over her sleep child she hang,
and sad her evening supplication sing;
like a small gem, amid the gloom of night,
a glowworm shoot its green and tremble light, —
and, 'amid the moss and craggy fragment, shed
faint lustre over her sleep infant head;
and hark! a voice — a woman voice, its sound
die in faint echo, 'amid the vault profound:

let we pity the poor white maid! 
she have no mother near!
no friend to dry she tear!
upon the cold earth she be lay:
let we pity the poor white maid!

it seem the burden of a song of woe;
and see, across the gloom a indian girl move slow!
her near look be sorrowful, yet mild,
her hang lock be wreathe with rockweed wild;
gentle she speak, poor christian, dry thy tear:
be thou afraid? all be not cruel here.
oh! still more wretched may my portion be,
stranger, if i can injure thy and thou!
and, lo! i bring, from bank and thicket wild,
wood-strawberrie, and honey for thy child. 
whence, who be thou, who, in this fearful place,
do comfort speak to one of spanish race?

indian.

it be a indian maid, who chance to hear
thy tale of sorrow, as she wander near:
i love a white man once; but he be fly,
and now i wander heartless and alone.
i trace the dark and wind way beneath:
but well i know to lead thou hence be death.
oh, say! what fortune cast thou over the wave,
on these sad shore perhaps to find a grave?

spanish woman.

three year have pass since a fond husband leave
i and this infant, of his love bereave;
he i have follow; need i tell thou more,
cast helpless, friendless, hopeless, on this shore.

indian.

oh! do he love thou, then? let death betide,
yes, from this cavern i will be thy guide.
nay, do not shrink! from caracalla bay,
even now, the Spaniard wind their march this way.
as late in yester eve i pace the shore
i hear their signal-gun at distance roar.
will thou not follow? he will shield thy child, —
the christian god, — through pass dark and wild
he will direct thy way! come, follow i;
oh, yet be love, be happy, and be free!
but i, a outcast on my native plain,
the poor Olola never shall smile again!

so guide from the cave, when all be still,
and point to the further glimmer hill,
the indian lead, till, on itata side,
the spanish camp and night-fire they descry:
then on the stranger neck that wild maid fall,
and say, thy own god prosper thou, farewell!

the owl be hoot overhead; below,
on dusky wing, the vampire-bat sail slow.
ongolmo stand before the cave of night,
where the great visard sit: — a lurid light
be on his face; twelve giant shadow frown,
his mute and dreadful minister, around.
each eye-ball, as in life, be see to roll,
each lip to move; but not a live soul
be there, save bold ongolmo and the seer.
the warrior half advance his lift spear,
then speak: dread master of the mighty lore!
say, shall the Spaniard welter in their gore?
let these dark minister the answer tell,
reply the master of the mighty spell.
then every giant-shadow, as it stand,
lift on high a skull that drop with blood.
yet more, the impatient warrior cry; yet more!
say, shall i live, and drink the tyrant gore?
it be silence. speak! he cry: none make reply.
at once strange thunder shake the distant sky,
and all be over; the grisly shape be fly,
and the grim warrior stand in the wild wood alone.

saint pedro church have ring its midnight chime,
and the grey friar be chant at their prime,
when wind, as of a rush hurricane,
shake the tall window of the tower fane; —
sound more than earthly with the storm arise,
and a dire troop be pass to Andes' snow,
where mighty spirit in mysterious ring
their dread prophetic incantation sing,
round chillan crater-smoke, who lurid light
stream high against the hollow cope of night.
thy genius, Andes, tower over the rest,
rise vast, and thus a phantom-shape address:

who come so swift amid the storm?
ha! i know thy bloodless form,
i know thou, angel, who thou be,
by the hiss of thy dart!
it be death, the king! the rock around,
hark! echo back the fearful sound; —
it be death, the king! away, away!
the famish vulture scent its prey.
spectre, hence! we can die —
thy wither weapon we defy;
dire and potent as thou be!
then speak the phantom of the uplift dart:
spirit who in darkness dwell,
i hear far off your secret spell!
enough, on yonder fatal shore,
my fiend have drink your child gore;
lo! i come, and doom to fate
the murderer, and the foe you hate!
of all who shake their hostile spear,
and mark their way through blood and tear,
(now sleep still on yonder plain)
but one — one only shall remain,
ere thrice the morn shall shine again.

then sing the mighty spirit. thou, they sing,
hail to thou, death, all hail to death, the king!

the penguin flap her wing in gore,
devote Spain, along the shore.
whence that shriek? with ghastly eye,
thy victor-chief abandon lie!
victor of the southern world,
who crimson banner be unfurled
over the silence of the wave, —
over a land of bleed slave!
victor, where be now thy boast;
thy iron steed, thy mail host?
hark! hark! even now i hear his cry! —
spirit, hence! — he die! he die!

Canto sixth.

argument.

the second moon have now begin to wane,
since bold Valdivia leave the southern plain;
goal of his labour, penco port and bay,
far gleam to the summer sunset lay.

the way-worn veteran, who have slow pass
through trackless wood, or over savannah vast,
with hope impatient see the city spire
gild the horizon, like ascend fire.

now wellknown sound salute he, as more near
the citadel and battlement appear;
the approach trumpet ring at interval;
the trumpet answer from the rampart wall,
where many a maiden cast a anxious eye,
some long-lost object of her love to espy,
or watch, as the evening light illume
the point of lance, or the pass plume. 
the grate drawbridge and the portal-arch,
now echo to the long battalion march;
while every eye some friend remember greet,
amid the gaze crowd that throng the street.

as bend over his mule, amid the throng,
pensive and pale, anselmo ride along,
how sacred, 'amid the noise of arm, appear
his venerable mien and snowy beard!

while every heart a silent prayer bestow,
slow to the convent massy gate he ride:
around, the brother, gratulate, stand,
and ask for tiding of the southern land.

as from the turret toll the vesper bell,
he seek, a weary man, his evening cell,
no sound of social cheer, no bed of state,
nor gorgeous canopy his come wait;
but over a little bread, with fold hand,
thank the god that give, a while he stand;
then, while all thought of earthly sorrow cease,
upon his pallet lay he down in peace.

the scene how different, where the castle-hall
ring to the loud triumphant festival:
a hundred torch blaze, and flame aloof,
long quiver shadow streak the vault roof, —
while, see far off, the illumine window throw
a splendour on the shore and sea below.

amid his captain, in imperial state,
beneath a crimson canopy, elate,
Valdivia sit — and, strike loud the string,
the wander ministrel of Valentia sing.
for chili conquer, fill the bowl again!
for chili conquer, raise the heroic strain!

lautaro leave the hall of jubilee
unmarked, and wander by the moonlit sea:
he hear far off, in dissonant acclaim,
the song, the shout, and his love country name.
as swell at time the trump insult sound,
he raise his eye impatient from the ground;
then smite his breast indignant, and cry,
chili! my country; will that i have die
on the sad night of that eventful day
when on the ground my murder father lay!
i shall not then, deject and alone,
have think i hear his injure spirit groan.
ha! be it not his form — his face — his hair?
hold, soldier! stern, inhuman soldier, spare!
ha! be it not his blood? avenge, he cry,
avenge, my son, these wound! he faint — he die!
leave i, dread shadow! can i then forget
my father look — his voice? he beckon yet!
now on that glimmer rock i see he stand:
avenge! he cry, and wave his dim-seen hand!
thus muse the youth, distemper and forlorn,
when, hark! the sound as of a distant horn
swell over the surge! he turn his look around,
and still, with many a pause, he hear the sound:
it come from yonder rock; and, list! what strain
break on the silence of the sleep main?

i hear the song of gladness;
it seem but yesterday,
but it turn my thought to madness,
so soon it die away:
i sound my sea-shell; but in vain i try
to bring back that enchant harmony!
hark! hear you not the surge say,
oh! heartless maid, what can thou do?
over the moon-gleaming ocean, i will wander away,
and paddle to Spain in my light canoe!

the youth draw near, by the strange accent lead,
where in a cave, wild seaweed round her head,
and hold a large sea-conch in her hand,
he see, with wilder air, a indian maiden stand.
a tatter poncho over her shoulder hang;
on either side her long black lock be fling;
and now by the moon glimmer, he espy
her high cheek-bone, and bright but hollow eye.
lautaro speak: oh! say what cruel wrong
weigh on thy heart, maiden, what bode thy song?
she answer not, but blow her shell again;
then thus renew the desultory strain:
yes, yes, we must forget! the world be wide;
my music now shall be the dash tide:
in the calm of the deep i will frolic and swim —
with the breath of the south over the sea-blossom skim.

if ever, stranger, on thy way,
sound, more than earthly sweet, thy soul shall move,
it be the youth! oh! do not say —
that poor Olola die for love.

lautaro stretch his hand; she say, adieu!
and over the glimmer rock like lightning fly.
he follow, and still hear at distance swell
the lessen echo of that mournful shell.
it cease at once; and now he hear no more
than the sea murmur die on the shore.
Olola! — ha! his sister have that name!
oh, horrid fancy! shake not thus his frame!
all night he wander by the desert main,
to catch the melancholy sound again.

no torch blaze in penco castle hall
that echo to the midnight festival. 
the weary soldier by their toil oppress,
have now retire to silence and to rest.
the minstrel only, who the song have sing
of noble Cid, as over the string he hang,
upon the instrument have fall asleep,
weary, and now be hush in slumber deep.
trace the scene long past, in busy dream
again he wander by his native stream;
or sit, his evening saraband to sing
to the clear garonne gentle murmur.

cold over the flecker cloud the morning break
aslant ere from his slumber he awake;
still as he sit, nor yet have leave the place,
the first dim light fall on his pallid face.
he wake — he gaze round — the dawn day
come from the deep, in garb of cloudy grey.
the wood with crow of early turkey ring,
the glance bird beneath the castle sing,
and the sole sun his rise orb display,
radiant and redden, through the scatter haze.

to recreate the languid sense a while,
when earth and ocean wear their sweet smile,
he wander to the beach: the early air
blow soft, and lift, as it blow, his hair;
flush be his cheek; his fade eye, more bright,
shine with a faint but animate light,
while the soft morning ray seem to bestow
on his tire mind a transient kindred glow.
as thus, with shadow stretch over the sand,
he muse and wander on the wind strand,
at distance toss upon the tumble tide,
a dark and float substance he espy.
he stand, and where the eddy surge beat,
a indian corpse be roll beneath his foot:
the hollow wave retire with sullen sound;
the face of that sad corpse be to the ground;
it seem a female, by the slender form;
he touch the hand — it be no long warm;
he turn its face — o god! that eye, though dim,
seem with its deadly glare as fix on he!
how sink his shudder sense, how change his hue,
when poor Olola in that corpse he know!
lautaro, rush from the rock, advance;
his keen eye, like a startle eagle glance:
it be she! — he know she by a mark impress
from early infancy beneath her breast.

oh, my poor sister! when all hope be past
of meeting, do we meet — thus meet — at last!
then full on Zarinel, as one amaze,
with rise wrath and stern suspicion gaze;
for Zarinel still kneel upon the sand,
and to his forehead press the dead maid hand.

speak! whence be thou?
pale Zarinel, his head
upraise answer,
peace be with the dead!
he do thou seek who injure thy and thou?
here — strike the fell assassin — i be he!

die! he exclaim, and with convulsive start
instant have plunge the dagger in his heart,
when the meek father, with his holy book,
and placid aspect, meet his frenzied look.
he tremble — strike his brow — and, turn round,
fling the uplift dagger to the ground.
then murmur: father, heaven have hear thy prayer —
but oh! the sister of my soul lie there!
the christian god have triumph! father, heap
some earth upon her bone, while i go weep! 
anselmo with calm brow approach the place,
and hasten with his staff his falter pace:
ho! child of guilt and wretchedness, he cry,
speak! — holy father, the sad youth reply,
god bid the sea the accuse victim roll
dead at my foot, to teach my shudder soul
its guilt: oh! father, holy father, pray
that heaven may take the deep, dire curse away!

oh! yet, anselmo cry, live and repent,
for not in vain be this dread warn send;
the deep reproach of thy soul i spare,
go! seek heaven peace by penitence and prayer.

the youth arise, yet tremble from the shock,
and sever from the dead maid hair a lock;
this to his heart with tremble hand he press,
and dry the salt-sea moisture on his breast.

they lay her limb within the sea-beat grave,
and pray: her soul, o bless mary, save!

Canto seven.

argument.

the watchman on the tower his bugle blow,
and swell to the morn the streamer fly;
the rampart-gun a dread alarm give,
smoke roll, and thunder echo over the wave;
when, start from his couch, Valdivia cry,
what tiding? of the tribe! a scout reply;
even now, prepare thy bulwark to assail,
their gather number darken all the vale! 
Valdivia call to the attendant youth,
Philip, he cry, belike thy word have truth;
the formidable host, by holy James,
may well appal our priest and city dame!
do thou not fear? nay — do thou not reply?
now by the rood, and all the saint on high,
i hold it sin that thou shall lift thy hand
against thy brother in thy native land!
but, as thou say, those mighty enemy
i and my feeble legion will despise.
yes, by our holy lady, thou shall ride,
spectator of their prowess, by my side!
come life, come death, our battle shall display
its ensign to the early beam of day!
with loud summons ring the rampart-bell,
and haste the shrive father from his cell;
a soldier heart rejoice in alarm:
and let the trump at midnight sound to arm!

and now, obedient to the chief command,
the gray-haired priest before the soldier stand.
father, Valdivia cry, fierce be our foe, —
the last event of war god only know; —
let mass be sing; father, this very night
i will attend the high and holy rite.
yet deem not that i doubt of victory,
or place defeat or death before my eye;
it blenche not! but, whatsoever befall,
good father, i will part in peace with all.
so, tell lautaro — his ingenuous mind
perhaps may grieve, if late i seem unkind: —
hear my heart speak, though far from virtue way
ambition lure have lead my step astray,
no wanton exercise of barbarous power
harrow my shrink conscience at this hour. 
if hasty passion oft my spirit fire,
they flash a moment and the next expire;
lautaro know it. there be somewhat more:
i will not, here — here, on this distant shore
(shall they, the indian multitude, prevail,
and this good sword and these firm sinew fail)
amid my deadly enemy be find,
"unhouselled, ananealed," upon the ground,
a die man; — thy look, thy reverend age,
may save my poor remains from barbarous rage;
and thou may pay the last sad obsequy,
over the heap earth where a brave soldier lie: —
so god be with thou!
by the torch' light,
the slow procession move; the solemn rite
be chant: through the aisle and arch dim,
at interval, be hear the implore hymn. 
now all be still, that only you may hear —
(the tall and slender taper burn clear,
who light anselmo pallid brow illume,
now glance on the mail soldier plume)
hear, sound far, only the iron tread,
that echo through the cloister of the dead.
dark cloud be wander over the heaven wide way;
now from the camp, at time, a horse neigh
break on the ear; and on the rampart height
the sentinel proclaim the middle watch of night.
by the dim taper solitary ray,
tire, in his tent, the sovereign soldier lie. 

meantime, as shadowy dream arise, he roam
'amid bright pavilion and imperial dome,
where terrace, and battlement, and tower,
glisten in air over rich romantic bower.
sudden the visionary pomp be past;
the vacant court sound to the moan blast;
a dismal vault appear, where, with swell eye,
as start from their orb, a dead man lie.
it be almagro corpse! — roll on, you drum,
lo! where the great, the proud Pizarro come!
her gold, her rich gem, let fortune strew
before the mighty conqueror of Peru!
ah, turn, and see a dagger in his hand —
with ghastly look — see the assassin stand!
Pizarro fall; — he welter in his gore!
lord of the western world, be thou no more!
Valdivia, hark! — it be another groan!
another shadow come, it be thy own!
ah, bind not thus his arm! — give, give he breath!
wipe from his bleed brow those damp of death!

Valdivia, start, wake. he be alone:
the taper in his tent yet dim shine.
lautaro, haste! he cry; lautaro, save
thy die master! ah! be this the brave,
the haughty victor? hush, the dream be past!
the early trumpet ring the second blast!
arm, arm! even now, the impatient charger neigh!
again, from tent to tent the trumpet bray!
by torch-light, then, Valdivia give command,
haste, let del oro take a choose band,
with watchful caution, on his fleet steed,
a troop observant on the height to lead. 

now beautiful, beneath the heaven grey arch,
appear the main battalion move march;
the banner of the cross be bear before,
and next, with aspect sad, and tress hoar,
the holy man go thoughtful and press
a crucifix, in silence, to his breast.
Valdivia, all in burnish steel array,
upon who crest the morn effulgence play,
majestic rein his steed, and seem alone,
worthy the southern world imperial throne.
his feature through the bar casque that glow,
his pole-axe pendent from the saddlebow;
his dazzle armour, and the glitter bright
of his draw sabre, in the orient light,
speak he not, now, for knightly tournament
array, but on emprise of prowess bend,
and deed of deadly strife. in bloom pride,
the attendant youth ride, pensive, by his side.
their pennoned lance, wave in the wind,
two hundred clank horseman tramp behind,
in iron harness clad. the bugle blow,
and high in air the sanguine ensign fly.
the arbalaster next, with crossbow sling,
march, while the plume moor their cymbal swing.
auxiliar-indians here, a various train.
with spear and bow, darken the distant plain;
drum roll, and fife re-echo shrill and clear,
at interval, as near and yet more near,
while flag and intermingle halberd shine,
the long battalion draw its pass line.
last roll the heavy gun, a sable tier,
by indian draw, with matchman in the rear;
and many a straggle mule and sumpter-train
close the embattle order on the plain,
till nought beneath the azure sky appear
but the project point of scarce-discovered spear,

slow up the hill, with float vapour hoar,
or by the blue lake long retire shore,
now see distinct, through the dispart haze,
the glitter file its banner length display;
now wind from the wood, again appear
the move line of matchlock and of spear.
part see, part lose; the long illustrious march
circle the swamp, now draw its various arch;
and seem, as on it move, meander slow,
a radiant segment of a live bow.

five day the Spaniard, troop in array,
over plain and headland, hold their eastern way.
on the sixth early dawn, with shudder awe
and horror, in the last defile they see
ten pendent head, from which the gore still run,
all gash, and grim, and blacken in the sun.
these be the gallant troop that pass before,
the indian'vast encampment to explore,
lead by del oro, now with many a wound
pierce, and a headless trunk upon the ground.
the horse startle, as they tramp in blood;
the troop a moment half-recoiling stand.

but boot not now to pause, or to retire;
valdivia eye flash with indignant fire:
follow! he cry, brave comrade, to the hill!
and instant shout the peal valley fill.

and now, up to the hill ascend crest,
with animate look and beat breast,
he urge his steed; when, wide beneath his eye,
he see, in long expanse, arauco valley lie.

far as the labour sight can stretch its glance,
one undulate mass of club and lance,
one animate surface seem to fill
the many-stirring scene from hill to hill:
to the deep mass he point with his sword,
banner, advance! give out "Castile!" the word.

instant the file advance, the trumpet bray,
and now the host in terrible array,
range on the height that overlook the plain,
have halt!
but the task be long and vain
to tell what nation, from the sea that roar
round patagonia melancholy shore;
from forest, brown with everlasting shade;
from rock of sunshine, white with prone cascade;
from snowy summit, where the Llama roam,
oft bend over the cataract as it foam;
from stream who bridge tremble from the steep;
from lake, in summer sweet light asleep;
indian, of sullen brow and giant limb,
with club terrific, and with aspect grim,
flock fearless.
when they see the spanish line
array, and front to front, descend shine,
burst, instant burst, the universal cry,
(ten thousand spear uplift to the sky) —
tyrant, we come to conquer or to die!

grim mariantu lead the indian force
a-left; and, rush to the foremost horse,
hurl with unerring aim the involve thong,
then fearless spring amid the mail throng.

Valdivia see the horse, entangle, reel,
and shout, as he ride, Castile! Castile!
lead on the charge: like a descend flood,
it sweep, till every spur be black with blood. 
his force aright, where Harratomac lead,
a thousand spear go hiss overhead,
and feather arrow, of each vary hue,
in glance arch, beneath the sunbeam fly.
dire be the strife, when ardent Teucapel
advance in the front of carnage fall.
at once, ongolmo, elicura, rush,
and sway their huge club together, crush
horseman and horse; then bathe their hand in gore,
and limb from limb the pant carcase tear.
caupolican, where the main battle bleed,
host and succeed host undaunted lead,
till, tear and shatter by the ceaseless fire,
thousand, with gnash tooth, and clench spear, expire.
pierce by a hundred wound, ongolmo lie,
and grasp his club terrific as he die.

with breathless expectation, on the height,
lautaro watch the long and dubious fight:
pale and resign the meek man stand, and press
more close the holy image to his breast.
now near to the fight lautaro draw,
when on the ground a warrior meet his view,
upon who feature memory seem to trace
a faint resemblance of his father face;
over he a horseman, with collect might,
raise his uplift sword, in act to smite,
when the youth spring on, without a word,
snatch from a soldier weary grasp his sword,
and smite the horseman through the crest: a yell
of triumph burst, as to the ground he fall.
lautaro shout, on! brave brother, on!
scatter they like the snow! — the day be win!
lo, i! lautaro, — attacapac son! 

the indian turn: again the battle bleed,
cleave be the helm and crush the struggle steed.
the bugle sound, and faint with toil and heat,
some straggle horseman to the hill retreat.
stand, brave companion! bold Valdivia cry,
and shake his sword, in recent carnage dye;
oh! droop not — droop not yet — all be not over —
brave, faithful friend, one glorious sally more.
where be lautaro! leap his will sword
now to avenge his long-indulgent lord!
he wait not for answer, but again
spur to the centre of the horrid plain.
club, arrow, spear, the spot of death enclose,
and faint now the spanish shout arise.
'amid ghastly heap of many a bleed corpse,
lie the caparison and die horse.

while still the rush multitude assail,
vain be the fiery tube, the twist mail!
the spanish horseman faint; long yell resound,
as the drag ensign trail the gory ground:
shout, for the chief be seize! — a thousand cry
burst forth — Valdivia! for the sacrifice!
and lo, in silent dignity resign,
the meek anselmo, lead in bond, behind!
his hand upon his breast, young Zarinel
amid a group of mangle indian fall;
the spear that to his heart a passage find
leave poor olola hair within the wound.

now all be hush, save where, at time, alone,
deep midnight listen to a distant moan;
save where the condor clamour, overhead,
and strike with sound beak the helmet of the dead.

Canto eight.

argument.

the morn return, and, redden, seem to shed
one ray of glory on the patriot-dead.
round the dark stone, the victor-chiefs behold!
still on their lock the gout of gore hang cold!
there stand the brave caupolican, the pride
of chili, young lautaro, by his side!
near the grim circle, pendent from the wood,
twelve hundred spanish head be drip blood.
shrill sound the note of death: in festive dance,
the indian maid with myrtle bough advance;
the tinkle sea-shell on their ancle ring,
as, hail thus the victor-youth, they sing: —

song of indian maid.

oh, shout for lautaro, the young and the brave!
the arm of who strength be uplift to save,
when the steed of the stranger come rush amain,
and the ghost of our father look down on the slay!

it be eve, and the noise of the battle be over,
five thousand brave warrior be cold in their gore;
when, in front, young lautaro invincible stand,
and the horse and iron-man roll in their blood!

as the snow of the mountain be sweep by the blast,
the earthquake of death over the white man have pass;
shout, chili, in triumph! the battle be win,
and we dance round the head that be black in the sun!

lautaro, as if wrap in thought profound,
oft turn a anxious look inquire round. 
he be not here! — say, do my father live?
ere eager voice can a answer give,
with falter footstep and decline head,
and slow by a age indian lead,
wound and weak the mountain chief appear:
live, live! lautaro cry, with burst tear,
and fall upon his neck, and, kiss, press,
with fold arm, his grey hair to his breast.
oh, live! i be thy son — thy long-lost child!
the warrior raise his look, and faint smile;
chili, my country, be avenge! he cry:
my son! — then sink upon a shield — and die.

lautaro kneel beside he, as he bow,
and kiss his bleed breast, and weep aloud.
the sound of sadness through the circle run,
when thus, with lift axe, caupolican:
what, for our father, brother, child, slay,
can thou repay, ruthless, inhuman Spain?
here, on the scene with recent slaughter red,
to sooth the spirit of the brave who bleed,
raise we, today, the war-feast of the dead.
bring forth the chief in bond! father, today
devote we to our god the noble prey!

lautaro turn his eye, and, gaze round,
behold Valdivia and anselmo bind!
one stand in arm, as with a stern despair,
his helmet cleave in twain, his temple bare,
where streak of blood that drop upon his mail,
serve but to show his face more deadly pale:
he eyebrow, dark and resolute, he bend,
and stand, compose, to wait the dire event.

still on the cross his look anselmo cast,
as if all thought of this vain world be pass,
and in a world of light, without a shade,
even now his meek and guileless spirit stray. 
where stand the spanish chief, a mutter sound
rise, and each club be lift from the ground;
when, start from his father corpse, his sword
wave before his once-triumphant lord,
lautaro cry, my breast shall meet the blow:
but save — save he, to who my life i owe!

Valdivia mark he with unmoving eye,
then look upon his bond, nor deign reply;
when Harratomac, steal with slow pace,
and lift high his iron-jagged mace,
smite he to earth; a thousand voice rise,
mingle with shout and yell, so fall our foe!

lautaro give to tear a moment space,
as black in death he mark valdivia face,
then cry — chief, friend, and thou, caupolican,
oh, spare this innocent and holy man!
he never sail, rapacious, over the deep,
the gold of blood-polluted land to heap;
he never give the arm host his aid,
but meek to the mighty spirit pray,
that in all land the sound of woe may cease,
and brother of the wide world dwell in peace!
the victor-youth see generous sympathy
already steal to every warrior eye;
then thus again: oh, if this filial tear
bear witness my own father be most dear;
if this uplift arm, this bleed steel
speak for my country what i feel and feel;
if, at this hour, i meet her high applause,
while my heart beat still ardent in her cause; —
hear, and forgive these tear that grateful flow,
oh! hear, how much to this poor man i owe!

i be a child — when to my sire abode,
in chillan vale, the arm horseman ride:
i, while my father cold and breathless lay,
far off the crest soldier bear away,
and for a captive sell. no friend be near,
to mark a young and orphan stranger tear!
this humble man, with kind parental care,
snatch i from slavery — save from dark despair;
and as my year increase, protect, feed,
and breathe a father blessing on my head.
a spanish maid be with he: need i speak?
behold, affection tear still wet my cheek!
year, as they pass, mature in ripen grace
her form unfold, and her beauteous face:
she hear my orphan tale; she love to hear,
and sometime for my fortune drop a tear.
i can have bow to dire ill resign,
but weep at look so sweet, at word so kind.

Valdivia see i, now in bloom age,
and claim i from the father as his page;
the chief too cherish i, yea, save my life,
when in Peru arise the civil strife.
yet still remember she i love so well,
oft i return to the grey father cell:
he voice instruct i; recall my youth
from rude idolatry to heavenly truth:
of this hereafter; he my darkling mind
clear, and from low and sensual thought refine.
then first, with feeling new impress, i strive
to hide the tear of tenderness and love:
amid the fair maiden of Peru,
my eye, my heart, one only object know:
i live that object love and faith to share;
he see, and bless we with a father prayer.

here, at valdivia last and stern command,
i come, a stranger in my native land!
anselmo (so he call — now most in need —
and stand here in bond, for who i plead)
come, by our chief so summon, and for aid
to the great spirit of the christian pray:
here as a son i love he, but i leave
a wife, a child, of my fond care bereave,
never to see again; for death await
my entrance now in lima jealous gate.

caupolican, do thou thy father love?
do his last die look affection move?
pity this age man; unbend thy brow:
he be my father — be my father, now!

consent mercy mark each warrior mien.
but who be this, what pallid form be see,
as crush already by the fatal blow,
bind, and with look white as a wreath of snow,
her hand upon her breast, scarce draw her breath,
a spanish woman kneel, expect death,
while, bear by a dark warrior at her side,
a infant shrink from the red plume, and cry!
lautaro start:
injure maid of Spain!
i! — metaphor! oh, take i to thy arm again!
she hear his voice, and, by the scene oppress,
with one faint sigh fall senseless on his breast.

caupolican, with warm emotion, cry,
live, live! lautaro and his beauteous bride!
live, age father! — and forthwith command
a warrior to unbind anselmo hand.
she raise her head: his eye first meet her view,
as round lautaro neck her arm she throw,
ah, no! she feeble speak; it be not true!
it be some form of the distemper brain!
then hide her face upon his breast again.

dark flash eye, terrific, glare around:
here, his brain scatter by the deadly wound,
the spanish chief lie on the gory ground. 
with lower brow, and mace yet droop blood,
and clot hair, there mariantu stand.
anselmo here, sad, yet in sorrow mild,
appear: she cry, a blessing on your child,
and kneel, as slow revive she wake sense,
and then, with look aghast, oh bear we hence!
now all the assemble chief, assent, cry,
live, live! lautaro and his beauteous bride!
with eager arm lautaro snatch his boy,
and kiss he in a agony of joy;
then to anselmo give, who strive to speak,
and feel the tear first burn on his cheek:
the infant hold his neck with strict embrace,
and kiss his pale emaciate face.

from the dread scene, wet with valdivia gore,
his wan and tremble charge lautaro bear.
there be a bank, where sleep the summer-light,
a small stream whisper go in maze bright,
and steal from the sea, the western wind
wave the magnolia on the slope incline:
the woodpecker, in glitter plumage green,
and echo bill, beneath the bough be see;
and, arch with gay and pendent flower above,
the floripondio its rich trellis weave.
lautaro bend, with look of love and joy,
over his yet tremble wife and beauteous boy:

oh, by what miracle, belove! say,
have thou escape the peril of the way
from Lima, where our humble dwelling stand,
to these tumultuous scene, this vale of blood?

rouse by his voice, as from the sleep of death,
faint she reply, with slow-recovering breath,
who shall express, when thou, best friend! be go,
how sink my heart! — desert and alone! 
will i be with thou! oft i sit and sigh,
when the pale moon shine on the silent tide —
at length resolve, i seek thou over the sea:
the brave bark cheery go before the breeze,
that arm and soldier to Valdivia bear,
from Lima bind to chili southern shore:
i seize the fair occasion — ocean smile,
as to the sire i bear his lisp child.
the storm arise: with loud and sudden shock
the vessel sink, dispart on a rock.
some mariner, amid the billow wild,
scarce save, in one small boat, i and my child.
what i have bear, a captive since that day —
forgive these tear — i scarce have heart to say!
none pity, save one gentle indian maid —
a wild maid — of she look i be afraid;
her long black hair upon her shoulder fall,
and in her hand she bear a wreathe shell.

lautaro for a moment turn aside,
and, oh, my sister! with faint voice he cry.

already free from sorrow and alarm,
i clasp in thought a husband in my arm,
when a dark warrior, station on the height,
who hold his solitary watch by night,
before i stand, and lift high his lance,
exclaim: no further, on thy life, advance!
faint, weary, sink to the earth with dread,
back to the dismal cave my step he lead.
only at eve, within the craggy cleave,
some water, and a cake of maize, be leave.
the thirteenth sun unseen go down the sky;
when morning come, they bring i forth to die;
but hush be every sigh, each bode fear,
since all i seek on earth, and all i love, be here! 

her infant raise his hand, with glisten eye,
to reach a large and radiant butterfly,
that flutter near his face; with look of love,
and truth and tenderness, lautaro strive
to calm her wound heart; the holy sire,
his eye faint-lighted with a transient fire,
hang over they, and to heaven his prayer address,
while, with uplift hand, he weep and bless.

a age indian come, with feather crown,
and kneel before lautaro on the ground.
what tiding, indian?

indian.

when i lead thy sire,
who late thou see upon his shield expire,
son of our Ulmen, do thou mark no trace,
in these sad look, of a remember face?
do thou remember Izdabel? look here!
it be thy father hatchet and his spear.
friend of my infant day, how i rejoice,
lautaro cry, once more to hear that voice!
life like a dream, since last we meet, have flee —
oh, my belove sister, thou be dead!

indian.

i come to guide thou through untrodden way,
to the lone valley, where thy father day
be pass; where every cave and every tree,
from morn to morn, remind he of thou!

lautaro cry: here, faithful indian, stay;
i have a last sad duty yet to pay.
a little while we part: — thou here remain.
he speak, and pass like lightning over the plain.
ah, cease, Castilian maid, thy vain alarm!
see where he come — his father in his arm! 

now lead, he cry. the indian, sad and still,
pace on from wood to vale, from vale to hill;
her infant tire, and hush a while to rest,
smile, in a dream, upon its mother breast;
the pensive mother grey anselmo lead;
behind, lautaro bear his father dead.

beneath the branch palm they sleep at night;
the small bird wake they ere the morning light.
before their path, in distant view, appear
the mountain-smoke, that its dark column rear
over Andes' summit, in the pale blue sky,
lift their icy pinnacle so high.
four day they onward hold their eastern way;
on the five rise morn, before they lay
chillan lone glen, amid who wind green,
the warrior love and last abode be see.
no smoke go up, a stillness reign around,
save where the water fall with soothe sound,
save where the Thenca sing so loud and clear,
and the bright humming-bird be spin near.
yet here all human tumult seem to cease,
and sunshine rest on the spot of peace;
the myrtle bloom as fragrant and as green
as if lautaro scarce have leave the scene;
and in his ear the fall water' spray
seem swell with the sound of yesterday.

where yonder rock the age cedar shade,
there shall my father bone in peace be lay.

beneath the cedar shade they dig the ground;
the small and sad communion gather round.
beside the grave stand age Izdabel,
and break the spear, and cry: farewell, farewell!
lautaro hide his face, and sigh adieu!
as the stone hatchet in the grave he throw. 
the little child that to its mother cling,
stretch out its arm, then on her garment hang,
with sidelong look, half-shrinking, half-amazed,
and drop its flower, unconscious, as it gaze.

and now anselmo, his pale brow incline,
the honour relic, dust to dust, consign
with christian rite, and sing, on bend knee,
"eternam pacem dona, domine."
then rise up he close the holy book;
and lift in the beam his light look,
(the cross, with meekness, fold on his breast),
here, too, he cry, my bone in peace shall rest!
few year remain to i, and never more
shall i behold, o Spain! thy distant shore!
here lay my bone, that the same tree may wave
over the poor christian and the indian grave.
oh, may it (when the son of future day
shall hear our tale and on the hillock gaze),
oh, may it teach, that charity shall bind,
wherever they roam, the brother of mankind!
the time shall come, when wild tribe shall hear
thy voice, o Christ! and drop the slaughter spear.

yet we condemn not he who brave stand,
to seal his country freedom with his blood;
and if, in aftertime, a ruthless band
of fell invader sweep my native land,
may she, by chili stern example lead,
hurl back his thunder on the assailant's head;
sustain by freedom, strike the avenge blow,
and learn one virtue from her ancient foe!
