night.

to Stella.

at this lone hour, when nature silent lie,
 and Cynthia, solemn, aid the rise scene,
 while hydra-headed care one moment sleep,
 and, listless, drop his gall chain to earth;
 o! let swift fancy plume her ruffle wing,
 and seek the spot where sacred rapture rise;
 where thy mild form, relax in guiltless sleep,
 forget to think, to feel; may dream of bliss
 lull thy soft sense, nor paint the scene of woe,
 i late tell; think not my spirit near,
 light airy shade, that will elude thy eye,
 and shrink to nothing, conscious of thy worth. 
yet here i dare, in fancy boundless walk,
 invoke thy muse, and hail thy song sublime. 

Melpomene! thou sad sigh maid! 
great queen of sorrow, in majestic weed,
 who gay air be solemn sound of woe;
 thou who awake fair stella soothe lie,
 soon as Aurora gild the blush east,
 o lend thy aid, while thy soft votary sleep,
 and bid i bold swell the artless line,
 lend i her pen, and guide my rustic hand,
 to draw soft pity from the tragic tale,
 where goad misery drive her ploughshare deep;
 teach i to paint the tremor of the soul
 in sorrow deep tint; assist the sigh,
 and, with its breathe, swell the throb heart. 
the tear-clad eye, when soft passion rush
 to assault the soul besiege by other woe,
 that eye where pity tip the point beam
 with triple softness — oh! that eye be she. 

the hoary hermit, chill by frigid rule,
 who totter on the hairbreadth verge of fate,
 and die a age that he may live for ever,
 will sudden stop, forgetful of the past,
 nor heed the future, listen to her song;
 her song, least part, her soar spirit share
 a early heaven, anticipate her bliss,
 and quaff nectareous draught of joy sublime;
 beyond yond starry firmament she rove,
 and bask in sun that never warm the earth;
 newtonian system lag her rapid flight,
 she pierce through his planetary world,
 and, eager, grasp creation yet to be. 

you busy world! what be your cobweb toil,
 your sisyphéan labour? infant pile,
 to raise a bubble, which in air dissolve;
 you toil a age to grasp the shine dust,
 death trip your heel, you throw it to the wind:
 "ah! let your iron on their anvil cool,"
 and list a while to stella moral strain;
 she will teach thy eye in mental maze to creep,
 timid and tremble, to explore the past;
 alarm by she, the monitor within
 shall aid thy search, and bring thyself to view. 
examine deep; that secret arbitrator
 shall give thou self-applause or deep remorse. 
heaven guard thou from that harpy, never fill,
 still, still insatiate as the bird of Jove,
 that deep gore the breast for meal eternal,
 nor know a glut from evergrow food. 
still struggle, restless; sink to depth profound,
 nor ever own a thought beneath immortal;
 as such Jehovah view thou in the dust,
 as such he will waft thou to the plain of heaven. 
what be death? like infant sick of senseless toy,
 we sink to rest — awake to love and joy;
 to love and joy awake the ravish soul,
 who live to virtue, and who own a god. 
but, ah! too dare theme — Stella, assist! 
my humble spirit wait your social hand,
 who friendly beckon point to realm of bliss;
 see, Stella soar, nor heed my plaintive note,
 nor will the muse assist my sluggard flight;
 with rapture, see, she clasp her favourite maid,
 and bid i fix where science never dawn;
 hard, hard command! and yet i will obey;
 unaided, unassisted, will deplore
 that learning, heaven best gift, be lose to i. 
cheerless and pensive over the wild of life,
 like the poor beetle creep my hour away;
 the journey close, i shoot the gulf unknown,
 to find a home, perhaps — a long lose mother. 
how do fond thought hang on her much-loved name,
 and tear each fibre of my burst heart. 
ah! dear supporter of my infant mind,
 who noble precept bid my soul aspire
 to more than tinsel joy; the filial tear
 shall drop for thou when pleasure loud call. 
the dark sky lour, and the storm of life
 rise high with wild roar; no voice be hear,
 but horror dismal train affright our soul. 
for see, from the dark cavern of the deep,
 their grisly form arise; the crown of death
 shine horrible resplendent. see! they seize
 a tremble, faint, unresisting form,
 which hourly meet their grasp: ah! spare she yet. 
see from the shore V— waft his friendly hand;
 he be bear to bless, and we may yet be happy:
 quick let i clasp she to my pant heart,
 and bear she swift over the beat wave. 
in vain, in vain; some great power unnerve
 my feeble arm; inexorable death,
 why will thou tear she from i? oh! she die,
 though v—'s dear name have lend a feeble glow
 to her pale cheek, — she own he, and expire. 
tremendous stroke! this be thy pastime, fate:
 if shrink atom thus thy vengeance feel,
 what the grand stroke of final dissolution? 

believe i, gentle friend, i can complain;
 but what avail the deep repine sigh? 
how inexpressive of the heart-felt pang! 
when heaven afflict, none shall oppose the plea,
 for who shall hold the arm that thus have wreck i? 

say, bright instructress! sooth of the soul,
 who flow number, strong as jesse harp,
 despair never hear, but loathe leave the soul;
 dire fiend! who sound of joy can never allure;
 o say, for strong-eyed faith have bear you far
 beyond the gloomy chamber of the grave;
 speak loud to my late correct soul,
 that sure reward await the blameless mind;
 else will i give the strenuous struggle over,
 deny a V— as delegate of heaven,
 throw up your angel mind, as paint shade,
 or notion strong from early precept catch,
 rove through the maze of all-alluring sense,
 and this side Jordan every hope shall fix:
 mere rave all — these crude idea die,
 as faith to calvary mount direct my view;
 nor will i lose, thus humble as i be,
 my dear-bought claim to immortality. 

excuse i, Stella! lo, i guideless stray,
 no friendly hand assist my wilder thought;
 uncouth, uncivilised, and rude rough,
 unpolished, as the form throw by by heaven,
 not worth completion, or the artist hand,
 to add a something more. such be the mind
 which thou may yet illumine; it be a task
 for angel thus to raise the grovel soul,
 and bid it pant for more than earthly bliss. 
then show heaven open glory to my eye;
 and i will view thou as the fount of light,
 which pierce old chaos to his depth profound,
 while all his native horror stand reveal. 

yet more i ask — ah, Stella! aid my pen
 to paint the grateful rapture, to describe
 how the big heart, exult, scarce beat,
 and joy too vast oppress all the frame! 
the ecstasy in languor leave the soul,
 and all her slacken faculty relax. 
the web of gratitude so fine wrought,
 think hardly dare to touch it; soften time,
 and frequent pause, give it strength of growth,
 even to oppression. oh, delightful pain! 
my soul want firm support. the gloomy joy
 i once prefer, and think the noble choice,
 have lose its relish; grand mistake of fool,
 in sullen self absorb! lo! far estrange
 from social joy, i fix my woe-fraught eye
 where riches blaze upon a murky soul,
 and serve to light its error to the world;
 i meet ungenial influence, bright, but cold,
 and, harden by encounter, deep i sink
 abstract — scorn and silence lead the way,
 no matter whither: — the too gaudy sun
 shine not for i; no bed of nature yield
 her vary sweet; no music wake the grove;
 no valley blow, no wave grain uprear
 its tender stalk to cheer my come hour;
 but horrid silence brood upon my soul,
 with wing deep-drenched in misery torpid dew. 
that heart which once have join the laugh train,
 who guiltless rapture fly on fancy wing,
 nor once suspect thus to feel the gripe
 of iron-clawed despair, now yield to pang,
 to agony more exquisite than death;
 that be — to live. o, nature! shriek no more,
 i have no answer for thy thrill voice;
 go, melt the soul, less freeze in her power,
 and bid she weep over misery not her own;
 hold up the faint babe who sigh its want,
 so mute incoherent; mark the head
 which age and woe bend tremulous to earth;
 who lamp, now quiver in the socket, call
 in haste for aid, never find it, and go out. 
plead thou for those, but never talk of aid
 for misery like i, which mock relief. 

thus desperate i reason, mad talk —
 thus horrid as i be, of rugged growth,
 more savage than the nightly-prowling wolf;
 she feel what nature teach; i, wild far,
 oppose her dictate — but my pant soul
 now shiver in the agony of change,
 as insect tremble in the doubtful hour
 of transmigration; loath to lose the form
 of various tint, its fond cherish pride;
 disrobe like i they fall, and boast no more. 

Stella, how strong thy gentle argument! 
by the convince, i scorn the iron lore,
 the savage virtue of untutored mind:
 in thy mild rhetoric dwell a social love
 beyond my wild conception, optic false! 
through which i false judge of polish life. 

this be the sullen curse of surly soul,
 to disbelieve the virtue which they feel not. 
ah, Stella! i be a convert; thou have tune
 my rust power to the bright strain of joy:
 my chill idea quit their freeze pole
 of blank despair, and, gentle usher in
 by grateful rapture, meet thy genial warmth:
 it be more than joy, or joy to a extreme;
 then teach my honest heart to feel more faint,
 more moderate in her grateful change, or lend
 fair elocution, who the mimic aid,
 to paint in bright hue the unfelt joy. 

accept the wild and untaught rapture, form
 from simple nature, in her artless guise;
 yet in its wildness charm to excess
 to soul like thy, distasteful to the vain,
 who relish nothing honest; nothing love
 but flatter strain, trick out with every art
 of gaudy eloquence, and trim deceit. 
