Alexis:

a pastoral ballad.

in two part.

by a lady.

Alexis, the pride of the plain,
 beside a clear brook lie recline,
 his complaint be fair daphne disdain,
 who have prove to the shepherd unkind:
 he flock be no long his care,
 his pipe now no long can please,
 he neglect his dress and his hair,
 and by solitude feed his disease. 

 "poor shepherd! he wild exclaim,
" alas! what avail all thy moan? 
 "the joy thy fond fancy have frame,
" with Daphne for ever be fly! 
 "how can you, o Daphne, deceive
" a swain not unworthy your love? 
 "why do thou, Alexis, believe
" such a maid can thy passion approve? 

 "her form be replete with each grace,
" the diamond beam forth in her eye,
 "the lily expand over her face,
" and the rose-bud impart its soft dye. 
 "no warbler can rival her song,
" Philomela with envy complain,
 "the stream glide in silence along,
" the glad zephyr diffuse her soft strain. 

 "when Daphne appear in the mead,
" her presence enliven the morn,
 "now the wind rough blow round my head,
" and the sun cheerful beam be withdraw. 
 "no long these meadow look green,
" now the warbler abandon the grove,
 "the air breathe no long serene,
" all summer be flee with my love. 

 "oh! Daphne, you hear my fond sigh,
" you do not my passion disdain,
 "when i gaze with delight on your eye,
" my soft glance you do not restrain:
 "but now you make sport of my woe,
" and laugh at the suffering i feel,
 "i enjoy not the sweet of repose,
" nor can i my torment conceal! 

 "farewell, you sad scene of my love,
" i shall never revisit you more! 
 "adieu to the mead an he grove,
" it be here i first learn to adore! 
 "i will banish this wretch from her sight,
" i know not what fate may ensue,
 "never more can i taste of delight,
" to every enjoyment adieu. " 

part the second.

with a torrent of heart-bursting grief
 Alexis continue his moan,
 tear give he some little relief,
 yet he cease not to sigh and to groan. 
pastora by chance hasten by,
 she see the poor shepherd despair,
 soft pity appear in her eye,
 she ask he the source of his care. 

 "what cause have Alexis to weep?" 
with look of compassion, she say;
 "have you lose ever a lamb or a sheep? 
" or be tray the poor favourite dead? 
 "or, perhaps, your fair daphne unkind,
" perhaps for her coyness you grieve,
 "ah! it be jealousy poison your mind! 
" but appearance often deceive. " 

the shepherd just raise up his head,
 he thank the kind maid for her care,
 he confess that all comfort be flee,
 and nothing be leave but despair. 
pastora even weep at the tale,
 and wish she can ease his distress;
 can her interest with Daphne prevail,
 his suffering shall soon find redress. 

he gaze on the fair with surprise,
 and admire the good-nature she show,
 when she go he withdraw not his eye,
 but with pleasure her footstep pursue. 
her sweetness, her beauty, and truth,
 with daphne late falsehood compare,
 so charm, so astonish the youth,
 that his heart for a change be prepare. 

yet still his fond wish will arise,
 "ah! be but my Daphne thus kind! 
" i will wipe off these tear from my eye,
 "and give up my sigh to the wind!" 
he say, and arise from the ground,
 then instant return to his cot,
 soon in sleep every suffering be drown,
 and daphne unkindness forget. 

with the sun the next morn he arise,
 pastora he seek in the grove,
 he repeat the tale of his woe,
 and mourn the sad fate of his love! 
pastora hear every complaint;
 again he impart his grief,
 he talk without fear or constraint,
 and find from her converse, relief. 

the friendship he feel for the fair,
 each meeting still serve to improve;
 he then bless his late cause of despair,
 and become a true votary to love. 
it be no long for beauty he sigh,
 he no long to merit be blind,
 it be his joy, and a laudable pride,
 that he value the charm of the mind. 

pastora with blush confess,
 that she feel all the force of true love;
 but that reason her passion suppress,
 yet that now she must own and approve. 
she soon give her hand to the swain,
 who proclaim to each shepherd this truth,
 he have meet a reward for his pain,
 more last than beauty and youth. 

when spring deck with verdure the mead,
 love waft mild fragrance around;
 when summer invite to the shade,
 love strew with fresh flowret the ground. 
in autumn through cornfield they rove,
 and their love as in springtime appear,
 though winter disrobe the know grove,
 yet their love vary not with the year. 

you nymph, to this maxim attend,
 though beauty awhile may allure,
 yet to fix in the lover the friend,
 it be virtue alone be secure! 
you swain, who be catch by a face,
 know, that beauty will quick decay;
 that virtue still heighten each grace,
 and impart more than time steal away! 
