EPILOGUE TO PHÆDRA.

Ladies, to Night your Pity I implore
 For One, who never troubled You before:
 An Oxford-Man, extreamly read in Greek,
 Who from Euripides makes Phædra speak;
 And comes to Town, to let Us Moderns know,
 How Women lov'd two thousand Years ago. 

If that be all, said I, e'en burn your Play:
 I' gad! We know all that, as well as They:
 Show Us the youthful, handsome Charioteer,
 Firm in his Seat, and running his Career;
 Our Souls would kindle with as gen'rous Flames,
 As e'er inspir'd the antient Grecian Dames:
 Ev'ry Ismena would resign her Breast;
 And ev'ry dear Hippolytus be blest. 

But, as it is, Six flouncing Flanders Mares
 Are e'en as good, as any Two of Theirs;
 And if Hippolytus can but contrive
 To buy the gilded Chariot; John can drive. 

Now of the Bustle You have seen to Day,
 And Phædra's Morals in this Scholar's Play,
 Something at least in Justice should be said:
 But this Hippolytus so fills One's Head —
 Well! Phædra liv'd as chastly as She cou'd,
 For she was Father Jove's own Flesh and Blood. 
Her aukward Love indeed was odly fated:
 She and her Poly were too near related:
 And yet that Scruple had been laid aside,
 If honest Theseus had but fairly dy'd:
 But when He came, what needed He to know,
 But that all Matters stood in Statu quo? 
There was no harm, You see; or grant there were:
 She might want Conduct; but He wanted Care. 
'Twas in a Husband little less than rude,
 Upon his Wife's Retirement to intrude —
 He should have sent a Night or two before,
 That He would come exact at such an Hour:
 Then He had turn'd all Tragedy to Jest;
 Found ev'ry Thing contribute to his Rest;
 The Picquet-Friend dismiss'd, the Coast all clear,
 And Spouse alone impatient for her Dear. 

But if these gay Reflections come too late,
 To keep the guilty Phædra from her Fate;
 If your more serious Judgment must condemn
 The dire Effects of her unhappy Flame:
 Yet, Ye chaste Matrons, and Ye tender Fair,
 Let Love and Innocence engage your Care:
 My spotless Flames to your Protection take;
 And spare poor Phædra, for Ismena's sake. 
