epilogue to PHÆDRA.

lady, to night your pity i implore
 for one, who never trouble you before:
 a oxford-man, extreme read in greek,
 who from Euripides make Phædra speak;
 and come to town, to let we modern know,
 how woman love two thousand year ago. 

if that be all, say i, even burn your play:
 i god! we know all that, as well as they:
 show we the youthful, handsome charioteer,
 firm in his seat, and run his career;
 our soul will kindle with as generous flame,
 as ever inspire the ancient grecian dame:
 every ismena will resign her breast;
 and every dear Hippolytus be bless. 

but, as it be, six flounce Flanders Mares
 be even as good, as any two of they;
 and if Hippolytus can but contrive
 to buy the gild chariot; John can drive. 

now of the bustle you have see to day,
 and phædra moral in this scholar play,
 something at least in justice shall be say:
 but this Hippolytus so fill one head —
 well! Phædra live as chastely as she can,
 for she be father Jove own flesh and blood. 
her awkward love indeed be odd fate:
 she and her Poly be too near relate:
 and yet that scruple have be lay aside,
 if honest Theseus have but fair die:
 but when he come, what need he to know,
 but that all matter stand in Statu quo? 
there be no harm, you see; or grant there be:
 she may want conduct; but he want care. 
it be in a husband little less than rude,
 upon his wife retirement to intrude —
 he shall have send a night or two before,
 that he will come exact at such a hour:
 then he have turn all tragedy to jest;
 find every thing contribute to his rest;
 the picquet-friend dismiss, the coast all clear,
 and spouse alone impatient for her dear. 

but if these gay reflection come too late,
 to keep the guilty Phædra from her fate;
 if your more serious judgement must condemn
 the dire effect of her unhappy flame:
 yet, you chaste matron, and you tender fair,
 let love and innocence engage your care:
 my spotless flame to your protection take;
 and spare poor Phædra, for ismena sake. 
