expostulation.

why weep the muse for England? what appear
 in England case to move the muse to tear? 
from side to side of her delightful isle,
 be she not clothe with a perpetual smile? 
can nature add a charm, or art confer
 a new find luxury not see in she? 
where under heaven be pleasure more pursue,
 or where do cold reflection less intrude? 
her field a rich expanse of wavy corn
 pour out from plenty overflow horn,
 ambrosial garden in which art supply
 the fervor and the force of indian sky,
 her peaceful shore, where busy commerce wait
 to pour his golden tide through all her gate,
 who fiery sun that scorch the russet spice
 of eastern grove, and ocean floore with ice;
 forbid in vain to push his dare way
 to dark clime, or clime of bright day,
 who the wind waft wherever the billow roll,
 from the world girdle to the freeze pole;
 the chariot bound in her wheel-worn street,
 her vault below where every vintage meet,
 her theatre, her revel, and her sport,
 the scene to which not youth alone resort,
 but age in spite of weakness and of pain
 still haunt, in hope to dream of youth again,
 all speak her happy — let the muse look round
 from east to west, no sorrow can be find,
 or only what in cottage confine,
 sigh unregarded to the pass wind;
 then wherefore weep for England, what appear
 in England case to move the muse to tear? 
the prophet weep for Israel, wish his eye
 be fountain feed with infinite supply;
 for Israel deal in robbery and wrong,
 there be the scorner and the slanderer tongue,
 oath use as plaything or convenient tool,
 as interest bias knave, or fashion fool,
 adultery neigh at his neighbour door,
 oppression labour hard to grind the poor,
 the partial balance and deceitful weight,
 the treacherous smile, a mask for secret hate,
 hypocrisy, formality in prayer,
 and the dull service of the lip be there. 
her woman insolent and self-caressed,
 by vanity unwearied finger dress,
 forget the blush that virgin fear impart
 to modest cheek, and borrow one from art;
 be just such trifle without worth or use,
 as silly pride and idleness produce,
 curl, scent, furbelowed and flounce around,
 with foot too delicate to touch the ground,
 they stretch the neck, and roll the wanton eye,
 and sigh for every fool that flutter by. 
he see his people slave to every lust,
 lewd, avaricious, arrogant, unjust,
 he hear the wheel of a avenge god
 groan heavy along the distant road;
 see Babylon set wide her two leave brass
 to let the military deluge pass;
 Jerusalem a prey, her glory soil,
 her prince captive, and her treasure spoil;
 weep till all Israel hear his bitter cry,
 stamp with his foot and smite upon his thigh;
 but weep and stamp and smite his thigh in vain,
 pleasure be deaf when tell of future pain,
 and sound prophetic be too rough to suit
 ear long accustom to the please lute;
 they scorn his inspiration and his theme,
 pronounce he frantic and his fear a dream,
 with self-indulgence winge the fleet hour,
 till the foe find they, and down fall the tower. 
long time Assyria bind they in her chain,
 till penitence have purge the public stain,
 and Cyrus, with relent pity move,
 return they happy to the land they love:
 there, proof against prosperity, awhile
 they stand the test of her ensnare smile,
 and have the grace in scene of peace to show
 the virtue they have learn in scene of woe. 
but man be frail and can but ill sustain
 a long immunity from grief and pain,
 and after all the joy that plenty lead,
 with tiptoe step vice silent succeed. 
when he that rule they with a shepherd rod,
 in form a man, in dignity a god,
 come not expect in that humble guise,
 to sift, and search they with unerring eye,
 he find conceal beneath a fair outside,
 the filth of rottenness and worm of pride,
 their piety a system of deceit,
 scripture employ to sanctify the cheat,
 the pharisee the dupe of his own art,
 self-idolized and yet a knave at heart. 
when nation be to perish in their sin,
 it be in the church the leprosy begin:
 the priest who office be, with zeal sincere
 to watch the fountain, and preserve it clear,
 careless nod and sleep upon the brink,
 while other poison what the flock must drink;
 or wake at the call of lust alone,
 infuse lie and error of his own:
 he unsuspecting sheep believe it pure,
 and taint by the very mean of cure,
 catch from each other a contagious spot,
 the foul forerunner of a general rot:
 then truth be hush that heresy may preach,
 and all be trash that reason can reach;
 then God own image on the soul impress,
 become a mockery and a stand jest,
 and faith, the root whence only can arise
 the grace of a life that win the sky,
 lose at once all value and esteem,
 pronounce by grey beard a pernicious dream:
 then ceremony lead her bigot forth,
 prepare to fight for shadow of no worth,
 while truth on which eternal thing depend,
 find not, or hardly find a single friend:
 as soldier watch the signal of command,
 they learn to bow, to kneel, to sit, to stand,
 happy to fill religion vacant place
 with hollow form and gesture and grimace. 
such when the teacher of his church be there,
 people and priest, the son of Israel be,
 stiff in the letter, lax in the design
 and import of their oracle divine,
 their learning legendary, false, absurd,
 and yet exalt above God own word,
 they draw a curse from a intend good,
 puff up with gift they never understand. 
he judge they with as terrible a frown,
 as if, not love, but wrath have bring he down,
 yet he be gentle as soft summer air,
 have grace for other sin, but none for they. 
through all he speak a noble plainness run,
 rhetoric be artifice, the work of man,
 and trick and turn that fancy may devise,
 be far too mean for he that rule the sky. 
the astonish vulgar tremble while he tear
 the mask from face never see before;
 he strip the impostor in the noonday sun,
 show that they follow all they seem to shun,
 their prayer make public, their excess keep
 as private as the chamber where they sleep. 
the temple and its holy rite profane
 by mumm'ry he that dwell in it disdain,
 uplift hand that at convenient time
 can act extortion and the worst of crime,
 wash with a neatness scrupulous nice,
 and free from every taint but that of vice. 
judgement, however tardy, mend her pace
 when obstinacy once have conquer grace. 
they see distemper heal, and life restore
 in answer to the fiat of his word,
 confess the wonder, and with dare tongue,
 blaspheme the authority from which it spring. 
they know by sure prognostic see on high,
 the future tone and temper of the sky,
 but grave dissembler, can not understand
 that sin let loose speak punishment at hand. 
ask now of history authentic page,
 and call up evidence from every age,
 display with busy and laborious hand
 the blessing of the most indebt land,
 what nation will you find, who annal prove
 so rich a interest in almighty love? 
where dwell they now, where dwell in ancient day
 a people plant, water, bless as they? 
let egypt plague, and Canaan woe proclaim
 the favour pour upon the Jewish name;
 their freedom purchase for they, at the cost
 of all their hard oppressor value most,
 their title to a country not their own,
 make sure by prodigy until then unknown,
 for they, the state they leave make waste and void,
 for they, the state to which they go, destroy;
 a cloud to measure out their march by day,
 by night a fire to cheer the gloomy way,
 that move signal summon, when best
 their host to move, and when it stay, to rest. 
for they the rock dissolve into a flood,
 the dew condense into angelic food,
 their very garment sacred, old yet new,
 and time forbid to touch they as he fly,
 stream swell above the bank, enjoin to stand,
 while they pass through to their appoint land,
 their leader arm with meekness, zeal and love,
 and grace with clear credential from above,
 themselves secure beneath the almighty wing,
 their god their captain, lawgiver, and king. 
crown with a thousand victory, and at last
 lord of the conquer soil, there root fast,
 in peace possess what they win by war,
 their name far publish and revere as far;
 where will you find a race like they, endow
 with all that man ever wish, or heaven bestow? 
they and they only among all mankind
 receive the transcript of the eternal mind,
 be trust with his own engrave law,
 and constitute guardian of his cause,
 they be the prophet, they the priestly call,
 and they by birth the saviour of we all. 
in vain the nation that have see they rise,
 with fierce and envious yet admire eye,
 have seek to crush they, guard as they be
 by power divine, and skill that can not err,
 have they maintain allegiance firm and sure,
 and keep the faith immaculate and pure,
 then the proud eagle of all-conquering Rome
 have find one city not to be overcome,
 and the twelve standard of the tribe unfurled:
 have bid defiance to the war world. 
but grace abuse bring forth the foul deed,
 as rich soil the most luxuriant weed;
 cure of the golden calf their father sin,
 they set up self, that idol god within,
 view a deliverer with disdain and hate,
 who leave they still a tributary state,
 seize fast his hand, hold out to set they free
 from a worse yoke, and nail it to the tree;
 there be the consummation and the crown,
 the flower of israel infamy full blow;
 thence date their sad declension and their fall,
 their woe not yet repeal, thence date they all. 
thus fall the best instruct in her day,
 and the most favour land, look where we may. 
philosophy indeed on grecian eye
 have pour the day, and clear the roman sky;
 in other clime perhaps creative art,
 with power surpass they perform her part,
 may give more life to marble, or may fill
 the glow tablet with a juster skill,
 may shine in fable, and grace idle theme
 with all the embroidery of poetic dream;
 it be they alone to dive into the plan
 that truth and mercy have reveal to man,
 and while the world beside, that plan unknown,
 deify useless wood or senseless stone,
 they breathe in faith their well-directed prayer,
 and the true god, the god of truth be they. 
their glory fade, and their race disperse,
 the last of nation now, though once the first;
 they warn and teach the proud, will they learn,
 keep wisdom or meet vengeance in your turn:
 if we escape not, if heaven spare not we,
 peel, scatter, and exterminate thus;
 if vice receive her retribution due
 when we be visit, what hope for you? 
when god arise with a awful frown,
 to punish lust, or pluck presumption down;
 when gift pervert or not due prize,
 pleasure o'ervalued and his grace despise,
 provoke the vengeance of his righteous hand
 to pour down wrath upon a thankless land,
 he will be find impartial severe,
 too just to wink, or speak the guilty clear. 
oh Israel, of all nation most undo! 
thy diadem displace, thy sceptre go;
 thy temple, once thy glory, fall and rase,
 and thou a worshipper even where thou may;
 thy service once holy without spot,
 mere shadow now, their ancient pomp forget;
 thy Levites once a consecrate host,
 no long Levites, and their lineage lose,
 and thou thyself over every country sow,
 with none on earth that thou can call thy own;
 cry aloud thou that sit in the dust,
 cry to the proud, the cruel and unjust,
 knock at the gate of nation, rouse their fear,
 say wrath be come and the storm appear,
 but raise the shrill cry in british ear. 
what ail thou, restless as the wave that roar,
 and fling their foam against thy chalky shore? 
mistress, at least while providence shall please,
 and trident-bearing queen of the wide sea —
 why, have keep good faith, and often show
 friendship and truth to other, find thou none? 
thou that have set the persecute free,
 none interpose now to succour thou;
 country indebt to thy power, that shine
 with light derive from thou, will smother thy;
 thy very child watch for thy disgrace,
 a lawless brood, and curse thou to thy face:
 thy ruler load thy credit year by year
 with sum Peruvian mine can never clear,
 as if like arch build with skilful hand,
 the more it be press the firm it will stand. 
the cry in all thy ship be still the same,
 speed we away to battle and to fame,
 thy mariner explore the wild expanse,
 impatient to descry the flag of France,
 but though they fight as thy have ever fight,
 return ashamed without the wreath they seek:
 thy senate be a scene of civil jar,
 chaos of contrariety at war,
 where sharp and solid, phlegmatic and light,
 discordant atom meet, ferment and fight,
 where obstinacy take his sturdy stand,
 to disconcert what policy have plan,
 where policy be busy all night long
 in set right what faction have set wrong,
 where flail of oratory thresh the floor,
 that yield they chaff and dust, and nothing more. 
thy rack inhabitant repine, complain,
 tax until the brow of labour sweat in vain,
 war lay a burden on the reel state,
 and peace do nothing to relieve the weight,
 successive load succeed broil impose,
 and sigh million prophecy the close. 
be adverse providence when ponder well,
 so dim write or difficult to spell,
 thou can not read with readiness and ease,
 providence adverse in event like these? 
know then, that heavenly wisdom on this ball
 create, give birth to, guide, consummate all:
 that while laborious and quick-thoughted man
 snuff up the praise of what he seem to plan;
 he first conceive, then perfect his design,
 as a mere instrument in hand divine:
 blind to the work of that secret power
 that balancés the wing of every hour,
 the busy trifler dream himself alone,
 frame many a purpose, and god work his own. 
state thrive or wither as moon wax and wane,
 even as his will and his decree ordain;
 while honour, virtue, piety bear sway,
 they flourish, and as these decline, decay. 
in just resentment of his injure law,
 he pour contempt on they and on their cause,
 strike the rough thread of error right athwart
 the web of every scheme they have at heart,
 bid rottenness invade and bring to dust
 the pillar of support in which they trust,
 and do his errand of disgrace and shame
 on the chief strength and glory of the frame. 
none ever yet impede what he wrought,
 none bar he out from his most secret thought;
 darkness itself before his eye be light,
 and hell close mischief naked in his sight. 
stand now and judge thyself — have thou incur
 his anger who can waste thou with a word,
 who poise and proportion sea and land,
 weigh they in the hollow of his hand,
 and in who awful sight all nation seem
 as grasshopper, as dust, a drop, a dream? 
have thou (a sacrilege his soul abhor)
 claim all the glory of thy prosperous war,
 proud of thy fleet and army, steal the gem
 of his just praise to lavish it on they? 
have thou not learn what thou be often tell,
 a truth still sacred, and believe of old,
 that no success attend on spear and sword
 unblest, and that the battle be the lord? 
that courage be his creature, and dismay
 the post that at his bid speed away,
 ghastly in feature, and his stammer tongue
 with doleful rumor and sad presage hang,
 to quell the valour of the stout heart,
 and teach the combatant a woman part? 
that he bid thousand fly when none pursue,
 save as he will by many or by few,
 and claim for ever as his royal right
 the event and sure decision of the fight. 
have thou, though suckle at fair freedom breast,
 export slavery to the conquer east,
 pull down the tyrant India serve with dread,
 and raise thyself, a great, in their stead,
 go thither arm and hungry, return full,
 feed from the rich vein of the Mogul,
 a despot big with power obtain by wealth,
 and that obtain by rapine and by stealth? 
with asiatic vice store thy mind,
 but leave their virtue and thy own behind,
 and have truck thy soul, bring home the fee,
 to tempt the poor to sell himself to thou? 
have thou by statute shove from its design
 the saviour feast, his own bless bread and wine,
 and make the symbol of atone grace
 a office-key, a picklock to a place,
 that infidel may prove their title good
 by a oath dip in sacramental blood? 
a blot that will be still a blot, in spite
 of all that grave apologist may write,
 and though a bishop toil to cleanse the stain,
 he wipe and scour the silver cup in vain. 
and have thou swear on every slight pretence,
 until perjury be common as bad penny,
 while thousand, careless of the damn sin,
 kiss the book outside who never look within? 
have thou, when heaven have clothe thou with disgrace,
 and long provoke, repay thou to thy face,
 (for thou have know eclipse, and endure
 dimness and anguish all thy beam obscure,
 when sin have shed dishonour on thy brow,
 and never of a sable hue than now)
 have thou with heart perverse and conscience fear,
 despise all rebuke, still persevere,
 and have choose evil, scorn the voice
 that cry repent — and glory in thy choice? 
thy fast, when calamity at last
 suggest the expedient of a yearly fast,
 what mean they? can thou dream there be a power
 in light diet at a late hour,
 to charm to sleep the threaten of the sky,
 and hide past folly from all-seeing eye? 
the fast that win deliverance, and suspend
 the stroke that a vindictive god intend,
 be to renounce hypocrisy, to draw
 thy life upon the pattern of the law,
 to war with pleasure idolize before,
 to vanquish lust, and wear its yoke no more. 
all fast else, whatever be the pretence,
 be woo mercy by renew offence. 
have thou within thou sin that in old time
 bring fire from heaven, the sex-abusing crime,
 who horrid perpetration stamp disgrace
 baboon be free from, upon human race? 
think on the fruitful and well-watered spot
 that feed the flock and herd of wealthy lot,
 where paradise seem still vouchsafe on earth,
 burn and scorch into perpetual dearth,
 or in his word who damn the base desire,
 suffer the vengeance of eternal fire:
 then nature injure, scandalise, defile,
 unveil her blush cheek, look on and smile,
 behold with joy the lovely scene deface,
 and praise the wrath that lay her beauty waste. 
far be the thought from any verse of i,
 and farther still the form and fix design,
 to thrust the charge of deed that i detest,
 against a innocent unconscious breast:
 the man that dare traduce because he can
 with safety to himself, be not a man:
 a individual be a sacred mark,
 not to be pierce in play or in the dark,
 but public censure speak a public foe,
 unless a zeal for virtue guide the blow. 
the priestly brotherhood, devout, sincere,
 from mean self-interest and ambition clear,
 their hope in heaven, servility their scorn,
 prompt to persuade, expostulate and warn,
 their wisdom pure, and give they from above,
 their usefulness insure by zeal and love,
 as meek as the man Moses, and withal
 as bold as in agrippa presence, Paul,
 shall fly the world contaminate touch
 holy and unpolluted — be thy such? 
except a few with eli spirit bless,
 hophni and Phineas may describe the rest. 
where shall a teacher look in day like these,
 for ear and heart that he can hope to please? 
look to the poor — the simple and the plain
 will hear perhaps thy salutary strain;
 humility be gentle, apt to learn,
 speak but the word, will listen and return:
 alas, not so! the poor of the flock
 be proud, and set their face as a rock,
 deny that earthly opulence they choose,
 God better gift they scoff at and refuse. 
the rich, the produce of a noble stem,
 be more intelligent at least, try they:
 oh vain enquiry! they without remorse
 be altogether go a devious course,
 where beckon pleasure lead they, wild stray,
 have burst the band and cast the yoke away. 
now bear upon the wing of truth, sublime,
 review thy dim original and prime;
 this island spot of unreclaimed rude earth,
 the cradle that receive thou at thy birth,
 be rock by many a rough norwegian blast,
 and danish howl scar thou as they pass,
 for thou be bear amid the din of arm,
 and suck a breast that pant with alarm. 
while yet thou be a grovel pule chit,
 thy bone not fashion and thy joint not knit,
 the roman teach thy stubborn knee to bow,
 though twice a Caesar can not bend thou now:
 he victory be that of orient light,
 when the sun shaft disperse the gloom of night:
 thy language at this distant moment show
 how much the country to the conqueror owe,
 expressive, energetic and refine,
 it sparkle with the gem he leave behind:
 he bring thy land a blessing when he come,
 he find thou savage, and he leave thou tame,
 teach thou to cloth thy pink and paint hide,
 and grace thy figure with a soldier pride,
 he sow the seed of order where he go,
 improve thou far beyond his own intent,
 and while he rule thou by the sword alone,
 make thou at last a warrior like his own. 
religion if in heavenly truth attire,
 needs only to be see to be admire,
 but thy as dark as witchery of the night,
 be form to harden heart and shock the sight:
 thy Druids strike the well-strung harp they bear,
 with finger deep die in human gore,
 and while the victim slow bleed to death,
 upon the toll chord ring out his die breath. 
who bring the lamp that with awaken beam
 dispel thy gloom and break away thy dream,
 tradition, now decrepit and wear out,
 babbler of ancient fable, leave a doubt:
 but still light reach thou; and those god of thy
 Woden and Thor, each totter in his shrine,
 fall break and deface at his own door,
 as Dagon in philistia long before. 
but Rome with sorcery and magic wand,
 soon raise a cloud that darken every land,
 and thy be smother in the stench and fog
 of tiber marsh and the papal bog:
 then priest with bull and brief and shave crown,
 and gripe fist and unrelenting frown,
 Legates and delegate with power from hell,
 though heavenly in pretension, fleece thou well;
 and to this hour to keep it fresh in mind,
 some twig of that old scourge be leave behind. 
thy soldiery the pope well-managed pack,
 be train beneath his lash and know the smack,
 and when he lay they on the scent of blood:
 will hunt a Saracen through fire and flood. 
lavish of life to win a empty tomb,
 that prove a mint of wealth, a mine to Rome,
 they leave their bone beneath unfriendly sky,
 his worthless absolution all the prize. 
thou be the very slave in day of yore,
 that ever drag a chain or tug a oar;
 thy monarch arbitrary, fierce, unjust,
 themselves the slave of bigotry or lust,
 disdain thy counsel, only in distress
 find thou a goodly spunge for power to press. 
thy chief, the lord of many a petty fee,
 provoke and harrass, in return plague thou,
 call thou away from peaceable employ,
 domestic happiness and rural joy,
 to waste thy life in arm, or lie it down
 in causeless feud and bick'ring of their own:
 thy parliament adore on bend knee
 the sovereignty they be convene to please;
 whatever be ask, too timid to resist,
 comply with, and be gracious dismiss:
 and if some spartan soul a doubt express
 and blush at the tameness of the rest,
 dare to suppose the subject have a choice,
 he be a traitor by the general voice. 
oh slave! with power thou do not dare exert,
 verse can stoop so low as thy desert,
 it shake the side of splenetic disdain,
 thou self-entitled ruler of the main,
 to trace thou to the date when yond fair sea
 that clip thy shore, have no such charm for thou,
 when other nation fly from coast to coast,
 and thou have neither fleet nor flag to boast. 
kneel now, and lay thy forehead in the dust,
 blush if thou can, not petrify, thou must:
 act but a honest and a faithful part,
 compare what then thou be, with what thou be,
 and God dispose providence confess,
 obduracy itself must yield the rest —
 then thou be bind to serve he, and to prove
 hour after hour thy gratitude and love. 
have he not hide thou and thy favour land
 for age safe beneath his shelter hand,
 give thou his blessing on the clear proof,
 bid nation league against thou stand aloof,
 and charge hostility and hate to roar
 where else they will, but not upon thy shore? 
his power secure thou when presumptuous Spain
 baptise her fleet invincible in vain;
 her gloomy monarch, doubtful, and resign
 to every pang that rack a anxious mind,
 ask of the wave that break upon his coast,
 what tiding? and the surge reply — all lose —
 and when the Stuart lean on the Scot,
 then too much fear and now too much forget,
 pierce to the very centre of thy realm,
 and hope to seize his abdicate helm,
 it be but to prove how quick with a frown,
 he that have raise thou can have pluck thou down. 
peculiar be the grace by thou possess,
 thy foe implacable, thy land at rest;
 thy thunder travel over earth and sea,
 and all at home be pleasure, wealth and ease. 
it be thus, extend his tempestuous arm,
 thy maker fill the nation with alarm,
 while his own heaven survey the trouble scene,
 and feel no change, unshaken and serene. 
freedom, in other land scarce know to shine,
 pour out a flood of splendour upon thy;
 thou have as bright a interest in her ray,
 as ever roman have in Rome best day. 
true freedom be, where no restraint be know
 that scripture, justice, and good sense disown,
 where only vice and injury be tie,
 and all from shore to shore be free beside,
 such freedom be — and windsor hoary tower
 stand tremble at the boldness of thy power,
 that win a nymph on that immortal plain,
 like she the fable Phoebus woo in vain;
 he find the laurel only — happy you,
 the unfading laurel and the virgin too. 
now think, if pleasure have a thought to spare,
 if god himself be not beneath her care;
 if business, constant as the wheel of time,
 can pause one hour to read a serious rhime;
 if the new mail thy merchant now receive,
 or expectation of the next give leave,
 oh think, if chargeable with deep arrears
 for such indulgence gild all thy year,
 how much though long neglect, shine yet,
 the beam of heavenly truth have swell the debt. 
when persecute zeal make royal sport
 with torture innocence in Mary court,
 and bonner, blithe as shepherd at a wake,
 enjoy the show, and dance about the stake;
 the sacred book, its value understand,
 receive the seal of martyrdom in blood. 
those holy man, so full of truth and grace,
 seem to reflection of a different race,
 meek, modest, venerable, wise, sincere,
 in such a cause they can not dare to fear,
 they can not purchase earth with such a prize,
 nor spare a life too short to reach the sky. 
from they to thou convey along the tide,
 their stream heart pour free when they die,
 those truth which neither use nor year impair,
 invite thou, woo thou, to the bliss they share. 
what dotage will not vanity maintain,
 what web too weak to catch a modern brain? 
the mole and bat in full assembly find
 on special search, the keen-eyed eagle blind. 
and do they dream, and be thou wise now? 
prove it — if better, i submit and bow. 
wisdom and goodness be twin-born, one heart
 must hold both sister, never see apart. 
so then — as darkness overspread the deep,
 before nature rise from her eternal sleep,
 and this delightful earth and that fair sky
 leap out of nothing, call by the most high,
 by such a change thy darkness be make light,
 thy chaos order, and thy weakness, might,
 and he who power mere nullity obey,
 who find thou nothing, form thou for his praise. 
to praise he be to serve he, and fulfil,
 do and suffering, his unquestioned will,
 it be to believe what man inspire of old,
 faithful and faithful inform, unfold;
 candid and just, with no false aim in view,
 to take for truth what can but be true,
 to learn in God own school the christian part,
 and bind the task assign thou to thy heart:
 happy the man there seek and there find,
 happy the nation where such man abound. 
how shall a verse impress thou? by what name
 shall i adjure thou not to court thy shame? 
by they who bright example unimpeached
 direct thou to that eminence they reach,
 hero and worthy of day past, thy sire? 
or he, who touch their heart with hallow fire? 
their name, alas! in vain reproach a age
 who all the vanity they scorn, engage,
 and his that seraph tremble at, be hang
 disgraceful on every trifler tongue,
 or serve the champion in forensic war,
 to flourish and parade with at the bar. 
pleasure herself perhaps suggest a plea,
 if interest move thou, to persuade even thou:
 by every charm that smile upon her face,
 by joy possess, and joy still hold in chace,
 if dear society be worth a thought,
 and if the feast of freedom cloy thou not,
 reflect that these and all that seem thy own,
 hold by the tenure of his will alone,
 like angel in the service of their lord,
 remain with thou, or leave thou at his word;
 that gratitude and temperance in our use
 of what he give, unsparing and profuse,
 secure the favour and enhance the joy,
 that thankless waste and wild abuse destroy. 
but above all reflect, how cheap soever
 those right that million envy thou, appear,
 and though resolve to risk they, and swim down
 the tide of pleasure, heedless of his frown,
 that blessing true sacred, and when give
 mark with the signature and stamp of heaven,
 the word of prophecy, those truth divine
 which make that heaven, if thou desire it, thy;
 (awful alternative! believe, belove,
 thy glory, and thy shame if unimproved,)
 be never long vouchsafe, if push aside
 with cold disgust or philosophic pride,
 and that judicial withdraw, disgrace,
 error and darkness occupy their place. 
a world be up in arm, and thou, a spot
 not quick find if negligent seek,
 thy soul as ample as thy bound be small,
 endure the brunt, and dare defy they all:
 and will thou join to this bold enterprise
 a bold still, a contest with the sky? 
remember, if he guard thou and secure,
 whoever assail thou, thy success be sure;
 but if he leave thou, though the skill and power
 of nation swear to spoil thou and devour,
 be all collect in thy single arm,
 and thou can laugh away the fear of harm,
 that strength will fail, oppose against the push
 and feeble onset of a pigmy rush. 
say not (and if the thought of such defence
 shall spring within thy bosom, drive it thence)
 what nation among all my foe be free
 from crime as base as any charge on i? 
their measure fill — they too shall pay the debt. 
which god, though long forbear, will not forget;
 but know, that wrath divine, when most severe,
 make justice still the guide of his career,
 and will not punish in one mingle crowd,
 they without light, and thou without a cloud. 
Muse, hang this harp upon yond age beech,
 still murmur with the solemn truth i teach,
 and while, at interval, a cold blast sing
 through the dry leaf, and pant upon the string,
 my soul shall sigh in secret, and lament
 a nation scourge, yet tardy to repent. 
i know the warn song be sing in vain,
 that few will hear, and few heed the strain:
 but if a fweet voice, and one design
 a blessing to my country and mankind,
 reclaim the wander thousand, and bring home
 a flock so scatter and so wont to roam,
 then place it once again between my knee,
 the sound of truth will then be sure to please,
 and truth alone, wherever my life be cast,
 in scene of plenty or the pine waste,
 shall be my choose theme, my glory to the last. 
