a spousal hymn.

address to his majesty on his marriage.

by JAMES SCOTT, m. a. fellow of trinity college, Cambridge.

as, when diffuse in solemn trance
 her dear delight the latmian shepherd lie,
 fond Cynthia come with lightning-glance,
 and over his bosom stream her virgin ray:
 so come, o gentle Muse, if ever aright
 i pay my vow, if ever implore
 one scanty beam of thy celestial light;
 proof to the muckworm miser golden hoard,
 nor envious of the statesman fair renown,
 the warrior death-bought wreath, and monarch thorny crown. 

come, guardian of my natal hour,
 that bid i choose the still sequester grove,
 the pathless mead, and woodbine bower,
 where placid care, and pensive pleasure rove;
 where oft by moon-light's silent, solemn glade,
 pale passion muse love to stray,
 and hand in hand, by melancholy lead,
 in thoughtful loneness wear herself away;
 o come, in all thy radiant charm confess,
 and fire with glow zeal my fond, devote breast! 

i ask not flowret fresh and gay,
 from Pindus cull to please the vain great;
 no silken strain, no tinsel lay,
 to cloak some public knave from public hate:
 no, virgin, no — fair freedom vestal flame
 pervade my soul; for she i twine
 the votive wreath, for her thy hallow name
 invoke, o make thy choice treasure i;
 breathe inspiration through each glow line,
 thy genuine form impress, and stamp the work divine! 

then shall thou, George, the song approve,
 o british-born! o freedom sacred heir! 
o thou, who all the grace love,
 religion boast, and virtue darling care! 
fain will the muse attempt thy various praise,
 but ah, in vain! — through ida bower
 with dubious foot the astonish woodman stray;
 where shall his work begin? — you sylvan power
 direct the blow; here oak aspire rise,
 there, monarch of the grove, tall cedar prop the sky. 

say, shall the muse thy patriot sire
 recall to view? tell how with conscious state
 she see the god-like prince retire
 to glorious exile, like Timoleon great? 
glad hear the voice, "avaunt, you wretched train,
" shall i my country be cause betray? 
 "betray my soul, my god, for sordid gain? 
" perish the thought! — you slave of gold away! —
 "in venal court though base corruption reign,
" know liberty shall breathe through kew indignant plain. " 

he speak, and lo! the reptile crew
 strike dumb with wonder flee! — hail, sacred source,
 whence George his patriot moral draw:
 prosper, you heavenly power, their genial course! 
o bid they branch into a thousand rill,
 a thousand stream! — whereve they flow,
 whether all glister down the lofty hill,
 or through the still, and humble vale below,
 let health pursue, no noxious weed be find,
 but flower immortal rise fresh-breathing sweet around! 

prophetic wish! — see discord fly,
 with all her rebel rout, her hellborn train! 
see faction fall, and party die,
 they die fell serpent, in his dawn reign:
 thus sure presage of many a glorious deed,
 bless omen of immortal fame,
 the son of Jove, when near his infant head
 devour snake in poisonous volume come,
 grasp in his brawny arm the scaly foe,
 smile on the danger past, and sink to soft repose. 

and now again, with careful hand,
 her goodly plant fair science joy to rear;
 and now again all bloom stand
 the beauteous progeny of art; they fear
 no kill frost, no thick unkind dew,
 such as from belgian plain arise;
 the genial cloud their pearly drop diffuse,
 and shower increase of sweetness from the sky;
 the youthful sun, in his meridian throne,
 beam with indulgent ray his foster influence down. 

hail, favour isle! bless seat of fame! 
for conquer arm, and peerless art renowned! 
hail, mighty George! thy darling name
 oft shall the muse with honest joy resound:
 not that abstemious, prudent, just, and wise,
 thy every deed fair virtue guide;
 nor that thy thought with holy ardor rise
 from earth low base, where vice and passion bide,
 to heaven bright mansion, there their sweet dispense,
 grateful as hallow fume from breathe frankincense. 

ay i so great, so bold a flight
 beseem not shepherd-swain, in lowly Mead
 far from preferment giddy height
 condemn, alas, a hireling flock to feed! 
yet will i sing how thy discern eye
 the boisterous sea of life survey,
 where toil before the son of merit lie,
 till call by thou their weary head they raise:
 what minute drop, but cherish by thy care
 a costly pearl become of matchless beauty rare? 

charm then your pipe, you shepherd swain,
 and bid the hill, and dale the song repeat,
 your patron, your Augustus reign! —
 but hark, with undulation soft, and sweet,
 what melt music steal upon the ear! 
be i deceive, or do a choir
 of wing cupid fan the buxom air
 till silence smile; while from their silver lyre
 harmonious number flow, who dulcet breath
 will recreate a soul beneath the pang of death? 

i do not err, a choir of love
 sublime in air attune the enchant lay;
 they leave idalia bloom grove,
 and cypria myrtle shade, where jocund stray
 the grace, smile, and hour, where nature care
 profuse kind allure the sight,
 and wrap the sense in bliss: you virgin fair
 of britain isle, sweet daughter of delight,
 receive the cherub throng, to you they fly
 with welcome tiding fraught, bless harbinger of joy. 

lo! lo she come from the albine shore,
 your maiden queen, adorn with peerless charm:
 like Phoebe, when by Taurus hoar
 enamour Alpheus strive with eager arm
 to grasp the fair: ah, fond and hapless boy! 
ah, cruel wayward dame! — in vain
 he breathe his amorous soul, for all too coy
 swift as the roe she seek the distant plain;
 leave he to pour in tear his plaintive theme,
 till change by love and grief he melt to a stream. 

see where from ocean pearly bed,
 who huddle water pass unwilling by,
 she come with easy modest tread,
 'midst echo crowd, and rapturous shout of joy:
 it be thus, the life-resembling tablet show,
 in youth and beauty fresh and gay
 the paphian goddess from the wave arise,
 while dolphin gambol through the watery way,
 old Neptune smile, the sea-green sister sing,
 and all the rook around with iö triumph ring. 

but ah, what daedal hand can trace
 the glow beauty of her air and mien;
 the lively sweetness of her face,
 and eye where wisdom azure beam be see? 
her bosom fraught with honour maiden treasure,
 unblemished faith, mild modesty,
 eternal love, unsoiled by base pleasure,
 and constant truth, and spotless chastity,
 where thought, that angel may admire, be breed,
 and flame of holy zeal, by pure religion feed? 

hail, virgin, hail, divine bless,
 by heaven endow with all that be good and great! 
o flower of virtue, in who breast,
 imperial reason dwell in royal state! 
there, there she sit as queen on ivory throne,
 the vassal passion round she stand,
 in suppliant guise her rightful power they own,
 and hear she still small voice, her soft command:
 far from the pure and unpolluted shrine
 each base affection fly, each haggard nurse of sin. 

leave then, you sister, leave the spring
 who hallow water flow through Minyas' land;
 conduct to britain bloom king
 this all-accomplished work of nature hand:
 it be you, imperial nymph, whatever be sweet,
 and fair and splendid to bestow;
 on you attend wealth, wisdom, beauty, wit;
 nor seat on olympus laugh brow
 will choirs celestial move till you advance,
 nor share the ambrosial feast, nor lead the sprightly dance. 

and thou, o queen of soft desire,
 who radiant smile dispel the gloom of care,
 and kindle friendship pure fire,
 chase from the soul suspicion, doubt, and fear,
 those grisly form: o come, bewitch power,
 come gentle, over the bridal bed
 in genial dew thy choice pleasure shower;
 such as in arcady voluptuous shade
 Lycaeus feel, when stretch on maia breast
 a image of himself the enrapture god impress. 

nor thou, Lucina chaste and fair,
 nor thou, sweet genius of the nuptial bower,
 be absent; on the royal pair
 profuse of joy your kindly blessing pour! 
o haste, you guardian of the sacred rite,
 who aid prolific power supply,
 so shall Britannia bless their pure delight,
 when future Georges, future charlottes rise;
 by who reflect distant time shall find
 the mother matchless grace, the father be virtuous mind. 
